BERTRAM OR RATRAM Concerning the BODY and BLOOD OF THE LORD, In LATIN; With a
New English Translation.

To which is Prefixed, An Historical Dissertation touching the Author and this
Work.

The Second Edition Corrected, and Enlarged with an APPENDIX: WHEREIN Monsieur
Boileau's French Version, and Notes upon BERTRAM are Considered, and his Unfair
Dealings in both Detected.

LONDON, Printed by H. Clark, for Thomas Boomer, at the Chirurgeons-Arms in
Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar, 1688.

Imprimatur,

Liber Ratramni de Corpore and Sanguine Domini cum Versione Anglica and
Praefatione secundum hoc Exemplar ab Interpret recognitum cum Appendice.

Oct. 6. 1687. H. Maurice, Rmo. in Christa P. D. Willielmo Archiepiscopo Cant.
a Sacris.

Amplissimo Viro,
Generis, Eruditions and Virtutis
Omnigenae Ornamentis
Praenobili,
HENRICO COVENTRY
Armigero,
Serenissimo Regi JACOBO II.
uti pridem
Fratri Charissimo CAROLO II.
A Privatis Consiliis:
Cui etiam Optimo Principi
Ob Fidem Patri and Sibi, nec non
S. Matri Ecclesiae Anglicanae,
In adversis fortiter servatam,
Ob munera in S. Palatio honorifica
Egregie defuncta.
Ob res arduas variis apud exteros
Legationibus
Summa Fidelitate, Singulari Prudentia,
Parique felicitate
Gestas
Apprime Charus extitit
Secretariusque Primicerius;
Hoc Opusculum
Ratramni Corbeiensis
De S. Eucharistia,
Fidei Veteris Ecclesiae Gallicanae
Testis luculenti,
Nec non
Nostrae vere Catholicae Anglicanae
Vindicis Eximii,
Vna cum Versione Vernacula
and Dissertatione praemissa
In Testimonium
Obsequii and Gratitudinis
LMQDDDCQ,
VVHSAEPR,
Editor.
THE PREFACE.
IT is now seven Years and more, since I first read over this little Piece of
Bertram in Latin, and the Satisfaction I had to see so Learned a Writer
expressly confute the Error of Transubstantiation, at its first rise in the
Western Church, invited me to a second and third Reading, and the Book not
being very common, I entertained thoughts of Reprinting it, both in Latin and
English; for remembering where I had seen an English Bertram, Published by Sir
Humphrey Lynd, A. D. 1623. I promised my self, that Publishing it in English,
would add but little to my trouble, not suspecting that a Translation published
by that Learned Gentleman, could have been other than accurate. I therefore got
together as many various Editions of the Book as I could, and sent for the
English Version, upon sight of which I saw my self disappointed. For there are
some Mistakes in rendering the Latin words, two of which may be seen in the
Preface. For Instance, Catholice Sapere, is Translated to be universally Wise,
which should have been rendered to be Orthodox, or Catholic in his Judgment;
and again, Non aequanimiter ista perpendens is rendered (though perhaps not
quietly and indifferently considering of these things) instead of sadly laying
to heart these things, [ viz. the Schism on occasion of the new Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.] And several other slips of that kind, I observed, which
made me guess the Translation could not be the work of the worthy Knight, who
recommended it to the Public. But had this been all, a little time and pains
might have rectified those Mistakes. That which rendered the Translation
unserviceable to me, was the perplexity of the style, through unnecessary
Parentheses, and the multiplying of Synonimous words, and in some places by
rendering the Author too much word for word, so that it does not give the Reader
a clear apprehension of the Author's sense. And to justify this charge, I need
only refer the Reader to the ninth and tenth Pages of the new Impression of
Bertram, where he proves that Consecration makes no Physical change in the
Bread and Wine; but as he is there Translated, his reasoning is hardly
intelligible.

Yet, I accuse not the Translator of unfaithfulness, but freely acknowledge,
that had his skill been equal to his Fidelity, I would have used his Version,
and saved my self the trouble of a new one, which I made and transcribed in
Septem. 1681.

Having finished my Translation, I proceeded to collect materials for the
Dissertation I intended, which I cast into loose Papers, and desiring a Learned
Friend to assist me, with what he knew on that Subject, he put into my hands an
Edition I had not before met with, in French and Latin, with a Learned
Advertisement prefixed, in which I found the Work designed by me, was already
very well performed, so that my Labor might be spared. Thus I laid aside my
Papers, and all thoughts of making them public, till about two Months since,
and then resumed them, upon the request of some worthy Friends, who judged it
necessary, since the Reprinting of the former Translation. Besides, the faults
of the Translator, in the new Impression there are great ones committed by the
Printer, in the Technical words of the Discourse, particularly in the beginning
of the Eleventh Page, he has printed Verity instead of Variety. At the desire
of those Gentlemen I resolved to Review and Print my Translation with the
Authors Text, that the Reader might have it in his Power, to judge of my
Fidelity therein. And though I see no reason to be proud of my performance, yet
I persuade my self this Book will be somewhat more useful, than that which now
goes abroad.

In the Dissertation prefixed, I have Collected all the little Historical
Passages I have met with any where, touching our Author and his Works, and
perhaps the Reader may think, I insist too long upon some matters of no great
moment. But in regard Ratramnus was an extraordinary Man, and no Body, that I
know, has in our Language, given any considerable account of him, and his
Writings, I thought it would not be altogether unacceptable to the Reader.

Though the French Advertisement be exceedingly well done, yet I have had great
helps, for the clearing the Antiquity and Authority of that Tract, which the
Author of that Advertisement wanted. To mention no other, the most Learned and
Ingenuous Father Mabillon (to whom I acknowledge my self obliged for my best
Informations) had not then published the Acts of the Benedictines of the IX
Century, in which our Author lived. What I design in my Dissertation, the
Contents of each Chapter will inform the Reader.

I shall only add, that my design is not to engage in the Controversy of
Transubstantiation, which is so completely handled, and clearly discussed, by
the Learned and Reverend Author, of a small Discourse against it, that it is
wholly needless for me, or any one else, to write further on that Argument. All
I intend, is with Fidelity to relate what I have upon diligent search been able
to Collect touching the Author and Work which I Publish, and I hope I have said
what may prevail with all Impartial Judges, to admit our Author for a competent
Witness of the belief of the Church in his Age, touching Christ's Presence in
the Holy Sacrament.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. AN Historical Account of the Author and his Writings. Chap. II. Of
his Treatise concerning Christ's Body and Blood, and the Author cleared of
Heresy, and the other Accusations of F. Cellot. Chap. III. That this Book is
neither wholly forged, nor yet depraved, that Ratramnus is its true Author, and
not Joannes Scotus Erigena. Chap. IV. Of the true sense of the Author in some
controverted Expressions. Chap. V. That this Treatise expressly confutes the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and is very agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Church of England. Chap. VI. That Ratramnus was not singular in his Opinion,
but had several other great Men in his own and the following Age of the same
Judgment with him in this Point.
CHAP. I. Of the Author's Name, Country and Profession; of his Eminent
Learning: With an account of his Works.
IN regard the Author of this Treatise has first appeared in Print under the
mistaken Name of Bertram, and by that Name is best known even to this day, I
conceive it may not be amiss, to see what he is called in the Titles of his own
Works, and in the Writings of other Authors, especially those of his own Time.

Serve. Lupus, Ep. 79.
Servatus Lupus writes to him by the Name of Rotrannus, whom Baluz. in notis ad
Lupum. Ad Rotrannum Monachum] Corbeiensem.
Baluzius doubts not to have been our Author, and it may be probably collected
from the subject of that Epistle. Others call him Ratramus, so his Name appears
to have been written by Sigebertus Gemblacensis, from the two Manuscripts
mentioned by Ad cap. 96. Sigeberti, inter Illustr. Eccl. Scriptores ed. 88.
Colon. 1580.
Suffridus Petrus in his Notes upon him. Flodoardi Hist. Remens. l. 3. c. 15.
and 28.
Flodoardus, who flourished about an 100 years after our Author, calls him
Ratrannus, but in the Inscriptions of his other Works, some of which I have
seen in Manuscript, as also that of this Tract, Mabillon Praefat. ad. Acta
Bened. secul. 4. p. 2. cap. 1. n. 43.
found by F. Mabillon in the Abbey of Lobez, he is called Ratramnus, so in the
Ibidem, scribitur RATRa^NI super posita communi nota literae M vel N unde orta
videtur lectio Ratranni.
Catalogue of that Library taken A. D. 1049. as also by Hincmarus de Praed. c.
5. and de non trina Deitate.
Hincmarus Archbishop of Rhemes, and In Epistola Metrica edita per Cellotium.
Append. Opusc. II. Amico fer ovans Ratramno.
Gotteschalcus, both contemporary with him, and by the Anonymous Writer
published by Hist. Gotteschalci Praedest.
F. Cellot, who is now discovered to be Mabillon Praef. ad Acta Ben. secul. 4.
p. 2. c. 1. n. 47, 48, 49. ex MS. Gemblac.
Herigerus Abbot of Lobez, who flourished in the end of the Tenth Century, and
died in the Year, 1007.

His true Name was doubtless Ratramnus, which came afterward to be changed
into Bertramus by the error of some Transcriber of Sigebertus, who mistook, as
he easily might, the The like mistake has sometimes happened in other Names,
as Babanus for Rabanus, in two MSS. of Cellots Anonymous Writer in the Library
of St Victor in Paris, when in the preceding Page they call Rabanus; Dissert.
sur Jean Scot, Art. 2. p. 6. at the end Mr. Arnaud's Defense, in quarto, 1669.
R in his Copy for a B, the letters being not much unlike, and Trithemius,
using a Copy of Sigebert so written, has propagated the mistake, which though
of no great moment, yet ought to be rectified, and our Author be called by his
true Name.

Ratramnus was in all probability a Frenchman, and of the Province of Picardie,
wherein he became a Monk. He was Educated in the Monastery of Corbey, not New
Corbey upon the Weser in Saxony, but the Old Corbey, in the Diocese of Amiens,
Founded by Batildis, Wife to Clodovaeus the Second King of France, in the Year
665. This was a very Eminent Monastery of Benedictins, in which the Quia in
Corbeia Monasterio laudabilis eo tempore Religio Monachorum habebatur. Acta
Bened. sec. 4. p. 1. In translat. Viti, c. 5.
Discipline of that Order was strictly kept up, in the Ninth Century, when the
Monks elsewhere grew very remiss, and it was Mabillonius Corbeiam vocat
Celebrem Academiam in Act. Ben. sec. 4. p. 2. In Elogio Historico Joanis
Aethelingiensis, c. 5.
a famous Academy, or Seminary of Learned, as well as Religious Men.

In this Cloister our Author was so happy a Proficient in the Study of
Divinity, that he was esteemed well qualified for the Holy Order of Priesthood,
and accordingly received it. And after the Death of Bavo, the same Ratramnus,
as it is thought, was by Carolus Calvus promoted to the Government of the
Monastery of Flodoard. Hist. Rhem. l. 3. c. 28. ABP. Usher seems to doubt
whether he were the same with our Author Hist. Gotesc. cap. 11. sub finem in
margin. But Bishop Cosins Dr. Cave, and Albertinus doubt not but he was.
Orbais, in the Diocese of Soissons.

Modern Writers, of both the Roman and Reformed Church, have been guilty of
mistakes, touching the time wherein Bertram wrote this Book. Some place him in
the very beginning of the IX. Century, and suppose this Tract to be written A.
D. 800. or 806. or 810. So Appar. Sac. T. 1. Betramus, Garetius circa Annum
806. Sir H. Linde in his Preface to Bertram.
Possevine and others. The manifest cause of their mistake, is the Inscription
[To Charles the Great Emperour] which they take for the Author's Address to
that Prince, and therefore conclude this Tract must needs be written before the
Year Lambecius in Orig. Hamb. tom. 2. in tab. Chronolog.
814. in which he died. But that Act. Ben. sec 4. p. 2. Praef. c. 1. n. 129.
Inscription is not found in the MS. which F. Mabillon met with in the Abbey of
Lobez; nor can it be the Author's. For though Carolus Calvus may by some
Flatterers be styled the Great, yet the addition of Emperor, will by no means
permit us to believe it Genuine, for he was not Emperor till the Year 875.
which was above 20 years after Ratramnus wrote this Book. So that what has
passed for the Inscription of the Book, is only the conceit of some late
Transcriber.

But as in the first Volume of his (...) Apparatus, Possevin. Apar. sac. t. 2.
Paschasius.
Possevine fixes our Author in the very beginning of the IX. Century, so
forgetting himself in the second Volume, he errs as much on the other hand, and
giving an account of the Works of Paschasius Radbertus, thrusts Bertram down
into the latter end of that Age, and makes him to have written A. D. 886. under
Carolus Crassus, and says, that Paschasius confuted his error in a Book to
Placidus. I presume the ground to this conceit was, that by this means, all
objections against the Address to Charles the Great Emperor, seem to be solved,
in regard of that Prince, his Surname Crassus or Grossus, which is in some
sense Magnus, and he was at that time Emperor. But this is a mere fetch, which
will not pass now as it might have done 80 or 100 years since, the Author and
his time being now much better known.

No doubt but as Lucas Dacherius tells us Literis and fama floruisse Ratramnum
Ludovici Pii and Caroli Calvi temporibus fidem faciunt quas protulit
elucubrationes. Dacherius spic. t. 1. Lectori nu. 5
he lived in great reputation for Learning in the Reign of Ludovicus Pius, and
Charles his Son, as may be easily gathered from the Books written by him on
several occasions. His two Books of Predestination were written, as the
President Mauguin. tom. 2. Disser. Hist. cap. 17.
Mauguin conjectures, A. D. 850. which was the next year after Goteschalcus was
degraded and condemned in a Synod at Carisiac. And his Answer to the Objections
of the Greeks, could not be well written before the Year 868. in regard the
Gallican Prelates were engaged in the work not above two months before the
Death of Pope Nicolaus the First, which happened in December, 867. So that
presuming Ratramnus to have lived 60 years, his flourishing Time was from 840.
to 870.] Hincm. Rhem. Op. tom. 2. Opusc. LV. Capitul. cap. 1. tradito Hincmaro
Laudun. in Synodo Attiniaci habita, A. D. 870.
Hincmarus in a Work published by him in the Year 870. mentions one Ratramnus
Presbyter, then 90 years of Age, but I am apt to believe he was not our Author,
for first he seems to have been a Secular Priest. And again, it is very
unlikely so Learned a Man should not set up for a Writer till about 60 or 70
years of age, or that he should write so smartly as he does against the Greek
Emperors at 88.

That he was in great Esteem for Learning in his own Age, is past doubt. It is
an argument of his known Abilities, that Charles the bald chose to consult him
upon points of so great moment, as the Predestination Controversy, and that of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, which appears by the Prefaces and
Conclusions of his Work on both those Subjects. And though Feuguer. Opusc.
Lugd. Praefat. p. 9, 10. Quod altem ad Calvi Aulam attinet, nullo quod sciam
docto uno ornata memoratur.
Feugueraeus in his Preface to Bertram, tells us, that Carolus Calvus had no
Learned Men in his Court, as his Grandfather had, Alcuin, Claudius Clemens, and
Joannes Scotus, its plain, that herein he is very much mistaken, as indeed he
is almost in every thing he says in that Preface. For Carolus Calvus was a
great Patron of Learning and Learned Men: Joannes Scotus lived in his Court,
and not in the Court of Charles the Great, and I verily believe that through
the Ignorance of some Monk, who had read the Names of those Learned Men who
were in favor with Charles the Great, thus recited, Alcuinum Flaccum, Claudium
Scotum, or Claudium Clementem Scotum, etc. and mistook Scotum, whereby the
Country of Claudius Clemens, who was an Irishman, is designed for the Name of a
Man; Joannes Scotus Erigena has been made a Domestic of Charles the Great,
and those other senseless Stories, that he was a Scholar of Vinc. Bellovac.
Spec. Hist. l. 23. c. 173. apud Not. Alex. de Jo. Scoto Erig. sec. 9. p. 2.
diss. 14. Fueruntque Parisiis fundatores illius studii quatuor Monachi Bedae
discipuli. Rabanus and Alcuinus, Claudius and Joannes Scotus.
V. Bid, Companion of Alcuin, and an Assistant to him in Founding the
University of Paris, have been raised. For Scotus is ordinarily mentioned next
after this Claudius on this occasion. But the mistake seems ancient, as
Berengarius by a MS. Epistle of his to Richardus, Dacherii Spicil. t. 2.
Council. t. 9 col. 1062.
published by D'Achery, and from him by Labbe in the Councils. Besides Scotus,
that King favored other Learned Men, who have written upon several Arguments
by his Command. In the matter of Predestination, he held two several Councils
in his own Palace at Carisiac, in the first of which Goteschalcus was
Condemned, and in the second the Doctrine of the Catholic Church was stated in
four short Determinations, though not in all points according to the Sentiments
of some of the most Learned Men in France. He consulted Scotus, Vide Serve.
Lupi, Ep. 128.
Servatus Lupus, and our Author. And Denique sunt multi, Domino donante,
Magistri
Haec regione siti, ingenio l^c. plete periti,
Vnde Palatina plerique morantur in Aula.
Vide Append. Cellotii, Opusc. II.
Goteschalcus, about whom all this Controversy arose in an Epistle to
Ratramnus, says, that there were many Learned Men then about his Court. And no
question but he always consulted Men of eminent note. Ratramnus was also in
good esteem with Odo, Successor to Paschasius in the Abbey of Corbey, and
afterward Bishop of Beauvais, to whom he dedicates his Book de Anima, and who
in all probability nominated him as a fit Person to Answer the Objections of
the Greeks against the Latin Church. Nay, F. Cellot acknowledges, Cellot.
Hist. Gottes. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 2.
That Hincmarus himself had such an esteem of him, [long after his writing of
the Sacrament and Predestination,] That whn at the desire of Pope Nicolaus I.
he sought all France for Learned Men to write against the Greeks, he invited
Ratramnus by Name to undertake that service. Nor had Hincmarus, Odo, and the
other Gallican Prelates, a better opinion of his Abilities for that Work, than
Praefat. ad Act. Ben. secul. 4. p. 2. n. 161. Ratramnus vero li^ge plura and
potiora prolatis exproprio genio validis ratiociniis quae argumentis and
autoritatibus a se adductis lucem ac robur concilient.
F. Mabillon has of his Performance, who says, That whoever shall compare the
work of Ratramnus with that of Aeneas Parisiensis, will easily discern how much
Ratramnus excelled him in Learning and Eloquence, for whereas Aeneas ordinarily
produces naked and jejune Testimonies, without any considerable Remarks upon
them, Ratramnus alleges many more, and better Authorities, enforcing and
illustrating them by solid reasonings of his own. The same good opinion has
President Mauguin of his Performance in his two Books of Predestination, when
he calls him, Mauguin. tom. 2. in Dissert Hist. c. 17.
Non levis armaturae in Ecclesia Christi militem, No raw Soldier lightly armed,
but an undaunted Champion of the Catholic Truth, against Innovators. And much
more he adds in his Praise. And though in his writing about the Sacrament,
Refut. du Mr. Claude, p. 3. c. 5.
Mr. Arnauld is pleased to style him, A fantastical, obscure and empty Divine,
whose reasonings are frothy cavils, yet in the Controversies of Predestination,
and Grace, both he and his Brethren the Jansenists acknowledge his Abilities
his great Reputation for Learning in France, and style him, That Learned
Benedictine, etc. I might add, that Servatus Lupus treats him in his Address,
as Clarissimo suo R. Lupus, Ep. 79.
an intimate and much esteemed Friend, directing his Epistle, To his most dear
Rotrannus; and Familiares habuit Praestantissimos quosque sui seculi viros,
Hincmarum Rem. Rhabanum Mog. Wenilonem Senon: Heriboldum -- Ratbertum
Corbeiensem, Ratramnum Monachum Corbiensem, etc. Baluz. in notis at titulum
[Beati Lupi] p. 340.
Baluzius numbers him among the Famous Men who were the familiar Acquaintance
of that Learned Abbot. As also the Testimony of the Chronicon Hirsaugiense,
published by Trithemius, That he was a Person well accomplished with all sorts
of Literature, and many other proofs of his admirable Learning: But I conceive
those already produced, will convince all unprejudiced Persons; and since his
other Works have appeared in Print, the Adversaries of his Doctrine, touching
the Real Presence, are ashamed to deny him right in this point, and betake
themselves to other arts for the evading the force of his Testimony of the
Belief of the Church in that Age.

To close this Section, I shall give a brief account of his Writings, as well
those which are not extant, as those we have in Print.

The first of his Writings extant, is that of the manner of Christ's Birth, or
of the Virgins Delivery. This must have been written before the Year 844.
Sirmondus in Vita Paschasii Radberti operibus praefixa. Par. 1618.
in which Pascasius Radbertus was made Abbot of Corbey, if Mabillon in Praef.
ad Acta Ben. sec. 4. p. 2. c. 3. nu. 150.

Monachorum omnium peripsema.


F. Mabillon mistake not when he tells us, that his two Books on that Argument,
are a Confutation of Ratramne. For he does not style himself Abbot, but only
the offscouring of all Monks, whereas in his Ibidem inter Acta Ben. p. 135. --
Humilis and exiguus Radbertus vester, etsi indignus, Abbas and Levita Christi
Monachorum omnium peripsema.
Epistle to Carolus Culvus, published by F. Mabillon, he styles himself Abbot.
Nor could his Book be written after his Resignation of that Abbey, being
dedicated to Theodrada, Abbess of Soissons, and her Nuns, which Mabil. ubi
supra.
Theodrada died, A. D. 846. and he resigned not till 851.

The occasion of his writing, was News out of Germany, (as I guess from New
Corbey, which had much correspondence with this Corbey in France, of which it
was a Colony,) that some in those Parts held strange opinions, touching our
Savior's Birth; as though he came not out of his Mothers Womb, into the World,
the same way with other Men. In opposition to that Doctrine, Vide Librum
Ratramni apud Dacherium Spicil. Tom. 1.
Ratramnus asserts, That Christ was Born as other Men, and his Virgin Mother
bare him, as other Women bring forth, to use Tertul. de Carne Christi, c. 23.
Tertullian's words, patefacti corporis lege. Those whose opinions he confutes,
were perhaps, some of those Novices, for whose use Paschasius had written his
Book of the Sacrament, and who had not only imbibed his Doctrine, touching the
Carnal Presence of Christ therein, but might have also heard the manner of our
Savior's Birth, without opening his Mother's Womb, alleged to solve an
Objection against it, for our Adversaries of the Church of Rome now say, Vide
Guil. Forbesii Consider. Modest. de Sacr. Euchar. l. 1. c. 2.
that it is no more impossible for one Body to be in two places than for two
Bodies to be in one, which they conceive must have happened in our Saviors
Birth, as also in his Resurrection, and coming into his Disciples, the Door
being shut. This might provoke Paschasius to write against our Author, as well
as Zeal for the Blessed Virgins Integrity.

And having said thus much on this subject, I cannot wave so fair an
opportunity of doing right to the ever memorable Archbishop Usher, whom Lucas
Dacherius having published this Work, reproacheth as a Liar, for saying,
Vsserius in Hist. Gottesc. c. 11.
That Ratramnus in this Work maintains the same Doctrine, which he has
delivered in his Book touching the Lord's Body and Blood, whereas he makes no
mention of the Eucharist in it. And F. Mabillon, who for his Candor is no less
to be honored than for his great Learning, imputes it to prejudice or mistake.

But I need not use Conringius ad Antiquit. Acad. Supplemento 39. apud
Mabillon. ibid.
Conringius his shift to vindicate him, and suppose Dacherius has suppressed
those passages which induced the Learned Primate to say what he did. It is
enough to justify him, that Apud Dacherium Spicil. Yom. 1. p. 333.
Ratramnus asserts two things, which by consequence oppose Transubstantiation,
and establish the contrary Doctrine; Mabillon. Act. Ben. Praef. sec. 4. p. 2.
c. 3. nu. 153.
and this he notoriously does, 1. In the very scope and drift of his Book,
contradicting an Illustration of that Doctrine by the manner of Christ's Birth.
2. By Denying that Christ (though Omnipresent in his Divinity) can in his Body
be in more than one place, so that when he comes to a new place, he leaves the
place where he was before. This Opinion in its consequences, maintains the
Doctrine of his Book concerning Christ's Body, though not expressly in Terms.

And this is as much as the Primate says. And when we consider where the
Dispute concerning Christ's Birth began, and that Paschasius defended it, what
I have said will appear not improbable. This Book is also in Manuscript in
Salisbury Library, and that of Bennet College in Cambridge.

On what occasion he wrote his two Books of Predestination, I have already
related. They are published by Mauguin, and in the new Bibliotheca Patrum,
Printed at Lions, 1677. Tom. XV. p. 442.

He likewise wrote a Book, about the Year 853. to justify an old Hymn which
Test ipso Hincmaro in libro De non Trina Deitate, operum T. 1. 450.

Et Mauguin. Dissert. Hist. c. 17. Dehinc post aliquot annos cum Hincmarus in
Ecclesia Remensi vetustissimum and receptissimum Hymni Ecclesiastici hunc
versiculum Te Trina Deitas unaque poscimus, cantari vetuisset Ipse Ratramnus
volumine non modicae quantitatis ad Hildegarium Meldensem Episcopum edito ex
libris SS. Hilarii and Augustini de Trinitate veterem Ecclesiae Traditionem
confirmavit.


Hincmarus of Rhemes had commanded to be altered, and that instead of Te Trina
Deitas, they should sing Te Summa Deitas, imagining the former expression to
make Three Gods, against which Order of Hincmarus, Ratramnus wrote a large
Book, asserting the expression to be Orthodox by the Authority of St. Hilary
and St. Augustine, but this piece is lost.

He wrote another Book Test Mabilioni ebi supr. n. 156. and
de Anima, at the instance of Odo, sometimes Abbot of Corbey, and Bishop of
Beauvais against a Monk of the same Convent, who taught that all Men had but
one and the same Soul, which Book is extant in Manuscript in the Vsserio. Hist.
Gottesch. c. 2.
Library of Bennet College in Cambrige, in that of Salisbury Church, and of St.
Eligius at Noyon in France, but not Printed.

About the Year 868. Pope Vide Mauguin. T. 2. Dissert. c. 17. Titulus libri sic
se habet. Contra opposita Graecorum Imperatorum Romanam Ecclesiam infamantium
libri quatuor Rathramni Monachi. Test Mabillonio.
Nicolaus I. having desired Hincmarus, and the French Bishops, to Consider and
Answer the Objections of the Greeks against the Latin Church; and Hincmarus
having employed Odo Bishop of Beauvais therein, it is likely he recommended our
Author to the Bishops, as a Man fit to underrake such a Work, and accordingly
he wrote four Books on that Occasion, published by Spicileg. T. 2.
Dacherius.

He has also among the Vide Felleri Catal. Codd. MSS. Biblioth. Paulinae in
Acad. Lipsiensi Duod. 1686. p. 125.
MSS. of Leipsick Library, an Epistle concerning the Cynocephali, Whether they
be truly Men and of Adam's Seed, or Bruit Creatures? What moved him to discuss
this Question, or how he has determined it, I know not. The Epistle is
directed to one Rimbert a Presbyter (I am apt to think) the same who succeeded
Anscharius in the Sea of Breme, and wrote his Life. For he was born not far
from Old Corbey, and bred up by St. Anscharius, and therefore more likely to
correspond with Ratramn, than the other Rimbertus Presbyter, who was a Dane,
and employed in the Conversion of the Northern Nations.

If the Epistle were addressed to the former, it must be written in or before
the Year 865. when Rimbert was made Archbishop of Breme and Hambrough.

I mention this Book of the Lord's Body and Blood, in the last place, written
by him, as some guess, about the Year 850. or perhaps sooner. Of which I shall
say no more at present, in regard it will furnish matter sufficient for several
Chapters.

CHAP. II. Of his Treatise concerning Christ's Body and Blood, and the Author
cleared of Heresy, and the other Accusations of F. Cellot.
THis Treatise of the Body and Blood of the Lord, was first Printed at Colon,
A. D. 1532. Cellot says, it was first published from a Copy prepared for the
Press by Oecolampadius, who died before it was Printed: That it was not Printed
at Colen, but Basil. How truly, I know not.
who was the Publisher, or what Copy he followed, or what became of the
Manuscript afterward, I know not. The Name of Bertram, and the Inscription to
Charles the Great, are an unquestionable proof that it was not the Lobes MS.
but some other not so ancient, which it is probable fell into bad hands, and is
made away.

The appearance of an Author near 700 years old, and so expressly contradicting
their Doctrine, put the Romish Doctors into great confusion. They all saw it
was necessary to take some course to deprive the Protestants of the advantage
they were likely to make of so material a Witness against them: But they were
very much divided in their Opinions, what course would prove most effectual.

Some have condemned the Author for an Heretic, which is a quick and sure way
to invalidate his Testimony in a point of Faith.

Others have spared the Author, but condemned the Book for Spurious as well as
Heretical, or at least as corrupted by the Disciples of Berengarius and Wiclef.

Others say, that it is not the Work of Ratramne, Monk of Corbey, but of
Joannes Scotus Erigena.

And lastly, their most Learned Writers of this present Age, allow the Book to
be Bertram's, and notwithstanding some rash expressions in it, which may bear a
Catholic sense, acknowledge the Work as well as its Author to be Orthodox, and
say, he does not oppose the present Doctrine of the Roman Church, being rather
for Transubstantiation, than against it.

Wherefore to vindicate this Work from our Adversaries, who use so many tricks
to wrest it out of our hands, I shall endeavor these five things.

1. To show that Ratramnus was Orthodox, and free from all just imputation of
Heresy.

2. To prove that this Treatise is a genuine piece of the IX. Century, that it
has not been maliciously depraved since those times, and that Ratramnus, and
not Joannes Scotus Erigena, is the Author thereof.

3. To settle the true sense of our Author, in some obscure and controverted
terms.

4. To prove, that the Doctre in delivered in this Book, is contrary to that of
Paschasius, and the present Roman Church, but very agreeable to the Doctrine of
the Church of England.

5. To show that he was not singular in his Doctrine, but that other Great Men
of that and the next Age, were of the same Judgment with him.

First then, let us consider the charge of Heresy, which some object against
him. Turrian says, That to cite Bertram, is only to show that Calvin 's
Heresy is not new. Bellarmine vouchsafes him no place in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, though twice he mentions him on the by, and fixes him, A.
D. 850. But in his Bell. Controv. Tom. 3. de Sacr. Eucharist. l. 1. c. 1. sec.
Tertius.
Controversies he numbers him among his Heretics; and with Possevine (who
says notwithstanding the Belgic Index, this Book may not be read but with the
Pope's License, in order to confute it) makes him to have lived under Carolus
Crassus, A. D. 886. So little exactness do these Great Men observe in their
Writings, as to Chronology, so little do they mind what they themselves
elsewhere say, that an ill-natured Protestant Critic might insult over
Possevine and Bellarmine, for slips in Chronology, as often and as justly as
Phil. Labbe de Script. Eccles. quos possim Onochronos, Ardeliones, Mataeologos,
appellat.
Phil. Labbe does over Gerhard, Hottinger, Maresius, etc.

But Praefat. ad Act. Ben. sec. 14. p. 2. c. 1. n. 125.
F. Mabillon observes other Writers every whit as Learned and Orthodox, absolve
him from the charge of Heresy, and he blames those Zealots for giving away an
Author to the Heretics, whom their Ancestors always esteemed a Catholic. De
Script. Eccles. T. 1. p. 53.
Phil. Labbe numbers him among the Catholic Tractators, Radbert, Lanfranc, and
Guitmund. And the Authors of the Belgic Index say he was a Catholic Priest.

And to condemn him upon the Testimony of so incompetent Witnesses, as Turrian,
Bellarmine, Possevine, etc. who are notoriously Parties, and lived many hundred
years after him, is against all Reason and Equity. Especially when they charge
him with no Heretical Opinions save in the matter of the Sacrament, for which
he was never condemned in his own Age, and which is the point now in
Controversy between us and them.

That our Author had the honor to be consulted by Carolus Calvus, on very
profound Arguments, his familiarity with Lupus Abbot of Ferriers, Ex Titulo MS.
operis de Anima.
Odo Bishop of Beauvais, and Hildegarius Bishop of Meaux; the trust reposed in
him by the French Prelates, who employed him to write an Apology for the Latin
Church against the Greeks; to which I may add (if he were the same Person whom
Flodoardus mentions as Abbot of Orbais) his Preferment to that Dignity, are
somewhat more than strong presumptions that he had the repute of an Orthodox,
as well as a Learned Man.

I know no body that offers to make good this charge in particular instances,
but F. Cellot Lud. Cellot. Hist. Gottesc. l. 2. c. 19. l. 3. c. 7. in
quaestione de Eucharistia monstrabitur Haereticus, etc.
a Jesuit, whose accusations are home, I confess, and represent him as
Heterodox, though not convict of Heresy, but he seldom offers in proof any
thing, save some bold conjectures, and those often contrary to the sentiments
of the most Learned Writers of his own Church.

1. He makes him Heterodox in the matter of Cellot. Hist. Gottesc. l. 2. c. 19.
numerat inter causas naufragii miserabilis Monachi, Ratramni Magisterium, l. 3.
c. 7. In Praedestinatione ita se Catholicum exibet ut tamen non levem
suspicionem sinistrae doctrinae -- relinquat.
Predestination, and to have been the Tutor of Gotteschalcus, which I conceive
is not sufficiently proved from the Complements of that Monk, who writes to
him, as he had done to Lupus and others, and calls him Friend and Master. That
he favored the sentiments of Gotteschalcus, I deny not, and that he wrote
against Hincmarus, but that he was not so rigid in the point as that poor Monk
F. Cellot himself confesses. Lupus was of the same judgment, so was Prudentius
Bishop of Troyes, and Vide Vsser. Hist. Gottesc. c. 16.
Remigius Archbishop of Lions, who sticks not to censure the punishment of
Gotteschalcus as beyond all examples of cruelty, and as unmerciful usage
unbecoming Religious Men, and the proceedings against him at Carisiac as
irregular. Our Author's judgment seems to be no other than St. Augustine's
against the Pelagians, and after all F. Cellot's accusations, these Books are
newly Printed in the last Edition of the Bibliotheca Patrum at Lions, without
the least censure.

2. He represents him as Heterodox, in the Cellot. Hist. Gottesc. l. 3. c. 7.
in explicatione Trinitatis ex errore discipuli, and ipse errare intelligetur.
Doctrine of the Trinity, for opposing the Alteration of Trina Deitas by
Hincmarus in an old Hymn, upon pretense that it implied Three God's. But this
contest was not about any Article of Faith, for Trinas Deitates affirmantem
ipse Goteschalcus execratur, apud Hincmarum de non Trina Deit.

Hymni Sanstorum mentis Strophe Vetus in Natali plurium Martyrum.

Te Trina Deitas unaque poscimus.
Vt culpas abluas, noxia detrahas,
Des pacem famulis, nos quoque gloriam,
Per cuncta tibi saecula.

Gotteschalcus and Ratramnus did as little believe Three Gods, as Hincmarus,
nor does he accuse them as Tritheites; the Dispute was about the sense of Trina
Deitas, which they denied to import Three Gods, any more than did Trinus Deus,
and therefore no Alteration need be made in the old usage of the Church. And in
this Controversy, he had the Mauguin. Tom. 2. Dissert. c. 45. Religiosi S.
Benedicti diu multumque reluctati sunt huic immutationi.
Religious of his own Order on his side, who stoutly resisted the Alteration.
And at last, a greater Clerk than Hincmarus, I mean Test N. Alexandro, sec. 9.
p. 2. Diss. V. J. 14. in Hymno Sacris Solemniis ab Angelico Doctore -- edito
ubique canit, in Festo Corp. Christi in Nocturn.

Te Trina Deitas unaque poscimus,
Sic tu nos visita sicut te colimus,
Per tuas semitas duc nos quo tendimus,
Ad lucem quam inhabitas.

Thomas Aquinas, composing an Hymn, now used in the Roman Church, inserts this
very expression. But, says Hist. Gottesc. l. 5. c. 5.
F. Cellot, he refers Trina to the Persons, not to the Nature. And so
(notwithstanding his confident denial) did Ratramnus and Gotteschalcus too. And
upon the whole Controversy, Mauguin and Natalis Alexander, allow them to have
had the better of Hincmarus in this Dispute.

3. Append. ad Hist. Gottesc. Opusc. 7. in notis passim.
Cellot accuses him for writing a crafty and heretical Tract against his Abbot
Paschasius Radbertus, who had explained the Catholic Doctrine of Christ's
Presence in the Sacrament. The Fact I admit, the Crime I deny him guilty of,
and shall vindicate him in a proper place.

4. He makes him of a busy and Vanum vocat and novandi cupidum, -- Ingenium
omnium novitatum capax Ratumni, lib. 5. cap. 2. page 45.

Turbae errantis Antesignani Ratramnus and Gotteschalcus, par Novatorum, p.
346. Monachum Corb adversus Metropolitanum and Abbatem suum calcitrantem. Hist.
Got. p. 570.


pragmatical Humor, a Novelist, and Rebel against his Superiors, viz. his
Abbot and his Archbishop; but how hard this censure is, will appear, when we
consider, that he seems not to have engaged in any Controversy save by the
Command of his Prince, or some Great Prelate, except in his Book de Nativitate
Christi. That his Book of the Sacrament and Predestination, in which he
dissents from his Superior, were written by the King's Order, and that in
defense of the old Verse, propably at the request of Hildegarius Bishop of
Meaux, to whom he dedicated it, and at the request of the Benedictins, who
esteemed him the most able Champion of that whole Order, but the Book being
lost, we cannot be positive. However, he treats them respectfully enough,
confuting their Opinions without reflecting on their Persons, or so much as
naming them any where, as I remember. Nor can he justly be styled a Novelist,
who only resisted the Innovating humor of others, and supported his own
Doctrine by Testimonies out of the Ancient Fathers, and public Offices of the
Church.

There appears nothing in all his Writings favoring of Pride or Faction, and
had he been on the other side, I doubt not but F. Cellot would as freely have
forgiven him his sentiments touching the Sacrament, as he does John Scotus, who
does him service against the Jansenists.

Though Ratramnus seems to have committed one fault, which a Jesuit can hardly
forgive, he has betrayed the Popes Supremacy in his Apology against the
Greeks. He foundeth it not upon any grant from Christ, Cellotius Hist. Gottesc.
Append. p. 578. citat haec ex Ratramni, l. 4. adversos Graecos. Quarta die
Imperator Constantinus privilegium, Romanae Ecclesiae pontifici constituit, ut
in toto orb Romano Sacerdotes ita hunc caput habeant, ut Judices Regem. --
Quando quidem sit Romana Civitas omnibus imperii Romani civitatibus
honorabilior, and Romanus Pontifex principatum obtineat Sacerdotii super omnes
Episcopos, utpote cum sit Civitas haec Domina omnium and illi civitati quisquis
praefuerit Episcopus ex antiquitatis constitutione [non Christi] princeps
omnium habeatur Ecclesiarum -- and paulo post. Quis autem ferat ut
Constanopolitanus Patriarcha cunctis praeferatur Ecclesiis, quod nec Antiquitas
ei contulit, nec ulla decreta majorum constituunt, nec rationis habetur, vel
Ecclesiasticae vel humane jurae fundatum.
but on Ecclesiastical Constitutions, the Grants of Princes, and the Dignity of
the City of Rome, the Head and Mistress of all Cities in the Empire, as the
Pope has the Pre-eminence over all Bishops and Churches, which though at the
time when our Author wrote, was as much as the Pope himself could wish, yet
comes so short of the Papal claims since the Hildebrandine times, that he now
passes at best but for a Trimming Catholic, with F. Cellot and his Friends.

This I hope will suffice to vindicate Ratramnus both in point of Faith toward
God, and of good manners toward his Governors, so that there appears nothing
in his Person, to prejudice us against his Doctrine delivered in this Book,
which whether it be his or not, and whether it be come pure and undepraved to
our hands, I shall enquire in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. That this Book is neither wholly forged, nor yet depraved; that
Ratramnus is its true Author, and not Joannes Scotus Eregina.
AMong our Adversaries of the Roman Church, who allow the Author, but condemn
his Work, there pass Three several Opinions, and all false.

1. That it is a Sixtus Senens. in Praefat Biblioth. Sanctae. Possevinus in
Praefat. Apar. Sac. Breerly.

Parsons in his three Controvers. p. 2. c. 10. But he makes the forgery
committed by the Followers of Berengarius.


late forgery, that it was written by Oecolampadius, and published under the
venerable Name of an Author of the IX Century by the Heretics. This Sixtus
Senensis, and after him Possevine, with extreme impudence pretend. But for want
of good memories, they elsewhere tell us, that the Author of that Book, wrote
under Charles the Great, A. D. 810. or the Gross, A. D. 886. and was confuted
by Paschasius Radbertus. Sure Sixtus Senensis forgot himself very much, when in
the very next Page he accused Oecolampadius for rejecting St. Ambrose his Books
of the Sacrament, which are cited by Bertram in this Work. It is withal
pleasant to observe, that Bishop Fisher Praef. lib. 4. De veritate Corp. and
Saug Christi contra Oecolam. Colen. 1527.
against Oecolampadius, names Bertram (among other Catholic Writers of the
Sacrament) five years before the first Edition of it, 1532. and I am apt to
believe he had read it in Manustript, and was of the same mind with the
University of Doway, who think with candid expounding he is Catholic enough:
But it were doing too much honor to this shameless calumny, for me to insist
longer on its confutation.

2. Others more plausibly, allow Bertram to have written a Book of this
Argument, and that this is the Book, but falling into the hands of Heretics,
the disciples of Berengarius and Wiclef, it is come down to us wretchedly
corrupted and depraved. This is the Opinion of Espenc. De Ador. Euchar. l. 4.
c. 19.
Espencaeus, Greg. De Valentia in Thom. Tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 3. punct. 1.
Gregory of Valentia, and many others, particularly the Publishers of the last
Bibliotheca Patrum at Lions, who give this reason why they have not inserted it
into that Collection, viz. Bibliothecae Patrum. Lugd. 1677. T. XV. ad finem
libri secundi de Praedest.
Because it is, if not a suspicious piece, yet depraved and adulterated with
spurious mixtures.

This is easily said, but not so easily believed: In whose hands have the
Manuscripts been kept, in ours or theirs? Has not the Popish Interest
prevailed all Europe over till the beginning of the XVI. Century? Have not the
Popish Clergy had the keeping all famous Libraries, and have they kept them so
negligently, that Heretics have had access and opportunity of depraving all
the Copies in the World? If they say, their number was small, and it might
easily be done, whom are we to thank for that? If they are interpolated, why do
they not assign the passages, and by genuine Copies convince the World of so
gross an Imposture? But alas! the pretense of Interpolation is very idle, and
he that would go about to clear it of what they call Heresy, must do it una
litura, and with a single dash expunge the whole Book; for though they may pick
out two or three passages that seem to favor them, yet if they read the next
sentences before and after, they will plainly see they are nothing to their
purpose.

For my own part, I doubt not, but that this Book is come to our hands as free
from corruption as any Book of so great Antiquity, it is manifestly all of one
piece; but if it be corrupted, those of the Church of Rome are likely to have
been the Interpolators, it being more easy to foist in two or three passages
into a Book, than two hundred; and I can, beyond all possibility of
contradiction, make out, that those passages which we allege in favor of our
Doctrine against Transubstantiation, are near an hundred years older than
Berengarius, who was for almost thirty years together baited in one Council
after another, and died about the Year 1088. For Aelfrick, Abbot of Malmsbury,
in a Homily translated by him into into the Saxon tongue about the year 970.
has taken word for word most of those passages which now sound harsh to Roman
Ears: This was observed by the Learned Answer to the Jesuits Challenge, chapter 3
of the Real Presence.
Usher, who has collected several, and I having with care compared Bertram and
that Homily, have observed several others, and I conceive it will not not be
unacceptable to the Reader to see them set in parallel, which I shall do,
following the This Homily is extant in the second Tome of the Book of Martyrs.
And in Lisle's Saxon Monuments, in quarto, Land. 1638. In English alone at
Oxford, about the Year 1674. And in Saxon and Latin by Mr. Wheelock in his
Notes on Bid, Hist. Eccl. L.V. c. 22. p. 462.
Edition Printed by John Day in 12o about the year 1566. And it is remarkable,
that after the Homilist comes to treat of the Sacrament (for a good part of
their discourse is about the Paschal Lamb) there scapes hardly one Page without
somewhat out of Bertram till he resume his former discourse.

I shall only note by the way, that the old word Husel ab Hostia derivari
modeste conjicit Eruditissimus Somnerus; at rectius omnino Cl. Junius in
Glossario a Gothico HUNSL deducit Saxonicum Husel, litera N, euphoniae gratia,
uti in nonnullis aliis origin Gothicis e medi^ Sublata, ex. gr. Tunth Gothice,
Saxonice Toth Anglice Tooth, Munth Gothice, Saxonice Muth, Anglice, Mouth, etc.
Housel, which is frequently used in this Homily, to signify the Holy
Eucharist, is of Gothic Extraction, and derived from Hunsl, a Sacrifice, in
Saxon Husel, the letter N. being here, as in some other Instances, left out to
soften the Pronunciation. Our Saxon Ancestors styled the Holy Eucharist a
Sacrifice, as the Fathers, both Greek and Latin anciently did in a large and
improper Sense, viz. Either as it is a Commemoration of that proper Sacrifice
once offered on the Cross, or as Alms, Prayers, and Thanksgiving are sometimes
called a Sacrifice.

Ratramnus, As Bertram defines what a Figure is, and what the Truth. 6, 7, 8.
8. VEritas -- utpote cum Christus dicitur natus de Virgin, Passus,
Crucifixus, mortuus and sepultus. One of his Instances of a Figure is, when
Christ calls himself Bread, whereas substantialiter nec Panis Christus, etc.

9. At ille panis qui per Sacerdotis ministerium Christi corpus efficitur aliud
exterius humanis sensibus ostendit, aliud interius Fidelium mentibus clamat.
Exterius quidem panis quod ante fuerat, formae praetenditur, color ostenditur,
sapor accipitur --

10. Cum tamen post Mysticam consecrationem, nec panis jam dicitur nec vinum,
sed Christi corpus and sanguis.

17. Consideremus fontem Sacri Baptismatis, qui fons vitae non immerito
nuncupatur -- in eo tamen font si consideretur solummodo quod corporeus
aspicit sensus, elementum fluidum conspicitur, corruptioni subjectum, nec nisi
corpora lavandi potentiam obtinere; sed accessit Sancti Spiritus per Sacerdotis
consecrationem virtus, and efficax facta est non solum corpora, verum etiam
animas diluere, and spirituales Sordes spirituali potentia dimovere.

18. Ecce in uno eodemque elemento duo videmus in esse sibi resistentia -- in
proprietate est humor corruptibilis, in Mysterio vero virtus sanabilis.

19. Sic itaque Christi corpus and sanguis superficie tenus considerata,
creatura est, mutabilitati corruptelaeque obnoxia, si Mysterii vero perpendis
virtutem, vita est participantibus se tribuens immortalitatem.

69. Multa differentia separantur corpus in quo passus est Christus -- and hoc
corpus quod in mysterio Passionis Christi, quotidie a fidelibus celebratur --

72. Illa namque Caro quae Crucifixa est, de Virginis carne facta est ossibus
and nervis compacta, humanorum membrorum lineamentis distincta; rationalis
animae spiritu vivificata in propriam vitam. At vero caro spiritualis quae
populum credentem pascit secundum speciem quam gerit exterius, frumenti granis
manu artificis consistit, nullis nervis, obsibusque compacta, nulla membrorum
varietate distincta, nulla rationali substantia vegetata: Quicquid enim in ea
vita praebet substantiam spiritualis est potentiae and invisibilis
efficientiae, divinaeque virtutis. Atque aliud long consistit secundum quod
exterius conspicitur, and illud secundum quod in Mysterio creditur.

76. Corpus Christi quod mortuum est, resurrexit and immortale factum est jam
non moritur and mors illi ultra non dominabitur. Aeternum est jam, non
passibile. Hoc autem quod in Ecclesia celebratur, temporale est non aeternum,
corruptibile est non incorruptum -- sed 77. negari non potest corrumpi quod per
parts comminutum dispartitur ad sumendum and dentibus commolitum in corpus
trajicitur.

88. Hoc Corpus [sc. quod in Mysterio celebratur] pignus est and species, illud
veritas. Hoc enim geritur donec ad illud perveniatur, ubi vero ad illud
perventum fuerit, hoc removebitur.

60. Corpus Christi est, sed non corporaliter, sanguis Christ est, sed non
corporaliter.

25. Nec istic ratio qua fieri potuit est disquirenda, sed fides quod factum
sit adhibenda.

25. Ipse namque qui nunc in Ecclesia omnipotenti virtute Panem and Vinum in
sui corporis carnem and proprii cruoris undam spiritualiter canvertit, ipse
tunc quoque Manna de Coelo datum Corpus suum and Aquam de Petra profusam
preprium sanguinem invisibiliter operatus est. --

27. Dominus Jesus Christus priusquam pateretur accepto pane gratias egit and
dedit discipulis suis dicens, Hoc est Corpus meum, etc. Videmus nondum passum
esse Christum, and jam tamen sui corporis and sanguinis Mysterium operatum
fuisse. -- 28. Sicut ergo paulo antequam pateretur panis substantiam and vini
creaturam convertere potuit in proprium corpus quod Passurum erat, and in suum
sanguinem qui post fundendus extabat, sic etiam in deserto Manna and Aquam de
Petra in suam carnem and sanguinem convertere praevaluit, quamvis long post
and caro illius in Cruce pro nobis pendenda, and sanguis ejus -- fundendus
superabat.

78. Manducavit and Moses Manna, manducavit and Aaron, manducavit and Phinees,
manducaverunt and multi qui Deo placuerunt and mortui non sunt: Quare? quia
visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter esurierunt,
spiritualiter gustaverunt, ut spiritualiter satiarentur.

39. Quod fecit semel nunc quotidie frequentat, semel enim pro peccatis populi
se obtulit, celebratur tamen haec eadem oblatio singulis per fideles diebus,
sed in mysterio, ut quod Dominus Jesus Christus semel sese offerens adimplevit,
hoc in ejus Passionis memoriam quotidie geritur per mysteriorum celebrationem.

73. Considerandum quoque quod in illo pane non solum corpus Christi, verum
corpus etiam in eum credentis populi figuretur.

95. Et -- sic dicit in consequentibus, Corpus ergo Christi vultis Intelligere
Apostolum audite dicentem vos estis corpus Christi and Membra -- Mysterium
vestrum in mensa Domini positum est. Mysterium Domini accipitis ad id quod
estis Amen respondetis, and respondendo subscribitis. Audis ergo Corpus Christi
and respondes Amen esto membrum Christi ut verum sit Amen -- ipsum Paulum
dicentem audiamus, unus Panis and unum Corpus multi sumus.

75 Sic in vino qui Sanguis Christi dicitur, aqua misceri jubetur, nec unum
sine altero permittitur offerri quia nec populus sine Christo, nec Christus
sine populo sicut nec caput sine corpore, nec corpus sine capite valet
existere. Aqua denique in illo Sacramento populi gestat imaginem.

The Saxon Homily.
SO Aelfric says, some things are spoken of Christ by signification, p. 31.
i. e. figuratively, and some in propriety.

A true thing and certain it is, that Christ was born of a Maid, suffered death
of his own accord. He is called Bread by signification, i. e. figuratively, but
Christ is not so in true nature, neither Bread, etc.

p. 32. Truly the Bread and Wine, which through the Mass of the Priest is
hallowed, shows one thing outwardly to human Senses, and another thing they
inwardly call to believing minds. clyp^ath.
Outwardly they appear Bread and Wine, both in figure and in taste.

And they be truly after their hallowing Christ's Body and Blood through
Ghostly Mystery.

p. 33. So the Holy Font-Water, which is called the Wellspring of Life, is
like in shape to other Water, and subject to corruption, but the Holy Ghosts
might comes to the corruptible Water through the Priest blessing, and it may
afterward wash the Body and Soul from all sin through Ghostly might.

Behold, now we see two things in this one Creature. After true nature, that
Water is corruptible moisture; and after Ghostly Mystery, has hallowing might.

So also if we behold the Holy Housel [or Sacrament] after bodily sense, then
we see that it is a Creature corruptible and mutable; if we acknowledge therein
Ghostly might, then understand we that Life is therein, and that it gives
immortality to them that eat it with Faith.

p. 35. Much difference is betwixt the Body in which Christ suffered, and the
Body which is hallowed to housel. The Body truly in which Christ suffered, was
born of the Flesh of Mary, with Blood, with Bones, with Skin, with Sinews, with
human Limbs, and with a reasonable Soul living. And his Ghostly Body, which we
call the Housel, p. 36.
is gathered of many Corns without Blood and Bone, without Limb, and without
Soul -- whatsoever is in that Housel that gives the substance of Life, that is
of the Ghostly might and invisible operation. And therefore is the Holy Housel
called a Mystery, because there is one thing in it seen, and another thing
understood.

p. 37. Certainly Christ's Body, in which he suffered Death, and rose again
from Death, never dies henceforth, but is Eternal and Impassible. But that
Housel is Temporal, not Eternal; corruptible, and divided into several parts,
chewed betwixt the Teeth, and sent into the Belly.

p. 38. This Mystery is a pledge and a Hip, and not as above getacnunge, which
is a figure in speech.
Figure, Christ's Body is the Truth itself. This Pledge we keep mystically,
until we be come to the p. 68. Quod dente premitur, fauce glutitur, quod
receptaculo ventris fuscipitur.
Truth itself, then is that Pledge ended.

Truly it is so as we said before, Christ's Body and Blood not Bodily but
Ghostly. See p. 35.

You should not search how it is done, but hold in Faith that it is so done.

p. 43. We said to you erewhile, that Christ hallowed Bread and Wine to Housel
before his Suffering, and said, This is my Body and my Blood. He had not
suffered as yet, he turned through invisible might that Bread to his own Body,
and that Wine to his own Blood, as formerly he did in the Wilderness before
that he was born to Men, when he turned that Heavenly Meat to his Flesh, and
that Water flowing from the Rock to his own Blood.

That which next follows, is a quotation out of St. Augustine, which it is very
likely that Elfrick took from Bertram, and not at first hand from that Father.

p. 44. Moses and Aaron, and many others of that People which pleased God, eat
that Heavenly Bread, and they died not that Everlasting death, [though they
died the common death] they saw that the Heavenly Meat [viz. Manna] was visible
and corruptible, and they understood somewhat Spiritual by that visible thing,
and Spiritually received it.

p. 46. Once Christ suffered in himself, and yet nevertheless his suffering is
daily renewed, through the Mystery of the Holy Housel at the Holy Mass.

p. 47. We ought also to consider diligently, how this Holy Housel, is both
Christ's Body, and the Body of all Faithful Men after Ghostly Mystery, as Wise
Augustine says, If you will understand of Christ's Body, hear the Apostle Paul
thus speaking, Ye truly be Christ's Body and his Members. Now is your Mystery
set on God's Table, and ye receive your Mystery, p. 48.
which Mystery ye be yourselves, be that which you see on the Altar, and
receive that which yourselves be. And again, St. Paul says, We many, be one
Bread, and one Body. --

i. e. Cannons Ecclesiastical, not the Holy Scripture.
Holy Books command that Water be mingled with Wine, which shall be for Housel,
because the Water signifies the People, and the Wine Christ's Blood, therefore
shall not the one without the other be offered at the Holy Mass. That Christ
may be with us, and we with Christ; the Head with the Limbs, and the Limbs with
the Head. p. 51.

And after these words our Homilist resumes his former Discourse of the Paschal
Lamb.

Thus have I at large set down in Parallel, the Passages of that Saxon Homily
taken out of Bertram. The Sea the Preface of the Homily.
Sermon was originally Latin, which Elfrick translated into Saxon; whether he
were the Compiler in Latin, I cannot be positive. But it seems the succeeding
Ages would not bear this Doctrine, for which reason the Latin is utterly lost;
either being wilfully made away, or the Governors of our Church not thinking it
fit to transcribe and propagate what, after the condemnation of Berengarius,
and the promotion of his great Adversary Lanfranc to the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, was generally reputed Heresy. But through the wonderful good
Providence of God, the whole is preserved in the Saxon Tongue, which few
understood.

By this account of that Homily, you learn Two things, and a Third Observation
I shall add.

1. That Bertram's Book was neither forged by Oecolampadius, nor yet depraved
by Berengarius or Wiclef his Disciples, since the most express Passages against
the Popish Real Presence are read in that Homily 70 or 80 years before
Berengarius made any noise in the World.

2. What I design to insist upon more largely in the last Chapter of this
Discourse, viz. That Ratramnus or Bertram stood not alone, but had others of
the same judgment with him in the IX and X Century, and that Paschasius his
Doctrine had not received as yet the stamp of public Authority, either by any
Popes or Councels confirmation.

3. Nevertheless this carnal Doctrine of Paschasius did daily get ground in
that obscure and ignorant Age next that he lived in, as may appear by some
Passages in this Homily (which I have not recited, because they are not in
Bertram) the absurd consequences of that error. For instance, p. 39 and 40,
there are two Miracles inserted to prove the Carnal Presence contrary to the
scope of the whole Discourse, and the one contrary to their own Doctrine of
Christ's Presence. This Miracle is found in Paschas Radbert. de Corp. and Sang.
Dom. in Bibl. Patrum. Par. 1610. Tom. VI. c. 14.
They tell you of a Woman whofe doubts touching the Real Presence, were cured
at the Prayers of St. Gregory, at whose request God caused the Host she was
about to receive, to appear as though there lay in the dish a joint of a Finger
all Bloody. Whereas, according to the Popish Doctrine, Christ's Council. Trid.
Sess. 13. Can. 3.
whole Body, Soul and Divinity is in every bit of the Host, and drop of the
consecrated Wine; and this Miracle, if it proves any thing, must prove the
contrary.

Again, our Homilist in the beginning of p. 47. says immediately after those
words cited by me out of the 46 page. Therefore the Holy Mass is profitable
both to the quick and to the dead. The propitiatory Sacrifice was by this time
set on foot, which necessarily supposes the Corporal Presence of Christ. But
it is worth observing, however, that the Adoration of the Sacrament sprang not
up till some Ages after, it being not mentioned either by Radbertus or
Ratramnus, or Elfrick in this Homily.

3. The Third Opinion, maintained by those who do not condemn our Author,
though they do this Book, is, that it is not the Work of Ratramnus, but of
Joannes Scotus. And so it may be for ought I have hitherto said, in regard he
was more Ancient than our Saxon Homilist, and equal with Bertram.

This Opinion was first delivered by the Learned P. de Marca in Epistola. Apud
Dacherium in Spicil. Tom. 2.
Peter de Marca, and is urged with great confidence by a At the end of Mr.
Arnaud's Defense, in quarto. Par. 1669. Dissert. 1. The Author is Mr. Paris.
Monk of St. Genouefe, whose Modesty M. Arnaud tells us caused him to conceal
his Name.

This Dissertator makes a great dust with his Conjectures, and would persuade
us that Bertram and Ratramnus are not the same Person, by reason of the variety
of Names given him, as I have shown in the beginning of this Discourse; but
this is a poor shift, for every one knows how differently Writers report the
Names of Men who flourished in that Age, and in those Parts of France; and
where the Authors make no difference, it often happens by the Transcribers
mistake: One would think the Instance he gives of Cellot's Anonymous Writer,
who in his first leaf calls the Adversaries of Paschasius, Rabanus and
Ratramnus, and in the next Babanus and Intramus, might have suppressed that
Objection.

In the next Section, he says, Trithemius and Sigebert make Bertram to have
written but one Book of Predestination, whereas Ratramnus wrote two, and that
the two MSS. mentioned by Suffridus Petrus, may be false written: And I may
better say, they are not; for he names neither more, nor elder Copies that make
it out. As for the precise number of Books, Sigebert, and more curious Men, are
not always exact, but many times, where the Work is small, call two Books, Ad
Carolum librum de Praedestin.
because one Work, a Book, so Sigebert says, and not one Book.

In his Third Section, this Monk of St. Genouefe gives us nothing but a taste
of his Modesty, in taxing the incomparable Usher of false dealing, and telling
the World that his Testimony is of no credit concerning a rasure out of a
Manuscript he had seen at Cambridge, and wonders he has the confidence to hope
that his bare word should be taken for it, after his false dealing about
Ratramnus his Book of Christ's Birth, without telling how the Passage rased was
recovered.

In the last Section, he offers toward an Answer to the Reasons that induced
Father Cellot to conclude Ratramnus Corbeiensis the Author of those Books which
pass under the Name of Bertram; I could, were it worth while, show the
insufficiency of his Answers, and would do it, but that I have in reserve such
Testimonies from F. Mabillon, as will baffle all his amusing Conjectures, and
to which any man of modesty will submit.

This he offers to prove, that Bertram is not Ratramnus. To make good the other
part of his undertaking, and show that Joannes Scotus is the Author of this
Book, he suggests Three things.

1. That this Book is agreeable to the account that is given of Scotus his
Book, whose Authority Berengarius used.

2. That the style and manner of arguing, are Scotus his peculiar way.

3. That the Disciples of Berengarius, after Scotus his Book was condemned, in
the Synods at Vercelli and Rome, gave it the disguised Name of Bertram, to
preserve it from the flames.

His Arguments from the account given of Scotus his Book, are well answered by
F. Mabillon; and all I shall say, is, what he omits, viz. That the Doctrine of
Scotus, according to the best accounts we can have of it, is not agreeable to
that of Bertram; for if F. Alexander and others are not Mistaken in Quod
Sacramenta Altaris non verum Corpus and verus Sanguis sit Domini, sed tantum
memoria very Corporis and Sanguinis ejus, de Praed. c. 31.
Hincmarus his meaning, he taught that the Sacrament was only a Memory of
Christ's Body and Blood, which this Dissertator, to give us a Specimen of his
Honesty, as he did before of his Modesty, changes into a naked figure without
any sort of Truth, and expressly contrary to his Sentiments, imputes to Bertram
as his Doctrine.

2. The style of Bertram and Scotus are not at all alike: Scotus is full of
Greek words, and notions and citations out of the Greek Fathers, which Bertram
is free from. His way of Arguing is not Syllogistical, as Bertram's, so far as
I can observe by his Books De Naturis. And his notion, Scotus de Divisione
Naturae, l. 5 N. XX. Item l. 2. n. XI.
That Christ's glorified Body is absorpt in the Divine Nature, and is not
local, nor visible, nor had the same Members after its Resurrection which it
had before, will quite overthrow many of Bertram's Arguments, to prove that in
the Sacrament is not exhibited the same Body in which he died and rose again.

His Third suggestion is a mere Conjecture, and a very weak one. For if
Berengarius his Disciples feigned that Name to preserve the Book from the fire,
What use did they preserve it for? What service did it ever do them? Who ever
mentions any of them that alleged Bertram's Authority? How comes it to pass
that no Copies of it were preserved in the Southern Parts of France, where the
Albigenses and Waldenses, Berengarius Disciples, have abounded in all times
ever since? It is much they should not save one Copy of Bertram.

But since he is Conjecturing, Why may not I offer a Conjecture or two in this
matter? 1. Why might not Bertram's Book through mistake both with Berengarius
and his Adversaries, pass under the Name of Scotus? It is not impossible, but I
insist not upon it. 2. It is very probable that when the Synods of Vercellis
and Rome condemned Scotus his Book to the flames, those who had the execution
of the Decree, especially in Normandy and England, Lanfranc's Province, might
burn Bertram for company, and occasion the present scarcity of Manuscripts.

But to silence all these pretenses, and show that Bertram's Book is no
Forgery, not corrupted by Heretical mixtures, nor yet written by Scotus, but
Ratramnus, Monk of Corbey; I shall close this Chapter, with the iningenuous
acknowledgment of the Learned and honest F. Mabillon, who says, Act. Ben. Sec.
IV. p. 2. Praef. p. 45. n. 83.
Traveling in the Netherlands, I went to the Monastery of Lobez, where, among
the few Manuscripts now remaining, I found two. One Book written 800 years
since, containing two pieces, one of the Lord's Body and Blood, and the other
of Predestination; the former one Book, the latter two. The Inscription and
beginnings of both were thus in the Manuscript; Thus begins the Book of
RATRaNVS, Therefore it is not Jo. Scotus.
of the Body and Blood of the Lord. You commanded me, Glorious Prince. At the
end of this Book. Thus begins the Book of RATRAMNVS concerning God's
Predestination. To his Glorious Lord, and most Excellent King Charles,
RATRAMNVS, etc. As in the Printed Book. The other Book was a Catalogue of the
Library of Lobez, with this Title, A. D. 1049. The Friars of Lobez taking an
account of the Library, find in it these Books -- Ratramnus of the Lord's Body
and Blood one Book. The same Author of God's Predestination, two Books, which
gives us to understand, that the Book which contains these pieces of Ratramnus
is the very same set down in the Catalogue A. D. 1049. and written before that
time; and by the hand, it appears to have been written a little before the IX
Century. And I doubt not but it is the very Book which Herigerus Abbot of Lobez
used at the end of the X Century.

This is full proof that Ratramnus is the Author, and that the Book is no
modern Forgery, being 800 years old.

Well, but has it not been corrupted and interpolated by Heretics? Let F.
Mabillon answer again touching the sincerity of the Editions of this Book; I
compared (says he) the Lobez Manuscript with the Printed Books; Ibid. p. 64.
nu. 130.
and the reading is true, except in some faulty places, which I corrected by
the Excellent Lobez Manuscript. There is That word is and existit p. which I
have inserted into the Text upon F. Mabillon's Authority. Let the Papists make
their best of it.
one word of some moment omitted -- which yet I will not say, was fraudulently
left out by the Heretics, the first Publishers of it, in regard, as I said
before, there appears not any thing of unfaithfulness in other places.

Thus does this Learned and Ingenuous Benedictine testify, that the Book we
now publish, is a genuine piece of the IX Century, that Ratramnus, Monk of
Corbey, is the true Author, and that his Work is come to our hands sincere, and
without Heretical mixtures either of Berengarius or Wiclef's Disciples.

Mabil. Iter Germanicum praefixum Analect. Tom. IV. Incipit Liber Ratramni de
perceptione Corporis and Sanguinis Domini ad Carolum Magnum.
Beside the Lobez MS. the same Father in his Germain Voyage met with another in
the Monastery of Salem Weiler, which he judges by the hand to be 700 years
old. This gives the Title in the end, as the Lobez MS. but in the beginning,
styleth it, The Book of Ratramne, of Receiving the Lords Body and Blood. To
Charles the Great.

CHAP. IV. Of the the true Sense of the Author in some controverted Expressions.
BEfore we can comprehend the Sentiments of Ratramnus in the Controversy
depending between us and the Church of Rome, touching Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament, it will be necessary to settle and clear his true meaning in some
Terms, which frequently occur in this Tract: Because our Adversaris, by abusing
the ambiguity of them, and expounding them according to the Prejudices
wherewith Education has possessed them, seem to think Bertram their own, and
charge us with impudence and folly in pretending to his Authority.

Those Terms which are in the state of the Question, are the principal Keys of
the whole Discourse, and well understood, will open our Author's mind therein.

That Quod in Ecclesia ore fidelium sumitur Corpus and Sanguis Christi. Qu. 1.
5.

Quod ore fidelium per Sacramentorum Mysterium in Ecclesia quotidie sumitur. Q.
2. sect. 50.


which the mouth receives, is the Subject of both Questions. Not what the
Faithful receive any way, but what their Teeth press, their Throat swalloweth,
and their Bellies receive. In what sense the consecrated Elements are Christ's
Body and Blood? and whether his natural Body or not?

In the first Question there are two opposite Terms, See them explained by
Bertram himself. sect. 7, 8. and him determining the Sacramental change to be
Figuratively wrought, not corporally, sect. 9, 16. and supporting himself by
the Testimony of St. Augustine de Doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
Figure and Truth. Figure.


The word Figure, when applied to Terms or Propositions, is taken in a
Rhetorical sense, and implies those Expressions not to be proper, but either
Metaphors, or Metonymies, etc. as when Christ is called a Vine. When applied to
things, as the consecrated Elements, Figure and Mystery are of the same
signification, and imply the thing spoken of to be a Sign or Representation of
some other thing. Verity or Truth.
And on the contrary, Verity or Truth in this Tract, when applied to Terms or
Propositions, signifies Propriety of Speech; but when applied to things, it
imports In Proprietate, Substantialiter, in manifestationis, Luce in veritatis
simplicitate, in this Tract, are equivalent to naturally, and in Verity of
Nature. This the Saxon Homily very well clears, and as superficie tenus
considerata answers to in proprietate a little before in Bertram, sect. 19. so
in the Saxon Homily superficie tenus considerata is rendered after bodily
understanding, which answers to true Nature immediately preceding.
Truth of Nature. So then Ratramnus determines the first Question to this
effect. That the words of our Savior in the Institution of the Holy Eucharist,
are not to be taken properly, but figuratively; and that the consecrated
Elements orally received by the Faithful, are not the True Body of Christ, but
the Figure, or Sacrament of it; though not mere empty figures, or naked signs,
void of all Efficacy, but such as through the Blessing annexed to our Savior's
Institution, and the powerful operation of the Spirit of Christ working in and
by those Sacred Figures, is the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ.

Besides this, Another sense of Verity.
Verity or Truth has yet another sense, as it stands opposed to a Lie or
Falsehood: For a Proposition is not immediately false, where the Praedicate is a
Metaphor or Metonymy, and does not in its first and native signification agree
to the subject; for unless the Trope be too obscure, it conveys the Speakers
true meaning into the mind of such as hear him.

Now in this sense Non utique mentitur, etc. sect. 35. and supra, cur nemo tam
ineptus est ut nos ita loquentes arguat esse mentitos, etc.
St. Augustine, cited by our Author, says, he tells no Lie, who gives the
Name of the thing itself to the Sign and Sacrament of it; and that this manner
of speaking was perfectly understood. And I may add, it was very familiar among
the Jews, and is Authorized by a multitude of Scripture Examples. Now in this
sense Ratramnus in some places affirms, that the consecrated Elements are truly
Christ's Body and Blood, and this without the least contradiction to himself,
though in the other sense he more frequently denies it. And a due regard to
these two senses of Verity or Truth, will clear the obscurity of which the
Romanists accuse our Author in many Passages of this Work.

There is another term of the same importance, Manifestation.
viz. Manifestation; but our Adversaries pretend it is a Key of the whole Work,
because Ratramnus defines Truth to be rei manifestae demonstratio, and charge
the Mabilonius A.B. Sec. IV. P. 2. Praef. n. 101.
French Translator of falsifying the Author, because he renders manifestae and
manifesta participatione, real and really. They say, whatever is manifest is
real, but the word real does not express the full notion of manifest, which
further includes evidence, many things being real which are not manifest. And
this is true. But yet Bertram's sense of the word must be judged by his own use
of it, which will appear by inspecting the several places of the Book where it
occurs; and I must needs say, that I cannot make sense of him, if he mean not
as the French Translator has rendered him.

In the state of the question, where he explains Verity, by that which appears
manifestationis luce, in a manifest light, or naked and open, his meaning in
that Question, (or rather the meaning of those against whom he writes, and
whose error the first part of this Discourse is intended to rectify) cannot
be; whether the Sacrament was the Body of Christ appearing in its own shape to
our bodily Eye: For that Cardinal Perron, or Mr. Arnaud do not pretend the
Stercorarists, or whoever else Bertram opposes, to have believed, but that the
accidents of Bread and Wine affected, or were subjected in the natural Body and
Blood of Christ. Now as to the matter of the Manifest appearance of Christ's
Body, it is all one, whether the accidents of Bread and Wine be subjected in
the Body and Blood of Christ, or subsist without a subject; for the bodily Eye
does not behold the Body of Christ, the more or less manifestly for that; nor
does it at all manifestly behold Christ's Body, unless it see him in the form
of a Man. And therefore if they meant any thing, it must be, whether the
sensible Object in the Sacrament were Christ's very Body, though under the
figure of the Sacramental Elements.

But to clear the point, we need only compare the two Prayers in the close of
Bertram's Discourse on the second Question, and we shall find, that what in one
Prayer they beg of God to receive by a manifest participation, in the other
they pray to be made really partakers of; and in the same Collect, manifest
participation is opposed to Receiving in a Sacramental Image: Now there is
nothing more naturally opposed to an Image, than the very thing whose Image it
is, or to a Sacrament, than the res Sacramenti, the real Object signified and
exhibited under it. The Reader will find the word bears the same sense in those
few other places where Ratramnus uses it, which are all near the end of the
Book.

Another controverted Term is Species, Species.
which has two senses in this Book. It is most commonly used to signify the
kind, and specifical nature of any thing, and is always so taken where it is
set in opposition to a Figure, or Sacrament, or where the Author is declaring
the nature of the consecrated Elements.

Sometimes it signifies the appearance or likeness of a thing; so it is taken
when it is opposed to Truth, as in the Post-Communion Prayer cited by
Ratramnus, and in his Inferences from it.

Besides these, the Romanists have another acceptance of the word, making it
to signify the sensible qualities of the consecrated Elements subsisting
without their substance, in which sense I positively affirm, that Species is no
where used in this Treatise. And herein the Authors of the Index Expurg. Belg.
in Bertramo. tametsi non diffitear Bertramum tunc temporis nescivisse exact
accidentia ista absque omni substantia sua subsistere, etc.
Belgic Index will bear me out, who acknowledge that Bertram did not exastly
know how Accidents could subsist out of their Subjects, which subtle Truth
latter Ages have learnt out of the Scripture.

As Species ordinarily signifies Nature, Species Visibilis.
so the addition of Visibilis alters not its signification. For Ratramnus does
not speak of those qualities which immediately affect the sense abstracted from
their Subject. And I know nothing in Reason, nor yet in the Holy Scriptures,
which are the Rule of our Faith, that can enforce us to believe that our Senses
are not as true Judges of what the Mouth receives in the Sacrament, as they
are of the nature of any other Object whatsoever, and may as easily discern
whether it be Bread or Flesh, as they can distinguish a Man from a Tree.

Our Author frequently mentions the Divine Word, Divine Word.
by whose power the Sacred Elements are Spiritually changed into Christ's Body.
Now when he thus speaks, we must not imagine, that he means a natural change of
the Substance of the thing consecrated by the efficacy of the words of
consecration, but a Spiritual change effected by the Power and Spirit of
Christ, who is God the Word, as he explains himself.

The last Term that needs explaining, Spiriutal Body.
is Christ's Spiritual Body; this he affirms the Sacrament to be in many
places. Now by a Spiritual Body, we are not to understand the natural Body of
Christ, but existing after the manner of a Spirit, or as our Adversaries love
to speak, not according to its proper existence, that is to say, it is Christ's
Natural Body, but neither visible nor local, nor extended; this is not
Bertram's sense of Christ's Spiritual Body, but that the thing so called, is
Figuratively and Mystically Christ's Body, and that it Spiritually communicates
to the Faithful, Christ with all the benefits of his Death.

I may also add, that Bertram uses great variety of Phrases to express that
which we call the outward sign in the Sacrament, that which the outward sense
beholds, that which the bodily eye sees, that which is outwardly seen or done
corporeal, that which the Teeth press, or the Mouth receives, that which feeds
the Body, that which appears outwardly, importing the sensible qualities to be
all that we have to judge the nature of visible Objects by, its extension and
figure, its color, its smell, its taste, its solidity, etc. None of those
Phrases imply the Accidents without the Substance, but they are descriptions of
the Sacramental Symbols or outward Signs.

And to these are opposed, that which faith, or the eyes of the mind only
beholds, that which we believe, that which is inwardly contained, or
Spiritually seen or done, that which faith receives, the secret virtue latent
in the Sacrament, the saving benefits of it, that which feeds the Soul, and
ministers the Sustenance of eternal life, all expressions equivalent to the
thing signified, or the grace wrought by the Sacrament. Also invisibly and
inwardly are generally of the same signification with spiritually.

These are the Terms whose Ambiguity Popish Writers commonly abuse, when they
go about to persuade us, that Ratramnus in this Book asserts the Real Presence,
in the sense of the Roman Church, and is for Transubstantiation, which any Man
that reads him, will find as difficult to believe, as Transubstantiation itself.

CHAP. V. That this Treatise expressly Confutes the Dostrine of
Transubstantiation, and is very agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of
England.
IT being acknowledged by Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. de Paschasio Radberto ad
A. D. 850
Bellarmine, that the first who wrote expressly and at large, concerning the
Verity of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, was Paschasius Radbertus,
(though he and Possevine, to mention no more, mistake grossly, in saying, that
he wrote against Bertram,) and Sirmondus confesses that he was the first who
explained the Genuinum Ecclesiae Catholicae sensum ita primus explicuit ut viam
caeteris aperuerit, qui de eodem argumento multi postea scripsere. Sirmond. in
vita Paschasii praefixa operibus, in Folio, Par. 1618.
genuine sense of the Catholic Church, so as to open the way for others, who
have since written on that Subject. It will not be amiss, before I propose
distinctly the Doctrins of the Church of Rome and our own Church, that I say
somewhat of Radbertus, and his sentiments, which our Adversaries own to be a
true Exposition of the sense of their Church.

That Bertram (as Bellarmine tells us) was the first that called
Transubstantiation in Question, we are not much to wonder, since Radbertus was
the first that broached that Error in the Western Church, and no Error can be
written against, till it be published. And Contra quem [i. e. Paschasium] satis
argumentantur and Rabanus in Epistola ad Egilonem Abbatem and Ratramnus libro
composito ad Carolum Regem. Apud Cellotium Opusc. Il. cap. 1.
Herigerus tells us, that not only Ratramnus, but also Rabanus wrote against
him, and by comparing circumstances of time, I shall show that his Book did not
long pass uncontradicted. If we look into the Preface of Vide Epistolum ad
Carolum apud Mabillonium Act. Ben. Sec. 4. p. 2. p. 135. Placidio meo, Warino
Abbati. Quem etiam Abbatem fuisse constat ex Prologo Paschasii. Ideo sic
communius volui stilo temperare subulco, ut ea quae de Sacramento Corporis and
Sanguinis Christi sunt necessaria rescire, quos necdum unda liberalium
attigerat literarum, vitae pabulum and salutis haustum planius caperent ad
medelam. Ibidem.
Paschasius Radbertus, it is easy to observe that the Book is not controversal
but didactical; and though dedicated to Warinus once his Scholar, but then
Abbot of New Corbey, yet it was written in a plain and low style, as designed
for the Instruction of the Monks of New Corbey, (as much Novices in
Christianity, as in the Religion of St. Benedict, and not so much as initiated
in any sort of good literature,) and to teach them the Doctrine of Christ's
Presence in the Sacrament.

This New Corbey was Founded by St. Adelardus, the next year after his return
from Exile, viz. A. D. 822. and the place chosen as conveniently seated for the
propagation of Christianity among the Pagan Saxons, lately Conquered by Charles
the Great, and Ludovicus Pius. And therefore this Book of Vide Mabillonium A.
B. sec. 4. p. 2. Praef. de Paschas. Radberto, and in Elogio Historico ejusdem.
Radbertus could not be written, as some conjecture, during the Banishment of
Adelardus, which lasted seven years, from 814. to 821. In regard the Society,
for whose use it was written, was not erected till afterward. Nor was Warinus
(to whom Radbert gives the Name of Placidius, as he did to himself the Name of
Paschasius,) Abbot till the Death of Adelardus, A. D. 826. The ground of the
mistake, was the Opinion that prevailed till the Lives of Adelardus and Wala,
written by Radbertus, were published by F. Mabillon, viz. That Ex vita S. Walae
a Paschasio Radberto scriptae.
Arsenius, mentioned in the Prologue, was Adelardus, whereas now it appears
that Radbertus constantly calls Adelardus by the Name of Antonius, and Wala his
Brother and Successor in the Government of Old Corbey, by that of Arsenius, and
it was during Wala's Banishment that Paschasius wrote his Book de Corpore and
Sanguine Domini, or as he styles it of the Sacraments, which happened A. D.
830. and lasted two years, so that Paschasius his Book may be supposed to have
been written A. D. 831. that is, thirteen years later than formerly it was
thought.

But though the Book was then first written on this occasion, Nunc autem
dirigere non timui vobis, quatenus nobis operis praestantior per vos exuberet
fructus mercedis pro sudore, cum per vos ad plurimos pervenerit commendatus.
Pasch. Radbert. in Ep. ad Carolum, apud Mabillon, sec. 4. p. 2. p. 135. and p.
136. Et ut hoc diligentius perlegat vestre Sagax intelligentia -- prostatis
imploro precibus, quatenus vestro examine comprobatus Codex, etsi jamdudum ad
plurimos pervenit, deinoeps securius haberi possit.
Paschasius to recommend his Doctrine with the better advantage by his own
Dignity, and the Authority of his Prince, sometime after his Promotion to the
Abbey of Corbey, writes an Epistle to Carolus Calvus, and sends him this Book,
though written many years before, as a Present or New-Years-Gift.

Upon the receipt of this, it is highly probable, that Carolus Calvus
propounded those two Questions to Ratramnus, and upon his Answer those feuds
might grow in the Monastery of Corbey, which made Paschasius weary of the
Place, and resign his Abbey in the year 851. in which Sirmondus supposes he
died, but F. Mabillon gives good reasons to prove that he lived till 865. That
the Controversies about the Sacrament made him weary of his Abbey, is F.
Mabillon's conjecture, and not mine. And if so, we have reason to believe, that
the Doctrine of Ratramnus had rather the Princes countenance, and the stronger
party in the Convent. And it will yet seem more probable; when we consider that
Odo, afterward Bishop of Beauvais, a great Friend of Ratramnus, was made Abbot
in the room of Paschasius. What the Doctrine of Paschasius was, I shall now
briefly show.

He says, Pasch. Radb. de Corp. and Sang. Dom. c. 1. Licet Figura Panis and
Vini hic sit, omnino nihil aliud quam Caro Christi and Sanguis post
consecrationem credenda sunt. -- Et ut mi^abilius loquar, non alia plane, quam
quae nata est de Maria and passa in Cruce, and resurrexit de Sepulchro. --
That although in the Sacrament there be the Figure of Bread and Wine, yet we
must believe it after consecration to be nothing else but the Body and Blood of
Christ. And that you may know in what sense he understands it to be Christ's
Body and Blood, he adds, And to say somewhat yet more wonderful. It is no other
Flesh than that which was born of Mary, suffered on the Cross, and rose again
from the Grave.

He illustrates this Mystery further by intimating, that whosoever will not
believe Christ's natural Body in the Sacrament under the shape of Bread, that
man would not have believed Christ himself to have been God, if he had seen him
hanging upon the Cross in the form of a Servant. And shelters himself against
all the Absurdities that could be objected against this Opinion, as the Papists
still do under God's Omnipotence, laying down this Principle as the foundation
of all his Discourse, That the nature of all Creatures is obedient to the Will
of God, who can change them into what he pleases. He renders these two
Reasons, why the miraculous change is not manifest to sense, by any alteration
of the visible form or taste of what is received, viz. Sic debuit hoc mysterium
temperari, ut and arcana Secretorum celarentur infidis and meritum cresceret de
virtute Fidei, c. 13. ubi plura ejusmodi cceurrunt.
That there may be some exercise for Faith, and that Pagans might not have
subject to blaspheme the Mysteries of our Religion. Yet notwithstanding this,
no man who believes the Word of God, says he, can doubt but by Consecration,
it is made Christ's Body and Blood in Verity or Truth of Nature. And he
alleges stories of the miraculous appearance of Christ's Flesh in its proper
form for the cure of doubting, as a further confirmation of his carnal Doctrine.

These are the sentiments of Paschasius Radbertus, and differ little from those
of the Roman Church at present, which I shall deduce from the Authentic Acts
of that Church, especially the Council of Trent.

1. In the Year 1059. there was a Council assembled at Rome by Pope Nicolaus
the II, in which a form of Recantation was drawn up for Berengarius, wherein he
was required to declare, Apud Gratianum de Consecratione. Did. 2. c. 42. Ego
Berengarius, etc.
That Bread and Wine after Consecration, are not only the Sacrament, Sign and
Figure, but the very Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is not only
Sacramentally, but Sensibly and Truly handled and broken by the Priests hands,
and ground by the Teeth of the Faithful: And this being the form of a
Recantation, ought to be esteemed an accurate account of the Doctrine of the
Church, yet they are somewhat ashamed of it, as may appear by the Gloss upon
Gratian, who has put it into the body of the Canon Law. But the Council of
Trents difinitions are more Authentic, which has determined,

I. If any one shall deny that in the most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist
there is contained really and substantially, the Body and Blood, together with
the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and consequently whole Christ;
But shall say that it is therein contained only as in a Sign, or Figure, or
Virtually, let him be accursed.

II. If any one shall say, that in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist there
remains the substance of Bread and Wine, together with the Body or Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and shall deny that singular or wonderful conversion of the
whole substance of Bread into his Body, and of the whole substance of 1.
Council. Trid. sess. 13. can. 1.
2. Conc. Trid. Ibid. c. 2.
Wine into his Blood, there remaining only the species, i. e. Accidents of
Bread and Wine, which conversion the Catholic Church very aptly calls
Transubstantiation, let him be accursed.

i. e. By faith and not orally.
III. If any man shall say, that in the Eucharist Christ is exhibited, and
eaten, only Spiritually, and not Sacramentally and Really, let him be accursed.

These are the definitions of the Church of Rome in this matter, and now let us
see whether the Doctrine of Ratramnus in this Book be agreeable to these Canons.

I might make short work of it, by alleging all those Authors who either
represent him as a Heretic, or his Book as forged or Heretical, and in so
doing, I should muster an Army of the most Eminent Doctors of the Roman Church,
with two or three Popes in the Head of them, viz. Pius the IV. by whose
Authority was compiled the Expurgatory Index, in which this Book was first
forbid; Sixtus V. who enlarged the Roman Index, and Clement the VIII. by whose
order it was Revised and published. They are all competent 3. Conc. Trid. Ibid.
can. 8. and cap. 8.
Witnesses that his Doctrine is not agreeable to the present Faith of the Roman
Church. And our Authors Vide Indic. Belgic. in Bertramo. (Excogitato commento.)
kind Doway Friends, are forced to Exercise their Wits for some handsome
invention to make him a Roman Catholic, and at last they cannot bring him
fairly off, but are forced to change his words directly to a contrary sense,
and instead of visibly write invisibly, and according to the substance of the
Creatures, must be interpreted according to the outward species or accidents of
the Sacrament, etc. Which is not to explain an Author, but to corrupt him, and
instead of interpreting his words, to put their own words into his Mouth. And
after all, they acknowledge that there are some other things, which it were not
either amiss or imprudent wholly to expunge, in regard the loss of those
passages will not spoil the sense, nor will they be easily missed.

But I shall not build altogether upon their confessions, in regard others who
have the ingenuity to acknowledge the Author Orthodox, and the work Catholic,
have also the confidence to deny our claim to Bertram's Authority, who is, as
they pretend, though obscure, yet their own. Therefore I shall show in his own
words, that his sentiments in this matter are directly contrary to Paschasius
Radbertus, and to the Council of Trent in three particulars.

1. He asserts that what is orally received, is not the true and natural Body
of Christ.

2. He asserts that the substance of Bread and Wine remain after Consecration.

3. That what is orally received feeds the body, and that Christ is eaten
Spiritually, and not Orally.

1. It is very plain from the determination of the second Question, that
Bertram expressly contradicts Paschasius, for the words of the Question, are
taken out of his book, and Bertram denies flatly what Paschasius affirms, viz.
That in the Sacrament we receive the same Body of Christ, which was born of the
Virgin, Crucified, and rose again. He urges a multitude of Authorities out of
the Fathers to confirm his own judgment herein, and in short, but pithy
expositions, shows how they are pertinent to the business. In obviating an
objection from the Testimony of St. Ambrose, he tells us, That the sensible
object is Christ's body and blood, not in nature or kind, but virtually. He
observes that St. Ambrose distinguishes between the Sacrament of Christ's
Flesh, and the Verity of Christ's Flesh, affirming the latter to be that Flesh
which was born of the Virgin, and the Holy Eucharist to be the Sacrament of
that true Flesh in which he was Crucified, mystically representing the former.
Again upon an objection, that St. Ambrose calls it the body of Christ, he
answers, That it is the body and blood of Christ, not corporally, but
Spiritually. He shows that what is orally received in the Sacrament is not
Christ's Natural body, because Christ's natural body is incorruptible, whereas
that which we receive in the Holy Eucharist, is corruptible, visible and to be
felt. He farther proves a great difference between Christ's Natural and
Sacramental Body and Blood in this, that his Natural Body really was what it
appeared to our senses, whereas the Eucharist is one thing in nature and
appearance, and another thing in signification. Likewise expounding St. Hieroms
Testimony, he says, Christ's natural body had all the organical parts of an
humane body, and was quickened with a reasonable soul, whereas his body in the
Sacrament has neither. He makes the body of Christ in the Sacrament to be only
an Image or Pledge, but the Natural body of Christ to be the Truth signified.
And in the first part he proves that the words of Christ Instituting this
Sacrament are Figurative, and that the thing orally received, or the Symbols
had the name of the things signified thereby, it being usual to give Signs or
Sacraments the name of the very thing represented under them. And this he
proves from St. Augustine. It must be acknowledged, that Bertram sometimes
says, that it is truly Christ's body and blood; but mark how he explains
himself, he says, they are not so as to their visible nature, but by the power
of the Divine Word, i. e. not corporally, but spiritually: And he adds, the
visible creature feeds the body, but the virtue and efficacy of the Divine
Word, feeds and sanctifies the soul of the Faithful. So that when he affirms
the Sacrament to be truly Christ's body, he means truly in opposition to
falsehood, not truly as that word is opposed to Figuratively.

But F. Mabillon, and F. Alexander, make Bertram and Paschasius to say the same
thing, and tell us that the former does not deny the Truth of Christ's natural
body in the Sacrament, which he as well as Paschasius holds, but only that it
is there propria specie, i. e. in its proper shape, and visible form, or in its
natural existence; I must now requite the candor of F. Mabillon to Archbishop
Usher, and impute this Opinion of his, to the prejudice of Education. For its
very evident, that what Ratramnus labors to prove, is an essential difference
between the Sacrament received by the Faithful and Christ's body, as great a
difference, as between a body and a spirit, between a corruptible and an
incorruptible thing, between the Image and the Original Truth, between Figure
and Verity: And it is as plain, that he admits these sensible qualities to be
clear proofs of an essential difference, and also allows our outward senses to
be proper Judges in the case, appealing to our eyes, our taste and smell, Sect.
99. He shows that our Saviors body after its Resurrection, was visible and
palpable, and cites Luke 24.39. Compare this with what he says, Sect. 72.
where he shows the difference between Christ's Natural and Spiritual Body.
as our Savior did to the outward senses, to prove the Verity of his body
after his Resurrection. Behold, my hands and my feet, that it is I my self;
Handle me, and see, for a Spirit has not FLESH and BONES as you SEE me to
have. So that in his Opinion we have the same evidence, that the Sacramental
Elements after Consecration are not Christ's natural body in which he suffered,
which the Disciples had that the body in which he appeared to them after his
Resurrection, was the same body in which he was Crucified and buried.

2. Ratramnus contradicts the Council of Trent, in affirming the substance of
Bread and Wine to remain after Consecration, which those Fathers deny, with an
Anathema to all that affirm it.

He tells us, expounding a citation out of St. Ambrose, As to the substance of
the Creatures, what they were before Consecration, they remain after it. Bread
and Wine they were before, and after Consecration we see they continue beings
of the same kind or nature.

F. Mabillon conceives Ratramnus to assert Transubstantiation in using the
words turn, conversion, and that it is made Christ's Body invisibly by the
powerful operation of the Holy Ghost. That the Bread and Wine after
Consecration are not what they were before, That they are truly by the Mystery
turned into the substance of his body and blood, etc. which last is the most
plausible sentence he quotes.

But I would fain know, whether when he denies it to be a natural change, and
affirms it to be a Spiritual, and which is all one, an invisible change, also,
that the substance of Wine is seen after Consecration, and that by Consecration
the Wine is made the Sacrament of Christ's blood, that it is made Christ's Blood
divini significatione Mysterii, by the signification of the Divine Mystery.
That there was in the Manna and Water a spiritual power of the Word, viz.
Christ, which fed the Souls of the believing Israelites. That the Psalmist
teaches us both what the Fathers received in the Heavenly Manna, and what the
Faithful ought to believe in the Mystery of Christ's body, in both certainly
Christ is signified. And in express terms, that as he could before his Passion
turn the Bread and Wine into his body which was to suffer, etc. So [before his
Incarnation] in the Wilderness, he turned the Manna and Water into his body and
blood.

And that as the Bread is Christ's body, so is it the body of the Faithful
People, and that if the consecrated Wine were corporally converted into Christ's
blood, the Water mixed with it must be corporally converted in the blood of the
Faithful People. I say after all this, I would fain know whether it be possible
to impose this sense upon Ratramnus. I must more than half Transcribe the Book,
should I collect all Passages which confute F. Mabillion's Notion of the change
which Ratramnus owns.

His sense is very clear to any man who shuts not his Eyes, where he enumerates
the three several kinds of Physical or Natural Changes, and proves that the
Sacramental Change which Consecration makes is none of these. Sect. 12. 13, 14,
15.
Not Generation, for no new being is produced. Not corruption, for the Bread
and Wine are not destroyed but remain after Consecration in truth of Nature
what they were before; Not alteration, for the same sensible qualities still
appear: Wherefore since Consecration makes a change, and it is not a Natural
but a Spiritual change, he concludes it is wrought Sect. 16.
Figuratively, or Mystically, and that there are not together in the Sacrament
two different things, a Body and a Spirit, but that it is one and the same
thing, which in one respect, viz. Naturally, is Bread and Wine, and in another
respect, viz. of its signification and efficacy, is Christ's Body and Blood. Or
as he says presently, they are in their nature corporeal Creatures, but
according to their virtue, or efficacy, they are Spiritually made Mysteries of
the Body and Blood of Christ. And this Spiritual virtue feeding the Soul, and
ministering to it the sustenance of Eternal Life, is that which Bertram means,
when he says, that it is mystically changed into the substance of his Body and
Blood, for he calls this virtue Substantiam vitae Aeternae, and as he calls our
spiritual nourishment the Bread of Eternal Life, and the substance of Eternal
Life, so in the place cited by F. Mabillon, he uses the word substance in the
same sense, viz. for food or sustenance, and he elsewhere calls it the Bread of
Christ's Body, and presently after explaining himself, calls it the Bread of
Eternal Life Manifestum est de quo pane loquitur, de pane (videlicet) Corporis
Christi, qui non ex eo quod vadit in corpus, sed ex eo quod panis sit vitae
aeternae, etc. Sect. 68. He means by the substance of Christ's Body in that
place, what he here calls the Bread of Christ's Body, and Sect. 83. Esca illa
Corporis Domini and Potus ille Sanguinis ejus, are terms equivalent to
Substantia in the place cited by F. Mabillon.
.

If F. Mabillon had observed those two excellent Rules for understanding the
sense of Old Authors which he quotes out of Facundus, viz. not to interpret
them by the chink of words, but their intention and scope, and to explain
dubious and obscure passages by plain ones; He could not have concluded him to
hold a carnal Presence and Transubstantiation.

But we are not to wonder that the Romanists attempt to reconcile Bertram with
Transubstantiation, though he wrote expressly against it; when we remember that
Ad calcem libri cui Titulus, Deus, Natura Gratia. Quarto Ludg. 1634.
Franc: a sancta Clara about 50 years since had the confidence to attempt the
expounding the 39 Articles of our Church, so as to make them bear what he calls
a Catholic sense, though they are many of them levelled by the Compilers point
blank against the Errors of the Roman Church.

3 To these I may add what by consequence destroys Transubstantiation, and
Christ's carnal Presence in the Sacrament. I mean, he frequently affirms, That
what the mouth receives, feeds and nourishes the body, and that it is what
Faith only receives, that nourishes the Soul, and affords the sustenance of
Eternal Life. I know our Adversaries tell us, those Accidents have as much
nourishing virtue as other substances. So the Authors of the Belgic Index
Index Expurg. Belg. in Bertramo.
answer the Berengarian experiment of some who have lived only upon the Holy
Sacrament. Sure they must be very gross Accidents, if they fill the belly. But
what if the Trent Faith, that the Accidents of Bread and Wine remain, without
their substances be built upon a mistaken Hypothesis in Philosophy? What if
there be no such thing in Nature as pure Accidents? What if Colors, Tastes, and
Scents, are nothing else but matter in different positions, lights or motions,
and little parts of the substance it self sallying out of the body, and making
impressions upon the Organs of Sense? Which Hypothesis is embraced by the most
curious Philosophers of our Age, who have exploded the former; what then
becomes of the Species or Accidents imagined to subsist in the Air?

To close this Digression, I shall add Bell. explic. Doct. Christ De
Sanctissima Eucharist. Quicunque hanc statuam videbat, ille speciem figuramque
uxoris Loath videbat, quae tamen uxor Loath amplius non fuit, sed Sal sub specie
mulieris delitescens.
Bellarmines Illustration of a body under species not properly its own. He
tells his Catechumen, Lots Wife was turned into a Pillar of Salt, and yet the
species and likeness of a Woman remained. She was no longer Lots Wife, but Salt
hid under the Species, or outward form of a Woman. -- Thus do Errors and
Absurdities multiply without end.

I have said enough to show, that Bertram expressly contradicts the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; but I must add a word or two, in Answer to the Evasions of
the Romanists.

Cardinal Perron tells us, that the Adversaries whom Ratramnus encounters, were
the Stercoranists, a sort of Heretics, that rose up in the IX Century; and
Vterque Stercoranistarum Haeresin, quae illo tempore orta est, confutavit,
uterque Catholicam veritatem asseruit, sed Radbertus Transubstantiationis
veritatem clarius expressit. Maug. Tom. 2. Diss. c. 17. p. 134.
Mauguin follows him, with diverse others. They are said to Believe that
Christ's Body is corruptible, passible, and subject to Digestion and the
Draught, and that the Accidents were Hypostatically united to Christ's Body.

But we read of no such Errors, censured by any Council in that Age; we do not
find any Person of that Time, branding any Body with that infamous hard Name.
The Persons whom some late Writers have aaccused, as Authors of that Heresy,
viz. Rabanus Archbishop of Mentz, and Heribaldus Bishop of Auxerre, lived and
died with the repute of Learned, Orthodox, and Holy Men, and are not accused by
any of their own Time of those foul Doctrines. The first I can learn of the
Name, is, that Humbertus Bishop of Sylva Candida calls Nicetas Stercoranist.
And Algerus likewise calls the Greeks so, for holding that the Sacrament broke
an Ecclesiastical Fast, which is nothing to the Gallicane Church, and the IX
Century. If Vide Labbeum de script. Eccles. Tom. 1. p. 484.
Cardinal Humbert drew up Berengarius his Recantation, he was the veriest
Stercoranist who called Stercoranist first; and Pope Nicolaus II. with the
whole Council that imposed that Abjuration upon him, were Stercoranists to some
purpose; who taught him, Of the Stircoranists, an Imaginary Sect, first
discovered by Cardinal Perron; see Conferences between a Romish Priest, a
Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of of England, p. 63. And Mr. L'
Arroque in his Hist. of the Eucharist, Book II. chapter 14.
That Christ's Body is truly and sensibly handled and broken by the Priests
Hands, and ground by the Teeth of the Faithful. And it is very unlikely that
Bertram writ against such an Heresy, when admitting him to have been of the
same Faith with the Church of Rome, touching Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament, he must have been a Stercoranist himself, who asserts, that what the
Mouth receives, is ground by the Teeth, swallowed down the Throat, and descends
into the Belly, nourishing the Body like common Food.

But Mabillon. Praef. ad sec. IV. p. 2. nu. 93.
F. Mabillon waves this Pretense of the Stercoranists, and makes Bertram to
have, through mistake, opposed an Error he thought Haymo guilty of, viz. That
the consecrated Bread and Cup are not signs of Christ's Body and Blood. I
confess the words cited by him, I can scarce understand, but (if that piece of
Haymo be genuine) by the citation he takes from him in the end of the same
Paragraph, in which he asserts, That though the Taste and Figure of Bread and
Wine remain, yet the nature of the Substance is wholly turned into Christ's
Body and Blood; I see no reason why Bertram might not write against Paschasius
and Haymo too. Though in truth I do not imagine him to have confuted the Book
of Paschasius, but only his Notion in answer to the two Questions propounded to
the King.

Who were the Adversaries of Paschasius (whose Doctrine is owned to be the
Catholic Faith now held by the Roman Church) he himself is best able to tell
us, and he informs us, Paschasius in Epist. ad Frudegardum.
That they were such as denied the Presence of Christ's Flesh in the Sacrament,
but held an invisible power and efficacy in and with the Elements, because (say
they) there is no Body but what is visible and palpable; which are the
Sentiments of Ratramnus, as will evidently appear to any unbiased Reader.

But to deprive us of all pretense to the Authority of Bertram, they falsely
impute to us the utter denial of the Verity of Christ's Presence in the
Sacrament, which we deny no otherwise than Bertram does. And to vindicate the
Reformed Church of England in this point, I shall propound her Doctrine, out of
her Liturgy, Articles and Catechism.

In the Catechism, we learn That the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and
indeed taken and received by the Faithful in the Lord's Supper.

In the 28 Article, we profess, That to them who worthily receive the Lord's
Supper, the Bread whith we break, is the Communion of the Body of Christ; and
likewise the Cup of Blessing, is the partaking of the Blood of Christ.

In the Prayer before Consecration, we beseech God that we may so eat the Flesh
of Christ, and drink his Blood, that our sinful Bodies may be made clean by his
Body, and our Souls washed through his most precious Blood.

In the Consecration Prayer, we desire to be made partakers of his most blessed
Body and Blood.

And in the Post-Communion, we give God thanks for vouchsafing to feed us --
with the spiritual food of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood.

It is not the Verity of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, that our Church
denies, but the rash and peremptory determination of the manner of his Presence
by the Roman Church. It Is a Corporal and Carnal Presence, and
Transubstantiation, which we deny.

This our Church declares against in the Rubric about Kneeling at the
Communion, asserting that we Kneel not At the end of the Communion Service.
to adore any corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. That the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remain in their very natural Substances after
Consecration. Also, that the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are
in Heaven, and not here, it being against the truth of Christ's natural Body,
to be at one time in more places than one. Our Art. 28.
Church declares, that Transubstantiation cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but is
repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament, and has given occasion to many Superstitions. That Christ's Body is
given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only in an Heavenly and Spiritual
manner; And that the means whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in
the Supper, is Faith only. These are Authentic Testimonies of the Doctrine of
our Church, out of her public Acts. I might add others of very great
Authority, out of the Apology for our Church, written by the Learned Jewel,
together with its Defense by the Author, Bishop Eliensis Apolog. contra
Bellarm. p. 11.
Andrews against Bellarmine, the Testimony of King James in Casaubonus nomine
Jacobi Regis in Epistola ad Card. Perronum, p. 48. and 51. ubi exscribit verba
Eliensis.
Casaubon's Epistle to Cardinal Perron, Hooker Eccles. Policy, lib. 5. sect. 67.
Hooker, Bishop Montacutius in Antidiatrib. contra Bulenger. p. 143.
Montague against Bulengerus, etc. but for brevity's sake, I refer the Reader
to the Books themselves. And also for a Vindication of the Foreign Reformed
Churches in this matter, I desire the Reader to consult their Confessions, and
the Citations collected by Bishop Hist Transub. c. 2.
Cosins, out of their Confessions, and their most Eminent Writers.

Both we and they assert the Verity of Christ's Body and Blood, as far as the
nature of a Sacrament will admit, or is necessary to answer the ends for which
that Holy Mystery was instituted by our Savior. We own a real communication of
Christ's Body and Blood, in that way which the Soul is only capable of
receiving it, and benefit by it. We acknowledge the Verity of Christ's Body, in
the same sense that Bertram does; and deny the same Errors, which the Church of
Rome has since imposed upon all of her Communion for Articles of Faith, which
Bertram rejected; though since that time they are increased in bulk, and formed
into a more Artificial Systeme. Most, if not all of these determinations of our
Church are to be found in this little Book, if not in express terms, yet in
such expressions as necessarily import them. And perhaps the judgment of
Bertram was more weighed by our Reformers in this Point, than any of our
Neighbor Churches. Bishop In Praef. libri de Coena Domini Latin excusi Genev.
1556.
Ridley, who had a great hand in compiling the Liturgy and Articles, in King
Edward VI. his Reign, had such an esteem of this Author and Work, that he does
in his Paper given in to Queen Mary's Commissioners at Oxford, besides his own
Answers and Confirmations, insist upon whatever Bertram wrote on this Argument,
as a further proof of his Doctrine, professing that he does not see, how any
Godly Man can gainsay his Arguments, and that it was this Book that put him
first upon examining the old Opinion, concerning the Presence of Christ's very
Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament, by the Scriptures and Elder Fathers of the
Churcb, and converted him from the Errors of the Church of Rome in that point.
And Dr. Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Reform. p. II. Book I. p 107.
Burnet tells us the same, adding, That Ridley having read Bertram, and
concluding Transubstantiation to be none of the Ancient Doctrines of the
Church, but lately brought in, and not fully received till after Bertram 's
Age, communicated the matter with Cranmer, and they set themselves to examine
it with more than ordinary care. Thus he, in the account he gives of the
Disputation concerning the Real Presence, A. D. 1549. which is the year in
which the first Common Prayer Book of King Edward VI. was published; at which
time also Bertram was Printed in English, by order of Bishop Ridley. So that a
Reverend and Learned Divine of our Church, (b) had reason, in asserting the
Doctrine of Bertram was the very same Doctrine which Several Conferences
between a Popish Priest, etc. p. 61.
the Church of England embraced, as most consonant to Scripture and the
Fathers. Which is not what our Adversaries would put upon us, that the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is a naked Commemoration of our Savior's Death,
and a mere Sign of his Body and Blood, but an efficacious Mystery, accompanied
with such a Divine and Spiritual Power, as renders the consecrated Elements
truly, though Mystically, Christ's Body and Blood, and communicates to us the
real Fruits, and saving Benefits of his bitter Passion. And this is the
Doctrine of Bertram, in both parts of this Work.

CHAP. VI. That Ratramnus was not singular in his Opinion, but had several
other Great Men in his own and the following Age, of the same Judgment with him
in this Point.
BUt after all that I have said, if Ratramnus (though never so Learned or
Orthodox) were singular in his Sentiments touching Christ's Presence in the
holy Eucharist, we can make little of his Authority. If the general Belief of
the Church in his Time, were contrary, it only shows, that one Eminent Divine
had some Heterodox Opinions. Let us therefore examine the Writers of his own
Age and the next after him, and see whether he or Paschasius delivered the
current sense of the Church.

I shall not stand to examine the Belief of the more Ancient and Pure Times of
Christianity, but refer my Reader to Albertinus, Archbishop Usher, and Bishop
Cosins for an account of it. I shall confine myself to the IX and X Centuries;
in which we shall find several of the most Eminent Doctors and Writers of the
Church of the same Judgment with Ratramnus, and some who were offended at the
Doctrine of Paschasius.

And indeed there are manifest Tokens in his Book, but more evident Proofs in
his Epistle to Frudegardus, that his Doctrine did not pass without
contradiction in his own life time. When he delivers his Paradox, he prepares
his Reader for some wondrous Doctrine. And so strange was that new Doctrine of
his, that (if the Anonym. de Euch. ad finem Sec IV. p. 2.
Anonymous Writer published by F. Mabillon be Rabanus his Epistle to Egilo)
this Great and Learned Bishop professes, That he never heard or read it
before, and he much wondered that St. Ambrose should be quoted for it, and more,
that Paschasius should assert it. But F. Mabillon offers it only by way of
conjecture, modestly submitting it to the Judgment of Learned Men, whether that
Tract against Radbertus be the Epistle of Rabanus or not. And I conceive there
are better reasons to persuade us, that it is not, than those he offers to
prove, that it is. As that it bears not the Name of Rabanus, though himself
mention his writing on that Subject to Egilo. That it is not in an Epistolary
Form, Egilo is not so much as named, nor does any address to a second person
appear throughout it, but it is plainly a Polemical piece. To which I may add,
that in the Anonymous piece there occurs an odd distinction of the same Body
Naturaliter, and Specialiter, and yet in expounding the Doctrine of the
Sacrament to Heribaldus, it is not used by Rabanus, though that Epistle to
Egilo were first written. But whoever he were that wrote it, he was in all
likelihood an Author of the same Time, and treats Paschasius very coursly and
severely, It is not likely that it was written while he was Abbot, since the
Author flouts him, and in an Ironical way, calls him Pontificem.

Among the Writers of the IX Century, I shall number Inter scriptores de
Divinis Officiis Ed. per Hittorpium Par. 1610. col. 303.
Charles the Great, though perhaps the Epistle to Alcuin was written somewhat
before, wherein he affirms, that Christ supping with his Disciples, brake
Bread, and gave it them with the Cup for a FIGVRE of his Body and Blood, and
exhibited a Sacrament highly advantageous to us. As Venerable Bede before him
speaks, He gave in the Supper to his Disciples, a FIGVRE of his Holy Body and
Blood, which notion consists not with the carnal Presence of Christ in the
Sacrament.

Apud L' Arroque Hist. Euch. l. 2. c. 13.
Theodulphus Aurelianensis, near the beginning of this Century, says, that by
the visible offering of the Priest, and the invisible consecration of the Holy
Ghost, Bread and Wine pass into the Dignity [not the Substance] of the Body and
Blood of our Lord. -- As Jesus Christ is figured by the Wine, so are the
Faithful People by Water.

Amalarius Amalarius Fortunatus Ibidem In Praefat. Col. 307. and l. 1. c. 24.
Fortunatus, in the Preface of his Books of Divine Offices, makes the
Sacramental Bread and Wine to represent the Body and Blood of Christ, and the
Oblation to resemble Christ's own offering of himself on the Cross, as the
Priest does the Person of Christ. And elsewhere he says, that the Sacraments
of Christ's Body are, secundum quendum modum after some sort Christ's Body,
which is like Bertram's secundum quid, not absolutely and properly, but in some
respect the Body of Christ: and Amalarius cites that Passage of St. Augustine
which Bertram alleged, to render a reason why the Sacramental Signs have the
name of the Thing signified.

What the Doctrine of Joannes Scotus was, is hard to say, only in the general
it is agreed, that it was contrary to that of Paschasius, though perhaps he
erred on the other extreme, making it a naked, empty Figure or Memory of our
Savior's Death.

And though Bib. Patrum, Tom. 6. Par. 1610. Col. 226, 227.
Florus, Deacon of the Church of Lions, accord not with Scotus in his
Sentiments touching Predestination, yet he agrees with him in contradicting the
carnal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament; for in his Exposition of the Mass,
he says, That when the Creature of Bread and Wine is by the ineffable
sanctification of the Spirit translated into the SACRAMENT of Christ's Body,
Christ is eaten. That he is eaten by parts in the Sacrament, and remains whole
in Heaven, and in the Faithful Receiver's heart. And again, All that is done in
the Oblation of the Lord's Body and Blood, is a Mystery; there is one thing
seen, and another understood; that which is seen, has a Corporal nature; that
which is understood, has a Spiritual fruit.

And in the Manuscript In Homiliario MS. Eccles. Lugd. apud Mabillon A. B. Sec.
IV. Par. 2. Praefat. nu. 80.
Homilies, which F. Mabillon concludes are his, expounding the words of our
Savior instituting the Sacrament, he says commenting on, This is my Body: the
Body that spoke was one thing, the Body which was given was another. The Body
which spoke was substantial, that Body which was given was Mystical; for the
Body of our Lord died, was buried, rose again and ascended into heaven, but
that Body which was delivered to the Apostles in the Sacrament, is daily
consecrated by the Priests hands.

Apud Hittorpium. De rebus Eccles. c. 16.
Walafridus Strabo, in the same Century teaches, That Christ in his last
Supper with his Disciples just before he was betrayed, after the Solemnity of
the Ancient Passover, delivered the Sacraments of his own Body and Blood to
his Disciples in the substance of Bread and Wine.

Apud Albertinum de Euchar. lib. 2. page 934. Hoc est corpus meum id est in
Sacramento.
Christian Druthmarus a Monk of Corbey, and contemporary both with Bertram and
Paschasius, in his Comment on St. Matthew, expounding the words of Institution,
says, That Christ gave his Disciples the Sacrament of his Body -- to the end
that being mindful of this Action, they should always do this in a Figure, and
not forget what he was about to do for them. This is my Body, that is,
Sacramentally, or in a Sacrament or Sign: And a little before he says, Christ
did Spiritually change Bread into his Body, and Wine into his Blood, which is
the Phrase of Bertram a Monk in the same Cloister with him.

To these may be added Apud L' Arroque in Hist. Euchar. lib. 2. c. 13. ex
Dacherii Spicileg. Tom. 6.
Ahyto Bishop of Basil, in the beginning of this Century, whose words cited by
Mr. L' Arroque in his History of the Eucharist are these -- The Priest ought to
know what the Sacrament of Baptism and Confirmation is, and what the Mystery of
the Body and Blood of the Lord is, how a visible Creature is seen in those
Mysteries, and nevertheless invisible Salvation, or Grace, is thereby
communicated for the salvation of the Soul, the which is contained in Faith
only. Mr. L' Arroque well observes, that his words relate to Baptism and
Confirmation as well as the Lord's Supper; he distinguishes in both the sign
from the thing signified, and asserts alike, in all three, that there is a
visible Creature, communicating Invisible, or Spiritual Grace, which is
received by Faith only.

Moreover, the Question moved by Heribaldus to Rabanus, which he answers (and
upon that score both those Learned and Holy Bishops have been traduced as
Stercoranists) evidently shows the Sentiments of Heribaldus to have been
contrary to those of Paschasius on this Argument. For he never could have moved
the Question if he had not believed the external part of the Sacrament to be
corporal Food, as Ratramnus does.

The Judgment of Rabanus, Archbishop of Mentz, whom Baronius styles the
brightest Star of Germany, and as Trithemius says, who had not his fellow in
Italy or Germany, agrees with that of Ratramnus, and appears in several of his
writings. He teaches, Raban. de institut. Cleric. lib. 1. c. 31.
That our Lord chose to have the Sacraments of his Body and Blood received by
the mouth of the Faithful, and reduced to Nourishment, on purpose that by the
visible Body the Spiritual effect might be shown. For as Material food
outwardly nourishes, and gives vigor to the body, so does the Word of God
inwardly nourish and strengthen the Soul. Again, The Sacrament is one thing,
and the virtue of the Sacrament is another, for the Sacrament is received with
the mouth, but the inner man is fed with the virtue of the Sacrament. In his Ad
Calcem Reginon. Prum. editi per Baluzium habetur Epistola haec Rabani, unde
Heribaldum vide c. 33.

Quidam nuper de ipso Sacramento corporis and Sanguinis Domini non rite
sentientes, dixerunt hoc ipsum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini quod de Maria
Virgin natum est, and in quo ipse Dominus passus est in cruce, and resurrexit
de Sepulchro [idem esse quod sumitur de Altari] cui Errori, etc.


Penitential, he makes the Sacrament subject to all the affections of common
food, and tells of some of late, viz. Paschasius and his followers, who had
entertained false Sentiments touching the Sacrament of the Lords Body and
Blood, saying, That this very Body of our Lord which was born of the Virgin
Mary, in which our Lord suffered on the Cross, and rose again from the Grave,
[is the same which we receive from the Altar] against which error writing to
Egilus the Abbot, we have according to our ability, declared what we are truly
to believe concerning the Lords very Body.

From which Passage many things of moment may be collected.

1. That Paschasius was written against in his lifetime, and not long after
his propounding his Doctrine publicly, by sending his Book, together with an
Epistle, to Carolus Calvus.

For Rabanus died before Paschasius, and In praefat. ad Rabani Epist. n. 17.
Baluzius makes it out very well, that he wrote this Answer to the Queries of
Heribaldus, A. D. 853. In which year Egilus mentioned by him was made Abbot of
Promie, and the question of the validity of Orders conferred by Ebbo Archbishop
of Rhemes, after his Deposition, was discussed in the Synod at Soissons.

2. We learn from this Passage, that Rabamus judged the Doctrine of Paschasius
to be a Novel Error, which he would not have done, had there been any color of
Ancient Tradition or Authority for it.

3. That F. Cellot is mistaken, in charging his Anonymous Writer with
slandering Rabanus, as also in saying, that what Rabanus wrote on this
Argument, he wrote in his youth, falsely presuming that Egilus, to whom he
wrote, was Abbot of Fulda, and immediate Predecessor to Rabanus in the
Government of that Monastry, where as it was another Egilus made Abbot of
Promie, A. D. 853. when Rabanus was very old, and but three years before his
death.

4. These words [the same which is received from the Altar] were as Baluz. in
notis ad c. 33. Ad calcem Reginonis.
Baluzius and F. Mabillon observe, razed out of the MS, from whence Stevartius
published that Epistle of Rabanus. Which I take notice of, because Mr. Arnauds
Modest Monk of St. Genouefe, makes so much difficulty to believe Archbishop
Usher, who tells of a Passage of the same importance razed out of an old MS.
Book of Penitential Canons in Bennet College Library in Cambridge, though he
had seen it himself, and no doubt the other MS. also out of which the lost
passage was restored.

This Passage is an Authority of the X Century confirming At the end of the
Saxon Homily Printed by Jo. Day.
Bertram's Doctrine, which I shall Transcribe. (But this Sacrifice is not the
Body in which he suffered for us, nor his Blood which he shed for us, but it is
Spiritually made his Body and Blood like the Manna rained down from Heaven, and
the Water which Flowed from the Rock, as) etc. These words enclosed between two
half Circles, some had rased out of Worcester book, but they are restored again
out of a book of Exeter Church, as is noted in the Margin by the first
Publishers of this Epistle, and the Saxon Homily, they are both one Authors
work, viz. Elfric's. Thus the Reader may be satisfied how the Passage was
recovered. And Bishop Usher did not invent it, which had it been lost utterly,
might also have been restored out of the Saxon Epistle printed immediately
before it. And now I am speaking of such detestable practices, I cannot but add
what for the sake of such a Passage has befallen St. Chrysostom's Epistle to
Caesarius. The Passage runs thus, Sicut enim antequam Sanctificetur Panis,
Panem nominamus, Divina autem illum sanctificante gratia, mediante Sacerdote,
liberatus est quidem appellatione panis; dignus autem habitus est Dominici
Corporis appellatione, etiemsi natura Panis in ipso permansit, and non duo
corpora, sed unum corpus Filii praedicamus sic, etc. Apud Steph. Le Moine inter
Varia Sacra. Tom. 1. p. 532.
As before the Bread is Consecrated we call it BREAD, but after the Divine
Grace has consecrated it by the Ministry of the Priest, it is freed from THE
NAME OF BREAD, and honored with THE NAME OF THE LORDS BODY, though the NATVRE
OF BREAD remains in it, and we do not teach two Bodies, but one Body of the
Son, so etc. This Epistle Peter Martyr found in the Florentine Library, and
Transcribed several Copies of it, one of which he gave to Archbishop Cranmer,
the Copies of this Epistle being lost, the World was persuaded by the Papists,
that the Passage was a Forgery committed by Peter Martyr. This past current for
about a 100 years, till at last Emericus Bigotius found it, and Printed the
whole Epistle with Palladii vita Chrysostomi Gr. lat. etc. Quarto. Par. 1680.
Inter paginas 235. and 245. In Schedis signatis G. g. and H. h.
the Life of St. Chrysostom, and some other little things, but when it was
Finished, this Vide Expostulationem hac de re editam, in Quarto. Londini. 1682.
Epistle was taken out of the Book, and not suffered to see Light.

The place out of which this Epistle was expunged, is visible in the Book by a
break in the Signature at the bottom, and the numbers at the top of the Page.
But at length it is published by Mr. le Moine among several other Ancient
pieces at Leyden, 1685. And since more accurately, in the Appendix to the
Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England.

So that notwithstanding the French Monks indignation at the Learned Usher for
charging the Papists with the razure of an old MS. its plain, that such tricks
are not unusual with them, that they are more ancient than their public
Expurgatory Indices, and more mischievous, and that some of their great Doctors
at this day make no conscience of stifling ancient Testimonies against their
corruptions, when it lies in their power.

I shall trouble the Reader with no more Citations to prove the concurrence of
other Doctors of the Ninth and Tenth Century with Ratramnus, in his Sentiments
touching Christ's Presence in the Holy Sacrament. These are enough to show that
his opinion was neither singular, nor novel, and that though he be the fullest
and most express witness of the Faith of those times, yet he is not a single
Evidence, but is supported by the Testimonies of many of the best Writers of
those times. And his Doctrine is reproved by no body, but Paschasius, who
reflects a little upon it in his Epistle to Frudegardus, and that piece of his
commentary on Matthew that is annexed to it.

On the contrary, the Doctrine of Paschasius was impugned as Novel and
Erroneous by the Anonymous Writer published by F. Mabillon, by Rabanus, and
Ratramnus, neither does it in all things please his Anonymous Friend said to be
Herigerus, who writes in his favor, and collects passages out of the Ancients
to excuse the simplicity of Paschasius. His own writings show, that he valued
himself upon some new discovery, which excited many to a more perfect
understanding of that great Mystery. That his Paradox was in danger of passing
for a Dream, or In Epistolis hortatur Placidum, and Regem Carolum ne existiment
illum contexere fabulam de salsura Maronis.
Poetical fiction, and that when he wrote to Frudegardus, many doubted the
truth of his Doctrine. Frudegardus once his Proselite upon reading a Passage in
St. Augustine. de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
Augustine, which Bertram also cites, was dissatisfied with his Explication of
Christ's Presence, and whether this Epistle did effectually establish him, in
the belief of Radberts Doctrine, or whether he adhered to St. Augustine, cannot
now be known.

It is evident, notwithstanding some gross conceits which began to possess the
minds of men in those dark and barbarous Ages, that the Church had not as yet
received the Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which was left by
Paschasius its Damme, a rude Lump, which required much Licking, to reduce it
into any tolerable shape or form, as a The B. of St. Asaph in a Sermon before
the late King, 1678.
Reverend Author observes, and was not confirmed by the Authority of any Pope
or Council in 200 Years after, nor did the Monster receive its name till the
Fourth Lateran Council.

The Writers of the Ninth and Tenth Centuries, speak of a change, or conversion
of the Elements into Christ's Body; but it is plain they mean not a Natural,
but a Mystical or Sacramental change, such as happens upon the Sea the Saxon
Homily.
Christening of a Pagan; they affirm the Elements to be Christ's Body and Blood
after Consecration, in the sense of Non rei veritate, sed significante
mysterio. S. Aug. apud Gratianum de Consecr. Did. 2. c. 48. Hoc est Sect.
Sicut.
St. Augustine, not in Truth of Nature, but by Mystical signification: And,
according to the Doctrine of that Father, teach Aug. contra Maxim. l. 3. c. 22.
, that in the Sacraments we are not to mind the nature of the visible Object,
but its signification; in regard Sacraments are Signs which ARE one thing, and
SIGNIFY another.

They all, according to the Language of St. Paul, style the Consecrated
Elements Bread and Wine, our Saxon Fol. 28.
Homilist says, this Bread is my Body, and Sect. 99. Panis and Calix qui
Corpus and Sanguis Christi nominatur and existit.
Bertram in the place where F. Mabillon thinks the adding of existit is of some
moment, says, Bread and Wine is Christ's Body and Blood. They make the
Sacrament to be a Figure, they speak of a conversion of the Elements into the
Sacraments of Christ's Body and Blood, they distinguish between Christ's
natural Body and his mystical Body, the Body which spoke, and the Body which
was given to his Disciples, and deny that the nature of the Elements is altered
by Consecration, which if any man can reconcile with Transubstantiation, I
shall acknowledge that Miracles are not ceased in the Roman Church.

RATRAMNI Presbyteri and Monachi Corbeiensis; (qui vulgo BERTRAMVS nuncupatur)
LIBER De Corpore and Sanguine Domini.

The Book of RATRAMNUS Priest and Monk of Corbey; (Commonly called BERTRAM)
Touching the BODY and BLOOD of the LORD.

Sigebertus Gemblacensis in libro de Viris Illustribus. c. 96.
BErtramus In Gemblac. cod. erat Ratramus and in Cod. Virid Vallis.
Scripsit librum de Corpore and Sanguine Domini and ad Calvum.
Carolum librum de Praedestinatione.

Testimonium Joannis Trithemii in Libro de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
BErtramus Presbyter and Monachus, in divinis Scripturis valde peritus, and in
literis Saecularium Disciplinarum egregie doctus: Ingenio subtilis and clarus
Eloquio; nec minus vita quam doctrina insignis; scripsit multa praeclara
opuscula, de quibus ad meam notitiam pauca pervenerunt. Ad Carolum Regem
Lotharii Imperatoris Fratrem scripsit commendabile opus.

De Praedestinatione Scripsit de Praedestinatione libros duos.
lib. 1.

De Corpore and Sanguine Domini lib. 1.

Claruit temporibus Lotharii Imperatoris Anno Domini DCCCXL.

Ita se habet MS. Laubiensis. Apud Mabillon. A^ta Bened. Secul. 4. par. 2.
Praef. c. 1. n 83. and 129.
INCIPIT LIBER RATRAMNI DE CORPORE ET SANGUINE DOMINI. [ Haec Inscriptio non
est Autoris, nec exstat in MS. Laub. MS. Salem. legit Ad Carolum magnum.
AD CAROLUM Calvum Magni Neporem.
MAGNUM Regem
IMPERATOREM.] PRAEFATIO.
I. JVssistis Jussistis ex MS. Laub. in impressis Jubes. item in MS. Monasterii
Salem.
, Gloriose Princeps, ut quid de Sanguinis and Corporis Christi Mysterio
sentiam, vestrae Magnificentiae significem. Imperium quam magnifico vestro
Principatu dignum, tam nostrae Parvitatis viribus constat difficilimum. Quid
enim dignius Regali Providentia, quam de illius sacris Mysteriis Catholice
sapere, qui sibi Regale solium dignatus est contribuere, and subjectos pati non
posse diversa sentire de Corpore Christi, in quo constat Christanae
redemptionis summam consistere?

II. Dum enim quidam fidelium Corporis Sanguinisque Christi Deest Mysterium.
, quod in Ecclesia quotidie celebratur, dicant quod nulla sub figura, nulla sub
obvelatione fiat, sed ipsius veritatis nuda manifestatione peragatur; quidam
vero testentur, quod haec sub Mysterii figura contineantur, and aliud sit quod
corporeis sensibus appareat, aliud autem quod fides aspiciat; non parva
diversitas inter eos Impressi Codd. esse dinoscitur legunt.
dignoscitur. Et cum Apostolus fidelibus scribat, ut idem sapiant and idem
dicant omnes, and Schisma nullum inter eos appareat, non parvo Schismate
dividuntur, qui de Mysterio Corporis, Sanguinisque Christi non eadem sentientes
eloquuntur.

III. Quapropter vestra Regalis Sublimitas zelo fidei provocata, non
aequanimiter ista perpendens, and secundum Apostoli praeceptum cupiens, ut idem
sentiant and idem dicant omnes, veritatis diligenter inquirit secretum, ut ad
eam deviantes revocare possit. Vnde non contemnitis, etiam ab humillimis hujus
rei veritatem perquirere, scientes quod tanti Secreti mysterium non nisi
divinitate revelante possit agnosci, quae sine personarum acceptione, per
quoscunque delegerit, suae veritatis lumen ostendit.

IV. Nostrae vero tenuitati, quam sit jucundum Vestro parere imperio, tam est
arduum super re L. ab humanis.
humanis sensibus remotissima, and Quam nisi.
nisiper Sancti Spiritus eruditionem non Possem penetrare.

Vel quae non nisi per Sancti Spiritus eruditionem non potest penetrari.


posse penetrare, disputare. Subditus igitur vestrae Magnitudinis jussioni,
confisus autem ipsius de quo locuturi sumus suffragio, quibus potuero verbis,
quid ex Impres. de.
hoc sentiam aperire tentabo, non proprio fretus Ingenio, sed Sanctorum
vestigia Patrum prosequendo.

V. QVod in Ecclesia ore fidelium sumitur Corpus and Sanguis Christi, quaerit
vestrae Magnitudinis Excellentia, in Mysterio fiat, an in Veritate? id est,
Vtrum aliquid Secreti contineat, quod oculis solummodo fidei pateat; an sine
cujuscunque velatione Mysterii, hoc aspectus intueatur Corporis exterius, quod
mentis visus spiciat interius, ut totum quod agitur in manifestationis luce
clarescat? Et utrum ipsum Corpus Deest sit.
quod de Maria natum est and passum, mortuum and sepultum, quodque resurgens
and coelos ascendens ad dextram Patris consideat?

VI. Harum duarum Quaestionum primam inspiciamus, and ne dubietatis ambage
detineamur, definiamus quid sit Figura, quid Veritas; ut certum aliquid
contuentes noverimus, quo rationis iter contendere debeamus.

VII. Figura est obumbratio quaedam, quibusdam velaminibus quod intendit
ostendens; verbi gratia, Verbum volentes dicere Panem nuncupamus: Sicut in
Oratione Dominica panem quotidianum dari nobis expostulamus, vel cum Christus
in Evangelio loquitur, dicens, Ego sum panis vivus, qui de coelo descendi; vel
cum seipsum vitem, discipulos autem palmites appellat, Impressi Codd. addunt,
dicens.
Ego sum vitis vera, vos autem palmites: haec enim omnia aliud dicunt and aliud
innuunt.

VIII. Veritas vero est rei manifestae demonstratio, nullis umbrarum imaginibus
obvelatae, sed puris and apertis, utque planius eloquamur, naturalibus
significationibus insinuatae; utpote eum dicitur, Christus natus de Virgin,
passus, crucifixus, mortuus and sepultus; nihil enim hic figuris obvelantibus
adumbratur, verum rei veritas naturalium significationibus verborum ostenditur,
neque aliud hic licet intelligi quam dicitur. At in superioribus non ita; Nam
substantialiter nec Panis Christus, nec Vitis Christus, nec palmites Apostoli.
Quapropter hic Figura, superius vero Veritas in narratione monstratur, id est,
nuda and aperta Significatio.

IX. Nunc redeamus ad illa, quorum causa dicta sunt ista, videlicet Corpus and
Sanguinem Christi. Si enim nulla sub figura Mysterium illud peragitur, jam
Mysterium non recte vocitatur; quoniam Mysterium dici non potest, in quo nihil
est abditum, nihil a corporalibus sensibus remotum, nihil aliquo velamine
contectum. At ille Panis qui per sacerdotis ministerium Christi Corpus
conficitur, aliud exterius humanis sensibus ostendit, and aliud interius
fidelium mentibus clamat. Exterius quidem panis, quod ante fuerat, Forma
praetenditur, Color ostenditur, Sapor accipitur: Ast interius long aliud multo
pretiosus, multoque excellentius intimatur, quia caeleste, quia divinum, id
est, Christi corpus ostenditur, quod non sensibus carnis, sed animi fidelis
contuitu, vel aspicitur, vel accipitur vel comeditur.

X. Vinum quoque quod sacerdotali Consecratione Christi Sanguinis efficitur
sacramentum, aliud superficie tenus ostendit, aliud interius continet. Quid
enim aliud in superficie quam substantia vini conspicitur? Gusta, vinum sapit,
Odora, vinum redolet: Inspice, vini color intuetur. At interius si consideres,
jam non liquor Vini, sed liquor Sanguinis Christi, credentium mentibus and
sapit dum gustatur, and agnoscitur dum conspicitur, and probatur dum odoratur.
Haec ita esse dum nemo potest abnegare, claret quia panis ille vinumque
figurate Christi Corpus and Sanguis existit. Non enim secundum quod videtur,
vel carnis species in illo pane cognoscitur, vel in illo vino cruoris unda
monstatur, cum tamen post Mysticam Consecrationem nec panis jam dicitur nec
vinum, sed Christi Corpus and Sanguis.

XI. Nam si secundum quosdam figurate nihil hic accipiatur, sed totum in
veritate conspiciatur, nihil hic fides operatur, quoniam nihil spirituale
geritur, sed quicquid illud est totum secundum Corpus accipitur. Et cum Fides
secundam Apostolum sit rerum argumentum non apparentium, id est, non earum quae
videntur, sed quae non videntur substantiarum, nihil hie secundum fidem
accipiemus, quoniam quicquid existit secundum sensus corporis dijudicamus. Et
nihil absurdius quam panem Carnem accipere, and vinum Sanguinem dicere. Nec jam
Mysterium erit in quo nihil secreti, nihil abditi continebitur.

XII. Et quomodo jam Corpus Christi Codd. impressi addunt and Sanguis.
dicetur, in quo nulla permutatio facta esse cognoscitur? Omnis enim permutatio
aut ex eo quod non est in id quod est efficitur, aut ex eo quod est in id quod
non est, aut ex eo quod est in id quod est. In isto autem Sacramento si tantum
in veritatis simplieitate consideratur and non aliud credatur, quam quod
aspicitur, nulla permutatio facta cognoscitur. Nam nec ex eo quod non erat
transivit in aliquid quod sit, quomodo sit transitus in rebus nascentibus:
Siquidem non erant prius, sed ut sint, ev non esse ad id quod est esse
transitum fecerunt. Hic vero panis and vinum prius fuere quam transitum in
Sacramentum Corporis and Sanguinis Christi fecerunt.

Sed nec ille Transitus qui fit ex eo quod est esse ad id quod est non esse,
qui transitus in rebus per defectum occasum patientibus existit. Quicquid enim
interit, prius subsistendo fuit; nec interitum pati potest, quod nunquam fuit.
Hic quoque non iste transitus factus essc cognoscitur, quoniam secundum
veritatem species creaturae quae fuerat ante, permansisse cognoscitur.

XIII. Item illa permutatio quae fit ex eo quod est in id quod est, quae
perspicitur in rebus qualitatis varietatem patientibus (verbi gratia, quando
quod ante nigrum fuerat in album demutatur) nec hic facta esse cognoscitur:
nihil enim hic vel tactu, vel ^olore, vel sapore permutatum esse deprehenditur.
Si ergo nihil hic est permutatum, non est aliud quam ante fuit. Est autem
aliud, quoniam panis Corpus and vinum Sanguis Christi facta sunt. Sic enim ipse
dicit Accipite and comedite, hoc est corpus meum. Similiter and de calice
loquens dicit, Accipite and bibite, hoc est Sanguis Novi Testamenti, qui pro
vobis fundetur.

XIV. Quaerendum ergo est ab eis, qui nihil hic figurate volunt accipere, sed
totum in veritatis simplicitate consistere, secundum quod demutatio facta sit,
ut jam non sint quod ante fuerunt, videlicet panis atque vinum, sed sint corpus
atque sanguis Christi? Secundum speciem namque creaturae, formamque rerum
visibilium, utrumque hoc, id est, panis and vinum, nihil habent in se
permutatum. Et si nihil permutationis pertulerunt, nihil aliud existunt quam
quod prius fuere.

XV. Cernit Sublimitas vestra, Princeps gloriose, quo Codd. Impressi legunt
aliter.
taliter sentientium intellectus cvadat, negant quod affirmare creduntur, and
quod credunt destruere comprobantur. Corpus etenim Sanguinemque Christi
fideliter confitentur, and cum hoc faciunt, non hoc jam esse quod prius fuere
proculdubio protestantur. Et si aliud sunt quam fuere mutationem accepere. Came
hoc negari non possit, dicant secundum quid permutata sunt? corporaliter namque
nihil in eis cernitur esse permutatum. Fatebuntur igitur necesse est, aut
mutata esse secundum aliud quam secundnm Corpus, ac per hoc, non esse hoc quod
in veritate videntur, sed aliud quod non esse secundum Impressi legunt
Existentia n.
esessentiam propriam cernuntur: Aut si hoc profiteri noluerint, Impr.
compellentur.
compelluntur negare Corpus esse Sanguinemque Christi, quod nefas est non solum
dicere, verum etiam cogitare.

XVI. At quia confitentur and Corpus and Sanguinem Codd. Impressi legunt
Christi.
Dei esse, nec hoc esse potuisse nisi facta in melius commutatione, neque ista
commutatio corporaliter sed spiritaliter facta sit, necesse est Impressi. Ut
jam.
jam ut figurate facta esse dicatur: quoniam sub velamento corporei panis,
corporeique vini, spirituale corpus Christi spiritualisque sanguis existit. Non
quod duarum sint existentiae rerum inter se diversarum corporis videlicet and
Spiritus, verum una eademque res secundum aliud species panis and vini
consistit, secundum aliud autem Corpus est and Sanguis Christi. Secundum namque
quod utrumque corporaliter contingitur species sunt creaturae eorporeae;
secundum potentiam vero, quod spiritualiter factae sunt, Mysteria sunt
Corporis, and Sangunis Christi.

XVII. Consideremus sacri Fontem Baptismatis, qui fons vitae non immerito
nuncupatur, quia descendentes in se melioris vitae novitate reformat, and de
peccato mortuis viventes justitiae donat. Number secundum quod aquae conspicitur
elementum esse istam potentiam obtinet? Attamen nisi sanctificationis virtutem
obtineret, labem vitiorum nequaquam diluere possit. Et nisi vigorem vitae
contineret, nullo modo mortuis praestare vitam valeret, mortuis autem non carne
sed anima: In eo tamen font si consideretur solummodo quod corporeus aspicit
sensus, Elementum fluidum conspicitur, corruptioni subjectum, nec nisi corpora
lavandi potentiam obtinere. Sed accessit Sancti Spiritus per Sacerdotis
consecrationem virtus, and efficax facta est non solum corpora verum etiam
animas diluere and spirituales sordes spirituali potentia dimovere.

XVIII. Ecce in uno eodemque Elemento duo videmus inesse sibi resistentia, id
est, corruptioni subjacens incorruptionem praestare, and vitam non habens vitam
contribuere. Cognoscitur ergo in isto Font and inesse quod sensus Corporis
attingat, and idcirco mutabile atque corruptible; and rursus inesse quod fides
sola conspiciat, and ideo nec corrumpi posse, nec vitae discrimen accipere. Si
requiras quod superficie tenus lavat, Elementum est, si vero perpendas quod
interius purgat, virtus vitalis est, virtus Sanctificationis, virtus
Immortalitatis. Igitur in Proprietate humor corruptibilis, in Mysterio vero
virtus sanabilis.

XIX. Sic itaque Christi Corpus and Sanguis superficie tenus considerata,
creatura est mutabilitati corruptelaeque subjecta. Si Mysterii vero perpendas
virtutem, vita est participantibus se tribuens immortalitatem. Non ergo sunt
idem quod cernuntur and quod creduntur: Secundum enim quod cernuntur corpus
pascunt corruptibile, ipsa corruptibilia. Secundum vero quod creduntur animas
pascunt in aeternum victuras, ipsa immortalia.

XX. Apostolus quoque scribens Corinthiis ait; Nescitis quoniam parts nostri
omnes sub nube fuerunt, and omnes Mare transierunt, and omnes in Mose baptizati
sunt in nube and in mari, and omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducaverunt, and
omnes eundem potum spiritualem biberunt? Bibebant autem de spirituali
consequenti eos petra; Petra autem erat Christus. Animadvertimus and mare
Baptismi speeiem praetulisse and nubem; patresque prioris Testamenti in eis, id
est, in nube sive mari Baptizatos Impaessi esse.
fuisse. Number vel mare secundum quod elementum videbatur, Baptismi potuit habere
virtutem; Vel nubes juxta quod densioris crassitudinem aeris ostendebat,
populum Sanctificare quiverit? Nec tamen Apostolum in Christo locutum audemus
dicere, quod non vere dixerit, patres nostros in nube and in mari esse
Baptizatos.

XXI. Et quamvis Baptismus ille formam Baptismatis Christi quod hodie geritur
in Ecclesia non praetulerit, Baptismum tamen extitisse and in eo patres nostros
Baptizatos fuisse, nullus negare sanus audebit, nisi verbis Apostoli
contralicere vesanus praesumpserit. Igitur and mare and nubes non secundum hoc
quod Corpus extiterant, sanctificationis munditiam praebuere; verum secundum
quod invisibiliter Sancti Spiritus sanctificationem continebant. Erat namque in
eis Mendosa procul^ubio est lectio in omnibus Ratramni quot quot vidi
editionibus invisibilis, quod and ex MS. Laub. constat.
visibilis forma quae Corporeis sensibus appareret, non in imagine sed in
veritate; Et interius spiritualis potentia refulgebat quae non carnis Oculis,
sed mentis Luminibus appareret.

XXII. Similiter Manna populo de coelo datum, and aqua profluens de petra,
corporales extiterant, and corporaliter populum vel pascebant, vel potabant;
attamen Apostolus vel illud Manna vel illam aquam, Spiritualem escam, and
spiritualem potum appellat. Cur hoc? Quoniam inerat Corporeis illis substantiis
Spiritualis verbi potestas, quae Mentes potius quam Corpora credentium pasceret
atque potaret. Et cum cibus vel potus ille futuri corporis Christi sanguinisque
mysterium quod celebrat Ecclesia praemonstraret, eandem tamen escam spiritualem
manducasse, Cood. Impr. and eundem.
eundem potum spiritualem bibisse Patres nostros Sanctus Paulus asseverat.

XXIII. Quaeris fortasse, Quam eandem? Nimirum ipsam quam hodie Populus
Credentium in Ecclesia manducat and bibit. Non enim licet diversam intelligi,
quoniam unus idemque Christus est, qui and populum in deserto in Nube and in
Mari Baptizatum sua carne pavit, suo sanguine tunc potavit, and in Ecclesia
nunc Credentium populum sui corporis pane, sui sanguinis unda pascit and potat.

XXIV. Quod volens Apostolus intimare, cum dixisset Patres nostros eandem escam
spiritualem manducasse, eundemque potum spiritualem bibisse, consequenter
adjecit, Bibebant autem de spirituali consequenti eos Petra; Petra autem erat
Christus. Vt intelligeremus in deserto Christum in spirituali petra
constitisse, and sui sanguinis undam populo praebuisse, qui postea Corpus de
Virgin sumptum, and pro salute Credentium in cruce suspensum, nostris saeculis
exhibuit, Cood. Impr. diversa.
and ex eo sanguinis undam effudit, quo non solum redimeremur, verum etiam
potaremur.

XXV. Mirum certe, quoniam incomprehensibile and inaestimabile! Nondum hominem
assumserat; nondum pro salute mundi mortem degustaverat; nondum sanguine suo
nos redemerat; and jam nostri patres in deserto per escam spiritualem, potumque
invisibilem ejus Corpus manducabant, and ejus Sanguinem bibebant, velut testis
Existit. Edit. Colon.
extat Apostolus; clamans, Eandem escam spiritualem manducasse, eundem potum
spiritualem bibisse Patres nostros. Non istic Ratio qua fieri potuerit
disquirenda, sed Fides quod factum sit adhibenda. Ipse namque qui nunc in
Ecclesia omnipotenti virtute Panem and Vinum in sui Corporis carnem, and
proprii cruoris undam spiritualiter convertit, ipse tunc quoque Manna de coelo,
datum Corpus suum and Aquam de Petra profusam proprium sanguinem invisibiliter
operatus est.

XXVI. Quod intelligens David, in Spiritu Sancto protestatus est; Panem,
inquiens, Angelorum manducavit homo. Ridiculum namque est opinari, quod Manna
corporeum Patribus datum coelestem pascat exercitum, aut tali vescantur edulio,
qui divini Verbi saginantur epulis. Ostendit certe Psalmista, vel magis
Spiritus Sanctus loquens in Psalmista, vel quid Patres nostri in illo Manna
coelesti perceperunt, vel quid Fideles in Mysterio Corporis Christi credere
debeant. In utroque Christus certe innuitur, qui and Credentium animas pascit,
and Angelorum cibus existit. Vtrumque hoc incorporeo gustu, nec corporali
sagina, sed spiritualis Verbi virtute.

XXVII. Et Evangelista narrante cognovimus, Quod Dominus Jesus Christus
priusquam pateretur, accepto pane, gratias egit, and dedit Discipulis suis,
dicens, Hoc est Corpus meum, quod pro vobis datur, hoc facite in meam
commemorationem. Similiter and Calicem postquam coenavit, dicens, Hic est Calix
novum Testamentum in sanguine meo, qui pro vobis fundetur. Videmus nondum
passum esse Christum, and jam tamen sui corporis and sanguinis Mysterium
operatum fuisse.

XXVIII. Non enim putamus ullum Fidelium dubitare panem illum fuisse Christi
Corpus effectum, quod Discipulis donans, dicit, Hoc est Corpus meum, quod pro
vobis datur; sed neque Calicem dubitare sanguinem Christi continere, de quo
idem ait, Hic est Calix novum Testamentum in sanguine meo, qui pro vobis
fundetur. Sicut ergo paulo antequam pateretur Panis substantiam, and Vini
Creaturam convertere potuit in proprium Corpus quod passurum erat, and in suum
sanguinem qui post fundendus extabat, sic etiam in deserto Manna and Aquam de
petra in suam Carnem and Sanguinem convertere praevaluit, quamvis long post
and Caro illius in cruce pro nobis pendenda, and Sanguis ejus in ablutionem
nostram fundendus superabat.

XXIX. Hic etiam considerare debemus quemadmodum sit accipiendum quod ipse
dicit; Nisi manducaveritis carnem filii hominis, and sanguinem ejus biberitis,
non habebitis vitam in vobis. Non enim dicit, quod Caro ipsius quae pependit in
cruce, particulatim concidenda foret, and a Discipulis manducanda, vel Sanguis
ipsius quem fusurus erat pro mundi redemptione, Discipulis dandus esset in
potum. Hoc enim scelus esset, si secundum quod insideles tunc acceperunt, a
Discipulis vel Sanguis ejus biberetur, vel Caro comederetur.

XXX. Propter quod in consequentibus ait Discipulis, non infideliter sed
fideliter verba Christi suscipientibus, nec tamen Impressi habent adhuc quomodo.
quomodo illa verba intelligenda Add forent.
penetrantibus; Hoc vos scandalizat (inquiens) Si ergo videritis filium hominis
ascendentem ubi erat prius? tanquam diceret, Non ergo Carnem meam vel Sanguinem
meum vobis corporaliter comedendam, vel bibendum per parts distributum
distribuendumve putetis, cum post Resurrectionem visuri sit is me coelos
ascensurum cum integri Corporis sive sanguinis mei plenitudine. Tunc
intelligetis quod non sicut Infideles arbitrantur, carnem meam a Credentibus
comedendam, sed vere per Mysterium Panem and Vinum in Corporis and Sanguinis
mei conversa Substantiam a credentibus sumenda.

XXXI. Et consequenter Spiritus est, (inquit) qui vivificat, Caro non prodest
quicquam. Carnem dicit quicquam non prodesse, illo modo sicut Infideles
intelligebant, alioquin vitam praebet, sicut a Fidelibus per Mysterium sumitur.
Et hoc quare? Ipse manifestat cum dicit, Spiritus est qui vivificat. In hoc
Itaque Mysterio Corporis and Sanguinis spiritualis est operatio quae vitam
praestat, sine cujus operatione Mysteria illa nihil prosunt; quoniam Corpus
quidem pascere possunt, sed Animam pascere non possunt.

XXXII. Hic jam suboritur Quaestio, quam plurimi proponentes loquuntur, non in
Figura, sed in Veritate ista fieri. Quod dicentes Sanctorum Scripta Patrum
contraire comprobantur.

XXXIII. Sanctus 3. Aug. De Doct. Christ. lib. 3. c. 16.
Augustinus, Doctor Ecclesiae praecipuus, in Libro De Doctrina Christiana
tertio taliter scribit: Nisi manducaveritis (inquit Salvator) Carnem Filii
hominis, and biberitis Sanguinem ejus, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Facinus
vel Flagitium videtur jubere; Figura ergo est praecipiens Passioni Domini esse
communicandum, and Apud Augustinum and in obiis editionibus Ratramni habetur,
and suaviter atque utiliter recondendum.
fideliter recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis ejus Caro crucifixa and
vulnerata sit.

XXXIV. Cernimus quod Doctor iste Mysteria Corpus and Sanguinis Christi sub
Figura dicit a Fidelibus celebrari: Nam Carnem illius Sanguinemque ejus sumere
carnaliter, non Religionis dicit esse, sed Facinoris. De quibus fuerant illi,
qui in Evangelio dicta Domini non spiritualiter, sed carnaliter intelligentes,
recesserunt ab eo, and jam cum illo non ibant.

XXXV. Idem in Epistola ad Bonifacium Episcopum scribens, inter reliqua, sic
ait, Nempe, saepe ita loquimur, Ut Pascha propinquente, dicamus crastinam vel
perendinam Domini Passionem, cum ille ante tam multos annos passus sit, nec
omnino nisi semel illa Passio facta sit. Nempe, ipso die Dominico dicimus,
hodie Dominus resurrexit, cum ex quo In editis Resurrecti.
resurrexerit tot anni Transiorunt in editis.
transierint. Cur nemo tam ineptus est, ut nos ita loquentes arguat esse
mentitos, nisi quia istos dies secundum illorum quibus haec gesta sunt
similitudinem nuncupamus? Ut dicatur ipse dies qui non est ipse, sed
revolutione temporis similis ejus, and dicatur illo die fieri propter
Sacramenti celebrationem, quod non illo die, sed jam olim factum In editis est.
sit. Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in seipso? Et tamen in Sacramento non
solum per omnes Paschae Solemnitates, sed omni die populis immolatur. Nec
utique mentitur qui interrogatus, eum responderit immolari. Si enim Sacramenta
quandam similitudinem In editis earum rerum.
rerum earum, quarum Sacramentum sunt non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non
essent. Ex hac ipsa autem similitudine plerumque In editis etiam.
jam ipsarum rerum Nomina accipiant. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum
Sacramentum Corporis Christi, Corpus Christi est, Sacramentum Sanguinis Christi
Sanguis Christi est: Ita i. e. Baptismus, ut patet ex eis quae sequuntur, apud
Augustinum, Ep. 23. quae est ad Bonifacium. -- Ac per hoc cum respondetur [i.
e. in Baptismo] parvulus credere, qui fidei nondum habet affectum, respondetur
fidem habere propter fidei Sacramentum, and convertere se ad Deum propter
conversionis Sacramentum.
Sacramentum Fidei Fides est.

XXXVI. Cernimus quod St. Augustinus dicit aliud Sacramenta, and aliud Res
quarum sunt Sacramenta: Corpus autem in quo passus est Christus, and Sanguis
ejus de latere qui fluxit, res sunt. Harum vero rerum Mysteria dicit esse
Sacrament a Corporis and Sanguinis Christi, quae celebrantur ob memoriam
Dominicae Passionis, non solum per omnes Paschae Solemnitates singulis annis,
verum etiam singulis in anno diebus.

XXXVII. Et cum unum sit Corpus Dominicum in quo semel passus est, and unus
Sanguis qui pro Salute Mundi fusus est, attamen Sacramenta ipsarum rerum
vocabula sumpserunt, ut dicantur Corpus and Sanguis Christi, cum propter
similitudinem rerum quas innuunt, sic appellentur. Sicut Lege Passio.
Pascha and Resurrectio Domini vocantur, quae per singulos In Imqressi dies.
annos celebrantur, cum semel in seipso passus sit and resurrexerit, nec dies
illi jam possint revocari, quoniam praeterierint. Appellantur tamen illorum
vocabulo, dies quibus memoria Dominicae Passionis, sive Resurrectionis
commemoratur, idcirco quod illorum similitudinem habeant dierum, quibus
Salvator semel passus est, and semel resurrexit.

XXXVIII. Vnde dicimus, hodie, vel cras, vel perendie Domini Passio.
Pascha est, vel Resurrectio, cum dies illi quibus haec gesta sunt, multis jam
annis praeterierint. Sic etiam dicamus Dominum immolari, quando Passionis ejus
Sacramenta celebrantur, cum semel pro Salute Mundi sit immolatus in seipso,
sicut Apostolus ait; Christus passus est pro nobis, vobis relinquens exemplum,
ut sequamini Vestigia ejus. Non enim, quod quotidie in seipso patiatur, quod
semel fecit. Exemplum autem nobis reliquit, quod in Mysterio Dominici Corporis
and Sanguinis quotidie Credentibus praesentatur, ut quisquis ad illum
accesserit, noverit se passionibus ejus sociari debere, quarum imaginem in
sacris Mysteriis praestolatur, juxta illud Sapientiae; Accessisti ad Mensam
Potentis, diligenter attend quae tibi sunt apposita. Sciens quia talia te
oportet praeparare: Hic verba non extant in Bibl. Hebr. sed in versione 70.
unde traducta, in nonnullis veteribus Latinis Bibliis lecta fuisse constat: Ab
Ambrosio enim citantur, De Officiis l. 1. c. 31. Sed in Versione Vulg. hodie
non habentur.
sciens quia talia te oportet praeparare. Accedere ad Mensam Potentis, est
divini participem libaminis fieri. Consideratio vero appositorum Dominici
Corporis and Sanguinis est intelligentia. Quibus quisquis participat, advertat
se talia debere praeparare, ut ejus imitator existat commoriendo cujus memoriam
Mortis non solum credendo, verum etiam gustando confitetur.

XXXIX. Item Beatus Paulus ad Hebraeos, Talis enim decebat, ut nobis esset
Pontifex, sanctus, innocens, impollutus, segregatus a peccatoribus, and
excelsior coelis factus; qui non habet necessitatem, quemadmodum Sacerdotes,
quotidie hostias offerre prius pro suis delictis, deinde pro populi; hoc enim
fecit semel se offerendo Dominus Jesus Christus. Quod semel fecit, nunc
quotidie frequentat; semel enim pro peccatis populi se obtulit, celebratur
tamen haec eadem Oblatio singulis per fideles diebus, sed in Mysterio, ut quod
Dominus Jesus Christus semel se offerens adimplevit, hoc in ejus Passionis
memoriam quotidie geratur per Mysteriorum celebrationem.

XL. Nec tamen falso dicitur, quod in Mysteriis illis Dominus vel immoletur,
vel patiatur: quoniam illius Mortis atque Passionis habent similitudinem,
quarum existunt repraesentationes. Vnde Dominicum Corpus, and Sanguis Dominicus
appellantur, quoniam ejus sumunt appellationem cujus existunt Sacramentum.

Isid. Orig. ^ lib. 6. c. 19.
Hinc Beatus Isidorus in Libris Etymologiarum, sic ait, Sacrificium dictum quasi
sacrum factum, quia prece mystica consecratur in memoriam pro nobis Dominicae
Passionis. Unde hoc eo jubente, Corpus Christi, and Sanguinem dicimus, quod dum
fit ex Fructibus Terrae, sanctificatur, and fit Sacramentum operante
invisibiliter Spiritu Dei. Cujus Panis and Calicis Sacramentum Graeci (...)
dicunt, quod Latin Frigidam hanc Etymologiam citat and Gratianus, Decret. l.
2. Causa 1. Quemadmodum and alia ejusmodi, quae ostendunt Isidorum non admodum
Linguae Graecae peritum, e. g. Metropolitani autem a mensura Civitatum
vocantur, Oril. l. 7. c. 12. Haec citat Gratianus, Decr. l. 1. Did. 21. qu. 1.
cap. Cleros.
bona gratia interpretatur. Et quid melius sanguine and Corpore Christi?
Clausula inter Asteriscos duos posita, non hodie legitur apud Isidorum, vereor
ne mala fide omissa sit.
Panis vero and Vinum ideo Corpori and Sanguini Impressi addunt Domini.
comparantur, quia sicut hujus visibilis Panis Vinique substantia exteriorem
nutrit and inebriat hominem, ita Verbum Dei, qui est Panis vivus participatione
sui fidelium recreat mentes Clausula inter Asteriscos duos posita, non hodie
legitur apud Isidorum, vereor ne mala fide omissa sit.
.

XLI. Et iste Doctor Catholicus sacrum illud Dominicae Passionis Mysterium in
memoriam pro nobis Dominicae Passionis docet agendum. Hoc dicens ostendit,
Dominicam Passionem semel esse faectam, ejus vero memoriam in sacris solennibus
repraesentari.

XLII. Vnde and Panis qui offertur, ex fructibus terrae cum sit assumptus, in
Christi Corpus, dum sanctificatur, transponitur, sicut and Vinum, cum ex vite
defluxerit, divini tamen sanctificatione Mysterii efficitur Sanguis Christi,
non quidem visibiliter, sed sicut ait praesens Doctor, operante invisibiliter
Spiritu In impressis Spiritu Sancto.
Dei.

XLIII. Vnde Sanguis and Corpus Christi dicuntur; quia non quod exterius
videntur, sed quod interius divino Spiritu operante facta sunt, accipiuntur. Et
quia long aliud per potentiam invisibilem existunt, quam visibiliter
appareant, discernit, dum dicit, Panem and Vinum ideo Corpori and Sanguini
Domini comparari; quia sicut visibilis Panis and Vini substantia exteriorem
nutrit and inebriat hominem, ita Verbum Dei, qui est Panis vivus,
participatione sui, Fidelium recreat mentes.

XLIV. Ista dicendo, planissime confitemur, quod in Sacramento Corporis and
Sanguinis Domini, quicquid exterius sumitur, ad corporis refectionem aptatur.
Verbum autem Dei, qui est panis invisibilis, invisibiliter in illo existens
Sacramento, invisibiliter participatione sui Fidelium mentes vivificando pascit.

XLV. Hinc etiam idem Doctor dicit, Sacramentum est in aliqua celebratione, cum
res gesta ita sit, ut aliquid significare intelligatur quod sancte accipiendum
est: Haec dicendo ostendit, In impressis confitetur.
omne Sacramentum in divinis rebus aliquid secreti continere, and aliud esse
quod visibiliter appareat, aliud vero quod invisibiliter sit accipiendum.

XLVI. Quae sunt autem Sacramenta fidelibus celebranda, consequenter ostendens
ait: Sunt autem Sacramenta, Baptismus, and Chrisma, Corpus and Sanguis. Apud
Isidorum additur Christi.
Quae ob id Sacramenta dicuntur, quia sub tegumento corporalium rerum, virtus
divina secretius salutem eorundem Sacramentorum operatur. Unde and a secretis
virtutibus, vel sacris Sacramenta dicuntur: Et in sequentibus ait: Graece (...)
dicitur, quod secretam and reconditam habeat Disyensauionem, ita libri impressi.
dispositionem.

XLVII. Quid istine perdocemur, nisi quod Corpus and Sanguis Domini propterea
Mysteria dicuntur, quod secretam and reconditam habeant Dispensationem iterum.
dispositionem. Id est, aliud sint quod exterius innuant, aliud quod interius
invisibiliter operentur.

XLVIII. Hinc etiam and Sacramenta vocitantur, quia tegumento corporalium
rerum, virtus divina secretius salutem accipientium fideliter dispensat.

XLIX. Ex his omnibus, quae sunt hactenus dicta, monstratum est, quod Corpus
and Sanguis Christi quae fidelium ore in Ecclesia percipiuntur, figurae sunt
sesecundum speciem visibilem. At vero secundum invisibilem substantiam, id est,
divini potentiam Verbi, vere Corpus and Sanguis Christi existunt. Vnde secundum
visibilem creaturam corpus pascunt, juxta vero potentioris virtutem
substantiae, Fidelium mentes and pascunt and sanctificant.

L. Quaestio Secunda, Jam nunc secundae Quaestionis Propositum est inspiciendum
and videndum: Vtrum ipsum Corpus quod de Maria natum est, and passum, mortuum
and sepultum, quodque ad dextram Patris consideat, sit quod ore Fidelium per
Sacramentorum Mysterium in Ecclesia quotidie sumitur?

LI. Percontemur quid ex hoc Sanctus Ambrosius sentiat. Ait namque in Habentur
haec in Libro de initiandis, c. 8.
primo Sacramentorum Libro; Revera mirabile est quod Manna Deus plueret
Patribus, and quotidiano Coeli Pascebantur alimento; Unde dictum est, Panem
Angelorum manducavit Homo. Sed tamen Panem illum qui manducaverunt omnes in
deserto mortui sunt. Ista autem esca quam accipis, iste panis vivus qui
descendit de Coelo, vitae aeternae substantiam subministrat, and quicunque hunc
Hunc panem in editis.
manducaverit, non morietur in aeternum, and Corpus Christi est.

LII. Vide secundum quod Doctor iste Corpus Christi dicat esse escam quam
Fideles accipiunt in Ecclesia. Ait namque, Iste panis vivus qui de coelo
descendit, vitae aeternae substantiam subministrat. Number secundum hoc quod
videtur, quod corporaliter sumitur, quod dente premitur, quod fauce glutitur,
quod receptaculo ventris suscipitur, aeternae vitae substantiam subministrat?
Isto namque modo carnem pascit morituram, neque aliquam subministrat
incorruptionem; neque dici vere potest, Vt quicunque hunc manducaverit non
morietur in aeternum. Et hoc enim quod sumit corpus, corruptible est, nec ipsi
corpori potest praestare ne moriatur in aeternum: Quoniam quod corruptioni
subjacet, aeternitatem praestare non valet. Est ergo in illo pane vita, quae
non oculis apparet corporeis, sed fidei contuetur aspectu, qui etiam panis
vivus, qui descendit de coelo existit; and de quo vere dicitur, Quicunque hunc
manducaverit, non morietur in aeternum, and qui est Corpus Ibid. c. 9.
Christi.

LIII. Item in consequentibus, cum de omnipotenti virtute Christi loqueretur,
sic ait; In Impressis Domini.
Sermo ergo Christi, qui potuit ex nihilo facere quod non erat, non potest ea
quae sunt in id mutare Quod in editis.
quae non erant? Nonne Minus in editis.
majus est novas Rebus in editis.
res dare, quam mutare Naturas?

LIVE. Dicit Sanctus Ambrosius, In illo Mysterio Sanguinis and Corporis Christi
commutationem esse factam, and mirabiliter, quia divine, and ineffabiliter,
quia incomprehensibile. Dicant qui nihil hic volunt secundum interius latentem
virtutem accipere, sed totum quod apparet visibiliter aestimare, secundum quid
hic sit commutatio facta? Nam secundum Creaturarum substantiam, quod fuerunt
ante consecrationem, hoc and postea consistunt. Panis and Vinum prius extitere,
in qua etiam specie jam consecrata permanere videntur. Est ergo interius
commutatum Spiritus Sancti potenti virtute, quod Fides aspicit, Animam pascit,
aeternae vitae substantiam subministrat.

LV. Item in consequentibus, Quid hic quaeris Naturae ordinem in Christi
corpore, cum praeter Naturam sit ipse Dominus Deus Natus in editis.
Jesus partus ex Virgin?

LVI. Hic jam surgit Auditor. Fortassis per Auditorem intelligit Catechumenum
rudem, and nondum plene dogmatis Evangelicis imbutum, vel Baptismati proximum.
Qui Auditores and Audientes apud Tert. appellantur, lib. De Poenit. c. 6. inter
Auditorum tyrocinia. Et Cyprianus Optatum Lectorem Catechumenorum institutioni
praepositum Doctorem Audientium a se constitutum dicit, Ep. 29. Ed Ox. 1682.
Hoc unum obstat, quod apud August. Hieron. vel Ambros. in quorum Scriptis magis
versatus videtur Ratramnus vocabulum Auditor nusquam, quod memini, ita acceptum
occurrit. Sed res parvi est momenti.
Auditor and dicit, Corpus esse Christi quod cernitur, and Sanguinem qui
bibitur; nec quaerendum quomodo factum sit, sed tenendum quod sic factum sit.
Been quidem sentire videris, sed si vim verborum diligenter inspexeris, Corpus
quidem Christi, Sanguinemque fideliter credis, Redundat sed si.
sed si perspiceres, quia quod credis nondum vides. Nam si videres, diceres,
Video; non diceres, Credo Corpus Sanguinemque esse Christi. Nunc autem quia
Fides totum, quicquid illud totum est, aspicit, and oculus carnis nihil
apprehendit, intellige quod non in specie, sed in virtute Corpus and Sanguis
Christi existant, quae cernuntur. Vnde dicit, ordinem Naturae non hic
intuendum, sed Christi potentiam venerandam, quae Deest permutat.
quicquid vult, Quomodo vult desideratur in excus s.
quomodo vult, in quodcunque vult, and creat quod non erat, and creatum
permutat in ^id quod antea non fuerat. Subjungit idem Author. Vera utique Caro
quae crucifixa est, quae sepulta est, Verae legisse videtur Ratramnus, nec
praeter mentem S. Ambrosii.
vere ergo Carnis illius Sacramentum est. Ipse clamat Dominus Jesus, Hoc est
Corpus meum.

LVII. Quam diligenter, quam prudenter facta distinctio! De Carne Christi quae
crucifixa est, quae sepulta est, id est, secundum quam Christus crucifixus and
sepultus est, ait, Vera itaque Caro Christi. At de illa quae sumitur in
Sacramento, dicit; Vere ergo Carnis illius Sacramentum est, distinguens
Sacramentum Carnis, a Veritate Carnis; quatenus in veritate Carnis quam
sumpserat de Virgin diceret eum crucifixum and sepultum; quod vero nunc agitur
in Ecclesia, Mysterium verae illius Carnis in qua crucifixus diceret esse
Sacramentum; patenter Fideles instituens, quod illa Caro secundum quam and
crucifixus est Christus, and sepultus, non sit Mysterium, sed Veritas Naturae;
haec vero Caro quae nunc similitudinem illius in Mysterio continet, non sit
Specie Caro, sed Sacramento. Siquidem in specie panis est, in Sacramento, verum
Christi Corpus, sicut ipse clamat Dominus Jesus, Hoc est Corpus meum.

LVIII. Item in consequentibus, Ambros. ibid. In impressis legitur quid ^damus.
Quid comedamus, quid bibamus, alibi tibi per Prophetam Spiritus Sanctus
expressit, dicens, Gustate and videte quoniam suavis est Dominus; Beatus vir
qui sperat in eo. Number corporaliter gustatus ille panis, aut illud vinum
bibitum, ostendit quam sit suavis Dominus? Quicquid enim sapit, corporale est,
and fauces delectat. Numquid Dominum gustare corporeum est aliquid sentire?
Invitat ergo spiritualis Rectius gustus in impressis.
gusti saporem experiri, and in illo vel potu vel pane nihil corporaliter
opinari, sed totum spiritualiter sentire: quoniam Dominus Spiritus est, and
beatus vir qui sperat in eo.

LIX. Item consequenter, In illo Sacramento Christus est, quia corpus Christi
est: Non ergo corporalis Esca, sed spiritualis est. Quid apertius? Quid
manifestius? Quid divinius? Ait enim in illo Sacramento Christus est. Non enim
ait, ille Panis, and illud Vinum Christus est, quod si diceret Christum
corruptibilem (quod absit) and mortalitati subjectum praedicaret: Quicquid enim
in illa esca vel cernitur vel gustatur corporaliter, corruptibilitati constat
obnoxium esse.

LX. Addit, Quia Corpus Christi est. Insurgis and dicis, Ecce manifest illum
Panem, and illum Potum Corpus esse Christi confitetur; sed attend quem admodum
In impressis Subjungitur.
subjungit. Non ergo corporalis esca, sed spiritualis est. Non igitur sensum
carnis adhibeas; nihil enim secundum eum hic decernitur. Est quidem Corpus
Christi; sed non corporale, sed spirituale. Est Sanguis Christi, sed non
corporalis, sed spiritualis, Nihil igitur hic corporaliter, sed spiritualiter
sentiendum. Corpus Christi est, sed non corporaliter; and Sanguis Christi est,
sed non corporaliter.

LXI. Item consequenter, Vnde and Apostolus hic (inquit) de Typo ejus ait, Quia
Patres nostri escam spiritualem manducaverunt, and potum spiritualem biberunt;
Corpus enim Dei, In impressis, Corpus spirituale.
spirituale est; Corpus Christi, Corpus est Divini Spiritus; quia Spiritus
Christus est, ut legimus In editis deest in Threnis.
in Threnis. Spiritus ante faciem nostram Christus Dominus.

LXII. Luculentissime Sanguinis and Corporis Christi Mysterium, quemadmodum
debeamus intelligere, docuit. Cum enim dixisset Patres nostros escam
spiritualem manducasse, and potum spiritualem bibisse; cum tamen Manna illud
quod comederunt, and aquam quam biberunt, corporea fuisse, nemo In MS. est
desideratur.
qui dubitet, adjungit de Mysterio quod in Ecclesia nunc agitur, definiens
secundum quid Corpus sit Christi. Corpus enim Dei, inquiens, Corpus est
spirituale. Deus utique Christus, and Corpus quod sumpsit de Maria Virgin,
quod passum, quod sepultum est, quod resurrexit, Corpus utique verum fuit,
Codd. impressi legunt idem.
id est quod visibile atque palpabile manebat. At vero Corpus, quod Mysterium
Dei dicitur, non est corporale, sed spirituale. Quod si spirituale, jam non
visibile, neque palpabile. Hinc Beatus Ambrosius subjungit, Corpus, inquiens,
Christi Corpus est divini Spiritus: Divinus autem Spiritus nihil corporeum,
nihil corruptible, nihil palpabile quod sit existit. At hoc Corpus quod in
Ecclesia celebratur, secundum visibilem speciem, and corruptibile est, and
palpabile.

LXIII. Quomodo ergo divini Spiritus Corpus esse dicitur? Secundum hoc utique
quod spirituale est, id est, secundum quod invisibile consistit, and
impalpabile, ac per hoc incorruptible.

LXIV. Hinc in consequentibus, Quia Spiritus Christus, ut legimus, Spiritus
ante faciem nostram Christus Dominus. Patenter ostendit secundum quod habeatur
Corpus Christi, videlicet secundum id quod sit in eo Spiritus Christi, id est,
divini potentia Verbi, quae non solum Animam pascit, verum etiam purgat.

LXV. Propter quod ipse dicit Author consequenter, Denique cor nostrum esca
ista confirmat, and potus iste laetificat cor hominis; ut Propheta Memoravit in
editis.
commemoravit. Number esca, corporalis cor hominis confirmat, and potus corporeus
laetificat cor hominis? Sed ut ostenderet quae esca, vel qui potus sint de
quibus loquitur, addidit signanter Esca ista, vel potus iste: Quae ista, vel
qui iste? Corpus nimirum Christi, Corpus Divini Spiritus; and ut apertius
inculcetur, Spiritus Christus, de quo Codd. alii Legitur.
loquitur, Spiritus ante faciem nostram Christus Dominus. Quibus omnibus
evidenter ostenditur, nihil in esca ista, nihil in potu isto corporaliter
sentiendum, sed totum spiritualiter attendendum.

LXVI. Non enim Anima, quae cord hominis praesenti loco significatur, vel esca
corporea, vel potu corporeo pascitur, sed Verbo Dei nutritur and vegetatur;
quod apertius in Libro quinto Sacramentorum, Doctor idem affirmat. Ambr. lib.
Sacr. 5. c. 4.
Non iste panis est, inquiens, qui vadit in corpus, sed ille panis vitae
aeternae, qui animae nostrae substantiam Fulcit in editis. Cujus loco memoriae
lapsu Librarius videtur subministrat scripsisse; nam Ratramnum etiam perinde ac
nos fulcit, legisse liquet ex clausula Paragraphi sequentis.
subministrat.

LXVII. Et quia non de communi pane dixerit hoc Sanctus Ambrosius, verum de
pane Corporis Christi, sequentia Lectionis manifestissime declarant. Loquitur
enim de pane quotidiano, quem Credentes sibi postulant dari.

LXVIII. Et idcirco subjungit, Si quotidianus est panis, cur post annum illum
sumis, quemadmodum Graeci in Orient facere consueverunt? Accipe Ergo non
legitur in impressis.
ergo quotidie quod quotidie tibi prosit, sic vive ut quotidie merearis
accipere. Ergo manifestum est de quo pane loquitur; de pane (videlicet)
Corporis Christi, qui non ex eo quod vadit in Corpus, sed ex eo quod panis sit
vitae aeternae animae nostrae substantiam fulcit.

LXIX. Hujus doctissimi Viri authoritate perdocemur, quod multa differentia
separantur, Corpus in quo passus est Christus, and Sanguis quem pendens in
cruce, de latere suo profudit, and hoc Corpus quod in Mysterio Passionis
Christi quotidie a fidelibus celebratur, and ille quoque Sanguis qui fidelium
ore sumitur, ut Mysterium sit illius sanguinis quo totus redemptus est Mundus.
Iste namque panis and iste potus non secundum quod videntur corpus sive sanguis
existunt Christi, sed secundum quod spiritualiter vitae substantiam
subministrant. Illud vero corpus in quo semel passus est Christus, non aliam
speciem praeferebat quam in qua consistebat. Hoc enim erat, quod vere
videbatur, quod tangebatur, quod crucifigebatur, quod sepeliebatur. Similiter
Sanguis illius de latere manans, non aliud apparebat exterius, and aliud
interius obvelabat: Verus itaque sanguis de vero corpore profluebat: At nunc
Sanguis Christi, quem Credentes ebibunt, and Corpus quod comedunt aliud sunt in
specie, and aliud in significatione. Aliud quod pascunt Corpus esca corporea,
and aliud quod saginant Mentes aeternae vitae substantia.

LXX. De qua re Hieron. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 1.
Beatus Hieronymus in Commentario Epist. Pauli ad Ephesios, ita scribit:
Dupliciter Sanguis Christi, and Caro intelligitur; Deeft vel in impressis.
vel spiritualis illa, atque divina, de qua ipse dicit, Caro mea vere est
cibus, and Sanguis meus vere est potus; vel Vel Caro and Sanguis quae crucifixa
est, and qui Militis effusus est Lancea.
Caro quae crucifixa est, and Sanguis qui militis effusus est lancea.

LXXI. Non parva Doctor iste differentia Corporis and Sanguinis Christi fecit
distinctionem. Namque dum Carnem vel Sanguinem quae quotidie sumuntur a
fidelibus, spiritualia dicit esse; at vero Caro quae crucifixa est, and Sanguis
qui Militis effusus est Lancea, non spiritualia esse dicuntur, neque divina;
patenter insinuat, quod tantum inter se differunt, quantum differunt corporalia
and spiritualia, visibilia and invisibilia, divina atque humana; Rectius
impressi at quae.
at quod a se differunt, non idem sunt. Differunt autem Caro spiritualis, quae
fidelium ore sumitur, and Sanguis spiritualis, qui quotidie Credentibus
potandus exhibetur, a Carne quae crucifixa est, and Sanguine qui Militis
effusus est Lancea, sicut autoritas praesentis Viri testificatur: Non igitur
idem sunt.

LXXII. Illa namque Caro quae crucifixa est, de Virginis carne facta est,
ossibus and nervis compacta, and humanorum Membrorum lineamentis distincta,
rationalis animae spiritu vivificata in propriam vitam and congruentes motus.
At vero Caro spiritualis, quae populum credentem spiritualiter pascit, secundum
speciem quam gerit exterius, Frumenti granis manu Artificis consistit, nullis
nervis ossibusque compacta, nulla Membrorum varietate distincta, nulla
rationali substantia vegetata, nullos proprios motus potens exercere. Quicquid
enim in ea vitae praebet substantiam, spiritualis est potentiae, and
invisibilis ^ffcientiae, divinaeque virtutis. Atque aliud long consistit,
secundum quod exterius conspicitur, atque Impressi legunt illud.
aliud secundum quod in Mysterio creditur. Porro Caro Christi quae crucifixa
est, non aliud exterius, quam quod interim erat, ostendebat; quia vera Caro
very hominis existebat, Corpus utique verum in very Corporis specie consistens.

LXXIII. Considerandum quoque quod in Pane illo non solum Corpus Christi, verum
etiam in eum credentis populi figuretur, unde multis Frumenti granis
conficitur: quia Corpus Populi credentis multis per Verbum Christi fidelibus
Forte coagmentatur.
augmentatur.

LXXIV. Qua de re, sicut in Mysterio, Panis ille Christi Corpus accipitur, sic
etiam in Mysterio, Membra Populi credentis in Christum intimantur, and sicut
non corporaliter, sed spiritualiter, Panis ille Credentium Corpus dicitur; sic
quoque Christi Corpus non corporaliter, sed spiritualiter necesse est
intelligatur.

LXXV. Sic and in Vino, qui Sanguis Christi dicitur, Aqua misceri jubetur, nec
unum sine altero permittitur offerri: Quia nec Populus sine Christo, nec
Christus sine Populo, sicut nec Caput sine Corpore, vel Corpus sine Capite
valet existere. Aqua denique in illo Sacramento populi gestat imaginem. Igitur
si Vinum illud sanctificatum per Ministrorum Officium in Christi Sanguinem
corporaliter convertitur, Aqua quoque quae pariter admixta est, in Sanguinem
Populi credentis, necesse est corporaliter convertatur. Vbi namque una
Sanctificatio est, una consequenter Operatio; and ubi par Ratio, par quoque
consequitur Mysterium. At videmus in Aqua secundum Corpus, nihil esse
conversum, consequenter ergo and in Vino nihil corporaliter ostensum. Accipitur
spiritualiter quicquid in Aqua de Populi Corpore significatur; accipiatur ergo
necesse est spiritualiter quicquid in Vino de Christi Sanguine intimatur.

LXXVI. Item quae a se differunt, idem non sunt: Corpus Christi quod mortuum
est, and resurrexit, and immortale factum, jam non moritur, and Mors illi ultra
non dominabitur; aeternum est, nec jam passibile, Hoc autem quod in Ecclesia
celebratur, temporale est, non aeternum; corruptibile est, non incorruptum; in
via est, non in Patria. Differunt igitur a se, quapropter non sunt idem. Haec
librarii incuria ex MS. Lobiensi excidisse videntur.
[Quod si non sunt idem] quomodo verum Corpus Christi dicitur, and verus
Sanguis?

LXXVII. Si enim Corpus Christi est, and hoc dicitur vere quia Corpus Christi
est; in veritate Corpus Christi est: and si in veritate Corpus Christi, and
Corpus Christi incorruptible est, and impassibile est, ac per hoc aeternum. Hoc
igitur Corpus Christi quod agitur in Ecclesia, necesse est ut incorruptible sit
and aeternum. Sed negari non potest corrumpi, quod per parts Commutatum male
in impressis.
comminutum dispartitur ad sumendum, and dentibus commolitum in Corpus
trajicitur. Sed aliud est quod exterius geritur, aliud vero quod per fidem
creditur. Ad sensum quod pertinet Corporis, corruptibile est, quod Fides vero
credit, incorruptibile. Exterius igitur quod apparet, non est ipsa res, sed
Imago rei; mente vero quod sentitur and intelligitur veritas rei.

LXXVIII. Hinc Aug. in Jo. Tract. 26.
Beatus Augustine. in Evangelii Joannis expositione, dum de Corpore Christi
loqueretur and Sanguine, sic ait; Manducavit and Moses Manna, manducavit and
Aaron, manducavit and Phinees, manducaverunt ibi multi qui Deo placuerunt, and
mortui In impress^ m^ tui non sunt.
sunt. Quare? Quia visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter
e^urierunt, spiritualiter gustaverunt, ut spiritualiter satiarentur. Nam and
nos hodie accipimus visibilem cibum, sed aliud est Sacramentum, aliudvirtus
Sacramenti. Item in posteribus, Hic est panis qui de coelo descendit. Hunc
panem significavit Manna, hunc panem significavit Altar Dei. Sacramenta ilia
fuerunt, in signis diversa, In editis diversa sunt.
in re quae significatur paria sunt. Apostolum Paulum audi, Nolovos ignorare,
Fratres, quia Patres nostri omnes sub Nube fuerunt, Verba unculis inclusa
desiderantur in MS. L^b.
[and omnes Mare transierunt, and omnes in Mose Baptizati sunt in Nube and in
Mari,] and omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducaverunt, and omnes eundem potum
spiritualem biberunt. Spiritualem utique eandem, nam corporalem alteram, quia
illi Manna, nos aliud, spiritualem vero quam nos. Et adjungit, Et omnes eundem
potum spiritualem biberunt. Aliud illi, aliud nos, sed specie visibili, quod
tamen hoc idem significaret, virtute spirituali. Quomodo enim eundem potum?
Bibebant, inquit, de spirituali sequenti Petra. Petra autem erat Christus. Inde
Panis, unde Potus. Petra Christus in In Signo in impressis.
signum, verus Christus in Verbo, and in Carne.

LXXIX. Item, Hic est Panis de Coelo descendens, ut si quis ex ipso
manducaverit, non moriatur; Sed Qui utrobique legunt libri impressi.
quod pertinet ad virtutem Sacramenti, non quod pertinet ad visible
Sacramentum, qui manducat intus, non foris; qui manducat in cord, non qui
premit dente.

LXXX. Item in posterioribus verba Salvatoris introducens, ita dicit. Hoc vos
scandalizat, quia dixi Carnem meam do vobis manducare, and Sanguinem meum
bibere? Si ergo videritis filium hominis ascendentem ubi erat prius. Quid est
hoc? Hinc solvit quod illos moverat, hinc aperuit unde fuerant scandalizati.
Illi enim putabant eum erogaturum Corpus suum. Ille autem dixit se ascensurum
in Coelum, utique integrum. Cum videritis Filium hominis ascendentem ubi erat
prius: Certe vel tunc videbitis, quia non eo modo quo putatis erogat Corpus:
Impressi legunt Corpus suum.
certe vel tunc intelligetis; quia Gratia ejus non consumitur morsibus. Et ait,
Spiritus est qui vivisicat, Caro non prodest.

LXXXI. Et pluribus interpositis rursus adjicit, Quisquis autem (inquit idem
Apostolus) Spiritum Christi non habet, hic non est ejus. Spiritus ergo est qui
vivificat, Caro autem non prodest quicquam. Verba quae ego locutus sum vobis,
Spiritus and Vita sunt. Quid est, Spiritus and Vita sunt? Spiritualiter
intelligenda sunt. Intellexisti spiritualiter, Spiritus and Vita sunt;
Intellexisti carnalitor, etiam C^dd. Impressi legunt etiam [sic illa] Spiritus.
Spiritus and Vita sunt, sed tibi non sunt.

LXXXII. Hujus Authoritate Doctoris Verba Domini tractantis de Sacramento sui
Corporis and Sanguinis manifest docemur, quod illa Verba Domini spiritualiter,
and non carnaliter intelligenda sunt, sicut ipse ait, Verba quae ego loquor
vobis Spiritus and Vita sunt. Verba utique de sua carne manducanda, and de suo
sanguine bibendo. Inde enim loquebatur unde Discipuli fuerant scandalizati.
Ergo ut non scandalizarentur, revocat eos Divinus Magister de Carne ad
Spiritum, de corporea Visione ad Intelligentiam invisibilem.

LXXXIII. Videmus ergo, esca illa Corporis Domini, and potus ille Sanguinis
ejus, secundum quid vere Corpus ejus, and vere Sanguis ejus existunt, videlicet
secundum quod Spiritus and Vita sunt.

LXXXIV. Item, Quae idem sunt una definitione comprehenduntur. De vero Corpore
Christi dicitur, quod sit verus Deus, and verus Homo. Deus qui ex Deo Patre
ante Secula natus; Homo, qui in fine Seculi ex Maria Virgin genitus. Haec
autem dum de Corpore Christi quod in Ecclesia per Mysterium geritur dici non
possunt, secundum quendam modum Corpus Christi esse cognoscitur, and modus iste
in Figura est and Imagine, ut Veritas res ipsa sentiatur.

LXXXV. In Orationibus quae post Mysterium Corporis Sanguinisque Christi
dicuntur, and a Populo respondetur, Amen, sic Sacerdotis voce dicitur, Deest
haec Oration in Libro Sacramentario Gregorii per Menardum edito. Extat vero in
secundo Libro Sacramentorum Romans Eccles. per Thomasium edito in quarto, Romae
1680. p. 160.
Pignus aeternae vitae capientes humiliter imploramus, ut quod In restitui ex
MS. Laub.
[in] imagine contingimus Sacramenti, manifesta participatione sumamus.

LXXXVI. Et Pignus enim and Imago alterius rei sunt, id est, non ad se, sed ad
aliud aspiciunt. Pignus enim illius rei est pro qua donatur. Imago illius,
cujus similitudinem ostendit. Significant enim ista rem cujus sunt, non
manifest ostendunt. Quod cum ita est, apparet quod hoc Corpus and Sanguis
Pignus and Imago rei sunt futurae, ut quod nunc per similitudinem ostenditur,
in futuro per manifestationem reveletur. Quod si nunc significant, in futuro
autem patefacient, aliud est quod nunc geritur, aliud quod in futuro
manifestabitur.

LXXXVII. Qua de re and Corpus Christi, and Sanguis est, quod Ecclesia
celebrat, sed tanquam Pignus, tanquam Imago: Veritas vero erit cum jam nec
Pignus nec Imago, sed ipsius rei Veritas apparebit.

LXXXVIII. Et alibi, Habetur altera ejusdem Libri page 135. and in Missali
Romano. Post-Communio in Sabbato quatuor Temporum post S. Crucem.
Perficiant in nobis, Domine, quaesumus, tua Sacramenta quod continent, ut quae
nunc specie gerimus, rerum veritate capiamus. Dicit quod in specie gerantur
ista, non in veritate, id est, per similitudinem, non per ipsius rei
manifestationem. Differunt autem a se Species and Veritas. Quapropter Corpus
and Sanguis quod in Ecclesia geritur, differt ab illo Corpore and Sanguine quod
in Christi Corpore Codd. nonnulli. [Per resurrectionem] jam glorificatum.
jam glorificatum cognoscitur. Et hoc Corpus Pignus est, and Species, illud MS
Lobiense addit verba haec emphatica and in omnibus hactenus exemplaribus
desiderata vero ipsa.
vero ipsa Veritas: Hoc enim geretur donec ad illud perveniatur, ubi vero ad
illud perventum fuerit, hoc removebitur.

LXXXIX. Apparet itaque, quod multa inter se differentia separantur, quantum
est inter Pignus and eam rem pro qua Pignus traditur, and quantum inter
Imaginem and rem cujus est Imago, and quantum inter Speciem and Veritatem.
Videmus itaque multa differentia separari Mysterium Sanguinis and Corporis
Christi, quod nunc a Fidelibus sumitur in Ecclesia, and illud quod natum est de
Maria Virgin, quod passum, quod sepultum, quod resurrexit, quod Coelos
ascendit, quod ad Dexteram Patris sedet. Hoc namque quod agitur in via,
spiritualiter est accipiendum; quia Fides, quod non videt, credit, and
spiritualiter pascit Animam, and laetisicat Cor, and vitam praebet aeternam and
incorruptionem, dum non attenditur quod Corpus pascit, quod dente premitur,
quod per parts comminuitur; sed quod in Fide spiritualiter accipitur. At vero
Corpus illud in quo passus est, and resurrexit Christus, proprium ejus Corpus
existit, de Virginis Mariae Corpore sumptum, palpabile seu visibile etiam post
Resurrectionem, sicut ipse Discipulis ait. Luc. XXIV. 40. Codd. impressi
addunt, Quid turbati estis and cogitationes ascendunt in corda vestra? Videte
manus meas, and pedes meos quia ego ipse sum.
Palpate and videte; quia Spiritus carnem and ossa non habet, sicut me videtis
habere.

XC. Audiamus etiam quid Beatus Fulgentius de Fide, ad Petrum Diaconum, c. 19.
Fulgentius in Libello de Fide dicat: Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubites
ipsum Unigenitum, Deum Verbum, Carnem factum, se pro nobis obtulisse
Sacrificium and Hostiam Deo in odorem suavitatis; cui cum Patre and Spiritu
Sancto a Patriarchis, a Prophetis, and Sacerdotibus tempore veteris Testamenti
animalia sacrificabantur; and cui nunc Idem.
id est, tempore novi Testamenti, cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto, cum quibus illi
una est Divinitas, Sacrificium Panis and Vini in Fide and Charitate, Sancta
Catholica Ecclesia per universum orbem Terrae offerre non cessat. In illis enim
carnalibus victimis In editis Figuratio
significatio fuit Carnis Christi, quam pro peccatis nostris ipse sine peccato
fuerat oblaturus, and lege Sanguinis.
Sanguis quem erat effusurus in remissionem peccatorum nostrorum. In isto autem
Sacrificio Gratiarum actio, atque commemoratio est Carnis Christi, quam pro
nobis obtulit, and Sanguinis quem pro nobis idem Deus effudit. De quo Beatus
Paulus Apostolus dicit in Actibus Apostolorum. Acts 20.28.
Attendite vobis and universo Gregi, in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit
Episcopos, regere Ecclesiam Dei quam acquisivit Sanguine suo. In illis ergo
Sacrificiis, quid nobis esset donandum figurate significabatur, in hoc autem
Sacrificio quid jam nobis donatum sit evidenter ostenditur.

XCI. Dicens quod in illis Sacrificiis quid nobis esset donandum
significabatur, in isto vero Sacrificio, quid sit donatum commemoretur,
patenter innuit quod sicut illa Figuram habuerit futurorum, sic and Sacrificium
Figura sit praeteritorum.

XCII. Quibus Dictis quanta differentia sit inter Corpus in quo passus est
Christus, and hoc Corpus, quod pro ejus Passionis commemoratione, sive Mortis
fit, evidentissime declaravit. Illud namque proprium and verum, nihil habens in
se vel Mysticum, vel Figuratum. Hoc vero Mysticum, aliud exterius per Figuram
ostentans, aliud interius, per Intellectum Fidei repraesentans.

XCIII. Ponamus adhuc unum Patris Augustini Testimonium, quod and Dictorum
Fidem nostrorum adstruat, and Sermonis marginem ponat; in Sermon quem fecit ad
Populum de Sacramento Altaris, sic infit; Extat hic Sermo ad calcem Epistolae
Fulgentii ad Ferrandum Diaconum de Baptismo Aethiopis moribundi, editae inter
alia Fulgentii Opuscula per Jacobum Sirmondum, 8. Par. 1612.
Hoc quod videtis in Altari Dei, Etiam in impressis.
jam transacta nocte vidistis, sed quid esset, quid sibi vellet, quam magnae
rei Sacramentum contineret, nondum audivistis. Quod ergo videtis Panis est and
Calix, quod vobis etiam oculi vestri renunciant. Quod autem Fides vestra
postulat instruenda, Panis est Corpus Christi, Calix Non legitur Est in
impressis.
est Sanguis Christi. Breviter quidem hoc dictum est, quod Fidei forte
sufficiat, sed Fides instructionem desiderat. Dicit enim Propheta, Nisi
credideritis, non intelligetis. Potestis ergo Modo addnnt hic Impressi.
dicere mihi, Praecepisti ut credamus, expone, ut intelligamus. Potest enim
animo cujuspiam cogitatio talis oboriri. Dominus noster Jesus Christus novimus
unde acceperit Carnem, de Virgin scilicet Maria. Infans lactatus est, nutritus
est, crevit, ad juvenilem aetatem perductus est, a Judaeis persecutionem passus
est, Repetunt hic Impressi in Ligno.
Ligno suspensus est, interfectus est, de Ligno depositus est, sepultus est,
tertio die resurrexit, quo die voluit in Coelum ascendit; illuc levavit Corpus
suum Vnde legit Sirmondus.
inde venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos; ibi est modo sedens ad Dexteram
Patris. Quomodo Panis Corpus ejus? Et Calix, vel quod habet Calix, quomodo est
Sanguis ejus? Ista, Fratres, ideo dicuntur Sacramenta, quia in eis aliud
videtur, and aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur, speciem habet corporalem; quod
intelligitur, fructum habet spiritualem.

XCIV. Ista venerabilis Author dicens, instruit nos, quid de proprio Corpore
Domini, quod de Maria natum, and nunc ad Dexteram Patris sedet, and in quo
venturus est judicare vivos and mortuos; Et quid de isto quod super Altar
ponitur, and Populo participatur, sentire debeamus: Illud integrum est, neque
ulla sectione dividitur, nec ullis Figuris obvelatur: Hoc vero quod super
Mensam Domini continetur, and Figura est, quia Sacramentum est, and exterius
quod videtur, Speciem habet corpoream, quae pascit Corpus; interius vero quod
intelligitur, Fructum habet spiritualem, qui vivificat Animam.

XCV. Et de hoc Mystico Corpore volens apertius and manifestius loqui, sic
dicit Apud Fulgentium, Ibidem.
in consequentibus: Corpus ergo Christi si Sirmondus legit, Vis and Audi.
vultis intelligere, Apostolum audite dicentem, Vos estis Corpus Christi and
Membra Haec verba unculis inclusa Librarii errore n MS. Lobiensi omittuntur.
[Si ergo vos estis Corpus Christi and Membra,] Mysterium vestrum in Mensa
Domini positum est. Mysterium Domini male.
Vestrum accipitis, ad id quod estis, Amen, respondetis, and respondendo
subscribitis. Audis ergo Corpus Christi, and respondes Amen, esto Membrum
Christi, ut verum sit Amen. Quare ergo in Pane? Nihil hic de nostro adferamus:
Apostolum item audiamus, in Impressis.
Ipsum Apostolum dicentem audiamus; cum Cum ergo, in Impressis.
de isto Sacramento loqueretur, ait. Vnus Panis, Vnum Corpus, multi sumus in
Christo, and reliqua.

XCVI. S. Augustinus satis nos instruit, quod sicut in Pane super Altar
positum, Corpus Christi signatur; sic etiam and Corpus accipientis Populi: ut
evidenter ostendat; quod Corpus Christi proprium illud existat in quo natus de
Virgin, in quo lactatus, in quo passus, in quo mortuus, in quo sepultus, in
quo resurrexit, in quo Coelos ascendit, in quo Patris ad Dextram sedet, in quo
venturus est ad Judicium. Hoc autem quod supra Mensam Dominicam positum est,
Mysterium continet illius, sicut etiam identidem Mysterium continet Corporis
Populi credentis, Apostolo testante, Dicente Codd. nonnulli.
Unus Panis, Unum Corpus, multi sumus in Christo.

XCVII. Animadvertat, Clarissime Princeps, Sapientia vestra, quod positis
Sanctarum Scripturarum Testimoniis, and Sanctorum Patrum Dictis, evidentissime
monstratum est, quod Panis, qui Corpus Christi, and Calix qui Sanguis Christi
appellatur, Figura sit, quia Mysterium; and quod non parva differentia sit
inter Corpus, quod per Mysterium existit, and Corpus quod passum est, and
sepultum, and resurrexit. Quoniam hoc proprium Salvatoris Corpus existit, nec
in eo vel aliqua Figura, vel aliqua Significatio, sed ipsa rei Manifestatio
cognoscitur, and ipsius Visionem Credentes desiderant; quoniam ipsum est Caput
nostrum, and ipso viso satiabitur desiderium nostrum. Quo Melius Codd. impressi
quoniam.
ipse and Pater unum sunt; non secundum quod Corpus habet Salvator, sed
secundum plenitudinem Divinitatis, quae habitat in homine Christo.

XCVIII. At in isto quod per Mysterium geritur, Figura est, non solum proprii
Corporis Christi, verum etiam Credentis in Christum Populi. Vtriusque namque
Corporis, id est, and Christi quod passum est, and resurrexit, and Populi in
Christo Impressi legunt in Christo [per Baptismum] renati.
renati, atque de mortuis vivificati Figuram gestat.

XCIX. Addamus etiam quod iste Panis and Calix, qui Corpus and Sanguis Christi
nominatur, and Et existit, Addidi haec verba monitus a Mabillonio, locum ita
extare in MS Laubiensi. Acta Bened. Saecul. 4. p. 2. in Praef. n. 130. Nec
quicquam tamen juvat Pontificiorum causam haec additio; agnoscunt enim
Reformati, Panem and Calicem non solum Corpus and Sanguinem Christi nominari,
sed etiam existere spiritualiter.
existit, Memoriam repraesentat Dominicae Passionis, sive Mortis, quemadmodum
ipse in Evangelio dixit; Hoc facite in mei commemorationem. Quod exponens
Apostolus Paulus ait, Quotiescunque manducabitis Panem hunc, and Calicem
bibetis, Mortem Domini annunciabitis donec veniat.

C. Docemur a Salvatore, necnon a Sancto Paulo Apostolo, quod iste Panis and
iste Calix, Forte reponendum est.
Sanguis qui super Altar ponitur in Figuram, sive in Memoriam Dominicae Mortis
ponantur, ut quod gestum est in praeterito, presenti revocet Memoriae, ut
illius Passionis memores effecti, per eam efficiamur Divini Muneris Consortes,
per quam sumus a Morte liberati. Cognoscentes quod ubi pervenerimus ad Visionem
Christi, talibus non opus habebimus instrumentis quibus admoneamur quid pro
nobis immensa Benignitas sustinuerit. Quoniam ipsum facie ad faciem
contemplantes non per exteriorem temporalium rerum admonitionem commovebimur,
sed per ipsius contemplationem Veritatis aspiciemus, que madmodum nostrae
Salutis Autori gratias agere debeamus.

CI. Nec ideo quoniam ista dicimus, putetur in Mysterio Sacramenti Corpus
Domini, vel Sanguinem ipsius, non a Fidelibus sumi, quando Fides, non quod
Oculus videt, sed quod credit, accipit; quoniam spiritualis est Esca, and
spiritualis Potus, spiritualiter animam pascens, and Aeternae Satietatis vitam
tribuens: Sicut ipse Salvator Mysterium hoc commendans, loquitur; Spiritus est
qui vivificat, nam Caro nihil prodest.

CII. Imperio vestrae Magnitudinis parere cupientes, praesumpsi parvus, rebus
de non minimis disputare; non sequentes aestimationis nostrae praesumptionem,
sed Majorum intuentes Autoritatem; quae si probaveritis Catholice dicta,
vestrae Meritis Fidei deputate, quae deposita Regalis Magnificentiae Gloria,
non erubuit ab humili quaerere Responsum Veritatis. Sin autem minus placuerint,
id nostrae deputetur Insipientiae, quae quod optavit, minus efficaciter Valuit;
Ita Colon. Editio, 1551. Et MS. Lob. Impressorum alii voluit, alii potuit
legunt.
valuit explicare.

FINIS.
Sigebert Gemblacensis in his Book of Illustrious Men, Chap. 96.
BErtram Two MSS. of Sigebert call him Ratramus.
wrote a Book of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and a Book of Predestination,
to Charles, viz. the Bald.

The Testimony of John Trithemius, in his Book of Ecclesiastical Writers.
BErtram, a Priest and Monk, a very able Divine, and also well skilled in
Humane Learning; a Person of a subtle Wit and great Eloquence: and no less
eminent for Sanctity than Learning, has written many excellent Pieces, few of
which have come to my knowledge. To K. Charles, Brother to Lotharius the
Emperor, he wrote a commendable Work.

Of Predistination He wrote two Books of Predestination.
one Book.

Of the Lords Body and Blood one Book.

He flourished in the Reign of Lotharius the Emperor, A. D. 840.

Here begins the Book of RATRAMNVS Concerning the BODY and BLOOD of the LORD.
[To CHARLES the Great EMPEROR.] The Preface.
I. YOU were pleased to command me Glorious Prince, to signify to your Majesty
my Sentiments touching the Mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ. Which
Command is no less becoming your Highness, than the Performance of it is above
my poor Abilities. For what can better deserve a Princes Care, than to see that
he himself be Catholic in his Judgment, concerning the Sacred Mysteries of
that God, who has placed him on the Royal Throne, and not able to endure, that
his Subjects should hold different opinions concerning the Body of Christ,
wherein it is evident, that the sum of our Redemption by Christ consists?

II. Great disputes concerning the Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament.
For while some of the Faithful say concerning the Body and Blood of Christ,
which is daily celebrated in the Church, that there is no Vail nor Figure, but
that the very thing it self is openly and really exhibited; and others of them
affirm, that these things [ viz the Body, the Body and Blood of Christ] are
present in a Mystery or Figure; that it is one thing that appears to our bodily
eyes, and another thing that our Faith beholds; it is plain, there is no small
difference in Judgment among them: And whereas the Apostle writes to the
Faithful, 1 Cor. 1.10.
That they should all think and speak the same thing, and that there should be
no Schism among them; there is no small Division and Schism among those who
believe and speak differently concerning the Mystery of the Body and Blood of
Christ.

III. Wherefore your Royal Highness moved with Zeal for the true Faith, and
sadly laying to heart these and being withal desirous that as the Apostle
commands, The (...) Consu^^ Ratramnus in the Controversy.
All Men should think and speak the same thing; does diligently search out this
profound Truth, that you may reduce those who err from it, and for that purpose
disdain not to consult the meanest; well knowing, that so profound a Mystery
cannot be understood, unless God reveal it, who shows forth the Light of his
Truth, by whomsoever he pleases, without Respect of Persons.

IV. And for my own part, your Commands I joyfully obey, notwithstanding the
great difficulty I find to discourse, on a subject so remote from humane
Understanding, and which no Man (unless taught by the Holy Ghost) can possibly
penetrate. Therefore in pure Obedience to your Majesty, and with an entire
confidence of his aid, concerning whom I am to Treat; I shall endeavor in as
proper Terms as I am able, to deliver my Sentiments on this Subject; not
relying on my own Understanding, but following the steps of the Holy Fathers.

V. The State of the Controversy in two Questions.
YOur most Excellent Majesty demands, Whether the Body and Blood of Christ,
which is in the Church received by the mouths of the Faithful, be such in a
Mystery, or in Truth? That is, Whether it contain any secret thing discernable
only by the eyes of Faith; or whether without the Coverture of any Mystery, the
same thing appears outwardly to the bodily Sight, which the eyes of the Mind
do inwardly behold, so that the whole matter is apparent and manifest to our
Senses? And whether it be the same Body which was Born of Mary, and Suffered,
Died, and was Buried, and Rising again and ascending into Heaven, sits at the
Right Hand of the Father.

VI. The first Question discussed.
Let us consider the first of these two Questions. And that we be not
confounded by the Ambiguity of Terms, let us define what a Figure is, and what
the Truth; that having some certain mark in our Eye, we may know how the better
to direct the course of our Reasoning.

VII. What a Figure is.
A Figure is a certain covert manner of Expression, which exhibits what it
intends under certain Vails. For example; We call the Word, Bread, as in the
Lords Prayer, we beg that God would give us our daily Bread: Or as Christ in
the Gospel speaks, John 6.51.
I am the Living Bread that came down from Heaven. Or when he calls himself a
Vine, and his Disciples Branches, John 15.1, 5.
I am the true Vine, and ye are the Branches. In all these Instances, one thing
is said and another thing is understood.

VIII. The Truth is the Representation of the very thing it self, not veiled
with any Shadow or Figure, but expressed according to the pure and naked (or to
speak more plainly yet) natural Signification of the words. As when we say that
Christ was Born of a Virgin, Suffered, was Crucified, Dead and Buried: Here is
nothing shadowed out under the coverture of Figures, but the very Truth of the
thing is expressed, according to the natural Signification of the words; nor is
any thing here understood but what is said. But in the forementioned Instances
it is not so. For i.e. In propriety of Nature: So the Saxon Homily, Aefter
sothum gecynd nis Crist nathor ne hlaf.
in Substance, neither is Christ Bread, or a Vine, nor the Apostles Branches.
These are Figures, but in the other, the plain and naked Truth is related.

IX. He proves the Sacrament to be a Figure from the notion of a Mystery or a
Sacrament.
Now let us return to the Subject which has occasioned the saying of all this,
viz. the Body and Blood of Christ. If there be no figure in that Mystery, it is
not properly called a Mystery; for that cannot be said to be a Mystery, which
has nothing secret, nothing remote from our bodily Senses, nothing covered
under any Vail. But as for that Bread which by the Ministry of the Priest, is
made Christ's Body, it shows one thing outwardly to our Senses, and inwardly
proclaims quite another thing to the minds of the Faithful. That which
outwardly appears is Bread, as it was before in Form, Color and Taste: But
inwardly there is quite another thing presented to us, and that much more
precious and excellent, because it is Heavenly and Divine: That is, Christ's
Body is exhibited which is beheld, received, and eaten,, not by our carnal
Senses, but by the sight of the believing Soul.

X. Likewise the Wine, which by the Priests Consecration, is made the Sacrament
of Christ's Blood, appears one thing outwardly, and inwardly contains another:
For what does outwardly appear but the substance of Wine? Taste it, there is the
relish of Wine; smell it, there is the scent of Wine; behold it, there is the
color of Wine. But if you consider it inwardly, then it is not the Liquor of
Wine, but the Liquor of Christ's Blood, which is Tasted, Seen, and Smelt. Since
these things are undeniable, it is evident, that the Bread and Wine are
Figuratively the Body and Blood of Christ: As to outward appearance, there is
neither the Likeness of Flesh to be seen in that Bread, nor the Liquor of Blood
in that Wine, and yet after the mystical Consecration, they are no longer
called Bread and Wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ.

XI. Another Argument from the nature of Faith.
If according to the Opinion of some Men, here is nothing Figuratively taken,
but the whole Matter is real, then Faith operates nothing, here is nothing
Spiritual done, but the whole is to be understood altogether corporally. And
seeing Heb. 11.1.
Faith is according to the Apostle, the Evidence of things that appear not,
that is, not of Substances which are seen, but of such as are not seen; we here
shall receive nothing by Faith, because we judge of the whole matter by our
bodily Senses. And nothing is more absurd, than to take Bread for Flesh, or to
say that Wine is Blood: Nor can that be any longer a Mystery in which there is
no Secret, no hidden thing contained.

XII. And how can that be styled Christ's Body and Blood, There must be a
Spiritual change, for there is no Physical change wrought in the Sacrament.
in which there is not any change known to be made; For every change is either
from not being to being, or from being to not being, or else That is, from one
quality to another.
from one being into another. But in this Sacrament, if the thing be considered
in simplicity and verity, and nothing else be believed but what is seen, we
know of no change at all made. For there is no change from not being to being,
No Generation.
as in the production of things. Since such did not exist before, but past from
a state of Nonentity into Being. Whereas here Bread and Wine were real Beings
before they became the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood.

Nor is here a passage from being, Nor Corruption.
to not being, as there is in things decayed and corrupted: For whatever
perishes, once did subsist, and that cannot perish, that never was. Now it is
certain, that there is no change of this kind made, for it is well known, that
the Nature of the Creatures remains in truth, the very same that they were
before.

XIII. And as for that sort of change, Nor Alteration.
whereby one thing is rendered another, which is seen in things liable to vary
in their qualities; (as for example, when a thing that was before black is made
white;) it is plain, that this change is not made here. For we can perceive no
alteration here either as to touch, color, or taste. Therefore if nothing be
changed, [the Elements] are nothing but what they were before. And yet they are
another thing, for the Bread is made the Body, and the Wine is made the Blood
of Christ. For he himself has said, Matthew. 26.26.
Take, eat, this is my Body. And likewise speaking of the Cup, he says, Mark
14.24.
Take and drink, this is my Blood of the New Testament which shall be shed fon
you.

XIV. I would now enquire of them who will take nothing Figuratively, but will
have the whole matter plainly and really transacted. In what respect is this
change made, so that the things are not now what they were before, to wit,
Bread and Wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ? For as to the Nature of the
Creature, and the form of the visible things, both (to wit) the Bread and Wine,
have nothing changed in them. And if they have undergone no change, they are
nothing but what they were before.

XV. Your Highness sees, They who will admit no figure in the Sacrament
contradict themselves.
Illustrious Prince, the tendency of their opinion who think thus: They deny
what they seem to affirm, and plainly overthrow what they believe. For they
faithfully confess the Body and Blood of Christ, and in so doing, no doubt they
profess that [the Elements] are not what they were before. And if they now are
other than they were before, they have admitted some change. This [inference]
being undeniable, let them now tell us, in what respect they are changed? For
we see nothing corporally changed in them. Therefore, they must needs
acknowledge, either that they are changed in some other respect than that of
their Bodies, and in this respect they are, what we see they are not in truth,
but somewhat else, which we discern them not to be in their proper Essence, or
if they will not acknowledge this, they will be compelled to deny that they are
Christ's Body and Blood; which is abominable not only to speak, but even to
think.

XVI. But since they do confess them to be the Body and Blood of Christ, which
they could not have been, but by a change for the better, nor is this change
wrought Corporally, but Spiritually: It must necessarily be said to be wrought
Figuratively. Because under the Vail of material Bread, and material Wine; the
Spiritual Body, and Spiritual Blood of Christ do exist: Not that there are
together existing, two natures so different, as a Body and Spirit: But one and
the same thing, in one respect, has the nature of Bread and Wine; and in
another respect, is the Body and Blood of Christ. For both as they are
Corporally handled, are in their nature Corporeal Creatures; but according to
their Virtue, and what they are Spiritually made, they are Mysteries of the
Body and Blood of Christ.

XVII. Let us consider the Font of holy Baptism, He Illustrates the matter by
comparing the two Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's Body.
which is not undeservedly styled the Fountain of Life, because it regenerates
those who descend into it, to the Newness of a better Life; and makes those who
were dead in Sins, alive unto Righteousness. Is it the visible Element of Water
which has this efficacy? Verily, unless it had obtained a Sanctifying virtue,
it could by no means wash away the stain of our Sins: And if it had not a
quickening Power, it could not at all give Life to the Dead. The Dead, I mean
not as to their Bodies, but their Souls. Yet if in that Fountain you consider
nothing but what the bodily Sense beholds, you see only a fluid Element of a
corruptible Nature, and capable of washing the Body only. But the Power of the
Holy Ghost, came upon it by the Priests Consecration, and it obtained thereby
an efficacy to wash not the Bodies only, but also the Souls of Men; and by a
Spitual virtue, to take away their Spiritual filth.

XVIII. Behold, how in one and the same Element, are seen two things contrary
to each other; a thing Corruptible, giving Incorruption; and a thing without
Life, giving Life. It is manifest then, that in the Font, there is both
somewhat, which the bodily sense perceives, which is therefore mutable and
corruptible; and somewhat which the Eye of Faith only beholds, and therefore is
neither Corruptible nor Mortal. If you enquire what washes the outside, it is
the Element; but if you consider what purges the inside, it is a quickening
power, a Sanctifying power, a power conferring Immortality. So then in its own
nature, it is a Corruptible Liquor, but in the Mystery it is a Healing Power.

XIX. Thus also the Body and Blood of Christ, considered as to the outside
only, is a creature subject to change and Corruption. But if you ponder the
efficacy of the Mystery, it is Life conferring Immortality, on such as partake
thereof. Therefore they are not the same things which are seen, and which are
believed. For the things seen, feed a Corruptible Body, being corruptible
themselves. But those which are believed, feed immortal Souls, being themselves
immortal.

XX. The Apostle also writing to the Corinthians, says, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3.
Know ye not, This is further illustrated by the Baptism of the Fathers in the
Sea and Cloud and by the Manna and Spiritual Rock, which afforded Meat and
Drink to the Fathers.
how that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea
and were all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat
the same Spiritual Meat, and did all Drink the same Spiritual Drirk; for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them: And that Rock was Christ. We
see both the Sea and the Cloud bore a resemblance of Baptism; and that the
Fathers of the Old Testament were Baptized in them, viz. the Cloud and the Sea.
Now could the Sea, as a visible Element, have the power of Baptizing? Or could
the Cloud as a condensation of the Air, Sanctify the People? And yet we dare
not say, but that the Apostle who spoke in Christ, did truly affirm, that our
Fathers were Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

XXI. And although that Baptism was not the same with the Christian Baptism,
now Celebrated in the Church, yet that it was Baptism, and that our Fathers
were therewith Baptized, no Man in his Wits will deny. None but a man that
would presume expressly to contradict the Words of the Apostle: Therefore the
Sea and Cloud did sanctify and cleanse; not as they were mere bodily
Substances, but as they did invisibly contain the sanctifying Power of the Holy
Ghost: For there was in them both a visible Form appearing to the bodily Eyes,
not in Image, but in Truth; and also a spiritual Virtue, shining within, which
was not discernable by the bodily Eyes, but by those of the Mind.

XXII. Likewise the Manna which was given the People from Heaven, and the Water
flowing out of the Rock, were corporeal Substances, and were both meat and
Drink for the nourishment of the Peoples Bodies. Nevertheless the Apostle calls
even that Manna, and that Water, spiritual Meat, and spiritual Drink. Why so?
Because there was in those bodily Substances a spiritual Power of the Word,
which rather feed and gave Drink to the minds, than the Bodies of the Faithful.
And whereas that Meat and Drink prefigured the future Mystery of the Body and
Blood of Christ, which the Church now Celebrates. St. Paul nevertheless
affirms, That our Fathers did eat the same Spiritual Meat, and drank the same
Spiritual Drink.

XXIII. Perhaps you will ask, In what sense the Fathers eat and drank the same
spiritual Meat and Drink with us.
What same? Even the very self-same [Food] which the Faithful now eat and drink
in the Church. Nor may we think them different, since it is one and the same
Christ, who then in the Wilderness fed the People, that were Baptized, in the
Cloud and in the Sea with his own Flesh, and made them to drink his own Blood,
and who now, in the Church, feeds the Faithful with the Bread of his Body, and
makes them to drink the Liquor of his Blood.

XXIV. The Apostle intending to intimate thus much, when he had said that our
Fathers did eat the same Spiritual Meat, and drank the same Spiritual Drink; he
adds, And they all drank of that Spiritual Rock which followed them, and that
Rock was Christ: To the end we might understand, that in the Wilderness Christ
was in the Spiritual Rock, and gave the Liquor of his Blood to the People; who
afterward That is under the Gospel.
in our times exhibited his Body, born of a Virgin, and Crucified for the
Salvation of such as believe; out of which he shed streams of Blood, whereof we
are made to drink, and not only redeemed therewith.

XXV. Truly it is wonderful, because it is incomprehensible and inestimable! He
had not yet assumed Man's Nature; he had not yet tasted of Death for the
Salvation of the World; he had not yet redeemed us with his Blood; whenas our
Fathers in the Wilderness, even then in their Spiritual Meat, and Invisible
Drink, did eat his Body, and drink his Blood, as the Apostle testifies; saying,
That our Fathers did eat the same spiritual Meat, and drank of the same
spiritual Drink. Now we must not enquire how that could be; but must believe
that it was so: For he, who now in the Church, does by his Almighty Power,
spiritually change Bread and Wine into the Flesh of his own Body, and the
Liquor of his own Blood; he also did invisibly make the Manna given from
Heaven, his own Body, and the Water issuing from the Rock, his own Blood.

XXVI. Which David understanding, spoke by the Holy Ghost, saying, Psalm. 27.25.
Man did eat Angels Food. For it is ridiculous to imagine, That the corporeal
Manna given to the Fathers, does feed the Heavenly Host; or that they use such
Diet, who are satiated with Feasting on the Divine Word. The Psalmist, or
rather, the Holy Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. Luke 22.19, 20.
Ghost speaking of the Psalmist, teaches us, both what our Fathers received in
that Heavenly Manna, and what the Faithful ought to believe in the Mystery of
Christ's Body. In both certainly Christ is signified; who both feeds the Souls
of the Faithful, and is the Food of Angels: And both he does and is by a
spiritual Relish, not by becoming bodily Food, but by virtue of the spiritual
Word.

XXVII. We are taught also by the Evangelist, He argues from the Institution of
this Sacrament before our Lord's Passion.
That our Lord Jesus Christ, before he Suffered, took Bread, and when he had
given Thanks, he gave it to his Disciples; saying, This is my Body which is
given for you; do this in remembrance of me. Likewise the Cup, after he had
supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which shall be shed
for you. You see Christ had not yet Suffered, and yet nevertheless he
celebrated the Mystery of his own Body and Blood.

XXVIII. For I am confident, no Christian doubts, but that Bread was made the
Body of Christ, which he gave to his Disciples, saying, This is my Body which
is given for you; or but the Cup contains the Blood of Christ, of which he also
says, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which shall be shed for you.
Wherefore, as a little before his Passion, he could change the Substance of
Bread, and the Creature of Wine, into his own Body, which was to Suffer, and
his own Blood, which was to be shed; so also could he in the Wilderness change
Manna, and Water out of the Rock, into his Body and Blood, though it were a
long time after, ere that Body was to be Crucified for us, or that Blood to be
shed, to wash us.

XXIX. Here also we ought to consider how those Words of our Savior are to be
understood, He expounds Joh. 6.53.
wherein he says, John 6.53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have not
Life in you. For he does not say, that his Flesh which hung on the Cross,
should be cut in pieces, and eaten by his Disciples; or that his Blood, which
he was to shed for the Redemption of the World, should be given his Disciples
to drink: For it had been a Crime for his Disciples to have eaten his Flesh,
and drunk his Blood, in the sense that the unbelieving Jews then understood him.

XXX. Wherefore, in the following words he says to his Disciples, who did not
disbelieve that Saying of Christ, though they did not yet penetrate the true
Meaning of it. John 6.53.
Does this offend you? What if ye shall see the Son of Man ascending up where
he was before? As though he should say, Think not that you must eat my Flesh,
and drink my Blood corporally, divided into small pieces; for, when after my
Resurrection, you shall see me ascend into the Heavens with my Body entire, and
all my Blood: Then you shall understand that the Faithful must eat John 6.69.
my Flesh, not in the manner which these Unbelievers imagine; but that indeed
Believers must receive it, Bread and Wine being mystically turned into the
substance of my Body and Blood.

XXXI. And after, John. 6.66.
It Is the Spirit, says he, that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing. He
says, The Flesh profits nothing, taken as those Infidels understood him, but
otherwise it gives Life, as it is taken mystically by the Faithful. And why
so? He himself shows, when he says, It is the Spirit that quickneth: Therefore
in this Mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ, there is a spiritual
Operation, which gives Life; without which Operation the Mysteries profit
nothing; because they may indeed feed the Body, but cannot feed the Soul.

XXXII. Now there arises a Question, moved by many, who say that these things
are done not in a Figure, but in Truth; but in so saying, they plainly
contradict the Writings of the Fathers.

XXXIII. St. Augustine, St. Augustine quoted.
an eminent Doctor of the Church, in his Third Book, De Doctrina Christiana
writes thus, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man (says our Savior) and
drink his Blood, you shall not have Life in you. He seems to command a
flagitious Crime: Therefore the Words are a FIGURE, requiring us to communicate
in our Lord's Passion, and faithfully In the printed Edition of St. Augustine
and Bertram, we read sweetly and profitably to lay up.
to lay up this in our Memory, that his Flesh was Crucified and Wounded for us.

XXXIV. We see this Doctor says, that the Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood
is celebrated by the Faithful under a FIGURE. For he says, To receive his
Flesh and Blood carnally, is not an Act of Religion, but of Villainy. For which
Cause, they in the Gospel, who took our Savior's Words not Spiritually, but
Carnally, departed from him, and followed him no more.

XXXV. Likewise in his Epistle to Boniface, a Bishop, among other things, he
says thus, We often speak in this manner, when Easter is near, we say, to
Morrow, or the next day is the Lord's Passion, although he Suffered many Years
since, and Suffered but once. Likewise, we say on the Lord's Day, This day our
Lord rose again, when yet so many years are passed since he rose again. Why is
no Man so foolish, as to charge us with Lying, when we speak thus? But because
we call these Days after the likeness of those Days in which these things were
really done. So that the Day is called such a Day; which in truth is not that
very Day, but only like it in Revolution of Time; and by reason of the
Celebration of the Sacrament, that is said to be done this Day, which was not
done this very Day, but in Old Times. Was not Christ offered up once only in
his own Person, and yet in the Sacrament he is offered for the People, not only
every Easter, but every Day? Nor does that Man tell a Lie, who being asked,
shall answer, that he is offered. For if Sacraments had not some Resemblance of
those things, of which they are the Sacraments, they would not be Sacraments at
all. And from that Resemblance, they commonly take the Names of the Things
themselves. Whereas the Sacrament of Christ's Body is in some sort the Body of
Christ, and the Sacrament of Christ's Blood is in some sort the Blood of
Christ, so the The Sacrament of the Faith, i. e. Baptism, as appears by the
following words in St. Austin, in his 23. Epistle, which is here cited.
Sacrament of the Faith, is the Faith.

XXXVI. We see St. Augustine says, that Sacraments are one thing, and the
things of which they are the Sacraments are another thing. Now the Body in
which Christ suffered, and the Blood which issued out of his Side, are Things;
but the Mysteries of these things, he says, are Sacraments of the Body and
Blood of Christ, which are celebrated in Remembrance of our Lord's Passion; not
only every Year, at the great Solemnity of Easter, but every day of the Year.

XXXVII. And whereas there was but one Body of the Lord, in which he suffered
once, and one Blood, which was shed for the Salvation of the World; yet the
Sacraments of these have assumed the Names of the very things; so that they are
called the Body and Blood of Christ. And yet are so called, by reason of the
Resemblance they bear to the things which they signify. As they style these
respective Days, which are annually celebrated, the Passion and Resurrection of
our Lord; whereas in truth he suffered, and rose again, but once in his own
Person; nor can the very Days return any more, being long since past.
Nevertheless, the Days in which the Memory of our Lord's Passion or
Resurrection is celebrated, are called by the name of those Days, because they
have some Resemblance of those very Days, in which our Savior once suffered
and rose again.

XXXVIII. Hence we say, to Day, or to Morrow, or next Day, is the Passion or
Resurrection of our Lord; whereas the very Days in which those things were
done, are long past. So we say, the Lord is offered, when the Sacraments of his
Passion are celebrated: Whereas he was but once offered in his own Person, for
the Salvation of the World, as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ has suffered for us, leaving you an Example, that you should follow
his steps. Not that Christ suffers every day in his own Person: This he did but
once; but he has left us an Example, which is every day presented to the
Faithful, in the Mystery of the Lord's Body and Blood: So that whosoever comes
thereunto, must understand that he ought to have a fellowship with him in his
Sufferings, the Image whereof he expects [to receive] in the Holy Mysteries;
according to that of the Wiseman, Prove. 23.1, 2.
If thou come to the Table of a Great man, consider diligently what is set
before thee, (knowing that thou thy self must prepare the like.) To come to
this Great-man's Table, is to be made a Partaker of the Divine Sacrifice: To
consider what is set before thee, is to understand the Lord's Body and Blood,
of which whosoever is partaker, ought to prepare the like, that is, to imitate
him, by dying with him, whose Death he commemorates, not only in believing, but
also in eating.

XXXIX. So St. Paul to the Hebrews, Heb. 7.26, 27.
Such an High Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, who needs not, as those, daily to
offer up Sacrifice, first for his own Sins, and then for the Peoples: For this
the Lord Jesus Christ did once, when he offered himself. What he did once, he
now every day repeats: For he once offered himself for the Sins of the People,
yet the same Oblation is every day celebrated by the Faithful; but in a
Mystery: So that what the Lord Jesus Christ, once offering himself, really did,
the same is every day done in Remembrance of his Passion, by the Celebration of
the Mysteries, or Sacraments.

XL. Nor yet is it falsely said, That in those Mysteries the Lord is offered, or
suffers; because they have a Resemblance of his Death and Passion, whereof
they are Representations; whereupon they are called The Lord's Body, and the
Lord's Blood; because they take the Names of those things, whereof they are the
Sacrament.

For this reason, St. Isidore, in his Book of Etymologies, says thus;
Sacrificium (the Sacrifice) is so called, from Sacrum Factum, a sacred Action,
because it is consecrated by mystical Prayer, in Memory of the Lord's Passion
for us: Whence by his Command, we call it the Body and Blood of Christ, which,
though made of the Fruits of the Earth, is sanctified and made a Sacrament by
the invisible Operation of the Spirit of God. Which Sacrament of the Bread and
Cup, the Greeks call the Eucharist; that is in Latin, bona Gratia, (good
Grace.) And what is better than the Body and Blood of Christ? These words which
lie between two little Stars, are not in the Printed Editions of St. Isidore; I
wish they were not purposely omitted by the Publishers of his Works, or rather
expunged anciently by the Enemies of Berengarius.
Now Bread and Wine are therefore compared to the Body and Blood [of Christ]
because as the Substance of this visible Bread and Wine, feed and inebriate the
outward man; so the Word of God, which is the living Bread, does refresh the
Souls of the Faithful, by the receiving thereof These words which lie between
two little Stars, are not in the Printed Editions of St. Isidore; I wish they
were not purposely omitted by the Publishers of his Works, or rather expunged
anciently by the Enemies of Berengarius.
.

XLI. Likewise this Catholic Doctor teaches, That the holy Mystery of the
Lord's Passion should be celebrated in Remembrance of the Lord's Suffering for
us. In saying whereof, he shows, that the Lord suffered but once; but the
Memory of it is represented in sacred and solemn Rites.

XLII. So that the Bread which is offered, though made of the Fruits of the
Earth, when Consecrated, is changed into Christ's Body; as also the Wine which
flowed from the Vine, is by Sacramental Consecration made the Blood of Christ,
not visibly indeed; but as this Doctor speaks, by the invisible Operation of
the Spirit of God.

XLIII. And they are called the Blood and Body of Christ; because they are
understood to be, not what they outwardly appear; but what they are inwardly
made by the invisible Operation of the Holy Ghost. And that this invisible
Operation, renders them much a different thing, from what they appear to our
Eyes, he (St. Isidore) observes, when he says, That the Bread and Wine are
therefore compared to the Lord's Body and Blood, because, as the Substance of
material Bread and Wine does nourish the outward Man, so the Word of God, which
is the Bread of Life, does refresh the Souls of the Faithful in partaking
thereof.

XLIV. In saying this, we most plainly confess, That in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Body and Blood, whatsoever is outwardly received, serves only for the
Refreshment of the Body: But the Word of God, who is the invisible Bread, being
invisibly in the Sacrament, does in an invisible manner nourish and quicken the
Souls of the Faithful, by their partaking thereof.

XLV. Wherefore again the same Doctor says, There is a Sacrament in any divine
Office, when the thing is so managed, that there is somewhat understood, which
must be spiritually taken. In saying thus, he shows, that every Sacrament or
Mystery of Religion, contains in it some secret thing. And that there is one
thing that visibly appears, and another thing to be Spiritually understood.

XLVI. And [soon after] showing what are the Sacraments which the Faithful
should celebrate, he says; And these Sacraments are Baptism, Chrism [or
Confirmation] and the Body and Blood [of Christ.] Which are called Sacraments,
because under the Coverture of bodily things, the Power of God does in a secret
way work the Salvation (or Grace) conferred by them. And from these secret and
sacred Virtues, they are called Sacraments. And in the following words, he
says, It is called in Greek (...) a Mystery, because it contains a secret or
hidden Dispensation.

XLVII. What do we learn hence, but that the Body and Blood of Christ are
therefore called Mysteries, because they contain a secret and hidden
Dispensation? That is, it is one thing which they outwardly make Show of, and
another thing, which they operate inwardly and invisibly.

XLVIII. And for this Reason they are called Sacraments, because under the
Covert of bodily Things, a divine Power does secretly dispense Salvation (or
Grace) to them that faithfully receive them.

XLIX. By all that has been hitherto said, it appears, that the Body and Blood
of Christ, which are received by the Mouths of the Faithful in the Church, are
Figures in respect of their visible Nature; but in respect of the invisible
Substance, that is, the Power of the Word of God, they are truly Christ's Body
and Blood. Wherefore as they are visible Creatures, they feed the Body; but as
they have the virtue of a more powerful Substance, they do both feed and
sanctify the Souls of the Faithful.

L. We must now consider the Second Question, The Second Question.
and see Which Paschasius Radbertus affirms, and Ratramnus denies; as also did
Rabanus Maurus, etc.
whether that very Body which was born of Mary, which Suffered, was Dead and
Buried, and which sits at the Right Hand of the Father, be the same which is
daily received in the Church by the Mouths of the Faithful in the Sacramental
Mysteries.

LI. Let us enquire what is the Judgment of St. Ambrose in this point: He
argues from a testimony of St. Ambrose
For he says in his First Book of the Sacraments, Truly, it is wonderful, that
God rained down Manna to the Fathers, and they were fed every day with Heavenly
Food; whereupon it is said, that Man did eat Angels Bread; and yet they who did
eat that Bread, all died in the Wilderness: But that Food which thou receivest,
that living Bread which came down from Heaven, ministers the Substance of
Eternal Life, and whosoever eats thereof shall never die; and this is the Body
of Christ.

LII. See in what sense this Doctor says, That the Body of Christ is that Food
which the Faithful receive in the Church: For he says, That Living Bread which
comes down from Heaven, ministers the Substance of Eternal Life. Does it, as it
is seen, as it is corporally received, chewed with the Teeth, as it is
swallowed down the Throat, and received into the Belly, minister the Substance
of Eternal Life? In this respect, it only feeds the Mortal Flesh, it does not
minister Incorruption; nor can it be truly said, That whosoever eats thereof,
shall never die. For what the Body receives, is corruptible, nor can it
preserve the Body, so that it shall never die; for what is it self subject to
corruption, cannot give Immortality. Therefore there is in that Bread a certain
[Principle of] Life, which does not appear to our bodily Eyes, but is seen by
those of Faith; which also is that Living Bread which came down from Heaven;
and concerning which it is truly said, that whosoever eats thereof, shall never
die, and which is Christ's Body.

LIII. And afterward speaking of the Almighty Power of Christ, he says thus:
Therefore the Word of Christ, which could produce things that were not, out of
nothing, cannot it change the things that actually exist, into that which they
were not? Is it not a greater Work to create things at first, than to alter
their Natures?

LIVE. St. Ambrose says, That in this Mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ,
there is a Change made, and wonderfully, because it is Divine, Ineffable, and
indeed Incomprehensible; I desire to know of them, who will by no means admit
any thing of an inward secret Virtue, but will Judge of the whole matter, as it
appears to outward Sense, in what respect this Change is made. As for the
substance of the Creatures, what they were before Consecration, the same they
remain after it. Bread and Wine they were before; and after Consecration, we
see they continue Beings of the same Nature and Kind: So that it is changed
Internally, by the mighty Power of the Holy Ghost; and this is the mighty
Object which Faith beholds, which fe^ds the Soul, and ministers the substance
of Eternal Life.

LV. And again it follows, Why do thou here require the Order of Nature [in
the mystery of] Christ's Body, when our Lord God himself was, contrary to the
Order of Nature, born of a Virgin?

LVI. Now perhaps, An Objection obviated.
some one at the hearing of this, may start up, and say, That it is the Body of
Christ which we behold, and his Blood that we drink; yet we must not enquire
how it becomes so; but only believe steadfastly that it is so. Thou seem to
think aright; but yet if thou did carefully observe the Importance of thy
Words, when thou say, That thou faithfully believe it to be the Body and
Blood of Christ, thou would understand, that what thou believe thou do
not see: For if thou saw it, thou would say, I see, and not I believe,
that it is the Body and Blood of Christ. Whereas now, because Faith discerns
the whole matter, whatever it is, and the Bodily Eye perceives nothing of it,
thou must understand, that those things which are seen, are the Body and Blood
of Christ, not in Kind, or Nature, but Virtually. For which Reason, he says,
That the Order of Nature is not to be considered; but the Power of Christ must
be adored, which changes what he will, how he will, into what he will; creating
what had no Being, and changing the Creature into what it was not before. And
the same Author adds; Doubtless it was the true Flesh [of Christ,] which was
Crucified and Buried; Or it may be rendered, The Sacrament of that true Flesh.
therefore this is really the Sacrament of that Flesh. The Lord Jesus himself
says, This is my Body.

LVII. How warily, Another Argument from St. Ambrose.
and wisely does he distinguish! Speaking of the Flesh of Christ, which was
Crucified and Buried, or in which Christ was Crucified and Buried, he says, It
is the true Flesh of Christ: But of that which is taken in the Sacrament, he
says, It Is therefore truly the Sacrament of that Flesh, distinguishing between
the Sacrament of his Flesh, and the Verity of his Flesh, [or his true Flesh] in
as much as he says, in that true Flesh which he took of the Virgin, he was
Crucified and Buried; whereas he says, the Mystery now celebrated in the
Church, is the Sacrament of that true Flesh in which he was Crucified; expressly
teaching the Faithful, that that Flesh in which Christ was Crucified and
Buried, is not a Mystery, but true and natural; whereas that Flesh which
mystically represents the former, is not Flesh in kind, or Naturally, but
Sacramentally: For in its Kind, or Nature, it is Bread; but Sacramentally, it
is the true Body of Christ, as the Lord Jesus says, This is my Body.

LVIII. And in the following words, The Holy Ghost has in another place by the
Prophet declared to thee what it is that we eat and drink, saying, Psalm. 34.8.
Taste, and see, that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that trusts in
him. Does the Bread and Wine, eaten and drunk, corporally show how sweet the
Lord is? Whatsoever is an Object of Tasting, is corporeal, and delights the
Palate. What? Is to taste the Lord, to perceive any Corporeal Object? Wherefore
he invites them to make Trial by their Spiritual Faculty of Tasting; and not
think of any thing Corporeal, either in that Drink or Bread; but to understand
every thing Spiritually: For the Lord is a Spirit, and blessed is the Man that
trusts in him.

LIX. And afterward, Christ is in the Sacrament, because it is the Body of
Christ; yet it is not therefore Bodily Food, but Spiritual. What could be more
plainly, clearly, and more divinely said: For he says, in that Sacrament
Christ is; but he does not say, that Bread, and that Wine is Christ; which
should he have said, he would have made Christ corruptible and mortal; which
God forbid he should: For it is certain, that whatsoever is corporeally seen,
or tasted in that Food, is liable to corruption.

LX. He adds, Because it is Christ's Body. You will reply upon me; Look here,
he plainly acknowledges this Bread and Wine to be Christ's Body. But have
patience, and mark what he subjoyns; Yet this is not bodily Food, but
spiritual. Use not therefore thy bodily Sense; for it is no Judge in this
Matter. It is the Body of Christ indeed, yet not Corporal, but Spiritual. It is
the Blood of Christ, yet not Corporal, but Spiritual: So that nothing is here
to be understood Corporally, but Spiritually. It is the Body of Christ, but not
Corporally: It is the Blood of Christ, but not Corporally.

LXI. And afterward, Wherefore the Apostle (says he) speaking of the Type
thereof, says, That our Fathers did eat Spiritual Meat, and drank Spiritual
Drink. For the Body of God is Spiritual. The Body of Christ is the Body of a
Divine Spirit, as we read in the Lamentations, The Place St. Ambrose cites, is
Lam. 4.20. where the LXX read (...); and the vulgar Latin, Christus Dominus;
but our English Translation renders it truly, The Lord's Anointed: By which
Expositors understand not Jesus Christ; but either Josiah, or as some think,
Zedekiah.
Christ the Lord, is the Spirit before our Face.

LXII. He very clearly teaches, how we are to understand the Mystery of
Christ's Body and Blood: For having said, our Fathers did eat Spiritual Meat,
and drank Spiritual Drink; when no body doubts that the Manna which they did
eat, and the Water which they drank, were Corporeal; He adds, concerning the
Mystery which we now celebrate in the Church, determining in what Sense it is
Christ's Body: For the Body of God is a Spiritual Body. Verily Christ is God;
and the Body which he took of the Virgin Mary, which Suffered, was Buried, and
Rose again, was his true Body, that is, it remained such as might be seen and
felt; but the Body, which is called the Mystery of God, is not Corporeal, but
Spiritual; and if Spiritual, then it can neither be seen, nor yet felt. And for
this reason St. Ambrose proceeds to say, The Body of Christ is the Body of a
Divine Spirit. Now, a Divine Spirit is no Corporeal, Corruptible, or palpable
Being: But that Body which is celebrated in the Church, according to its
visible Nature, is both Corruptible, and such as may be felt.

LXIII. In what respect then is it called the Body of a Divine Spirit? Truly,
as it is Spiritual, that is, as it is invisible; as it cannot be felt, and is
therefore incorruptible.

LXIV. Which makes him further add, That Christ is a Spirit; as we read,
Christ, the Lord, is the Spirit before our Face. Whereby he plainly shows, in
what respect it is accounted Christ's Body, to wit, in as much as the Spirit of
Christ is therein, that is to say, the Power of the Divine Word, which does not
only feed, but also purifies the Soul.

LXV. Wherefore our Author goes on: Lastly this Meat strengthens our Heart,
and this Drink makes glad the Heart of Man, as the Psalm. 104.15.
Prophet testifies. Now does our Bodily Food strengthen, or does this Bodily
Drink make glad the Heart of Man? But to show of what Meat and Drink it is that
he speaks, he adds emphatically: This Meat, and this Drink. What is this Meat,
and this Drink? Even the Body of Christ, the Body of the Divine Spirit; and (to
explain the Matter yet more) Christ himself, who is a Spirit, of whom he says,
Christ, the Lord, is the Spirit before our Face. By all which Discourse, it
evidently appears, that in this Meat and Drink, nothing is to be corporally
understood; but all must be Spiritually taken.

LXVI. For the Soul, which is in this place signified by the Heart of Man, is
not fed with bodily Meat, or Drink; but is nourished by the Word of God, and
grows thereby. Which the same Doctor does more expressly affirm in his Fifth
Book upon the Sacraments, saying, It is not that Bread which goes into the
Body, but the Bread of Life Eternal, which affords Sustenance to our Souls.

LXVII. And that St. Ambrose spoke not this of common Bread; but of that Bread
which is also Christ's Body, is most manifest from the following Passages: For
he speaks of the Daily Bread, which the Faithful pray for.

LXVIII. Adding, If it be Daily Bread, why do thou receive it but once in the
Year, as the Greeks in the East were wont to do? Receive that every Day, which
may every Day do thee good; and live so, that thou may be every Day worthy
to receive. So that it is plain of what Bread he speaks, to wit, of the Bread
of Christ's Body, which sustains our Souls, not as it passes into our Bodies,
but as it is the Bread of Eternal Life.

LXIX. By the Authority of this most Learned Father, He Sums up the force of
St. Ambr. his Discourse.
we are taught how vast a difference there is, between the Body, in which
Christ suffered, and the Blood which he shed out of his Side, as he hung on the
Cross, and that Body which is daily celebrated by the Faithful, in the Mystery
of his Passion; and that Blood, which is received with their Mouths, as the
Sacrament of that Blood wherewith the whole World was Redeemed. For that Bread
and Drink, are not the Body and Blood of Christ, as they are visible; but as
they Spiritually minister the Sustenance of Life. Moreover, that Body, in which
Christ once suffered, appeared to be no other thing than really it was; for
such it really was as it appeared to the eye, to the touch, the same thing
which was Crucified and Buried. Likewise the Blood issuing from his Side, did
not outwardly appear one thing, and inwardly contain another: So that true
Blood flowed from his true Side. But now the Blood of Christ, which the
Faithful drink, and that Body which they eat, are one thing in their Nature,
and another in their Signification; one thing, as they feed the Body, Bodily
Food; and another thing, as they feed the Soul, viz. the Sustenance of Eternal
Life.

LXX. Of which matter St. Hierom in his Comment on St. Paul's Epistle to the
Ephesians, writes thus: St. Hierom on the Ephesians. c. 1.
The Flesh and Blood of Christ is taken in two Senses; in the one, it is that
Spiritual and Divine, of which he says, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood
is Drink indeed. -- In the other, it is that Flesh which was Crucified, and
that Blood which was let out by the Soldier's Spear.

LXXI. This Doctor distinguishes, and makes no small difference between the two
acceptations of Christ's Body and Blood. Christ' s Body is taken in two Senses.
For whilst he styles that Body and Blood of Christ, Spiritual, which is daily
received by the Faithful; and that Flesh which was Crucified, and that Blood
which was let out by the Soldier's Spear, is not said to be either Spiritual,
or Divine; he manifestly insinuates, that these differ from each other, as much
as Corporeal and Spiritual, Visible and Invisible, Humane and Divine: Now
things that differ, are not the same. And in the Opinion of this Author, [ viz.
St. Hierom] That Spiritual Flesh which the Faithful receive with their Mouths,
and that Spiritual Blood, which is daily given to Believers to drink, differ
from that Flesh which was Crucified, and that Blood which was let out by the
Soldier's Spear: Therefore they are not the same.

LXXII. For that Flesh which was crucified, He shows the Difference of his
Natural and Spiritual Body.
was made of the Virgin's Flesh, consisting of Bones and Nerves, distinguished
by its Lineaments, into several Members of a humane Body, animated with a
reasonable Soul, having proper Life, and agreeable Motions. But that Spiritual
Body, which spiritually feeds the faithful People, as to its external Nature,
is made of several Grains of Wheat, by the Baker's hand, has neither Sinews
nor Bones, nor distinction of Members, nor is it animated by any reasonable
Substance, nor can it exercise any vital Motion. But that, whatever it is which
gives the Substance of Life, is the Efficacy of a spiritual Power, of an
invisible and divine Virtue. And that which appears outwardly, is quite another
thing, than that which is believed in the Mystery. Moreover, the Flesh of
Christ which was crucified, did not outwardly appear any other thing, than what
inwardly it was. For it was the true Flesh of a true Man; a true Body in the
shape of a true Body.

LXXIII. It is further to be considered, The Sacramental Bread a figure of the
People, as well as of Christ's Body.
That in that Bread, not only the Body of Christ, but also the Body of the
People believing in him, is figured; and therefore it is made of many grains of
Wheat, as the Body of faithful People is made up of many Believers by the Word
of Christ.

LXXIV. For which reason, as in the Sacrament, that Bread is understood to be
Christ's Body; so in the same Sacrament, his Members, the People that believe
in Christ, are also signified. And as that Bread is said to be the Body of the
Faithful, not corporally, but spiritually; so must it necessarily be understood
to be the Body of Christ, not corporally, but spiritually. As is also the Water
mixed with the Wine.


LXXV. So with the Wine, which is called Christ's Blood, Both the Greek and
Latin Church used to mix Water with Wine in the Eucharist, but held it not
essential to the Sacrament.
Water is commanded to be mixed; nor is one allowed to be offered without the
other; because neither is the People without Christ, nor Christ without the
People: As the Head cannot be without the Body, nor the Body without the Head.
Lastly, Water in that Sacrament, represents the People. Now if the Wine
consecrated by the Minister's Office, were corporally changed into Christ's
Blood, the Water also which is mixed therewith, must necessarily be corporally
changed into the Blood of the faithful People: For where there is but one
Consecration, there is consequently but one Operation; and where there is the
like Reason, there is the like Mystery. But we see no corporeal Change in the
Water, neither is there any corporeal Change in the Wine. The Representation of
the Body of the People in the Water, is altogether spiritual; therefore the
Representation of the Blood of Christ in the Wine, must also of necessity be
altogether spiritual.

LXXVI. Again, The Sacrament not incorruptible, therefore not Christ's natural
Body.
Things that differ from each other, are not the same. The Body of Christ that
died, and rose again, and being made immortal, Romans 6.6.
dies no more, nor has Death any more Dominion over it; is eternal now, and
no longer passible. But that which is celebrated in the Church, is temporal,
not eternal; corruptible, not exempt from Corruption; in our Way, not in our
[heavenly] Country. Therefore they differ, and are not the same. And if they
are not the same, how are they said to be the true Body, and true Blood of
Christ.

LXXVII. For if it be Christ's Body, if it be truly said, that it is Christ's
Body, then it is Christ's Body in verity [of Nature;] and if so, then it is
incorruptible, impassible, and by consequence, eternal. And therefore this Body
of Christ, which is celebrated in the Church, must necessarily be incorruptible
and eternal. Now it cannot be denied, but that thing is corrupted which is
broken into pieces, and distributed piecemeal to be received, and being ground
by the Teeth, passes into the Body. But it is one thing, that is outwardly
done, and another that is received by Faith. That which our bodily Sense
perceives, is corruptible; that which Faith believes, is incorruptible.
Wherefore that which outwardly appears, is not the thing it self, but the Image
of it; but that which the Mind perceives and understands, is the very thing it
self.

LXXVIII. Whereupon St. A large Citation out of St. Augustine.
Augustine, in his Exposition of St. John's Gospel, speaking of the Body and
Blood of Christ, says thus; Moses did eat Manna, and both Aaron and Phineas
did eat, and many others who pleased God, and died, did eat thereof. How so?
Because they did spiritually understand their visible Food, they did hunger
spiritually, and taste spiritually, and were spiritually filled. And we at this
day receive visible Food; but the Sacrament is one thing, and the virtue of the
Sacrament is another. And afterward; This is the Bread that comes down from
Heaven. The Manna signified this Bread; the Altar of God signified the same.
These were Sacraments differing in the Signs, but agreeing in the thing
signified. Hear what St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, that our Fathers were all under the
Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized into Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea; and did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and drank the
same spiritual Drink. The same spiritual, but other corporal Food. They did eat
Manna, we quite another thing. But yet they did eat the same spiritual Meat
with us. He adds, And they drank the same spiritual Drink. They drank one
thing, and we another, but In its visible Nature.
only as to what outwardly appeared, which by a spiritual virtue signified and
same thing. How was it the same Drink? They drank, faith he, of that spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Thence had they Bread whence
they had Drink. The Rock was Christ in a Type, but the true Christ was the Word
incarnate.

LXXIX. Again, John 6.63.
This is the Bread which came down from Heaven, whosoever eats thereof, shall
never die; which must be understood of him who eats the Virtue of the
Sacrament, not the mere visible Sacrament; him who eats inwardly, not
outwardly; who feeds on it in his Heart, not who presses it with his Teeth.

LXXX. Again, in what follows, quoting our Savior's Words, he says, Does this
offend you, that I said, I give you my Flesh to eat, and my Blood to drink?
What if you shall see the Son of Man ascending where he was before? What means
this? Here he resolves that which troubled them; here he expounds the
Difficulty at which they were offended. For they thought he would have given
them his Body; but he tells them, that he should ascend in his Body entire into
Heaven. When you shall see the Son of Man ascend where he was before; certainly
then you will see, that he did not give his Body in the way which you imagine;
then you will understand, that the Grace of God is not eaten by Morsels. He
says, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing.

LXXXI. And after many other Passages, he adds, Whosoever (says the same
Apostle) has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his: Therefore it is the
Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing. John 6.63.
The words which I have spoken unto you, are Spirit and life. What means he, by
saying, they are Spirit and Life? That they must be Spiritually understood. If
thou understandest them Spiritually, they are Spirit and Life, if thou
understandest them Carnally, [even so] also, they are Spirit and Life, but not
to thee.

LXXXII. By the Authority of this Doctor, treating on the Words of our Lord,
touching the Sacrament of his own Body and Blood, we are plainly taught, That
those words of our Lord are to be spiritually, and not carnally understood; as
he himself says; The words which I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life. That
is, his Words concerning eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood. He had
spoken those things at which his Disciples were offended: Therefore that they
might not be offended, their Divine Master calls them back from the Flesh to
the Spirit, from Objects of the outward Sense That is, to spiritual Objects.
to the understanding of things invisible.

LXXXIII. So then we see, that food of the Lord's Body, and that drink of his
blood, are in some respect truly his Body and his Blood; that is, in the same
respect in which they are Spirit and Life.

LXXXIV. Again, those things which are one and the same are comprehended under
the same Definition. We say of the true Body of Christ, that he is very God,
and very Man; God, begotten of God the Father before the World began; and Man
born of the Virgin Mary in the end of the World. But since these things cannot
be said of the Body of Christ, which is mystically celebrated in the Church, we
know that it is only in some particular manner the Body of Christ; which manner
is Figurative, and in the way of an Image; so that the Verity is the Thing it
self.

LXXXV. He argues from a Prayer in his time used after the H. Communion.
In the Prayer used after the Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood, to which the
People say, Amen; the Priest speaks thus, This Prayer is not found in the
present Roman Mass Book.
We who have now received the Pledge of eternal Life; most humbly beseech thee
to grant that we may be Or, Really.
manifestly made partakers of that which here we receive under an Image or
Sacrament.

LXXXVI. A Pledge and Image are the Pledge and Image of somewhat else; that is,
they do not respect themselves, but another thing. It is the Pledge of that
thing for which it is given, the Image of the thing it represents. They
signify the thing of which they are the Pledge or Image, but are not the very
thing it self. whence it appears, that this Body and Blood of Christ are the
Pledge and Image of something to come, which is now only represented, but shall
hereafter be Or, Really.
plainly exhibited. Now if it only signify at present what shall be hereafter
really exhibited, then it is one thing which is now celebrated, and another
which shall hereafter be manifested.

LXXXVII. Wherefore it is indeed the Body and Blood of Christ which the Church
celebrates; but in the way of a Pledge, or an Image: The truth we shall then
have, when the Pledge or Image shall cease, and the very thing it self shall
appear.

LXXXVIII. And in another Prayer; He argues from another Collect.
This is extant in the ordinary Mass Book.
Let thy Sacrament work in us, O Lord, we beseech thee, those things which they
contain, that we may really be made partakers of those things which now we
celebrate in a figure. He says that these things are celebrated in a Figure,
not in Truth; that is, by way of Representation, and not the Or Real Presence.
Manifestation of the Thing it self. Now the Figure and the Truth are very
different things: Therefore that Body and Blood of Christ which is celebrated
in the Church, differs from the Body and Blood of Christ, which is glorified.
That Body is the Pledge or Figure, but this the very Truth it self; the former
we celebrate, till we come to the latter; and when we come to the latter, the
former shall be done way.

LXXXIX. It is apparent therefore, that they differ vastly, as much as the
Pledge, and that whereof it is the Pledge; as much as the Image, and the Thing
whose Image it is, as much as the Figure and Truth. We see then how vast a
difference there is between the Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood, which the
Faithful now receive in the Church, and that Body which was born of the Virgin
Mary, which suffered, was buried, rose again, ascended into Heaven, and sits
at the Right Hand of God. For that Body which is celebrated here in our way,
must be spiritually received; for Faith believes somewhat that it sees not;
and it spiritually feeds the Soul, makes glad the Heart, and confers Eternal
Life and Incorruption, if we attend not to that which feeds the Body, which is
chewed with our Teeth, and ground to pieces, but to that which is spiritually
received by Faith. Now that Body in which Christ suffered, and rose again, was
his own proper Body which he assumed of the Virgin, which might be seen and
felt after his Resurrection; as he says to his Disciples; Luke 24.40. Handle
me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have.

XC. Let us hear also what St. He urges the Authority of Fulgentius.
Fulgentius speaks in his Book of Faith. Firmly believe, and doubt not in any
wise, that the very only begotten Son, God the Word, being made Flesh Ephesians.
5.2.
offered himself for us a Sacrifice and Oblation of a sweet smelling savor to
God; to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, by Patriarchs, Prophets and
Priests, living Creatures were sacrificed in the time of the Old Testament; and
to whom now, that is, under the New, together with the Father and Holy Ghost,
with whom he has one and the same Divinity, the Catholic Church throughout
the World, cease not to offer a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine in Faith and
Charity. In those Carnal Sacrifices, there was a signification of the Flesh of
Christ which he without Sin should offer for our Sins, and of that Blood which
he was to shed on the Cross for the Remission of our Sins; but in this
Sacrifice, there is a Thanksgiving and Commemoration of that Flesh of Christ
which he offered for us, and of that Blood, which the same [Christ] our God,
has shed for us: Of which, the Apostle St. Paul, in the Acts of the Apostles,
says, Acts 20.28.
Take heed to your selves and to the whole Flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Bishops, to rule the Church of God, which he redeemed with his own
Blood. In those Sacrifices, what was to be given for us, was represented in a
Figure; but in this Sacrifice, what is already given, is evidently shown.

XCI. By saying, That in those Sacrifices was signified what should be given
for us; but that in this Sacrifice, what is already given is commemorated; he
plainly intimates, That as those Sacrifices were a Figure of things to come, so
this is the Figure of things already past.

XCII. By which Expressions, he most evidently shows, how vast a difference
there is between that Body of Christ, in which Christ suffered, and that Body
which we celebrate, in remembrance of his Death and Passion: For the former is
properly and truly his Body, having nothing mystical or figurative in it. The
latter is mystical, showing one thing to our outward Senses by a Figure, and
inwardly representing another thing by Faith.

XCIII. He concludes with another Testimony of S. Augugustine.
Let me add one Testimony more of Father Augustine, which will confirm what I
have said, and shall put an end to my Discourse; in his Sermon to the People
touching the Sacrament of the Altar: Thus he says, What it is which you see
upon God's Altar, you were shown last Night; but you have not yet heard what it
is, what it means, and of how great a Thing this is a Sacrament. That which
you see, is Bread and the Cup; thus much your own Eyes inform you: But that
wherein your Faith needs Instruction, is, that this Bread is the Body of
Christ, and the Cup is the Blood of Christ. This is a short account of the
Matter, and perhaps as much as Faith requires; but Faith needs further
Instruction; as it is written, Isa. 7.9.
Except you believe, you will not understand. You may be apt to say to me, You
require us to believe, expound to us, that we may understand. Such a Thought as
this may arise in any man's Heart. We know that our Lord Jesus Christ took
Flesh of the Virgin Mary; when an Infant, he was suckled, nourished, grew, and
arrived to the Age of a young Man, was Persecuted by the Jews, suffered, was
hanged on a Tree, put to Death, taken down, and buried, the third day he rose
again, and on that day himself pleased, he ascended the Heavens, and carried up
his Body thither, and shall from thence come to Judge both quick and dead,
where he is now sitting at the right Hand of the Father. How is Bread his Body,
and how is the Cup, or the Liquor in the Cup, his Blood? These, my Brethren,
are styled Sacraments, because in them we see one thing, and understand
another. That which we see, has a Bodily Nature; that which is understood,
has a Spiritual Fruit, or Efficacy.

XCIV. In these Words, this Venerable Author instructs us, what we ought to
believe touching the proper Body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary,
and now sits at the right Hand of God, and in which he will come to Judge
the Quick and the Dead; as also, touching that Body which is placed on the
Altar, and received by the People. The former is entire, neither subject to be
cut or divided, nor is it veiled under any Figure. But the latter, which is set
on the Lord's Table, is a Figure, because it is a Sacrament. That which is
outwardly seen, has a Corporeal Nature, which feeds the Body; but that which
is understood to be contained within it, has a spiritual Fruit, or Virtue, and
quickneth the Soul.

XCV. And in the following Words, having a Mind to speak more plainly and
openly touching this Mystical Body, he says, If you have a mind to understand
the Body of Christ, hearken to the Apostle, who says, Ye are the Body of
Christ, and his Members: And [if ye are the Body of Christ, and his Members,
then] there is a Mystical Representation of your selves set on the Lord's
Table. You receive the Mystery of your selves, and answer, Amen; and by that
Answer i.e. Own your selves to be the Body and Members of Christ.
subscribe to what you are. Thou hear the Body of Christ named, and
answerest, Amen; become thou a Member of Christ, that thy Amen may be true, i.
e. How are we represented as Christ's Body in the Bread?
But why in the Bread? I shall offer nothing of my own, but let us hear what
the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.17.
himself speaks of this Sacrament; who says, And we being many, are one Bread,
and one Body in Christ, etc.

XCVI. St. Augustine sufficiently teaches us, That as in the Bread set upon the
Altar, the Body of Christ is signified, so is likewise the Body of the People
who receive it. That he might evidently show, That Christ's proper Body is that
in which he was born of the Virgin, was suckled, suffered, died, was buried,
and rose again, in which he ascended the Heavens, sits on the right Hand of
the Father, and in which he shall come again to Judgment: But this which is
placed upon the Lord's Table, contains a Mystery of that, as also the Mystery
of the Body of the Faithful People; according to that of the Apostle; And we
being many, are one Bread and one Body in Christ.

XCVII. Your Wisdom, He determines this second Question in the negative.
Most Illustrious Prince, may observe, how both by Testimonies out of the Holy
Scriptures, and the Fathers, it is most evidently demonstrated, That the Bread,
which is called the Body of Christ, and the Cup which is called the Blood of
Christ, is a Figure, because it is a Mystery; and that there is a vast
Difference between that which is his Body Mystically, and that Body which
suffered, was buried, and rose again: For this was our Savior's proper Body;
nor is there any Figure or Signification in it; but it is the very thing it
self. And the Faithful desire the Vision of him, because he is our Head; and
when we shall see him, our Desire will be satisfied; 1 John 10.30.
For he and the Father are one: Not in respect of our Savior's Body, but
forasmuch as the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in the Man Christ.

XCVIII. But in that Body which is celebrated in a Mystery, there is a Figure,
not only of the proper Body of Christ, but also of the People which believe in
Christ: For it is a Figure representing both Bodies; to wit, that of Christ, in
which he died, and rose again, and that of the People which are regenerated,
and raised from the Dead [by Baptism] into Christ.

XCIX. And let me add, That the Bread and Cup, which is called, and is the Body
and Blood of Christ, represents the Memory of the Lord's Passion or Death; as
himself teaches us in the Gospel, saying, Luke 22.19.
This do in Remembrance of me. Which St. Paul the Apostle expounding, says, 1
Cor. 11.26.
As often as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you show forth the Lord's
Death till he come.

C. We are here taught both by our Savior, and also by St. Paul the Apostle,
That the Bread and Blood which is placed upon the Altar, is set there for a
Figure, or in remembrance of the Lord's Death; that what was really done long
since, may be called to our present Remembrance; that having his Passion in our
mind, we may be made partakers of that Divine Gift, whereby we are saved from
Death: Knowing well, that when we shall come to the Vision of Christ, we shall
need no such Instruments to admonish us, what his Infinite Goodness was pleased
to Suffer for our sakes; for when we shall see him face to face, we shall not
by the outward Admonition of Temporal things, but by the Contemplation of the
very thing it self, shall understand how much we are obliged to give Thanks to
the Author of our Salvation.

CI. But in what I say, I would not have it thought, That the Lord's Body and
Blood is not received by the Faithful in the Sacramental Mysteries; for Faith
receives not that which the Eye beholds, but what it self believes. It is
Spiritual Meat, and Spiritual Drink, spiritually feeding the Soul, and
affording a Life of eternal Satisfaction; as our Savior himself, commending
this Mystery, speaks: John. 6.63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing.

CII. Thus in Obedience to your Majesty's Command, I, though a very
inconsiderable Person, have adventured to dispute touching Points of no small
Moment not following any presumptuous Opinion of my own; but having a constant
regard to the Authority of the Ancients: If your Majesty shall approve what I
have said, as Catholic, ascribe it to the merit of your own Faith; which,
laying aside your Royal Glory and Magnificence, condescended to enquire after
the Truth of so mean a Person. And if what I have said, please you not, impute
it to my own Weakness, which renders me incapable of explaining this Point so
well as I desired.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO RATRAM, OR BERTRAM.

In which Monsieur Boileau's French Version of that Author, and his Notes upon
him are Considered, and his unfair Dealings in both Detected.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXVIII.

AN APPENDIX TO RATRAM, OR BERTRAM, etc.
ABout Three Months after I had first Published this small Tract, I was
acquainted by a Friend that it was newly Printed at Paris, with a quite
contrary design, viz. To show there the Sentiments of Ratram, touching the
Sacrament of the Eucharist were exactly conformable to the Faith of the Roman
Church. This News made me very desirous to see the Book, but living near an
Hundred Miles from London, it was above six Months more, ere I could procure
it. At first view I perceived the Publisher James Boileau, Doctor in Divinity
of the College of Sorbon, and Dean of the Metropolitan Church of Sens.
was a Person of no small Figure in the French Church; and that he had several
other Doctors of the Sorbon to avouch, See the Approbation at the end.
That there is nothing either in his Version or Notes, but what is agreeable to
the Text of that Ancient Writer. But upon further perusal I soon found that
Monsieur Boileau, had rather given us his own Paraphrase, than the Author's
Words in French; that his design was not so much a Translation, as the
Conversion of Bertram; and that he had made almost as great and wonderful a
change in his Doctrine, as that which the Romanists pretend to be wrought in
the Eucharist it self. I confess his Undertaking seemed both useful and
seasonable, and well deserving encouragement; for if he proceed successful in
it (in the present juncture) it must needs much facilitate the Conversions in
hand. And unless some such way can be found out to bring over the Old
Heretics, who for a Thousand Years together after CHRIST, taught that The
Bread and Wine remain after Consecration; and that, It is not the Natural Body
of our Savior, which is orally received in the Holy Sacrament. The poor
Hugonots will still be of Opinion, That they ought not to distrust the Judgment
of their Senses, confirmed by Scripture and Antiquity, or to resign their
Understandings to any Church Authority on Earth.

But the misery of it is, that the Doctor has not been more generous in his
Undertaking, than he is unfortunate in his performance: For though the
Abjurations of the new Converts, cannot be more against their private Sense,
than Dr. Boileau's Exposition is against the Sense of this Author; yet as they
recant their forced Subscriptions, whenever they can escape out of France; so
Bertram when permitted to speak his own Words in Latin, contradicts whatever
this Translator has forced him against his mind to say in French. But how ill
soever he has treated the Author in French, we must acknowledge our selves very
much obliged to him, for giving us the Latin Text, See his Preface, p. 18.
according to F. Mabillons correct Copy of the Lobes Manuscript. We thank him
heartily for it, and it is no small piece of Justice he has done us, to show
the World that the former Printed Copies were not corrupted by us, as some have
pretended. That the Variations from them are inconsiderable, generally in the
order of the Syntax, or the use of some other word of like signification; and
where the Doctor himself thinks the variations material, the advantage (if any
be) lies on our side.

In his Preface and Remarks, I meet with nothing of any moment, which is not
obviated, and fully cleared in my In Chapters IV. and V.
Dissertation. For I had considered the main things on which he insists, in the
Writings of F. Mabillon, and Natalis Alexander, and given them an Answer. If he
had borrowed F. Mabillon's Modesty and Ingenuity, as he has done his
Arguments, or contented himself with them, he would have escaped many foul
imputations, which will now unavoidably disparage either his Judgment, or his
Integrity.

There are two things which disable me for a thorough examination of Monsieur
Boileau's Work; the one is the want Dacherij Spicilegium. Mabillonij Analecta,
etc.
of some Books, which it were necessary for me to consult on this occasion,
which cannot be here procured; and the other, the want of a little more
critical Skill in the French, in order to the more effectual discovery of his
unfair dealing. However under these disavantages, I doubt not to convince all
unprejudiced Persons, of these three things.

1. First, That Monsieur Boileau has grossly misrepresented the design and
sentiments of Ratram, in this Book.

2. That he has not acted the part of a Faithful Translator, nor used that
exactness which himself, and his Approvers pretend, but on the contrary has
all along accommodated his Version to his own Hypothesis, and not the Authors
Words.

3. That his Exposition of the Controverted Terms in this Discourse, both in
his Preface and Remarks is often very absurd, that those Terms cannot bear his
Sense, nor are they used therein by other Ecclesiastical Writers, either of the
same or elder times.

And the proof of these, will be a full confutation of this Doctors confident
Pretense, that this Book of Ratram contains no other Sentiments, than those of
that Church, which he styles, Catholic, Apostolic and Roman, touching the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Before I enter upon the first part of my Undertaking, it will not be amiss to
take a short view of Monsieur Boileau's Preface, the sum of which is this.

That although this piece of Ratram is one of the most considerable Monuments
of the Ninth Century, and serves admirably to clear the perpetuity of the Faith
touching the Eucharist, yet it has lain in the dark, and been taken notice of,
by almost no body, from his own time till it was Printed at Colen, Anno Dom.
1532. That upon its first appearance in public, it met with very odd
entertainment, and quite contrary to what it deserved; being challenged by the
Protestants as favorable to their Sentiments, and given up by the Roman
Catholics as an Impudent and Heretical Forgery. Insomuch, that this Tract was
put into the Index of Prohibited Books made in the Council of Trent, Anno Dom.
1559. and stands condemned in the succeeding Indices, and the most eminent
Doctors of that Communion have ever since esteemed it a Dangerous and Heretical
Piece. Some few indeed have treated poor Ratram a little more favorably. The
Lovain Divines, who compiled the Belgic Index, declare that with the help of a
Catholic Exposition, he may be tolerated. And M. de Saint Boeuve, Kings
Professor of Divinity in the Sorbon, did in the Year 1655. generously undertake
the Defense of his Doctrine in his public Lectures. But after all, no less a
man than Petrus de Marca and others, have been since laboring to prove, that
this Book was written by Joannes Scotus, and not Ratram, and is the same that
was condemned in the Berengarian Controversy by the Synods of Rome and
Vercelli. Having rejected this, and all other hard censures, he tells us that
Ratram's Sentiments are entirely Catholic, and not in the least contrary to
the Doctrine of Paschasius Radbertus, or the present Roman Church; and this he
doubts not to make evident, by his Translation of Bertram into French, and the
Exposition of his obscure terms given in this Preface, and the remarks which he
has added to justify his Translation.

Having given this general account of Mr. Boileau's Work, I shall show how he
represents the Scope and Sentiments of our Author.

In the Negative, Que cet Auteur n'a point eu d'autre creance que celle de la
realite and de la Transubstantiation. Preface, p. 10.
That he does not impugn the Doctrine of the Real Presence, or
Transubstantiation, nor dispute against the Opinion of Paschasius Radbertus.
But on the contrary, Cet Auteur n' est point oppose a Paschase, ny a la
Doctrine de l'Eglise Catholic. Ibid. and p. 23, 24.
That he and Paschasius teach the same Doctrine.

2. In the Affirmative, Ce livre de Ratramne est fait contre des Theologiens
Catholics, mais-pas-contre le Sentiment Catholic, p. 21.
That this Book was written against certain Catholic Divines, tho not against
the real Presence and Transubstantiation. And that the Opinions which he
encounters, are these See page, 22. 23.
two.

1. That, The Body of our Lord received in the Holy Sacrament, is exposed naked
to our bodily Senses, without any Figure or Vail whatsoever.

2. That the Body of Christ which is visible and orally received in the Holy
Sacrament, or whatever is the object of Sense therein (which as Preface, p. 25.
and in Versione passim.
Mr. Boileau expounds this Tract, is only the Species or Accidents of Bread and
Wine) is the self same Body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin, Crucified,
Dead and Buried: That is, his true and natural Body.

Now in this account of the Design and Sentiments of Ratram, this Doctor is
either grossly mistaken himself, or else he grossly abuses his Reader. And this
I hope to make out, both by showing the weakness of those Arguments he offers
for it, and also by producing better Reasons against it.

The Sum of what is said to support the Negative, viz. That Ratram does not
confute the Sentiments of Paschasius, or the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
may be reduced to these three things.

1 Preface, p. 2, 3, 4.
The Silence of all Authors from his own time, to the Year 1532. (especially in
the Berengarian Controversy) none, save F. Cellot's Anonymus, once mentioning
him as an Adversary to Paschasius.

2. Ibid, p. 21, 25, 26.
The Silence of Ratram himself, who never mentions Paschasius, or his Book, nor
the real Presence; but on the contrary, uses terms proper to establish
Transubstantiation.

3. Ibid, p. 8, 9, 10, 12.
That many Learned Writers of the Roman Communion, especially since Manuscript
Copies of it have been found, have esteemed this Piece very Orthodox.

To the First I answer, That the pretended Silence of Authors, hinders not but
that Ratram might impugn the Doctrine of Paschasius. When two Authors of the
same time handle one and the same Argument, and the one advances this
Proposition, That the Body of Christ received orally in the Sacrament, is the
same Body which was born of the Virgin, Suffered on the Cross, and rose from
the Grave, as Paschasius did; and the other puts the Proposition into the Form
of a Question, and determines it in the Negative, as Through the whole
discussion of the Second Question.
Bertram has done: I conceive there needs no witness to make any man (who is
not sunk quite over head and ears into Skepticism) believe that this latter
opposes the Doctrine of the former.

But Secondly, He does not say that no body has mentioned him as an Adversary
to Paschasius; he acknowledges that F. Cellots Anonymous Author, has expressly
affirmed it. And though he thinks it enough to invalidate his Credit, by saying
of him (as the Bishop of Meaux does of M. Imbert, See the Bishop of Meaux his
Letter in the Vindication of his Exposition. p. 116. Un homme sans nom comme
sans scavoir.
He is a man of neither Repute nor Learning) that he is an Author of little
Sense or Merit, whose Name, or Age cannot be discovered. This will not serve
his turn, for the credibility of a Witness depends more upon a man's Honesty,
and the means he has of truly informing himself touching the matter he
attests, than on his renown, or deep Learning; an ordinary Parish Priest may be
as credible a Witness of a matter of Fact within his knowledge, as the Bishop of
Meaux, or the Dean of the Metropolitical Church of Sens. We were in a miserable
case, if none under the Dignity of a Dean could tell Truth; or if we were to
know no more than some Sorbon Doctors are content to let us. But what if Mr.
Boileau be mistaken when he tells us (that by the confession of all Mankind) he
has little Sense or Reason, and that his Age is unknown? What if his Time and
Name be well known, and he appear to have been an Author of some Figure and
Note for Learning? F. Acta Ben. S. IV. p. 2. Praef. n. 48. Proinde auctorem
Herigerum Abbatem Laubiensem affirmare non vereor. De Herigero autem Girardus
in vita Adalbardi Corbeiensis apud Mabillon. Ibidem n. 48. Abbas Laubiensis
HERIGERUS, qui eo tempore inter Sapientes habebatur celeberrimus.
Mabillon thinks he knows both his Name and Time, and that he was no meaner a
Person than Herigerus Abbat of Lobes, who lived about 120 Years after Ratram.
But if the discovery had never been made, it is a slender Argument that he was
not worth the Publishing, because Sirmondus, and Archbishop Usher, could have
Published him, but did not: How many other Authors which they could have
Published, but did not, must be judged worthless Scribblers, if this be true
reasoning? Let M. Boileau despise him as much as he pleases, he is a far
better Witness that Ratram wrote against Paschasius, than any he can produce to
inform us who those Divines were in the Ninth Century, that held the Opinions
of Abbaudus, and Prior Gaultier, the imaginary Adversaries which he makes him
to encounter. He can neither show the Books of that time, wherein those
Opinions are taught, nor yet prove by any Author, that they were then held by
any body. That Preface, p. 4.
neither Sigebertus Gemblacensis, nor Trithemius (who both mention this Tract)
say any thing of its being written against Paschasius is no convincing Proof
that it was not. For those Authors ordinarily give us no further account of
Books, than the bare Titles afford, and they omit many unquestionable Works of
those Writers whom they mention. F. Mabillon Acta Ben. S. IV. p. 2. Praef. n.
149. 150.
makes no doubt but the two Books, De partu Virginis, were Written by
Paschasius against Ratram's Book on that Subject; yet neither Sigebert or
Trithemius say one Word of that Dispute; nor can M. Boileau produce any one
Writer from those times to the beginning of this Century, who so much as
mentions it: Neither the Popes, nor those Councils which they assembled against
Berengarius, at Rome and Verceli doubted but Joannes Scotus wrote against
Paschasius; and yet neither No very accurate Writers, who make two Authors of
Joannes Scotus, and Joannes Erigena, as Mr. Sclater or his Printer does, p. 76.
Trithem. de Script. Eccles. fol. 63. and 65. Quarto, Paris, 1512. Sigeb. cap.
65. and cap. 95.
Trithemius, nor Sigebert He wrote in Defense of the Emperor, Henry IV. against
Pope Gregory VII. and Paschal II. And Died A. D. 1113.
(who lived, and was a Writer in the latter days of Berengarius) says one
Syllable of it. As for Bishop Fisher, he did not (as M. Boileau pretends)
Preface, p. 4. Qui le cite.
cite Bertram, he only mentions his Name among other Catholic Writers on that
Subject.

His Second Argument concludes as little as the first; for we pretend not that
this Tract was written against the Book of Paschasius, but only against his
Sentiments; so that there was no occasion to mention it. It was upon the
command of his Prince, who propounded those two Questions, that he meddled with
this Controversy; and if he wrote about the Year 850. whilst Paschasius was
Abbot of Corbey; there is another obvious Reason, for his Silence in that Point.

But though we confess that this Tract confutes not the Book of Paschasius; yet
we think it too boldly said Preface, p. 21.
That it makes as little mention of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation,
as it does of Stercoranism; unless his meaning be, that they are not mentioned
in those proper Terms, which were not then in use. He ought to be very well
assured, that Veritas in Bertram, does not signify Verity of Nature, but such
a Verity as is discerned by our bodily Senses; otherwise he must retract this
confident Assertion, and give us leave to believe some other great Doctors
Espenceus, Genebrard, etc.
of the Sorbon, who do acknowledge that he both mentions and denies them.

But whether he does or not, as also whether he uses Terms proper to establish
Transubstantiation, I shall have a fitter occasion hereafter of discoursing
with our Author; and shall therefore proceed to consider,

What he can fairly collect from the favorable Opinion, which some Learned
Doctors of the Church of Rome have had of this Piece. The Lovain Doctors think
he needs a Comment to give him a tolerable Sense: And though Writing invisibly
for visibly, be but the Correction of a Typographical Error, yet the Exposition
of external Species, or Accidents of the Creatures, where the Author says, the
substance of the Creatures, and the other that follows is a Gloss that marrs
the Text, at least when Index Exp. Philippi II. Regis Catholici jussu, Ant.
1571. p. 7.
the Expositors themselves confess, that Bertram knew not that the Accidents did
subsist without their subjects. And when they have done all they can by way of
Exposition, they think it necessary Denique, quaedam, quae videntur n^n obscure
ab Haereticis inserta and assuta sub libri finem. Ibidem p. 5. and iterum p. 6.
Non male aut inconsulte omittantur igitur omnia h^c a fine page Considerandum
quoque etc.
to expunge all from the beginning of the 73 number, to near the end of n. 77.
And again from the beginning of n. 84. to the middle of n. 89. which they say,
are Interpolations; and yet they are as conformable to the Manuscript, as any
thing else in the Book. But because they cannot be so expounded, as to
reconcile them with the Real Presence, therefore forsooth, they are
Interpolations foisted in by some Heretic.

What M. De Saint Boeuve said in the Defense of this Tract I know not, nor
what Reputation he might get by maintaining a Paradox; but it is plain he made
few Proselytes to his Opinion, when the great In Epistola praefixa Tomo Secundo
Spicileg. L. Dacherij.
de Marca, Two Years after, fathered it upon Joannes Scotus, and said it is the
same Book which was condemned in all the Synods against Berengarius, and At the
end of M. Arnaud's Defense, in Quarto, Paris, 1669.
M. Paris wrote a Dissertation to support de Marca's Conjecture.

That he tells us, Pref. p. 10.
Since the Manuscripts of it are found, it is that Roman Catholic Divines have
judged Bertram no Adversary to Paschasius or the Church, is an excellent hint,
and we are much obliged to him for it; for it lets us into the Secret, if there
be any in the matter. The naked Truth is this: Ratram had always maintained
the Character of an Pref. p. 4. Un Escrivain tres-Catholique.
Orthodox Writer, and is not now to be kicked off as an Heretic. The
Manuscripts now brought to Light, baffle the pretenses of Forgery and
Corruption, as also M. de Marca's Conjecture; and therefore to expound him in a
Popish Sense, is the only Game left them to play. As long as there was any
color for saying so; Bertram was an Heretic, or the Book Spurious, or at
least grievously Corrupted by the Protestants. But now all these Shifts fail
them upon appearance of the Manuscripts; he is grown on a sudden a very
Catholic Writer. I profess, that it is beyond my reach to comprehend the
Reasons, Why the sight of the Manuscripts, should alter any man's Judgment
touching the Orthodoxy of Bertram. The Printed Copies differ very little from
that which Doctor Boileau now gives us from the Lobez Manuscript, which is not
without some Faults, not committed in the old Editions; and they differ not at
all in those places which the Belgic Censors, and Espenceus suspect to have
been inserted by the Heretics. So that it is pure Necessity, and not any new
Light which they have received from the Manuscripts, which makes the French
Doctors now contend for an Author, whom their Predecessors rejected. If the
Roman Catholic Divines had formerly entertained that good Opinion of Bertram
in M. S. the World had not waited till F. Mabillon obliged us therewith, for a
Transcript of the Lobez MS. Ant. Sanderi Biblioth. Belgica M S S. par. 1. p.
303. Quarto Insulis 1641.
Antonius Sanderus in his account of the M S S. in the Belgic Libraries,
mentions this very Book, Juxta exemplar Duaci 1629. in Octa. licet suppresso
loci and Typographi nomine. p. 304.
from a Printed Catalogue taken near 50 Years before F. Mabillon found it. And
the President Vide Praef. ad vet. Auctores. IX. Saeculi. Libri Ratramni ex M.
S. Codice Coenobij Lobbiensis, cujus Authenticum exemplar cura Doctoris
Lovaniensis and R. P. Lucae Dacherij -- consecuti sumus. Vide etiam Testimonium
Notarij pub. ad calcem utriusque libri.
Mauguin in the Year 1648. procured a Copy of his two Books of Predestination,
which immediately follow this Tract in the same Volume, by the favor of a
Lovain Doctor, and M. d' Achery, who cannot be presumed ignorant of its being
there. I say nothing of the Manuscript seen by Le Cardinal du Perron, qui a ete
persuade que ces Manuscrits etoient veritablement conformes a l'imprime -- n'a
pas laisse de l'abandonner comme un Auteur Heretic, qui cache ses pensees
sous des terms and des expressions Catholics. Preface, p. 10. 11.
Cardinal Perron, without operating any change in his Judgment of the Author,
whom he abandons as an Heretic [and a crafty one too] that conceals his
[Heterodox] Opinions under Catholic Terms and Expressions. So that if the
Sorbonists at present have better thoughts of this Tract, its Author owes them
very little thanks for that Favor.

Let us now consider what is offered to make good the Affirmative; viz. That
Ratram's Adversaries held,

1. That there is no Figure in the Holy Eucharist, but that the Body of our
Savior was exposed naked to our Corporal Senses.

2. That what our Senses perceive therein [that is, the Accidents of Bread and
Wine] are the self same Body of Christ which was born of the Virgin, Crucified,
etc.

For proof of the former, he cites our Preface, p. 22.
Author in the Preface to the King, n. 2. and in the state of the first
Question, n. 5. making them to deny, that the Body of Christ, and his Blood
Remarks, p. 207. and 215. upon n. 2. 5. and 9.
are under any Figure or Vail; and to say that the Sacrament is pure and simple
manifestation of the Truth; which was not the Sentiment of Paschase, or the
Church of Rome, who teach as expressly as Ratram himself, that there is Figure
in the Sacrament: If you demand who these Divines were, He tells you Preface,
p. 34. and Remarks on n. 2.
of one Abbaudus, and Walter Prior of Saint Victors in the Twelfth Century,
adding, Remarks, p. 213. 214.
That this Opinion seems to have been common in the Year 1059. when Berengarius
made his Recantation: And in regard Opinions do not grow common on a sudden, it
may be reasonably thought, that these were the Sentiments of some in the times
of Ratram; and that as much is intimated by Paschase, in his Book of the Lord's
Body and Blood, in the Twentieth Chapter. This is all that I can find, either
in his Preface or Remarks that looks like a Proof; how little it concludes
shall presently be shown.

1. Those Passages which are cited do not necessarily infer an absolute denial
of any kind of Vail or Figure in the Holy Sacrament, but that his Adversaries
denied such a Figure or Vail, as Ratram and the Ancient always acknowledged
therein, viz. such a Figure as was a Corporeal Substance, as the Water in
Baptism is. The Pelagians are charged by the Orthodox Fathers, as Adversaries
of the Doctrine of Grace, though they did not utterly deny Grace, Vide
Pelagium, citante August. de Gratia Christi, lib. 1. c. 7.
but advanced such a Notion of it, as amounted to no more than the Illumination
of the Mind by God's Spirit. Whereas the Catholics did further acknowledge its
powerful Sway over our Wills, and its assistance in every good Work. Now if
Paschasius and his Party do in Words acknowledge a Sign or Figure, but such as
in effect is none; Ratram might well enough charge them with denying any Vail
or Figure in the Sacrament.

Bertram and Quae ob id Sacramenta dicuntur quia sub tegumento corporalium
rerum Virtus Divina Secretius Salutem eorundem Sacramentorum operatur. n. 46.
Isidore, cited by him, make Sacramental Figures to be res corporales, Corporal
Things; not only the proper Accidents of a Body, as the Figure and Taste of
Bread and Wine (which Paschase and Haymo both admit in the Sacrament) but
Corporal Substances. And in the Holy Eucharist Sub velamento corporei Panis,
corporeique Vini, etc. n. 16. See Numb. 97.98.
Ratram says, That Christ's Spiritual Body and Blood are under the Vail of
Corporeal Bread, and Corporeal Wine, which are Bodily Substances: He also says
of the Consecrated Corpus and Sanguis Christi quae Fidelium ore in Ecclesia
percipiuntur Figurae sunt secundum visibilem Speciem. Which is expounded by
Visibilem Creaturam, in four Lines after, n. 49.
Bread and Cup, which is called Christ's Body and Blood, that it is a Figure of
Christ's proper Body: That the Body and Blood of Christ received in the Church
are Figures, as they are Visible Creatures. Whereas Lib. de C. and S. D. c. 4.
Est autem figura vel character hoc quod exterius sentitur, sed totum veritas
and nulla adumbratio, quod intrinsecus percipitur.
Paschase contends, that the Consecrated Elements are both a Figure; and the
Truth; as Christ who is true God, is styled Heb. 1.3.
the Figure or Character of his Substance.

This Haymo (although he teaches a Real Presence of Christ's natural Body)
looked upon as absurd, saying that nothing can be a Figure or Sign of it self;
and upon that account denied Panis ille Sacratus and Calix signa dicuntur. Non
autem hoc quantum ad carnem Christi and Sanguinem accipiendum est -- Jam enim
Corpus and Sanguis Christi non essent. Nullum enim Signum est illud cujus est
Signum: Nec res aliqua sui ipsius dicitur Signum, sed alterius. Apud Mabill. A.
B. S. 4. p. 2. Praef. n. 93.
The consecrated Elements to be Signs of Christ's Body. Nor will the Text cited
by Paschase bring him off, for in the It is (...)
Original Christ is said to be the Figure of his Person, not his Substance; and
the Vulgar Interpreter must mean Subsistence, by Substantia, or he was an
Arian. For the Son was the Image, not of the Essence, but the Person of the
Father; and consequently Christ was not truly the Father, though truly God; so
that the same thing is not proved to be both a Figure and Truth. I confess
Paschase expounds the Words of Christ's Human Nature, which though it clear him
of Arianism, yet it spoils his proof, that a thing may be a Figure of it self.

Upon reading his Book with the best attention I was able, I cannot say whether
he deny the Substance of the Consecrated Elements to remain, or not; he is so
inconsistent with himself, and seems rather to be for Impanation, than
Transubstantiation. But our Adversaries believing his Doctrine to be the same
with that of the present Church of Rome, which is, that mere Accidents remain
to be a Figure or Vail of Christ's natural Body, he and they are as justly
chargeable with denying any Figure, as the Fancied Predecessors of Abbaudus and
Walter; nay as those Authors themselves, who only asserted that Christ's very
Body [not the Accidents only] was sensible, and sensibly broken, but never
denied that the Accidents, or somewhat which made the same Impressions on
Sense, as did the Accidents of Bread and Wine before Consecration, shrouded it
from their Eyes. Whether those Accidents were subjected in Christ's Body, or
only environed it; or whether God miraculously Imprinted the Idea of them on
the Organs of Sense, the case is no way varied: For the Natural Body of Christ
is still covered from the outward Senses, so that what is pretended, could not
be the Point in Dispute between Ratram and his Adversaries, who must needs
admit a Figure and Vail in the Holy Eucharist, as the Roman Catholics now do.

2. A right Understanding of the Terms of the Question, will clear the Truth of
what I said last and overthrow M. Boileau's Fancy. In the Question there are
three Parts to be considered. 1. Subjectum, Quod in Ecclesia ore fidelium
sumitur.

Suppositum, Quod Corpus and Sanguis Christi fiat.

Quaesitum, An hoc fiat in Mysterio an in Veritate.


The Subject of it, which is comprised in these words [That which the Faithful
do in the Church receive with the Mouth] which import somewhat more than the
bare Accidents or Superficies of Bread and Wine, viz. the Substance which they
environ, and which passes into the Mouth with them. 2ly. A thing admitted by
both Parties touching this Subject, viz. That by Consecration it is made
Christ's Body and Blood. 3ly. The point remaining in debate, which is, in what
manner, and by what sort of change it is made Christ's Body and Blood; whether
by a true and natural change, or only by a Mystical and Sacramental change.
There is a great Emphasis in the Word Fiat, which is more than a bare Verb
Substantive in the Question, and imports a change made. At quia confitentur and
Corpus and Sanguinem Dei esse, nec hoc esse potuisse, nisi facta in melius
commutatione, neque ista commutatio Corporaliter sed Spiritaliter facta sit,
necesse est jam ut figurate facta esse dicatur. Ratr. n. 16.
Ratram proves against his Adversaries that it was a Figurative and Mystical,
not a Substantial and Corporal change; and Haymo Idem Panis in Carnem Domini
mutatur, and idem Vinum in Sanguinem Domini transfertur non per figuram neque
per umbram, sed per Veritatem. Haymo, Hom. in Evang. die S. Palmarum. Item in 1
Cor. 11. eadem habet prope ad verbum.
who was of the contrary Opinion, makes the Elements to be converted into
Christ's Body and Blood, not Figuratively, or Mystically, but in Verity; so that
if Haymo were, as F. Mabillon A. B. S. 4. p. 2. n. 93.
supposes the Adversary whom our Author disputes against, on the first
Question, Ratram as expressly denies the Real Presence of Christ's Natural Body
in the Holy Eucharist, as Paschase, or Haymo can assert it.

I confess he explains Verity by Manifestation, and makes them to say, that the
Object of their Faith was also perceived by the bodily Eye; but their meaning
must only be, that what they saw upon the Altar, was truly, certainly, and
without any Trope the Lord's Body. Manifestation does not necessarily import
the Sensible Evidence of a thing, but rather its certain Truth: And accordingly
it is used in this Sense by our Author in another Work, Ratramn. de Praed. lib.
2. p. 77. Apud Mauguin. Qui vero ad illum, quive at^ istum pertineant finem, in
hac mortalitatis caligine, nulla veritatis manifestatione comprehenditur. Verba
Isidori sunt supra. Incertum tamen est ad quem sint Finem Praedestinati.
where expounding Isidores words, Who are predestined to Life, and who to
Death is uncertain, expresses it thus; It is not comprehended by any
manifestation of the Truth. But more of this when I come to consider how M.
Boileau expounds the Controverted Terms of our Author.

3. Let us for once admit (though it be false) that the Writers whom he names,
did in the Twelfth Century hold the Opinion which he pretends our Author to
have confuted. How does this infer, that any body held it in Bertram's days,
near 300 Years before? This sort of Reasoning is a little of kin to the Logic
of that Oxford Alderman, who said, That if they could prove that King Henry the
Eighth, Reigned before King Henry the Sixth, the City would carry their cause.
It is true, he adds, That this was a common Opinion in the middle of the
Eleventh Century, when Berengarius made his first Recantation; and that
Opinions do not grow common all on a sudden: I hope he does not think it was
the Opinion of Pope Nicolas II. and the Council who ordered Berengarius to
recant in that Form; if he does, it is a shrewd Reflection on the Pope's
Infallibility. But suppose it were then commonly believed; cannot an Opinion
grow common under 200 Years? Did not Gnosticism, and the Millenary Opinions
grow common in a much shorter time? Did not Arianism overspread the World in
less than 40 Years? Nay are not the Doctrines of Molino, grown common in 7
Years space?

There is nothing in that Chapter of Paschase, like the Sentiments which he
would fix upon Ratram's Adversaries, and one of the Passages to which he
refers, viz. That the Sacrament is digested and passes into the Draught, is
precisely Ratram's own Doctrine, and he argues thence, That what is Orally
received is not Christ's Natural Body.

The Truth is, the Opinions of Abbaudus and Walter plainly point out their
Original: The Dispute about the breaking of Christ's Body, sprung from that
beastly form of Recantation imposed upon Berengarius, by Pope Nicolas the II.
of which the Romanists themselves were afterward ashamed; and neither Nubes
Testium nor Consensus Veterum think it convenient to be cited among their
Testimonies for Transubstantiation. The Pope and Cardinal Humbert Ore and cord
profiteor de Sacramentis Dominicae Mensae eam fidem tenere quam Dominus and
venerabilis Papa Nicolaus, and haec Sancta Synodus -- tenendam tradidit --
scilicet Panem and Vinum quae in Altari ponuntur, post consecrationem, non
solum Sacramentum, sed etiam verum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini Nostri J. C.
esse, and sensualiter, non solum Sacramento, sed in veritate, manibus
Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri. Apud Gratianum. de
Consecr. Did. 2. c. 42. Ego Berengarius.
resolving to make it full enough, quite over-did the Business; for they made
him profess it as the Faith of the Pope and Council, That Christ's Body is
Sensibly and Truly (and not only Sacramentally) handled and broke by the
Priest's hands, and ground by the Teeth of the Faithful.

When the Council was over, and the Recantation came to be scanned; some who
were too much Abaelardus and others. Vide Sequentiam in Festo Corp. Christi in
Missali Romans Fracto demum Sacramento,
Ne vacilles, sed memento
Tantum esse sub Fragmento,
Quantum toto tegitur.
Nulla rei fit scissura,
Signi tantum fit Fractura,
Qua nec status nec statura
Signati minuitur.

Divines to believe the natural Body of Christ capable of Fraction, or
Division, said it was broken and chewed in Sacramento, non in Re; in the Signs
only, viz. the Accidents and outward Forms of Bread: Others, as See their Words
cited by M. Boileau, in his Preface, p. 36. And in the Remarks, p. 210. 211,
212, 213, 215.
Abbaudus and Walter were for adhering to the Letter of the Council, and were
too much Philosophers to believe Accidents could subsist without a subject; and
they contended that our Saviors Body under those Accidents was broken truly;
and said that if it were not really broken, it was not really his Body: So that
to say, that the breaking affected only the Species, or abstracted Qualities,
was to revive the Heresy of Berengarius.

This is the true Pedigree of the Disputes about the breaking of Christ's Body,
which cannot be derived from any greater Antiquity, than the Roman Synod, A. D.
1059.

This is more than enough to confute all that M. Boileau offers to prove, that
Ratram's Adversaries believed no Figure in the Holy Sacrament. Let us next see
how he proves, that the Opinion encountered by him in the Second part of this
Tract, was not the Opinion of Paschase, but of some body (he knows not who)
that held the Sensible part of the Holy Eucharist, or the Accidents of Bread
and Wine, to be the same Body which was Born of the Virgin, etc.

Truly, for the Proof hereof, he misrepresents the Subject of the Question, as
though it were only concerning the Sensible Qualities of what is received in
the Holy Sacrament; whereas it is touching the Thing orally received: Then he
refers us to his Translation and Remarks, which we shall consider in their
proper place. And in the beginning of his Preface, he sets aside the Testimony
of Cellot's Anonymus, who tells us, That Ratram and Rabanus, both opposed
Paschase in this Point, though the Truth of what he asserts be notorious, from
the express Words of both those Writers. And the Words of Rabanus are so
Emphatical, that although I have already Dissert. c. 6.
produced them, I cannot but repeat them here, and add some few remarks to
show, how fully, and directly they contradict the Popish Notion of the Real
Presence of Christ's Body in the Holy Eucharist. His words are these; Quidam
nuper de ipso Sacramento Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, non rite sentientes
dixerunt hoc ipsum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini, quod de Maria Virgin natum
est, and in quo ipse Dominus passus est in cruce, and resurrexit de Sepulchro,
idem esse quod sumitur de Altari; cui errori, etc. Rhabani. Ep. ad Heribald. ad
calcem Reginonis, c. 33.
Some of late entertaining false Sentiments touching this Sacrament of the
Lord's Body and Blood, have said, That this very Body and Blood of our Lord,
which was born of the Virgin Mary, in which our Lord suffered on the Cross, and
rose from the Grave, is the same [Body] which is received from off the Altar;
against which Error, etc. I hence observe,

1. That the Opinion censured by him, is the express Doctrine of Paschase, and
the Roman Church at this day. Nor is there any color for M. Boileau to say,
That he censured men who held the Accidents to be Christ's Body; for he speaks
of the Body received from the Altar, which he will not deny to be somewhat
besides the sensible Figure and Accidents of the consecrated Elements.

2. He censures this Opinion, as a Falsehood, and Error, against which he had
purposely written.

3. He condemns it as a late Opinion; so that it had not Antiquity to plead.

4. He represents it as no Universal Opinion, but as the Sentiments of some few.

1. Quidam, non omnes ubique. 2. Nuper, non semper. 3, Non rite sentientes,
ergo erronei.

So that in short, the Doctrine which was made an Article of Faith in the
Eleventh Century, was in the Ninth Century not so much as a Probable Opinion,
but rejected by Rabanus as a false Novel, and private Opinion, and by no means
the Ancient, Catholic, and True Belief of Christ's Church.

If Mr. Boileau could produce any Piece of the Ninth Century, wherein the
Proposition censured by Rabanus and Ratram, is expounded as it is by him, or
that contradicted Cellot's Anonymus, we would readily yield the Point in
Dispute. But that without any proof, nay against so notorious Evidence, and so
express a Testimony, he should hope to obtrude upon us, his own Chimera's
touching the Design and Adversaries of Bertram in this Book, argues a degree of
Confidence unbecoming a Divine of his Character.

F. Mabillon A. B. S. 4. p. 2. Praef. n. 56. Rabanum, Ratramnum, Anonymum,
Herigerum, aliosque siqui sint, Paschasii Adversarios in reali Christi corporis
in Sacramento praesentia, cum ipso convenisse, and contentionem hanc in vocum
pugna sitam fussse.
has more Ingenuity and Discretion than to attempt it; and frankly confesses,
that both these Writers did dispute against Paschase, though to salve all
again, he pretends that they believed the Real Presence, as much as he did,
that they differed only in Words, not in Doctrine; so that it was rather a
Verbal than a Real Controversy. But by this Learned Fathers leave, the
difference appears much more weighty; Paschase and his Adversaries are at as
wide a distance, as Protestant and Papist; and of this the Reader will be
satisfied upon perusal of the Fifth Chapter of my Dissertation; wherein I have
set down the Doctrine of Paschase and the Church of Rome, together with
Ratram's contrary Doctrines; and have from the Author himself shown, in what
Sense he has used those Terms which seem proper to establish
Transubstantiation, but really overthrow it; and this without the help of those
new and bold Figures, which M. Boileau has been forced to invent.

Hitherto I have been detecting the weakness of those Arguments which this
Doctor makes use of, to prove his Paradox, that the Doctrine of Ratram is
conformable to that of Paschase, and the Faith of the Church of Rome.

I shall now offer some few Reasons that convince me of the contrary.

1. It is a just and strong Presumption of this Authors being against them,
that for above 120 Years together after his first appearance in Print, their
most eminent Doctors have with one consent yielded the Point. I will not except
his Lovain Friends, whose Expedient to make him Orthodox, is with good Reason
by M. Alix declared impracticable, since the appearance of Manuscripts; for
they justify those passages to be Genuine, which the Lovain Divines would have
expunged as spurious Mixtures. If Bertram be so full and considerable a Witness
of the perpetuity of their Faith, touching the Presence of Christ in the Holy
Sacrament, How comes it to pass, that their Supreme Judge of Controversies has
treated him as a Knight of the Post?

The Doctors of the Church of Rome in former days, were not unacquainted with
the Art of Expounding, which is now practiced with so much applause, but have
shown themselves much greater Masters in it, than M. Boileau, and have used it
with greater dexterity, for evading the Testimonies produced out of other
Fathers by our Divines against Transubstantiation. Nor can we doubt but that
they were bred under the strongest Prepossessions and Prejudices for the Real
Presence, and consequently as well disposed to understand all the obscure and
harsh Passages of this Book, in the sense of their own Church, if the Words
could possibly have born it. If it be now so plain, as Nous avons son livre il
ne faut que le lire, Pref. p. 24. 25.
M. Dean of Sens would have it thought, That Bertram wrote neither against the
Stercoranists, nor the Real Presence: If the very reading of the Book be
sufficient to convince a man thereof; How came it to pass, that so many Popes
and Cardinals, with other eminent Prelates and Doctors have conspired in the
Condemnation of so Useful and Orthodox a Work? To pass a Pref. p. 5.
Sentence quite contrary to its merit; and such as no man, who had well
examined it, could reasonably have expected? Did they condemn it without
Examination? Then God preserve us from such Judges. Did they not understand the
Book? Or did they want Skill to try it by the Roman Standard? For my part I
cannot think so meanly of the Trent Fathers, who were employed to censure
Books, and who composed the Index. What pity was it, that no Artist of that
time, could furnish those Fathers with a pair of M. Boileau's Spectacles!

F. Mabillon A. B. Ubi supra n 126. At cum haec classis contineat libros, qui
propter Doctrinam, quam continent non sanam aut Suspectam -- rejiciuntur --
nihil inde in Ratramni fidem inferri potest, nisi quod ob duriores quasdam and
obscuriores sententias, suspectam Doctrinam visus est continere.
tells us, that Bertram is not placed in the first Class of the Index, which
consists of condemned Authors, but in the second Class in which the Works of
Catholic Writers, containing false or suspected Doctrine, are prohibited; so
that nothing can be hence concluded against the Soundness of his Doctrine, but
only that some harsh and obscure Sentences, rendered it suspected.

To this I Answer;

1. That nothing appears in the Censure, by which we can learn that the Book
was prohibited only for Suspected Doctrine, and not for unsound Doctrine; which
is also assigned as the Reason why some Books of Catholic Divines are rejected.

2. If the Censors of Books had only rejected Bertram for the Obscurity of his
Expressions, or Suspicious Doctrine, and not for false and unsound Doctrine,
why might they not have allowed him (as they have done others in the same
Class) the favor of a Temporary Prohibition Vide Indicem in Class 2. B.
donec corrigatur, till he be corrected, or explained? I fear those Fathers
despaired of softning his harsh Expressions into any tolerable Catholic Sense.

3. If we may judge of the Sense of the Pope, who published the Index, and the
Council, which ordered it to be made, by the Judgment of the most eminent
Doctors in and soon after that time, we must believe that False and Heretical
Doctrine was the fault, which the Trent Censors found with it. Sixtus Senensis,
who wrote within three Years after the Council was dissolved, calls it
Perniciosum Oecolampadii volumen -- in vulgarunt sub titulo Bertrami. Sixtus
Sen. in Praef. Biblioth. S.
a pernicious Book of Oecolampadius, against the Sacrament of Christ's Body.
And says, Aug. Expositionem hujus loci Bertramus -- detorquet ad Haeresin
Sacramentariorum, Lib. 6. Annot. 196. n. 1. vide n 2.
That he wrests St. Austin's Exposition of these words, I am the Living Bread;
to the Sacramentarian Heresy, making the Holy Eucharist to be nothing else but
Bread and Wine in substance, bearing a Figure and Resemblance together with the
Name of Christ's Body, which is not truly and corporally present, but only in a
Spiritual and Mystical way. And makes Berengarius -- ducentis pene post
Bertramum annis eandem Haeresin instauravit, ib. n. 6.
Berengarius to have revived the same Heresy Two hundred Years after him.
Espencaeus, an Author of the same time, points out the very Propositions, which
show the Pseudo-Bertram Espencaeus de ador. Euch. lib. 2. c. 19.
, as he styles him, to have been no true Son of the Church, but the Son of a
Strange Woman, Vide pref. p. 8.
Claudius Saints, who was at the Council of Trent, judged the Book full of
Errors and Heresies, and therefore spurious. Gregory de Valentia, Greg. Valen.
Comment Theol. Tom. IV. Disp. VI. Punct. 3.
tells us that the Book is leavened with the Sacramentarian Error, and justly
[sure for false Doctrine] condemned in the Trent Index. And Possevin Appar. T.
1. p. 219. Bertramus. Prohibitus est omnino a Clem. VIII. Pont. Max. in
postremo indice Librorum prohibitorum. Itaque amplius legendus non est, nisi
quis concessus, Sedis Apostolicae, ad refellendos qui ex illo errores
afferuntur -- Bertramo qui Divinum hoc mysterium, haud recte intelligebat neque
credebat. --
acquaints us, that notwithstanding the favorable Judgments of the Lovain
Divines, It may by no means be read, save by the Pope's special License in
order to confute it, being utterly Prohibited: So that it is not for an obscure
Expresson, or suspected Proposition, but for downright Heresy, that he stands
condemned.

M. Boileau Preface, p. 8. He might have added Baronius, who could not be
ignorant of this Work, yet never vouchsafes to mention it, nor the Author more
than once, and that with Disgrace, as an Adversary to Hincmare, in the
Controversy of Predestination.
confesses, that not only the Trent Censors, but Pope Clement the VIII. with
the Cardinals, Bellarmine, Quiroga, Sandoval, and Alan, utterly rejected this
Book as Heretical. But he gives an incredible account of their inducement to do
so, viz. That the Protestants run them down by the pure dint of Impudence,
Estant imprime par le soin des Protestants d' Allemagne, comme un ouvrage
qu'ils s'imaginerent leur estre favorable, ils en furent ^rus sur leur parole,
and presque tous les Catholics le rejetterent comme un tres-mechant livre,
etc. Pref. p. 5. see also p. 12.
They first Published it, they claimed it as favorable to their Sentiments,
and made Translations of it into French to serve their own turns, and they had
the fortune to have their bare word taken; and thereupon the R. Cs. generally
rejected it as a pernicious Forgery. These were Candid Doctors indeed, to take
an Adversaries bare word, and let go so considerable a Champion for the Real
Presence. This was an extraordinary piece of Civility, for those Doctors are
not usually so prone to believe us, though we produce Scripture, and Authentic
Testimonies from the Fathers in proof of our Assertions. The first Editions of
this Book have little appearance of that confidence, we are accused of, there
were no large Prefaces or Remarks printed with the Text, no Expositions or
Paraphrases but plain Translations, for many Years after the Roman Doctors had
censured it, but the naked Text was fairly left to the Readers Judgment. The
first Publishers of our Party, could not possibly make a more confident
pretense to the favor of Bertram, than M. Boileau does, and yet we must beg
his Pardon, that we cannot return the Civility and give him up to the Church of
Rome on his bare word.

Whatever motives prevailed with them, it is undeniable, and by M. Boileau
himself confessed, that their greatest Men have judged this Book Heretical; and
I see no reason to believe that Espenceus, Genebrard, and other Sorbon Doctors
of the last Age, were not as competent Judges, whether the Doctrine it
contains, be agreeable to the Faith of the Church of Rome, as himself, M. le
Faure, and the other Doctors his Approvers. And yet, if after all, the Judgment
of so many great Prelates and Doctors of the Church of Rome must stand for
nothing, and be no prejudice to the Notion of Ratram's Orthodoxy, advanced by
Mr. Dean of Sens, I think it but a modest and equitable request to him and his
Friends, that they make no use of the Concession of the Centuriators As Mr.
Boileau does. Remarks on n. 15. and some others, citing Cent. IX de Doctrina.
Transubstantiationis habet Semina Bertramus, utitur enim vocabulis
commutationis and conversionis. Non sequitur. Vide in Dissertationis nostrae
cap. 5. quo sensu his Vocabulis utatur. Centuriatores etiam objiciunt
Mabillonius and N. Alexander.
who acknowledge in this Author, the Seeds of Transubstantiation. Especially
when it is remembered that those Authors being Lutherans have no power to make
Concessions for us, and being for Consubstantiation, which Doctrine is utterly
inconsistent with Ratram, it was indifferent to them, since he was no Friend of
theirs, whether they gave him up for a Calvinist or Papist; if their
Inclinations were determined one way rather than the other, they must be
stronger to allow him for a Transubstantiator, who agrees with them in the
Belief of a Corporal Presence, than to acknowledge him a favourer of our
Sentiments, which are against both.

2. A Second Reason why we cannot understand this Tract in the Sense of M.
Boileau, and for Transubstantiation, is because Aelfric and our Saxon
Ancestors, who lived in the Tenth Century, have taught us to understand it in a
contrary Sense. And if there be any thing in the Vulgar Plea for Oral
Tradition, we may justly expect a better account of the Doctrine of the Ninth
Century, the Age immediately before him, and of the true Importance of the
controverted Terms and Phrases of this Book from Aelfric, than from Mr.
Boileau, or any interessed Writer of these times.

How large a part of the Saxon Homily for Easter day was taken out of this
Piece, Dissert. chapter 3.
I have shown before. And as Mr. Wheelock In notis ad Bedae. l. v. c. 22. p.
462. Liber Catholicorum Sermonum Anglice, in Ecclesia per annum recitandus.
well observes from the general Title of the Manuscript, from which he has
Printed it; this Sermon must not be looked upon as the Private Judgment of a
single Doctor, but the public Doctrine of the English Church in that Age. Now
Bertram's expressions are so Translated into the Saxon, as renders them
incapable of that Paraphrase which Mr. Dean of Sens has given us.

This I hope to make appear from sundry Passages of the Homily, which now and
then upon occasion, I shall crave leave to Translate for my Self, where the
Version Printed with the Text is too literal, and therefore somewhat obscure.

1. Here is acknowledged (what some of our Adversaries are loath to own, though
it is impossible to deny it) that there were Controversies about the Presence
of Christ's Body in the Holy Eucharist, in the Ninth and Tenth Centuries, Nu
smeadon ge hilc men often and git gelome smeagath. Nonnulli saepe disputa^unt and
etiamnum frequenter disputant. Male in praesenti disputat per C l. Wheelock
redditur smeadon.
Men often have Disputed, and still do frequently Dispute, etc. And the Question
was not (as M. Boileau bears us in hand) whether there be any Figure in the
Sacrament? But what is the effect of Consecration, By what sort of change it
makes Bread and Wine become Christ's Body and Blood? Whether by a Physical or a
Mystical change? And consequently, whether the Holy Sacrament be called the
Body and Blood of Christ, in Propriety of Speech, that is, in a Literal, or
Figurative Sense? The Words are these:

How Bread made of Corn, and Baked with Fire, can be turned into Christ's Body?
And how Wine is by Consecration turned into Christ's Blood? That Ratram's first
Question, and that here discussed by our Homilist, is one and the same, is
apparent from the Answers given by both Authors; and the Instances whereby they
explain the Terms Figure and Truth. And as in the Saxon, the Emphasis lies
unquestionably on the Word Hu se hlaf -- mage be on aend to cristes lichaman
oththe that in -- theor the aend, etc. Fol. 30.
Turned; so doubtless in Ratram the Word Fiat is of the like force, and imports
the Question to be, By what kind of change the Consecrated Elements are made
Christ's Body and Blood? Whether it be by a Substantial, or only by a
Sacramental change?

2. As Ratram to clear his Discourse, gives us such definitions of a Figure and
Truth, as best agree to Figurative and True, that is, proper Forms of Speech.
So Aelfric premiseth thurh getacnunge -- thurh geissum thing. Fol. 30.
a distinction of things attributed to Christ, some Figuratively, and some
Truly and Properly. And to express the latter, he uses a Word which answers to
manifestatio, and res manifesta in Ratram, and fully expresses its Sense in
the Explication of the first Question, and the Terms abovementioned. The Saxon
THurh geissum thing. geis Certus, planus, manifestus. Somneri Lex. The
opposition of this term to getacnunge directs us in this place, which
acceptance to choose; as Bread, Lamb, Lion, etc, are affirmed of Christ in an
improper or Figurative Sense; so that he was born of the Virgin, Crucified and
rose again, are affirmed of him in the plain, manifest, and proper Sense of the
words.
Word signifies certain, plain, or manifest, and is opposed to Figurative, and
therefore cannot import the sensible Evidence of Things, as Mr. Boileau
pretends, but the plain, manifest, and natural Signification of Words. The
Instances both in the Homily and Bertram, are an undeniable Proof hereof, and
withal give us Light into their Sense of our Saviors Words, This is my Body,
which they understood not literally but figuratively; which is what Aelfric
himself meant by not corporally but spiritually, and no doubt in that Sense he
understood Bertram; and that he was not mistaken, is evident from number. 74.
where the Words corporally and spiritually can be no other Sense. Sicut non
Corporaliter, sed Spiritualiter Panis ille credentium Corpus DICITUR; sic
quoque Christi Corpus non Corporaliter sed Spiritualiter, necesse est
INTELLIGATUR. n. 74.

Aelfric says, Fol. 23. that Christians must not keep the Old Law lichamlice,
corporally, i. e. literally. But learn (...), what it Spiritually signifies,
that is, of what Christian Duties it was the Figure. And in this Sense the
Letter and Spirit, and the Flesh and Spirit are opposed each to other by Saint
Paul.


As the Bread is not corporally but spiritually [that is not literally and
properly, but figuratively] said to be the body of the Faithful, so is there a
necessity of understanding it in the same Sense to be the Body of Christ. Not
corporally SAID to be, etc. not corporally UNDERSTOOD, etc. can signify
nothing else, but not literally and properly affirmed to be the Body of Christ,
or of the Faithful.

In this Sense the word Corporally is taken, when it is applied to Terms and
Propositions; but when applied to things, as the Baptismal Water, the
Consecrated Elements in the Eucharist, or the Types of the Old Testament, it
signifies the natural Substance, by positive Institution made a Figure, in
opposition to its Sacramental Signification and Virtue; and our Homilist calls
the spiritual Mystery, the spiritual Virtue, or spiritual Understanding thereof.

3. Aelfric so expounds Ratram, as to make him expressly deny, that the Holy
Eucharist is Christ's Body in Truth of Nature, and affirm it to be Bread and
Wine after Consecration. When the Objection is made, Why is the Holy Sacrament
called Christ's Body and Blood, if it be not Truly what it is called? He admits,
that the Consecrated Elements are not in Verity of Nature the Body and Blood of
Christ. Whereas if Aelfric had been a Transubstantiatour, he would have denied
the Supposition, and with M. Boileau have said, The sensible part of the Holy
Sacrament, i. e. the Accidents of Bread and Wine are not Christ's Body; they
are only the Vails and Figures that cover it, but his very natural Body and
Blood are environed by, and contained really under those Vails. He would
roundly have answered, That by Consecration the Substance of Bread and Wine was
substantially converted into Christ's Body and Blood; so that nothing of their
Substances; but only the sensible Qualities and outward Figure of them remained.

Whereas he says, that we sensibly discern them in Figure and Taste to be Bread
and Wine, and that (...), therefore not in verity of Nature.
in spiritual Mystery they are truly Christ's Body and Blood, that is,
Sacramentally, or in Signification.

Again, he Illustrates the matter by comparing the change made by Consecration
in the Eucharist, with a twofold change made in Baptism, neither of which is a
substantial change, 1 Fol. 31. (...). Inwardly changed.
With the change made in the Person Baptized, who is inwardly changed, not in
Nature or Substance, either of Soul or Body, but morally. 2 gelice on hiothrum
aeterum. i. e. Common Water, a corruptible Liquor. So the Eucharist.
With the change wrought in the Baptismal Water, whose Substance as well as the
sensible Accidents is confessed to remain, and which by Consecration only
acquires a Sanctifying Virtue. And as he says of the Water, that in Verity of
Nature it is a corruptible Liquor: So Hit is on gecynd brosniendlic hlaf and
brosniendlic in. In Nature corruptible, and therefore common Bread and Wine.
gesepenlican hie agenes gecyndes; Fol. 34. which is of the same importance with
Substantiae suae Species in Ratr. de Pred. l. 2. p. 88. On gecynd is
Substantialiter, for so it is Translated by Aelfric, where Bertram says, That
Christ is neither Bread ^or a Vine, Substantialiter. n. 8.
says he of the Holy Eucharist it is in kind or nature, Corruptible Bread and
Wine; distinguishing between the Invisible, or Spiritual Virtue of it, and the
visible Species of its proper Nature. This latter expression confounds the
Popish Notion of Species, conjoining the sensible Accidents with the Substance,
upon which Aelfric immediately adds: It is in kind or nature, corruptible
Bread and Wine, but through the power of the Divine Word, it is truly Christ's
Body and Blood, yet not corporally, but spiritually. The Saxon Word gecynd.
signifying kind, or nature cannot be perverted as the Latin Species is;
because, though perhaps it may sometimes signify the Natural Qualities of a
thing, yet it never signifies the Image, or Resemblance of a thing, and much
less the sensible Qualities without their Subject.

Again, he makes Fol. 36. and Fol. 44. He bad them not, to eat the Body, the he
mid befanten aes, in which he was apprehended, but he meant the Holy Housel, or
Eucharist.
the Sacrament not to be Christ's Body wherein he Suffered, nor his Blood shed
on the Cross; but to be his Body and Blood, as the Manna and Rock in the
Wilderness were; And how is that? Fol. 40. Nas se stan --. lichamlice Crist ac
he getacnode Crist.. Not Corporally, i. e. Not in Substance, or truth of Nature.
Not Corporally Christ, but it signified or was a Type of Christ.

Again, reciting the words of our Savior spoken to his Disciples, Aelfric
expounds THIS as signifying Bread, which whoever does cannot understand those
words literally, by the confession of our Adversaries. Etath isne hlaf: hit is
min lichama. This occurs twice, in the Homily Fol. 28. and in Aelfrics latter
Epistle, Fol. 68.
Eat THIS BREAD, IT is my Body. Which also Ratram in effect does in those
places, which M. Boileau, with little reason brags of, for they make against
him, where he says, The Bread and Cup which is called, and IS the Body and
Blood of Christ. For if Bread and the Cup be the Subject, they cannot be
affirmed to be the Body and Blood of our Savior which was Born of the Virgin;
For Bread and Wine were not Born of the Virgin. Nor were they in rerum natura,
when our Savior's Body was broken, and his Blood shed for us on the Cross, and
consequently could not be that very Body. And therefore of two absurd Opinions,
Transubstantiation seemed a less absurdity than Consubstantiation, and
accordingly the Romanists, being sensible of it, rejected Which appears to have
been the Notion of Rupertus, and others, who held a Corporal Presence; see the
Preface to a Determination of Joan. Parisiensis.
Impanation, and asserted a Miraculous Conversion, whereby the substance of
Bread is destroyed. Now this Ratram in several places affirms, viz. That Bread
is Christ's Body, but then teaches us elsewhere in what sense he affirms it is
so Figuratively, it is so Spiritually; which is the same. The like also does
Aelfric with great Caution, more than once adding, nevertheless not so
Corporally, but Spiritually; that is, by a Figure. In the same sense as the
great City where our Lord was Crucified, is said to be Spiritually called Sodom
and Egypt, Rev. 11.8. which all confess to be Figurative.

To this I shall add as a further evidence of our Saxon Ancestors belief, that
the Elements remain in their first substance that the Translator Os thysum
eorthlican ine, Mat. 26.29.
of St. Matthew's Gospel, calls the Consecrated Wine, Earthly Wine, which was
a voluntary Gloss, to the use whereof the De genimine vitis.
the Vulgar Latin gave him no Invitation; and the same words are by
Translators of the other Evangelists rendered literally. The Fathers understand
our Savior to speak of the Consecrated Wine, which this Translator would never
have called Earthly Wine, if he or the Saxon Church had believed it to be the
Natural Blood of Christ, or not believed the substance of Wine to remain after
Consecration.

4. Aelfric all along so expresses himself, that any Man may see, he did not
hold the Substance of Christ's Body, and Blood; to be in the Sacrament, but
only the Virtue and Efficacy thereof. This is Ratram's express Doctrine, and
reflected on with displeasure by Paschase Miror quid velint nunc quidam dicere,
non in re esse veritatem Carnis Christi vel Sanguinis, sed in Sacramento,
Virtutem Carnis, non Carnem, virtutem Sanguinis and non Sanguinem, Figuram and
non Veritatem.
, who professes to wonder what some Persons meant, who said that the Eucharist
was not in reality Christ's true Flesh and Blood, but Sacramentally; the Virtue
of his Flesh, not Flesh, the Virtue of Blood not Blood, a Figure not the Truth.
Accordingly Aelfric when there is occasion to make an Antithesis of the Visible
Sign, to the Res Sacramenti, does not oppose an Invisible Substance, or a
Spiritual Body to the Visible Sacrament, but only an Invisible Power, or
Virtue. As in Baptism, the Sanctifying Virtue to the Corruptible Liquor. So in
the Lord's Supper, he opposes a Spiritual Virtue to the Sensible Object, which
he calls a Corruptible Creature, adding that there is a vast difference between
the Invisible Virtue of the Holy Eucharist, and the Visible shape of its proper
Nature.

And speaking of some Men's receiving a bigger piece of the Consecrated Bread,
and others a less, he says the Ac hit bith theah phpaeder aeften gast lure
miht on aelcum daele eall, Fol. 36.
whole Virtue not Substance of Christ's Body, is as much in the one as the
other, and the Virtue being entire in the smaller piece, must consequently be
equal to the Virtue of the whole Host. This is a very intelligible Notion, That
in Signification and Efficacy, a part may be equal to the whole, especially
where it operates as a Moral Instrument. But to say that in Substance or
Quantity after infinite Divisions, the least sensible Part should be equal to
the whole, is an insolent Contradiction to the standing Principles of Geometry.

And in some places he so renders Bertram, that the Passages which in the
Author appear a little favorable to M. Boileau's Exposition, in Aelfric's
Paraphrase quite subvert it, comparing the Sacrament of Baptism, with the Holy
Eucharist, having determined that Water in the Former, is in its own nature a
corruptible Liquor, but in the Sacrament it is an Healing Virtue; says in like
manner of the Holy Eucharist. That outwardly considered, the Body and Blood of
Christ is a corruptible Creature, but if you ponder its Mystical Virtue it is
Life. M. Boileau Translates Superficie tenus considerata, considered as to its
Exterior Superficies which falls under Sense, on purpose to beguile the
Reader, and make him believe, that Bertram calls the Sensible Accidents only, a
corruptible Creature: But Aelfric renders Superficie tenus aeften lichamlicum
andgite, Fol. 32.
after bodily Understanding, that is, considered Corporally, or in its Nature,
in opposition to its Virtue and Beneficial Efficacy. For so he expounds himself
immediately; and that Ratram intended not to separate the Superficies from its
Subject, is I think very evident, from N. 10. Vinum quoque -- aliud Superficie
tenus ostendit, aliud interius continet. Quid enim aliud in Superficie quam
SUBSTANTIA VINI conspicitur, Ratr. N. 10.
where he says of the Consecrated Wine, What do we discern else in its
Superficies, but the Substance of Wine. And speaking of the Baptismal Water, he
uses the like Phrases, In eo tamen font si consideretur solummodo quod
corporeus aspicit Sensus, etc. n. 17. Cognoscitur ergo in eo font and inesse
quod Sensus corporis artingat and idcirco mutabile atque corruptibile, n. 18.
as it is seen by the Bodily Sense, it is a corruptible, fluid Element; and
again, There is in the Holy Font, that which the Bodily Sense can reach, which
is mutable, etc. and yet no Body will pretend, that those Phrases import no
more than the Sensible Accidents of Water without its natural Substance.

So then Substances are Objects of Sense, by the good leave of the
Transubstantiation defended, p.5.
Defender of Transubstantiation, though he Chastises his Learned Adversary, as
one who has less Logic than a Junior Soph, for saying that it is a matter of
Sense, that we dispute with the R.Cs. when we prove the Holy Eucharist to be
Bread and not Flesh; and for all the Maxims which he gravely lays down against
it, Substances do truly, though not immediately, affect the Organs of Sense,
which are competent Judges of the Essential difference of Bodies, by their
proper Sensible Qualities. And all this he confesses as; soon as his Passion
is a little spent.

Again, AElfric teaches us Ratram's true sense of Christ's Spiritual Body, and
shows it to be vastly wide of what the Romanists fancy. For he meant not
thereby Christ's Natural Body subsisting after the manner of a Spirit, that is,
without being Visible, or Local, and without its proper Dimensions, under the
Visible forms of Bread and Wine; but on the contrary by Christ's Spiritual Body
he understands the Viible Sacrament, or consecrated Bread, which he calls the
Holy Housel, and stles it a Spiritual Body, in (...) Origin. in Matthew. Tom. I.
page 254. Edit. Huetianae.
Origen's sense, when he calls it a Typical or Symbolical Body; or, as the
Apostle calls the Rock in the Wilderness, a Spiritual Rock, I Cor. 10.4.
i.e. a Typical Rock. To make out this, I need only produce his bare words,
where distinguishing his Body wherein he Suffered from that in the Sacrament,
he proves them to be quite different things, because the former was born of the
Flesh of Mary with Blood, Bones, Skin, Sinews, distinct Limbs, and animated
with a Rational Soul, whereas Saxon Hom. fol.34, 35. (...), is of manegum
cornum gegaderod. Et Ratramnus, n.72. At vero caro Spiritualis quae Populum
credentem Spiritualiter pascit, secundum speciem quam gerit exterius, frumenti
granis manu artificis consistit. etc.
his SPIRITUAL BODY which we call the HOUSEL, is made up of many Corns, without
Blood, Bone, Limb, or Soul, etc. Therefore not as the Trent Fathers teach us,
the entire Person of Christ, Body, Soul, and Divinity. It is obvious also to
remark the same thing fairly intimated by him in another place, where
expounding these words of our Savior, He that eareth my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has everlasting Life. He glosseth thus after St. Austine, Liflica hlaf,
fol. 69. gastlice husel, fol. 71.
He did not command them to eat that Body in which he was apprehended, nor to
drink that Blood which he shed for us, but he meant the holy HOUSEL by those
words, which is SPIRITUALLY his Body and Blood, and proceeds immediately after
Fulgentius and Ratram, to compare the Legal Sacrifices, with this Eucharistical
one, and makes the difference principally to consist herein, that the Legal
Sacrifices did PREFIGURE Christ TO BE given us, and the Holy Eucharist was a
commemorative Type, or Memorial of Christ ALREADY given to Die for our Sins.
And in Elfrics latter Epistle, he says, that the Consecrated Bread, On
lichamlican thing ac on gastlecum and gyte, fol. 69.
which he calls Living Bread, that it is not Christ's Body in Corporal
Substance or Reality, but in a Spiritual, i. e. Sacramental or Mystical Sense.

I could add many more Observations from this Homily, and other Monuments of
our Saxon Ancestors, which show that the Transubstantiators, and not we are
departed from the Faith of our Ancestors 700 years ago. As his speaking of
theah sum men gesceote laes se dael ne bith sa mare miht on tham maran daele
thonne on tham laessan. fol. 37.
pieces of Christ's Body, and Fol. 62. and 65.
its growing black, hoary, or rotten, whereas no such division, or ill-favored
Accidents can happen to Christ's true Body, and how new Accidents can be
generated without a Subject, or be subjected in the remaining Accidents of
Bread and Wine, is a Phenomenon that transcends all Philosophical Solution.
For Consecration can have no effect on Accidents not existing, and which have
no relation at all to the Holy Mystery, and consequently cannot be presumed to
exempt them from the common Law of Accidents, which necessarily require a
Subject to subsist in, whereas these are not subjected in Christ's Body, and
how they should be subjected in other Accidents, Aristotle himself would not be
able to resolve us.

I shall only add, That had our Saxon Ancestors believed the Housel to be
Christ's Natural and true Flesh, it is incredible, that their Canons should
enjoin fresh Consecrations, every Week or Fortnight at longest, to prevent such
Accidents, and that if Canones sub Edgaro apud Spelman. Council. Tom. I. vide
Canon. 38. p. gif hit forheaden sy that his man brucan ne maege thonne sorbaern
hit man on claenum fire -- I know the Roman Missal in some cases injoyns
Burning, but not till the Species be wholly corrupted, when in the Judgment of
the Schoolmen, Christ's Body and Blood are retired.
the Housel grew stale and nauseous, it should be burnt in a clear Fire, and
the Ashes buried under the Altar; I say it is incredible that they should order
it to be burnt, if they believed it the very Body of our Savior. I shall
trouble the Reader with nothing further, till I come to show how absurdly Mr.
Boileau, in his Remarks senseth some terms of Ratram, whose true meaning the
Saxon words used as equivalent in this Homily will very much illustrate.

III. My third Reason to show that Mr. Boileau has not given us a true account
of the Sentiments and Design of Ratram, is because his Arguments prove a great
deal more, than that there is a Figure in the Sacrament, or that the Accidents
are not the Sensible Truth of Christ's Body.

The very first Inference he makes is this, Claret quia Panis ille Vinumque
FIGURATE Christi Corpus and Sanguis EXISTIT. n. 10.
Hence it is evident, that this Bread and Wine are Figuratively Christ's Body
and Blood; which is a great deal more than that there is a Figure in the
Sacrament. 1. He says positively, that this Bread and this Wine, not the
Sensible Qualities of them, are Christ's Body and Blood. 2. He says they are
Figuratively, not simply and in propriety of Nature Christ's Body and Blood.
These words Mr. Boileau has fraudulently Translated, IN A FIGURE.

Again, When he has proved that there is no Physical change upon Consecration,
neither Generation, nor Corruption nor Alteration, he thence infers Necesse est
jam ut FIGURATE facta esse dicatur, scil. commutatio. n. 16.
that of necessity it must be Figuratively changed, which is somewhat more than
Mr. Boileau will acknowledge to have been in dispute between him and his
Adversaries. For it determines the Nature of the change to be Figurative, and
if so, the Elements are not Substantially turned into Christ's Body and Blood,
as the Church of Rome has defined. That a Figurative change infers no
Substantial change in Ratram's Judgment, we may observe in his Explication of
the words Figure and Verity, where having said that Christ was by a Figure
called Bread, and a Vine; he tells us however Nam SUBSTANTIALITER nec Panis
Christus, nec Vitis Christus, nec Palmites Apostoli. Quapropter hic FIGURA. n.
8.
that Christ is not Substantially either Bread or a Vine, etc. And this is in
express Terms the Heresy which Chifflet's Anonymous Writer charge
Berengarius with advancing, contrary to the Catholic Faith. He tells us,
Asserens Panem and Vinum in Sacrificio Domini, non VERE and ESSENTIALITER, sed
FIGURATE tantum CONVERTI in Corpus and Sanguinem Dominicum. Council. To. IX.
col. 1050. Edit. Labbei.
that Berengarius taught, that the Consecrated Bread and Wine was not Truly and
Essentially, but only in a Figurative manner turned into Christ's Body and
Blood. This Author is said to have written A. D. 1088. in which year
Berengarius died, and if he misrepresent not his Sentiments, and understood
what was then esteemed the Catholic Faith, we have great reason to believe;
that had Bertram stood a Trial before the same Judges with Berengarius, he
would have fallen under the same Condemnation.

Mr. Boileau hopes to excuse him from asserting in the forementioned
Expression, that which he takes to be the Doctrine of Berengarius, and the
Reformed Churches by this shift: Says he, Remarks, p. 219. II ne dit pas
qu'ils sont seulement en Figure le Corpus de J. C.
Ratram does not teach, that the Holy Eucharist is ONLY IN A FIGURE Christ's
Body. But this will not serve the turn. For, 1. If he intend by adding the word
ONLY, to make the Asserters of a Figurative change, to exclude any Spiritual
Efficacy or Grace annexed to this Sacrament, and to own no more than empty
Signs, he grossly abuses the Reformed Religion, as may be seen by our
Confessions. No sober Protestant ever affirmed it, nor did Berengarius, who
with Ratram owned a Divine Virtue therein conferring Grace. Sacramentum quidem
transitorium est Virtus vero quae per ipsum operatur and Gratia quae
insinuatur, aeterna. Bereng. in Ep. ad Ricardum Conc. Tom. XI. col. 1062. Which
words, with those that follow, are ascribed to Paschase, in the Bibl. Patrum
Edit. Par. 1610. Tom. VI. col. 296. the order of the Sentences differs, but the
words are the same.
The Sacrament, says he, is Transitory, but the Virtue that works thereby,
and the Grace conferred is eternal. Yet this Declaration did not satisfy the
Councils of the XI. Century, nor did it please Paschase, as has been shown,
and the Council of -- Sed dixerit tantummodo esse in eo, ut in Signo, vel
Figura aut Virtute, Anathema sit. Conc. Trid. Sess. XIII. Can. I.
Trent has Anathematized all such as acknowledge not Christ personally present
in the Sacrament, but only in Sign, in Figure, or Virtue.

2. Ratram does in effect say, That the Consecrated Elements are ONLY in Figure
and Virtue Christ's Body and Blood, because he denies them to be Corporally, or
in Nature changed, or to be Christ's Body born of the Virgin, etc. and affirms
them to be the Figures, Pledges, Images, Sacraments of Christ's true and natural
Flesh and Blood, which are indeed more express Exclusives than the Conjunction
ONLY.

I shall not here call Mr. Boileau to an account, for his sly and fraudulent
Translation of the word En Figure instead of en maniere Figurative, or par une
Figure, n.
Figurate in a Figure, in stead of by a Figure, to insinuate that Ratram held
Christ's natural Body to be invisibly under the Forms or remaining Accidents of
Bread and Wine, but remember him of it in another place.

Again, The Parallel which Ratram makes between the Holy Eucharist, and
Baptism, manifestly shows his intention to prove somewhat more than barely,
that there is a Figure in the Sacrament. For the Analogy between the two
Sacraments lies in this as Material Water in Baptism, without any Physical
change, has through the Blessing annexed to that Institution by our Savior, a
Spiritual Efficacy and Sanctifying Virtue, which works a real effect on the
Soul, which resembles the cleansing effect of common Water: So in the Holy
Eucharist, Material Bread and Wine do by the same means obtain a Spiritual
Efficacy and Nutritive Virtue, which Spiritually feeds the Soul, as the
Material Bread and Wine nourish the Body.

This Mr. Boileau Remarques, p. 226.
flatly denies, but upon very slender Reasons. For, says he, were this the
Authors sense he could not say as he does, that Christ's Body is there, and
that it is a Crime so much as to imagine the contrary: That there is in the
Sacrament a change of one thing into another, or that the Corporal appearances
of Bread and Wine, and Christ's Body have not two several Existences.

But all this is mere Smoke, and Amusement. For Ratram does not say it is a
Crime to think that the Consecrated Elements are not Christ's NATURAL Body; he
says it himself twenty times over, and tells us that they are Christ's
SPIRITUAL Body, and the Sense of the word Spiritual I have already shown.
Neither does he affirm the Sacramental change to be of one thing into another;
those words are added by way of Paraphrase, by Mr. Dean of Sens, as I shall
show in its proper place. He fairly intimates the contrary, where he tells us,
That it is a change for the beter Nec hoc esse potuisse nisi facta in melius
commutatione, neque ista commutatio Corporaliter sed Spiritualiter Facta sit;
necesse est jam ut Figurate, etc. n. 16.
, having before proved it to be no Physical change, for such an advancement may
be made without any Substantial change, by raising the Elements to a Dignity
above the condition of their Nature, and separating them from common to sacred
Uses. As for what he adds that the Corporal appearances, and Christ's Body, have
not two distinct Existences, I shall when I come to consider how he abuses the
word Species, show that the Bodily Appearances he speaks of are mere Fiction,
never dreamed of by our Author. In the mean time I shall give the Authors true
sense, which is this: That there are not two Consubstantiate Beings in the
Sacrament, as in a Man there is a Soul and Body. but that one and the same
thing, viz. The Elements considered with respect to their Natural Substance are
Bread and Wine, but considered as Consecrated, they are Sacraments of Christ's
Body and Blood. This is easily illustrated by a familiar Example: The King is
not two Persons as he is a Man and a Prince, but one, who considered in his
Natural Capacity is a Man, and in his Civil Capacity is a Prince.

The same Inference may be also made from Ratram's Parallel of the Holy
Eucharist with Manna, and the Rock Water, which he says were Spiritually
turned into Christ's Body and Blood, and were eaten and drunk by the Faithful
Israelites in the Wilderness. His scope is plainly this, to prove that the
change made by Consecration is not Substantial, but Figurative, like that of
the Manna, which could not be properly Transubstantiated into Christ's Body,
before his Incarnation, before he had a Body prepared him.

And yet a wanton Wit might in Mr. Boileau's way, as handsomely elude all
Arguments against Ratram's belief of a substantial change of the Manna and
Water into Christ's Body, as he does our Arguments against the Corporal
Presence from Bertram.

If he object that Bertram speaks of the substance of Manna and tne Water, it
is easily answered, that the word Substantia, even by the confession of Mr.
Boileau Remarques, p. 246, 247.
, is not always taken in the strict Philosophical Notion, but sometimes more
largely, for the Sensible Qualities of things.

If he urge that Bertram calls them Corporal Things, it may be answered, that
by Remarques, p. 222.
Mr. B's confession, that may signify no more than the External appearance of
a Body, and the sensible Accidents.

If he further press the Impossibility of the Thing, that Manna should be
substantially converted into a body not Existing: It may be plausibly replied,
That Bertram says N. 25.
, We must not exercise our Reason, but our Faith in this matter. It is a
Miracle, a Mystery Incomprehensible, a Work of God's Omnipotence, which is not
to be limited by the pretense of Impossibilities and Absurdities.

In fine, when he comes to determine the first Question, and make his Inference
from all the Arguments and Authorities which he had before alleged, he
concludes thus: N. 49. Figurae sunt secundum Speciem Visibilem, at vero
secundum Invisibilem Substantiam, id est, Divini Potentiam Verbi vere Corpus
and Sanguis Christi Existunt.
The Body and Blood of Christ orally received by the Faithful, may be
considered either as Visible Creatures, and so they are Figures, and feed the
Body, or according to their Invisible Substance; which is, as he explains
himself, The Power of the Divine Word, and so they are truly Christ's Body and
Blood, feeding and sanctifying the Souls of the Faithful.

From which Passage it is plain, not only that Ratram proves a Figure in the
Sacrament, but that this Figure is more than the outward appearance of Bread
and Wine, that it is the Substance, for what he meant by the visible Species he
after explains, by calling them the Visibilis Species is Expounded by Visibilis
Creatura.
Visible Creature, and affirming that it feeds the Body; and though he oppose
hereunto the Invisible Substance, the words that follow direct us to take
Substance in an improper sense.

For he delivers himself with great Caution, as if it were on purpose to
prevent any such Mistake, according to the Invisible Substance, Invisibilem
Substantiam, by potentioris Virtutem Substantiae.
that is, (says he) the Power of the Divine Word; and again, The virtue of a
more Powerful Substance, which is the Grace annexed to the Sacrament, by virtue
of the Institution. For that he should hereby mean Christ's Natural Body, no
Body will believe, who considers, that he affirmed Inerat corporeis illis
Substantiis, SPIRITUALIS VERBI POTESTAS, quae mentes potius quam Corpora
credenti^m pasceret atque potaret, n. 22.
a Spiritual Power of the Word, to have been in Corporeal Substances of Manna
and Water, in which no R. C. ever pretended that Christ was present in verity
of Substance.

In the second Part, it is as evident that he encounters not that Fictitious
Error Mr. Boileau would have him, viz. That the outward Species, and Sensible
Accidents of Bread and Wine, are Christ's Flesh and Blood born of the Virgin,
etc.

For first, The subject of the Question is, as has been already shown, the
Consecrated Elements, the whole Eucharist as Orally received, and not their
mere Accidents: For he says, Nam secundum Creaturarum Substantiam, quod
fuerant ante Consecrationem, hoc and postea consistunt, Panis and Vinum prius
extitere, etc. N. 54.
The substance of the Creatures remains after Consecration, what they were
before, that is, Bread and Wine. Indeed, if the Subject were only the outward
Species, or Accidents of Bread and Wine, I know no need Mr. Boileau has to
Translate the word Veritas, the Sensible verity, as he does forty times over,
where Ratram denies that which is orally received to be Christ's Natural Flesh.
For the mere Accidents are in no sense Christ's Natural Body, they are in no
way Christ's Body in verity of Nature, neither the Sensible nor yet the
Invisible verity thereof.

2. The matter in Question cannot be whether the Holy Eucharist is Christ's Body
born of the Virgin, in its proper state, with its Sensible Qualities, and
Dimensions, but whether it be his True and Natural Body, which Paschase
describes as in the Question.

The former could not be the Notion opposed by our Author, for besides, that he
no where mentions any such Opinion, it does not any way else appear by any
Writer, either before or of his time, that such an Opinion was ever embraced,
or vented by any Man.

The latter was the Doctrine of Paschase, a Doctrine which by his own
confession gave offense to many, and that Ratram disputes against it, seems
very clear to any Man who observes, in how accurate Terms he establishes an
Essential Difference, between the Consecrated Elements and Christ's Natural Body.

He distinguishes them as things of vastly different Natures, using the words
aliud and aliud, ONE THING and ANOTHER THING, THIS Body, and THAT Body, which
was born of the Virgin. He teaches that Sacraments are ONE thing, and the
THINGS whereof they are Sacraments are ANOTHER. That Christ's Natural Body and
Blood are THINGS, but the Mysteries hereof are SACRAMENTS. Number. 36.

Again, He proves them to differ (I think Essentially) because the same
Definition does not agree to both. For one of their Canonized Schoolmen
teaches, Bonav. in Sent. 14. Did. 10. p. 1. q. 4.
That even Omnipotence it self cannot separate the Definition, and the thing
Defined.

Again, He calls the one Christ's PROPER Body, the other his MYSTICAL Body, N.
94, 95. And in a word, he distinguishes the Eucharist, from Christ's Proper
Body, in almost the same words wherein St. Hierom Tantum interest inter Panes
Propositionis and Corpus Christi, quantum inter umbram and Corpora, inter
Imaginem and Veritatem, inter Exemplaria and ea quae praefigurabantur, Hier. in
Titum, Cap. I.
compares the Shewbread with the Eucharist, calling it Christ's Body, and
declaring how much the latter excels the former, N. 89. It appears, says
Ratram, that they are extremely different, as much as the Pledge differs from
the Thing for which it is given in Pledge, as much as the Image differs from
the Thing Whereof it is the Image, as much as a Figure from the Truth: And if
the words do not effectually import an Essential Difference, it is hard to
devise words that can do it.

In a word, the Scope of all his Arguments and Authorities, is to prove such a
Difference between the Holy Eucharist, and our Saviors Natural Body. And in
the close of the Book, when he sums up the force of all his Reasonings, and
comes to determine the Point, he concludes thus.

N. 97.
From these Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures and Fathers, it is most evidently
demonstrated, that the Bread and Cup, which are called the Body and Blood of
Christ are a FIGURE, because they are a Mystery, and that there is NO SMALL
DIFFERENCE between the BODY which is so MYSTICALLY, and the BODY that SUFFERED,
etc. For this latter is the PROPER BODY of our Savior, nor is there any
FIGURE, or Signification therein, but the very manifestation of the thing it
self -- N. 98.
Whereas in the Body which is celebrated by a MYSTERY, there is a FIGURE, not
only of Christ's PROPER BODY, but also of the People who believe on Christ: For
it bears a FIGURE of BOTH BODIES.

N. 99.
Moreover, That Bread and Cup which is called, and is Christ's Body and Blood,
represents the Memory of the Lords Passion, i. e. (as he explains himself in
the next Number) N. 100.
they are placed on the Altar for a FIGURE or MEMORIAL of the Lord's Death.

And lest his Adversaries should misrepresent his Doctrine, as though he taught
that Christ's Body and Blood were not received by the Faithful, but a mere
Memorial, and Figure of them (as the Romanists slander the Doctrine of the
Reformed Churches) he N. 101
closes all with a caution against any such Inference, adding that Faith
receives not what the Eye beholds, but what it self believes, for it is
Spiritual Meat, and Spiritual Drink, which do spiritually feed the Soul. Which
words, if Mr. Boileau take to be a Declaration in favor of their Real
Presence, I shall the less wonder, since our Adversaries at Home have the
confidence from such Apologies of our own Divines, to infer that they and the
Church of England are for their REAL PRESENCE.

Having thus shown how Mr. Boileau either grossly mistakes, or wilfully
misrepresents the Authors Design in the account he has given, I shall now
proceed to take a view of his Translation.

Now this Book of Ratram's being a Theological Controversy, whosoever shall
undertake to turn it into any other Language, ought to employ his utmost care
in truly expressing the Authors Sense, and as much as the Language will bear
it, in his own words. He may not take those liberties of Paraphrase, which are
llowable in the Translator of a Poem, or a Piece of History or Morality. He may
not to adorn his Version, or smooth his Style, add, omit, or change, a word;
for the Nature of the Subject forbids it. And moreover Mr. Boileau has obliged
himself to observe the strictest Laws of Translation, having professed to have
made this Version with all possible exactness, and brought severa^ of his
Brethren of the Sorbon to al vouch its conformity to the Author's Text. He is
severe upon Preface, p. 47, 48.
M. Dacier, and the Protestant Translator of Bertram, for taking as he
conceives undue Liberties. He will not allow the Remarques, p. 250. and p. 277.
latter to express in French, what is plainly understood in the Latin, and
expressed within four Lines before; and he cries out Falsification and
Corruption, because the Protestant Publisher of Bertram does with an Asterisk
refer the Reader to the Margin, and there explains a word in the Text by
another Latin word, which he thought equivalent.

A Man might therefore reasonably expect, that Mr. Boileau had avoided all
these Faults, and that if his Version had any defect, it should be in the grace
of his Language only, by his keeping too close to the Authors own Terms. But I
perceive Mr. Boileau is subject to that general Weakness of Humane Nature which
makes men very severe against those Vices in others, which they discern not in
themselves. For certainly never did any Man use those undue liberties of
adding, omitting, and altering the Authors words at a more Extravagant rate,
than he has done in Translating Bertram: Insomuch that should he rise from the
Dead, he would find his Sense and Doctrine as much changed, as the French
Tongue is since his days. For Mr. Boileau does not content himself to refer the
Reader to the Margin, or to his Remarks for the Exposition of a controverted
Term, which he might have done without impeaching his own Sincerity, but he
mixeth his gloss by way of Paraphrase with the Text, and does not by any
difference of Character, or by enclosing them in Hooks [ ] distinguish his own
words from the Authors, so that the Reader who understands not Latin, cannot
tell when he reads Bertram, and when Mr. Boileau.

I shall not tire my self, or the Reader with a complete List of his unfair
Dealings, but give him some remarkable instances by which he may take an
estimate of Mr. Boileau's exactness and fidelity.

I shall begin with his Fraudulent Omissions, which are but few; and of these I
shall give you two Instances, both near the beginning of the Book.

Mr. Boileau. For it is not the Appearance of Flesh, that is seen in that
Bread, or of Blood in the Wine.


Ratram. N. 10. Car ce n'est pas l'apparence de la chair, que l'on voit dans ce
pain -- ny du sang dans le vin.
Non enim secundum quod videtur, vel carnis Species in illo Pane cognoscitur,
vel in illo vino cruoris unda monstratur.


Having rendered Species Carnis, the appearance of Flesh, he gently slides over
the word unda, and leaves it Untranslated; by which means he tacitly insinuates
to the unwary Reader, that Ratram does not deny the Substance of Flesh and
Blood to be in the Sacrament: But only says that the Appearance of Flesh, and
Blood is not discerned therein. Whereas the word unda, Liquor, imports the
Liquid Substance of Blood, and therefore by parity of Reason, Species must
signify somewhat more than the mere visible accidents of Flesh: So that if he
deny the Substance of Blood to be in the Wine, he could not believe the
Substance of Flesh to be in the Bread.

If it be alleged, that Ratram only says, that they are not known or
discerned, or shown therein, he does not say they are not there invisibly. The
answer is obvious. Ratram esteemed our Senses competent Judges of what we
orally receive in the Sacrament, and able to distinguish Flesh from Bread. And
withal, as I shall shortly prove, the words cognoscitur, and monstratur, and
ostenditur, are frequently used as the Copula of a Proposition, and signify no
more than Est, and have nothing of Emphasis in them.

Another crafty omission is of the word Sacrament, which he leaves out in
Translating the last words of Number XII.

Ratram. Hic vero Panis and Vinum prius fuere, Avaunt qu'ils passassent au Corpse
and au sang de J. C.
quam transitum in Sacramentum Corporis and Sanguinis Christi fecerunt.


M. Boileau. But here the Bread and Wine did exist before they passed into, or
were changed into the Body and Blood of Christ.


How wide difference there is between being turned into Christ's Body and Blood,
and into the SACRAMENT of his Body and Blood; any one knows, who is not blind
because he will not see. I wonder why Mr. Boileau did not omit the same word in
other like Passages; as where our Author says, That Wine is made the Sacrament
of Christ's Blood by the Priests Consecration thereof: And again, That the
Elements are Spiritually made Mysteries or Sacraments of Christ's Body and
Blood, etc. For these Expressions teach us how to understand him in other
places, where he says, That Bread and Wine are made the Body and Blood of
Christ, viz. that they are made the Memorials, Symbols, or Sacraments thereof.
For we have no reason to doubt, that Ratram who from St. Augustine observes,
that it is familiar to give the name of the thing signified to the Sign or
Sacrament, by reason of its Analogy thereunto, I say we have no reason to
doubt, but that he frequently does so himself in this Book.

I shall next give you a taste of his bold Paraphrases and Additions to the
Author's Text, so that it is very difficult for a Common Reader to distinguish
Ratram's own words from Mr. Boileau's Exposition of them. And passing by many
of his less Material, though large Interpolations, I shall instance in some
foisted in to serve the Cause of Transubstantiation against the Author's true
Sense. What is not in the Latin, I have enclosed thus in [ ] Hooks for the
Readers ease.

Ratram, N. XI. Et que tout ce que l'on y voit, soit la Pure Verite.
Sed totum in Veritate conspiciatur.


Mr. Boileau. But the whole that is seen there, is [the Pure] verity. So N.
XXXII.


And in several other places, he renders Veritas the [Pure] Verity. If he
believe that really to be the Author's meaning, he might have advertised his
Reader in a Marginal Note; but the inserting that Explication into the Text is
more than well consists, with that great exactness in Translating, to which he
pretends.

It were easy to guess, though he had not acquainted us in a Remark, for what
end he foisted in the word Pure; it was to insinuate that Ratram disputes not
against Paschase, but against some unknown Adversaries, who held there was no
Vail or Figure in the Sacrament, and that Christ's Body presented it self Naked
to our View. Now that these Extravagant Opinionists never had any being, save
in Mr. Boileau's Imagination, has been already shown. And as he is pleased to
make them express their Sentiments, viz. That the whole which is seen is the
pure Verity; it were more reasonable to think, that they believed nothing but a
Figure in the Sacrament, nothing but Bread and Wine, since nothing else is
discerned by the Eye. And he makes them elsewhere to say, Mais que tout y est
tell qu'il paroist aux yeux, n. 54.
That the whole is just what it appears to the Eye. If the Notion were that the
Accidents of Bread and Wine, whose first Subject was destroyed, were translated
into Christ's Natural Body, it was very improper for him to make them say that
the Sensible Object was the Pure Verity; for it must needs be a Prodigious
Compound of one Substance divested of its natural Qualities; and the proper
Accidents of another Substance.

Again, This Translator in many places does greatly corrupt the Author's Sense
by inserting the Particle [there], which though it be the addition of a single
Letter [y] in the French, yet it makes almost as great a change in Ratram's
Doctrine, as the Arrians made in the Christian Faith, by the addition of an
Iota to the word Homoousios. For hereby he insinuates the Presence of Christ's
Natural Body, in an invisible manner, where the Author had no intention to say
any thing of Christ's Presence at all, but only to show that the Consecrated
Elements are Christ's Body and Blood, which in Ratram's sense we also
acknowledge them to be. I shall give an Instance or two of his Fraud in this
kind.

For [we there see] nothing, which passed from not being into being.

N. XII. Car on n' y voit rien qui, etc.
Nam nec ex eo quod non erat, transivit in aliquid quod sit.

His design is by that addition to insinuate, that although we see it not, some
other Substance is there present, under the Vails or Accidents of Bread and
Wine. Whereas Ratram only says, that the Consecrated Elements did not pass
from a state of Nonentity into Being.

Now if none of these three changes be here made, we must conclude, that
nothing is [there] but what was before. But [there] is some other thing, for
the Bread is made the Body, and the Wine the Blood of Christ.

Again, N. XIII. Or s'il n' y a aucun de ces trois changemens, il en faut
conclure qu'il n' y a rien qui n' ait ete auparavant. Cependant il y a autre
chose.
Si ergo nihil est hic permutatum, non est aliud quam ante fuit. Est antem
aliud, quoniam Panis Corpus and Vinum Sanguis Christi facta sunt.

Here he insinuates the Presence of some other thing in the place, and under
the Accidents of Bread and Wine, whereas all that Ratram says is this, That if
there be no change upon Consecration, not as our Translator makes him speak,
none of those three Changes, which were to make him argue against himself, who
had newly in express terms denied any of those three Changes. I say, if there
be no change at all made, then the Elements after Consecration are nothing more
than they before were: But they are something more, for the Bread and Wine are
made Christ's Body and Blood, that is, as our Author often expounds himself,
Mystically, Spiritually, Figuratively. And this may very well be, without the
Invisible Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh in the place of the Bread.

Again, N. XVI. S' y rencontrent and y existent.
Quoniam sub V^lamento Corporei Panis Corpo e^que Vini, Spirituale Corpus
Christi, Spiritualisque Sanguis existit.

For under the Vail of Corporeal Bread, and Corporeal Wine, the Spiritual Body
of Christ, and his Spiritual Blood [is there found and there] exists.

The Presence of Christ's Natural Body and Blood under the Accidents of Bread
and Wine, is intimated in the Addition of the Particle there, in this Sentence.
Whereas Bertram says nothing like it, but only proves that the change wrought
by Consecration is not a Physical, but a Figurative, or Mystical change,
because Christ's Spiritual, that is, as has been shown, his Symbolical, or
Sacramental Body and Blood are in, or under the Vail of Material Bread and Wine.

I should not so much have regarded this little Interpolation, but Mr. Boileau
swaggers so much with these Passages both in his P. 26. and 226.
Preface and Remarks, and draws Inferences from them, whereas he therein
imposes on the Reader, who consults not the Author's Latin, which without his
Interpolation, gives no color for such Inferences.

In the same Paragraph, immediately before the words last cited, we have
another Instance of his exactness in Translating.

And this change is not made Corporally [that is to say, in that which falls
under the Bodily Senses] but Spiritually.

Corporellement, c'est a dire, en ce qui tomb sous les s^ns corporels, mais
spirituellement.
Neque ista commutatio Corporaliter, sed Spiritualiter facta sit.

Whether he has given the true meaning of the Term shall be elsewhere
considered, but in the mean time it was fit that Mr. Dean should be told, that
he deals not fairly to foist his own gloss into the Author's Text.

Here arises a Question, -- touching which many hold, That in all these things
there is not any Figure, but the whole is done in [Pure] Verity, [that is to
say, in a manner that is Sensible and Corporal, by which the Flesh of Jesus
Christ is cut into bits like our ordinary Meat.]

Mais que tout s'y fait dans la pure verite: c'est a dire, d'une maniere
sensible and corporelle, par la quelle la chair de JESUS CHRIST est divisee par
morceaux comme une viande ordinaire.
Again, n. XXXII. Hic jam illa suboritur Quaestio quam plurimi proponentes
loquuntur, non in Figura Mais que tout s'y fait dans la pure verite: c'est a
dire, d'une maniere sensible and corporelle, par la quelle la chair de JESUS
CHRIST est divisee par morceaux comme une viande ordinaire.
sed in Veritate ista fieri.

Most exacty Translated! But sure Veritas is one of the most pregnant words in
the Latin Tongue, which carries all this in its Belly. Now the use of this
Gloss appears more plainly N. XXXIV. where Mr. Dean makes this to be the Notion
of Carnally eating Christ's Flesh.

Bertram having cited Facinus vel Flagitium videtur habere. Figura ergo est
praecipiens, etc. n. 33.
St. Augustine to confirm his own Exposition of our Savior's Words, John 6.54.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye shall have
no Life in you. Which is, that they must be understood Figuratively, and not
Literally. He adds, that in this Fathers Judgment, to eat Christ's Body
Carnally, is so far from being an Act of Religion, that it would be a piece of
horrid Wickedness. But what is this barbarous crime of eating Carnally? Why Mr.
Boileau here explains the Point. It consists Recevoir charnellement, c'est a
dire, en le broiant avec les dents and le coupant par morceaux.
in cutting Christ's Body into bits, and in bruising it between the Teeth, like
our ordinary Meat. What pity is it, that Mr. Boileau had not been in our
Savior's Train, to have answered those Disciples which were offended at this
Doctrine, and complained of it as an John 6.60.
hard saying. I warrant you, it would have given mavelous satisfaction, had
any one told them: Sirs, you grossly mistake the matter, you imagine that
Christ's Flesh is to be eaten like common Meat out of the Shambles, that it
must be cut in bits on your Trencher, and chewed small before it will go down.
It is no such, it is not a dead but living Body that he gives you to eat, nor
are you to touch it with your Knife, or Teeth, but swallow him whole. And
because it might otherwise go against your Stomach, you are not to receive his
Body under the Offensive Species or Appearances of Flesh, but, in the same
manner as Physicians sometimes give a Nauseous Bolus, wrapped up in a Wafer, so
that you shall neither see nor taste it.

This would have been very Edifying no doubt, it would have removed the
Scandal, and have reduced those Apostates to our Savior. But can any man in
his Wits believe, that their Scruple was merely about the cutting and mangling
of our Savior's Body, and that they would have made no bones of swallowing him
whole? No sure, they stumbled at the Literal Sense of his Words, they could not
digest a command to eat man's Flesh, which seemed (as St. Austine observes) to
be an impious Precept; and they would no doubt have as much abhorred him,
(could such a Monster have been found) who should swallow a man whole, as an
ordinary Canibal.

But is Mr. Boileau in earnest, when he tells us J'ay ajoute [c'est a dire, en
la broiant avec les dents and le coupant par morceaux] parce que c'est le
veritable sens de ces mots Charnellement, etc. Remarques, p. 236.
, that to cut Christ's Body in pieces, and tear it with the Teeth, is the true
Notion of Carnal eating. Does our Savior's answer to those murmuring Deserters
any wise countenance this Notion? Does it give the least hint that their
mistake and scandal lay, in apprehending that Christ's Body was to be eaten
piecemeal? No; but he blames their stupidity, for taking his Words, which are
SPIRIT, and LIFE, in a carnal or litteral Sense.

St. Austine cited by Bertram, expounding our Savior's Answer, makes it
import, that his words touching the necessity of eating his Flesh, and drinking
his Blood, must be Spiritually, that is, Mystically, and not carnally or
literally understood. In another place cited by N. 33, 34.
Bertram, he makes the hard saying an Instance of the necessity of
understanding the words of Scripture in a Figurative Sense, telling us those
words are a FIGURE, enjoining us to communicate in our Savior's Sufferings, by
a faithful and profitable commemoration of his Death on the Cross for us.

I confess both St. Austine and Bertram, describing the mistake of these
Disciples, deny that his Body was to be cut into pieces, and eaten by bits, but
they make not this to have been the scruple of those Infidels, nor do either of
those Writers so much as hint, that Christ's Body was to be swallowed whole. On
the contrary, St. Austine makes it to have been their Erroneous conceit, that
Illi putabant se erogaturum Corpus suum; ille autem dixit se ascensurum in
coelum utique integrum. Apud Ratram, n. 80.
Christ intended to give them his Natural Body, his Body which they saw with
their Eyes. And Bertram showing how our Savior's Words confute that gross
Conceit, says by way of Paraphrase on them, that when his Disciples should
behold him ascend into Heaven, with his Body and Blood entire and without
Diminution, they should then understand the mistake of those carnal Infidels,
viz. That he did not command them to eat his Natural Body, which was
impossible, since it was conveyed from them unto Heaven. This Paraphrase he
borrowed from Verba quae locutus sum, Spiritus and Vita sunt, spiritualiter
intelligite quod locutus sum. Non hoc Corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis,
etc. Aug. in Ps. 98. and in Joannem Tract. 27. Intellexerunt -- quia --
disponebat Jesus, carnem qua indutum erat verbum veluti concisam distribuere
credentibus, etc.
St. Austine, whom he cites for it, N. 80. And Sax. Hom. Fol. 44.
Aelfric as has been shown, expounds the words as did Aug. in Ps. 98.
St. Aust.

Again, N. XL. Parce que comme la Substance visible c'est a dire ce qui paroist
aux yeux de ce pain and de ce vin.
Sicut hujus Visibilis Panis, Vinique substantia exteriorem nutrit and inebriat
hominem, etc.

As the Visible Substance [that is to say, what appears to our Eyes] of this
Bread, and this Wine, nourishes and quenches the thirst of the outward man,
etc.

In rendering this half Sentence, there is a double Fraud committed. 1. The
Adjective Visible, is unduly applied to the word Substance, whereby he hoped to
persuade the Reader, that Substance is not here to be understood in its proper
Sense, but only for the Sensible Qualities of Bread and Wine, whereas this
Author joined that Adjective to the Bread and Wine. Isidore says, Hujus
visibilis Panis, Vinique Substantia.
The substance of this Visible Bread and Wine; not as Mr. Boileau Translates
him, the Visible Substance, i. e. Qualities of this Bread and Wine feed the
outward Man. 2. The Notion of the word Visible is corrupted by the Translator's
Gloss inserted into the Text of Isidore, viz. That which appears to the Eye of
this Bread, etc. viz. the Accidents; whereas the Author meant material Bread
and Wine. The Passage is a clear Authority against Transubstantiation, and
deserves a Remark or two.

1. The Bread and Wine whereof he speaks is Consecrated Bread and Wine, which
the Pronoun THIS demonstrates. 2. He says that the SUBSTANCE of this Bread and
Wine [after Consecration] do nourish the Body. 3. He calls it Visible Bread and
Wine, which Term is so far from importing what our Adversaries would have it,
viz. The Sensible Qualities only, that it signifies Material Bread and Wine, as
I hope to prove beyond all Dispute, when I come to Examine Mr. Boileau's
Exposition of the Controverted Terms. So that I do not wonder that these words
are not now read in Isidore's Works.

In the like manner he corrupts Bertram, N. LII.

Car ce Corpse Visible and Sensible que l'on recoit.
Hoc enim quod sumit Corpus Corruptibile est.

For this [Visible and Sensible] Body which is received, is subject to
Corruption.

The Epithetes Visible and Sensible, are impertinently as well as deceitfully
foisted in, for if he had minded the Authors words; Corpus in that place
imports not the Body of Christ received, but the Body of the Receiver, and the
Clause should have been thus rendered, That which the Body receives is
Corruptible. I should not have taken notice of this Slip, as I have not of some
other mere slips in Translation, had it not been for the Fraud thereby designed.

A worse piece of false dealing appears in the next Paragraph, N. LIII. where
he adds a false Gloss to the words of St. Ambrose.

Does it not require a greater power to Create a thing of nothing, than to
change the Natures, [that is, the Substances of things.]

Nonne majus est novas res dare quam mutare Pour changer les Natures; c'est a
dire les Substances des chooses?
naturas?

He tells us Remarks, p. 245.
That the Natures here mentioned can be no other than those of Bread and Wine,
changed into Christ's Body and Blood; and this obliged him to add the word
Substances by way of Explication. Now admitting what he says, I can see no
such necessity of understanding the word of the Natural Substances of the
Elements. Neither this Context of St. Ambrose, to which he refers, nor
Bertram's Exposition of that Father, nor yet the force of the word Nature it
self, do any way oblige him to it.

For, 1. St. Ambrose parallels the change made by Consecration in the Holy
Eucharist with several others, which are not Substantial changes, as the
dividing the Waters of the Nonne claret Naturam vel maritimorum fluctuum, vel
fluvialis cursus esse mutatam? Ambros. Ibid.
Red Sea and Jordan. The sweetning of the Waters of Marah, the causing of Iron
to swim, which are only changes of the Natural Qualities, not of the Substances
of things.

2. Neither does Bertram expounding St. Ambrose any way Authorize that Gloss,
but on the contrary directs us to take the word Nature in another Sense, by an
express denial of any change in the Substance of Bread and Wine. As to Nam
secundum Creaturarum Substantiam, quod fuerunt ante Consecrationem, hoc and
postea consistunt: Panis and Vinum prius extitere, etc. N. LIVE.
the Substance of the Creatures, they continue after Consecration, what they
were before, viz. Bread and Wine.

3. Neither will he say that the word Natures can bear no other Sense, who
contends, that the word Substance may signify no more than the Sensible
Qualities of a thing. And it were gross Trifling for me to labor in the proof
of the contrary by Examples. Nevertheless I shall give him one, out of Salvian,
speaking of some of those changes which St. Ambrose parallels with that in the
Sacrament. Having proved Gods Providence, by miraculous methods, in which he
brought the Israelites out of Egypt, protected and fed them in the Wilderness,
he goes on thus: Add huc fontes repent natos, add medicatas aquas, vel
datas, vel immutatas, SPECIEM servantes, NATURAM relinquentes, Salv. de Gub. l.
1. p. 21. Edit. Baluz. Par. 1669.
To this add new Fountains instantly springing out of the Earth, also Medicated
Waters, the one given [Miraculously], the others changed [and made wholesome]
keeping their Species [or Natural Substance] and forsaking their Nature, i. e.
Natural Qualities, viz. Bitterness, and Unwholesomeness. Here Species signifies
the Substance, and Natura the Sensible Quality of Bitterness.

Another corrupting Interpolation may be observed in the words which
immediately follow, N. LIVE.

St. Ambroise dit, due -- le changement qui se fait d'une chose en une autre
est admirable, etc.
Dicit Sanctus Ambrosius in illo Mysterio Sanguinis and Corporis Christi
commutationem esse factam, and mirabiliter, etc.

St. Ambrose says, That in this Mystery of Christ's Body and Blood the change
[of one thing into another] is admirable.

Not to insist on his licentious alteration of the Syntax, I appeal to any Man
that understands Latin, whether Ratram make St. Ambrose to say St. Ambroise
dit, due -- le changement qui se fait d'une chose en une autre est admirable,
etc.
that in the Sacrament one thing is changed into another, that is, as Mr.
Boileau would have it, Remarquer, p. 246.
one Substance into another. Ratram infers no more than this, That there is a
change made, which no Body denies: But that this change is of one thing or
substance into another is Mr. Boileau's Fiction, who basely imposes on his
Reader, both in his Preface and Remarks, citing this place so Translated, to
prove that this Author's Sentiments could not possibly be different from those
of the Church of Rome. Whereas in the words immediately following, as I
observed just before, he denies expressly any substantial change.

I might add many more Instances of his foul Glosses inserted into the Text,
such as Translating Veritas, the [Visible and Sensible] Truth, or [with all its
Dimensions]. Proprium Corpus Christi, the Proper Body of Christ, [together with
its Natural Properties], etc. But I am weary of tracing him in these By-ways,
and should I follow him further, my trouble would be endless, almost every
Paragraph to the end of the Book, being thus corrupted.

I shall therefore give but an Example or two, of his bold Variations from the
Author's Words, as well as Sense.

N. XIV. Quaerendum ergo est ab eis qui nihil hic Figurate volunt accipere, sed
totum in veritatis simplicitate consistere Il faut donc demander -- comment ce
Changement soit fait; de sort que les chooses qui etoient auparavant, ne soient
plus, c'est a dire, que le pain and le vin qui etoient auparavant ne soient
plus, mais, etc.
, secundum quod demutatio facta sit, ut jam non sint quod ante fuerunt,
videlicet, Panis atque Vinum; sed sint Corpus atque Sanguis Christi.

It must be demanded of those who pretend that there is no Figure, and who
maintain that all is there spoken in the pure and simple Verity, how this
Change is made, so that the things which were before, are no longer, that is,
the Bread and Wine which were or did exist before, are or do exist no longer,
but are become the Body and Blood of J. Christ.

All that the Author intended to say, was no more than this, That after
Consecration, the Elements are not what they were before it, but somewhat more
excellent, than common Bread and Wine, viz. The Body and Blood of Christ. He
never intended to deny the Existence of the Elements, as this Version makes him
to do. The words are plain and intelligible, but Mr. Boileau, by some unknown
Rules of Construction inverts their natural Order, and joins a Nominative
Singular to a Verb Plural, and then by a sort of Logic as peculiar to himself,
making the Predicate the Subject of his Proposition, so renders the Passage as
by a A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, vel, ab est tertii adjecti ad
est secundi adjecti in propositione Negativa, quales consequentiae non
necessario valent, and non raro falsissimae sunt.
Notorious Fallacy, to make the Author deny the Existence of Bread and Wine,
immediately after he had been proving it, and against the Scope of his
Discourse in this place.

For Ratram thus argues against his Adversaries, Either Consecration makes a
Figurative Change of the Elements, or else it makes no change. The absurdity of
saying the latter, is this, that then the Consecrated Elements are not the Body
and Blood of Christ, which to say is Impious.

And to make good his Consequence, he reminds them of what he had largely
proved just before, that the Elements as to their Species, or Nature, had
undergone no change, there being no Substance produced anew, none corrupted,
nor yet so much as altered in its Natural Qualities by Consecration, and
therefore no Physical Change made thereby. But Mr. Boileau is resolved in
defiance both of Priscian and Aristotle, to make poor Ratram say what he
pleases.

I hope it may be denied of the Water in Baptism, or the Chrism, or a Church
after Consecration, that they are what they were before; that is, common Water,
or Oil, or an Ordinary House, without denying Water, Oil, or the Building to
exist my longer. And in this sense, Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 3. (...), etc.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem, says, As the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist are not
mere, or common Bread and Wine; so after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, the
Chrism is not common Oil. And in like manner, Catech. 1. He compares the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, with Meats offered to Idols, teaching, That as the
former by the Invocation of the Holy Trinity, of common Bread and Wine are made
the Body and Blood of Christ, so the Meats offered to Idols are in their nature
common Meat, i. e. Lawful, but by Invocation of Devils they are rendered
profane, or unlawful. Which infers no destruction of the Old Substance, but
only the introducing of a new Quality, or relation to the impure Demons, which
rendered the Meat profane or unclean.

So that to be made what a thing was not before, infers not necessarily that it
cease to be what it was before; it is sufficient that it receives some new
perfection, or additional Dignity.

Again, N. LVI. Intellige quod Les chooses qui y tombent sous le sens, ne sont
pas le Corpse and le sang de J. C. dans leur espece ou appearance visible, mais
qu'ils y sont par la Virtue du Verb.
non in Specie, sed in Virtute, Corpus and Sanguis Christi existant, quae
cernuntur.

Know assuredly that the things which fall under the Senses, are not Christ's
Body and Blood, in their Species, or Visible Appearance, but that they, [viz.
Christ's Body and Blood] are there by the Virtue of the Word.

Ratram says, That the Visible Elements, are Christ's Body and Blood, not in
Nature, but in Virtue, which is a distinction understood by every Freshman; but
Mr. Boileau makes him to say, That which destroys the Antithesis, which
insinuates an unheard of distinction of Appearance, and Virtue, and which is
not a proper Answer to the Objection started upon the Authority of St. Ambrose.
Mark you (say Ratram's Adversaries) This Father, teaches Hic jam surgit
Auditor and dicit, Corpus Christi esse quod cernitur, and Sanguinem qui
bibitur, etc.
, that what is seen on the Lords Table, and orally received, is the Body and
Blood of Christ. To this Ratram answers by a distinction, and shows in what
sense the Holy Elements are Christ's Body and Blood, and in what sense they are
not so, viz. In their Species or Nature they are not Christ's Body and Blood,
but in their Virtue and Efficacy. It was not his business to affirm the
presence of Christ's Body and Blood, but to give an account in what sense St.
Ambrose affirmed the Consecrated Elements to be Christ's Body and Blood.

Again, N. LXXVII. Car si ce Corpse est celuy de J.C. and s' il est ainsi
appelle veritablement parce qu'il est le Corpse du J. C. il est le Corpse de J.
C. dans la Verite, c'est a dire de la maniere don't il se comporte, and don't il
paroist a nos yeux, etc.
Si enim Corpus Christi est and hoc dicitur vere, quia Corpus Christi est, in
Veritate Corpus Christi est: and si in veritate Corpus Christi est, etc.

If this Body which is celebrated in the Church be Christ's, and it be so
called truly, because it is the Body of Christ, then it is the Body of Christ
in Truth, that is, as it shows it self to the Eye, and if so etc.

It was cunningly done to make Nonsense of an Argument, which truly
translated, would have quite spoiled the whole design of M. Boileau's Version
and Remarks. He could not be ignorant that dicitur vere quia, etc. ought to
have been rendered if it be truly [i. e. properly] affirmed that it is Christ's
Body. And that he argues, that it is not in propriety of Speech affirmed to be
Christ's Body, because it is not so in Truth of Nature, in regard Christ's
Natural Body is Incorruptible, Impassible and Eternal, whereas the Sacrament is
undeniably corrupted, being broken in pieces, chewed small by the Teeth,
digested, and turned into the Substance of the Receivers Body.

But to trouble my self and the Reader with no more particulars of his false
dealings, I shall give you an entire Paragraph exactly translated from his
French, which I desire may be compared with the Authors Latin.

N. LVII. Quam diligenter quam prudenter facta distinctio! De carne Christi
quae crucifixa est, quae sepulta est, id est, secundum C'est a dire dans
l'apparence sensible de la quelle J. C. a eye crucify, and enseveli.
quam Christus and crucifixus est and sepultus, ait Vera itaque Caro Christi,
and de illa quae sumitur in Sacramento "Vere ergo carnis illius Sacramentum
est; Distinguens Sacramentum Carnis a Veritate Carnis: Quatenus in Veritate
Carnis quam sumpserat de Virgin, diceret eum and crucifixum and sepultum, quod
vero nunc agitur in Ecclesia Mysterium verae illius carnis in qua crucifixus
est, diceret esse Sacramentum: Patenter Fideles instituens, quod illa Caro
secundum quam and crucifixus est Christus and Sepultus, non sit Mysterium sed
Veritas Naturae; haec vero Caro quae nunc similitudinem illius in Mysterio
continet, non fit Specie Caro, sed Sacramento. Siquidem in Specie Panis est, in
Sacramento verum Christi Corpus, sicut ipse clamat Dominus Jesus, Hoc est
Corpus meum.

Now observe with what prudence St. Ambrose establishes this distinction! He
says of the Flesh which was crucified and buried, that is, according to which
Christ was crucified and buried, C'est a dire dans l'apparence sensible de la
quelle J. C. a eye crucify, and enseveli.
[that is to say in the sensible appearance whereof Jesus Christ was crucified
and buried.] It is the True Flesh of Jesus Christ. But of that receivd in the
Sacrament, he says, it is truly the Sacrament of that Flesh, distinguishing of
his Flesh from the [Sensible] Verity of his Flesh; meaning, that according to
the [Sensible] Verity of his Flesh, Christ was crucified and buried, and that
the Mystery celebrated in the Church, is the Sacrament of that True [and
Sensible] Flesh in which he was crucified. And thereby plainly teaching the
Faithful, that this [Sensible] in and according to which Christ was Crucified
and Buried, is no Mystery, but the Mais la verite de la nature, avec toutes ses
dimensions au lieu que cette chair, qui en contient l'Image dans le Mist cre n'
est pas la chair selon l'apparence, and selon ce qui tomb sous le sens, mais
dans le Sacrament. Puis que selon les apparences sensibles ce que l'on voit est
du Pain, etc.
Verity of Nature [with all its dimensions] whereas that Flesh which contains
the Image hereof in the Mystery, is not Flesh, according to Sensible
Appearance, but in the Sacrament. For according to the Sensible Appearance,
that which we behold is Bread, and that in the Sacrament it is the True Body of
Christ, as he himself declares in these words, This is my Body.

This is a remarkable Specimen of Fidelity in Translating, and may suffice to
let the Reader see, how far he is to rely on the Translators exactness and
sincerity, or to give credit to the Testimony of his Brethren of the Sorbon,
who have under their hands declared, this Version of M. Boileau and his Notes
to be conformable in every thing to the Text of this Ancient Author.

I shall now in the last place endeavor to show, that the Sense, which he
imposes on the Technical Terms by which we are to learn the Author's true
Sentiments, is generally forced, and often absurd; that it is not agreeable to
the scope of the Author, neither are those Terms so used by Ecclesiastical
Writers of the same or elder Times.

I shall begin with the word Veritas, which is one of the Terms of the first
Question, and often occurs in this Tract. Now when Ratram denies that which is
orally received in the Sacrament, to be Christ's Body and Blood in Verity, or
his True Body and Blood, we understand him to deny the Holy Eucharist to be his
Body and Blood in Reality or Truth of Nature, or which is all one, his Natural
Body. And in case we Si cette pretention avoit ete autorisee de quelque bonne
preuve -- il n'y auroit pas lieu de doubter, qui n' eust ete l'Inventeur de
l'Heresie du Calvin. p. 27. Pref.
be in the right, M. Boileau confesses that he must yield the Point in
dispute, and abandon poor Ratram as the Author of Calvin's Heresy; so he is
pleased to style the Doctrine of the Ancient Church for the nine or ten first
Centuries.

He therefore tells us, that of Pref. p. 31.
Two and forty places in which those Terms Verum and Veritas are found in this
Book, there are not above seven or eight (of which the Protestants can make no
advantage) in which they signify Real or Reality, and in the other Three and
thirty, so curious has Mr. Dean been in his Observations, it imports only the
Manifestation, or Sensible Appearance of Christ's Body. That in this sense
Ratram opposes Verity to a Figure, and denies the Holy Eucharist to be
Christ's true Body and Blood, from which nothing can be concluded against the
Real Presence, which is, as he explains it, the Proper Substance and Humane
Nature of Jesus Christ.

Now on this Point we will join Issue, and I will first examine the Proofs he
brings for his sense of the word, and afterward I shall show that sense to be
false, absurd, and contrary to the use of that Term in other Ecclesiastical
Writers of the same and elder Times.

To make out his Notion of the Word, two things are offered by M. Boileau. 1.
He says, That Ratram himself expounds Verity by Manifestation. 2. That the
Writers of the middle Ages use it to signify the Depositions of Witnesses, and
the Proof of things.

To the former of these, somewhat has already been said in the Page 66.
Dissertation before this Tract, and in this Appendix, which I desire the
Reader to consult, and I shall further add what I conceive will take off the
force of this Argument.

I admit that Ratram does so expound Verity, and defines it to be the manifest
Demonstration of a thing, but he no where expounds Manifestation to be the
Sensible Appearance. I have already shown that the Verity which he defines is
Propriety and Plainness of Speech in opposition to Figurative Speech; and in
that Notion of this word, diverse things are manifested which have no Sensible
Appearances. These sayings, that the Father is God, the Soul is a Spirit, that
Angels are Creatures, are in Ratram's sense, the naked Manifestation of the
Truth, or the plain or manifest Demonstration of the things, which have no
Sensible Appearance at all; that is, the words in their native signification
import that which they are used to express; whereas in the Figurative and
Mystical Forms of Speech, the words are used to express quite another thing,
than what they really and naturally import. So that the one is a covert and
obscure, the other a plain, proper and natural way of speaking, and this
Bertram calls the clear light of Manifestation, the plain or simple Verity; and
our Saxon Homilist, as I have shown, uses a word geissum thing Fol 29.
of the same importance; whereas had he understood Bertram in that sense M.
Boileau does, he must have expressed Manifestation by another word, which is
afterward used for the sum sutelunge be tham halgan husel, Fol. 38.
Sensible Demonstration of a thing.

Now as this Term, when applied to Forms of Speech, imports Propriety of
Speech, so when applied to Things, it signifies Propriety of Nature, or the
Very thing it self, without any Mystical Signification of, or Respect unto
another thing. And thus it stands opposed to a Pledge, an Image, or Figure
instituted to represent one thing, whilst it is in Substance, in Reality and
Truth of Nature another.

When its urged to prove that Ratram uses the word Manifestation to signify
the Reality, That he must use it in the same sense it was used by his
Adversaries, who must either thereby understand, the Reality; or else believe
the Holy Eucharist to be our Savior's Body, in humane Form, which none
pretends they did: Mr. Dean briskly denies the Consequence, and like a Doctor
of great Authority, adds, P. 35. Je Soutiens, qu'ils se persuadoient seulement
de voir le Corpse and le Sang'de J. C. affectez des qualitez du pain and vin,
etc.
I maintain that they only believed it to be Christ's Body affected with the
Qualities of Bread.

Now I appeal to any Man of common sense, whether any thing can be more absurd,
than some Passages of this Book are, if so expounded? For Example, in that
Prayer, N. 85. Quod in imagine contingimus Sacramenti, manifesta participatione
sumamus.
wherein the Church begs of God, to grant the manifest Participation of that,
which is received in a Sacramental Image, the meaning must be, that they might
partake of our Savior's Flesh, under the Sensible Appearance of Bread. And
again, where N. 97. Nec in eo vel aliqua figura vel significatio sed ipsa rei
Manifestatio.
he says, the Body which suffered and rose again, is our Savior's Proper
Body, and in it there is no Figure or Signification, but the Manifestation of
the thing it self, he must mean, if M. Boileau has hit upon the true Notion of
Ratram's Adversaries, that the Body of our Savior which was crucified and rose
again, is his Natural Body affected with the sensible Accidents of Bread, which
I take to be rank Nonsense, and so I am apt to think does our Translator also:
For he does not render that Passage by the word Manifestation, as he had
elsewhere done, leaving the Reader to seek the sense of so uncouth a Phrase in
his Preface and Remarks, but he renders it by words importing our Saviors Body
in Human Shape. Though in so doing he makes Bertram a very despicable and
impertinent Sophister, and to dispute vehemently against an Opinion which his
Adversaries did not maintain. For so he does, if they affirming the Holy
Eucharist to be Christ's Body affected with the Sensible Appearances of Bread,
he brings Arguments to prove that it was not his Body in its proper state, that
is, retaining the Members, Dimensions, Lineaments, and all other Sensible
Qualities of a Man's Body.

That Ratram used Manifestation as a Term equivalent to the Reality, is clear
to any Man who will observe how he uses the Adverb Manifest, which is one of
its Conjugates. When he is describing a Pledge and Image, he says, Significant
enim ista rem, cujus sunt, non manifest ostendunt. N. 86.
they have a relation to some other thing which they signify, but non
manifest ostendunt do not manifestly show, i.e. really exhibit. This must be
his sense, for he he is delivering the Notion of Pledges and Images in General
which are not the very thing for which they are deposited, or which they
represent in Substance and Reality, and only want the Sensible Appearances
thereof. For on the contrary, an Image has the Sensible Appearance of what it
represents without the Reality.

I do not deny but Ratram supposes Christ's true Body to be Visible, when he
says, it is the very Manifestation of the thing; some of his Arguments to
prove the Sacrament not to be Christ's Very Body, are drawn from a Supposition,
that if it were so, it would be a Living, Organical Body, Visible, Palpable and
Manifest to our Bodily Senses: Yet the Visibility of Christ's glorified Body, is
not the thing primarily imported by the word Manifestation, but its Truth and
Reality. As the Apostle, speaking of 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifest in the flesh, principally designed to teach the Truth of Christ's
Incarnation, that the Word was truly made Flesh, that is, Man, and not that God
Visibly appeared to Man. And as Idem ipse Christus illis in Petra figuratus,
nobis in carne manifestatus est. Aug. in Psalm. 77.
St. Austin, when he says, The same Christ who was Typified in the Rock to the
Jews, is now manifested in the Flesh to us, does not by that Phrase imply our
Savior's Visible Appearance to us, but that he was truly and actually
Incarnate for us.

As for his Second Reason to prove that Verity imports not the Reality, but the
Sensible Appearance, viz. That the Writers of the Middle Age use the word to
signify the Depositions of Witnesses, and the Proof or Evidence of things, I
conceive it to be weak and unconcluding. The Instances to which he refers us,
are in M. du Cange's Glossarii, Tom. 3. col. 1283.
Glossary: And I might tell him, that they are not taken out of Writers of the
Middle Age, but the Scilicet, A. D. 1228.
Latest Times; but not to insist on that Circumstance, I think that he cannot
infer, that Proofs by Witnesses are called Verities, because they clear the
Point in dispute, in regard it seems more likely that Depositions (if they are
styled Verities) have that name from the Charitable Presumption, that every Man
has so just a reverence of an Oath, that he will swear nothing but the Truth.
I say, if Depositions are styled Verities, for I conceive the Learned and
Industrious M. du Cange is mistaken in the sense of the word Veritas Veritas,
Depositio Testis. Veredictum J. C. Anglis, -- Veritate Scabinorum convincatur
Procul dubio hallucinatur, Veritas Scabinorum. idem valet quod Judicium
Scabinorum, supra in voce Scabinus, ubi statuit Cl. du Cange, Scabinos esse
Judices urbanos.
in those Instances he makes to prove that it signifies the Deposition of a
Witness; and that he more truly expounds it by the English word Verdict, which
is the Sentence of the Jury, who are Judges of the Fact, and not Witnesses, and
in those places Judgments are styled Verities, according to a known Rule of the
Civil Law, that a judged Case is taken for Truth.

His other Instances from the Synod of Coyac, A. D. 1050. are much more
impertinent; for the word Veritas is there a Feudal Term, and imports in the
former Canon the Title of the Church to its Possessions, against which three
years Usurpation should not prescribe; and in the latter Canon, the Homage and
Fealty of the Vassals to their Lord, and is equivalent to Veritatem and
Justitiam Regis non contemnant, sed sicut in diebus Adelfonsi Regis fideles and
recti persistant, and talem Veritatem facient Regi qualem, etc-
Fidelitas, which signifies Faith and true Allegiance. So that M. Boileau has
made a great flourish with these Authorities to no purpose.

He tells us moreover that Paschase uses the word Veritas to signify the
Sensible Truth, but the words cited out of him seem plainly to import the
Reality. They are these; Quando jam ultra non erunt haec Mystica Sacramenta in
fide; sed in REIPSA VERITAS, quae adhuc recte agitur in Mysterio luce clarius
referetur, and erit omnibus palam in fruitione, quod nunc sumimus in Mysterio.
Pasch. apud Boileau, p. 216.
Then these Mystical Signs in our Faith shall cease, but the Truth in Reality,
which as yet is rightly celebrated in the Mystery, shall be shown clearer than
the Light, and that shall be evident to all in the enjoyment which we now
receive in the Mystery. I conceive Reipsa may very aptly be rendered the Real
Truth, or Truth in Reality. Nor does the latter Clause expound the word
Veritas, but is easy to observe a double Antithesis of Mystical Sacraments to
the Real Verity, and of an obscure Representation to the clear Vision, which
double Antithesis is ordinary in the Writings of the Fathers, and in this Tract
of Ratram.

Having thus answered that M. Boileau offers to maintain his Notion* that
Verity signifies not the Reality, but only the Sensible Appearance, I shall
next prove his Notion not only groundless and precarious, but also false and
absurd, by showing,

1st. That this Notion of Verity is inconsistent with Bertram's own Exposition
of that Term in this Treatise. And,

2dly. That it agrees not with the Use of the Word in other Writers of the same
or elder Times.

I. It is inconsistent with Bertram's own Exposition of the Term in this
Treatise, who explaineth it very frequently, and by great variety of
Expressions equivalent to the Reality or very Truth, as will appear in the
following Instances.

N. XV. Verity is expounded by Proper Essence; Fatebuntur ergo necesse est, aut
mutata esse secundum aliud quam secundum Corpus, ac per hoc non esse hoc quod
in Veritate videntur, sed aliud quod non esse secundum propriam Essentiam
cernuntur. N. 15.
They must needs confess either that they are changed in some other respect
than that of their Bodies, and that in this respect they are not what we see
they are in Truth, but somewhat else which we discern them not to be in their
Proper Essence, etc. what he styles Verity or Truth in one Member of the
Antithesis, is called the Proper Essence in the other, which I take to be
equivalent to the Reality. In this Passage the Lobe MS. varies from the Printed
Copies, which read Existence instead of Essence, and I think the Variation of
some moment, and that it is advantageous to the Protestant Cause.

Again, In discussing the Second Question, he often describes the Real and
Natural Body of our Savior in Terms as clear and express as Human Wit can
devise, viz. His Body born of the Virgin, which suffered, was buried, and rose
again: This he calls our Lord's True or Very Body, and denies the Holy
Eucharist to be that Body. For Instance, he says that Christ's Natural Body
Non sit Mysterium sed Veritas Naturae. N. 57
is no Mystery but Truth of Nature, which he denies the Sacrament to be.

Again, N. LXII. The Body which he took of the Virgin Mary, which Suffered, was
Buried, and Rose again, was a True Body, that is, such as remained Visible and
palpable. But the Body which is called the Mystery of God, is not Corporeal,
but Spiritual; and if Spiritual, then it can neither be seen, nor felt. From
which words we may learn what Ratram's Notion of a True Body is, viz. such as
our Senses judge to be a Body, discernible by the sight and touch. A Real Body,
and not a Spirit or Phantasm. So N. LXXII. He describes Christ's to be an
Organical Body, animated with a Reasonable Soul, to be the True or Real Flesh
of a True or Real Man Vera Caro very hominis existebat, Corpus utique Verum in
Very Corporis specie consistens. N. 72.
, A True Body in the shape of a True Body, which cannot be affirmed of his
Spiritual Flesh or the Holy Sacrament; which expressions most evidently import
the Reality, and not the Sensible Appearance. And therefore in denying the Holy
Eucharist to be such a True Body, he denies the Real Presence.

Again, He sometimes expounds Verity by ipsa Res, the thing it self, which is
the Reality, N. 77. Exterius igitur quod apparet, non est IPSA RES, sed Imago
REI, mente vero quod sentitur and intelligitur, Veritas REI, n. 77.
Wherefore that which outwardly appears is not the thing it self, but the Image
of it, but that which the Mind perceives and understands is the Verity of the
thing, or the very thing it self. Here ipsa res, and veritas Rei, are
manifestly the same.

Thus also speaking of Christ's Body in the Sacrament in opposition to his True
Body, he says, that the former Secundum quendam modum Corpus Christi esse
cognoscitur, and modus iste in Figura est and imagine ut Veritas RES IPSA
sentiatur, n. 84
is only in some particular manner [or respect] the Body of Christ, which
manner is Figurative, and in the way of an Image; so that the Verity is the
THING IT SELF. And again, Veritas vero erit, cum jam nec Pignus, nec Imago; sed
IPSIVS REI veritas apparebit, n. 87.
The Truth we shall then have when the VERY THING it self shall appear. And
elsewhere comparing the Natural Flesh of our Lord, with the Holy Eucharist,
which is commonly called his Body, he says, Et hoc Corpus Pignus est, and
Species; illud vero IPSA Veritas. n. 88.
This Body is a Pledge and Figure, but that is the TRUTH IT SELF; where we owe
the Emphatical Pronoun ipsa, to the Lobez MS. He says Sed IPSA REI
manifestatio cognoscitur, n. 97.
of Christ's Natural Body, That it is the very Manifestation of the THING,
whereas he denied the Holy Eucharist to be the Non per IPSIVS REI
manifestationem, n. 88.
Manifestation of the THING IT SELF, N. 88. Which two latter Phrases are
perfectly equivalent to the Ipsius Veritatis nuda manifestatione, n. 3.
Manifestation of the TRUTH IT SELF, in the Preface of this Tract; and all
these Expressions plainly import the REALITY.

Moreover, He calls our Savior's Body, born of the Virgin Illud namque
proprium and Verum nihil habens in se vel Mysticum vel Figuratum: hoc vero
Mysticum.
, his Proper and True Body, having nothing Mystical or Figurative in it. So
many several ways is the Term Verity explained, and in all the Holy Eucharist
denied to be the True, that is, REAL Body of our Savior.

Again, The Sense of the word Verity, may be learned from the Terms to which it
stands opposed through the whole Discourse, which manifestly declare the
subject of which they are affirmed, not to be Christ's Real Body. Sometimes it
is opposed to a Figure, now nothing is a Sign or Figure of it self, sometime to
a Pledge, sometime to an Image, to a Similitude, a Remembrance, and the like;
and by affirming the Consecrated Elements to be Christ's Body in any of the
forementioned respects, he virtually denies them to be his Natural and Real
Body, and by consequence when he says they are Christ's Flesh and Blood in
Figure and not in Truth, he must mean thereby, not in Reality.

Lastly, If this be not the Sense of that Term, Ratram's Reasoning, N. 77. is
false and absurd Si enim -- hoc vere dicitur quia Corpus Christi est, (1) In
Veritate Corpus Christi est; and si in Veritate Corpus Christi est', -- (2)
Incorruptibile est and impassibile, etc. n. 77.
. He argues thus; If the Holy Eucharist be Christ's Body, and be truly and
properly said to be the Body of Christ, then it is such in Verity, and if so,
then it is Incorruptible impassible, and by consequence Eternal, etc. Now as M.
Boileau expounds that Term, the former (1) consequence is false, and Ratram
must contradict himself as our Adversaries understand him. It follows not,
that if the Eucharist be properly and truly said to be Christ's Body, that
therefore it is so in the sensible appearance, on the Principles of the Church
of Rome. Nor is the latter (2) Inference valid, viz. That if it be Christ's Body
in sensible Verity, then it is incorruptible and impassible. For the
Incorruptibility of Christ's Body, depends not upon the Sensible Qualities, but
upon its Glorified State. And Christ has no other Real Body but his Glorified
Body. In the state of Humiliation, when he was Scourged, Buffeted, and
Crucified, the Body of our Savior was visible and palpable, and was a true
Body with all the sensible Appearances of such a Body, yet I am of opinion,
that M. Boileau will scarce adventure to say, that our Savior's Body was then
Impassible, Incorruptible, or Immortal.

Whereas if the word Veritas be taken in its genuine and common Sense, the
Consequence is undeniable. For to the Truth of a Proposition it is requisite,
that the Praedicate do really agree to the Subject, and that the Subject be in
Truth of Nature, what it is affirmed to be. And whatever the Subject is not in
Reality, that is either falsely or improperly affirmed of it.

I hope this may suffice to show, that Ratram did not use the Term in M.
Boileau's sense, which is as much as I am obliged to prove. But for the further
manifestation of his Extravagance in imposing that signification upon it, I
shall proceed to let you see how contrary it is to the usage of the word Verity
in other Ecclesiastical Writers of his own and Elder times.

I shall give you an Instance or two out of Tertullian, who in answering those
Heretics, who objected against the Reality of the Incarnation the words of St.
Paul, Romans viii. 3. God sending his Son in the LIKENESS of sinful Flesh, etc.
thus expresses himself: Non quod Similitudinem Carnis acceperit, quasi
IMAGINEM Corporis and non VERITATEM: Sed Similitudinem peccatricis carnis vult
intelligi, etc. Tertul. de Carne Christi, c. 16.
Not that he assumed the LIKENESS of FLESH, as if it were the IMAGE of a Body,
and not the VERITY, i. e. a Real Body. Again, Answering an Objection of
Marcion, who said, That if the Image of God, the Soul sinned in Man, the Guilt
would affect God himself. He says, Porro IMAGO VERITATI haud usque quaque
adaequabitur, aliud enim est secundum VERITATEM esse, aliud IPSAM VERITATEM
esse, Adv. Marcion. l. 2. c. 9.
The IMAGE must not be in all respects made equal with the VERITY, it is one
thing to be made after the TRUTH, i. e. in imitation of it; and another thing
to be the VERY TRUTH it self. Again, He proves that Christ had a Real Body,
because the Sacrament was a Figure of it. For there could be no Figure, unless
there were a TRUE Body.

Irenaeus does not only use the word in the same sense, but establishes an
Essential difference between the Image, and Verity: Typus enim and Imago
secundum materiam, and secundum Substantiam aliquories a VERITATE diversus est,
secundum autem habitum and lineamentum debet servare similitudinem, Iren. adv.
Haer. l. 2. c. 40.
A Type and Image, says he, is sometimes in Matter and Substance different
from the VERITY, or TRUTH, but it ought to resemble the Shape and Lineaments
thereof. They differ Substantially.

St. Cyprian also uses the Term in the same sense, where making the
deliverance of the Firstborn in Egypt, whose Door-posts were sprinkled with
the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, a Type of our Salvation by the Cross and Passion
of our Lord, he says, Quod ante occiso agno praecedit in imagine, impletur in
Christo, secuta postmodum Veritate, Cypr. ad Demetrian, p. 194. Edit. Oxon.
That [Salvation] which anciently in the slaying of the [Paschal] Lamb went
before in the way of an IMAGE, is fulfilled in Christ, the TRUTH which followed
after.

St. Ambrose frequently uses VERITAS for the Reality, speaking of boaring the
Ear of the Jewish Servants, and the Circumcision of their Flesh, etc. SIGNA
sunt ista and non VERITAS. Sed ille intelligit qui cor suum Spiritali
Circumcisione castificat, etc. Ambr. in Ps. 118. Oct. 13.
These things are SIGNS and not the TRUTH; which was Sanctification, as he
tells immediately. And in what sense the word Verity must be taken when we find
it opposed to Signs, he elsewhere teaches, speaking of Abraham's Circumcision;
Abraham Signum accepit Circumcisionis: Vtique SIGNVM non IPSA RES, sed ait rius
rei est; hoc est, non VERITAS sed indicium VERITATIS, de Abraham l. 1. in Genesis
c. 17.
The Apostle Paul said, that Abraham received the Sign of Circumcision, now the
SIGN is not the THING IT SELF, but [the Representation] of another Thing, that
is, not the TRUTH, but an Indication of the TRUTH. where he not only opposes
the TRUTH to a SIGN, but also expounds it to be the REALITY.

So Gaudentius, Bishop of Brescia, contemporary with St. Ambrose, speaking of
the Paschal Lamb as a Type of Christ's Death, says, Figura erat, non
Proprietas Dominicae Passionis; FIGVRA etenim non est VERITAS, sed imitatio
VERITATIS. Gaudent. Brix. Sermon. 2. in Exodus Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. Edit. Par. 1610.
It was a FIGURE of our Lord's Passion, and not the PROPRIETY; now a FIGURE is
not the TRUTH or REALITY, but an Imitation of the TRUTH. Here he makes a Figure
and the REALITY to be Inconsistent, in their very Natures.

I might produce several Passages of St. Austine to the same effect, but shall
content my self with one or two.

Hujus Sacrificii Caro and Sanguis ante adventum Christi per victimas
SIMILITVDINVM promittebatur; in Passione Christi per IPSAM VERITATEM
reddebatur: Post ascensum Christi per SACRAMENTVM MEMORIAE celebratur, August.
contra Faustum Manich. l. xx. c. 21.
Having cited those words of the Psalmist, Sacrificium laudis glorificabit me,
etc. He adds, The Flesh and Blood of this Sacrifice was promised by Typical
Victims before the coming of Christ, it was given in VERY TRUTH [or Reality] in
the Passion of Christ, and is celebrated in the SACRAMENT which is the MEMORIAL
thereof, after the Ascension of Christ. This is a remarkable Passage, not only
as it gives us the true sense of the word verity, but as it declares the Holy
Eucharist to be an Historical Type of our Saviors Oblation on the Cross, as
the Jewish Sacrifices were Prophetical Types thereof; but neither one nor the
other his Flesh and Blood in Reality.

The other place is cited by Gratian, whose Decretum the Sed animum hic
advertat Sanctitas tua; Nam Decretalium, and Sexti and Clementinarum, and
Extravagantium tantum supra Meminimus, ac non item Decreti, quod minime mirum
videri debet. Est enim Perniciosus liber, and Authoritatem tuam valde imminuit,
etc. Council. quorundam Episc. de stabilienda Romana Eccles. fol. 5.
Bishops met at Bononia, in their Advice to Pope Julius III. had reason (upon
account of this and many other Passages of the Ancient Fathers and Councils no
way favorable to Popery extant in that Collection) to call a Pernicious Book.
The words occur not in the Works of St. Austine, but are cited from Prosper's
Sentences of St. Austine, and are cited by Lanfranc, and other Zealots for
Transubstantiation; I marvel why: And they run thus, Sicut ergo coelestis
Panis, qui vere Christi caro est, suo modo vocatur Corpus Christi cum REVERA
sit SACRAMENTVM Corporis Christi, illius videlicet quod Visibile Palpabile,
mortale in cruce est suspensum, vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis quae
sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi Passio, Mors, Crucifixio, non REI VERITATE sed
SIGNIFICANTE MYSTERIO. Sic, etc. De Consecr. did. II. c. 48. Sect. sicut.
Therefore as the Heavenly Bread which is truly the Flesh of Christ, is [suo
modo] in its peculiar manner called the Body of Christ, though in REALITY, it
is the SACRAMENT of Christ's Body, namely of that [Body] which was Visible,
Palpable, Mortal, and Hanged on the Cross; and the very Immolation of his Flesh
by the hands of the Priest is called the Passion, Death, and Crucifixion of
Christ, not [that it is so] in VERITY of NATURE, but in MYSTICAL SIGNIFICATION.

And the Gloss is very extraordinary; Caeleste Sacramentum quod VERE
REPRAESENTAT Christi carnem dicitur Corpus Christi, sed IMPROPRIE, unde dicitur
SVO MODO, sed non REI VERITATE, sed significati MYSTERIO, ut sit sensus,
Vocatur Corpus Christi, id est SIGNIFICAT. Glossa in verbum Caelestis.
The Heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the Body of Christ, is called
the Body of Christ but improperly. -- So that the meaning is, it is called the
Body of Christ, that is, it signifies it.

I shall make two or three brief Remarks on this Passage.

1. As Bertram Secundum quid, secundum quendam modum Corpus Christi esse
cognoscitur and Modus iste in Figura est, and in Imagine, N. 84.
says of the Holy Eucharist, that it is in some respect, or in some particular
manner, the Body and Blood of Christ; so here it is said to be in a peculiar
way called Christ's Body, though RE VERA.
in Reality it is only the Sacrament thereof.

2. As Bertram declares that manner and respect to be Figurative, and in the
way of an Image, so here the Holy Eucharist is said to be, as the Gloss
teaches us, Sed improprie.
improperly so called, it being the Body of Christ only in Mystical
signification, not in Verity of Nature.

3. That verity when opposed in Sacramental Discourses to Signs, Mysteries,
Figures, Pledges, Images, and the like, imports Reality, or Truth of Nature.

But to come nearer Bertram's time, the Venerable Bede, Cum omnes electi carne
agni immaculati, id est, Dei and Domini nostri, non amplius in Sacramento
credentes sed in REIPSA and VERITATE videntes, reficientur, Beda in Esdram l.
2. c. 8.
has a Passage in which he expounds the Truth to be the THING it self. Having
mentioned the Resurrection, he proceeds, When all the Elect shall feast on the
Flesh of the Immaculate Lamb, that is, of our God and Lord; no longer
exercising Faith in the Sacrament, but beholding him in REALITY, and in TRUTH.

I shall close all with a Manuscript Prayer, which I found among the Saxon MSS.
In libro cui titulus Anglo-Saxon Remains ad calcem Psalterii Saxonici Anglice
redditi per M. Lisle. Quarto Cod. 1249.
of Archbishop Laud's gift to the Public Library at Oxford, which was Copied
by that Industrious Collector of Saxon Monuments, Mr. Lisle, from a MS. Rule of
Nuns, in Bennet College Library In Biblioth. Coll. S. Bened. Cod. 274. page
16. vide titulum apud James, Ecloge Oxonio Cantab. p. 89.
in Cambridge, which I have gotten compared with the Original, and is found
exactly to agree with it.

The Title.

Another to be said at receiving the Sacrament of the Altar.

Concede, quaesumus, Omnipotens Dens, ut quem enigmatice and sub aliena Specie
cernimus quo Sacramentaliter cibamur in Terris, facie ad faciem eum videamus,
eo sicuti est VERACITER, and REALITER frui mereamur in Coelis. Per eund.

Grant, we beseech thee Almighty God, that him, who we see darkly and under
another Species, on whom we feed Sacramentally on Earth, we may behold Face to
Face, and enjoy him TRULY and REALLY as he is in Heaven, Through, etc.

The Antiquity or Author of this Prayer I know not, but I believe it may be
somewhat more Ancient than the Saxon Prayers among which I found it; which I
believe to be, as Dr. James says, later than the Conquest by the Language,
which is much nearer English, than Elfric's Sermon.

The Prayer is a plain Allusion to those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.12. (...).
now we see as in a glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part,
but then shall I know even as also I am known. And the Allusion makes it
apparent that the Author of the Prayer did not believe the Real or Oral
Manducation of Christ in the Sacrament.

The words, Quem aenigmatice and sub aliena specie cernimus.
whom we see darkly and under another Species, are of the same importance with
those of Per speculum in aenigmate.
St. Paul, as in a glass, darkly, which import not the direct and immediate
Vision of the thing it self, but an obscure and reflex Vision of it by an
Image; so the Author of the Commentaries on St. Paul's Epistles, that go under
the Name of Apertum est nunc Imagines videri per Fidem, tunc Res ipsas. Ambros.
in Loc.
St. Ambrose, It is plain that now we behold Images by Faith, but then [we
shall see] the very things themselves. And as Tertullian Tertul. Adv. Praxtam,
cap. 14* Non in aenigmate, id est, non in imagine. Aenigma, Figura, sive Typus,
sive Sprcies. Isidor. in Glossis.
interprets the word which our Translators render darkly, in an Image, and as
Ecclesiastical Writers commonly style the Types of the Old Law, Veteris literae
putruerunt aenigmata. Author de Unction Chrismatis apud Cyprianum. Vide Origin.
Hom. 7. in Number.
Aenigmata, so the Sacramental Symbols are called (...). Dion. Areop. de
Hierarch. cap. 3.
Aenigmatical vails; so that the former Antithesis imports a denial that the
Visible Object is the TRUE Body of Christ. And then the latter Antithesis
between the Sacramental feeding on him here on Earth, and the True and Real
enjoyment of him in Heaven, as plainly implies, that it is the Sacrament, and
not the Real Body of Christ, which is Orally received, and our Spiritual repast
on Earth, and that the TRUE and REAL enjoyment of Christ is reserved for our
entertainment in Heaven. These things I thought good briefly to observe: but
the design on which I cited this Prayer, is only to prove, Veraciter and
realiter, conjunctio and exegetice usurpatur.
that TRULY and REALLY are Terms equivalent, and here the former is expounded
by the latter.

I have been the more prolix on this Term, because M. Boileau lays the stress
of the whole Controversy upon its true Sense, in which I persuade my self that
any impartial Reader must needs perceive him to have been grossly misled by
Prejudice.

I shall now proceed to show how gross an Error he is guilty of in expounding
another Term of no less moment in this Controversy, which is the word SPECIES,
which he makes to signify the Il signify appearance, and non pas la Substance
and la Nature des chooses, comme les Philosophes le prennent ordinairement.
Praef. p. 41. Remarq. p. 220, and p. 250. Il n'entend pas la Verite de la
Nature -- mais seulement -- ce que l'on appelle les Accidents qui tombent sous
le sens. p. 253, 254.
Appearance, and not the Substance and Nature of things, in which Exposition,
if I prove him deceived, he must for ever renounce his confident claim of
Ratram for a Patron of Transubstantiation.

Let us then, before we offer any thing to evince the contrary, see what Proof
M. Boileau brings to make out his Assertion, that by Species in this Tract must
be understood, the Sensible Apearance or Accidents, and not the Nature or
Substance of things. Now for Proof hereof, he sends the Reader to his Remarks,
and upon a careful perusal of the places to which he refers, I protest, I
cannot observe the least Show or Appearance either of Reason or Authority to
countenance the sense which he imposes on the Term: and the Truth is, I have
always had more trouble to find out his Arguments, than to Answer them.

The former of the two places to which he refers, is a Remark on these words.
Rem. p. 220. on n. xii: Quoniam secundum veritatem Species creaturae quae
fuerat ante, permansisse cognoscitur.
It is well known that the Species of the Creature remains in Truth what it was
before. This Passage, I confess, deserved a Remark, and unless our Translator
make out his sense of Species very clearly, it will stand in direct Opposition
to the Trent Doctrine, That the Substance of Bread and Wine remain not after
Consecration.

To clear this Passage, he therefore cites another by which it may be
expounded, in which Ratram says, Non enim secundum quod videtur, vel carnis
Species in illo pane cognoscitur, vel in illo vino Cruoris unda monstratur.
number. x.
That we see not the Form or Appearance of Flesh and Blood in this Mystery. How
honestly that Passage is thus rendered by him, has been already shown; but how
he proves Species in that place to signify Appearance I am still to learn; for
as I noted before, unda cruoris imports the Liquid Substance of Blood, and
gives us fair ground to conclude that Species Carnis signifies the Substance,
and not the mere Accidents of Flesh.

He further adds, Rem. p. 220.
That Ratram learnt this use of the word from the Books of the Sacraments
ascribed to St. Ambrose, whence he cites this Passage following for an Example
of it. Spiritus enim Sanctus in Specie Columbae, non in Veritate columbae --
descendit de Coelo. lib. 1. cap. 3.
The Holy Ghost descended from Heaven in the Species or likeness of a Dove, not
in the Verity or Real Substance of a Dove. I freely grant the word in this
place imports the Likeness or Appearance in opposition to Truth of Nature, but
then withal, I deny that it signifies any thing like what they make Species of
Bread and Wine in the Holy Eucharist to be. It does not import all the Sensible
Qualities of a True Dove, which was miraculously converted into the Holy Ghost;
nor yet does it imply the Sensible Accidents of a Dove existing, without a
Subject. For though the generality of the Fathers are express in denying the
Holy Spirit to have assumed the Nature or Real Body of a Dove, yet some of them
Surgenti manifesta Dei praesentia claret
Scinditur auricolor coeli septemplicis aethra
Corporeamque gerens Speciem, descendit ab alto
Spiritus, aeream simulans in nube columbam.
Jnvencus Evang. Hist. l. 1. inter Poet. Vet. Eccles. Basil. 1564. in Quarto.

Non tamen de avibus sumpsisse columbam, sed ex aere minime dubitatur. l. 3. de
mirabil. Script. c* 5. apud August. Tom. 3.


make him to have assumed a Body like a Dove formed of Air condensed; of which
matter, it is ordinarily believed, the Bodies assumed by Angels do consist. And
if so, the Accidents which affect the Senses have a Real and Corporeal, as the
Colors and Features of a well-made Effigies subsist in a Real Subject, though
not in the Very Person whom it resembles. So that this Citation is no Authority
for the sense he imposes on the Term, and upon examination of these Books,
whence he makes Bertram to have learned this use of the word Species, many
undeniable Examples of its being used for the Substance and Specific Nature
will appear.

This is all the Proof he offers, unless the ipse dixit of a Sorbon Doctor must
pass for a Demonstration; Ad number. 54.
the other Remark to which he sends us, contains neither Argument nor Authority
to bear out his Exposition of that Term.

I shall therefore now take leave to enquire into the true sense thereof, and
in a short Digression give a probable Account how it came into use with
Ecclesiastic Authors. And had M. Boileau taken the same method to search out
the true meaning of Species, which he took to justify his forced
Interpretation of Veritas, that is, had been pleased to consult the Learned M.
du Cange, I might have spared my pains. From him he might have learned, that it
is Species. Vox J. C. notissima, quibus idem sonat quod veteribus fruges, etc.
Glossar. Tom. 3. col. 918.
a Term wherewith the Lawyers are well acquainted, and signifies all that the
Ancient Latin Writers include in the Notion of Fruges, Wine, Oil, Corn, Pulse,
etc. And the Glossary at the end of the Theodosian Code, published by
Gothofred, extend its Signification Species sunt res seu corpora quaecunque
quorum usus est aliquis in humana conversatione, and quidem quae tributi
annonarumque nomine Fisco penduntur. Glossar. Nomic. tit. Species.
to all Necessaries of Life, Tributes, Public Stores of Provisions, and not
only for the Belly, but the Back also, Rich Clothes, and Household Stuff,
Jewels, as also Materials for Building, Timber and Iron, passing by that Name
in both the Theodosian and Justinian Codes, in the Writers of the Imperial
History, Vegetius, Cassiodorus etc. In the Theodosian Code there are many Laws
concerning the public Species, Tributa in ipsis Speciebus inferri. Non sunt
pretia Specierum, sed ipsae quae postulantur Species inferendae, Cod. Theod. l.
xi. Tit. 2. Leg. 4.
requiring them to be brought in kind, and not a composition for them in Money;
Particularly that the Speciem Vini, Ibid. Leg. 2.
Species of Wine be paid in Kind: There are Laws to compel all Farmers to
furnish their proportions of all Species, to oblige Men, and Ships, and Wagons
for the Carriage of them to Rome and other places, Laws also directing the
mixing of sweet and fresh, with the Species decayed and corrupted by long lying
in public Granaries and Cellars. Cassiodorus 1. Speciem Laridi, lib. 2. Ep.
12. (2.) Tritici Speciem, l. 3. Ep. 41. Vini, tritici, panici Speciem, l. 12.
Ep. 26. Vini, olei vel tritici Species, l. 12. Ep. 23.

(3. 4.) Casei and Vini Palmatiani -- Species, l. 12. Ep. 12. (5.) De ferro, l.
3. Ep. 25. Convenit itaque hanc Speciem diligenti indagatione rimari.


in his Epistles issues out orders for the providing of the Species, (1) of
Bacon, (2) wheat (3, 4) Cheese, wine, and (5) Iron. And the Law-Notion of the
Term, I conceive took its rise, from the great variety of Necessaries of
several sorts and kinds, that are requisite for the subsistence of Armies, or
great Cities, or else from the variety of such Provisions paid in the Nature of
Rents or Tribute.

Now as the word Sacrament is generally acknowledged to be a term borrowed from
the Roman Military Laws, so probably was the word Species; and as Corn and Wine
and other stores for the public use either of the Prince, the City, or Army go
by that Name, especially what came in by way of Pension Species praeterea, quae
mensis Regiis apparentur, -- perquirite, l. 12. Ep. 18.
or Tribute, so it is not unlikely that the Oblations of the Faithful brought
to the Altar, as a Tribute to God, for the use of his Holy Table consisting of
Bread and Wine, the two main supports of Life, might in allusion thereunto be
called Species by Ecclesiastic Writers.

Now this premised, I shall attempt to show two things 1. That Species in
Bertram, imports the same thing, which 'its used to signify in the first
Bestias terra juxta Species suas, Genesis l. 25.
of Genesis by the Author of the Vulgar Latin Version, viz. the Specific
Nature, the Substance as well as the Appearance.

2. That the word bears the same sense in other Authors, and particularly in
the Books de Sacramentis falsely ascribed to St. Ambrose.

To evince the former I shall present you with some passages, which will appear
very absurd, if the word be understood in Mr. Boileau's sense. And I shall
begin with that, on which he himself has bestowed a Remark. Quoniam secundum
veritatem Species Creaturae quae fuerat ante permansisse cognoscitur, n. 12.
For 'its well known that, the Species of the Creature, remains in Truth what
it was before. Now if by Species we are with Mr. Boileau, to understand the
sensible Appearance, these absurdities will follow.

1. Ratram will contradict himself, in what he had said in the very Sentence
next before. viz. Hic quoque non iste transitus [sc. ab esse ad non esse]
factus esse cognoscitur, Ibid.
That in the Sacrament nothing is changed by way of Corruption, nothing passes
from being into a state of Non Existence: If in these words he intended only to
affirm, that the Accidents of Bread and Wine, and not their Substance do remain
after Consecration. How can he say that nothing here is Corrupted, if he
thought that Accidents only remained, and that their Specific Nature perished?

2. Whereas Ratram proposes a distinction consisting of three Members, if
Species import only the sensible Qualities, the two latter Members will be
Coincident. For in the next Paragraph, Nihil enim hic vel tactu vel color vel
sapore permutatum esse deprehenditur, n. 13.
he proves there is no alteration, because we perceive no Alteration either as
to Touch, Color, or Taste. Now if in the preceding Paragraph he designed only
to assert, that the sensible Qualities remain after Consecration; I desire to
be informed what other sensible qualities the Holy Elements have besides those
here mentioned?

3. It is plain that as passing from Non Entity into being, is a substantial
Change, so the contrary is a substantial Change, whereas if Species do not
import the substance, instead of the universally received distinction of two
sorts of Substantial Mutation, and one Accidental, he makes Ratram the Author
of a Novel and unknown Distinction of two kinds of Accidental Mutation, and one
Substantial. And I might add, that the Emphatical word in Truth, which I take
to signify verity of Nature must stand for just nothing; whereas the true
meaning of the place is, That the Creatures of Bread and Wine remain in Reality
after Consecration what they were before.

Again, Figurae sunt secundum speciem visibilem, n. 49.
They are Figures in respect of the Visible Species: In this place if we
understand him of the Sensible Qualities, the Assertion is false, for it is the
substance of Bread and Wine, which have any resemblance of the Body and Blood
of Christ; the Accidents have no Analogy to it, or the Benefits of our Saviors
Death. It is not Whiteness, or Roundness, or Dryness, or Moistness, but the
substance of Bread and Wine which feeds the Body, and therefore aptly
represents the Spiritual Improvements which the Soul finds in the worthy
participation of the Holy Eucharist; and therefore what Ratram calls the
Visible Species in the former part of the Paragraph, is styled the Visible
Creature in the latter.

Again, Quod illa Caro secundum quam and Crucifixus est Christus and sepultus,
non sit Mysterium, sed Veritas Naturae; haec vero Caro quae nunc similitudinem
illius in Mysterio continet, non sit Specie caro sed Sacramento. Si quidem in
Specie Panis est, etc. n. 57.
where he tells us, That the Flesh in which Christ suffered was no Mystery, but
the Truth of Nature, whereas his Body in the Holy Eucharist is not Flesh in
Specie, but in Sacrament or Mystery, for in Specie its Bread: There will be no
Antithesis unless we understand him to deny the Sacrament to be Flesh, in the
same sense wherein he affirmed his Body born of the Virgin to be Flesh, viz. in
verity of Nature.

Also where he declares, Ast nunc Sanguis Christi, quem Credentes ebibunt. and
Corpus quod comedunt, aliud sunt in specie, and aliud in significatione, n. 69.
That what the Faithful do Orally receive, is one thing in Specie, and another
in Signification; if Species imply only the outward appearance, the Antithesis
is frigid and without force. For in Sacramental Discourses, Things are opposed
to their Mystical signification, so that the force of such Antithesis lies in
the difference between the Being, the Essence, the Substance, and the
Signification, to which they stand opposed.

This I shall make very plain from two or three Authorities of St. Austin,
Quoniam signa sunt rerum, aliud EXISTENTIA and aliud SIGNIFICANTIA, Aug. contra
Maximin. l. 3. c. 22.
speaking of Sacraments, he says, That they are signs of Things, which signs
ARE one thing, and signify another: There Existence or Being, and signifying
are opposed.

Again, Hinc est quod dictum est, Petra erat Christus; non enim dixit Petra
significat Christum, sed tanquam hoc esset, quod utique per SVBSTANTIAM hoc non
erat, sed per SIGNIFICATIONEM, Aug. Quaest. super Levit. 57.
Therefore it is said that Rock WAS Christ, he did not say it SIGNIFIED Christ,
as though it had been what indeed it was not in SUBSTANCE, but in
SIGNIFICATION; what Ratram called Species, St. Augustine calls Substance.

And if any doubt it, I hope to satisfy him by a third Authority, where
affirming that the Fathers and We had the same Spiritual Meat and Drink, he
explains himself, in what sense he called it the same, Idem itaque in Mysterio
cibus and potus illorum qui noster, sed SIGNIFICATIONE idem, non SPECIE, Aug.
in Ps. 77. Aliud illi, aliud nos, sed Specie visibili, quod tamen hoc idem
significaret, virtute Spirituali, n. 78. ex Tract. 26. in Joan.
viz. The same in SIGNIFICATION, not in SPECIE or Substance. And to these I
might add the Testimony cited by Ratram, N. 78. where he states the difference
in the same Terms.

Now by this we may understand what he means, when above, N. 54. Panis and
Vinum prius extitere, in qua etiam Specie, jam consecrata permanere videntur,
n. 54.
he says, That Bread and Wine continue in the same Species, that is, Specific
Nature after Consecration, which they had before; though that place is clear
enough without borrowing Light hence; for what is here called Species, is in
the sentence immediately preceding called Nam secundum creaturarum substantiam
quod fuerunt ante Consecrationem, hoc and postea consistunt, etc.
the Substance of the Creatures; so that Species here is what Ratram in a place
before cited out of another Work of his, In substantiae suae specie, Ratr. de
Praed. lib. 2.
calls the Species of its Substance. And as in this Tract, by the Corpus in
quo semel passus est Christus, non aliam Speciem praeferebat quam in qua
consistebat, n. 69. id est quam eam Speciem in qua consistebat, quae est natura
specifica.
Species in which Christ's Natural Body consisted, he meant a REAL Humane Body;
so in this place, N. 54. where he says the Consecrated Elements, were Bread
and Wine before, and consist, or remain in the same Species after Consecration,
he must necessarily mean, that they continue REAL Bread and Wine.

There are other Passages, where the Intelliges quod non in SPECIE, sed in
VIRTVTE Corpus and Sanguis Christi existunt, quae cernuntur, n. 56.
Species and Virtue, and the Corporeal N. 93, 94. Speciem corporalem, and
Fructum spiritualem.
Species and Spiritual Fruit, stand opposed which would illustrate this Matter,
which I pass over, that I be not tedious to the Reader. And shall only add,

That if in the Ninth and Tenth Centuries, Species had born M. Boileau's sense,
and our Saxon Ancestors had believed nothing but the Appearances of Bread and
Wine to remain, it had been of great moment carefully to have expressed it in
those very Terms, in Translating the 72 Paragraph of Bertram, where he says,
the Spiritual Body of Christ, [as to the Species it outwardly bears] is made of
several Grains of Wheat by the Bakers hand, etc. Whereas Aelfric in rendering
that place, omits the words See the Saxon Hom. Fol. 35, 36.
Secundum speciem quam gerit exterius, and says without any such restriction,
or limiting Exposition, That Christ's Spiritual Body which we call the Housel,
is gathered of many Corns Buton blood.
without Blood, etc. Where by the way also observe, that our Saxon Ancestors
held not the Doctrine of that Concomitance which was devised since, to justify
the Sacrilegious Practice of depriving the People of the Cup.

I shall now consider in what sense the word Species is used by other
Ecclesiastical Writers.

I will begin with Tertullian, the most Ancient of the Latin Fathers, who
expounds the word Species by Res and Veritas. For Instance Per fidem
incedentes, non per Speciem, id est, spe, non Re, Tertul. De^Res. Carn. c. 43.
, Walking by Faith and not by Species, that is, says he, in Hope and not in
[Fruition of] the thing. And elsewhere, having occasion to quote, Numb. 12.8.
in which place God expresses his extraordinary favor to Moses, and promises
to admit him, to more familiar Conversation with himself, than he would other
Prophets; he thus glosseth upon the words Os ad os loquar illi in Specie, id
est, in Veritate, and non in aenigmate, id est, non in imagine, Adv. Praxeam.
c. 14. vide etiam Contra Marcion. l. 4. c. 22. in Specie utique hominis quam
gesturus erat. --
: To him will I speak Mouth to Mouth, in Specie, that is, in Truth, and not
Aenigmatically, that is, in an Image.

Likewise Origin, or some Hoc liquet ex Hom. 18. ubi haec leguntur. In Libro
qui apud NOS quidem inter Salomonis volumina haberi solet, and Ecclesiasticus,
dici: apud GRAECOS vero sapientia Jesu filii Sirach appellatur.
Latin Writer, whose Homilies on the Book of Numbers are found among Origens
Works, expounding the same place, does at least ten times over make Species to
import Truth, and Aenigma the Type or Figure. Hereof take these Instances, Lex
Dei jam non in figuris and in imaginibus sicut prius, sed in ipsa Specie
veritatis agnoscitur: Et quae prius in aenigmate designabant, nunc in Specie
and Veritate complentur, Origin. Hom. VII. in Numeros.
Those things which were formerly designed in the way of an Image, are now
fulfilled in Reality and Truth. And again, Vides quomodo aenigmata legis Paulus
absolvit, and Species aenigmatum docet, Ibid.
You see how Paul clears the Figures of the Law, and teaches the Things
signified by those Figures. Antea in aenigmate fuit baptismus in nube and in
mari, nunc autem in Specie regeneratio est in aqua and in Spiritu Sancto, Ibid.
Anciently there was a Figurative Baptism, in the Cloud and in the Sea, now
there is True Regeneration in Water and the Holy Ghost. In all the
forementioned Instances the word Species does import the very Thing, the
Reality, the Truth, and not the Appearance.

In other Authors it implies the Creature, also the kind, or sort of
Creatures, in conformity to the use of the word in the Roman Laws, or the
Natural Substance.

Gaudentius Recte etiam Vini Specie tum sanguis ejus exprimitur, quia cum ipse
in Evangelio dicit, Ego sum Vitis Vera, satis declarat, sanguinem suum esse,
omne Vinum quod in Figura Passionis ejus offertur, Gaudent. Brix. ad Neophyl.
Sermon. 2. Bibl. Pat. tom. 2. Edit. Par. 1610.
says, Likewise is our Savior's Blood fitly set forth by the Species, [or
Creature] of Wine, because that he himself in his Gospel, by saying I am the
true Vine does sufficiently declare, that all the Wine which is offered in the
Figure [or Sacrament] of his Passion, is his Blood. Here Species Vini, and
Vinum are the same, and signify the Natural substance of Wine, and not the
mere Appearances and sensible Qualities thereof.

Salvian Speciem servantes, naturam relinquentes, lib. 1. de Gub.
uses the word Species for the Natural Substance of Water, in the place
already produced upon another occasion.

Isidore of Sevil says, Post Speciem Maris and Terrae. formata duo Luminaria
magna -- legis, Isid. Hisp. de Ordine Creat. c. 5.
After the Species of Sea and Earth, you read that two great Luminaries were
Created. Species there signifies the Creatures of Sea and Earth.

What St. Austin Aug. Sermon. ad Infantes apud Fulgent. de Bapt. Aethiopis.
meant by the Visible Species in the Sacrament, which he opposes to the
Spiritual Fruit, in a Passage cited and expounded by Bertram, who adds that
the Visible Species feeds the Body; may be best learned from himself in the
same Sermon, where he has these words. Sicut enim ut sit Species Visibilis
panis, multa grana in unum consperguntur; tanquam illud fiat quod de Fidelibus
ait Scriptura Sancta, Erat illis anima and Cor unum in Deum: Sic and de vino,
fratres, recolite unde sit unum. Grana multa pendent ad botrum; sed liquor
granorum in unitate confunditur. Ita Dominus Jesus Christus NOS significavit,
NOS ad SE pertinere voluit. Mysterium Pacis and Vnitatis nostrae in sua mensa
consecravit.
As to the making the Visible Species of Bread, many Grains of Corn are molded
into one Mass; as it is said of the Faithful in the Holy Scripture, that they
had one Soul and one Heart, so, my Brethren, consider how the Wine is made one
Body. Many Grapes hang on the Bunch, but the Juice of those Grapes is pressed
together into one [Body of Liquor.] Thus our Lord Jesus Christ has signified
US, [ viz. the Body of Believers,] and would that we should belong to him,
[that is, as Members of the Mystical Body, whereof he is Head,] and has
consecrated the Mystery of our Peace and Unity on his own Table.

There are several things to be Remarked from this Passage, 1. That he says,
the visible species of Bread is made up of many Corns molded together, and
made up into one Lump. Now this cannot be said of the Accidents, but of the
Substance of Bread, made up into one Loaf before Consecration. For in another
place, Quod cum per manus hominum ad illam Visibilem Speciem perducitur, non
Sanctificatur ut sit tam magnum Sacramentum, etc. de Trin. l. 3. c. 4.
he uses the same Expression, with relation to Unconsecrated Bread; Which,
says he, after it is by the hands of Men brought to that Visible Species, is
not Sanctified, and made so great a Sacrament, but by the Invisible Operation
of God's Spirit.

2. When he comes to speak of the Sacramental Wine, he does not call it the
Visible Species of Wine, but simply Wine; which is an Argument, that by the
visible Species of Bread, he meant real Bread.

3. St. Austin makes the visible Species of Bread, to be a Figure of the Unity
of the Faithful among themselves, as also of their Union with Christ their
Head. Now the mere Appearances of Bread and Wine have no resemblance of many
Members compacted into one Body, the Figure, Color, or Taste of the
Consecrated Elements, suggest not the least hint of the Union of the several
Members of Christ's Mystical Body, whereas their Natural Substances are very
apt and lively Representations thereof.

4. Bertram N. 94. Exterius quod videtur, speciem habet corpoream quae pascit
corpus.
expounding St. Austin, ascribes an effect to the Corporeal Species, which
cannot be wrought by the Sensible Appearances severed from their Subject, he
says, They feed the Body, which is Nourished only by substantial Food,
digested and turned into its own Substance: Now how mere Accidents can be
converted into Chyle and Blood, and become substantial Flesh is inconceivable,
whereas how this may be effected by true Bread and Wine, it is very easy to
apprehend.

Caesarius Etiam in hoc ipso, quod innumerosis tritici granis confici novimus,
unitatem constat assignari populorum. Sic enim frumentum solita purgantis
solicitudine praeparatum in candidam Speciem molarum labor perficitur, ac per
aquam and ignem in unius panis Substantiam congregatur. Sic variae gentes,
diversaeque nationes in unam fidem convenientes, unum de se Christi Corpus
efficient, Caesar, Arel. Hom. 7. de Pasch. in Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. Par. 1610.
Bishop of Arles, has a Passage very like this of St. Austin, Also in that the
Bread is made of innumerable Grains of Wheat; its certain, that it signifies
the Unity of the People. For thus, Wheat carefully made clean and prepared, is
by the Mill brought to a white Species, and by Water and Fire united into the
substance of one Loaf. Thus also various People, and diverse Nations agreeing in
one Faith, make up of themselves one Body of Christ. Doubtless, the Species
spoken of by this Father, is not the bare Appearance; but the Substance of
Meal: And before, where he speaks of the In eadem Homilia.
Species of Manna, he must be understood of the thing it self.

It is evident, that Walafridus Strabo had this place of St. Austin in his eye,
when having said, Post Paschae Veteris solemnia, Corporis and Sanguinis sui.
SACRAMENTA in Panis and Vini SVBSTANTIA, eisdem Discipulis Tradidit, Nihil ergo
Congruentius his SPECIEBVS, ad significandam Capitis atque Membrorum unitatem,
potuit inveniri. Quia videlicet, sicut Panis de multis Granis aquae coagulo in
unum corpus redigitur, and Vinum ex multis acinis exprimitur; Sic and Corpus
Christi ex multitudine sanctorum coadunata, completur. de ^eb. Eccles. cap. 16.
That after the Solemnity of the Old Passover, our Savior delivered to the
same Disciples, the SACRAMENT of his Body and Blood in the SVBSTANCE of Bread
and Wine; and taught them to Celebrate it in remembrance of his most Holy
Passion. He adds, That nothing could be found out more proper to signify the
Unity between the Head and Members, than those SPECIES. For as the Bread
consisting of many Grains, is by Water reduced into one Body, and as the Wine
is pressed out of many Grapes: Thus also is the Body of Christ made up of the
United Multitude of Saints. Observe, that in the words immediately preceding,
our Author styles these Species the Substance of Bread and Wine, and in the
following words describing the way in which they are made, and thereby adapted
to signify the Union between Christ and his Members, he calls them simply
Bread and Wine.

The same Author Vnde Eutychianus XXVIII Sedis Pomanae Praesul constituit,
fruges super altar tantum Fabae and Vvae benedici. -- Alias autem diversarum
SPECIES rerum statutum est ubilibet benedici a sacerdotibus, etc. Ibid. cap.
18. Fruges, and Species pro Synonymis habuit Walafridus.
uses the word Species for the Fruits of the Earth, and cites for it a forged
Decretal Epistle under the name of Pope Eutychian, which orders all other
Species, that is, Fruits of the Earth, except what by the Apostles
constitutions may be offered on the Altar to be brought home to the Priest to
receive Benediction, and the Species allowed to be Blessed on the Altar are
Beans and Grapes.

And Regino citing that Canon of the Apostles, to which Walafridus, or rather
the pretended Eutychian refers, gives it this Title, Quae Species ad altar,
non ad Sacrificium, sed ad Benedictionem simplicem debent offerri. Regino de
Discip. Eccles. l. 1. c. 64. ex Can. 4. Apost.
What Species ought to be offered at the Altar, not for Sacrifice, but for
simple Benediction; and the Canon mentions -- Praeter novas Spicas and Was and
Oleum and Thymiama, id est, incensum. -- Can. 5. Reliqua poma omnia ad domum
Episcopi vel Presbyteri dirigantur, etc.
Ears of new Corn, Grapes, Oil and Incense. Now in these Instances none can
doubt but by Species, the Specific Nature, the Substance is to be understood,
and not the Sensible Qualities of the Particulars mentioned.

In the very same sense Arnobius Junior Non solum Speciem frumenti, sed and
Vini and Olei administrans. Arnob. in Ps. 104.
uses the Term, speaking of God's bounty to the Israelites, Whom he furnished
not only with the Species of Corn, but also with those of Wine and Oil.

And it appears, that the Unconsecrated Elements were styled Species, from a
Prayer in the Gothic Missal, to be used after the Sanctus, which is before
Consecration. Vt Dominus and Deus Noster SPECIEM istam suo ministerio
CONSECRANDAM coelestis gratiae inspiratione sanctificet. Missale Gothicum, p.
375. Collectio post Sanctus, in Codd. Sacramentorum editis per Thomasium,
Quarto, Romae, 1680.
Most dear Brethren, let us pray that our Lord and God would Sanctify by the
Inspiration of his Heavenly Grace, this SPECIES which is TO BE Consecrated,
etc. Now here Species must necessarily import the Substance, for our
Adversaries themselves do not pretend, that the substance of Bread and Wine
cease before Consecration.

But in regard M. Boileau will have it, that Ratram learned this use of the
word from St. Ambrose, and particularly from his Books De Sacramentis, I shall
crave leave a little more largely to expose, the falsehood and indecent
confidence of that Assertion. That the Instance produced by M. Boileau is
Impertinent, and Mistaken, I have already shown, and shall now make some
Instances to disprove his pretense entirely.

In the Book De Initiandis, which more plausibly pretends to the Authority of
St. Ambrose, than the six Books of the Sacraments which follow it, we have
manifest Examples of the use of the word Species, for the Specific Nature, or
Substance. SPECIEM autem pro VERITATE legimus, and de Christo, and Specie
inventus ut Homo, and d^ Patre Deo: Neque Speciem ejus vidistis. Ambr. de iis
qui Mist. initiantur, c. 4.
He tells us, That the word Species is sometimes used to signify the truth,
and not the bare resemblance; as when it is said of Christ, that he was found
in Specie, in fashion as a Man; and of God the Father, neither have ye at any
time seen his Species; it is plain, that this Author understands by Species in
the first place, Christ's true Humane Nature, and in the latter the Divine
Substance or Essence. Gravior est enim ferri Species quam aquarum liquor, cap.
9.
For the Species of Iron is heavier than the Liquor of Water. Here Species
ferri implies the substance of Iron. And the Author, who some Ages after St.
Ambrose, enlarged this Tract into six Sermons, The fourth of these is among St.
Austins Sermons, de Verbis Dom. Sermon. 28.
which have long passed for so many Books of that Father on the Sacraments, but
plainly appear both by the beginnings and conclusions to be Homilies; I say
that Author expounds Species by Matter or Substance, saying of Iron, Est enim
Materies gravior quam aquarum est Elementum, de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
For it is a more weighty Substance than the Element of Water.

Again, Ante Benedictionem Verborum coelestium species nominatur, post
Consecrationem Corpus Christi significatur. De initiandis, c. 9.
Before Consecration the Species is named, after Consecration the Body of
Christ. De Consecr. did. 3. c. 69.
Gratian cites the words thus, Before Consecration another Species is named;
and the Gloss Alia Species, i. e. alterius rei Species, id est, substantia
fuit. Glossa.
expounds the word Species by Substance, as the Homilist Panis iste PANIS est,
ante verba Sacramentorum, etc. l. 4. c. 4. Dixi vobis quod ante verba Christi,
quod offertur PANIS dicatur, etc. Ibid. l. 5. c. 4.
does by Bread twice.

Also our Ambrosiaster, in his comparison between the Supernatural Effect of
Baptism, and the Miracle wrought by the Prophet Elisha, when he made Iron to
swim, says, That Vbi Baptizatus fuerit, non tanquam ferrum, sed tanquam jam
levior fructuosi ligni Species levatur. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 4.
before Baptism every Man sinks like Iron, but when Baptized, he rises, like
the lighter Species of fruitful Wood. In this place, who doubts but he intended
the Substance, and not the appearance of Wood?

In the third Book, he says, The Hesterno die de font Baptismatis
disputavimus, cujus Species veluti quaedam Sepulchri forma est. de Sacra. l. 3.
c. 1.
Species of the Font is of the form of a Grave, where doubtless he means the
very Font-stone, or if not, then its Figure united with the Stone.

Again, He starts an Objection, Forte dicis Speciem Sanguinis non video. Sed
habet Similitudinem. Sicut enim mortis similitudinem sumpsisti, ita etiam
similitudinem preciosi sanguinis bibis. de Sacra. l. 4. c. 4.
I see not the Species of Blood; to which he answers, but what thou see has
a Resemblance of it: For as thou have received the similitude of his Death, I
presume he means in Baptism, so, thou drinkest the similitude of his Blood. Now
the word Species being opposed to Similitude, it is doubtless used for the
Reality, not for the Appearance. And so indeed he Expounds himself, objecting
the same thing in these words, Quomodo vera Caro, quomodo verus Sanguis? Qui
similitudinem video, non video Sanguinis veritatem. de Sacram. l. 6. c. 1.
I see only a Similitude, I see not the Verity of Blood.

As I remember, the word Species occurs but once more in these Books, and in
that De Sacram. l. 2. c. 3.
place it unquestionably signifies a Figure, or Type; in which sense we find
it also used in the Book Cap. 9.
De Initiandis, and by Ratram too. But I know not any advantage our Adversaries
can make of this.

Were it necessary, I could produce many Instances out of St. Ambrose, to
prove, that Species imports the Nature, or Substance: As when he says of the
Pillar, which directed the Marches of the Israelites, Illa autem columna nubis
specie quidem praecedebat filio Israel, Mysterio autem significabat Dominum
Jesum, etc. Amb. in Psalm. 118. Oct. 5.
The Pillar went before in the Species of a Cloud, but it Mystically signified
the Lord Jesus, etc. Who ever doubted it to be a Real Cloud? Again, speaking of
the Water turned into Wine by our Savior, he says, Vt rogatus ad Nuptias
aquae Substantiam in Vini Speciem commutaret. Ambr. op. t. 5. Sermon. 15. ex
Edit. Par. 1632.
That our Lord turned the substance of Water into the Species of Wine. That is,
no doubt, into the Specific Nature, as well as the sensible Appearance of
Wine. But I shall trouble you with no more, when I have produced one Instance
of the use of this Term, out of Paschasius Radbertus, if he really did alleadg
the Miracles which we now read in his Work, to prove the Carnal Presence.

He makes Plegils, a Saxon Priest, to pray that God would discover to him, What
the Quae foret Species latitans sub forma Panis and Vini. Pasc. Radb- de C. and
S. D. c. 14.
Species was which lay hid under the form of Bread and Wine. In which place,
according to the Romanists themselves, Species must import the Natural
substance of our Lord's Body, and not the sensible Qualities only. And I do not
remember that Paschase (who uses the word Species, for the sensible Qualities
of Bread) does any where intimate its substance to be destroyed. I know in
Berengarius his time, it was taken for granted that he did. But I am of
opinion, that this Notion was a refining upon the Doctrine of Paschase, and the
first Author in which I meet the word Species, in the Popish sense is Algerus,
who disputing against Impanation, says, Quum in utero sumpserit Speciem vel
formam cum substantia: In altari vero Speciem vel formam Panis mutata and non
permanente substantia. Alger. de Sacr. l. 1. c. 6.
That Christ does not take on him the Species or Form of Bread in the
Sacrament, as He took the Species or Form of Flesh in the Virgin Womb: For
there he took the Species or Form together with the Substance, but upon the
Altar he assumes the Species or Form of Bread, the substance not remaining but
being changed. I am confident, the word Species was never used in the sense of
the present Roman Church before the Eleventh Century, and that not before the
Disputes against Berengarius, whose Adversaries were the first who advanced the
Notion now current.

I have the more largely insisted on these two Terms, Veritas and Species, in
regard the Confutation of M. Boileau's Exposition of them, does effectually
Rescue Ratram out of his hands, and evince that there is no color of Reason
for him to claim the Authority of this Book, for the support of
Transubstantiation. The other Terms remaining in Dispute, I shall dispatch more
briefly; for in Truth, I need only relate M. Boileau's Exposition of them, to
satisfy any Impartial Reader who is tollerably skilled in the Latin Tongue,
that the sense which he gives them, is very unnatural, and absurd.

I took notice elsewhere, Dissert. Chapter IV. p. 73.
how great Variety of Phrases are made use of in this little Tract to express
what we call the outward Signs in the Sacrament, and by which we understand, as
in Baptism the Substance of water, so in the H. Eucharist the Substance of
Bread and Wine. But M. Boileau expounds them all of the sensible Qualities of
the H. Elements without their Substance.

1. The Adjective Visible which is sometimes joined with Bread, sometimes with
Species, sometimes with Creature, Sacrament, Food, is by our Translatour so
rendered as though it did signify Apparent in opposition to Real. The Visible
Substance of Bread, is by him made to imply, so much of Bread as appears to the
Eye, viz. Figure and Color. The Visible Creature, and Visible Sacrament, is
with him, no more of them than falls under our Senses, viz. the outward
Appearance.

Now if this be the true Sense of the Word, many passages of Ratram, and other
Authors, are egregious Nonsense; for Example. S. Augustine Citatus a Ratramno.
n. 78, 79.
calls the Manna Visible Food, and in a few lines after, says, that [in the
Sacrament] we now receive Visible Food, which in the next Paragraph he calls
the Visible Sacrament. If by the Visible Food or Sacrament, we must with the
Romanists understand only La Substance Visible, cest a dire, ce qui paroist aux
yeux de ce pain. n. 40. Selonla creature visible et qui tomb sous les sens. n.
49. ce que le Sacrament a de visible. n. 79. nourriture visible and qui tomb
sous les sens. n. 78.
so much as falls under our senses, viz. the sensible Qualities, we must then
understand by the Visible Food which the Fathers eat and understood
Spiritually, only the sensible Accidents of the Manna, and believe that more
than a million of persons for forty years together lived upon roundness,
whiteness, and sweetness and other like Accidents of Manna. Quod credat Judaeus
Apella. At this rate of expounding who knows but Ratram did with Basilides, and
Saturninus deny that Christ had true Flesh, a Real Humane Body; for he says it
was visible and palpable, by which possibly he might mean that our Savior's
Body had only the Qualities which are proper to affect the Eye, or the Touch,
without the natural Substance of a true Humane Body. Should that old Heresy
revive, its Proselytes might as plausibly wrest the Terms of this Author to
prove that Christ had only the Species or external Appearances of an Humane
Body, as M. Boileau does to show, that he believed only the accidents of Bread
and Wine to remain in the Sacrament after Consecration.

It is plain that Bertram by Visible Bread means Material Bread, and by the
Visible Creature, he means a Corporeal Creature, and by Visible Food, Bodily
Food. It Is very well known, that the Graeci passim (...), and (...) opponunt*
and per (...), and (...) Substantias Corporeas intelligunt. Ita and Latini per
Visibilia.
Fathers both Greek and Latin commonly distinguish all beings into Visible, and
Invisible, or Sensible, which is all one with Greg. Nyssen. in Cant. Hom. 6.
sic dividit rerum Naturam and exponit (...), and (...).
Material, and Intelligible or Spiritual. And accordingly in the Nicene Creed
we find all God's Creatures divided into things Visible and Invisible, that is,
Corporeal and Incorporeal, Bodies and Spirits. So that there is no room to
doubt, but Bertram uses the Word Visible in the Vulgar, and received Sense,
for Corporeal and Material Bread.

2. And the same doubtless he means by that which the eye beholds, which the
bodily sense perceives, that which outwardly appears. For he speaks in the same
manner concerning In eo tamen font si consideretur solummodo quod Corporeus
aspicit sensus, elementum fluidum conspicitur, etc. n. 17.
the Water in Baptism, if you consider ONLY what the bodily Sense beholds, it
is a fluid Element, or Substance. And again, Erat namque eis and Visibilis
forma quae corporis sensibus appareret. N. 21.
of the Cloud and Red Sea, they had a Visible form which appeared to the bodily
Senses, which we are to understand of the Substance of the Sea and Cloud, for
this latter expression, is in effect the same which he had said before, Igitur
Mare and Nubes non secundum hoc quod Corpus extiterant, etc. Ibid.
that the Cloud and Sea were Bodies, and soon after Similiter Manna -- and Aqua
-- Corporales extiterant: and 22. Inerat Corporeis istis Substantiis
Spiritualis Verbi potestas. Ibid. Verba Visibilis, and Corporalis. Rabanus De
Instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 30. pro synonymis habet. -- Aqua enim Sacramenti,
Visibilis est: Aqua Spiritus, invisibilis est. -- Sicut etiam Aqua Corporalis
corpus lavat and potat, ita Spiritualis Spiritum abluit and pascit.
of the Manna and Rock Water that they were Bodily Substances, and that both
the one and the other had a Spiritual Virtue, a Sanctifying Power, upon which
he illustrates this Question touching the Eucharist, by comparing it with those
Sacraments of the Old Testament.

And the last of these three Phrases, That which outwardly appears, or which
appears to the Bodily Sense, though it look a little suspiciously, yet in
Truth, no way favors M. Boileau's Hypothesis. For even in the Celebrated
Catacheses of Cyril, which our Adversaries produce in Triumph against us,
(...), the Apparent or Visible Bread signifies true and real Bread, the
Substance, and not the mere appearance of it, as much as (...). Catech. Mist. 3.
(...), the Apparent or Visibile ointment, signifies true ointment or the
Substance of the Chrism. And indeed the Phrases above mentioned in Ratram
designed to express the outward part of the Sacrament, are equivalent to an
Expression of Origin, (...). Orig. in Matthew. p. 254. Edit. Huet.
who says, that Holy Eucharist as to the material part, is digested and
passes into the draught.

For Bertram expresses himself in the same manner, and makes all the several
Phrases which follow, equivalent, viz. Number secundum hoc quod videtur, quod
Corporaliter sumitur, quod dente premitur, quod fauce glutitur, quod
receptaculo ventris suscipitur, etc. n. 52.
As it is seen, as it is Corporally received, pressed by the Teeth, and passed
down the Throat, into the Belly. Now what this material part of the H.
Eucharist is, Origin himself very expressly declares, viz. (...). Ibid.
the Material Substance of Bread.

3. M. Boileau makes the word Body to imply only the Corporaliter and Secundum
corpus en ce que paroist aux sens corporels. n. 15. See the Remarks.
sensible Qualities and corporally to be in a sensible way. The Exposition is
very harsh yet to justify it, he does not allege so much as one Instance in
which these are so used by any Father or other good Author. It were easy for
me to produce an hundred instances of its being taken otherwise: but to save
both my self and the Reader trouble, I will content my self to offer two or
three places in this Tract in which it cannot without falsehood and absurdity be
so rendered.

N. 15. We see there is nothing CORPORALLY changed in them, therefore they must
needs acknowledge that they are changed in some other respect than that of the
BODY, etc.

I presume none will deny that in this place the Terms Corporally, and in
respect of the Body are equivalent, and are opposed to Figuratively, in
Signification or Spiritually, and sometimes to Virtually, or in respect of its
Efficacy. Now there lies no Antithesis between an Appearance and a Figure, or
between, Sensible Qualities and Signification; but there is a manifest
Antithesis between in Verity of Nature and in Figure, between the Substance and
Signification of the Consecrated Elements, and such as is authorized by many
examples, some whereof have been lately produced: whereas I dare challenge M.
Boileau and all his Brethren of the Sorbon to make a single instance in St.
Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, Fulgentius, or Isidore (which are all the Fathers
cited in this Tract) of an Antithesis between Appearance, and Signification.

Again, if corporally changed be no more than Sensibly or in outward Appearance
changed, then Ratram's Discourse is impertinent upon two accounts. 1. For
laboring to confute an Absurd Doctrine which no Body maintained; for it is not
pretended, that Ratram's Adversaries affirmed that Consecration made any change
in the sensible Appearances of the Hallowed Bread and Wine. And 2dly. For
proving more than was needful, he mentions all the three kinds of Physical
Changes, he proves that Consecration does not work any of the three, whereas it
had been sufficient for him to have shown that it made no Alteration. And
indeed by proving, that nothing is Generated, or Corrupted, he proves
effectually that Bread and Wine remain after Consecration, which will not
consist with the Council of Trent.

Besides, if this were his meaning, that nothing is Sensibly changed, when he
denies a Corporal Change, it is very wonderful, that he should no where
distinguish between the Substance of Bread and Wine, and their Appearance,
determining the former to be Changed upon Consecration, and the latter to
remain unaltered; but there is nothing like it in the whole Book.

Lastly, in De Praedest. lib. 1. p. 42. and ibidem, Vniversa quae sive secundum
corpus, sive secundum animam aguntur, etc.
another work our Author says, that God appoints all things quae secundum
corpus homines patiuntur, which affect men in their Bodies; now I suppose none
will be so ridiculous as to interpret the words of the Appearance of their
Bodies, which plainly import the Natural Substance.

And even in this place he had just before said, that as to the N. 14. Secundum
Speciem namque Creaturae -- panis and vinum nihil habent in se permutatum.
Species of the Creature -- neither the Bread or Wine have any thing changed.
Which has been fully proved to imply the Nature or Kind of those Creatures.
Likewise in the following context these Phrases in Truth or Reality, and in
their Proper Essence are used in the same sense with Corporally. And doubtless,
whatever any thing is according to its proper Essence, that it is In
Proprietate humor corruptibilis. n. 18.
in Propriety of Nature, or Nam Substantialiter nec Panis Christus etc.
Substantially, both which Terms are used by this Author.

In another place n. 65. 66.
where he says we must not consider any thing Corporally in that Meat and
Drink viz. the Consecrated Elements, he gives this Reason, Because the soul
cannot feed on Corporal Meat and Drink. Now I would fain be informed, whether
the Substance of Bread and Wine be not as unsuitable Food for the soul, as the
sensible Appearances thereof, as also whether the Soul can feed on the Natural
Flesh of Christ, any more than on Bread and Wine? The words are easy to be
understood by any man who has no interest to make the plainest things obscure,
and their meaning is, that the Soul which is a Spirit cannot receive
Nourishment from any material Food, which is it self a Corporeal Substance, and
the proper Sustenance of the Body.

Lastly, He says elsewhere n. 75. Si Vinum illud Sanctificatum -- in Christi
Sanguinem Corporaliter convertitur, aqua quoque quae pariter admixta est, in
Sanguinem Populi credentis necesse est Corporaliter convertatur. -- At videmus,
in aqua Secundum Corpus nihil esse conversum: consequenter ergo et in Vino
nihil Corporaliter ostensum,
If the Wine be CORPORALLY changed into Christ's Blood, then must the Water
mixed with it in the Chalice be CORPORALLY turned into the Blood of the
Faithful -- Now we see that the Water has nothing in it CORPORALLY changed,
therefore neither has the Wine, etc.

Will M. Boileau say, that Ratram believed, the Water to be Really and
Substantially, tho not Sensibly and in outward Appearance turned into the Blood
of the People? If Corporally does not signify Sensibly but in Bodily
Substance, when he denies the Water to be Corporally changed, then neither
does it signify Sensibly, but Substantially when he denies the Wine to be so
changed into the Blood of Christ.

But M. Boileau Remarq. p. 246. 247. 248.
tells us that Substantia, likewise is improperly taken in this Book for the
Appearance; and to make this out (tho he says the Calvinists confess it to be
sometimes used Improperly) he has Mustered a great many Examples out of the
Fathers; whence we may conclude reasonably, that he would not have failed to
back his new Expositions of other Terms, with the like colorable Authorities,
if he could any where have met with them.

But all this show of Authority is mere empty Appearance, for in those few of
his Citations, where Substantiae is used for the Qualities of any Substance, it
implies them Subsisting in their Subject, and not of themselves their Subject
being destroyed. Besides, what tho the word be sometimes improperly used, must
it therefore never be taken in 'its natural sense? To which add, that as in
those Instances which he cites, it is apparent that the place will not bear the
word in its natural sense; so on the contrary those places of this Book in
which M. Boileau would expound it in an Improper sense, will bear none but the
Natural and Primitive sense of the Word.

N. 54. Where he renders secundum creaturarum Substantiam, The Visible
Creatures as they appear, the place necessarily determins any unbiassed
Judgment to understand the Word properly, and in the sense of Aristotle, for
which M. Boileau frequently declares his Aversion. Had Bertram designed only to
say, that the same sensible Qualities remain, Quale and Tale would more aptly
have expressed his sense, Nam Secundum creaturarum Substantiam, Quod fuerunt
ante Consecrationem Hoc et postea CONSISTVNT. PANIS and VINVM prius EXTITERE,
in qua etiam SPECIE jam Consecrata permanere videntur.]
than Quod, and Hoc, which he uses. And he would rather have said, they had
the Appearance of Bread and Wine before Consecration, which they retain after,
not Peremptorily that they were Bread and Wine before, and continue after in
the same Specific Nature.

Mr. Boileau would not be well pleased if we should refuse to take the word
Substance in its proper sense, in some places of this Book, where it is very
apparent, that it is improperly used. For example. N. 30. Where Ratram
Paraphaseth on our Saviors Words to his Disciples, John vi. 62, 63.
Does this offend you? What and if ye shall see the Son of Man Ascend up where
he was before? In this manner. When after my Resurrection ye shall see me
Ascend into Heaven carrying with me my entire Body, and every drop of my Blood,
Sed Vere PER MYSTERIVM, PANEM ET VINVM in Corporis and Sanguinis mei conversa
SVBSTANTIAM a Credentibus Sumenda. n. 30.
Then you will understand that my Flesh is not to be Eaten by the Faithful in
the way that these Infidels imagine, but that they must receive Bread and Wine
being in Truth Mystically turned into the Substance of my Body and Blood.

Now there are two things which will not permit us to take the Word Substance
properly. 1. The Author says that the things to be Received by the Faithful
are Panem and vinum -- sumenda, non uti in pridem editis Sumendam.
BREAD and WINE, which appears manifestly to any impartial Reader, who
observes the Syntax according to M. Boileau's Edition from the MS. For the
Participle is of the Plural Number and Neuter Gender, which plainly refers to
Bread and Wine, and not as in the former Editions Sumendam, referring to our
Saviors Flesh. This I did not observe when I Corrected the Latin Text
according to the Lobez MS. and therefore have not altered the Translation. 2.
He says it is Vere per Mysterium.
Mystically turned into the Substance of his Body and Blood, whence we may
learn that it is not properly changed, it is a Mystical not a Natural and
Substantial change, and therefore does not change the H. Elements from their
own Natural Substance, into the Proper Substance of our Saviors Flesh and
Blood. There may appear some Emphasis in the Adverb Vere in Truth, but the
Addition of Per Mysterium mystically, clears the Authors meaning, who uses the
Word to import the Sacramental Verity, not the Natural; For Sacraments give a
true Representation, and the Real Benefits and Virtue of the thing signified,
tho they do not Exhibit the very thing it self. And this sense of the word True
in Opposition to False, or Imaginary also to the Natural Sustance is clearly
expressed by the Author of the Books De Sacram. l. 6. c. 1. In Similitudine
quidem accipis Sacramentum, Sed vere Naturae GRATIAM VIRTVTEMQVE consequeris.
Suspicor legendum verae; sed nil ex conjectura statuo.
de Sacramentis, who to an Objection which I have mentioned before, I see the
Similitude, not the Truth of Blood, Answers; Tho thou receivest the Sacrament
in a Similitude, yet thou truly obtainest the Grace, and Virtue of the Natural
Substance, which may improperly be styled the Substance of his Blood. And good
Authority I find for this improper use of the word Substance in Sacramental
changes in the Old Gallican Missal, published first at Rome by Thomasius, and
after at Paris by F. Mabillon, in which we have this Collect. Confirma, Domine,
famulos tuos quos ex Aqua and Spiritu sancto propitius redemisti, ut veterem
hominem cum suis actionibus deponentes, in ipsius conversatione vivamus, ad
cujus SVBSTANTIAM per haec Pasc halia Mysteria TRANSTVLISTI. Per. Miss. Gallic.
Miss. Paschal. Fer vi.
Confirm, O Lord, us thy Servants whom thou have graciously redeemed with
water, and the Holy Ghost, that putting off the Old Man with his works, we may
live after the Conversation of him, into whose SUBSTANCE thou have by these
Paschal Mysteries TRANSLATED us etc. This Prayer was made in the name of the
New Baptized Persons on the Friday in Easter week. And you may observe that it
speaks of those Neophytes as turned into the Substance of Christ, by the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper received immediately upon it. Which
cannot be understood of the Natural Substance of his Flesh, but of his Mystical
Body into which they were Incorporated by the Sacrament of Baptism, and made
true Members of Christ, not in Verity of Nature, but in Veritate Mysterii vel
Sacramenti, deriving true Grace and Spiritual strength from Christ their Head.

I shall but in a word show how vainly he baulks the Adverb Figurement,
Figuratively in Translating Figurate, and constantly renders it in a Figure,
which I should not have noted, but that there is a manifest design to
Insinuate, that the Accidents are the outward Sign and Figure under which not
Bread and Wine, but the Natural Substance of Christ's Body and Blood do exist.
And F. Mabillon A.B. Sec. iv. p. 2. n. 116. Vno in versu duo sunt facinora,
Primum quod Sub Figura vertit Figurement, uti etiam page 2. non enim ait Auctor
haec Mysteria in Figura celebrari, sed Sub Figura quae Corpus Christi velet,
non excludat.
imputes it a great Crime to the Hugonot Translatour, that he has rendered Sub
Figura Figuratively; whereas to any Man who will consult this Author
throughout, it will soon appear that the good Father departed from his usual
Candor, in passing that severe Censure on his Countryman. For Ratram does
indifferently use the following Phrases, viz. Mysteria Corporis and Sanguinis
Sub Figura dicit celebrari, n. 34. Verba autem St. Augustini ita se habent.
Figura ergo est, n. 33. quibus contraria esse affirmat Ratramnus placita eorum
qui docent non in Figura* n. 32. Aliud exterius per Figuram ostentans, n. 92.
Figurate Christi Corpus and Sanguis existunt, n. 10. Secundum quendam modum
Corpus Christi esse cognoscitur, and modus iste in Figura est, n. 84.
Under a Figure, in a Figure, by a Figure, Figuratively, and it is a Figure,
affirming in all these various ways of Expression, that the Holy Eucharist is
Christ's Body, as may be seen, by the Instances in the Margin, and indeed the
words in a Figure, do not imply the Holy Eucharist to consist of the Person of
our Savior under the Accidents of Bread and Wine, which our Adversaries call
the Figure, or Vail: For St. Austin Petra Christus in Signo, Verus Christus in
Verbo and in Carne, n. 78. i. e. Signum Christi, non Verus Christus.
cited by Ratram, says, That the Rock was Christ in Signo, which imports not,
that it was Christ personally present under the Appearance of a Rock, but that
the Rock was a Sign or Type of Christ. So in his Exposition of the LIVE David in
Figura Christus est, Tom. 8. in Ps. 54.
Psalm, he says, David was Christ in a Figure, that is, a Figure of Christ, or
Figurately styled the Christ, or Anointed of God.

2. He likewise amuseth us, as though there were some special Mystery in those
Verbs, which according to the Tumid Style of the Middle Ages, Ratram uses
instead of the Verb Substantive Est. And therefore he renders N. 12. Et alibi
passim.
Cognoscitur, is sensibly known. Cernitur and Videtur, appears to our Bodily
sense; in the like manner Ostenditur and Monstratur: Now if there were any
Emphasis intended in the use of these words, as perhaps sometimes there was,
though not generally, yet the Emphasis is directly contrary to what M. Boileau
makes it; for the Author does not use those Terms by way of Reserve and
Caution, or to express an uncertainty, as this Translator very ridiculously
makes him rendering Videntur, it seems, N. 54. For where there is an Emphasis,
they do vehemently affirm or deny, and imply the highest assurance of the Truth
of what is said; the Evidence of Sense, and certain Knowledge, being the best
grounds upon which we can conclude a thing either to be, or not to be. So that
in the place newly mentioned, Ratram does expressly say, That we see the
Consecrated Bread and Wine remain in the former Species, or Kind, and not as
our Et depuis il semble qu'elles demeurent dans la meme espece, c'est a dire
apparences. Remarque p. 250.
Translator has it; it seems they remain after Consecration in the same
Appearance. And he uses promiscuously Videtur, Ostenditur, and Cernitur, which
last is not capable of that doubtful sense, which the first may sometimes bear.

However, I say commonly these Verbs are not Emphatical, but used for the Verb
Substantive, as in the following Instances. Non parva diversitas inter eos esse
dinoscitur, n. 2. In quo nulla permutatio facta esse cognoscitur, n. 12. Non
iste transitus factus esse cognoscitur, ibid.
There is no small difference [known to be] among them. Again, How can that be
called Christ's Body, in which no change is [known to be] made. And the same
Occurs at least four times over in the same and the next Paragraph, and is
expounded by the Author himself, saying expressly, Si ergo nihil hic EST
permutatum, etc. n. 13. Nihil HABENT in se permutatum, n. 14.
that there IS nothing changed, and that the Bread and Wine HAVE NOTHING
changed in them. Again, Number mare secundum quod Elementum VIDEBATVR, i. e. fuit,
Baptismi potuit habere virtutem? Vel Nubes juxta quod densioris crassitudinem
aeris OSTENDEBAT, i. e. aer crassus and condensatus fuit, n. 20.
could either the Sea, as it was [seen to be] an Element, have a Baptismal
virtue, or the Cloud as it did show condensed Air, sanctify the People. Did
the Sea only seem to be Water, or had the Cloud only an Appearance of condensed
Air, or were they in substance, the one Water, and the other thick Air? I must
needs say, M. Boileau plays at small Games, when he lays so much stress on
nothing, and has the confidence, because Ratram says, That the Body and Blood
of Christ celebrated in the Church, are different from that Body and Blood
which now is [known to be] Glorified, to aver that Toute la difference qu'il y
etablit enter le Corpse de J. C. dans la gloire est que ce dernier per
resurrectionem jam glorificatum cognoscitur, ae lieu qu'il n'avoit qu' a dire
jam glorificatum existit, qui est un mot en usage, etc. Pref. p. 40.
all the Difference that Ratram makes between Christ's Body in Heaven, and on
the Altar, is, that [both being his Glorified Body] the former Glorificatum
Cognoscitur, is known to be Glorified, whereas he might as easily have said
simply, IS Glorified. Now if by Cognoscitur, M. Boileau means, is sensibly
Glorified, as I presume he does, Christ's Body in Heaven to us, appears not
Glorious, being received up out of our sight.

He likewise mightily vapors with the word P. 40. Pref. p. 224. Rem. etc. Iste
Panis and Calix qui Corpus and Sanguis Christi nominatur and EXISTIT, n. 99.
Existit, as though it imported the Existence of Christ's Natural Body in the
Sacrament, and ten times over twits us with these words, The Bread and Cup is
called the Body and Blood of Christ, and IS SO.

Now all this Flourish has nothing in it. For first, Our Author N. 21.
Baptismum tamen extitisse pro fuisse, n. 26. Angelorum cibus existit, n. 40.
Mortis and Passionis -- cujus existunt repraesentationes.
uses the word Existit, for Est, in forty places of this Book, of which see
two or three Examples in the Margin, 2. Where he uses the word Existit, he
generally adds something that is Inconsistent with their Notion of Christ's
Presence in the Sacrament: Spirituale Corpus, Spiritualisque Sanguis existit,
n. 16. Existum repraesentationes -- ejus sumunt appellationem cujus existunt
Sacramentum, n. 40. Secundum quid, n. 83. id est, Secundum quendam modum
nimirum Figurate, quemadmodum clarius rem exponit Ratramnus, n. 84. Item de
Corpore ex Virgin, Proprium salvatoris Corpus existit, de Mystico, Corpus quod
per Mysterium existit, n. 97. and 96. Claret quia Panis ille Vinumque Figurate
Christi Corpus and Sanguis existunt.
Telling us, either that the Bread and Cup are his Spiritual Body and Blood, or
they are the SACRAMENT of his Body and Blood. That in some respect, [not
simply,] they are truly his Body and Blood; and elsewhere intimates that they
are not his proper Body, but only a Figure, or Mystery thereof; and expressly
says, near the beginning of this Tract, that it is clear, that the Holy Bread
and Wine, are FIGURATIVELY the Body and Blood of Christ; by which Exposition of
the Author himself, we are satisfied how we must understand that Passage, M.
Boileau so much Triumphs in. But what most amazeth me, is to find, that in his
Remarks on N. 16. and these words whence it necessarily follows, that the
change is made Figuratively, he makes a Flourish with Authorities, and makes a
Parallel between Ratram, Paschase, and the second Nicene Council, Rem. p. 225.
(...).
making them all teach the same Doctrine, whereas our Author says, That the
Holy Elements, are Figuratively the Body and Blood of Christ, or the Spiritual
Body and Blood, which is all one; and the Nicene Doctors say, that they are
(...), properly his Body and Blood. I would gladly be informed, in what Greek
Lexicon Mr. Boileau finds that word expounded by Figurate.

But thirdly, Those words of Ratram overthrow the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and by very firm Ab est vel existit adjecti tertii, ad est
adjecti secundi valet consequentia; Panis Corpus Christi existit, ergo Panis
existit.
consequence infer, that the Bread and Wine do remain after Consecration. For
by the Rules of Logic, this Argument is good, M. Boileau is Dean of Sens,
therefore M. Boileau IS in being; and in like manner after Consecration, Bread
and Wine are the Body and Blood of Christ: Therefore after Consecration, Bread
and Wine do exist.

Thus at length, I have done with his Exposition of our Author's controverted
Terms, which if true, Mr. Dean would do well to Publish a Glossary on purpose
to assist the Reader, who by the help of all the Dictionaries yet extant, will
never be able to comprehend this Author's sense. But I must needs say, the
difficulties are all Fictions of the Translator, who delights to perplex the
most plain Expressions, and by new and bold Figures, and forced Significations
invented to serve his design, has offered manifest violence to our Author's
words, in an hundred Passages of this small Piece. I confess he uses so great
License, and indulgeth his Fancy at so extravagant a Rate, that I was almost
tempted to think, that M. Boileau the Poet, had commenced Doctor in the Sorbon,
and began unluckily to play the Divine, as Poets commonly do, when they begin
their Theological Studies in their Old Age. If it had really been so, I could
have pitied and forgiven him many Extravagancies, which are venial Faults in a
Poet, but unpardonable in a Professor of Divinity.

Here I once thought to dismiss him, but upon second Thoughts, I resolved to
attend him a little further, and consider the Reflections wherewith he
concludes his Preface: I shall say nothing in defense of Protestant
Translators three Reflections, which stand firm after all his weak assaults
upon them.

His first Reflection is, That supposing, though falsely, that Ratram intended
to dispute against the Real Presence, yet since he treats his Adversaries as
Catholics, and calls them the Faithful; the Question in dispute must
necessarily have been some opinion of less moment than the Real Presence; the
belief thereof, or of the contrary, could never have been held indifferent by
the Faithful.

Not to spend time in exposing his absurd pretense to suppose a thing, when he
immediately assumes, and concludes the contrary, I deny this consequence, viz.
Ratram does not call his Adversaries Heretics, but treats them as Brethren,
therefore he did not write against the Real Presence. All that can be concluded
thence, is, that the Adversaries of that Doctrine were then as they still are,
Persons of a more charitable and meek Spirit, than those who maintain and
propagate it. There is a great deal of difference between Heresy, and some
gross Errors, whose Patrons do not desert the Communion of the Church; and
therefore it does not follow, that because Ratram treats these Erring Brethren
as Catholics, and includes them with their Adversaries in the common Notion of
Faithful, he must needs esteem the Question in dispute of so little moment,
that it was indifferent which way it was held. It Is plain, he Number. 11.
charge them with Consequences very absurd, Number. 15.
with contradicting themselves, with subverting what they pretended to believe;
Number. 32. Sanctorum Scriptis Patrum contraire comprobantur.
and with contradicting the Authority of the Fathers, which are no very slight
Accusations, and show plainly, that he did not esteem it a matter of no moment,
whether his own or his Adversaries Opinion were embraced.

His second Reflection is, That Ratram could not possibly write against
Paschase, because he takes no notice of the Miracle of Christ's Apparition in
the form of Flesh, alleged by Paschase in the fourteenth Chapter of his Book.

To which I Answer, 1. That there is no necessity that he should take notice of
this Miracle any more than he does of his other Arguments, since, as it has
been before observed, that it is the Notion and not the Book of Paschase,
against which he disputes. He acts the part of an Opponent throughout, and
never answers one Argument, save that he once, N. 56. obviates an Objection
from St. Ambrose.

2. That admitting us to pretend, that Ratram encountered the Book of Paschase,
we may as fairly from our Author's Silence infer, that there were no such
Miracles alleged in it, but that those Fables were since foisted in. M.
Boileau says, that Blondel rejects the whole Chapter as spurious; I have not
his Book at command to see his Reasons, but I cannot believe he did it without
all Authority, as is pretended. M. Boileau Pref. p. 52.
himself says enough to show, that the two last Miracles were foisted in, when
he acquaints us, that one Old Manuscript has all Three, but another more
Ancient, only One. If one Superstitious Monk took liberty to Insert those two,
why might not the first (which doubtless was the Fiction of some Greek Monk
after the Second Nicene Synod) together with the Discourse that ushers it in,
be a Forgery too?

As for the Story of Gregory the Great, and the Roman Matron (which is likewise
foisted into our Saxon Homily) out of the Life of that Pope, it was impossible
that Paschase should allege it. Since that Life of Gregory was not written in
many years after According to F. Maubillon, A. D. 831.
Paschase had Published his Book, and admitting him to have Lived till 865.
which is fourteen Years after the time when Sirmondus says he Died; Paschase
must have been at least seven Year in his Grave, before Vide Vossium de Hist.
Latin. l. 2. c. 36. de Joanne Diacono.
Joannes Diaconus wrote the Life of Gregory, (in which only it occurs) and
Dedicated it to Pope John the VIII, who was Advanced to the Papal Throne, A. D.
872. that is, about forty Years after Paschase first Published his Book, and
above twenty after his A. D. 851.
Resignation of the Abbey, and consequently after his second Publication of it,
with an Epistle to Carolus Calvus, in which he styles himself Abbot.

As for the story of Plegils the Saxon Presbyter, who prayed to see Christ in
the form of a Child, and obtained his Request; it is a shrewd Presumption
against the Antiquity, and Authority thereof, that it is omitted by the
Interpolator of the Saxon Homily, who would hardly have neglected so remarkable
a Miracle wrought in Favor of an English Priest.

But Thirdly, not to stand exposing the Falsehood and Impudence of these fained
Apparitions, or rather of their Fabulous Author, Joannes Diaconus lived near
300 years after. Gregory's Pontificate, is a Fabulous Writer and Author of the
story of Trajans Soul being Praid out of Hell by that Pope.
they all prove too much, or else just nothing. For either in these Apparitions
they saw what really was under the forms of Bread and Wine, and what really was
Transacted in the Sacrament, or they did not. If they did not, the whole was a
mere Illusion and Fancy. And on the other hand if they did, Then Christ
according to the description of the first, and third Miracle is still an
Infant, both the Jew and the Saxon Priest are said to have seen a little Child.
Again, Christ must be divided into several parts, as the Jew saw his Body
broken in Pieces in St. Basil's Hands. Again, every Communicant does not
Receive Christ Entire, but only some part of him, for the Roman Matron saw the
Piece which she was to receive, turned him bam ear th aeteoed seo snaed thaes
husles the heo thicgan sceolde sylce thar laeg on tham disce anes fingres lith
aeal geblodgod. Hom. Sax. Fol. 38.
into a Joint of the little Finger all Bloody. Again, at this rate Christ must
be actually slain, and the Sacrifice of the Altar be a Bloody Sacrifice, for
the Jew is said to see his Body divided in S. Basils hands, and our Saxon
Miracle Monger tells us that the two Monks, saw an Angel with a Sword at
Consecration divide the Child's Body, and pour his Blood into the Chalice, and
if so what becomes of the Doctrine of Concomitancy? So that either these
Miracles prove nothing at all, or else they prove what will as little consist
with the Romish Belief as with ours.

His Third Reflection is this, That if Ratram had been against the Real
Presen^e, he would not have failed to have Reproached the Greeks with the
Belief of it, in his four Books Written against them,

But this is a very Trifling Remark, for this was a point upon which the Greek
as well as the Latin Church was at that time divided, and as it had been
unreasonable to Reproach the whole Church with the Errors of one Party, so it
had been Imprudently done to object to the Greek a Reproach which might have
been retorton the Latin Church.

But the true reason of his Silence on that Question is, that he had no
occasion to mention it, since it was none of the Ten Points which F. Mabillon
says, were matter of dispute between the two Churches, and the Subject of
Ratram's Book; Capitula ista numero erant omnino december, nempe de Processione
Spiritus Sancti ex patre Filioque de jejunio Sabbati, de Coelibatu
Presbyterorum, de Chrismatione Frontis Baptizatorum Presbyteris vetita, de
Abstinentia octo heb domadarum ante Pascha non inchoata, de Barbae rasione
Clericorum, de Episcoporum Ordinatione per saltum, de Primat^ Romani
Pontificis, de Confectione Chrismatis ex aqua fluminis, and de Ob^atione agni
in Festo Paschae. A. B. Sec. 4. p. 2. Praef. n. 160.
what they were you may see in the Margin.

As for what he says touching the Adoration of the Eucharist, it is not my
Province to consider it, tho I see nothing but what has been long since
objected by their Writers, and often Answered by ours; but my Appendix being
already grown to more than double the Bulk first designed, I shall desire the
Reader to consult our Authors who handled that Question at large, and
particularly the Answer A Discourse of the Adoration of the H. Eucharist.
quarto London, 1686.
published about two years since, to M. Boileau's Book on that Subject which he
mentions twice or thrice in the Preface.

And at parting give me leave to offer one Reflection which any man, though of
no very profound Reach must naturally make upon M. Boileau's design and methods
in this Edition of Ratram.

As there is nothing the Church of Rome boasts more of than a sure Rule of
Faith, an Infallible Judge in Controversies, and their great Unity and
agreement in Doctrine, so our late Deserters pretend, that our Dissentions which
can never be Composed for want of a Supreme Tribunal in our Church, and our
Uncertainty in matters of Faith, and want of any certain Rule for the direction
either of our Belief or Conscience was ^he Cause why they left our Communion,
for one in which they pretend there are none of these defects, and private
Spirits, no such liberty of Interpreting the H. Scriptures as among us.

Now who ever Reads M. Boileau's Preface must needs see, that there is nothing
like that Unity which Mr. Sclater Consens^s Vet. p. 6, 7. etc.
Celebrates in such Raptures of Joy, as would make a man imagine, that he had
been upon his Conversion taken up into the third Heaven, and in an excess of
Charity when he came down again, would have given all he was worth to find in
one single Family in England, I presume he means his own, where the Father is
divided against the Son, and the Son against the Father etc. according to the
Letter of our Saviors Prediction. But I leave him in his New Atlantis to
entertain himself at this juncture with his Chimerique Consens. Vet. p. 11.
Speculation of France under the Spiritual Tuition of 17 Archbishops, 107
Bishops, etc. Italy under one Supreme Bishop, Head of Unity, Conservator of
Peace and Truth etc. and return to consider the wonderful Agreement of the
Catholic Doctors.

This small Tract for sixscore year, together is forbidden, Condemned for
Heretical by the general Vote of most of their Great Divines, Popes, Cardinals
and others; I may add the Council of Trent too, which had as great an Interest
in that Index wherein Bertram stands Condemned, as it had in the Catechism. Now
all on a sudden he is acknowledged for a good Catholic. But tho he be so in
France, I doubt in Spain and Italy, his Doctrine, were he alive to Answer for
it, would bring him in danger of the Inquisition. Nay tho this Tract be
pronounced Orthodox at Paris by M. Boileau and his Brethren, yet at Lions it is
Rejected as Spurious, or at least Adulterated with Heretical mixture, such
Blessed Agreement is there among their Doctors of this and the last Age, and of
those of France, with their Brethren in Italy and Spain; nay in France it self
between M. de Marca A. B. of one Metropolitical Church, who says, it was
written by Jo. Scotus, and condemned in the Councils of Rome and Vercellis, and
M. Dean of See.
another Metropolitical Church, who says it is Catholic, and written for the
real Presence.

Perhaps it may be said, that this is matter of Fact to which the Infallibility
does not extend, but not of Faith; But by their leave, I look upon it a matter
of Faith, and what nearly concerns men's Consciences, especially in an Age of
Conversions. For the Question is not whether the Book be Genuin or Spurious,
but whether the Doctrine which it contains be Orthodox or Heretical. Suppose a
wavering Catholic should come to M. Boileau, and propose his doubts concerning
the Trent Doctrine having been shocked in his belief thereof, by that passage of
S. Austine, which made Frudegard doubt the Truth of Paschase his Doctrine, and
make Confession of his Faith in the words of Bertram, Set your Heart at rest,
your Belief is very sound, you are a good Catholic, would M. Boileau say. But
then because this is but one Doctors Opinion, should he Consult M. Paris who
supported De Marca's conjecture, he would tell him this is down right Heresy,
condemned in several Councils, and every body knows the Importance of that
Sin, and that such a Declaration must needs disturb the Conscience, which was
set at ease by M. Boileau's more favorable Sentence. Such certain direction
have men in the Roman Communion for their Faith and Consciences over what we
have! I am of opinion, few of their doubting Catholics, or New Converts are
able to declare their Faith touching the Sacrament so Intilligibly and
distinctly, as Ratram has delivered his Judgment in this Book, and I fear few
of their Spiritual Guides understand what is the Doctrine of their Church better
than those Doctors who have Condemned Ratram for an Heretic.

And withal, Where is the Obedience of private Spirits, and their deference to
Church Authority, when three or four Sorbon Doctors confront three Popes, five
Cardinals, besides Archbishops, and Bishops, with other Doctors, almost
numberless* Methinks it looks like an Argument that private Spirits in that
Communion, are as Wanton and Ungovernable, as among the Protestants. And
methinks, Mr. Sclater seems to resolve his own Conversion into the Dictates of
the private Spirit, and that whatever opinion he might have of those Divines,
who carried Church Authority highest, yet he had little Reverence for it
himself, otherwise he would have listened to the Liturgy, Articles, and
Homilies, which are the public Doctrine of our Church, rather than the moderate
Declarations of Bishop Forbes, Bishop Andrews, and Bishop Tailor, that is one
single Bishop in each of those three Kingdoms, who notwithstanding believed
Transubstantiation no more than we now do.

And though he reproach our private Spirits with sensing the five little Words
of our Savior, any Man that ever looked into Controversy, can tell him, that
the private Spirits of his Church have with a much more extravagant Wantonness,
sensed those Words contradicting one another almost in the sense of every Word;
and whilst they condemn us for admitting one Figure, Authorized by Scripture
Examples, and the Authority of the Fathers, in which we all agree, they are
forced without any such Authority to admit several, Quarrelling with one
another about the sense of almost every Word. See Albertin. de Euchar. lib. 1.
c. 9, 10, 11. Bishop Morton, of the Eucharist, Book the Second, Edition 1635.
If this be the Unity which Mr. Sclater so much Applauds, let him enjoy it
without our Envy.

As for M. Boileau's part, he has sensed this Author at such a rate, that
using the same Liberty, a Man might make a Calvinist of Paschasius, a Roman
Catholic of Barengarius, an Arian of Athanasius: And since Master Sclater
Consensus Veterum, p. 2.
offers the Hint, by telling of a thoughtful Gentleman, no doubt, who held it
worth while to enquire, whether the Alcoran might not have its motives of
Credibility; I shall add, that upon the same Privilege of perverting the
natural sense of Words, which M. Boileau makes use of, he might Reconcile
Mahomet with Christ, and make Gospel of the Alcoran.

FINIS.
An Account of the several Editions of Bertram.
1. AT Cologne, A. D. 1532. in Octavo. Father Cellot says, That this was
Printed at Basil, not Cologne; but I know not why we may not believe it to have
been Printed at Cologne, in regard Hermannus was then Archbishop, who favored
the Reformation; and though he did not at that time publicly declare, yet he
might secretly encourge it.

2. At Geneva, A. D. 1541. in Octavo. Wherein the Publisher has taken upon him
to correct the Author's Latin, as to put Servator for Salvator, etc. For which
reason I have corrected nothing in Bertram's Text by the Authority of this
Edition, nor noted his variations.

3. In the Micropresbyticon, Printed at Basil, 1550. Fol. we find Bertram, p.
513.

4. A Second Edition at Cologne, with Paschasius Radbertus, whom the Publisher
mistook for Rabanus Maurus, and some other Pieces on that Argument, Octavo, A.
D. 1551.

5. At the end of a Diallacticon (which is said to be written by Bishop Poinet)
Printed at Geneva, 1557. is Bertram's Book, Printed after the former Edition,
at Geneva.

6. Feuguereus, a Frenchman, and Professor of Divinity at Leiden, Published it
with his Opuscula, in Octavo, Lugd. Bat. 1579.

7. In the Catalogus Testium Veritatis, printed at Geneva, 1608. in Folio, it
is inserted, after the Cologne Impression, Lib. 10.

8. Lomierus has Published this Book with Notes, which I have not seen, but
have my Information from the Catalogue of Books, Prohibited newly by the French
Clergy.

9. There are two Editions in French and Latin; the latter in the Year 1672.
The Latin Text of this Edition, being most accurate, is that which I followed,
in the first Edition, save in manifest false Prints, or where F. Mabillon's M.
S. has directed a better Reading.

10. Dr. Boileau, Dean of Sens, has Published our Author in French and Latin,
from F. Mabillon's Copy, Octavo, Paris 1686.

11. In English, it was Printed A. D. 1549. which Translation was made either
by Bishop Ridley, or his Advice, and is accurate enough, but the Language
obsolete.

12. In Scotland, it was Printed at Aberdeen, A. D. 1622. in Octavo.

13. A. D. 1623. Sir Humphrey Lynd Published the Translation newly Reprinted.

Casaubon told Archbishop Usher, that he saw a Manuscript of it in possession
of Mr. Gillot, a Senator of Paris. Perhaps it was the same which I find in
Thuanus his Library; which F. Mabillon says, is not a true Copy.

That Father however acknowledges, that there is an excellent Old Manuscript of
it in the Lobe's Library in the Low Countries, upon the Sambre, in the Diocese
of Cambray, and that he found another M. S. in a Cistercian Monastery in
Germany, called Salem Weiler, written above 700. years since.

All the Printed Editions I have seen and compared, except the first Cologne,
that of Lomierus, and the Scotch Impression, and have noted all material
Variations, except false Prints, and the arbitrary Variations of the Geneva
Copy, but have followed the Text of D. Boileau, who tells us that he has
Printed after an accurate Copy of the Lobe's M.S. and I have distinguished the
Text into Sections or Paragraphs, according to his Partition, that the Reader
may without trouble, find our References to the Text of the Author, in either
his Edition or mine.

ERRATA.
In the Preface.
PAge 2. Margin, Line 2. Read Octavo. p. 9. l. 21. r. as ancient as, p. 18.
marg. l. 12. r. ubi, p. 30. marg. l. 2. r. Ratramni, p. 32. mar. l. 17. r.
humanae jure, p. 79. mar. l. 6. r. vestra, l. 7. r. Prostratis, p. 109. l. 24.
r. unlikely.

In the Book.
Page 133. l. 13. dele the Body, p. 134. mar. l. 4. dele non, p. 136. l. 9. r.
aspiciat, p. 138. l. 14. r. ut pote cum, p. 142. l. 15. r. monstratur, i. 24.
secundum, p. 144. l. 15. r. consideretur, l. 21. ex non esse, p. 146. l. 4. r.
quod non fuit, p. 156. l. r. patres, p. 160. l. 14. r. atque potat, p. 164. l.
13. r. hoc non corporco, p. 165. mar. add Ps. 78.25. p. 169. l. 6. r. Corporis
l. 18. propinquante, marg. r. Resurrexit, it. aliis, p. 180. l. 12. r. pro
Paulus lege Apostolus, mar. l. 1. r. Haec, p. 186. l. 20. dele planissime, p.
188. mar. l. 3. r. Dispensationem, p. 194. mar. (a) r. in Impressis Domini, (b)
Ibid. cap. 9. (c) Quod in editis, p. 218. l. 2. r. qui, p. 226. l. 21. dele
Paulum, p. 228. l. 13. r. sequente eos petra, p. 229. mar. r. Joh. 6.50. p.
244. l. 18. r. habuere futurorum, sic and hoc, p. 252. l. 3. r. Membrum
Corporis Christi, p. 254. l. 17. r. Quoniam.

In the Appendix.
Page 275. l. 6. for there, r. that, p. 276. l. 22. r. proved, p. 319. mar. l.
4. r. concessu S. Sedis, p. 328. l. 2. r. can bear, p. 330. l. 4. blot out
Substance of, p. 333. l. 20. r. the Bread and Wine daily Consecrated, p. 356.
l. 10. r. in the corporeal, p. 359. l. 23. r. these words, p. 371. l. 1. r. we
[there] see, p. 373. l. 18. r. but that, p. 386. mar. l. 1. r. que -- p. 329.
l. 6. r. say that, p. 426. mar. l. 9 r. Species, p. 468. l. ^. for that read
the.

A Catalogue of some Books Sold by Thomas Boomer, at the Surgeons Arms in
Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar.
1. FOrty Sermons by the Right Reverend Father in God, Ralph Brownrig, late
Lord Bishop of Exeter.

2. A Complete History of England, from the first Entrance of the Romans, under
the Conduct of Julius Caesar, unto the end of the Reign of King Henry III.
comprehending the Roman, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Affairs and Transactions in
this Nation, during that time: Wherein is showed the Original of our English
Laws; the Differences and Disagreements between the Secular and Ecclesiastic
Powers; The true Rise and Grounds of the Contentions and Wars between the
Romans and our Ancient Kings: And likewise an Account of our Foreign Wars with
France, the Conquest of Ireland, and the Actions between the English, Scots,
and Welsh, during the same time; All delivered in plain Matter of Fact, without
any Reflections or Remarks, by Robert Brady, Doctor of Physic.

3. The Parable of the Pilgrim, Written to a Friend, by Simon Patrick, D D.
Dean of Peterborough, the 6th. Edition corrected.

4. Mellificium Chirurgiae, or the Marrow of Surgery, an Anatomical
Treatise: Institutions of Physic, with Hippocrates Aphorisms, largely
Commented upon. The Marrow of Physic, showing the Causes, Signs and Cures of
most Diseases incident to Humane Bodies. Choice Experienced Receipts for the
Cure of several Distempers. The fourth Edition enlarged with many Additions,
and purged from many Faults that escaped in the former Impressions, Illustrated
in its several parts, with 12. Brass Cuts, by James Cook of Warwick,
Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgery.

5. Certain Sermons and Homilies appointed to be Read in Churches, in the time
of Q. Elizabeth, of Famous Memory, and now Reprinted for the Use of Private
Families, in two Parts, in 12s.


