A Disquisition Upon our Savior's SANCTION OF TITHES, Matthew. 23. 23. and Luke
11, 42.

WHEREIN That whole CASE is most Impartially Stated and Resolved According to
Express SCRIPTURE: FOR THE Satisfaction of All SCRUPLES.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Th. Dawks, 1685.

A DISQUISITION UPON TITHES.
From Mat. 23. 23. and Luke 11. 42. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for you pay Tithe of Mint, Anise, Cummin, Luke.
and Rue, and all manner of Herbs; and have omitted the weightier matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith, and Luke.
pass over the Love of God; These ought ye to have done, and not to have left
the other undone.
THat we may arrive to the Argument arising from these Words, their full Sense
and Explanation lies thus:

Our Savior in the Course of his severe Denounciations upon the Scribes and
Pharisees, and while he was with a just Indignation exposing them, charges
their foul Hypocrisy, that they Tith'd Mint, Anise, etc. and passed over
Judgment, Mercy, etc. the weightier matters of the Law, and then subjoyns this
Censure; These Things ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

Now I allow, the (...), to be understood of the paying, not the Sacerdotal
Receiving, or Magistratical Adjudication of Tithes; Although the Scribes and
Pharisees being mostly Priests, and of the Sanhedrim, some Interpreters incline
to that Sense of Receiving, or Adjudication of Tithes, which seems to raise the
Sense somewhat higher, and indeed (...), Heb. 7. 5. signifies to receive
Tithes; but then it is applied to to the people (...): to receive Tithes of the
people, and not to the Things Tith'd, as here; I rather therefore understand
them in that Pharisees Sense, Luke 18. 12. (...), I pay Tithes of all I
possess, proper to a Pharisee at large. Again the (...), or, these Things,
ought ye to have done; I refer to the nearest Judment, Mercy, etc. and the
(...), or those Things ought you not to leave undone, to the furthest of Mint,
Anise, Cummin, etc. Although Interpreters think each referrible to each, which
would still aggrandize our Saviors Sense in Favor of Tithes: But I rather
Interpret them thus; These weightier Things ye ought in the first place, and
with a higher Intention upon the Things themselves to have done, and the other,
Tithing Mint, Cummin; in regard of the Authority of the Lawgiver, and the
Equity of his Laws, even to every iota of them, ought ye not to leave undone.

Taking then the Words with the least Favor to Tithes; They must needs amount
to this, our Lord at that very Time, when he had the greatest Provocation from
the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, (which he was so sharply chastising) preferring
the minutest parts of Tithing, above the (...)* and when he was comparing
Things of so puisne a Consideration, as Tithing Mint, Anise, etc. with those
Massive Duties of Righteousness, Judgment; yet, he saw something in these so
petite Observations of Tithing, some Foundation that they rested upon, of so
huge Importance and Consequence, that the same (...), or ought he applys to the
doing the weightier things of the Law, or to the (...), he applys also to the
(...), or the not leaving undone those smallest Punctillo's of paying Tithes:
at the least by the Frame of his Speech, It is necessarily so extended: And
thus by his own proper Sanction the payment of Tithes, even to the smallest
particles of Justice therein, he Establishes.

But because notwithstanding all that has been yet said, it may seem a
Permission rather than a Sanction or Injunction, I shall enforce what I have
already said by this Argument.

That which our Lord in the most minute Instances of observance gives the very
same Sanction to, that he does to the more weighty Duties of the Law, that he
does not only permit but enjoin: But to the minutest Instances of paying
Tithes, he gives the same Sanction, as to the more weighty parts of the Law;
therefore he does not only permit, but enjoin the payment of Tithes.

That our Lord confirmed all the weighty parts of the Law with his own
Sanction, is undeniable; if therefore he fixes the same ought upon the payment
of Tithes in the smallest Instances, as he does upon the weighty Things of the
Law, he then by his own Sanction Establishes the one with the other; And if he
allowed that deference to the smallest Instances of Duty in the Payment of
Tithes, to Mint and Cummin, what by way of proportion would he have allowed to
the more Bulky, and weighty Instances of payment of Tithes; For the Tithing of
Mint and Cummin, and the neglecting of the more considerable Seeds of the Land
would have been great Hypocrisy, if the Pharisees had been guilty of it; even
as the neglecting or passing over Judgment and Mercy was; and the Robbing of
God in them had been much more worthy of being rancked with the passing over
JUDGMENT and MERCY, those more weighty Things of the LAW, then Mint, and
Cummin could amount to. But now as the minutiae of Tithing were only in this
Case under our Saviors Eye, so his Sanction is upon them equally, not as to
the Things themselves, for so do they infinitely outweigh one another, but as
to the general obligation of Duty. Seeing we must not wilfully break the Law
in one point, or in one of its least Commandments, in regard of the Authority
of the Lawgiver, and the general Equity of his Laws, as was said before,
though the matters of Obedience do so much preponderate one to another.

Now that our Saviors (...), or ought, upon both is undeniable from the Text,
for to make up the Sense it necessarily communicates it self to the one as to
the other; and as the one is to be done with a more Solemn Address of the Soul,
so the other is not to be left undone in its just place and Season.

But having proceeded thus far, I must now contest a more weighty Objection;
that is, This Injunction of our Lord was Commensurate to the Time, Moses his
Law was to continue in full Force and Strength; but as soon as that Expired,
which was at the Death of Christ, then did that Precept of Tithing expire and
naturally go off with the whole Body of Moses his Ceremonial Law, with the
Sacrifices and Priesthood of that Law.

In Answer to this Objection, I shall first argue Negatively, and then
Affirmatively; and so proceed to a further debate upon each Argument.

That which our Lord upon so just an occasion, and even so great a Provocation,
as the Hypocrisy the Pharisees committed on these Punctillo's of Tithing to
compensate for their passing over Judgment, etc. yet derogated nothing in the
least Iota from, as He did from other parts of Moses his Law, in that he saw no
just Reason on any Account for the Abrogation of it at his Death. But he
Derogated not in the least Iota from the payment of Tithes, as from other parts
of Moses his Law, on so just an occasion, and so great a Provocation, therefore
he saw nothing in it for which it ought to be Abrogated at his Death with such
other parts of Moses his Law.

That which our Lord did not so Remonstrate to as to other parts of Moses his
Law, on so just an occasion and provocation, in that he saw something more
valuable, than that it should be Abrogated with other parts of Moses his Law,
and Jewish Observances at his Death.

But in this Case our Lord Remonstrated nothing against payment of Tithes in
the smallest Instances; therefore he saw something more valuable than that it
should be Abrogated with other parts of Moses his Law, and Jewish Observances
at his Death.

In both these Arguments I have placed the stress not upon the Sanction, I have
just before made Evident our Lord gave to the Law of Tithes, because I presumed
it might be supposed only Temporary as other parts of Moses his Law; But the
stress is placed upon the Treaty, our Lord gave to this part of Moses his Law,
very different from other parts of it to be Abrogated at his Death; and that
together with the Sanction, he gave to this particular Law, he made no
Explanatory Remonstrance of its near approaching Abrogation for some Fault he
found with it: This plainly argues, our Lord saw something so Equitable in this
Law, for the sake of which he intimated no signification, that it was to be
abrogated at his Death, but to continue in its own place; For the very want of
such an Equity had else been a fault in the Eye of Christ, Now the minor
Propositions in both these Arguments that Christ Derogated nothing,
Remonstrated nothing, are Evident from the Text of both the Evangelists, who
give us no Account of any such either Derogation or Remonstrance, but only of
his Sanction: And it cannot be supposed, but they would as freely have Recorded
and delivered over to us the one as the other; and that they would have been
directed so to do by the Divine Spirit, if it had been a point of Christ's
Doctrine.

For the proof therefore of the major Propositions, that Christ not Derogating
from, nor Remonstrating to this Law of Tithes, saw nothing in it for which it
should be abrogated; but that he saw something in it, why it should not be
abrogated, but continue after his Death; I shall now reason these two ways.

1. By observing our Savior did Remonstrate to any other parts of Moses his
Law, or Jewish Observances as they came in his way, and by some fit way show
either his present dislike, or give some forebodes of his Pleasure, they should
be abrogated at his Death, and his Servants discharged from them; but having
not done so in this particular Law; it argues he saw nothing in it at which he
was at that present offended, nor for which it should be abrogated at his Death.

And therefore I shall set my self to observe such particulars of Moses his
Law, and Jewish Observances, as by the Evangelical Records fall under our Lords
particular Remark, and of his particular Demeanor toward the severals of them
compared with this.

2. In that our Lords Respect to this Law, as we shall under the former Head
make good will be found very different from other parts of the Jewish Law, and
observance; and that such a Respect cannot be imagined to be grounded on an
indifferency, that it was neither Good nor Evil; it will therefore follow, he
saw something of a positive Equity and Goodness, why he did so regard it as no
way to predict its Abrogation at his Death; and therefore I shall endeavor by a
compare with other Scriptures centring in this, to find out that positive
Equity and Goodness.

Let us then first Examine our Saviors Treaty of the several parts of Moses
his Law.

1. And first as to the Moral precepts of Moses his Law, our Lord was so far
from Abrogating them, that he sublimated them to their own purity, far above
the false Glosses of the Pharisaick Doctors, or the low sense the Carnal Jew
had of them, as appears all along that divine Sermon on the Mount, and for the
perpetuity Mat. 5. 18. etc.
he dates the Duration of every Iota or Tittle of them beyond that of Heaven
and Earth.

2. In those things wherein either Jewish Custom and Practice, or explicit
permission by Moses his Law had prevaricated from the Divine and Original
Constitution; Our Savior plainly and immediately reduced those Customs and
Practices to that Divine original by settling that Standard of Reduction; From
the Beginning it was not so, as in the Case of Marriage and Divorce. Mat. 19. 8.


3. He peremptorily decided to the Civil Power the due of Tribute, and therein
of all subjection consistent with the supreme Law of God, all pretenses from
the Jewish Law or any other of latter date to the contrary notwithstanding, in
that everlasting Oracle, Render therefore to Caesar the Things that are Cesars,
and Mat. 22. 2^.
to God the things that are God's.

4. He diverted the severity of the Judaick Judicial Law as to the Execution,
from the woman taken in Adultery, John 8. 9, 10.
although (...), in the very Fact; by striking the Consciences of her Accusers
with their own Guilt.

5. In that great precept of the S^bbath Day, Our Lord crossed the
Superstitious Austerity of the Pharisees, and refuted it by Arguments drawn
from the Mosaic Law it self, which allowed nullum in Sanctuario Sabbati Otium
no Sabbatism of rest in the Sanctuary; but the Priests profane, as our Lord
says, the Sabbath Day in Mar. 12. 1. etc. Mar. 2 23 etc.
the Temple, and are blameless, from their own practice in Leading their Beasts
to Water, from the true Intention of the Sabbath, which was made for Man, and
not Man for John 5 17.
it, from the ever Active Goodness of the Divine Being and the Mediator that
never Sabbatizes; my Father works hitherto, and I work: And he foreboded the
change of it from the seventh Day to the First, by declaring himself Lord, even
of the Sabbath; and assigning that for the Reason, why he declared himself Lord
over it, viz. to change it, because the Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man
for it, That is, the First day Sabbath might be as much adapted to Man's Good,
as the seventh was; and that neither the one nor the other was any of those
Eternal and Immutable Laws for which Man was made. Therein intimating he
changed no such Laws, but as the Son of Man or the the great Mediator he
changed such Laws as were made for Man's Interest, to what he saw most for
their interest by variety of Circumstances and Times; and were not those
eternal immutable Laws for which Man was made, and wherein his Happiness
without any Alteration consisted: Thus he judged the First Day honored with
his Resurrection, and as a seventh part of Time including the Memory of the
CREATION was now fittest for a Sabbath. For who as the Son of Man can judge of
those advantages of Humane Nature, who took that Nature upon him, that he might
be touched with our Infirmities, and might be a Compassionate High Priest. Upon
this Head I have insisted the longer, because it gives great light into the
main discourse, and because I shall have after occasion to compare together the
precept of Tithes, and of a seventh part of Time.

6. He foreboded the Change of the whole Mosaic Frame, by declaring the Scribe
not far from the Kingdom Mark 12. 34.
of God, who understood the Love of God and our Neighbor, to be more than all
whole Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, which our Lord soon after (as we shall
presently see) in an umbrage abrogated: Circumcision was already antiquated by
the Baptism of John, and the Disciples of Jesus; and was undervalued in compare
with the making a man every whit whole, the great Design of John 7. 22.
the Gospel; although by the first Institution, the Uncircumcised was to be cut
off from his People; the Passover was voided by the Lords Supper, the Feast
upon the True Paschal Lamb substituted to it.

7. In all Cases wherein Pharisaick Hypocrisy, Extortion, Vainglory,
Traditional Superstition had introduced any Additions upon Ceremonial, or even
Moral Duties; our Savior was most Rigorous in the Detection and Censure, as in
their Phylacteries, Corban, Eating with washed Hands, their long Prayers,
Fastings, Alms, the odd Sentiments of the Resurrection fastened to Moses his Law
by the Sadduces, with many other Instances of both kinds.

Now to draw up a Comparison betwixt the aforenam'd Instances (for there remain
two more of a peculiar consideration) of our Saviors Treaty of Moses his Law,
and his Treaty of it in this particular of Tithes, and it thus arises.

We find the Interpretation of Moses his Law, concerning Tithes was most
particular, and to the utmost Stretch and Extent, when it was drawn down to
Mint, and Cummin, far more express than any Words we find in the Levitical Law
it self; yet our Lord blames nothing, he finds no fault, nay he Approves, and
sets his Seal to it; These Things ought ye not to leave undone: He does not
make it void, nay he Establishes it; it could not indeed be, but that
especially the Tantilloes, those uttermost Farthings of Tithing, must be in
themselves much lighter in our Lords Account than Judgment, Mercy; but else he
moves them not out of their place, though but as the Dust of the Balance in
Tithing it self.

And therefore undoubtedly, our Savior saw some Rule of unchangeable Right,
that sustained so nice an Exposition of Moses his Law, and that supported even
that Law it self above the Ceremonial, or Judicial Sanctions of Moses.

He does not fulfill it, that is explain it at a greater Breadth or Height, as
he did Matthew the 5th, those greater Laws: Indeed the Pharisees had done that
to his Hand, and shrivelled up the other by false Glosses, but he Evacuates it
not, he retrenches nothing, he gives nothing of an equitable Interpretation to
it: He redargues nothing as in all the rest of the forementioned Instances. It
assures us therefore, this Exactness of Tithing was none of their Extortion,
Vainglory, Traditional Superstition, Rigid or Erroneous Interpretation, not
knowing the Scrip^ures in their Mercy to Humane Nature, or the Power of God;
but only their Hypocrisy showed it self in their passing over the weightier
Matters of the Law, while they were so punctilious in Tithing Mint, and Cummin.

But besides all these Instances given of our Lords Abearance toward the Law
of Moses, there are two more that require a more intimate research into them,
because they import a greater Favor of our Lords toward the Mosaical Law, and
yet in one of them there was a certain Expiration of Moses his Institution at
the Death of Christ, and in the other within less than half an Age after his
Death: so that except there shall be a certain Distinction found betwixt those
two Instances, and this of Tithing, we are upon; it may have been out of Date
with the Rest of the Mosaic Law, which had some kind of Languishing Life till
the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus.

The first is that of the Leper, Mat 8. 2. etc. who being cleansed by our Lords
miraculous Power, was enjoined by him to show himself to the Priest, and to
offer for his cleansing as Moses commanded, from whence it may be thus argued:

Christ enjoined, or approved the Offering Moses Commanded for cleansing the
Leper.

But that Offering is abrogated by Christ's Death, therefore some part of Moses
his Law abrogated by Christ's Death is yet enjoined, or approved by him.

And as it would be Jewish and Anti-Evangelical to continue such an Offering
upon the Cure of a Leper, because of that Injunction of Christ, so is it the
same to continue the Observation of the Law of Tithes, because Christ said at
that Time to the Pharisees. These ought ye not to have left undone.

But in Answer to this Argumentation, I rejoyn these Considerations:

1. Our Lord was indeed himself in all Instances of Duty obedient to the Law of
Moses, under which he was made, and proportionably he withdrew no man at Galat.
4 4.
that time of his Being upon Earth from a present Actual Obedience to it,
rightly understood, so to this Leper, he enjoined the observation of the Law of
his cleansing so far as to offer according to it.

2. Yet in the course of our Lords miraculous Healing, there were many Lepers
cleansed; For as a daily thing, he renunciates to John by his Disciples, among
other Miracles, the Lepers are cleansed; and yet we have only this
Exemplification of Christ's Solemn Command Mat 11. 15.
to observe Moses his Command; Nor did he Caution his Apostles concerning it in
their Commission to cleanse the Lepers, Mat. 10. 8.

3. In that most remarkable Healing of the Ten Lepers, Luke 17. 14. There was
only a Command to show themselves to the Priest, without any mention of the
Offering, which shows, though our Lord did pay an observance to the Mosaic
Law; yet in all his miraculous Cleansings, he knew a Greater than Moses was
there, and so did not oblige the Cleansed rigorously to those Observances.

4. He Limits the Injunction to the proper end of it, viz. For a Testimony to
them: that is,

1. That our Lord was no Contemner of Moses his Administration, though they
calumniated him as such on all occasions, but a Just moderator over it. As a
Son over his own House.

2. For a Testimony to them, that the Kingdom of God was come upon them in the
Miraculous Power of Christ: Luke 11. 20.
And therefore the Leper was charged to tell no Man, but to surprise the Priest
with the Offering for his Purification, that so there might be a legal
Attestation to the Truth of the Miracle, which was so porfect doubtless (like
Naamans his Flesh coming again, as the Flesh of a 2 Kings 5. 14.
Child,) as to surmount any occasion for the seven Days probationership, Levit.
13 6. The Appearing thus to the Priest, and the Offering for Cleansing were
Indisputable Ratifications of the Miracle, and therefore were so carefully
Commanded.

Now all these things laid together, There will appear to any unprejudiced
Considerer, a vastest Difference betwixt our Savior's Sanction of the Duty of
Tithing, and the Command to the Leper, as pro hac vice, for that time to show
himself to the Priest, and Offer, etc. and that for so great an End, as a
Testimony to them, without which there had been no such necessity.

The second of these two last Instances, and much the Greater is comprehended
in those two John 2. 14, etc. Mar. 11. 15. 16.
Zeloticisms (if I may be bold so to call them) of our Lord and Savior, the
one at the first Passover he publicly appeared at, after his Baptism; and the
second at his last, just before his Death, viz. the Whipping and Ejecting the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and which is most Remarkable, prohibiting
the passing of Vessels through the Temple or Sanctuary rather; setting these
(...),
Two Mottoes, as it were, by his Divine Action on the Gates, or first Avenues
to the Temple.

The first in his First Action, make not my Fathers House a House of
Merchandise.

The second in his Second Action, my House shall be called a House of Prayer
for all Nations.

This I account an Instance of greatest moment to the present Case;

1. Because our Savior gave this as a Sanction of his own above, and beyond
the Sentiment of the Jews, who were in amaze at it, and asked a Sign to be the
Warranty of so great Doings, and it did so enrage the Pharisees, that they
sought to destroy him upon it, and yet the Temple of the Lord was their great
Cry, and their last Accusation of our Lord at his Death was for the very
Temple, as if Blasphemed by him. And further, It is the more remarkable,
because Christ for the fulfilling of a double Prophecy thus Soveraignly
manifested himself, the first Time, that of David his Type; The Zeal of thy
House has ^aten me up. The last Time, that of the Prophet Esaias, My House shall
be called the House of Prayer for all Nations.

2. It is the more Influential on our present Discourse because Tithes and the
Sanctuary had such a Correlation one to another, that they may seem to have
Lived, and Died together.

3. Because this Divine Zeal of our Lord terminated in a Temple, whose Holiness
and Use was much prostrated at his Death; Then the Vail of the Temple, that
separated it from common Approach, even of Eyes, was by Miracle rent from the
Top to the B^ttom, Mat 27. 51.
and within less than forty years it was burnt by Titus, the Instrument of
Divine Vengeance, and utterly rased.

Here then appears, as Solemn a Sanction upon the Holiness of the Temple, as
upon Tithes; and yet how soon, It was of necessity to be abrogated, and that
even as by a Hand from Heaven, we have seen, as our Mat. 24. 1, 2.
Savior also foretold, A Stone not left on a Stone.

Now to All This these two things are said,

1. That our Lords Intention was to put that Sanction upon the Holiness of the
Temple, as an Entail of the same Holiness upon the successive Temples of the
Christians; against which I shall say no more, then that the very want of the
Cabor and Shecinah, proper only to that material Sanctuary does disprove that
opination.

2. The more valuable Account of the most Pious and Learned Mead, takes the
Place of this, who puts the Emphasis of our Savior's Action of Favor to the
the Temple, on that part of it, which was allowed to the Gentiles, which the
Jews valued at that vile Rate, as to make it as Common and Unclean: But our
Lord for the Vindication of it in preparation to the Gentiles coming into his
Church, did thus Exterminate All that profane Encumbrance of it: and
Correspondent to this does that Prophecy especially shine out; My House shall
be called for All Nations the House of Prayer.

3. Although this Account of our Savior's Action can be by no means spared,
much less excluded for the very sake of that Prophecy, and also the near
approach of the Gentiles Conversion; yet I shall be bold to give one larger,
and more Receptive, as also more close and nearer to the purpose of this
unparalleled Coming of the Lord into his Temple.

And that is, This was indeed our Lords Causing Sacrifice and Oblation to
cease, foretold by Daniel in the midst of the week his last Passover, or just
approaching Death Consummatively; as it was inchoated at the very beginning of
the Week, or the first Pass Over.

And when Saerifice was thus caused to Cease; Prayer, Dan 9. 27.
that was at least Coeval with Sacrifice, and to endure to the very end, as the
surviving Worship succeeded naturally to it alone; as Comprehensive of all
Spiritual and Intellectual Worship, and God's Acceptance of it.

This Action then of our Lords so superlative takes away the First, that he may
Establish the Second. And that here resided the Mind of that Heavenly Grandeur
our Lord assumed, I thus argue.

1. The Temple was at that time the Great Symbol of both the Divine Presence
and Worship, and indeed the only then in the World.

2. It was from its very first Foundation, a House of Prayer, Solomon dedicated
it, as such at the first, by that 1 Kings 8. 2 Chr^n. 6.
his Reyal Prayer, Prayer was intermixed with all Sacrifices, as the most
Learned Dr. Outram often observes, in that Excellent Discourse of Sacrifices.
It was always Comprehensive of all Divine Worship, Oh thou that hear Prayer,
to thee shall all Flesh come; but yet under Moses his Law Sacrifice over-shaded
it; and the Temples name was (...) is not (...) primarily, not a House of
Prayer, but a House of Sarifice.

3. The Evangelical Prophet Esaias foretells: It should in the Gospel state of the
Church receive another name; It should be called the House of Prayer, that is,
of Prayer separated from Sacrifice, for else it was before the House of Prayer,
and although he joins Sacrifices, yet it is only according to the Language of
that time a prediction of Spiritual Sacrifices.

4. That Merchandise our Savior ejected, and the passing of Vessels through
the Bounds of the Sanctuary he prohibited, was in a Sense absolutely necessary;
at least of High Convenience to the Sacrifices of the Temple, and had some
Countenance from God's Allowance to the Far Dwellers of his People, to bring
their Money instead of their Sacrifices, that they might buy nearer the Temple,
and on many Accounts the Vessels could very ill be interdicted to that Service;
so that the Cessation of one was hardly possible without the other; the
Cessation of the Merchandise and the Vessels, without the Cessation of the
Sacrifices.

5. The Remark of these two Actions of our Lords is put upon this first: Make
not my Father's House a House of Merchandise; and in the second, It shall be
called the House of Prayer.

6. It is once by the Evangelist Mark added, For all Nations; which argues to
us, It was not principally, but yet inclusively and consequentially intended,
that is when it should be a House of Prayer, and not of Sacrifices. All Nations
should flow into the Chruch, and it could not indeed be a House of Prayer for
All Nations, in a confluence to the Church of God, while it was a House of
Sacrifice; For that state was fitted only to the Jewish Nation.

There are these Three Things therefore in our Lord's Intention in the Action,
and his Concomitant discourse.

1. That there should be a Cessation of that Carnal Jew^sh Worship, of God by
Sacrifice.

2. That in the place of it should succeed a Spiritual Intellectual Worship
comprehended under Prayer, and that represented by the Temple, or House of God,
as the Symbol of it.

3. Our Savior with so high a Zeal thrusts out that Market, that Sacrifices
necessarily brought so near the Temp^^, not only with the Reproach of its
Sordidness, but of all that Fraud, Injustice, and other Rapines attending
places of Traffic, by which it was made a Den of Theives. And this to prepare
for that Purer, Freer, less Cumbersom Worship, signified by Prayer; and that
should not be clogged with those Temptations of Fraudulency.

4. The Christian Church Catholic, as consisting of all Nations, rises as it
were out of this Temple, when the Apostles met together, when the Effusion (...)
of the Holy Spirit coming down, as a Shecinah upon them, viz. in Fiery Cloven
Tongues, consecrated that Church Acts 2. 1. etc.
to be the House of the Living God, a House of Prayer for all Nations, a
representative of which then met, Devout men of every Nation under Heaven.

5 The Jews and especially the Pharisees Surmizing, whither All this Action of
our Lord tended, were filled with so much Rage and Amazement, being equally
Enemies to the Cessation of Sacrifice, and to the Church of God spread through
all Nations.

And thus I have given Account of the most plausible Appearance of our Lord's
Sanction upon a Branch of the Mosaic Jewish Law, which yet was indeed, and in
true understanding the most efficacious Abrogation of it, and Introduction of
the Evangelical state; and I have insisted the more industriously upon it
because it is of difficult explication according to its true Sense, and
according to that Sense very different from this Case of Tithes.

I am now arrived to the second Point of the Argument, that is, that our Lord
not only blamed nothing in this most Rigid Interpretation of the Pharisees
upon the Law of Tithes given by Moses; nor in the Law it self: But on the
contrary, that he saw some unchangeable Equity in it, for the sake of which, he
intimated not the least Iota of Abrogation in relation to it.

And that we may attain that, I shall proceed by these several Propositions
that are either evident by their own Light, or proved in the former, or
following course of the Argument.

the most High possessor of Heaven and Earth.



High Priest, and Mediator, in whom All things now consist; there has
therefore arisen together with the Colos. 1. 17.
aforesaid Acknowledgment of the Divine Nature, an Acknowledgment of our High
Priest and Mediator, an Acknowlegment of the Son of God in our Nature, through
whom we receive All, and offer All; who abides a High Priest continually,
without either Beginning of Days. or End of Life. Heb. 7.


Goodness of this sort extend in specie, therefore he has declared his
Pleasure, It should be Deputed.

1. To the outward means and conveniences of Solemnizing his Worship.

2. Because for the more Due, and certain Performance of his Worship, God has
separated and selected persons for the Care of, and Service in it; He has
therefore given to those his Immediate Servants, and Ministers of his Worship
in the World, their just proportions of those Acknowledgments, due to him, out
of what we possess, both for an Inablement to, and Recompense of their Service,
not as Alms, but as Honor. 1 Timothy 5. 17


3. After this by way of Alms to the Poor, which yet is also called our
Righteousness on this Account. 2 Cor. 9. 9, 10,


Tenth of All has been pitched upon, as the Quota pars, or proportion of a
Tribute to him, to whom All is indeed Due.

peculiar Nation, and Government, the Tenth of All the Increase of the seed of
the Land, and of whatsoever passed under the Rod of the Flock, or of the Herd,
was Holy to the Lord by his special Appointment.

Here then we find, that, which was in our Savior's Eye, that differences this
Law of Tithing so much from other parts of Moses his Law.

Even the Everlasting Equity of Acknowledging God by the Mediator, and Eternal
High Priest, out of what we possess, deputatively deferred to the immediate
Ministers and Servants of his Solemn Worship, which Acknowledgment is most
duly, and justly arising from the very least Things; even the Mint and Cummin,
that serve the uses of Life, and is therefore to continue in the Substantials,
as long as God has a Holy Service in the World, Priests and Ministers of it,
even throughout All Ages; and no less under the Evangelical Law, then the
Mosaic; after Moses, as it was before him; As long as the Goodness of God
grants us All Things to enjoy, even so long does our Tribute to God through
Jesus Christ, oblige us out of All Things, we do enjoy, It is of Eternal Equity
to Honor the Lord with our Substance, and with the First Fruits of all our
Increase, Prove. 2. 9.

Abraham, therefore the Father of Decimation gave Genes. 14. 18, 19.
the Tenth of All to Melchized^k, long before Moses, and under that Character,
Priest of the most High God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, who Blessed him in
the name of the most High God.

Aod who this Melchizedek was and of whom he was so Near, so Express, and
Immediate a Type in his PRIESTHOOD, and therein so Great a Man, Abraham, who
saw Christ's Day, and was Glad, very well knew, and therefore He Received
Blessing from Him, who Himself had the Promises; which Blessing Melchisedek
could not have conferred upon him, who had the promises, had he not immediately
represented the Seed, who was Heb. 7. 4.
the True High Priest and Blesser, in whom both Melchizedek, Abraham, and All
the Nations of the Earth were Blessed. Upon all which Accounts Abraham gave him
the Tenth of All. Which Tenth as to its Substantial Sense and Intention was
first of the Eternal Law of Equity, and Evangelical, before it was Mosaickly
Legal.

In pursuance of this Acknowledgment of God, Jacob Genes. 28. 22.
the Third from Abraham, vowing JEHOVAH should be his God, that he would Build
him a House, Vowed also to that God, the Tenth of All, He should give him,
according to the Example of his Great Father, and by the same Divine Impulse,
God's Acceptance of which he testified to Jacob when he said, after the giving
him Laban's Cattle: I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst Genesis 31. 13.
the Pillar, and Vowedst a Vow unto Me, and at other times after that.

And after all this, when the God of Abraham, and Jacob founded a National
Church in their Seed, from which the High Priest after the Order of
Melchizedeck also sprang; in approbation of his own Impulse, He separated a
Tenth part of ALL to himself for the Priesthood, Number. 18, etc.
he ordained.

Now all this being under the Eye of our Lord and Savior, the High Priest of
Our Profession; He diminished nothing from the Right of God, and of himself in
the very least Particles, however abused by his Hypocritical Adversaries to the
neglect of Greater Things; He knew ir too Awful to be violated, and did it not;
No; he established it by his own Sanction, even the minimum quod sic, the very
smallest Digits of it.

Thus our Savior looked back upon what had been before; That he looked forward
upon the Future state of Things also is undoubted: For at this time the Kingdom
of God, or the Evangelical State was already Commenced, although the Mosaic
Frame was allowed a Co-existence with it for a Time: But that it was already
entered is most certain, and that some Time before.

1. John the Baptists Preaching, and Baptism is styled Mar. 1. 1. Luke 3 1.
by the Evangelist Mark; the Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And the
Year of it directly noted by the Evangelist Luke; Our Lord calls it the Counsel
of God, Luke 7 30.
which the Pharisees rejected against themselves, being not Baptized of J^hn:
The Publicans and Harlots conversion by it he Praises, as their entering into
the Kingdom of Heaven before the Pha^^sees, who were Baptized with John 's
Baptism: He dates the Law and the Prophets till John, and that then the Kingdom
of God was taken by violence, and Ceremoniousness no longer attended it. The
Week Dan. 9. 27.
our Lord's confirming the Covenant was begun; John's Baptism, as an
Intermedious Ministration had decreased, that our Lord's might increase and
outshine it, and the John 3, 25; etc.
least in the Kingdom of Heaven became greater than He, so that He himself had
instructed Nicodemus concerning Baptism, the Symbol of Regeneration into his
Kingdom, some considerable time before this: For now our Lord's John 3. 3. 5*
Week waxed near its middle point, that he might Cause Sacrifice to Cease, as I
noted even now.

And now it was that he gave this his Determination concerning the Exactness of
Tithing; These Things ought ye ^^t to leave undone.

And whether this was the very Time, to which the Apostle refers, and which he
further explains, when he says, the Lord ordained, That they, who preach the
Gospel, should Live of the Gospel; even as they that Minister about Holy
Things, etc. May be now farther examined.

Thus much of certainty we have attained, that the Gospel being begun, and the
whole Mosaic Law of Sacrifices, ready to expire; He thus ordained, (as we have
already all along declared,) These Things ought, etc.

I come therefore now to make the Appeal of this Discourse to the Apostolical
Writings, and to observe from them, how the Scales will turn, whether to the
Dissenters from Decimation, or toward the Assertors of it: And that the
proceeding may be most equal, I will first make the Objection of the Dissenters
from those Apostolic Writings, as strong as I am able, and then apply to it
its Answers: first from what is most Certain and Demonstrative, out of the
Apostolic Writings, then from what is very probable and agreeable to Reason,
although possibly not so Demonstrative.

The Objection I frame thus.

Tithing was a proportion for the Acknowledgment of God, and his Ministers,
adjusted to the Time of Sacrifice, and the Priesthood Attendant on Sacrifices.
It was indeed before Moses, and was transplanted into the Mos^ick Law as
Circumcision, and commanded under the name of a Heave Offering; All these
three, Sacrifice, Circumcision, and Tithes being first of the Fathers, and then
of Moses. But the very original of Tithes, was in Honor of a Priest, and
doubtless of a Priest, that Offered Sacrifice, though that part of his Office
for as great Reasons concealed, as his Genealogy, and only his Blessing in the
Name of God recorded.

To argue then, Tithes were not abrogated by Christ, because before Moses, is
no stronger then to argue Sacrifices, or Circumcision were not abrogated,
because before Moses.

And if we continue Tithes, we may as well continue Sacrifice, or Circumcision
because of the Fathers.

And seeing we justly reject the continuance of Sacrifices, so should we also
Tithes, as of a Sacrifical Nature.

The continuance therefore of them is justly Blameable, as Jewish and
Antichristian, and is of the same sort with calling the Ministers of the
Gospel, Priests, on which account Tithes are so earnestly contented for by
them, a Priestly Maintenance for a Priestly minister.

Therefore the Apostles, as in all their Writings, they carefully avoid
affixing any Priestlyness to the Ministers of the Gospel; so do they any
Subindications of a priestly maintenance; and therefore though our Lord abated
nothing from the Law of Tithes, yet he left it to his Apostles by the Total
Silence of any such Law to declare it abrogated with the Sacrifical Law.

The two main Hinges, on which this Objection turns are these.

1. Tithes were of a Sacrifical and Priestly Original, and as such, consigned
into Moses his Law; and therefore certainly Abrogated with all things of that
sort and alliance.

2. They are not once mentioned by the Apostles, and therefore are to be
concluded abrogated, though our Lord out of Honor to that Law of Moses
defalked nothing from it himself, yet He left it to be thus done by his
Apostles.

To the first of these Objections, I make these following Answers.

1. The whole sum of all True Religion was by Divine Artifice, interwoven with
the Jewish Administration, whatever of Natural or Revealed Truth had been
derived from God. was either in plain precepts, or curious Types and Shades to
be found in that Theocratical Frame of Laws; and not only what had been
implanted, or delivered by God to his Servants; but even the whole Evangelical
Frame was in apt Figures, and Emblems delincated in it. It is no wonder then,
that a Tenth, devoted as a Tribute to God, should be taken into the Mosaic
Frame under the Symbol of a Heav-Offering, which by its Exaltation (as Terumah
signifies) to Heaven, and then let down to Earth Sursum, Deorsum should carry
its pedigree, and original in that symbol; even the Acknowledgment of the most
High God, Possesser of Heaven and Earth. And in the second Heaving by the
Levites of the Best of the Tithes for the use of Aaroh, the High Priest and his
Successors; the most lively Number. 18. 2^.
Type, the Jewish Priesthood had of our Lord's Priesthood; there were the
Lineaments of the first Decimation to Melchisedeck, the more lively Type of
Jesus, our High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek.

2. As all True Religion was by God's own Infinite Wisdom deposited in the
Jewish Types, so in them were the most unchangeable and eternal Moral Duties
performed by all True Worshippers: In the Sacrifices were close Applications to
the Infinite Mercy of God in Christ under the Type; Confessions, Supplications,
Thanksgivings, Acknowledgments of JEHOVAH, the Only True God; filling Heaven
and Earth with his presence; of which the Tenupha, or Wave-Offering was a
Symbol; turning the Worshipper to all parts of the World ^rorsum, Retrorsum,
Dextrorsum, sinistrorsum, to Adore God, to whom the Sacrifice was Waved.

3. When therefore under the Gospel the Shaddows flew away, and the Types were
stripped off, whatever was substance still remained; Nor did the Holy Spirit of
God so desert its formerly Instituted Organs of Divine Worship, but that it
still delighted to make use of them, as lively Expressions of those Duties, the
Things themselves had formerly been the Shades of; Prayers are called ^d^urs;
and Praise is still a Sacrifice; and True Christians called Priests; The
Offering up the Body in Holiness is a Living and Acceptable Sacrifice.

The Apostles Conversion of the Gentiles was a Priestly Romans 15. 16.
or Hierurgical service: And more close to our purpose, (...).
The Things the Philippians sent to the Apostles supply, were an Odor of a
sweet smelling savor, and would abound Phil 4. 17, 18.
to their Account, of what they possessed under the most High possessor of
Heaven and Earth; To do good, and to Communicate, a Phrase proper to the
support of Gospel Ministry, (as is to be observed) are Sacrifices, with which
God is well pleased; Thus we see these Moral Duties remain, and continne a
Memory of the Divine Law by Moses, by being expressed to us in the Gospel,
under such Tralations, as were proper to that Law,

If therefore we shall find Great Moralities under Tithing as a Tribute to God
in his Ministers; If we shall find in a Tenth Part, more then Typical and
Ceremonial, and in such Expressions as resemble such a Dedication to God, as
Decimation was; why should we reject it as merely Sacrifical.

For it is Evident, Sacrifice has a plain and undoubted Ceremonialness in its
Nature, for the sake of which only can it by any Law of Nature, or Equity be
once supposed an Acceptable Acknowledgment of God, or Worship of him; and
whenever a Ceremonial Worship vanishes, that must needs Evanish also.

But setting out a Tenth part to God, and in honor of the Priesthood of
Christ, for so Great and Real an Use, as the upholding the Worship of God in
the World in his Ministers, Set apart to that Work; is of so True a Morality in
the Substance, as not to be denied, and the Omission of it is a Robbing of God.

And for the Tenthliness of it, It is the Determining so far a settled
proportion, to such a purpose, as which beyond all Reversal, God did once
accept and approve, and therefore could not be Inequitable in it self, and
which also after so many Ages, Christ on an occasion of Severity Reviewed, and
Blamed nothing in both which Characters of honor can never be razed out.

But now what was Shaddowy, Mosaic and Typical; viz. the Tenth being accounted
above other parts, Holy to the Lord; the Bringing the Tithes to Jerusalem; Any
Ceremony of Heaving them, first to the Levite^, then to Aaron; the Affixing
them to Sacrificing Priests; These are all vanished.

For in no such Sense do the Ministers of the Gospel claim them, nor call
themselves a PRIESTHOOD, but Romans 15. 16.
as they offer up by their Ministry Souls Converted to GOD, who are thereby as
the Apostle in allusion speaks; (...) and He Himself, as before, a Priestly
Administrator.

And as they are (...), Seniors, or Elders in the Family of God, offering up
the Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise, as the Apostle James instructs us. Jam 5.
14. Heb. 13. 10.


And lastly as they attend on that Altar, of which they have no right to eat
that serve the Tabernacle; viz. The continual publication of the Sacrifice of
Our Lord Jesus, who suffered for his people without the Gate, as a Malefactor,
by Preaching, and Administration of the Lords Supper, which is a setting forth
of Jesus Christ evidently, before Heb. 6. 6.
Men's Eyes, crucified among them, and a showing forth his Death till he come;
as Apostasy, and Denying of Christ is in a contrary sense Crucifying the Son of
God afresh, putting Heb. 10. 29.
him to an open shame, counting the Blood of the Covenant, a Common, or Unclean
Thing.

In any other Sense we are all of the same Mind with that Eminent Servant of
God, and Minister of the Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis p. 222.
Gospel ^ow with Christ.

It is of great Remark; That none of the Ministers of Christ. in whatsoever
order they are constituted, are any where in the Holy Scripture, called
Priests, or Chief-Priests;

And a little after; Not the Gospel Ministry, but the Priesthood of Christ was
in Succession to the Jewish Priesthood; so that there is no one by Divine
Authority, either Priest, or High Priest surviving, except Christ alone, viz.
An Advocate with God for Men.

Thus the whole Objection from the Connection between Tithes and Sacrifices is
clearly removed; and therein whatever concerns the first part of the Objection.

I come now to the second part of the Objection, There is no mention of Tithing
in the Apostles Writings with Reference to the Ministers of the Gospel; but
such a Deep Silence, as argues it a very Unevangelical Practice to Require or
Receive such a Maintenance.

In Answer to this, I shall first observe, what is Demonstratively certain from
the Apostolical Writings: And that is.

1. That, It is the Ordination of Christ the Lord, that they, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. This is so expressly the Ap.
Paul's Doctrine; that it cannot be questioned even when he most professed a
Recession from his own Right or Power, as it were to fit himself for it, there
he most boldly asserted this, either as immediate Revelation, or some most
known Decree of the Lord in this Case, or the Result of this Determination upon
the Law of Tithes or that undoubted Maxim; The Labourer is worthy of his Hire:
But this is most positive; The Lord has ordained, that they who preach the
Gospel, should Live of the Gospel, whether we take it for the Reward of the
Messengers of Good Tidings, according to the Custom of all Ages and Nations,
who use to proportion the Rewards to the Goodness of the Tidings, or for the
Sacrifices of Gratitude to God for so Joyful an Embassy of Peace: It is evident
the Compensation for 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Spiritual Things out of our Carnal Things is to be Great and Honorable; like
the Presents made to Ambassadors, answerable to the Dignity of the Prince from
whom, and to whom they are sent, and according to the particular Riches of
every Country, where they are to Treat.

All the provision the Law made for the Ministers of the Altar and Temple, and
even for the very Oxen tended hither; for if the Ministers of the Law, that was
2 Cor. 3. 6. etc.
but a Ministration of Death, and Condemnation were so honored; the Ministers
of the Gospel, the Ministration of Life are worthy of Double Honor; and least
any should think a Low Proportion enough the Apostle in this very Case of
Communication admonishes; God is not mocked, that is, He will not suffer
himself to be so.

2. It is most certain, the Tenth part under so many Scales of Divine
Acceptance must remain a Standard, to the very ends of the World, of that
proportion God expects, as a Sacrifice of Praise to him, of Glory to him in the
Highest for the Message of Peace on Earth, and Good will to Men proclaimed in
his Gospel; so that if it be supposed not to be absolutely required to the
Formality, yet it cannot but be expected in the Substance. Seeing the Right of
God and our High Priest is unchangeable; and the obligation through the
clearness of the Revelation is much higher: The Tribute therefore cannot
possibly abate in its value or obligation, but must needs Rise.

2. There is therefore great probability, that the Provision made by God for
the Ministers of the Temple, 1 Cor. 9.
and the Altar, leads to the very Specification of a Tenth Part; that the
Double Honor is suited to the 1 Timothy 5 17.
Promogeniture of the Evangelical Presbytery above that of the Law; that the
Priesthood of Christ, shaddowed Heb. 7.
by Melchisedeck, that was honored with Abraham's Decimation to it, so
abundantly insisted upon by the Apostle, was an Admonition to Christians of
that Acknowledgment Due to our High Priest, as conferred upon the Preachers of
his Sacrifice and Intercession, by those to whom the Feet of them that bring
those glad Tidings are Beautiful. That Communicating in all Good Rom 10. 15.
Galat. 6. 6.
Things, is a silent insinuation of the Ancient Law of Tithing, carrying so
clear an Image of it: But because These Things are not so Cogent, as to
convince the Gain-sayer, I therefore acquiesce in what is impossible by those
that acknowledge the Scriptures of the New Testament to be contested.

Let us then for a Conclusion of this whole Matter, observe several Reasons,
why we may suppose no such Cogent Indications of a Tenth part, in the
Apostolic Writings, as agree with former Times of Scripture. To omit the great
modesty of the Gospel, as to any secular Design I give these.

1. Because in the first ministration of the Apostles in Jerusalem, so much
above a Tenth part was freely given, that Christians sold Entire Possessions,
and laid the Prices of them at the Apostles Feet; neither said Acts 4. 32.
Any Man that ought he possessed was his own: And it is probable in all the
First Christian Churches, Greater proportions, then the Tenth were offered for
the service of the Gospel.

2. That in the Affluence of Nations, States, and persons; They might not think
themselves Circumscribed, nor indeed discharged by a Tenth part as a Tribute to
God: The Priests and Levites had much more given them by God under the Law. Nor
Any, whose Increase falls not under ordinary Decimation should absolve
themselves from the main Duty.

3. Because some Things clearly, and abundantly settled in their Formality in
the Old Testament are more silently in the New applied only to the Gospel
pu^pose, and Service.

Thus the Lord's Day so evidently noted by the First Day of the Week, the Day
of our Lord's Resurrection; of his several Appearances to his Disciples, of the
Effusion of the Spirit, at Pentecost fully come for Preaching the Acts 2 1.
Gospel, as it had been of Giving the Law on Mount Sinai, the Day of Christian
Sollemnities, and ^ollections is the only Day of the Week, noted in all the
Scripture, after the Six Days of Creation, except the Seventh, or Sabbath; and
after it had been often remarked under the name of the First Day was at length
consecrated by the name of the Lord's Day, as Breaki^g of Bre^d was by the name
of the Lord's Supper* Which Two Engraven with our Lord's Name, as in Capital
Letters, (...), are the Commemorations of Two of the Lords Great Actions (in
which all the rest Center) appointed us in his Word; viz. his Dying for Our
Sins, and Rising again for Our justification, one in a Sollemn Institution, the
other in a Solemn Time; and it were Happy, if they could at no Time be sundred,
one from the other.

Yet That This Day though the only Instituted Time in the New Testament is to
be a Sabbath; its Observation to be Weekly in memory of the Creat^on; Its
Celebration to be by keeping it Holy: All these so principal Concernments are
referred to the State of that Matter in the Old Testament, where every Thing is
full and clear: And although the Reversal of the Jewish Sabbath by the Apostle;
the First Day so sollemnly Recorded as the Day of the ^ord's Resurrection and
Christian Meetings; the Apostles Being in the Spirit on this Day; (though the
principal Intendment be Prophetical) It Is being styled the Lord's Day are very
Great Characters of a Christian Sabbath; Yet the Importance and Ratification of
such a Sabbath are to be derived wholly from the Old Testament; No wonder then,
if Devoting a Tenth Part to God, which cannot be supposed equal to God's
Sanctification of a seventh part of Time be only conserved in the Old
Testament, and confirmed by our Lord in the Days of his Ministry, as a
Standard of proportion, and yet not mentioned in that so undoubted point of
Duty in the Apostolical Writings, viz. Let Him that is taught, Communicate to
him that teaches in All Good Things, fortified with so Tremendous a Monition;
God is not mocked.

4. That there might be no ensnaring Consciences in regard of the various
Revolutions of States and Laws determining this point of Decimation: Or not
allowing the possibilities of it; either setting it apart to the support of a
False Religion, as under the Papacy, or to Secular uses: In such Cases the
Consciences of Subjects Gal 6. 6.
are Free, in rendering them according to Law, to Caesar, as the Things that are
Caesar's; For public Acts having divested private persons of them, they can
have no propriety in them; although yet this Standard of Dedication to God out
of what they possess beyond that Alienated Tenth obliges them still to Render
to God the Things that are Gods.

But especially where Both Concur, the Laws of Men with the Laws of God; we at
the same Time Render to Caesar the Things that are Caesar 's, in obeying Laws;
and to God the Things that are God's, in that they are devoted to his Service,
and are therefore to do it with all Heartiness and Cheerfulness as to the Lord,
and not to Men only: For God loves a Cheerful Giver. No Man now can have any
Just Reason of being Scandalaiz'd at the separation of such a Tenth for an
Evangelical Ministry, that duly weighs what has been offerr'd.

And especially seeing their whole Lives, the Education of their Youth, and the
service of their Age, are necessary to this Service, since the Cessation of
extraordinary Gifts; and the Labor not only of the Mind but of the Body are
sequestered to it. Giving themselves wholly to their Ministry, and Attending in
private to Reading, as well as publicly to Exhortation, and Preaching in
Season, and without Season, are expressly required by the Apostle; so that it
is but a Recompense of Justice required by God in this Case:

But if on any Account whatever, Any Man be unsatisfied in the Decimation, Laws
impose upon him: He must consider, nothing separated by public Acts, that have
stood from Age to Age is any more any Man's claim by his Birth Right; then a
wholesome Air, or Fruitful soil are, when his Country is not so happily situated.

FINIS.

