An Impartial RELATION OF THE Surrender and Delivery OF THE Famous City of
Dublin. To the French, BY THE Late King James. WITH Some Great and Remarkable
Passages, Which happened betwixt Teague O Regan, and the English General, at
the Surrender, etc.
Licensed, May 22d. 1690.

J. Fraiser.
And Entered according to Order.



SIR,

THE Vessels that arrive here daily, furnish us with good News, from all parts
of Ireland; and whatever is confirmed by credible Persons, assure your self, I
shall communicate to you the next Posts.

From Dublin we are informed, that the Late King James, has delivered that City
over to the French King, by giving the Keys of the Castle of Dublin, and the
Gity Gates, to French Commanders in chief; and by mounting and dismounting the
Guards, with the French Soldiers; the Irish being rejected, or eased of that
trouble; so that the Case of the whole Inhabitants of that City is to be
lamented; the English and Protestants being compelled to give Free Quarters to
the French; and the Papish Inhabitants, to those of the Irish Soldiers, that
are yet remaining there.

King James has also seized on all the Brewers Malt; and in every Brew House
has placed Officers of the Army; and strictly ordered, that none of the Liquor
shall be sold, but all brewed for the use of the Army; and has laid his
Commands on them, to sell him their Beer Five Shillings in the Barrel cheaper,
than formerly they did; (notwithstanding his Copper Payments:) The French are
highly dissatisfied with the Irish in Dublin, villifying, and calling them a
Thousand Cowardly Rogues; urging, That they could not keep their own Country,
but that They (meaning the French) must be sent for, and exposed to all
hardships, through their Cowardice.

From Newry, in the North of Ireland, we are informed as follows, That
Colonel Stewart went lately to the Walls of Dundalk, and seeing no probability
of Opposition, he went farther, and seized on One Thousand Head of Black
Cattle; and caused them to be drove by Dundalk: And that the Irish might not
think he came purely for the Prey, the worthy Colonel sends them a Trumpeter,
to tell rhem, That he came not to steal their Cattle, but took them fairly; and
if they were so disposed, they might come and Rescue them, or receive Payment
for them. But so great was the damp on their Spirits, that though there were
Three Regiments in the Town, not one of them came out, nor so much as made one
Shot from the Walls, but suffered the Colonel to carry off his Prey, without
the least Interruption; and since that, the Irish, as we are credibly imformed,
have deserted Dundalk, Atherdee, and Carlingford.

We have likewise a Confirmation of the actual Surrender of Charlement. And
that the Governor, Teige O Regan, when he took his leave (with the Commander
in Chief of the English Forces there) desired, that one thing might be granted
him; which was, That he might carry King James one of the Brass Guns, which
they left in the Castle; which the General much wondered at, after the Articles
and Surrender had passed, saying, I know no use you can make of it, unless it
be to Coin Brass Money. To which Mr. Governor Teige Answered, Be me Shoul
Joy, I believe your Grace is in the true of it.

And now, to conclude, from the above Particulars, in all probability, when,
and wheresoever our Army Approaches, the Irish will either Desert or Submit,
rather than truckle to the French Tyranny, and Absolute Power; which that that
they may do, is the earnest Desire of,

Your Assured Friend, and Servant, W. B.

ADVERTISEMENT.
CAtastrophe Galliae, and Hiberniae Restitutio. An Impartial Judgment, denoting
the Reduction of Ireland, this Revolution 1690. With the Conquering of Lewis
XIV. present King of France, by His Sacred Majesty King William III.
Prophetically Deduced from the Characters of Heaven. Likewise, the Planets
Attributes, according to the Doctrine of Hermes. With a Philosophical Discourse
of the four Elements, and the Nature and Powerful Influences of the Heavenly
Bodies. Also, A modest Defense of Prophecy, demonstrated from the Ten Sybils,
and of their wonderful Predictions of our Blessed Savior, long before his
Birth. To which is added, Scutica Gadburiana, or, A Whip for that Scorpionist
Gadbury. Printed and are to be Sold by Tho. Howkins, in George*Yard, in
Lombard* Street. 1690.

London: Printed for R. Hayhurst, in Little Britain.


