Cupids Court OF SALUTATIONS. Full of Complemental Dialogues, and other amorous
passages, as well Commodious as delightful for Young Men and Maids to Read and
Exercise.

This may be Printed,

R. P.

Printed for J. Deacon, and are to be Sold by R. Kell, at the blew Achor in
Pye-Corner, near West Smithfield: 1687.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is a custom, that in every small Pamphler, the Epistle to the Reader must
fill up some room: therefore I present these few Lines unto you, and with them
my Book, which I entreat you to peruse with an impartial judgment: For it is
the first I ever ventured into the the World, and must only commit to your
censure, which, according to your estimation of it, shall either imbolden or
direct my hopes; I could tire my Pen with Complements to you, and praise the
use of eloquent Phrases, and force that fair speeches bear, in expressing that
passions of a Lover to his best Beloved; and instruct you how to behave your
self before you encounter your Mistress. First in the gesture of your body, and
other passages, either at Table, or in other Company, when conference will not
be admitted; but I know that he who is a Lover, is capable enough of such
behavior; and therefore not desiring to trouble your patience, or burden your
Memory with too many superfluous Words, I only Dedicate these few Verses to
your favorable Construction of them and me.

He that is a Lover must find out
More ways then one, and trace about
In several paths; he must not be
Discouraged, though he daily see
Strange crosses to perplex his Love,
But still in constant cross; move;
And so at length he shall aspire
To the full height of his desire.
Three things in Love he must endure,
E're he the depth of Love procure;
First Time, then Opportunity,
The next is patient Constancy:
Time, Opportunity does bring,
And Opportunity the thing
Which he desires, if Patience,
Can but Foundation take from hence,
And wait the time till it discry,
And find out Opportunity.
That man who constantly these ways can prove
Let me lose mine, if he get not his Love.
W. B.

A Direction for Lovers, how to choose their Mates.
WHen Cupid with his Golden Dart,
Has pierced your breast, and that your heart
Feels amorous flames, if you intend
To choose a Mate, and Bridal Friend,
Let them be Young, or let them be
Of suiting Years which may agree,
And equal to your chaste desires,
Cherish you still in loves strong fires*
Or when your love you chance to fix,
Place it so firm as't never may mix
With wavering thoughts, but always may
Be constant to your Dying day:
Which shall transport your Souls from Earth,
In Love unto a second Birth:
Where when pale Death has born you hence
True Love will make you recompense.
CUPID TO ALL HIS SCHOLARS.
Young Men and Maids, whose constant mind
To true affection is inclined:
Whose modest thoughts yet never knew,
Unchaste desires, but still were true:
Unto your chosen Mates resort*
With boldness* unto Cupid's Court.
If you want words to Woo, or Art,
My best of skill I here impart:
But from your breast you banish must
All foul desires, that nourish Lust;
For Cupid's Shafts is never used,
Where Love with Lust shall be abused.
A Complemental Dialogue Between a Young Man and a Maid, at the first Meeting.
DIALOGUE. 1.
Young Man: Fair Maid, e're I begin my suit, I must ask your Pardon.


Maid. Pardon Sir! that is easily granted, you never offended me.


Young Man. Nor never will: yet least my rude Language, and too hold intrusion
into so fair a Virgins presence, especially on so small acquaintance may seem
offensive, I crave that, and freedom to speak, that I might reveal a secret,
which will break my heart if I conceal it any longer.


Maid. Sir, modesty, which is a Maidens chiefest guide, almost forbids me to
admit long conference with a single Man in private, lest jealousy might make
some suspect, what our chaste thoughts never intended.


Young Man. Mistress, you may vanish that fear: it is for any sensual affection,
as intending in the least point to stain your honor, that I have presumed to
utter my mind in secret to you.


Maid. If I may be assured of this Sir, that small time I have, which (alas) is
but little from my Parents sight, I willingly dispense with, to hear your Suit,
and therefore desire you that you would be brief.


Young Man. Then know fair Maid, I love you, moved thereunto* not upon easy
grounds, or a rash and hasty desire of obtaining, but by the report and
splendour of those rare qualities which are inherent in your virtuous mind; but
since I viewed your Person, and those rich features which adorn it, and
equalize your better parts, my heart is re-inflamed with a strong, yet chaste
affection; and I could wish this minute were the hour to accomplish my desires,
and knit our hearts in a true Lovers Knot, by the lasting bond of Marriage.


Maid. I were ungrateful, Sir, should I absolutely deny you, and not return you
thanks, though I cannot upon the sudden (for Marriages too hasty concluded,
seldom prosper) resolve you fully, yet time and oftener meeting, I hope, shall
e're long confirm our affections. I fear my Fathers displeasure, and dare not
presume too much upon it, therefore I must entreat you to excuse my abrupt, yet
unwilling departure: but yet despair not, but till our next meeting (which I
hope shall be as sudden as our wishes) let it suffice that I am yours, which I
will confirm by the conveyance of some private Letters, and find occasion to
appoint a time convenient; that when we meet again, we may make our selves more
happy in enjoying each others presence more opportunely, and a longer space: So
for this time, wishing that all the joy and happiness of a constant Lover may
still attend you, I take my leave.


DIALOGUE. II.
A Dialogue between a Young Man and a Maid, at their second meeting. Young Man.
FAir Mistress, for so I may now more boldly term you, since I find you steadfast
in your Love, es in my absence you have expressed by your Letters, and not
wavering according to the Old Proverb; Out of sight, out of mind. I cannot
conceive whether my absence so long from you seemed more tedious or your
presence at this instant more joyful to me; since every minute methought seemed
a day, and every day a month, and every month a year, till I saw you.


Maid. You discover so much effection to me, Sir, as I should show ingratitude,
if I should not both accept and require it; and were it not that I might be
taxed of disobedience, if I should too suddenly condescend to what you request
of me, to conclude a march without the consent of my friends, this minute
should give an end to all delays, and consumate our felicities in the happy
Union of Wedlock: therefore I must entreat you, that they who gave me birth and
education in this World, may be a furtherance to our further proceedings.

Now shall we when the Nuptial knot is tied,
Be joyful in each others company;
You glad in the imbracements of your Bride,
And I enjoy my Bridegroom lovingly:
For Marriages concluded by consent
Of friends, till death divide the knot shall last,
When others against their wills breeds discontent,
And are dispersed by every little blast.

Young Man. Mistress, you speak my thoughts, and though I have often seen what
strange changes in affection the deferring of time has bred in Love, yet I
cannot distrust you, for I know it is as impossible that any separation should
step between our hearts, as it is for virtue to depart from yours, where it
has had so long abode; and therefore that you may see I am not overhasty in a
matter which so much concerns both our goods, I leave it to your discretion
to appoint the way, and work the means with an earnest protestation, that you
shall not find me backward in my best endeavors to effect it, since I must
either dye or live in your embraces.


Maid. Well Sir, we need no greater assurance of our mutual constancy; only let
this have Salutation seal the hand of our affection, till it be more firmly
tied in the public Congregation, and I hope not only with the correspondence
of our own desires, but the assistance and liking of our Parents.


DIALOGUE. III.
To move a suit to a Father, for his consent to Marry his Daughter. Young Man.
WOrthy Sir, I doubt not but your Daughter, and my most intimately affected
Friend has certified you partly of what I intend more at large to request of
you, which is your good will and liking, and that you would be pleased to
esteem so well of me, as to bestow your Daughter in Marriage upon me.


Father. Sir, your request is reasonable, and may be accepted: but blame me not
if at first I seem somewhat scrupulous, for it behooves a Father to regard his
Childrens welfare, since in their behavior toward him (both while they are
under his tuition, or from it) and his care of their prefermet, consists his
Felicity or Misery: therefore I must desire some respiie, that I may be essured
both of your estate and condition; which when I have been truly certified of,
you shall receive an answer.


Young Man. I know Sir, you have been a Lover in your days, and have felt how
tedious a small time seems to them, whose hearts have been combined by a
Natural consent already, and therefore humbly desire your spredy resolution;
for as I enlarge in a fervent desire, lawfully to enjoy your fair daughter, so
shall I grow proud to be termed the Son of so grave and aged a Father.


Father. Sir, your external qualities both in Person and Behavior, show you to
be worthy of a better match than my Daughter; nor if I find no other deserts,
shall it be long e're I strike a conclusion to your lingering expectations. Till
then, I pray you to take a freedom of my poor house for your entertainment, in
your frequent visitation of my Daughter, and I hope time will not only discover
your perfections in deserving her equal, but make my age joyful in two such
obedient children, and a prosperous issue from them.


DIALOGUE. IV.
An earnest Suit of a constant Lover, to a Coy Maid. Lover. FAir Maid, I have
long been an earnest Suitor, both by Letters, and other rare expressions of my
love, but in my absence, could never obtain the least show of favor from you,
which has made me at the last present my self, and shall be happy, if I may
perceive the least glance of a pleasing Smile from your sweet Countenance to
shine upon me.


Maid. Sir, it was not a conceit of any defect either in your person or
Quality, nor suspicion of your descent, that made me all this while conceal my
affection from you (though the deceit of Lovers in this age, give a just cause
thereof) but the consideration of the misery which purfues hasty Wedlock, made
me for a time defer an answer, lest my too hasty consent might move you and
some others to imagine that it proceeded rather from a fear of wavering
inconstancy, than truth of perfect affection.


Lover. Then say dear Friend, you love me now, and let one poor syllable
breathed from your sweet Lip, receive my drooping Heart, that has thus long
languished under the burden of your disdain, O speak quickly, or else

My scarce conceived joys will dye,
And perish in their Infancy.

Maid. You are too importunate, yet that you may not despair, know, I somewhat
affect you, but must defer the conclusion of our Marriage longer, in the mean
time you may visit me, and shall be kindly welcome, and for this time I bid
your farewell.


Lover. My best wishes attend you, but hear you fair one. I have one suit more:
O stay a little, and do not take away my heart my life, my happiness all at
once, for with you goes all, all that this world affords me. But if you will
needs go, let this parting salutation leave some impression upon your sweet
Lips, to put you in some remembrance of me, your impatiently afflicted servant.


Maid. Now you are immodest, and I must chide you, while you protess true love
(which delights not in lascivious kisses) I was partly willing to embrace it;
but now I must recall my too forward promise.


Lover. O be not so cruel, let not a wrinkled frown obscure the brightness of
that fair Sunshine, which dwells upon those smooth Cheeks: be not unkind and
fair, for such the mighty Cupid in his doom has vowed to be revenged on: let
not a cruel Sentence pronounced from those bright Rubies, so soon deprive me
quite of Life* since you are my judge, whilst I plead at the bar of Love) and
can at one word strike me dead, or reprieve me: O then let one pleasing smile
from you lend me a minutes happiness.


Maid. Moved as much by pity as Affection, I lend you this minutes happiness
if you be constant) as by your seeming passions you express, you may entertain
a resolution that you shall enjoy me: but by a legal way, I prize you as my
self, and would not you should miscarry either in health or sickness for a
Million: but must entreat your further patience, till I have finished some
business which may highly concern our Marriage, and make us happier when it is
performed* so take a freedom that was never granted to any (a chaste kiss) for
our pledge according to your own unspotted desire.

But if an unchaste thought you entertain,
Never shall you embrace my Love again:

Lover. If I have been too rude, or seemed the least way to abuse your chaste
intentions with my too bold or unmannerly behavior, where the regard of fame,
honor, modesty, and only such discourse, as a kind Brother might salute his
Sister with, should rather have been rendered. O forget it, and henceforth I
will always be silent to all discourses, but such as shall suit to your sweet
thoughts, and discreet modesty.

Indeed I will not ask a Kiss of you,
No, not to wring your finger, or to sue
To these blessed pair of fixed Stars for smiles,
All a young lovers cunning, all his wiles,
And pretty wanton dallyings shall to me
Be strangers, only to your Chastity
I am devoted ever, that shall bind
Our hearts as firm as is the Ivy twined
About a well-grown Elm, and never untye,
Till Hymen yoke us in true Loyalty.

Maid. Continue in this resolution, and I am yours.


DIALOGUE V.
A Merry way of Wooing a Widow, by a Young Man. Young man. THe time of the day
to you Widow, or the best hour of the night, when you have a Bedfellow, and
had rather wake than sleep.


Wid. The like to you Sir, your own wishes are returned, farewell.


Young. You Are very abrupt Widow.


Wid. Faith, would you were so too Sir, that I might be gone, I have more
business than to stand prating about had I wist.


Young. Nay, but stay Widow, I have a suit to you.


Wid. To me Sir! I pray you then prove a good Tailor, and finish it quickly.


Young. You Are witty Widow: but in good sooth now tell me, that is my business,
what think you of me, or how do you like me?


Wid. Why to tell you the truth, I think you are a very sprute Young Man, and
for the other, I like you as I always did, as well before as behind.


Young. And better too I believe: but to be brief, what say you? Could you
affect me, Widow? durst you venture to cast away your self upon a lusty Lad
now? I have good limbs, and a strong back, and can work hard for my living.


Wid. You were best to go to the Mines, and dig Coals at New Castle, there will
be employment for you.


Young. Nay, but to leave off these demuring justs, can thou love me? come,
come, be like a Maid for once, say no and take it; you have been long troubled
with a cross old Fellow, and now you are rid of him that lay Bedridden by you so
many years; he not a Fool, and lie (as many) alone; I le make thee young again.


Wid. I thank you for nothing Sir, I can do that with a little Pomar jum and
Maiden-blush, dawbed upon my Cheeks.


Young. Nay, once again be brief, in truth I love you heartily, and could wish
we were going to Church to be Married.


Wid. Soft Sir, two words to a bargain; old Birds are not caught with Chaff,
Marry in have, and repent at leisure: When I have taken a little consideration
of my Pillow, I will tell you more of my mind, adieu.


Young. But when shall I see you again?


Wid. When I have nothing else to do.


Young. Come, come, we must not part yet, IN says, you shall take a pint first
Widow.


Wid. What must be, must be, let us have it quickly then.


Young. Yet I must not forget my old suit, what can you love me or no?


Wid. I cannot tell truly yet, but I think I shall do by and by.


Young. Well, the other Blass of Canary to you Widow; that and a little pause
will confirm it, speak, is it concluded?


Wid. Come, I had as good be serious, and give you your answer; for I perceive
I shall be troubled with you: You have won my affection, by your importunance:
A thousand bashful Coxcombs might have come and I should have dashed them all
our of countenance, but thou have hit the nail on the head, and had not thou
tired me with tedious Wooing, thou had never got me, but now be as brief to
procure a License speedily (that shall be your charge) for tomorrow I must be
wedded, and bedded, or I am gone again.


DIALOGUE VI.
To entreat a Friends assistance, in obtaining his Mistress. Lover. WOrthy
friend, so I hope our long acquaintance has admitted freedom, to call you, and
be assured of it, my occasion makes me earnest to entreat a courtesy of you;
and I hope you will not deny it.


Friend. Not if it be in the power of a Man to perform; for I prize a true
friend as my self: and there is a Sympathy in perfect Friendship, which
mutually combines their hearts; and methinks the good that does befall my true
Friend, reflects upon my self; and I shall be as glad to be employed in your
service, as joyful that it may be effected prosperously, whenever you shall
command me to undertake it.


Lover. Sir, I presume upon the truth of your Friendship, otherwise I should
not be so bold either to be so troublesome to you, or to commit so great a
secret to your charge, which so infinitely may import my welfare, if I enjoy
it; or misfortune, if I miss of it.


Friend. You cannot disclose it Sir, so soon as I shall be willing to embrace,
and with my best endeavor and power, strive to bring it to a desired
conclusion.


Lover. Give ear then worthy Friend, while I relate it: I have a Mistress, in
whose fair tountenance dwells more sweetness than the most curious Painters can
allow to their best Pieces: In comparison of whose beauty, all the best
expressions of ancient Poets, either of Hellen (or more than mortal Venus) come
far short of, of whom I may say with the Poet:

Methinks in her fair face,
Dwells all the features, all the grace
A beauteous Woman can enjoy,
No she, whose beauty bore to Troy
A fatal ruin; not the Mother
Of fair Cupid, nor any other
That nature ever framed, can be
Compared to my Mistress: she
Exceeds all these besides Divine;
All Virtues that amongst the nine
Celestial Sisters were divided,
Are in her fair breast united.
From whose fair eyes was glanced a stronger tharm, than my weak Soul is able
to endure, unless by the same beauty from whence it first was darted, it be
again recovered; but alas, I know not which way to accomplish it, without the
assistance and furtherance of an intimate friend, whose care may convey some
Letters interchangeable betwixt us; for I dare not adventure to visit her my
self, because of the enmity betwixt our Parents, and some other lets which
interrupt my resolutions. Be not angry therefore, worthy friend, that I am thus
familiar with you to trouble you so far: you are not ignorant, how wary lovers
should be in committing fruth to any man in visitation of their Mistress, lest
his present familiarity might transport her affections from her absent beloved
Friend: It is not policy indeed, but my confidence of you is such, that I
cannot entertain a thought that may induce me the least way to suspect your
faith, or imagine that you will give the least occasion for the breach of your
friendship.


Friend. Again, I vow to be your true friend and servant, and to undertake your
business, with as sull intent to conclude it, and as true a zeal, as if it were
mine own; and if you find me the least way faulty, or negligent in your
business, or treacherous to deceive you of your love, may the greatest vexation
of a Lover fall upon me, and my wife (when it pleases Cupid to bestow one on
me) be like his Mother and with every Clown cornute me.


Lover. It is sufficient; let me request you therefore with your best secrecy,
to convey this Letter to my fair Mistress, and in it enclosed this Ring, the
posie whereof is,

I long to prove, The joys of Love.
And what my rude Language has not fully expressed, be you my Orator to satisfy
her more fully, and how I stand affected and obliged as well to her virtues as
Beauty. My impatient desire to hear from my fair Mistress, will nor give me
leave to detain you any longer, therefore with my equal wishes for your success
and health, till I am made happy with the sight of you again, by your quick
return, I take my leave.


DIALOGUE VII.
The Friends return, with a Letter from his Mistress. Friend. WOrthy Sir, with
as much gladness as speed to bring you these happy tidings, I return you this
answer from your second self: that Cupid reciprocally has wounded her with his
Golden Shaft, and she is as much inamoured of you, as your affection possible
can be extended toward her; of which this Letter will more at large, and more
certainly give you knowledge.


The LETTER.
WOrthy Sir, I could rather wish to have been the bearer hereof my self, (that
we might have expressed our gladness more full, enjoying the happiness of each
others presence) then to have sent it in writing, for I shall never rest quiet
till I see you be assured of my love, therefore (though my shortness of time,
which I borrowed from the sight of my two strict Guardians, will not give me
leave to be more copious) and let your resolution be constant, to meet at the
place appointed; till when, with as much patience as my impatient affection
will permit me, I continue

Your truly devoted and dearest Friend.

FINIS.

