THE Present State OF FRANCE.

Containing A General Description OF THAT KINGDOM.

Corrected and purged from the many Gross Mistakes in the French Copy, enriched
with Additional Observations and Remarks of the New Compiler, and digested into
a Method Conformable to that of The State of ENGLAND.

By R. W. M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Gilbert Cownly, at the Pope's Head, in the Lower-Walk of
the New-Exchange, in the Strand, 1687.

TO THE Right Honorable, RICHARD Lord Vicount Preston, IN THE Kingdom of
SCOTLAND, And One of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
THis being my first Essay in Print, I thought I could not but in duty present
it to your Lordship, as being a Description of that Renowned Court and Kingdom,
wherein your Lordship, as upon a Most Illustrious Theater, Signalized your Self
with so much Reputation to your Self and Country, and Mutual Satisfaction to
those great Princes, between whom you were so successful an Instrument of that
good Correspondence, that has not a little Contributed to the Happiness of Both
Monarchies, the most Flourishing at present of Europe.

And indeed, France, my Lord, being the Place too, wherein I was honored and
made happy, by so many of your Lordship's Favors, what more Congruous Mark,
could I give you, of the Lasting and deeply Impressed Sense, I have of them,
than the Present, I humbly make you of France it Self, or at least of this
small Prospect of so vast a Monarchy? A Present, which (though perhaps
inconsiderable on the account of the Imperfections it may have contracted from
it is Author) will, I hope, be grateful, in respect of its noble Subject, and by
your accustomed Goodness, be accepted as a Cordial Testimony, of the real
Gratitude, and Profound Respect, I have and shall ever preserve, for your
Honor, of whom, I am,

My Lord, The most humble, and most devoted Servant, R. Wolley.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
YOU have in this Treatise the Portraicture of a great and Flourishing
Monarchy; viz. The Present State of France, as it now is, under the Government
of the Potent and Victorious Prince, Lewis the Fourteenth, Surnamed the Great.
It is very different from that which formerly appeared under the same Title,
and though a great deal of the matter be taken out of the latest and best
Edition of the French Author, on that subject, yet it is not altogether a
Translation; and for your better and clearer understanding of what is
remarkable in a Country, of the particularities of which, our Nation above all
others is most curious, I have Explained all Passages needing Explication,
added many Observations of my own, made during ten Years Travel and Converse in
that Magnificent and splendid Court, and digested the Whole into a Method, as
conformable as the matter would suffer, to that observed, by the Worthy and
Ingenious Author of The Present State of England; and consequently, if I be not
mistaken, rendered both the Book, and the Country, much more intelligible to an
English Reader than it was before; when it was so far from being Illustrated,
that it was hardly half Translated, and left in many of the most material
Places, almost as much French, as in the Original, and done in a very perplexed
Method, which allayed much the Pleasure of the Reader, who, I hope, will peruse
this with more satisfaction and delight.

Farewell.
Note, That (l.) after the several Sums, signifies Livers, which is something
more in value than eighteen pence English, and that (d.) signifies Deniers, or
Sols, which is in value somewhat loss than a Penny English.

THE Present State OF FRANCE.
Of France in general.
CHAP. I.
Of its Name, Climate, Dimensions, Divisions, Air, Soil, Commodities, Riches,
Trade, Moneys, Weight, Measures, and Buildings.

THIS Famous Country has its present Name, as by most Authors is agreed, from
the Franci, or Franks, a People of Germany, who seized upon those parts of it
nearest the Rhine, in the time of Valentinian the Third, and having afterward
subdued Paris, and made it the Seat-Royal of their growing Empire, caused the
Country thereabouts to be called FRANCE. Which Name, as they enlarged their
Borders, they communicated to the rest of the Country, and those parts of
Germany also that were Conquered by them. The Ancient Name was Gallia, or Gaul,
and the people were called Galli or Gauls, and with those that write in Latin,
the ancient name is still in use.

It is situated between the degrees of 15 and 29 Climate.
of Longitude, and between 42 and 51 of Latitude, in the Northern Temperate
Zone, between the middle Parallel of the fifth Clime, where the longest day is
15 hours and 12 Minutes, and the middle Parallel of the Eighth Clime, where the
longest day is 16 hours and a half.

It is bounded on the North with the British Bounds.
Ocean, and some parts of the Netherlands, on the South with part of the
Pyrenean Mountains, and the Mediterranean Sea; on the East with a branch of the
Alps, and the Countries of Savoy, Switzerland, and some parts of Germany, and
the Rhine; and on the West by the Aquitanian Sea, and the rest of the Pyrenean
Mountains.

The figure of it is, according to most, squarish, Dimensions and Figure.
and to others roundish, or tending to an Oval, but all agree that it is almost
of equal extent every way; and much about 200 Leagues, or 600 Miles, according
to the common account of 3 Miles to a League, which is an account by which most
Geographers mightily enlarge the extent of other Countries, and make England
much less than it is: for I have observed, they reckon all by 3 Miles to a
common League, whereas, I never could find, that a common French League was
more than 2 common Miles; and if it be said that in some places they have much
longer Leagues, that is balanced by answering, that in some parts of England,
there are likewise very long Miles. An eminent Geographer reckons it 660
Italian Miles in length, 570 in breadth, and 2040 in compass; and makes it
contain 200 Millions of Arpens of Land, (which is a measure something more than
an Acre.

The Ancient Gallia or Gaul was distinguished by several Divisions, but as not
intending a History, Division.
but only a short Description, I shall take notice of but only two made by the
Romans after they became Masters of this Country; from the time of Julius
Caesar, by whom it was divided into these four parts, viz. 1. Narbonensis is
called so from the City of Narbon, then a Roman Colony, containing Languedoc,
Provence, Dauphiny, and some part of Savoy, called also Braccata, from the wild
habit worn by the people. 2. Aquitanica, so called from the City of Aquae
Augustae, (now D' Acqu's) in Guienne, lying upon the Pyrenees and the wide
Ocean, comprehending the Provinces of Gascoyn, Guienne, Xiantoygne, Limosin,
Quercy, Perigort, Berry, Bourbonnois, and Auvergne, extending from the
Pyrenees, to the River Loyre. 3. Celtica, so named from the valiant Nation of
the Celtae; also Lugdunensis, from the City of Lions, and Comata, from the long
hair worn by the people; extending from the Loyre to the British Ocean, and
containing the Provinces of Brittany, Normandy, Anjou, Tourain, Main, le
Beausse, the Isle of France, part of Champain, the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the
County of Lyonnois. 4. Belgica, from the Belgae, a potent Nation of that Tract,
taking up all the East parts, viz. Picardy, the rest of Champain, the County of
Burgundy, with so much of Germany and the Netherlands, as lies on this side of
the Rhine, part whereof has been reconquered lately by the Present King, and
the rest remaining to the Spaniard, the States of the United Provinces, and to
the Empire.

In the new Modelling of the Empire by Constantine the Great, Gaul was divided
into 17 Provinces, as 1. Lugdunensis prima. 2. Secunda. 3. Tertia. 4. Quarta.
5. Belgica prima. 6. Secunda. 7. Germania Prima. 8. Secunda. 9. Narbonensis
Prima. 10. Secunda. 11. Aquitania Prima. 12. Secunda. 13. Novempopulonia. 14.
Viennensis. 15. Maxima Sequanorum. 16. Alps Graiae and Poeninae. 17. Alps
Maritimae. Of these 17, Germania Prima, and Secunda, all Belgica Prima, and
part of Secunda, saving only what has been lately Reconquered; and all that of
the Alps Graiae, and Poeninae, and so much of the Maxima Sequanorum, as is in
Switzerland, are now dismembered from the name and account of France.

The modern Division of France is threefold. First, According to its
Ecclesiastical Government. Secondly, According to its Civil Government, or
Administration of Justice. And thirdly, According to its military Government.

1. According to its Ecclesiastical Government, it is divided into 17
Archbishopricks, containing 106 Bishoprics and Diocesses, besides the
Archbishopricks of Cambray, Besancon, and the Bishoprics of Arras, St. Omers,
Ypres and Perpignan, in the Conquests, which are subdivided into Parishes.

2. According to the Civil Government, and Administration of Justice, it is
divided into 10 Parliaments, besides several other Sovereign Courts, and into
many Bayliwicks and Seneschalchies.

3. According to the Military Government, it is divided into twelve Governments
within France, and four in the Conquered Countries, being sixteen in all: Of
these sixteen,

Four lie Northward, viz. 1. Picardy. 2. Normandy. 3. The Isle of France. 4.
Champaign.

Four in the middle of France, and on each side the Loire, viz. 5. Britany. 6.
Orleanois. 7. The Duchy of Burgundy. 8. Lyounois.

Four are Southern and beyond that River, viz. 9. Guienne. 10. Languedoc. 11.
Dauphiny. 12. Provence.

The four last lie Eastwards toward Germany, and are 13. The French Low
Countries, or Netherlands. 14. Lorrain. 15 Alsatia. 16. Franche Comte, or the
County of Burgundy.

There are reckoned in the Kingdom of France, besides the Conquests, 32 Cities,
above 4000 Towns, 27400 Parishes, 1450 Abbeys, 540 Arch-Priories, 12320
Priories, 567 Nunneries, 700 Convents of Friars, 259 Commanderies of Malta;
several Colleges of Jesuits and other Religious Houses of later Foundations
not reckoned, and 10 Universities: Of all which, we shall speak more
particularly elsewhere.

The Air is every where generally temperate and Air.
pure, and so healthful, that it is observed to be less subject to Plagues and
Sickness than any other Country in Europe, and the Air particularly about
Montpelier is held Medicinal for Consumptions. The North Wind reigns much
there, a great part of the Year, which is thought to contribute much to the
salubrity of the Air; the Winter in the Northern parts of it, is rather fiercer
and sharper than in England, though not altogether so long, but the Summer much
hotter; and at Marseilles, and some parts that way, observed to be hotter than
in several parts of Italy.

It is of an extraordinary fruitful Soil, as well in Soil.
the Mountains as the Vales; every where watered with wholesome Springs and
Streams, and with several great Navigable Rivers, and to say the truth, there
are not many Countries of Europe, to which Nature has imparted so rich a
Portion of her choicest Blessings: the Woods there afford great plenty of
Timber and Fuel-Wood, and abound with Chestnuts and Walnuts; the former
producing excellent Pork and Bacon, the latter great Quantities of Oil, which
in some parts of France they use instead of Butter: The Fields are large and
open, intermingled with Vines and Corn, and bordered and interlined with choice
of Fruits; and the steep sides of Hills, and most sandy stony grounds there
produce often the strongest and richest Wines. In fine, it is every where so
cultivated, that it seems like the Garden of Eden it self.

Its Commodities, Merchandises, and Manufactures Commodities.
are many, and so necessary to other Countries, that of late they hardly barter
them but for Money: For from this Kingdom, are Exported vast quantities of
Salt, Wine, Brandy, Corn, dried Fruits, Silks, Stuffs, Canvas, Linen,
Scissars, Nuts, Nut-Oyl, Box-Wood, Paper, Skins, Hats, perfumed Gloves, and all
manner of Toys and trifles; and besides, they have within themselves, and from
their own Conquests, and Plantations, such quantities of Oranges, Lemmons,
Oils, Sugars, Wool, Stuffs, Cloths, Seafish, Stone for Building, and all
other things for necessity, or pleasure, that they will hardly barter of late
years, but Trade only for Money, for the most part. The Country is every where
well stocked with fresh Fish, store of Venison, though little eaten by them;
Wildbores there much prised, with Rabbits, Hares, and all sorts of Wild-Fowl,
and some unknown to us: They want not good Beef, which is very sweet, nor
Mutton, which is generally sweeter than in England, nor excellent Pork; and as
for tame Fowl they have it in much more abundance than in England, and the
Provinces of Normandy and Brittany, furnish great store of good Butter, salt
and fresh; but for Cheese, they buy considerable quantities from the Hollanders
and Suitzers.

By what has been said, their Riches cannot but Riches and Trade.
be very great and inexhaustible, consisting in so many rich and inland
Commodities, that like so many Loadstones attract the greatest part of the
riches, both of Europe and of the whole World into France. For their Wines,
Brandy, Salt, Canvas, Silks, Stuffs, and Toys, are Commodities which constantly
bring them vast profits from England, Holland, and all the Northern Regions;
and then in the Spanish Dominions, they vend so much Corn, Linen, Flax,
Canvas, Cordage, Stuffs, and all sorts of Manufactures, that they fill their
Country with the Coin of that Nation in return; they likewise disperse great
quantities of the said Commodities in Italy and Barbary, and of late, they
drive a considerable Trade in the West Indies, and have made some progress in
the East.

Their usual accounts are kept by Deniers, Sols, Money and Coins.
and Livers; a Liver is twenty of their Sols, or Pence, which is a little more
than eighteen pence of our Money, and their Denier is the twelfth part of a
Penny, and very convenient for buying small quantities of things, and reckoning
Fractions; but these Deniers in Specie or Coin, are used but in the parts of
France, remote from Paris. Next are their Doubles, which are worth two Deniers,
and are the sixth part of a Penny, though formerly they went for Liards or
Farthings, and still bear that Inscription; their Carolus's, or pieces of five
Doubles, are absolute, though still used in reckoning, their Sols or Pence
called Sols Marquis, or marked Pence, of a mixed Metal, that went in the War
time for five Farthings, but now but for a Penny; then they have their three
pence halfpenny pieces, that go in England but for three pence, half three
pence halfpenny pieces, five penny pieces; fifteen pence pieces, or
Quart-D'ecu's, Half-Crowns, or thirty pence pieces, and Crowns, which are
reckoned here at four shillings six pence, or fifty four pence Sterling, though
they be worth sixty Sols French: whereas an English Crown is valued there at
sixty five pence, and a pound Sterlin at thirteen Livers Tournois, or pounds
French, contrary to what is set down in most Books. Their Golden Coins are at
present, Crowns of Gold weighing a Dram, and are worth five Livers and fourteen
pence, Lys D'or, which are but rare, worth seven Livers ten pence; half Lewis's
worth five Livers ten pence, whole Lewis's worth eleven Livers, and valued here
at seventeen shillings and a groat, and sometimes six pence; Double Lewis's,
Quadruples, and Octuples; but the two last are unusual. Besides these, most of
the Moneys of Spain, both Gold and Silver, are here current, and the gold
pieces are more numerous than the French, viz. the Pistols, half Pistols,
double Pistols, Quadruples, and Octuples, of the same value as the Lewis's,
half Lewis's, double Lewis's, etc. The silver Spanish Coins are Crowns, Ducats,
and other lesser pieces: Gold Coins are more frequent in payments than Silver,
and though the Peasants be poor, there is a vast quantity of money always
moving in the Kingdom, among the Courtiers, Tradesmen, and Merchants; but
Spanish pieces are seldom taken without weighing first.

Their Weights are different, as are likewise their Measures, the most
remarkable, and necessary to be Weights and Measures.
known by Merchants and Strangers, are those of Paris, Rouen, Bordeaux, Lions,
and Marseilles.

1. The Weights of Paris are, the Ounce, the Pound, and the Quintal, which is
accounted a hundred Gross, but is found to make a hundred pound of London
Subtle, two per Cent, more or less, and is of Lions weight, of sixteen Ounces,
a hundred and sixteen. Lastly, There is the Cargo or Great Quintal, which is
three hundred pound Troy weight.

Their Measures of length called Aulns or Else, are two, one for Linen, and
the other for Silks, and are much about the length of the vantaged and
unvantaged Aulns, but seldom used in Gross, because Silks and Stuffs, etc. in
this City, are generally sold by weight; which makes recompense to the Buyer,
for any defect in them. Their Concave Measures for Wine, are the Pint, which is
about a London Quart, the Chopine, which is a London Pint, and the Demysthier,
which is half a Pint; the Citern, which is eight Pints, or a Paris Gallon,
ninety six of which make a Tun, and a Muid, which contains two hundred and
eighty Pints. But in the Country about, these Measures are almost double to
Paris liquid Measure.

2. At Rouen, their Weights are chiefly the Kings Beam, or Viconte, being about
a hundred twenty six pounds English: Their Measure of length, is the Auln,
accounted something better than forty six Inches: their other Measures are such
as are common through France.

3. At Bordeaux, their Weight called a Quintal of a hundred pounds, makes a
hundred and ten pounds English: their Wines are computed by Hogsheads and
Terces, and sold in Retail by Measures more than doubling those of Paris.

4. At Lions, the Weights most in use, are the Kings Beam, containing a hundred
pounds, which is larger than the largest Town-Beam by eight per Cent, by which,
the Customs are proportioned, than there is in the greater Town-Beam, weighing
a hundred pounds of sixteen Ounces to the pound, used for gross goods: And the
lesser Town-Beam called the Pound-Mark, containing a hundred pounds, at fifteen
Ounces to the pound, used for weighing Silks. The Measure of Lions for length,
is the Auln, which is forty six English Inches, seven of them making nine
English Yards, and a hundred pounds subtle of London, makes in Lions ninety six
pounds and a half silk weight.

5. At Marseilles, their weight is the Pound of sixteen Ounces, a hundred of
which make a Quintal, three Quintals the Cargo; the Quintal is eighty eight and
a half English pounds. Their Measures of length are the Cane, which they divide
into eight Palms, which make two English Yards and one eighth part. Their
Concave Measure for Corn, Salt, etc. is the Mine which makes little above the
third part of the English Quarter.

But Weights and Measures general for the whole Kingdom, are the Mark, by
which, are weighed Gold, Silver, and great Pearls, containing eight Ounces,
each Ounce containing twenty four Deniers, and each Denier twenty four Grains.
The Mark weighs three Carats, each Carat being reckoned for the third part of
an Ounce, and is used by the Changers: For Corn and Salt they have their
Minots, their Muids, and their Boisseaux, or Bushels; the Boisseau, or Bushel,
is little more than an English Peck. Their Inch is something bigger than ours,
and consequently their Foot, which is larger by half an Inch than the Roman
Foot: their Lands are measured by Arpents; an Arpent of Paris contains a
hundred Perches square, every Perch containing twenty two Feet: the distances
of places are measured by Leagues, the least Leagues contain twelve thousand
Paris Feet, and the greater twenty thousand like Feet.

As for their Buildings in France, they are generally Buildings.
of Stone, and at Paris very high, made mighty strong with Timber, and the
Floors of Plaster of Paris, or paved with pretty Tiles, or else covered with
Wood wrought with inlaid work; all which the better and neater sort keep well
rubbed. Their Noblemens Houses are all very spacious, regular and magnificent,
with stately Portals, and fine Courts and Gardens, and handsome stabling
behind, or on the side. The chief Buildings in France are the Palaces of the
Kings, of which more in their place; some Cathedrals, Colleges, Hospitals, and
Religious Houses of Modern Foundation, in which the perfection of Architecture
is to be seen; the Foundation of many of which, is attributed to the English.

CHAP. II.
Of the Inhabitants, of their Laws, Religion, Manners, and punishments, of
their Number, Language, Stature, Diet, Attire, Recreations, Names, and
Surnames, and of their Computation, and manner of Numbering.

THE present Inhabitants are the French, who Inhabitants.
are a mixture of the ancient Gauls, Romans, Goths, Burgundians, and Francs,
from which last they derive their name, who sometime before they seized on
France, had seated themselves about Franconia in Germany, and hovered about the
Rhine a long time, being till then, no settled, but an Ambulatory People, as
many Authors of note affirm; nay some make them to have been but ancient
Colonies of the Old Gauls, who after they had rambled through several parts of
the world, and could fix in no place, returned at last to this their ancient
home, finding so fair an opportunity to recover it from the Romans, who had
been the first occasion of their rambling.

They are governed chiefly by the Civil Law, Laws.
though they have likewise their Customary Laws, peculiar to several Provinces,
as the Laws in Normandy, which were the foundation of several Laws in England
since the Norman Conquest.

Their Religion is the Roman Catholic, but yet Religion.
they are stiff Assertors of the Rights and Privileges of their particular
Church, which they call the Gallican Church.

The Manners of the ancient Gauls, as they are Manners.
described by Caesar and other Historians, seem to have been inherited by the
present French, and to be effects of the Climate: for they are very
quickwitted, and of a nimble apprehension, but withal, they are generally rash
and precipitate, impatient, hasty, inconstant, eager and full of fire at the
first onset, but better at a push than at an obstinate pursuit; thus they are
naturally; But the present King, who has much of the sober mixture of a
Spaniard in him, has made it appear to all Europe, That His French well
moderated, are capable of making as wise, discreet, and sedate Counselors as
any in the World, and as capable of managing secrets, which has been thought a
thing almost incompatible with the temper of this Nation: Then, as for
Soldiers, by providing well for them, as for Cloths, Victuals, and exact pay,
by good Discipline, and by frequent, but cautious fleshing them in Wars, under
experienced and fortunate Commanders; and lastly, by intermingling Foreign
Forces of all Nations with them, to stir them up to emulation, He has made both
his Infantry and Cavalry formidable, and it can no more be said now, that the
French know not how to storm a Town, endure the Fatigues of a Siege, or rally
again when their Ranks are broken: As for Commanders, they always had store of
them, and have now the greatest plenty of them, and the best of any one Country
in Europe.

This Country has in all Ages produced great numbers of Learned Men, of which,
and of all ingenious Artists, their Princes and great Men, have in this last
Age been very great Encouragers; and all the Sons of their Gentry, as well
those that are designed for Military Employments, as for the Gown, are bred up
at least to a competent knowledge of the Latin Tongue: So that as usually it
happens under Great and Fortunate Princes, they now abound with Great Scholars,
Great Statesmen, and Great Soldiers; and their Paris is become the Rendezvous
of all the famous Wits and Artists of Europe, who flock thither from all
places. Their Gentry is accomplished, polite and civil, to the highest degree.
They keep up their State and Magnificence with such a Decorum, as hinders them
not from being familiar and courteous to all; the Ceremonies they observe seem
natural, and they love nothing that is crampt and precise. Their Citizens,
Tradesmen, Artisans, and very Peasants, are generally more civil and courteous
to Strangers, and in ordinary conversation, than those of other Nations. They
are very airy, amorous, and full of talk, and always in action or motion: In
bargaining, by prevalence of custom, they will ask three or four times as much
as a thing is worth, and will have it if you bargain not, and when they buy,
bid as little, but if you stand with them, you may buy cheap enough, and sell
dear enough. They are very charitable and good natured, and will do any thing
for you by spurts, if you take them when they are warm: They are very
quarrelsome, and given to Duelling, were they not severely restrained, but they
are easily reconciled and disposed to forget injuries: But above all things,
they are most given to Lawsuits and Contentions, there being more Lawyers and
Lawsuits there than in all Christendom besides, and that between the nearest
Relations; by which it comes to pass, that the Lawyers, Judges, and other
Officers of Justice, with the Partisans or Farmers of Taxes, are reckoned the
richest Body in the Kingdom, excepting the Churchmen. The Women partake less
or more according to their Sex, in all the Qualities of this Character, and are
generally very talkative, but yet very pleasing in Discourse, of a graceful and
winning deportment, generally good Singers, and so free in converse, that many
Strangers, ignorant of their genius, are apt at first to mistake them to be
what they are not.

Their punishments for Nobles, among which, all Punishments.
Gentlemen are reckoned there; for smaller offenses, are Fining and
Imprisoning, and for greater, Confiscation of Lands and Goods, Degradation, and
after that Hanging, or Condemnation to the Galleys, as meaner persons,
otherwise Beheading; those that are not Gentlemen are Fined or Whipped, as
here, or Hanged for Thefts and some other Crimes; but Highway-men,
Assasinators, or wilful Murderers, are generally broken on the Wheel, of what
Quality soever, unless they be favored. Traitors not noble, are drawn to
pieces by wild Horses, or otherwise tormented; but Gentlemen are commonly
Beheaded, Poysoners and Sorcerers are burned: Many Crimes there are for which
the Criminals are Condemned to the Galleys; false Witnesses in Capital Cases
are put to Death: They use there the torture or Question, which is ordinary or
extraordinary, which is by giving the Party Drenches of Water till they almost
burst, and tying them up in painful postures.

France is very populous, the number of people Number.
being reckoned to be about fifteen Millions, of which two hundred and seventy
thousand are said to be Churchmen, besides Nuns, about five Millions fit for
War.

Their Language is a mixture of the old Gaulish, Language.
Gothish, Roman, and German Tongues, not without some smack of the Greek, and
is now so polished, that it is become the sweetest, the most courtly, and most
modish Language of Europe, but most especially of the fair Sex, and politer
part of men. It is tender, amorous, and delicious to the Ear, quaint and
charming in expression, easy enough to learn in part, but most difficult to
attain in perfection: It is rather elegant than copious, being not so
significant and comprehensive as the English in prose, nor so fit for numbers,
and strong and lofty in Verse, yet very melodious when sung, and very obedient
and pliable to any variety of Airs and Tunes, of which they have some of the
best and most aerie and sprightly that can be invented. Many neat, elegant, and
ingenious works there are in this Language, but solid and profound Writers, not
so many as in some other Tongues.

Their Stature and Complexion is different, according Stature and Complexion.
to their quality, and according to the different Provinces they inhabit: The
common people that are exposed to the Sun, and hard labor, and fare hard
besides, are commonly not very tall, and are tawny, tan'd and withered, both
Men and Women, but hardy and strong; and the Women for their Sex more than the
Men. The persons of Quality are generally tall, straight, well-shaped, and very
handsome and well complexioned, both Men and Women: the middle sort of people
are generally slight timber'd, but indifferently well shaped and complexioned,
the Men more than the Women, as if they had in some sort robbed the Female Sex
of their chief Prerogative: Yet the Women there among the Gentry and better
sort of Citizens, are for the most part, tall, and well shaped, and many of
them very fair hair'd and complexiond, very white skinned, and blue-eyed, which
is reckoned there a Beauty; and some there are as perfect Beauties as any are
in the World: But the major part are black or pale, yet well featured, and are
almost all so aerie, so well carriaged, as we have already remarked; and withal
so witty and dextrous at their Tongues, that they charm without Beauty: Those
of Normandy, Picardy, and Brittany, are most like the English and Germans; but
yet at and about Angers and Blois, are reckoned to be both the handsomest and
wittiest Women in all France: Those in Languedoc, Provence, and other Provinces
toward Italy and Spain, come nearer the temper and complexion of those two
Nations: And in a word, we may say of the whole Nation in general, that they
are of a Sanguine and airy temper and complexion.

Their Diet among the Peasants is very miserable, who feed on black Bread,
Sallets, and Broth made Diet.
of a little Salt and Herbs, fatned with the rinds of Rusty-Bacon, and on
Apples and other Fruits, and drink Water almost all the Year, daring not to eat
their own Fowls, nor drink the Wine of their own growth, for fear of being
taxed the more, they being very envious one against another, and apt to betray
one another, and carry tales on such occasions, to the Assessors of Taxes,
making them believe their Neighbors are richer than they think, and
consequently able to bear a heavier burden, by which, they became the mutual
instruments of their own misery: But in Towns and Cities, Tradesmen and
Artificers diet well enough, only they eat their meat fresh and fresh, having
constantly boiled meat, and Broth they call Soupe, for Dinner, made generally
of a little piece of Mutton, Beef and Veal, and sometimes a Fowl; and at Night,
they have commonly a joint of meat roasted, or some good Fowl, with Fruits and
Sallets; on Fish-Days they have their meager Broths of Herbs, with Fish or
Pulse in proportion; and always a competent quantity of Wine.

The Noblemen, Gentry, and richer sort keep very good Tables, though not so
profuse as the English, they choosing rather to show their riches in Coaches,
Horses, Liveries, Attendants, and other Equipage, than in Diet: Yet at Feasts
and Entertainments, they are generally more Magnificent than the English: They
use great variety of Hashes, Entries, Kickshaws, Poignant Sawces, and other
made Dishes: But in Pastry, they use only Pasties and no Pies, among which, the
Hare and Wild-Boar Pasties are much in esteem; they eat much young Kid, but
Venison they prize it not. They are in general, great Eaters of Sallets,
Fruits, and Bread: they use no salt meat but Pork and Bacon, but they use much
Salt and Pepper in their Hashes and other Dishes: Those of the Female Sex
seldom drink Wine there, till they come to be Married.

Their Attire being so much imitated by the Attire.
English, cannot be unknown, whose Nations, little or much, following of late
years their Mode, and therefore I shall refer you to your own Eyes for that;
but this may be said in general of them, both Men and Women, that are more
neat, curious and costly in their Habit than in any thing else, and put them on
after such a manner, that they always become them; and that they look upon a
fair outside as one of the first and most necessary steps to any that would
live, and make a figure in the World.

Their Recreations and Exercises are Tennis, every Recreations.
Village affording a Tennis-Court, and Paris, many hundreds; Dancing which is
natural to them, Masks, Plays, Music, Singing, Fencing, Riding the Great
Horse, Vaulting, Bowls, Biliards, Dice and Cards, to which they are much
addicted. It is accounted a mean and scandalous thing to smoke Tobacco at
Paris, or in any of the Inland Towns, and they will drink briskly enough for
good Company and Divertisement, but seldom to Drunkenness, at least the better
sort, and never drink without eating some good bit. Their Gentry use much
Hunting and Hawking, and for the former sport, buy many Horses and Hounds out
of England, having them in great esteem: At Court, they use too, running at the
Ring, at a Head, and Carousels, where these and other nobler Divertisements are
practiced.

They have Christen-Names and Sur-Names as in Names.
England. Their Christen-Names are generally Saints-Names, of which, they join
many times two or more, and sometimes a Man's and Woman's Name both in one
compound, as Lewis-Marie, or Marie-Lewis: Their Surnames have generally the
Particles du, de la, le or la, that is to say, of, of the, or the, before them,
and are taken from the name of some Quality, Trade, or other matter or thing,
or accident; if they be not noble, as le Blanc, White, la Fleur the Flower, le
Fevre, the Smith, etc. But Noblemens, or Gentlemen's Names, are generally taken
from some chief or ancient Land of their Inheritance or Possession, and their
Sons that are not Heirs to the whole Estate, or succeed to any Lordships newly
acquired by their Father, many times Quit their Fathers Name, and take up the
Name of that Land or Lordship which they Inherit from him, which in process of
time breeds obscurity in the Genealogies of Families, notwithstanding the help
of Heraldry, which yet is very much cultivated among them. It is to be observed
to by the way, before we quit this Article, that a Woman by Marrying, quits not
her Name, for though in common Conversation she be called by her Husbands Name,
yet in all Writings and Acts, she Signs always her Maiden-Name.

They number as the English, and other Europeans, but they compute the Year
from the first of January, Computation and Numbering.
and follow the New, or Gregorian Account, which is ten days before the Julian
or English, and denominate their quarters or terms of payment, from the first
day of every first Month of each Quarter; As for Example, the Quarter beginning
the first of January, they call the Quarter of January, etc.

Of the King, Royal Family, and other Princely Families in France.
CHAP. III.
Of the Present KING, and of the Title, Style, and Prerogatives of the KINGS of
France.

THE Present King, is named Lewis the Great, the Fourteenth of that Name, King
of France and Navarre, Son of Lewis the Thirteenth, Surnamed the Just, and
Grandchild of Henry the Great. Many have called our Most August Monarch,
Godgiven, for his happy Birth granted to the Prayers of the French after twenty
three years expectation. He was Born of Queen Anne of Austria, at St. Germans
en Lay, the 5th of September 1638. and succeeded the King his Father the 14th
of May, 1643. He was declared Major, or at Age, the 7th of September, 1651.
Consecrated at Reims 1654, and Married at St. John de Luz's, the 9th of the
same Month 1660.

As to his Consecration, or Anointing, (for so the French call the Coronation
of their Kings) though the Medals made on that occasion bear date the 31th of
May, you are to remark that it was not performed till the 7th of June, of the
said Year 1654.

I thought I could not give you a more faithful Draught of the Person of our
Invincible Monarch, than that which I have borrowed from the words of the late
Archbishop of Paris, in the History that Illustrious and Learned Prelate
composed of Henry the Great.

Yes, Sir, (says he to him) Heaven has given you a generous, good, and
bounteous Soul, a Wit sublime, and capable of the greatest things, an happy and
easy Memory, an Heroic and Martial Courage, a clear and solid Judgment, a
strong and vigorous Body, and over and above all this, another very particular
advantage, and that is, That Majestic Presence, that Air and Gate almost
Divine, that shape and that beauty worthy of the Empire of the Universe, that
attracts the Eyes and Respect of the whole World, and which without the Force
of Arms, and without the Authority of Commands, wins you all those to whom your
Majesty is pleased to show your Self.

The King of France is called Most Christian, for the great and Signal
Services, received by the Church and the Holy See, from this Crown.

He is also, for the same reason, styled the Eldest Son of the Church, and by
several Bulls of Popes, a privilege has been granted to the Kings of France,
that they should not be liable to Excommunication, nor their Subjects absolved
of the Oath of Allegiance due to them.

This Monarch is [in point of precedence] the first King of Christendom,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Kings of Spain, who never disputed, or
did so much as take place next after our Kings before the time of the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, and then other Kings preceded them. It is true indeed, that
that Emperor, being likewise King of Spain, because his Ministers and
Ambassadors preceded those of France, as representing the Emperor; the
Spaniards under his Successor Philip the Second, who was only King of Spain,
endeavored under that pretense in the Year 1558. at Venice, to gain the
Precedence of France; but that Republic regulated that dispute, and ordered
the Precedence to be continued to the Ambassadors of France, as Pope Paul the
Fourth had done before: And Philip the Fourth the King of Spain last deceased,
agreed to it, by the satisfaction he caused to be made to the King of France by
the Marquess de la Fuente, his Ambassador Extraordinary, in the presence of
eight Ambassadors, and twenty two Residents or Agents, the 24th of March 1662.
for the Assault made by his Ambassador on ours in England, in October 1661.

The Title of the King of France is so Excellent, and so much exalted above
that of other Kings, that Suidas, an ancient Greek Author, writes, that in the
World, when it is said, only the King, without naming who, it was meant of the
King of France: Matthew Paris calls him, Terrestrium Rex Regum, the King of
Earthly Kings; And Bodin says, that that King is Emperor in France: and many
assert it to be a common notion of all the Nations of the World, that the
Quality of King is much more sublime than that of Emperor. Pope Gregory the
first, lib. 9. Ep. 6. Writing to Childebert King of France, says, that the
Kings of France as much surpass all other Kings of the Earth, as the Royal
Dignity is exalted above the rest of men.

CHAP. IV.
The Genealogy of the Royal Branch of Bourbon.

SAint Lewis the Ninth of that Name, had four Sons, of which there was none but
Philip the Bold, and Robert his Fourth Son, that left Issue. Of this Robert,
Count of Clermont, who was afterward Lord, or Sire a Title anciently given to
most great Lords who were petty Sovereigns, though now only to Kings.
Sire of Bourbon, are descended our Kings, in manner as follows.

Robert Count of Clermont in the Country of Beauvais, Married Beatrix, Sole
Heiress of John of Burgundy, Count of Charolois, and of Agnes, Daughter of
Archimbald the Younger, Sire of Bourbon, and by her he had Lewis Sire of
Bourbon, in favor of whom, the said Land, Sirerie, Lordship, or Barony of
Bourbon was erected into a Duchy or Peerage, by Philip de Valois, in the Year
1329. which Lordship belonged to him in right of his Mother, whose Name he
bore, according to the Articles of the Contract of Marriage between his Father
and Mother.

Lewis had Issue, Peter Duke of Bourbon, and James Earl of Ponthieu, and de la
March, Constable of France: But because the Masculine Line of the said Peter
is extinct, we shall leave it, to speak of that of James of Bourbon, Earl of
Ponthieu.

James of Bourbon, Earl of Ponthieu, had John of Bourbon, by Jean de Chatillon,
Daughter of the Earl of St. Paul.

John of Bourbon, had, by Catharine of Vendome, Sister, and Sole Heiress of
Bouchard, last Count of Vendome, James, King of Naples, who leaving no
Children, transferred the Birthright to his Brother Lewis.

Lewis of Bourbon, Count of Vendome, Grand Master of France, had by Jean
Daughter of Guy, Count de Laval, Lord of Gaure, John the Second of that Name,
Earl of Vendome.

John the second of Bourbon, had by Isabelle of Beauvais, Daughter of the Lord
of Pressigny, Francis, his Successor, and Earl of Vendome, and Lewis Prince de
la Roche Sur-Yon.

Francis of Bourbon had five Children, by Marie of Luxemburg, Countess of St.
Paul, the Eldest was Charles Count, and made Duke of Vendome by King Francis
the First.

Charles the First of Bourbon, Duke of Vendome, had seven Male Children by
Francise, Daughter of Renie, Duke of Alencon, of which, there were but two that
left Issue: viz. Antony of Bourbon, who succeeded him as first Heir, and was
afterward King of Navarre, and Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, Duke of
Anguien, Marquess of Conti, Count of Soissons, which latter had among other
Children, Henry the First of that Name, Prince of Conde, whose Son, Henry the
Second, Prince of Conde, was Father of Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, of
Armand of Bourbon, late Prince of Conti, and of Anne-Geneveve of Bourbon,
Duchess of Longueville, who had Children, as we shall say afterward.

Antony of Bourbon Duke of Vendome, had by Joan d' Albret, Queen of Navarre,
Daughter of Henry the Second of that Name, King only of Navarre, and of
Margaret d' Angouleme-Valois, Daughter of Francis the First King of France,
Henry the third of that Name, of Navarre, who reuniting together the two Crowns
of France and Navarre, was named Henry the Great, the Fourth of that Name, King
of France and Navarre, Father of Lewis the Just, and Grandfather of Lewis our
glorious Monarch, who by his great Actions, as well as his Grandfather has
acquired to himself the Surname of Great.

You are to remark, that as soon as any Branch of the Blood Royal comes to the
Crown, that they quit their former Surnames, and take up that of France: So,
the King styles himself Lewis of France, and not of Bourbon (in which several
people have been mistaken) and Monsieur, Philip of France, etc. though they
Sign only with their Christian-Name, without adding of France.

CHAP. V.
Of the Children of France.

THE Children of France are only the Kings Children, the Children of the
Dauphin, or the Kings Eldest Son, and the Kings Brothers or Sisters, and the
Brothers Children, the Sisters being always either Married abroad, or made
Religious: all others of the Royal Family are called Princes of the Blood.

The first Son of the Kings of France is called the Dauphin, and the second Son
of France is called Monsieur, without addition of any other Title. But after
the Dolphin, his younger Brethren are Dukes of Orleans, of Anjou, of Alencon,
of Valois, of Touraine, of Berry, of Ponthieu, and other Apanages; these
younger bear the Surname of France, and Sign only with their proper Names, as
the King does, so likewise do the Daughters of France, who are styled Ladies.

The Dauphin was Born at Fountain-Bleau, the first of November, 1661. about
Noon, and Baptized at St Germains en Lay, in the Court of the Old Castle the
24th of March 1668. by Cardinal Antony Barberin, Great Almoner of France. His
Godfather was our Holy Father Pope Clement the Ninth, Represented by the
Cardinal Duke of Vendome, Legate a Latere; and his Godmother, the Queen Mother
of England, Represented by the Princess of Conty, who named him Lewis.

The Dauphin is Heir Apparent of the Crown of France, and bears the Title of
Dauphin by virtue of a Donation of the Province of the Dauphinate made by
Humbert, last Prince Dauphin of Viennois, to Philip de Valois, in the Year of
our Lord 1349. upon condition, the Eldest Sons of the Kings of France should
thenceforward, be styled Dauphins.

For that reason he bears the Arms of France Quartered with those of the
Dauphinate, environed with the two Orders of the King, because the Sons of
France wear the blue Ribband from their Cradles.

His Coronet is raised with Flower-deluces, as is that of all the Sons of
France. Some Authors had formerly, without any ground, affirmed, the Dauphins
used to wear their Coronets closed, by way of Excellence; but the Abbot of
Brianville, who had likewise upon their credit, averred the same thing, in his
Game of the Coats of Arms of Europe, has since found the contrary upon all the
Seals, Coins, and other Monuments: and afterward presented to the King such a
Coronet, of his own Invention, closed by four Dolphins, whose Tails meet all in
a Button or knob, with four Angels supporting a Flower-deluce, which his
Majesty liked so well, that he ordered the Dolphin should wear no other.

The Princess, that Heaven has replenisht with all sorts of Virtues, to be the
worthy Spouse of my Lord the Dauphin, is named,
Marie-Ann-Christine-Francise-Josephe-Terese-Antoinette-C ajetane-Hyacinthe
Felicia-Victoria of Bavaria, Born in 1660. the 28th of November, or the 18th
old Style. She is only Sister to the present Elector of Bavaria, Daughter of
Ferdinand-Marie, late Elector of Bavaria, and of Henriette-Adelaide of Savoy:
Her Marriage with the Dauphin was Celebrated at Municke in Bavaria, the 28th of
January, 1680. and the Ceremonies, or the Benediction of the said Marriage, was
renewed in France at Chaalons in the Chapel of that Bishopric, between the
hours of 7 and 8 at Night, the 7th of March, the same Year, by the Cardinal of
Bouillon, Great Almoner of France, who next Morning said the solemn Mass on
that occasion.

By her he has three Sons, the Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Anjou, and the
Duke of Berry. Monsieur the Duke of Burgundy was Born at Versailles the 6th of
August, 1682. about a quarter, and five or six minutes of an hour after ten at
Night; Some call him Monseigneur, or My Lord Duke of Burgundy: He is a very
handsome Prince, and seems to be very healthy: He was sprinkled, (that is, he
received the essential part of Baptism, without the Ceremonies, which in the
Children of France are commonly deferred some Years) by the Cardinal of
Bouillon, Great Almoner of France, presently after his Birth. The King sent him
the Cross of the Order of the Holy Ghost, by the Marquess of Signelay, Minister
and Secretary of State, and Treasurer of the Orders of his Majesty.

The Duke of Anjou was Born at Versailles, at half an hour after four in the
Morning, on Sunday the 19th of December 1683.

The Duke of Berry was Born on Saturday the 21st of August Old Style, and the
last of August New Style, 1686.

The Children of France that are deceased, were
1. The most High and Mighty Princess, the Lady Anne-Elizabeth of France, was
Born the 28th of November 1663. and died in the Castle of the Louvre the 10th
of January 1664.

2. The most High and Mighty Princess the Lady Marie-Anne of France, was Born
the 17th of November 1664. and died in the Castle of the Louvre the 26th of
December, the same year.

3. The most High and Mighty Princess, the Lady Marie-Terese of France, was
Born half an hour past ten at Night, the second of January 1667. and died the
1st of March 1672. at the Age of five Years and two Months: She was Baptized in
the Chapel of the Tuilleries in January 1668. and had for Godfather Monsieur,
the Present Duke of Orleans, and for Godmother, Madame the late Duchess
Dowager of that Name.

4. The most High and Mighty Prince, the Lord Philip Son of France, Duke of
Anjou, was Born the 5th of August, 1668. at St. Germains en Lay, where he died
the 7th of July 1671. at the Age of three years wanting 25 days: He was
Baptized in the Chapel of the Tuilleries, by Cardinal Antony Barberin, Great
Almoner of France, the 24th of March 1669. his Godfather was the Emperor,
represented by the Duke of Orleans, and his Godmother, the then Queen of Spain,
Represented by his Sister, the Lady Marie-Terese of France.

5. The most High and Mighty Prince the Lord Lewis-Francis, Son of France, also
Duke of Anjou, was Born the 14th of June 1672. and died the 4th of November,
the same year.

These two Dukes of Anjou are here placed according to the order of their
Birth, after the Ladies their Sisters, though it is well known, they being of
the nobler Sex, took place before them, though they were elder, which Order is
observed by the Officers of both Sexes that served them.

When there are any Children of France, They are served by several of the Kings
Officers. As for Example, The Kings Chaplains say Mass every day in their
Chamber; The Chief Physician, or one of the Physicians of the quarter is
present when they are shifted: the Valets de Chamber, come thither and serve
them too: The Door-Keepers do their Office; There are likewise twelve of the
Kings Lifeguard Men, Commanded by an Exemt in Ordinary, and a Sub-Brigadier,
that keep Guard every day at the outward Door, and lie in the Hall: Two of the
Kings Footmen wait always in the Antichamber, to be in readiness to go
wherever there shall be occasion to send them for the service of the Children
of France; and they have besides ten other little Footmen.

If any of the Children of France be carried or Conducted to the Audiences
given by the King, to Ambassadors, they are placed on the Kings right hand:
The Governess, and Under-Governess too, enter within the Rails upon the Cloth
of State, as likewise the Chambermaid that holds them in her Arms, and the
Gentleman Usher that leads and supports them for fear they should fall.

Of Monsieur the Kings only Brother, and his Family.
Philip, Son of France, only Brother to the King, Duke of Orleans, etc. was
Born the 22d of September, 1640. His first Wife was the Lady Henriette-Anne, of
England, Daughter to the late Charles the First, King of Great-Brittain, and
Sister to the Present King of England; to whom he was Married the last day of
March 1661. She died the 29th of June 1670. leaving him two daughters,
Marie-Lewise of Orleans, Queen of Spain, Born the 27th of March 1662. Married
at Fountain-bleau the 31st of August 1679. and Anne of Orleans, Duchess of
Savoy, Born the 27th of August, 1669. and Married at Versailles the 10th of
April, 1684. His second Wife is Madam Charlotte-Elizabeth of Bavaria, Daughter
to the late Elector Palatine, who was Born the 27th of May, or the 17th old
Style 1651. and was Married to him the 21st of December, 1671. By whom he has
Issue, the Duke of Chartres, named Philip, Born the second of August 1675, and
Mademoiselle of Chartres, Born the 13th of September 1676. named Elizabeth
Charlotte.

The Duke of Chartres is Colonel of the Regiment of Guienne, His Governor is
the Marshal d' Estrades, who has the same allowance as the Governors of the
Sons of France. His Tutor is Monsieur de St. Laurent, formerly Introductor of
Ambassadors to their Royal Highnesses.

The Governess of their Royal Highnesses Children, is the Marshal of Grancy's
Lady.

Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, is a Prince of a very lively spirit, that
delights in great things, and that has signalized his Courage in several
Rencounters, as at the taking of St. Omers, at the Battle of Mount-Cassel, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Princes of the Blood.

MOnsieur, the late Duke of Orleans, who was named Gaston-John-Baptiste, Son of
France, Duke of Orleans, etc. Died at Blois, at the Age of 52 Years, the second
of February, 1660.

His first Wife was Marie of Bourbon, Daughter and Sole Heiress to Henry of
Bourbon, Duke of Montpensier, and Sovereign Prince of Dombes, and to
Henriette-Catharine Duchess of Joyeuse: She was Married to him in the Year
1626. and died the 4th of June the next Year, being 1627. leaving him a
Daughter Born the 29th of May in the said year 1627. Styled Mademoiselle of
Orleans, who Signs Anne-Marie-Lewise of Orleans, The Countess of Fiesque was
her Governess: She is likewise Duchess of Chatelleraud, (which formerly
belonged to the Dukes of Hamilton in Scotland, and is still Claimed by them)
and of Montpensier, etc. Princess de la Roche-sur-Yon, etc. and Sovereign
Princess of Dombes, etc. But she has given the Principality de la
Roche-sur-Yon, to Francis Lewis of Bourbon, at present Prince of Conti, and the
Sovereignty of Dombes, (which gives power to Coin Money) to my Lord the Duke of
Maine, reserving only the profits of it during her Life.

In the year 1632. the said late Monsieur Married for his second Wife, Margaret
of Loraine, second Daughter of Francis Count de Vaudemont, and of Christine de
Salme, and Sister of Charles Duke of Lorrain, who was Born in the year 1615.
and died at Paris, in her Palace of Luxemburgh, the 3d of April 1672. By whom
he left three Daughters.

1. Mademoiselle of Orleans, named, Margaret-Lewise, Born the 28th of July
1645. and Married the 19th of April 1661. to the Prince of Tuscany, at Present
Great Duke of Florence, by whom he has Ferdinand of Medicis, Prince of Tuscany,
Born the 9th of August 1663. and Marie Magdalene of Medicis, Born in the year
1665.

2. Mademoiselle d' Alencon Isabel of Orleans, Born the 26th of December. 1646.
She is Duchess Dowager of the late Duke of Guise, by whom she had a Son.

3. And Mademoiselle de Valois, Francise of Orleans, Born the 13th of October
1648. and Married to the Duke of Savoy 1663. She died in 1664.

He had likewise a Son by her, named John-Gaston Duke of Valois.

Before we come to the Princes of Conde and Conti, we must take notice, That
Lewis of Bourbon, the first of that Name, Prince of Conde, [Brother of Antony
of Bourbon, King of Navarre, who was Father to King Henry the Great.] Had by
Eleonor de Roye, Countess of Roucy, Marchioness of Conti, and Lady of Muret,
his first Wife, Henry Prince of Conde, the first of that Name: This Henry the
first had, by Charlotte-Catherine de la Tremouille, Henry the Second, who by
Charlotte Margaret of Montmorency, Daughter to the last Constable of
Montmorency, and Lewise de Budos his second Wife, who died the 2d of December
1650. left three Children and died the 28th of December 1646.

1. Lewis of Bourbon the second of that Name, Prince of Conde, first Prince of
the Blood, Duke of the Territory of Bourbon, etc. and General of the Kings
Armies, who was one of the most Valiant Princes of Europe, or to speak better,
the Alexander of his Age: He was Born the 8th of September 1621, and on the
11th of February 1641. being as then but Duke of Enguyen in his Fathers
Lifetime, Married Clare-Clemence, de Maille Breze, Daughter of the late
Marshal de Breze, and of the late Cardinal Duke of Richelieu's Sister: By whom
he had at Paris, the 29th of July 1643. Henry-Julius of Bourbon, now Prince of
Conde, Knight of the Orders of his Majesty, Governor of Burgundy, etc. Grand
Master of France, or of the Kings Household, under which Head, we shall speak
further of him. The Late Prince of Conde died at Fountain-bleau the 11th. of
December, 1686. in the 65 Year of his Age.

On the 11th of December 1663. The present Prince Married Anne Countess
Palatine, Duchess of Bavaria, who was Born the 11th of December 1647. Daughter
of the late Edward of Bavaria, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and of Anne of
Gorzague, and was adopted only Daughter of Poland: By whom he had, 1.
Marie-Terese, called Mademoiselle de Bourbon, who was Born at Paris, the first
of February 1666. and Baptized at the Convent of the Carmelites, in the Street
called, La rue de Bouloy, the 22th of January 1670. 2. Lewis of Bourbon, Duke
of Enguien, and Governor of Burgundy, Born at Paris the 11th of October 1668,
who Married Mademoiselle of Nantes, Lewise Francise, of Bourbon, legitimated,
of France, the 24th of July 1685. 3. Anne-Lewise of Bourbon called Mademoiselle
of Enguien, Born at Paris the 11th of August 1675. 4. Lewise-Benedicte of
Bourbon called Mademoiselle de Conde, Born the 8th of November 1676. and 5.
Marie-Anne of Bourbon, called Mademoiselle de Montmorency, Born the 24th of
February 1678.

The King Restored to the Prince at the time of the Pyrenean Treaty, the County
of Clermont, Steney, and Dun, and that of Jamets; and since he has given him
the Domain of the Country of Bourbon, being the ancient Patrimony of this Royal
Branch, before it came to the Crown.

This Princes only Brother, was the late Armand of Bourbon Prince of Conti,
Governor of Languedoc, Knight of the Kings Orders, he was Born at Paris, the
8th of October 1629. and died at Pezenas, the 21st of February 1666. He Married
Anne-Marie Martinozzi, Niece to the late Cardinal Mazarine, who died the 3d of
February 1672. by whom he left two Princes, who were brought up with the
Dauphin, which were 1. The late Prince of Conti, Lewise-Armand of Bourbon, Born
the 4th of March 1661. and Baptized the last of February 1662. The King and the
late Queen Mother being his Godfather and Godmother, who named him Lewis; he
died at Fountain-bleau, the 9th of November 1685. on the 16th of January 1680.
he Married Mademoiselle de Blois, Marie-Anne legitimated of France. The King
gave then to this Prince, 50000 Crowns ready money, and a yearly Pension of
25000 Crowns, and to the Princess, a Million of Livers ready money, with a
yearly Pension of 100000 Livers, and many Jewels, besides the Duchy of
Vaujours; she had besides, as Heiress, all that was left, by her Brother the
late Count of Vermandois, High Admiral of France. 2. The Prince de la
Roche-sur-Yon, Francis Lewis of Bourbon, at present, Prince of Conti, Born the
30th of April 1664. The King has given him a Pension of 20000 Crowns a year.

3. Anne-Genevieve of Bourbon, only Sister to the present Prince of Conde, was
Born the 27th of August 1639. and died the 15th of April 1679. She Married
Henry the second of that Name, Duke of Longueville.

There still-remains of the Family of Bourbon, the Princess of Carignan, named
Marie de Bourbon-Soissons, Born in 1606. Wife of the Deceased Prince Thomas,
and Mother of Prince Emanuel Philbert, Prince of Carignan in Savoy, of the late
Count of Soissons, Eugenius-Maurice of Savoy, and of the Princess of Baden.

And Lewis Son of Lewis of Bourbon, Count of Soissons, Cousin German of the
late Henry the Second of that Name, Prince of Conde, who died in 1641. He is
called Knight of Soissons, being Knight of Malta, and Abbot de la Couture, in
Manse.

We have hitherto named only those Princes in France, which are such, without
being obliged for that honor to any thing else but their Birth, but the
Princes of Courtnay, pretend they ought likewise to be comprised, having made
great instances to that purpose, under the reign of Henry the Great,
Representing that they were descended in a direct Male Line, from Peter of
France, Seventh Son of King Lewis the Sixth, Surnamed the Gross: which because
they have not as yet been acknowledged such, we shall pass by, and speak of
some other Princes and Princesses descended from the House of France, who
because they are natural Children, (or their Descendants) of the Royal Family,
Born out of Legal Matrimony, have need of Letters of Legitimation, or of a
public act, by which they may be acknowledged of Royal Issue, and enjoy the
Rank of Princes, which the Kings Natural Children so Legitimated, and their
Descendants, have always had in France.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Legitimated Children of the Present King.

1. THE first Legitimated Child of the Present King, is Marie-Anne of Bourbon,
Legitimated of France, Natural Daughter of the present King, and of
Lewise-Francise, de la Baume le blanc de la Valiere, Duchess of Vaujour, etc.
formerly one of the Maids of Honor, to the late Duchess of Orleans,
Henriette-Anne of Great-Brittain; who is at present a professed Nun in the
Great Convent of the Carmelitesses, into which Order she entered the 4th of June
1675. under the Name of Sister Lewise of Mercy; This young Princess was Born in
October 1666. and as we have already remarked, is now the Widow of the late
Prince of Conti, to whom she was Married the 16th of January 1680. having had
no Children by him.

Her Letters of Legitimation were verified in Parliament the 14th of May 1667.

2. Her Brother by the same Mother was the late Lewis, Legitimated of France,
Count of Vermandois, and High-Admiral, or Grand-Master of the Seas, Head and
Super-Intendant General of the Commerce and Navigation of France, who was Born
the 2d of October 1667. and died at Courtray, the 18th of November 1681. at
five a Clock in the Morning, and was Interred in the Cathedral Church of Arras,
leaving all he had to the said Lady his Sister.

His Letters of Legitimation bear date the 20th of February 1669. in which he
is styled Duke of Vermandois.

Other Legitimated Children of France, by Madam de Montespan.
1. Lewis-Augustus of Bourbon Legitimated, of France, Duke of Maine, Sovereign
Prince of Dombes, and Colonel General of the Suisses and Grisons, etc. Born the
last of March 1670. and Legitimated the 19th of December 1673.

The Sovereignty of Dombes was given him, by Mademoiselle Anne-Marie of
Orieans, in the Month of March 1682. reserving only the profits to her self
during her Life.

2. Lewis Caesar of Bourbon, Legitimated of France, Count de Vexin, Born in
1672. Legitimated the 19th of December 1673.

3. Mademoiselle of Nantes, named Lewise-Francise of Bourbon, Legitimated of
France, the 19th of December 1673. who was Married to the Duke of Bourbon, the
24th of July 1685.

4. Mademoiselle de Tours, named Lewise-Marie-Anne of Bourbon, who was
Legitimated of France, in January 1676. and died in September 1681.

5. Lewis-Alexander of Bourbon, Earl of Toulouse, and at present Great Admiral
of France, and Colonel of the Regiment of Toulouse, Bornthe 6th of June 1678.
and Legitimated of France in Novem. 1681.

6. Mademoiselle of Blois, Francise-Marie of Bourbon, who was also Legitimated
of France, in November 1681.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Legitimated Children of Henry the Great, and their Descendants.

1. BY the Lady Gabriele d' Etrees, Duchess of Beaufort, one of Henry the
Great's Mistresses, during his first Marriage, he had, First, Caesar Duke of
Vendome, Born in the Month of June 1594. The second, Alexander of Vendome,
Grand Prior of France, who died in the Wood of Vincennes; and the Third
Catharine-Henriette, who Married the Duke of Elbeuf, last deceased.

The deceased, Caesar of Vendome, Duke of Vendome, etc. was Born in the Month
and Year abovesaid, at Coucy-le Chateau, His Majesty Legitimated him in 1595.
and gave him the Dukedom and Peerage of Vendome in 1598. and caused him to take
both that Name, and the Arms belonging to it. The same Year a Marriage was
treated off, between him and Francise of Lorrain of Mercoeur, only Daughter,
and Heiress Apparent of Philip-Emanuel of Lorrain, Duke of Mercoeur, and of
Marie of Luxemburg, Princess of Martigues, who died the 8th of September 1669.
which Marriage was Consummated in 1609. He took the Oath of Duke and Peer in
Parliament in 1606. He was Governor and Lieutenant General for the King in
Brittany, which Place he Resigned, in favor of the Queen Regent, in the Month
of May 1650. for that of High Admiral of France: The Crosses and disgraces this
Prince had met withal, having nothing abated his Zeal for the service of the
King and State. He died in his Palace at Paris, the 22d of October 1665.
leaving three Children behind him.

1. Lewis Duke of Vendome and Mercoeur; Governor of Provence, etc. and
afterward Cardinal, who before he was Cardinal, Married in the year 1651.
Victoria-Mancini, Niece to the Late Cardinal Mazarine, who died the 8th of
January 1657. And died himself at Aix, the 6th of August 1669. leaving two Sons
by this Marriage, of whom we shall speak below.

2. His Brother Francis of Vendome, Duke of Beaufort, Peer of France, Knight of
the Kings Orders, High Admiral, or Grand Master of the Seas, Head and
Super-intendant General of the Commerce and Navigation of France, was Born at
Paris in the Month of January 1616. and was in April 1669. declared by his
Holiness, General of all the Forces of Christendom, sent to the Relief of
Candia, and never could be found or heard of since that unhappy attack given by
the French to the Turks the 25th of June 1669. He was never Married.

3. Their Sister was named Isabel of Vendome, and died in May 1664. being the
Widow of the late Duke of Nemours, Charles-Amedeus of Savoy, by whom she left
two Daughters, as we shall remark afterward.

The two Sons of the abovesaid Cardinal, Duke of Vendome, during his said
Marriage, are yet living, and are

1. Lewis-Joseph of Vendome, Duke of Vendome, etc. Great Senechal and Governor
of the Country and County of Provence, etc. was Born the first of July 1654. He
won the prize at running at Heads, performed at St. Germains in February 1680.
and that at running at the Ring the 2d of May the same year.

2. Philip of Vendome Grand Prior of France, Knight of St. John of Jerusalem,
etc. was Born the 22d of August 1656.

The same Henry the Great, had during his second Marriage, by the Lady
Henriette of Balsac D' Antragues, Marchioness of Vernueil, a Son and a
Daughter, being

1. The late Henry of Bourbon, Duke of Vernueil, etc. who on the 29th of
October 1668. Married Charlote Seguier, Duchess Dowager of Sully, who died
without Children, the 28th of May 1682.

2. The late Gabriele of Bourbon, first Wife to the Deceased Duke of Epernon,
by whom she had the Duke of Candale, who died at Lions, and a Daughter, who is
a Carmelite Nun.

By the Lady Jaqueline de Bueil, Countess of Moret, he had Antony of Bourbon,
Count of Moret, who was killed at the Battle of Castelnau d' Ary in 1632.

Lastly, By the Lady Charlotte of Essars, Countess of Remorantin, his fourth
Mistress, the said King had two Daughters, viz. The Lady Joan-Baptist of
Bourbon, Abbess and Chief of the Order of Fontevrault, who was Born in 1608.
and died the 16th of January 1669. and the Lady Marie-Henriette of Bourbon,
Abbess of Chelles, who is likewise dead.

CHAP. IX.
Of the House of Longueville.

THE late Henry of that Name, Duke of Longueville, etc. Died at Roan the 11th
of May 1663. at the Age of 69 years; He Married, as we have said, the present
Prince of Conde's Sister, by whom he had two Sons, viz.

1. John-Lewis-Charles of Orleans, of Longueville, called, The Abbot of
Orleans, Duke of Longueville and d' Estouteville, Count de Dunois, (or the
Country of Dun) etc. was Born the 12th of January 1646. and took the Order of
Priesthood in 1669.

2. Charles of Orleans Duke of Longueville Count of St. Paul's, his Brother, was
killed at the memorable passage of the Rhine, near Tolbuys in Holland the 12th
of June 1672. leaving only a natural Son called the Chevalier Longueville, who
was Legitimated the same year.

Their Sister by the Fathers side, by a former Wise, was Anne-Marie of Orleans,
who was Born the 5th of March 1625. being Widow of Henry of Savoy, last Duke of
Nemours.

This Family descended in a direct Male Line, from John, Natural Son to Lewis
of France, Duke of Orleans, Brother to Charles the Sixth. This Count de Dunois,
did such brave Exploits in the reign of Charles the Seventh, against the
English, under the Names of the Bastard of Orleans, and of Count de Dunois,
That he obtained for his Posterity very singular Privileges, and such as never
before or since him, were ever granted to any Natural Children but those of the
Kings themselves.

After the Princes of the Blood, and those which are Legitimated, I thought
good to subjoin those Families, that the King suffers to enjoy some particular
honors which other Dukes and Peers are not allowed; which are called,
Stranger-Princes.

CHAP. X.
Of Stranger-Princes.

THese Princes, though born in France, and truly French by Nation, yet are
called Strangers, because they are originally descended from a Foreign House
and Principality, and bear its Name: As those of the House of Lorain, Savoy,
and others, of which we shall here speak.

It is almost impossible to regulate the point of Precedence among the
Sovereign Families settled in France, and therefore not to meddle with those
disputes, I shall follow the Order of the time of their respective settling
here: And since the Branches of the House of Lorain, that for these many Ages
have been settled in this Kingdom, have longer enjoyed the Bank of Princes in
France, than those of the House of Savoy; I hope none will take it ill that I
give them the first place: for, as for the Precedence of some other Houses,
there being as yet, almost nothing determined in France on that subject, I
shall leave it wholly to the Reader to think of that point what he pleases.

Of the House of Lorain.
The better and more distinctly to describe to you all the Princes and
Princesses of the House of Lorain, that are at present living, I shall divide
the Family into five Branches, and accordingly shall speak first,

Of the first Branch of Lorain.
The late Charles the Third of that Name, Duke of Lorain, who died of a Fever
at Cologne, the 17th of September 1675. at the Age of 75 Years, Married on the
22d of May 1621. his Cousin-German Nicole of Lorain, eldest Daughter of the
deceased Henry Duke of Lorain. This Charles Duke of Lorain, was detained a long
time Prisoner in Spain, which was the cause that the Princess Nicole Duchess
of Lorain, not being willing to fall into the same Misfortune with her Husband
retired into France, where, in consideration of an honorable Pension for the
support of the dignity of so great a Princess, she yielded up all her rights to
the Duchy of Lorain, and died without Children, at Paris, the 21th of February
1657.

After which the said late Duke Charles Married for his second Wife, at Nancy,
the 5th of November 1665. the Lady Mary of Apremont, of Nantenil, by whom he
had likewise no Children.

He in like manner, yielded up to the King of France, the Property and
Sovereignty of his Dutchies of Lorain, and of Bar: which Donation was verified
in Parliament, in presence of the King himself, who sat there in person on his
Bed of Justice, in the Month of February 1662.

Yet there remain two Natural Children of the said late Duke Charles the Third,
which he had by the Lady Beatrix of Cusance, Princess of Cantecroix, viz. a Son
and a Daughter.

1. The Son is Charles-Henry Legitimated of Lorain, Prince of Vaudemont, Born
the 25th of April 1649. and on the 27th of April 1669. at Bar le Duc, Married
Anne-Elizabeth of Lorain, of Elbeuf, Daughter of Charles of Lorain Duke of
Elbeuf, and Anne-Elizabeth of Lannoy de la Boissiere, Widow of Henry of Plessis
of Liancourt, Count de la Recheguyon, his first Wife.

2. The Daughter is Anne-Elizabeth, Legitimated of Lorain, Wife to
Francis-Marie of Lorain, Count of l' Isle-bone, who was Born the 6th of August
1649.

The late Prince, named Francis-Nicholas of Lorain, who died at Nancy the 26th
of January 1670. was Brother to the said Duke Charles, and likewise Married his
Cousin-German Claudia of Lorain younger Sister of the abovesaid Duchess
Nicole, by whom he left an only Son, who is

Charles-Leopold-Nicolas-Sixtus of Lorain, the present Duke of Lorain in Title,
though as yet he has no possession of it, as having refused to be included in
the late Treaty of Nimguen. His Titles are, Duke of Lorain, Marchis, Calabria,
Bar, and Gueldres, Marquess of Pont-a-Mousson, and of Nomeny, Count of Provence
and of Vaudemont, Blamont, Zutphen, Sarwerden and Salm: He was Born at Vienna,
the 3d of April 1643. On the 15th of February 1678. He Married the Princess
Eleonor-Marie of Austria, Sister to the Emperor, and Queen Dowager of Poland.
He has for several Years, been Generalissimo of the Imerial Forces: He took
Philipsburg from the French, and has done very noble things against the Turks
in Hungary, at the relief of Vienna, the Battle of Gran, and the two Sieges of
Buda, etc. The late Duke Charles had likewise two Sisters.

1. Margaret of Lorain called Madame Dowager, as being Widow of the late
Monsieur Gaston, Duke of Orleans, Brother to the last, and Uncle to the present
King, of whose Children we have spoken; she died the 3d of April 1672.

2. Henriette of Lorain, the younger Sister, Married to her first Husband,
Lewis of Lorain, Prince of Phalzburg.

Of the second Branch, which is of Guise.
The late Duke of Joyeuse, Lewis of Lorain, left a Son and two Daughters by his
Wife Margaret of Valois, only Daughter and Heir of the Duke of Angouleme, and
of Henriette de la Gui^he, Lady de la Palisse.

1. The Son was named Lewis-Joseph of Lorain, Duke of Guise, he died the 30th
of July 1671. on the 15th of May 1667. he Married Mademoiselle d' Alencon
Isabelle of Orleans, to whom he left a Son, called Francis-Joseph of Lorain,
Duke of Alencon, of Guise, etc. who died the 16th of March 1675.

2. Mademoiselle of Guise, named Marie of Lorain, Duchess of Guise and
Joyeuse, etc. Born in 1615. and

3. Francise-Renee of Lorain, of Guise, Abbess of Montmarire Born in 1621. and
died the 5th of December 1682.

Of the third Branch, which is of Chevreuse.
The late Duke of Chevreuse, was named Claudius of Lorain, Son of Henry of
Lorain, Duke of Guise; he died in his Palace at Paris the 24th of January 1657.
and of three Daughters he had by the Lady Marie of Rohan, who was Widow of the
Constable of Luyne, there is none left but Henriette of Lorain of Chevreuse,
Abbess of Jouare, who was Born in 1631.

Of the fourth Branch, which is of Elbeuf.
The late Duke of Elbeuf who died the 8th of December 1657. left four lawful
Children, by Catherine-Henriette, Legitimated of France, Sister to the late
Caesar Duke of Vendome, and Daughter of King Henry the Great, and of Gabriele
d' Etrees Duchess of Beaufort.

I. The Eldest, who is at present, the head of the House of Lorain in France,
is Charles Duke of Elbeuf, etc. and Governor for his Majesty in Picardy, of
the Country and County of Artois, of Hainaut, and the particular Governor of
the Town and Citadel of Montreuil on the Sea, in the said Province of Picardy;
He was Born 1620. and Married to his first Wife on the 7th of March 1648.
Anne-Elizabeth de Lannoy, Daughter of the Count of Lazzon, and Widow of Henry
du Plessis, Count de la Rocheguyon; and to his second Wife, in the Month of May
1656. Elizabeth de la Tour d' Auvergne, Sister to the Duke of Bouillon, who
died the 23d of October 1680. And to his third Wife, on the 25th of August,
1684. Francise de Montaut, de Navailles, Daughter of the Marshal Duke of that
Name.

By his first Wife, he has two Children; Charles of Lorain, Prince of Elbeuf,
Knight of Malta, who was Born the 2d of November 1650. and Anne-Elizabeth of
Lorain, who was Born the 6th of August 1649. and Married to Charles-Henry
Legitimated of Lorain, Prince of Vaudemont, at Bar-le-Duc, the 27th of April
1669.

By his second Wife, he has four Children; 1. Marie-Eleanor of Lorain, who was
Born the 24th of February 1658. 2. Francise-Marie of Lorain, who was Born the
5th of May 1659. She is a Nun at the Nunnery of St. Marie in the Fauxbourg St.
Jaqu's. 3. Henry of Lorain, Prince of Elbeuf, who has the Reversion of the
Government of Picardie; he was Born the 7th of August 1661. and Married to
Mademoiselle de Vivonne, Named Charlotte de Rochechouart, de Mortemart, the
30th of January 1677. by whom he has one Son, called the Abbot of Lorain, whose
name is Lewis of Lorain; he was Born the 8th of September 1662. and is Abbot of
Orcamp. 4. Prince Emanuel of Lorain.

II. Charles of Lorain, Count of Harcourt, etc. was Born in 1623. He Married in
the year 1645. Anne of Ornano, Niece to the Marshal of that Name; by whom he
had three Sons and three Daughters, viz.

1. Alphonso-Henry-Charles of Lorain, Prince of Harcourt, Count of Montlaur,
etc. who about the end of February 1667. Married Marie Francise de Brancas,
Daughter of the Count de Brancas, Lady of Honor, or of the Palace to the
Queen. Their Children are

1. Anne-Marie-Joseph of Lorain-Harcourt, Count of Montlaur, Born the last of
April 1679. 2. Suson of Lorain-Harcourt. 3. Francis of Lorain-Harcourt. The
Prince and Princess of Harcourt, had the honorable Office of Conducting into
Spain Marie-Lewise of Orleans, the Present Queen Consort of Spain.

2. Marie-Angelique-Henriette of Lorain, who was Married the 7th of February
1671. to the Duke of Cadaval, of the House of Braganza in Portugal, where she
died the 7th of June 1674.

3. N.... Lorain, Born in 1657. Abbess of Montmartre.

4. N.... Lorain, Abbot of Harcourt, Born in 1661.

III. Francis-Marie of Lorain, Prince of l' Isle-bone, etc. called by some,
Julius-Augustus-Lewis, was Born in 1624. and Married to his first Wife, on the
8th of September 1658. Christine d' Etrees, and to his second, on the 7th of
October 1660. Anne of Lorain, Legitimated Daughter of the aforesaid late
Charles Duke of Lorain, and Beatrix of Cusance, Princess of Sante-Croix, who in
the year 1684. had the honor to Conduct into Savoy, her Royal Highness Anne of
Orleans, Duchess of Savoy. Their Children are, 1. Charles of Lorain Prince of
Comercy, Born the 11th of July 1661. 2. Mademoiselle de l' Isle-bone, Beatrix
de Lorain, Born in June 1662. 3. The Princess of Commercy, Teresa of Lorain,
Born in May 1663. 4. N.... Lorain, she was Born the 4th of April 1664. 5. N....
Lorain, Born in 1672.

Of the fifth Branch, which is of Armagnac.
The late Henry of Lorain, Brother to the late Duke of Elbeuf, Count of
Harcourt, who died the 25th of July 1666. Married the Daughter of the Baron of
Pont-Chateau, named Margaret-Philippa de Cambout, Kinswoman to the late
Cardinal of Richelieu, who was Widow of the late Lord Antony de Lage, Duke of
Puylorent; and died in 1675. by whom he had five Children, viz.

I. Lewis of Lorain, Count of Armagnac, of Charny, and Brione, Vicount of
Marsan, etc. Great Seneschal of Burgundy, in the Bailywick of Dijon, etc. Grand
Master of the Horse, of France; was Born in 1641. and on the 7th of October
1660. Married Catherine of Neuville, Youngest Daughter of the late Marshal Duke
of Villeroy, by whom, he has, 1. Henry of Lorain Count of Brione, who was Born
on the 15th of November 1661. who has the reversion of his Fathers Place, of
Great Master of the Horse, which was confirmed to him the 25th of November
1677. 2. Margaret of Lorain, called, Mademoiselle d' Armagnac, who was Born the
17th of November 1662. and Married on the 25th of July, to Don Nunno Alvarez
Peyrera de Mello, Duke of Cadaval, Grandee of Portugal, Grand Master of the
Household to the Queen of Portugal, who had buried his first Wife, the Princess
of Harcourt. 3. Francis-Armand, Born the 17 of February 1665. called the
Chevalier D' Armagnac, Abbot of Chateliers. 4. Camillus of Lorain, Born the
26th of October 1666. called Prince Camillus. He gained the Prize the first day
of the Carousel held at Versailles, at running at Heads, with the Lance, Dart,
and Sword, the 4th of June 1685.

II. Philip of Lorain, called the Chevalier de Lorain, Marshal of the Kings
Camps and Armies, was Born in 1643. He is Abbot of St. John of the Vines of
Soissons.

III. Alphonso-Lewis of Lorain, called the Chevalier de Harcourt, was Born in
1644. He is General of the Galleys of the Knights of Malta, and Abbot of
Royaument, Primate of Lorain, and Commander of Noisy-le-sec.

IV. Raymond Beranger of Lorain, called the Abbot of Harcourt, is a Licenciate
in Divinity of the College of Navarre, and was Born the 4th of January 1647.
He has several Abbeys.

V. Charles of Lorain, called the Count of Marsan, was Born in 1648. He won the
Prize at the running at the Ring, at St. Germains, in the Month of February
1680. In 1682. he Married Mademoiselle d'Albret.

Of the House of Savoy settled in France.
The late Count of Soissons, Eugenius-Maurice of Savoy, was Cousin-German to
Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. His Elder Brother, that is in Savoy, is named,
Prince Emanuel-Philibert-Amedeus, of Savoy, Prince of Carignan, who was Born
the 22d of August 1631. His Sister the Princess Lewise-Christine of Savoy, on
the 15th of May 1653. was Married to Ferdinand-Maximilian, Marquess of
Baden-Hochberg, Prince of the Empire; he was Born the 23d of September 1625.
and died in 1669. By whom she had Lewis-William Prince of Baden, who was Born
at Paris the 8th of April 1655.

They were Children of the late Prince of Carignan, who was called Prince
Thomas, Son of Charles-Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and of the Daughter of Philip the
Second, King of Spain: he was Grand Master of the Kings Household, when he died
at Turin the 22th of January 1656. of a Fever he got at the Siege of Paris,
where he Commanded the French Army. He Married in the year 1624. Marie of
Bourbon-Soissons, called the Princess of Carignan, who was Born the 3d of May
1606.

The late Count of Soissons, Colonel General of the Suissers and Grisons, and
Governor of Champagne and Brie, was Born the 3d of May 1633. and on the 21th
of February 1657. Married a Niece of the late Cardinal Mazarine, named Olimpia
Mancini, who was formerly Chief of the Queens Council, and Super-Intendant of
her Household: He died the 7th of June 1671. and left these Children following,
viz.

1. Lewis-Thomas of Savoy, Count of Soissons, Duke of Carignan, Colonel of the
Regiment of Soissons, who was Born the 16th of December 1658. He has Married
Mademoiselle de Beauvais.

2. Philip of Savoy, Knight of St. John of Jerusalem, Abbot of St. Peter of
Corbie, etc.

3. Francis-Eugenius of Savoy, Chevalier de Carignan, called, the Abbot of
Savoy.

4. Mademoiselle de Soissons, named Marie-Joan-Baptiste, Born the first of
January 1665.

5. Mademoiselle de Carignan, Born the 22d of November 1667. named
Lewise-Philibert.

There were still besides, of the House of Savoy, the two late Dukes of
Nemours, descended from Philip of Savoy Count of Geneva, to whom King Francis
the first, gave the Duchy of Nemours; he was Uncle to the Grandfather of the
present Duke of Savoy, and Brother to Emanuel-Philibert, and Charles-Emanuel,
Dukes of Savoy.

The first of these two Dukes of Nemours last deceased, was named
Charles-Amedeus of Savoy, Duke of Nemours and of Aumale, Peer of France, Count
of Geneva, and of Gisors, etc. He was a very Comely Prince, and bred up to all
the Exercises becoming his Birth: He was in many Military Expeditions, and
principally at the taking of Mardike and Dunkirk; where he gave signal proofs
of his Valor, and received a dangerous Wound: He died at Paris, behind the
Hotel of Vendome, the 30th of July 1652. at the Age of 27 years and a half,
leaving behind him two Daughters, by Isabelle of Vendome, whom he Married at
the Louvre the 3d of July 1643. She died the 19th of May 1664. These Daughters
were,

1. Marie-Joan-Baptiste of Savoy-Nemours, Born the 12th of April 1644. She was
Married on the 11th of May 1665. to Charles-Emanuel, Duke of Savoy; She is at
present Duchess Dowager of Savoy, after having for many years been Regent of
those Territories with much applause.

2. Marie-Francis-Elizabeth of Savoy-Nemours, was Born the 21st of June 1646.
and was Married in 1665. to Alphonso the Sixth King of Portugal: But afterward
that Marriage being declared void, because of the Impotence of that King, She
was Re-Married to his Brother the Prince Don Pedro, then declared Regent of
Portugal, the 28th of March 1680. and who is now King. She died the 27th of
December 1683. leaving behind her only one Daughter, who was Born the 6th of
January 1669. and Baptized the 2d of March following, and named
Elizabeth-Marie-Lewise-Josephe: She is called the Princess, or otherwise, the
Infanta of Portugal.

The Brother of the said Precedent Duke of Nemours, was Born in 1625. and was
named Henry of Savoy Duke of Aumale, who after he had been brought up to the
Exercises worthy of a Prince, was promoted to the Archbishopric of Reims, and
other Benefices. But upon the Death of his said Brother he quitted his
Benefices, to take up the Sword, to endeavor to keep up and make to flourish
in his person, the Illustrious House of Savoy: And so, taking the Title of Duke
of Nemours, he Married on the 22d of May 1657. Mademoiselle Anne-Marie of
Orleans, Daughter to the Duke of Longueville, who is now Duchess Dowager of
Orleans; but died without Heirs, the 14th of January 1659. In whom, the Branch
of Nemours, after it had subsisted in France about the space of 150 years, was
extinguished.

Of the Family de la Tour d' Auvergne, of which the famous Godfrey of Bouillon.
All the Princes of this House have remained in France, ever since the late
Frederick Maurice de la Tour d' Auvergne, made an exchange with the King of his
Sovereignty of Sedan, in the year 1651. who by Contract, gave him in lieu
thereof, the Dutchies of Albret, and of Chateau-Thierry, and the Counties of
Auvergne and Evreux, without pretending any thing to the right of Sovereignty
this Family has over Bouillon, which then had been long usurped from him.

The said Prince Frederick-Maurice, who died at Pontoise the 19th of August
1652. was the Son of Henry de la Tour-d' Auvergne, Duke of Bouillon, Sovereign
Prince of Sedan, and of Raucourt, Vicount of Turenne, Count of Monfort, and of
Negrepelice^; and of Elizabeth of Nassau, Daughter of William Prince of Orange.

He Married Eleonor-Febronie de Bergh, who died the 14th of July 1657. by whom
he had Issue, as follows.

1. Emilia-Eleonor de la Tour-d' Auvergne, who is a Nun at the great Convent of
the Carmelitesses at Paris.

2. Godfrey-Maurice de la Tour-d' Auvergne, Sovereign Duke of Bouillon, etc.
High Chamberlain of France, and Governor of the upper and lower Auvergne. The
Principality of Bouillon, upon the Kings Interposition, was restored to him,
and put into his Possession, the 15th of June 1678. On the 19th of April 1662.
in Presence of their Majesty's in the Chapel of the Louvre, he Married the
Lady Marie-Anne de Mancini, Niece to the late Cardinal Mazarine, by whom he
has, 1. Lewis de la Tour Prince of Turenne, Born the 14th of January, and
Baptized the 18th of April 1665. upon whom the Reversion of his Fathers Office
of High Chamberlain, was Confirmed the 24th of January 1682. 2. A Daughter,
styled Mademoiselle of Bouillon. 3. Emanuel-Theodosius Abbot of St. Saviors of
Redon, now Duke of Albret. 4. Mademoiselle d'Albret. 5. The Duke of
Chateau-Thierry. 6. Lewis de la Tour d'Auvergne, Count of Evreux. 7. A Daughter
Born the 26th of November 1679.

3. Frederick-Maurice de la Tour d'Auvergne, Count of Auvergne, Marquess of
Bergopzoom in the Low Countries, Colonel-General of the Light Horse of France,
Governor and Seneschal of the upper and lower Limosin, and Lieutenant General
of the Kings Armies, who in the year 1662. Married Henriette-Francise of
Zollern, only Daughter of the late Iter-Frederick, Prince of Zollern, of the
Electoral House of Brandenburg, and of Elizabeth de Berg, Princess of Zollern;
by whom he has, 1. Emanuel-Maurice de la Tour d'Auvergne, Marquess of Bergh. 2.
Henry de la Tour, called the Abbot of Auvergne. 3. Lewis, called, le Chevalier
d' Auvergne. 4. Francis, Prince of Limeil. 5. Elizabeth Eleonor de la Tour. 6.
Lewise de la Tour. 7. Marie-Anne de la Tour.

4. Emanuel Theodosius de la Tour d'Auvergne, Cardinal of Bouillon, Great
Almoner of France, etc. Great Provost of Liege, and Doctor of Sorbon.

5. Hippolyte de la Tour d'Auvergne, who is a Carmelite Nun with her
abovenamed eldest Sister.

6. Mauricia-Phobronia de la Tour d'Auvergne, called the Princess of Evreux,
who on the 25th of April 1678. was Married at Chateau-Thierry, to Duke
Maximilian-Philip of Bavaria, Son of Maximilian Elector of Bavaria, and of
Marie-Anne Arch-Dutchess of Austria.

Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne Vicount of Turenne, and of Castillon, Count of
Negrepelice, their Uncle, was Governor and Seneschal of the upper and lower
Limosin, Colonel-General of the light Horse, and Marshall de Camp General, to
the Kings Army, and was the Most Renowned Captain of this Age: But alas! on the
fatal 27th of July 1675. New style, a Canon shot put an end to the Illustrious
Life of that Great Man, and to all the vast Projects he was about for the glory
of his Majesty's Arms.

He Commanded then the French Army on the other side the Rhine, against the
Imperialists, under the Command of Count Montecuculi. The King in Honor of his
Memory, caused a solemn service to be said for him in the Church of Nostre Dame
at Paris, on the 9th of September 1675 at which the Parliament, and all the
Superior Companies were present, and ordered him a Stately Tomb in the Church
of St. Denis in France, among the Mausolaeums of his own Royal Predecessors.

Of the Family of Grimaldi de Mourgues, or of the Prince of Monaco in Italy.
Lewis the first of that Name, Sovereign Prince of Monaco, etc. Duke of
Valentinois, Peer of France, etc. and Lord of the Town of St. Remy, was Born
the 25th of July 1642. on the 30th of March 1660. He Married Catherine
Charlotte of Gramont, who died the 4th of June 1678. leaving him two Sons, and
two Daughters. 1. Antony de Grimaldi, called the Duke of Valentinois, who is
Colonel of the Regiment of Soissons, and was Born the 27th of January 1661. 2.
The Chevalier de Monaco, Born in 1669. 3. Marie-Charlotte Grimaldi, called
Mademoiselle of Monaco, Born the 14th of January 1662. And 4. N..... de Monaco,
who is a Nun.

The Prince of Monaco's Sisters are, Marie-Hippolyte de Grimaldi, Born in 1644.
and Married in 1659. to Charles-Emanuel-Philibert de Simiane, Marquess of
Pianezz, lately first Minister of Savoy. 2. Joan-Marie de Grimaldi, who was
Born in 1645. Widow of N.... Imperiale. 3. Devote-Marie-Renee Grimaldi, Born in
1646. who is a Nun. And 4. N.... de Grimaldi, Born in 1648.

Of the Family of Rohan.
The Family of Rohan being descended from the first Sovereigns of Brittany; is
one of the most illustrious ones of the Kingdom: The Princes of this Family
still maintain a Rank comformable to their Extraction, as they formerly did,
enjoying the same Honors and Prerogatives as the forementioned Families. This
Family has had several Alliances with our Kings, with the Emperors, and with
the Kings of England, Scotland, Spain, Arragon and Navarre; and if Anne the
Heiress of Brittany, who was afterward Queen of France, and Wife both to
Charles the VIII. and Lewis the XII. had died without Children, there was no
Family nearer to succeed to that Duchy than this.

But the better to particularize in Order those which at present remain of this
Illustrious Family, we shall make this Observation, That they descend all from
these three following Heads or Chiefs.

1. From the late Henry, Duke of Rohan. 2. From the late Peter, Prince of
Guemene. 3. From his late Brother Hercules of Rohan, Duke of Montbazon.
1. The late Henry Duke of Rohan, Prince of Leon, left by Margaret of Leon his
Wife, Daughter to the late Duke of Suilly, Margaret of Rohan, his only Heiress,
who died the 9th of April 1684. In her, the Duchy of Rohan, as well as the
Vicounty of Leon, fell to the Distaffe (as they call it in France.) She Married
Henry Chabot, Lord of St. Aulaye, the last in Rank, of the Barons of Jornac,
and Grandchild to Admiral Chabot, and died the 27th of February 1655. by whom
she had a Son and three Daughters, viz.

1. Lewis de Rohan-Chabot, Peer of France, of whom we shall speak among the
Dukes and Peers. 2. Anne Chabot de Rohan, Married the 16th of April 1663. to
Francis of Rohan, Prince of Soubize. 3. Margaret Chabot of Rohan, Widow of the
Marquess of Coetquen, Governor of St. Malo, who died the 24th of April 1679.
4. Joan-Pelagia Chabot of Rohan, called Mademoiselle of Leon; She was Married
to the Prince d' Epinoy the 11th of April 1668.
II. The late Peter of Rohan, Prince of Guemene, Count of Montauban, Elder
Brother of the late Duke of Montauban, Married Magdalene of Rieux, Daughter to
the Lord of Chateau-neuf, by whom, he had Anne of Rohan who was Married to the
late Lewis of Rohan her Cousin-German, as we shall show further in due place.

III. The late Hercules of Rohan Duke of Montbazon, Count of Rochefort, Knight
of the Kings Orders, Peer, and Great Huntsman of France, Governor of the City
of Paris, and Gentleman Usher to Queen Marie of Medicis, who died in the year
1654. Married to his first Wife, Magdalene of Lenoncourt, Daughter and sole
Heir of Henry of Lenoncourt, and the Lady Francise Laval; and to his second in
the year 1628. Marie of Brittany, Daughter of the Count of Vertus; By both
which, he had the Children following.

His Children by the first Wife were,
1. Lewis of Rohan, the Seventh of that Name, Prince of Guemene, Duke of
Montbazon, Peer and Great Huntsman of France, Knight of the Kings Orders, who
died the 19th of February 1667. in the 68th year of his Age: He Married Anne de
Rohan, Princess of Guemene, his Cousin-German abovementioned, who died the
14th of March 1685. by whom he had one Son, viz.

Charles de Rohan Duke of Montbazon, Peer of France, Count of Rochefort, and of
Montauban, who Married Joan Armanda of Schomberg, Daughter and Sister of the
two late Counts and Marshals of that Name, by whom he has these following
Children.

1. Charles of Rohan, Prince of Guemene, Duke of Montbazon, who Married to his
first Wife, Mademoiselle de Luyne, Marie-Anne d' Albret, who died the 21st of
August 1679. and to his second, on the 2d of December, the same year,
Charlotte-Elizabeth de Cochefilet, called Mademoiselle de Vauvineux.

2. John-Baptist-Armandus of Rohan, called, The Abbot of Rohan.

3. John of Rohan, called the Prince of Montauban, who in 1682. Married N....
de Bautru Nogent, Widow of the Marquess of Ranes, Lieutenant General of the
Kings Armies.

4. Anne of Rohan, called Mademoiselle of Guemene.

5. Elizabeth of Rohan, called Mademoiselle of Montbazon, Born the 25th of
March 1643.

6. And Mademoiselle of Montauban.

2. The late Marie de Rohan Duchess Dowager of Chevreuse, who died the 13th of
August 1679. was Daughter to the same late Hercules of Rohan, by the same Wife:
She was first Married to Charles D' Albot Duke of Luyne, Peer, Constable and
Great Falconer of France, Knight of the Kings Orders, Principal Gentleman of
the Kings Bedchamber, and Governor of Picardie, who died in 1621. By whom she
had Lewis-Charles d' Albert, Duke of Luyne, who was first Married to
Lewise-Marie Seguier Daughter of the Marquisse d' O, by whom he had several
Children, and since, to the abovesaid Mademoiselle of Montbazon.

The same Marie of Rohan, after the Death of the said Constable of Luyne, was
Married again, as we have said, to Claudius of Lorain, Duke of Chevreuse, and
had by him three Daughters, of whom there remains only Henriette of Lorain
Abbess of Jouare.

The Children of the said late Hercules of Rohan by his second Wife, were one
Son, and two Daughters, viz.
I. Francis of Rohan, Prince of Soubize, Count of Rochefort in Iveline,
Lieutenant-Captain of a Company of the Kings Gens d' arms, Governor of Berry,
and Lieutenant General of the Kings Armies; who on the 16th of April 1663.
Married his Cousin Mademoiselle de Rohan, Lady of Honor to the Queen; By whom,
he has had several Children, the Eldest of which is

1. Lewis of Rohan of Soubize, who was Baptized at the Royal Chapel at St.
Germains en Lay, the 16th of February 1675. Their Majesty's being pleased to
stand for his Godfather and Godmother.

2. Hercules-Meriadec of Rohan, Abbot of St. Taurin of Evreux, called, the
Abbot of Rohan.

3. Anne-Margaret of Rohan of Soubize, who is a Nun in the Convent of the
Benedictin Nuns of Nostre Dame de Consolation, in the Street called the Rue de
Chasse-midy, in the Suburbs of St. Germain, at Paris.

4. Mademoiselle de Frontenay, N. ^. de Rohan.

5, and 6. Two Boys more.

II. Constance Emilia of Rohan, who was Married by Proxy, on the 18th of May
1683. to Don Joseph Rodrigo de Camara, Son of Don Miguel de Camara, Count de
Ribeyra-grande, Grandee of Portugal. This Don Joseph-Rodrigo de Camara, is of
the Privy Council to the present King of Portugal, Governor, and
Captain General, and Lord of the Island of St. Michael, and of the Town de
Poule-Delgade.

The Ceremony of the Espousals was performed the day before, at Versailles, in
the Kings Great Cabinet, in Presence of their Majesty's, of my Lord the
Dauphin, and my Lady Dauphiness, of Monsieur, and Madame, and of all the
Princes and Princesses, and principal Lords of the Court: She arrived in
Portugal, in the Month of October 1683.

Of the Family of Tremoille.
I. The late Prince of Tarente, Charle-Henry de la Tremoille, Duke of Thouars,
Peer of France, Knight of the Order of the Garter; bore Arms in Holland, and
was General of the Cavalry of the States of the United Provinces, and Governor
of Bois le Duc, for the said Lords States. He made Abjuration of the reformed
Religion, before the Bishop of Angers, the 3d of September 1670. and died the
14th of September 1672.

He Married on the 1st of May 1648. the Princess Emilia of Hessen, Sister to
William Landgrave of Hessen-Cassel, who was Born in 1626. by whom he left
diverse Children; viz.

1. Charles-Belgick-Holland de la Tremoille, Duke of Thouars, Peer of France,
Prince of Tarente, etc. who has the Reversion of the Place of one of the
Principal Gentlemen of the Kings Bedchamber, after his Father-in-Law, the Duke
of Crequi: He Married on the 3d of April 1675. Mademoiselle of Crequi, named
Magdalene of Crequi, only Daughter to the Duke of Crequi, by whom he has Issue
a Daughter N.....: of Tremoille, Born in 1677. and a Son, N.... of Tremoille,
Born in 1683.

2. William Frederick of Tremoille, Prince of Talmont, Abbot of Charroux, etc.
and Canon of Strasburg.

3. Charlotte-Emilia of Tremoille, who having been Married in Denmark the 29th
of May 1680. to Antony of Altemburg, Count of Oldenburg, became a Widow four
Months after.

4. N..... of Tremoille.

5. N..... of Tremoille.

II. Marie of Tremoille, their Aunt called heretofore, Mademoiselle of
Tremoille, who was Married on the 18th of July 1662. to Prince Bernard of
Saxe-weimar, Son of Duke William.

Of the Brothers and Sisters of the deceased Henry Duke of Tremoille,
Grandfather to the present Duke, who died the 21st of January 1674. There
remains the Issue that follows.

1. Of the late Frederick of Tremoille, Count of Laval, etc. who died at Venice
in February 1642. of a Wound he received in a Duel against the Sieur du
Coudray-Montpensier, there remain some natural Children by Mrs. Anne Orpe, an
English Gentlewoman, and one Daughter, by N.... de Moussi, a Venetian Lady.

2. Henry-Steven of Tremoille, whose Birth was Controverted in the Court of
Parliament of Paris, and declared Illegitimate, by a Sentence of the 23d of
March 1647.

3. Charlotte of Tremoille, Married to the Lord James Stanly, Earl of Darby,
King in Man, etc. Eldest Son to the late Earl William, and the Lady Elizabeth
Vere: He did great Services to the late King Charles the First, in the Civil
Wars, against the Rebellious Parliamenteers.

Of this Marriage are come several Children.

Those which remain at present of the two Branches of Tremoille-Royan, and
Tremoille-Noirmoutier, are second Cousins to the Prince of Tarente last
deceased, who was Charles-Henry of Tremoille.

The House of Tremoille, at the late Treaties of Munster and Nimguen,
Represented the pretensions it has to succeed Frederick of Arragon, last King
of Naples in that Kingdom.

I have not mentioned the Family of Epernon, because there remains none of it
but one Daughter, who is a Carmelite Nun, and Marie of Cambout, Duchess
Dowager of that Name.

Before I put an end to this Chapter, it will not be amiss to tell you, what it
is, to have The Pour, or The for, (as they term it) which is a Privilege at
Court, allowed only to Princes of the Blood, or to Legitimated Princes, or to
such Lords, who as those of this last sort, have the Privilege and Rank of
Princes.

To explain then, what is the meaning of having the Pour, or the for at Court;
You must know, That in France, it is a thing immemorially practiced by the Kings
Harbengers, called Fouriers, to mark out beforehand Lodgings in private Houses
in all places, whither the Court is to remove, for all the great Persons,
Officers, and Attendants belonging to it, without consulting the leave or
liking of the Owners, who are bound to furnish the Rooms and supply
necessaries, according to the respective Quality, as well of the Owner as of
the Person or Persons he is to lodge, at a certain stinted inconsiderable rate.
Now these Harbingers or Fouriers, mark the Doors of the Houses, or Chambers
they single out for these purposes with Chalk; and if it be only for an
ordinary, or mean Officer, or any Person beneath the Quality above-specified,
then they mark out in Chalk only the Name of the Person, without further
addition; but when they mark out any House or Rooms, for Persons of this high
Quality, They then prefix this word Pour, i. e. for, and write Pour, i. e. for
Monsteur or Monseignour tell, i. e. Mr. or My Lord such a one: And this is
called, Having The Pour.

It is to be observed, That there are some particular Lords in France, that
bear the style of Princes, as a thing annexed to the Lands they possess, which
have the Title of Principalities; such as are, The Principalities of Dombes,
and of La Roche-sur-Yon, lately belonging to Mademoiselle of Orleans
Montpensier, of Martigues and Anet, to the Duke of Vendome; of Neuf-Chatel, and
Wallenghin in Suisserland, to the House of Longueville, and of Chatel-aillon in
the Country of Rochel, to the Barony of Joinville, belonging to the House of
Guise, Erected into a Principality, the 9th of May 1552. Of Guemene belonging
to the Prince of that Name, Erected in 1570. and verified in Parliament the
same year: Of Soubize, Erected into a Principality, by Letters Patents of the
Month of March 1667. and verified in Parliament, the first of July the same
year. That of Talmont, belonging to the House of Tremoille: That of Tarente in
Italy, which though it be in the possession of the King of Spain, yet the right
thereof is pretended to by the said House of Tremoille, and accordingly the
Eldest Son of that House takes thence his Title: That of Soyon, in Vivarais,
belonging to the Duke d' Uses: Of Enrichemont de Boisbelle, to the Duke of
Suilly: Of Mortaigne sur Gironde, to the Duke of Richelieu: Of Marsillac, to
the Duke of La Rochefoucault: Of Leon, an ancient Principality in Brittany, to
the Duke of Rohan: Of Tingrie in the Country of Bologne, and of Lusse, to the
Duke of Piney-Luxemburg: Of Bidache, to the Duke of Gramont: Of
Chateau-Portien, to the Duke of Mazarine, Erected into a Principality, by
Charles the Ninth, the 4th of June 1561. Of Poix, to the Duke of Crequi: Of
Buch, to the Duke of Foix-Rendan: Of Bedeilles, to the Countess of Marsan: Of
Carency, to the House of Escars La Vauguyon: Of Chalais, to the House of that
Name: Of Yvetot, to the House of Crevan-cing^: Of Amblise, to the House of
Anglure: Of Delain, in the Franche-County, to the Marquess of Montglat: Of
Chabanois, in the Country of Angoumois, built on the Bank of the River of
Vienna, to the Marquess of Sourdis: Although those that are possessed of these
Principalities, have not the Rank of Princess, unless they be otherwise so in
one of those four Manors last above described; but only enjoy that place which
is due to them among the other Dukes and Peers of France, if they be such: Of
whom we shall treat further, under that Title.

CHAP. XI. Of the Royal Households.
Of the Kings Household, and of the Ecclesiastical Officers of the Kings
Household, and their Attendants; and First,

Of the Great Almoner of France.
THE Present Great Almoner of France is the Cardinal of Bouillon, who by his
Place, is Commander of the Kings Orders: He was named to this Office of Great
Almoner of France, the 10th of December 1671. And after having taken the usual
Oath on that occasion, to the King, accordingly took possession of it the 12th
of the same Month. He succeeded therein, the late Cardinal Barberin, Nephew to
Pope Urban the VIII. High Chamberlain of the Holy Church, Archbishop and Duke
of Reims, and first Duke and Peer of France, who died the 3d of August 1671.

He has of ancient standing Wages fixed in the Wages.
general Pay-Book of the Household, 1200 l. a year, and 1200 more under the name
of a Pension; 6000 l. for his Table and Livery; 3000 l. paid him by the
Treasurer of the Mark of Gold, on the 1st of January, and 3000 more by the same
Treasurer, as Commander by his place, of the Kings Orders, making in all 14400
l. French, which is about 1108 l. Sterling.

The Great Almoner of France, is by virtue of his Prerogative.
Place Commander of the Kings Orders: And He, or his Great Vicars, are commonly
appointed to make the Inquests of the Lives and Manners of the Knights of those
Orders, and to receive their profession of Faith.

Roillard and Loiuseau, and some other Authors affirm, that he is an Officer of
the Crown. This Office is in France the Solstitium honorum, or highest Pinnacle
of Ecclesiastical Honor, and has accordingly been almost always honored with
the Purple, and possessed by Cardinals.

Though in all times there always was a Head of the Court-Clergy, yet he never
bore the Title of Great Almoner of France, tell the time of Francis the First,
who Created Antony Sanguin Gardinal of Meudon, Great Almoner of France: though
even in the time of Charles the VIII, Geffrie of Pompadour Bishop of Perigneux,
began to take that Title, as appears in the Chamber of Accounes, by the Account
he gave of the Kings Alms, in the year 1489, but was not followed in it till
the said Reign of Francis the First.

The Great Almoner takes an Oath of Fidelity to Oath.
the King.

He gives the usual Certificates of the Oaths of Fidelity taken by all new
Archbishops, and Bishops in France, and in partibus infidelium, as likewise, by
any General of the Order, by Grand Priors of the Order of Malta, in France, who
are Grand Priors of France, by those of St. Giles, or of Provence, of
Champagne, of Aquitain, and of Auvergne, and by some Abbots: for formerly, all
Abbots and Abbesses, did likewise take Oaths of Fidelity to the King. He
likewise presents to the King, the Book of the Holy Gospels, when he is to
swear solemnly to any Alliance; as appeared in the Church of Nostre Dame at
Paris, at the Renewing of the Aliance with the 13 Swisse-Cantons, performed the
18th of November 1663. He marches at the Kings right Hand in all Processions,
and when the King permits any Officers to sit down in his Presence, during
Sermon, or other Church Service, the Great Almoners Seat is on his Majesty's
right Hand.

The Great Almoner has the Charge of Goal Deliveries, Office.
usually made by Kings at their coming to the Crown, at Kings and Queens
Coronations, at their Marriages, at their first Entries into any Cities of the
Kingdom, at the Birth of any Children of France, at the great Annual Festivals,
at Jubilies, upon any signal Victory or Conquest, and upon other occasions.

It Is he that Disposes of the Revenue appointed for the Kings Alms, and that
gives Order for the making the necessary Ornaments ordinarily used in the
Chapel; he goes when he pleases, and performs the Service, as at the Kings
rising, and going to Bed, to assist at the Kings Prayers, at Royal Feasts, or
at the Kings ordinary Meals, to crave a Blessing, and give Thanks; and at Mass,
where he takes the Kings Prayer Book from the Clerks of the Chapel of the
Oratory, to present it to the King, as likewise the springsing Brush when Mass
is done, to give the King some Holy Water. He Accompanies the King when he goes
to the Offertory, from his praying Desk to the Altar. The same Functions are
also performed by the Chief Almoner, or in his absence, by the other Almoners.

He does likewise other Functions, if he please to be present at all the
Ceremonies that are done, as on the days the King touches for evil.

He administers the Communion to his Majesty, and other Sacraments of which he
has need.

He is the Bishop of the Court (as the Abbot of Peyrat, one of the Kings
Almoners, shows in his Antiquities of the Chapel Royal) and performs several
Episcopal Functions in any Diocese wherever it be, that the Court is, without
asking leave of the Bishops of the places.

He Baptizes the Dauphins, the Sons and Daughters of France, the Princes, and
all others for whom the Kings and Queens, or any Children of France are please
to stand Godfathers or Godmothers for, whether in person, or by Proxy, He
affiances and marries in the Kings Palace, Princes and Princesses. You are to
observe, that on a Communion-day, the Great Almoner, with his Crosier and
Miter, gives the Absolution, without asking leave of the ordinary, or else
appoints another Bishop to do it in his stead, according to the practice used
in Cathedrals.

It Is he, if he be in the Chapel, that gives the King the Gospel, and the Pax
to kiss on certain Festivals, and when his Majestry Communicates.

He gives the Ashes to their Majesty's, and the usual Dispensation for eating
Eggs and Flesh in Lent.

The Abbot of Peyrat in his Book of the Antiquities of the Chapel Royal,
brings Examples to show, that the Great Almoner gives permission to the Court
Clergy, to Contract and Marry and Officers in the Kings Service, without any
need of their going to a Parish Church.

He apoints those of the same Clergy to hear the Confessions of the Kings
Officers, especially on the great Festivals of the year, and at Easter, and to
administer the Sacraments to them when they desire it, and when they are sick.

The power of the great Almoner extends it self yet further out of the Kings
Chapel, and Household.

He has the disposing of all places in the Hospitals of France, and he has
power to appoint Vicars throughout all the Provinces and Diocesses of the
Kingdom, to take an account of the Revenues of the said Hospitals; but he
appoints one Vicar General, who has power over the rest.

The Great Almoner has likewise power in the University of Paris, over the 17
Lecturers of the Royal College, over the College of Mr. Gervase, and over
that of Navarre. He has the gift of the Scholars and Principals Places in those
Colleges, where he has the right of Visiting.

He has also the Super-Intendance of the Hospital of the Fifteen-score blind
People at Paris, of that of the sixscore blind at Chartres, and of that of the
Haudriettes at Paris, which are now the Nuns of the Assumption.

It will not be amiss to place here, the Form of the Oath of Fidelity or
Allegiance which the Bishops in France take to the King upon the Holy Gospels.

The Form of the Oath of Allegiance taken by the Bishops.
I Swear, Sir, by the Most Holy and Sacred Name of God, and Promise to your
Majesty, That I will be to you, as long as I live, a Faithful Subject and
Servant: That I will procure your Service, and the good of your State, with all
my power: That I will never be present in any Counsel, Design, or Enterprise,
to the prejudice of either; and, that if there comes any thing of that kind, to
my Knowledge, that I will make it known to your Majesty. So help me God, and
these Holy Gospels.

CHAP. XII.
Of the first Almoner, and other Almoners, according to their Quarters.

THE first Almoner, when he pleases, in the absence of the Great Almoner,
performs all the same Functions; and he Administers the Oath of Fidelity to the
other Officers of the Chapel, and of the Oratory: which the other Almoners do
not do.

In the absence of the Great Almoner, he likewise gives to Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical Dignitaries, a Certificate of their having taken the Oath of
Fidelity, or Allegiance to the King during Mass.

He has 1200 l. per annum, Wages, paid by the Treasurer of the Household, and
6000 l. more for his Table at Court, paid by the Masters of the Chamber of
Deniers.

On Sundays, if he be at Chapel, he presents Holy Bread to the King, to the
Queen, to the Dauphin and Dauphiness, to Monsieur, the Kings Brother, and to
Madame. Then the Almoners of that Quarter, give it to the other Princes and
Princesses of the Blood, or to those that are Legitimated, which are near the
Kings Foot-Cloth.

The first Almoner, and another of that Quarter, hold the two Corners of the
Communion Napkin, on that side next the Altar, when the King receives; and
commonly two Knights of the Orders, or two other Lords hold the two other
Corners, on his Majesty's side; But if the Dauphin happen to be there, then he
only is to hold the Communion Napkin on his Majesty's side.

The Master of the Oratory, has 1200 l. per annum Wages, paid by the Treasurers
of the Household, and 3600 l. more for his Table at Court, paid him by the
Masters of the Chamber of Deniers.

The Kings Confessor, who is the Reverend Father la Chaise, a Jesuit, has 1200
l. a year by Name of Wages 2654 l. at the Chamber of Deniers, and 3000 l. more
to maintain his Coach.

On the great Festivals of the year, and when the King Communicates, the
reverend Father Confessor is always at Church near his Majesty, Clothed with a
Surpliss under his Mantle.

On other days, he assists, if he pleases, at the Kings Mass, but without a
Surpliss.

By an Order of Philip the Long, made at St. Germain en Lay, in the Month of
June 1316. The Kings Confessor has power to Order all Letters for Collating of
Benefices to be made ready for the Royal Signature and Seal, and the Great
Almoner, those of Royal Gifts and Alms; according to Mr. Tillet, Tom. 1. f.
434, and 435.

By a Charter of the same Philip the Long, made at Bourges, the 16th of
November 1318. All persons were forbidden to speak to the King while he was
hearing Mass, except his Confessor, who might speak to him, only about things
concerning his Conscience.

And after Mass, he might speak to him about the business of Collating of
Benefices.

The King has eight other Almoners, whereof two wait every Quarter, and of
those two, at least he that is to wait that Day, is to be present at the Kings
Rising, Dinner, and Mass, during which last, the Almoner of the Quarter, or
some other, is to hold his Majesty's Hat and Gloves, or in their absence, the
next Chaplain or Clerk of the Chapel, to be found in the way, is to receive
them. The Almoners are to be afterward at the Kings Supper, and at his going to
Bed, to perform the following Ceremonies, as to open the A Box containing the
Kings Plates, Napkins, Knives, etc.
Nave on the Table, if there be one, and to take it away when Supper is done,
to crave a Blessing, and to give thanks.

The Almoners are present on solemn Festivals, and when the King Communicates,
Clothed with Rotchets under their Mantles, both at Mass, and at Vespers. They
Preach in Rotchets, both before the King and else where. They administer the
Communion to the King. They go and present the Holy Bread; they also deliver
Prisoners, give Dispensation in Lent to eat Eggs and Flesh, give Ashes to the
King, Queen, and other Royal Persons; they give Holy Water to the King and
Queen, when Mass is done; and in fine, in the absence of the Great, or the
first Almoner, perform all Functions which they should do.

They have each a Salary 300 l. a piece for serving the King, and their Diet at
the Table, called the Almoners Table. And for serving at the Dauphins, by
turns, one year in two, they have half the Wages they have in the Kings
Service, and half a Pistol a Day for their diet, which one year with another,
makes 600 l. to each, besides their diet at Court.

I shall not mention those many titular Preachers and Almoners, that the King
is pleased to admit only, ad honores, because they have no rank here. There is
one Chaplain in Ordinary, who has 1200 l. a year under the name of Wages, and
1098 l. for his diet, at the Chamber of Deniers.

Besides whom, there are eight Chaplains that serve quarterly, two to each
Quarter: Who are to say every day (excepting the High-Mass days) a low Mass
before the King; they serve commonly Weekly, and he that is not in Waiting any
Week in the Kings Service, may, if he pleases, when he is present at the Kings
Mass, kneel in Mass-time next behind the Almoners, on the Kings right hand.
They serve also the Dauphin, and his Children. They have each 240 l. Wages a
year, for three Months waiting in the Kings Service, and their diet at the
Almoners Table, during their said three Months Service, and 120 l. to serve by
turns at the Dauphins, and their diet at Court, at the Deservers, or
Water-Servers belonging to the Dauphin. They have likewise 120 l. Recompense
for serving every other Year at the Duke of Burgundies, and 270 l. for their
diet, at the end of their quarter. And besides, you are to take notice, that at
the Dauphins, they are allowed half a Pistol a day a piece for their diet,
every day there is no Table kept, which one year with another makes 495 l.
yearly Revenue to each, besides their diet at Court, and some other profits.

The Chaplains, besides the ordinary Ceremonies, go before they begin Mass, and
give their Majesty's Holy Water: and when Mass is done, they present the
Corporal, on which they have Celebrated, to their Majesty's to Kiss.

There are eight Clerks of the Chapel and Oratory, that serve Quarterly, two
each Quarter, before the King, or before the Dauphin and his Children.

They have each 180 l. a year Wages paid by the Treasurers of the Household, for
three Months Service to the King, and Diet at the Almoners Table, at Court,
during their said three Months Service 75 l. a piece paid by the Treasurers of
the Offerings, for Furniture for the Kings Chapel, 90 l. Wages, or recompense
at the Treasure Royal, for serving every other year at the Dauphins, and their
diet at the Serdeau's or Deservers Table at the Dauphins, and when no Table is
kept, half a Pistol a day for their diet, as have the Chaplains, 100 l. for
Furniture for the Dauphins Chapel: They have likewise every other year 90 l.
recompense paid at the Treasure-Royal, for three Months serving the Duke of
Burgundy, 270 l. for their diet, at their quarters end, paid at the Chamber of
Deniers, and 100 l. for the Furniture of that Chapel, paid likewise at the
Treasure Royal, which makes up one year with another 580 l. Revenue yearly,
besides their diet at Court, and some other profits; as for Fees due to them
from Bishops and others, at their taking the Oaths of Allegiance to the King,
in his Chapel and Oratory, etc. Besides all this, when his Majesty gives
Mourning at any time to the Officers of his Household, and of his Chapel, the
Clerks of the Chapel and Oratory, have an equal allowance with the Chaplains,
as it was confirmed in 1684. at the Mourning for the late Queen Marie-Teresa of
Austria; the Clerks of the Chapel having allowed them, on that occasion, 50
Crowns as well as the Chaplains for every Marriage Celebrated in the Kings
Presence, his Majesty allows them 20 golden Lewis's, paid by the Principal
Valet de Chamber then in Waiting, which are at present divided between the two
Chaplains, and the two Clarks of the Chapel, who are in waiting at the time of
such a Ceremony.

The Chaplains and Clarks of the Chapel, in the absence of the Almoners, may
perform almost all the Functions, which they might do, if present, being as it
were, their Vicars by their places.

You are to observe, that of the three Officers last named, viz. Of the
Almoners, Chaplains, and Clarks of the Chapel, when they go out of waiting
with the King, there enters into waiting with the Dauphin, one Almoner, one
Chaplain, and one Clark of the Chapel; and with the Dauphins Children, only
one Chaplain, and one Clark of the Chapel.

You are likewise to observe, that in the general Account-Books of the Kings
Household, the Ecclesiastical Officers are called Masters: and in the Book of
Accounts of the Chamber of Deniers, the first eight Chaplains, and the eight
other Clarks of the Chapel, are equally placed under the Title of the Kings
sixteen Chaplains.

There are two Grooms of the Chapel, who have 600 l. a year each.

The 20th of December 1669. the King Created an Office of Master of the
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies of his Chapel and Oratory, which is at present
vacant.

He began first to exercise the Functions of his place, on All Saints day in
1668. and bore for a mark of his Office, a Staff about the length of a Singing
Man's Staff, covered with Violet-coloured Velvet, wrought with Flower de luces,
and headed with a Crown Royal, and used to serve principally at high Masses,
Vespers, and other Ecclesiastical Ceremonies where his Majesty was present, or
that were performed by his Order. He had 1500 l. per annum Wages, paid
quarterly.

The 2d of December 1681. The King Created an Office of Vestry-Keeper of his
Chapel and Oratory, who has 900 l. -- a year, Wages, and 1095 l. a year for
his Diet, and takes an Oath of Fidelity, in presence of the Lord Great Almoner.

Note, The manner of taking the Oath of Fidelity is thus: The Party who takes
the Oath, kneeling on his Knees, puts his hands joined between the Kings, or
any other dignified persons hands, who receives the said Oath, and so
pronounces the Oath, and after, Kisses the Gospels, which are presented to him;
and this is the reason of the French Phrase, Preter serment enter les mains du
Roy, to take an Oath between the Kings Hands, when they speak of taking one to
him.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Music of the Kings Chapel.

THE Music of the Kings Chapel is composed of a Master of the Kings
Chappel-Musick, who is at present the Archbishop of Reims, etc. and has under
the name of Wages 1200 l. and 3000 l. more for his Table at Court, paid at the
Chamber of Deniers.

He receives the Oath of Fidelity from the four Chaplains, for the High-Masses,
from five Clerks, from the Musick-Masters, Organists, and Singers, and others
of the Chappel-Musick.

Four Masters of the Music that serve each their quarter.

The first of these performs all the Ecclesiastical Functions of a
Musick-Master, during the half year, beginning from January, and besides,
during all the same time, he has care of the nourishment, Education, and
maintenance of the Pages of the Music. And the second has the like care of
them, during the other half year.

You are to take Notice, that in the Account-Books of the smaller expenses, by
which all Wages of the Chappel-Musick are paid, they are only styled
Under-Masters of the Music.

Two Composers of the Music, 50 Crowns.

Four Organists 600 l. They serve quarterly.

There are several Musicians that serve all by the half year, at the ordinary
allowance for Diet and Maintenance of 900 l. a year, and the Pages of the
Music, etc.

Two Fouriers, or Harbingers of the Chapel of the Kings Music; serving by the
half year.

Two Grooms, and one Landrer of the Music Chapel.

Of the Clergy of the Kings Household, and Court in general.
Thus much of the Ecclesiastical Officers that serve about the King, and other
Royal Persons. There are besides them other Ecclesiastical Officers appointed
for the Kings Household, and the whol-Court in general, viz.

Six Almoners of the Kings Household, serving every six Months, whereof the last
was added in 1670. whereas there were but five before.

They have for their Wages a Denier being the twelfth part of a penny upon
every Liver, or twenty pence French, out of the Wages of all the Officers
Commoners of the Kings Household, each receiving 331 l. 2 pence, and 48 l.
besides at the Chamber of Deniers for every half year.

Formerly they used to Bless the Meat at the ancient Table of the great Master,
and at that of the Stewards of the Household, when they had their diet at Court,
and they likewise rendered thanks there, placing themselves at the upper end of
the Table. At present they eat at Court, at the Table called the Almoners Table.

The Confessor and Preacher of the Household, or of the Commoners, as they are
called, have an allowance of 300 l. a year, and likewise his diet at the
Almoners Table: He takes an Oath to the Great Almoner.

Besides these, there are the Almoners belonging to the great and little
Stables, and to the other Bodies of the Kings Household, and the Chaplains
belonging to the several Companies of Guards, and of the Gentlemen-Musqueteers,
and others, of which we shall speak in their places.

The New Chapel of the Louvre, was Consecrated the 18th of February 1659. by
the late Bishop of Rhodes, since Archbishop of Paris; and that of little
Bourbon, pulled down in the Month of August, the same year.

The Kings Ecclesiastical Officers keep always on his Majesty's right hand in
the Chapel; and the Bishops, Abbots, and Ecclesiastical Officers of the Queen,
on his left. Now, on his Majesty's right hand, the Great Almoners Place is next
to the Kings Person, then follows that of the first Almoner on the right hand
of the Great Almoner: As for the Kings Father Confessor, he places himself at
the Great Almoners left hand, more within the Kings Praying-Desk: The Master of
the Chappel-Musick takes his place on the left hand, next adjoining to the
Kings Praying-Desk. The rest of the Almoners rank themselves to the
right-hand-ward, from the foot of the Kings Praying-Desk, toward the Altar, and
after them, the Chaplains and Clerks of the Chapel, and Oratory, and the other
Clergy of the Kings Household, every one in their Order.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Great Master of the Kings Household, and those who depend on him, and of
the Stewards of the Household.

THE Prince of Conde is at present Grand Master of the Kings Household, and his
Son the Duke of Enguien has it in Reversion.

The Grand Master has yearly, under the name of Wages, 3600 l. for Liveries
42000 l. paid quarterly, for his Collations 1200 l. and 1800 l. for his Steward.

Under the first Race of our Kings, the Great Master of France, was called the
Mayor of the Palace, who was a Lieutenant General over the whole Kingdom; and
according to the ancient Disposition of the State, as there was a Duke placed
over twelve Earls, and sometimes, a Duke over whole Provinces, so the Mayor of
the Palace, was the Duke of Dukes, and styled himself Duke or Prince of the
French. His Authority was not confined only within the Kings Household, where he
disposed of all Offices, but he had a great power over all Officers of War, and
Justice, over the Managers of the Revenue and Treasury, and indeed over all
Affairs of State; and grew so great at last, that it Eclipsed the Kings, and
gave Pepin, who was but Mayor of the Palace, opportunity to assume the Crown,
which having done, and fearing, that if he continued any longer any such great
Authority as this, in an Officer, his own practice might be returned on him and
his Successors, he suppressed this Office of Mayor of the Palace, and Erected
in its stead, that of Seneschal, for the Government only of his Household,
reserving all the other powers, of that former Office, to himself. Yet it has
happened since, that the Seneschal for all that, has taken upon him some
Command in the Armies, even so far as to have the Guard of the Kings Person:
Some have called him the Great Gonfanonier, or Standard Bearer.

This Office became Hereditary to the Counts of Anjou, from the time of Geffry
Grisegonelle, to whom King Robert gave it about the year 1002. and those that
exercised it about the King, held it in Fee, of those Counts, to whom they did
Homage for it, and paid certain acknowledgments, as going to meet the Count of
Anjou, when he came to the Palace, Lodging him, letting him serve the King,
etc. and furnishing him in the Armies, with a Tent big enough to hold a hundred
Knights, as Hugh de Cleries reports at large.

This Officer also retained still a part of the power of the Mayors of the
Palace in other things, and decided all differences arising among the
Attendants of the Court, and among the Officers of the Household.

After the Kings Death, he throws his Staff upon Functions and Prerogatives.
the Coffin, before all the rest of the Officers Assembled together, to show
that their Offices are expired; but the succeeding King, ordinarily restores
them, out of his special Grace and Favor.

The Great Master Regulates every year the expense of the Mouth of the Kings
Household. He has an entire Jurisdiction over the seven Offices, the most part
of which places he disposes of, and the Officers thereof take the Oath of
Allegiance to the King, between his hands: Nevertheless, the Great Masters have
voluntarily resigned the Office of Intendant of the Gobelet, and of the Mouth,
into the Kings hands, ever since Monsieur de Soissons, Great Master of the
Kings Household, under Henry IV. refused to trouble himself any longer with the
care of them.

He receives the Oath of Allegiance from the first Master of the Household, from
the Master of the Household in Ordinary, and from twelve Masters of the
Household, that wait Quarterly, from the Great and Chief Pantler, Cup Bearer,
and Carver; from the thirty six Gentlemen Servitors, from the three Masters of
the Chamber of Deniers, from the two Controulers-General, from the sixteen
Controulers Clerks of Offices, from the Master of the Kings Chappel-Musick, and
from the Master of the Kings Oratory, from the Almoners of the Kings Household,
from the Great Master, the Master, and the Aid of the Ceremonies; from the
Introductor of Ambassadors, and from........ from the Kings Master of the
Horse in Ordinary, and of the twenty other Masters of the Horse that serve
quarterly; from the four Lieutenants of the Guards of the Kings Gate, from the
Keepers of the Tents, etc.

When he serves in Ceremony, and that he goes along with the Meat, he marches
nearer the Kings Meat than all the Stewards of the Household, carrying his Staff
strait, and bolt upright, like a Scepter, and the other Masters of the Household
hold theirs more downward, in his presence. It is he likewise that at all Great
Ceremonies, presents the first wet Napkin to the King. The Office, called the
Kings Office, or Counting House, is kept under the Authority of the Great
Master.

CHAP. XV.
Of the first Master of the Household, and of the other Masters under him.

THE first Master of the Household is at present the Marquess de Livry, who has
a Jurisdiction over the seven Offices, as far as relates to their Service, but
has not the disposal of their places. He may also receive the Oath of Fidelity
from the Offieers of the Cup or Goblet, and of the Mouth, and of the other
Officers, and in the Great Masters absence, of those other Officers which ought
to perform that Ceremony to him. He has his Lodging in the Louvre, and has
yearly for Wages 3000 l. for Liveries 7968 l. and for the Counters 60 l.

He keeps the Great Chamberlains Table, and has the last course of it for his
Fee. The privilege of the said Table is an acquisition that has been made to
this Office, by some preceding First Masters of the Household.

When the King has at any time received the Communion, he presents to the
Priest a Cup of Wine for his Majesty, and at the same time, a Napkin to the
King, to wipe his Mouth. But if a Prince of the Blood, or any Prince
Legitimated, be present, then that Prince presents the Napkin.

The first Master of the Household, or the Master of the Household then in
Waiting, goes along with the Broth that is carried to the King when he takes
any: He receives the Kings Orders concerning his Majesty's Diet, and the hours
he prescribes for his Repasts, and gives notice of them to the Officers of the
Goblet, and of the Mouth.

The next Officer is the Master of the Household in Ordinary, who has yearly
1200 l. ordinary Wages, 1420 l. Liveries, and 60 l. for the Counters.

In the absence of the first Master of the Household, he does the same
Functions, as he, both in the Kings-Office or Counting House, and in his
Household.

It was Ordered in 1669. that whenever the King, being at a Ball, a Comedy, a
Balet, or an Opera, or the like, should take a Collation without sitting down
at Table, that the Master of the Household in Ordinary should serve his Majesty.
In the absence of the Captain of the Guards, he renders for him the same
Honors at the Great Masters Table.

There are twelve more Masters of the Household, that wait three and three by
quarters, who formerly had 900 l. a piece yearly, of the Treasurers of the
Household, but now they have but 450 l. besides which, they have at the Chamber
of Deniers, each Man 300 l. at the end of their quarters waiting, and 64 l. for
Counters, besides several other profits, and he that serves the Dauphin in the
same quality, has 225 l. Wages at the Treasure-Royal, and 150 l. more at the
end of his quarters waiting, out of the Chamber of Deniers.

His Majesty by a Declaration in April 1654. reduced the number of the Masters
of the Household to twelve, and that of the Gentlemen-Walters, or Servitors, to
thirty six.

By another Declaration of the 17th of October, The Masters of the Household are
styled Counselors, and Masters in Ordinary, of the Household, Knights and
Squires; They may bear their Coats of Arms timbred, and enjoy, as do their
Widows after them, an exemption from all manner of Taxes and Impositions
whatever.

They have a Command over all the Offices called the seven Offices, and in the
Kings House, when they Conduct the Meat to his Table, they carry Staves
garnished* with silver and gilt Vermilion, having on the tops a Crown set with
Flower-deluces.

They present to the King the first wet Napkin, with which his Majesty washes
his hands, before he eats, and they yield this honor to none but the Princes
of the Blood, the Legitimated Children of France, and the Great Master: They
are present at all business that passes in the Kings Office, or Counting House,
as we shall show afterward.

In the absence of the first Master, or Master in Ordinary, they go every Night
to ask his Majesty what hours he will please to eat at next day; and
especially, when the Court is upon a Journey, they ask the King the time and
place he would please to dine at, that they may give Order to the Officers of
the Goblet, and of the Mouth, to provide accordingly.

The Officers of the seven Offices, and several others, that are accustomed to
take the Oath of Fidelity in the presence of the Great Master, may take it in
an Assembly of this Office, and then those who preside there, which are the
Master of the Household in Ordinary, or the Masters of the Household then in
Waiting, may in the absence of the Great Master, or the first Master, receive
the said Oaths of Fidelity. On Fish-Dayes a Master of the Household is to be
present at the taking in of the Fish.

When the King is to give any Holy, or Blessed Bread in any Parish or Society,
the Master of the Household in Waiting that day, holding his Staff in his hand,
is to accompany the Holy Loaves to the Church, which are commonly six in
number; The Almoner that goes to present them from his Majesty, marches between
the Master of the Household, and the Comptroller, at whose left hand goes the
Treasurer of the Offerings.

The Masters of the Household keep the Table called the Masters of the Households
Table, or else eat at the Table of the ancient Great Master; and at the
Dauphins, they keep the Table of His Highnesses Ser-d'eau, or Water-server,
that is, his Deserver, or Voider, that takes away, when Meals are done.

Of the Great Pantler, Cup Bearer, and Carver.
These three Officers are always present at great Ceremonies, where they have
Rank, as they had at the Kings Coronation, etc.

They have 600 l. a year each, as Wages, paid them on the Book of the
establishment of the Household, in which they are only styled, First Pantler,
First Cup Bearer, and First Vsher-Carver.

We shall tell you their Offices, in speaking of the Gentlemen-Waiters, or
Servitors, who daily their Functions.

The present Great Pantler is, Timoleon Count de Cosse, of which Office, it is
observable, that there remains still an ancient Custom in the Kings House, that
upon every New-Years-Day, and on the four principal Feasts in the Year, as soon
as the King is gone out of his Chamber, to go to Mass, the Serdeau, or Voider,
cries aloud three times, either out of a Balcony, or from the Stairs head; M.
such a one, Great Pantler of France, lay the Cloth for the King.

The Great Cup Bearer is an Office set up instead of the Great Bottler, or
Butler; which was anciently one of the Principal Officers of the Crown, from
the time of Charles the Great, to a considerable time after the rise of the
Kings of the third Race, he used to Sign all Charters, and Letters Patents, and
to be present at all Assemblies, as other great Officers are.

The Great Vsher-Carver is the last of the three.

The Great Pantler has a Jurisdiction at the Palace, which is at Paris, what
Westminster Hall has here: as we shall show further when we come to speak of
that.

All the Bakers of Paris are obliged on every next Sunday after the Epiphany,
to go and do homage to the Great Pantler, between the hands of his
Lieutenant General, and to pay him, as they call it, the good Denier. Besides,
all Master-Bakers, newly made free, are bound likewise to come and present the
Rosemary-Pot to the Lieutenant General, for the Great Pantler.

Of the Gentlemen-Waiters.
The Gentlemen-Waiters perform by turns the Functions of the three next
abovenamed Officers: They are always called Gentlemen-Waiters to the King,
because they serve none but Crowned Heads, Princes of the Blood, and Sovereign
Princes when the King is pleased to entertain them.

In the Letters Patents for their places, they are styled Esquires; and by a
Declaration of the King, of the 17th of October 1656. they may take the Titles
of Knights and Esquires, and may bear their Coats of Arms timbred. On
Maundy-Thursday, they serve together with the Princes of the Blood, and other
great Lords of the Court, in carrying to the King those Dishes which his
Majesty on that day serves up to the thirteen poor people; he then entertains
those who are called the Children of the Holy Supper. They have rank and place
at all great Ceremonies, as at the Kings Coronation, his solemn Entry into
Paris, and at the Christning of the Dauphin. They wait with their Swords by
their sides, and may be present in the first Office of every quarter in which
they have place and voice next after the Masters of the Household, according to
the Regulations set down in the Ordinances made for that purpose.

They were formerly more in number, till his present Majesty, by a Declaration
of the Month of April 1654. they were reduced to thirty six, who take the Oath
of Fidelity in presence of the Grand Master, or of those, who as we have said,
in his absence supply his place. They likewise, and their Widows, enjoy an
exemption from all Taxes and Impositions; They are ranked upon the Book of the
Establishment at the rate of 700 l. per annum Wages, though they receive but
half that sum, and they have all their Diet at Court, at the Table, called the
Kings Water-Servers, or Voiders Table, and those that serve at the Dauphins,
eat likewise at his Highnesses Water-Servers, or Voiders Table.

After these we may conveniently place the Serdeaus, who are the Water-Servers,
or Voiders, who are six in number, and serve every one in their turns two
Months each: they had formerly 300 l. a piece yearly Wages, but now but 225 l.
which is paid by the Treasurers, and 18 l. more paid at the Chamber of Deniers.
They are called Serdeaus, or Water-Servers, because they present the chief
Officers of the Household and Kitchen with Water to wash their hands, before
they serve up the Meat to his Majesty's Table; they may likewise be styled
Voiders, or Deservers, because they receive all the Dishes as they are taken
from his Majesty's Table, and see them conveyed to the Gentlemen Waiters Hall,
where they serve them likewise with Water, and such as dine with them at their
Table.

After them are the Ushers of the Hall, who after they have Conducted the Kings
Meat from the Kitchen of the Mouth to the Antichamber, where his Majesty dines
in public, take on them the keeping of that Door from the time the Table is
spread, till the Cloth be taken away; they are twelve in number, waiting three
and three quarterly: they have 300 l. a piece yearly Wages, and eat with the
Gentlemen-Waiters: and he that serves the Dauphin in the same quality, has 226
l. Wages.

Of the Order observed in serving the King, when he Dines in Public.
As soon as the Usher of the Hall has received Order to have the Kings Table
spread, he goes to the Lifeguard Chamber, and knocking at the Door of their
Hall, he cries aloud, Gentlemen, Spread the Kings Table here. Thence taking a
Guard with him, he goes to the Goblet or Buttery, then the chief of the
Officers of the Goblet, bring the The Nave is the Box containing the Kings
Plates, Napkins, Knives, etc.
Nave, the others the rest of the Table Furniture; the Guard marching near the
Nave, and the Usher of the Hall, with his wan in his hand, before them, carry
the two Table-Cloths: And when they come all to the Preparation-Table (as they
term it) the Usher of the Hall, himself alone, spreads one of the Cloths upon
the Side-Bord, which done, the Officer of the Goblet, and the Usher of the Hall
together, spreads the other on the Preparatory-Table; of which the Usher
receives one end, being decently cast into his hands by the Officer of the
Goblet, who keeps the other end to himself. After that, the other Officers of
the Goblet place the Nave, and make an end of covering the Table; then the
Gentleman-Waiter, whose turn is that day to attend the Preparatives, cuts out
the Essays or tastes of the Bread already prepared at the Goblet, and causes one
of the Officers of the Goblet to take a taste of the Kings two little Loaves,
and of his Salt, he touches likewise, with one of his Slices of Essay, the
Kings Napkins, Spoon, Fork, Knife, and Tooth-pickers, giving afterward the said
Essay to an Officer of the Goblet, to eat, which is called, making the
Preparatives: And the said Gentleman Server, having thus taken possession of
the Preparatory-Table, continues to keep it.

These Preparatives being made, one of the Officers of the Goblet, and the
Usher of the Hall, go to the Table where the King is to eat, and lay the Cloth
on it in the same manner as is above expressed, which done, one of the
Gentlemen-Waiters spreads on it a Napkin, letting one half of it hang down on
that side next his Majesty, and upon that Napkin he places the Kings Cover, or
Service, viz. His Plate, and the stand on which are the two Manchets, his
Spoon, Fork, and Knife, over which he lays the Kings Napkin, neatly folded with
little Tassels. Then the same Gentleman-Waiter folds back over the whole, that
part of the Under-Napkin that hung down, and so goes on to place the stands for
the Plates, and the Carving-Knife, Spoon and Fork which he is to use in the
service; wrapping these three last pieces in a Napkin, folded between two
Golden Plates: Which having done, he stays at the Table to look after the Kings
Cover, till Dinner be served up.

An Extract taken out of the Ordinances made for the Kings Household, renewed
and signed by the King, the 14th of April 1665.
When his Majesty's Meat is to be served up to Table, whether at Dinner, or at
Supper, two Archers or Sergeants of the Kings Life-guards are to march before,
then the Usher of the Hall, and next the Master of the Household, with his
Staff, after whom, are to follow the Gentleman-Waiter, the Controuler General,
the Clerk of the Offices, and others that carry the Dishes; and besides them,
the Usher of the Kitchen, and the Keeper of the Plate, behind all which are to
march two Archers more of the Guards, who are always to appear in their Coats,
and with their Halbards, or Arquebusses, and are to suffer none to come nigh
the Kings Meat.

After the Serdeau, or Water-Server, has given Water to the Master of the
Household, to the Gentleman-Waiter, and to the Comptroller, to wash their hands
with, in the Office of the Mouth. The Usher of the Mouth places the Dishes upon
the Office-Table, and presents two Essays, or tastes of Bread, to the Master of
the Household, that is, to taste the first Service, who after he has touched the
Meat with the said two Essays of Bread, eats one himself, and gives the other
to the said Usher of the Mouth, to eat. Then the Gentleman-Waiter takes the
first Dish, the Comptroller the next, and the Officers of the Mouth the rest.
In this Order, the Master of the Household, with his Staff in his hand, marches
at the head of them, some steps before whom, goes the Usher of the Hall, with
his Wand in his hand, which is the mark of his Office, and when the Meat is
brought to the Table, guarded by three of the Life-Guards, with their Carabines
on their Shoulders. The Master of the Household makes a bow to the Nave, and the
Gentleman-Waiter that carried the first Dish, sets it on the Preparatory-Table,
and having received an Essay of the Gentleman-Waiter that makes the
Preparatives, he eats it, and sets his Dish upon the said Table, after which,
the Gentleman-Waiter that makes the Preparatives, takes the rest of the Dishes
out of the hands of the Comptroller, and others that brought, and places them
likewise on the said Table, giving every Man a taste of the Dish he brought;
which done, the other Gentlemen-Waiters take the said Dishes off the
Preparatory-Table, and carry them to the Kings Table. The first Course being
thus served up upon the Table, the Master of the Household, with the Usher of
the Hall going before him, with his Wand in his hand, goes and gives his
Majesty notice: the said Master of the Household, when there, carries his Staff
as a mark of his Office, but in his absence, the Gentleman-Waiter that
officiates his place, carries only for a mark of his present Function, a were
Napkin between two golden Plates, that his Majesty may see by that, the Meat is
on the Table; then he comes back, marching before the King to the Table, where
his Majesty being arrived, the Master of the Household, or in his absence the
Gentleman-Waiter presents him the said wet Napkin to wash withal, according to
an Order of the King for that purpose, of the 5th of September 1676. upon
occasion of the dispute that happened thereon in the Queens Household; the said
Master of the Household, or Gentleman-Waiter, ought likewise when he takes the
said wet Napkin of the Officer of the Goblet, to make him make trial of it.
Thus much for the first course; as for the others, you may observe, that the
Gentleman-Waiter that has the charge of the Preparatory-Table, continues all
along, to make the Officers of the Mouth and Goblet, taste of every thing they
bring up at each course, which the other Gentlemen-Waiters come and take, and
serve up to the Kings Table, when his Majesty calls for them.

But the other Gentlemen-Waiters, after they have brought up the first course,
go no more down to the Office, but having washed their hands with Water given
to them by the Officer of the Goblet, at the Side-Bord in the Antichamber, or
some other place, come back and wait at the Kings Table, on that side opposite
to his Majesty, and not behind, where commonly Noblemen and Ladies stand.

Upon New-Years-Day, in the year 1674. his Majesty having been pleased to
Order, that for the future, none but the Gentlemen-Waiters should serve him at
Table, and that they should wait five at a time, that the Service might be the
more exactly performed; Since that time, one of them always waits at the
Preparatory, or Testing-Table, as we have said, till the last course be served
up, after which, he quits it, and going to the Officers of the Goblet, or
Buttery, he takes of them the second wet Napkin, after he has made them make
trial of it, and holds it ready for the King, to wash his hands with at the end
of his stepast; and the other four wait always at the Kings Table, while his
Majesty is eating.

He that serves as Cup Bearer, when the King asks for Drink, cries out
presently, aloud, Some Drink for the King, and then bowing to his Majesty, goes
to the Side-Bord, and takes from the hands of the Chief Butler of the Mouth, a
golden Plate, on which are placed a Glass with a Cover, and two Caraffes are
large Glasses, in form of those used for Vinegar, at our Tables.
Caraffes, or larger Glasses of Crystal, one of Water, and one of Wine, and
then comes back the Chief Butler and his Aid, or Assistant of the Goblet of the
Mouth going before him to the Kings Table, where being all three come, and
having made Obeisance to the King, the said Chief-Butler steps on one side, and
presents a Vermilion-Taster to the Gentleman-Waiter, who likewise turns himself
toward him, and pours out of the two Caraffes, some Wine and Water into the
said Taster, being a little Cup of Vermilion gilt, in the Chief-Butlers of the
Goblets hands; after which, the said Chief-Butler pours out the half of what
was filled into the Taster in his hands, into another like Vermilion presented
him by his Aid, or Assistant, then giving the first into the Gentleman-Waiters
hands, and taking the other out of his Assistants, he drinks that off first,
after which, the Gentleman-Waiter drinks his, and returns it to the
Chief-Butler, who returns them both to his said Assistant: Having thus tasted
the drink, in the Kings sight, the Gentleman-Waiter bows again to his Majesty,
and giving him the Glass, takes off the Cover, and presents him at the same
time, the Plate or Stand, on which are the Caraffes, out of which, his Majesty
fills himself Wine and Water, or Wine alone, as he likes, and when he has
drunk, sets the Glass on the Stand again, which the Gentleman-Waiter covers
again, and taking up the Stand, with what is upon it, bows once more to the
King, and then gives it back into the Chief Butlers hands, who carries it to
the Side-board.

It is to be remarked, that when the Nave is placed on the same Table on which
the King eats, when the King asks for drink, the Gentleman-Waiter goes to the
Side-board, with a Guard before him, and fetches the Plate or Stand, with the
Glass as aforesaid.

If the Nave be placed on the same Table at which the King eats, every time the
King changes Napkins, which is at every course, at least, after the Almoner has
opened the Nave, one of the Gentlemen-Waiters is to lift up the sweet or
perfumed Bag which lies over them, to make room for another of his Companions
to take them out, after which, the first Gentleman is to put in the Sweet-Bag
again, and the Almoner to shut the Nave.

He that Officiates for the Chief-Carver, after he has washed his hands, and
taken his place as is abovesaid, at the Table, is to present to his Majesty the
Dishes, to uncover them, and to take them off, when his Majesty makes him a
sign so to do, to the Serdeau, or Water-Server, and gives the King clean Plates
from time to time, and Napkins at the coming in of any Inter-Messes, or choice
Dishes, twixt Course and Course, and Carves the Kings Meat unless he please to
carve it himself.

At Great Ceremonies, when the Great Pantler, Great Cup Bearer, and Great
Usher-Carver serve in Person, they do all the forementioned Duties themselves.

From the time the Cloth is laid, till his Majesty rises from Table, the Usher
of the Hall is to keep the Door of the Room where his Majesty Dines in Public
at Home; and if the Nave be there, then he keeps the Door of the Antichamber.

The Serdeau, or Water-Server, receives all the Dishes that are taken off the
Kings Table, which are carried thence to the Office, or else to the
Gentlemen-Waiters Hall, commonly called the Serdeau's Hall, where he serves up
the same Dishes, to the said Gentlemen-Waiters, and to those who have their
Diet at the same Table with them: Under the Serdeau, there are likewise several
Servants that attend the Office; and the Gentlemen-Waiters Servants, eat
afterward, of what is taken from their Table.

Of the Kings-Office, or Counting House.
The Kings-Office, or Counting House, which is of the nature of the Green-Cloth
with us, and is held twice a Week, on Tuesdays and Fridays, in which these
following Officers have Voice and Place; viz. The First Master of the Household,
the Master of the Household in Ordinary, the Masters of the Household serving
quarterly, then the Masters of the Denier-Chamber, or Chamber of Deniers, and
their Substitutes, the Comptroller General and his Substitutes, the Comptroller
in Ordinary, of the Mouth, and the Comptrollers-Clarks of Offices.

We have spoken of the former, let us now speak of the rest.

There are three Masters of the Denier-Chamber, or Treasurers of the Household,
who serve by turns, and are present at all Debates and Consultations about the
Government of the Officers, and regulation of the Expenses of the Household, and
other matters of concern.

They have 1880 l. a piece yearly Wages, 5300 l. Liveries, 64 l. for Counters,
and 2650 l. Wages more at the Dauphins.

They are to solicit and see themselves paid the allowance assigned for
defraying the Expenses of the Mouth of the Kings Household, and to pay the
Officers for such Expenses. They pay also the Liveries, they have their
Ordinary at the Master of the Houshold's Table, or else at that of the ancient
Great Masters, and he that serves at the Dauphins, eats at his Highnesseses
Sirdean's, or Water-Servers Table.

They have every one their Substitutes, and if they please, under the Title of
Officers, who assist them at their Offices, and officiate for them in their
absence, having their Diet as their Masters, either at the Master of the
Households Table, or when they serve at the Dauphins, at his Highnesses
Serdeau's, or Water-Servers Table.

There are two Comptrollers-General, that serve each six Months, who have 900
l. a piece Wages, 1355 l. for Liveries, and 64 l. for Counters; and at the
Dauphins for Liveries, ancient Wages, and binding up the accounts, they have in
all 2065 l.

The Comptrollers General settle and control all the Expenses of the Mouth in
the Kings Household. One of them, or his Deputy that is in Waiting, is always in
the Office with Pen in hand. They take all the settled Accounts of Extraordinary
Expenses, of which a Roll is made every Month. They deliver the Extracts of the
said Accounts so settled, to the Merchants that furnished the Commodities, in
order to their payment, by the Masters of the Chamber of Deniers: and after the
Comptroller General has got the Original Roll of the said Accounts, Signed by
the Great Master, and has Entered it upon his Register, he gives the said
Original to the Master of the Chamber of Deniers. The Comptroller General,
during the six Months he is in Waiting, does likewise Accompany the Kings
Broths, and receives his Majesty's Orders about his eating, as the Masters of
the Household do; They have every one their Substitute, and if they will, in
quality of an Officer, who assist them at their Offices, and Officiate for them
in their absence.

When it happens, that his Majesty Dines in Public, and that the Master of the
Household does not reform the Ceremony of carrying his Staff there, the
Comptroller General ways on his Majesty at Table, in the absence of the first
Master of the Household. The Comptroller General in the time of his Waiting, is
to take care of all his Majesty's Gold and Silver, and Vermilion Plate and
Vessels, which he gives in Custody to the Keepers of the Plate and Vessels, and
other Officers.

The Comptrollers General, and their Substitutes, have their Diet at Court, at
the Master of the Households Table, and when they serve at the Dauphins, at that
of his Highnesses Serdeau, or Water-Server.

There is besides a Controuler in Ordinary, of the Mouth, and of the Goblet, or
Buttry, who has 2000 l. Wages, and 3000 l. a year Liveries at the Kings, and
1000 l. more for Liverles at the Dauphins.

He is to be present at the taking in of all Provisions of Fish and Flesh, for
the Kings Mouth, and before they are served up to his Table, he Examines
whither all the particular things, set down in the Account of the smaller
Expenses, be made use of or no. Besides, He keeps an Account of Novelties in
Provisions for the King, and of Fruits, Comfits, and Sweet Wines, etc. which
are to be put into his hands: and in fine, he has an Eye and Inspection over
all the Expenses of the Mouth, or Goblet, and other Expenses of the Household.

When the King eats in public, without the Ceremony of having the Staff born
by the Master of the Household, the Comptroller in Ordinary, of the Mouth, sets
the Meat on his Majesty's Table, and when several are to serve, the
Comptrollers Clerks, of Offices, likewise place some Dishes, but the
Comptroller of the Mouth, serves on the Kings side. He has his Ordinary at the
Master of the Households Table, while he is in Waiting on the King, and, at the
Dauphins Serdeau's, or Water-Servers, when he waits there.

There are sixteen Comptrollers-Clerks of Offices, that draw up the Rolls and
Bills of the Extraordinary expenses of the Kings Household, and have Voice and
Place at the Board of the Office. They have every one 600 l. Wages, and about
1500 l. Liveries yearly.

These Rolls which are in Parchment, contain a daily Account, ready sum'd up,
of all the Expenses of the Kings Household, and are Signed by the Masters of the
Household; And the Roll which is made on the last day of every Month, contains
the whole Expense of all that Month; which only is Signed by the Great Master.

For the extraordinary Expenses, there is a Monthly Account of them kept, which
is cast up and settled at the Office, and Signed by the Great Master, by the
first Master, by the Master in Ordinary, and by the other Masters of the
Household, then in Waiting; upon which Bills of Accounts so settled and verified
in the Office, the Masters of the Chamber of Deniers, pays those Expenses to
the Purveyors and Merchants to whom they are due. The said Comptrollers Clerks
of Offices, are of the Body of the Office. At Feasts, and extraordinary
Entertainments, they wait at the Kings Table, with their Swords by their sides,
and set the Dishes on the Table themselves. Under the Masters of the Household
and other Superior Officers, they have Command over the seven Offices of the
Household, the Officers of which, are bound to obey them as far as it concerns
their Function. They write all the ordinary and extraordinary receipts of Flesh
and Fish; They Comptrol all the Provisions of the whole Household, and when they
are not so good as they should be, they buy others, and the Money so by them
laid out, is repaid them at the Chamber of Deniers, and bated on the Merchants
Bills. They have their Diet at Court, at the Master of the Households Table, or
else at the ancient Great Masters Table, or at the Almoners, and when they
serve at the Dauphins, at his Highnesses Serdeau's, or Water-Servers Table.

There are eight Ushers of the Chamberlains, and of the Office, who formerly
had 300 l. but now but 225 l. a piece by Name of Wages paid by the Treasurers
of the Household, and 133 l. more at the Chamber of Deniers, yearly.

The seven Offices are, 1. The Goblet, or Buttry of the Mouth. 2. The Kitchen
of the Mouth; which two first are only for the Kings Person. 3. The Common
Pantry. 4. The Common Buttry. 5. The Common Kitchen. 6. The Fruit-Office. 7.
The Fewel-Office.

1. Of the Goblet of the Mouth, or of the Kings own Buttry.
The Goblet consists of the Pantry of the Mouth, and that which is more
properly called The Cup, or Buttry of the Mouth.

In the Pantry of the Mouth, there are twelve Chief Pantlers, that serve by
turns, three every quarter, who have each 600 l. yearly.

The Officers of the Pantry of the Mouth, have allowed them besides, for
Furnishing his Majesty's Table with all sores of Pourcelan, or China-Ware, both
ordinary and extraordinary, 75 l. for the two Quarters, beginning in January
and October, and 200 l. for the other two Quarters, beginning in April and July.

There are under these, one Keeper in Ordinary of the Plate and other Vessels,
who has 800 l. a year Wages, paid by the Treasurer of the Household, and 800 l.
more Augmentation, at the Chamber of Deniers, besides, an Ordinary for himself,
and another for a Servant, which he should have in specie, but commonly takes
Money of the Master of the Denier Chamber for it.

Two Grooms serving six Months a piece, who have each 600 l.

One Groom in Ordinary for the Linen, who has 600 l.

One Landrer who has 400 l. paid by the Treasurers of the Household.

In the Buttry, or Collar of the Mouth.
There are likewise twelve Chief-Butlers, serving by turns, three every
Quarter, who have each 600 l.

One Chief, or Head-Groom in Ordinary for Sweet-Waters 1600 l.

Four Aids, or Helpers, each 400 l.

One Aid in Ordinary 800 l.

Four other Grooms serving by turns, two each half year, 600 l. each.

Four Wine-Couriers serving two every six Months, 600 l.

The Servants of the Goblet have for their allowance 480 l. at the
Denier-Chamber, and four Loaves, and four Quarts of Wine every day out of the
Common Pantry and Cellar: besides this, the three foremost Servants of the
Pantry of the Mouth, have six pounds of Beef, every Flesh-Day, and every
Fish-Day a good large Corp, and two Quevivers or Sea-Dragons: And the foremost
Servant of the Buttry, or Cellar of the Mouth, has every Flesh-Day, two pounds
of Beef, and every Fish-Day one Quaviver.

The several Duties of the Officers of the Goblet.
The Officers of the Goblet, have several Charges, some are to take care of the
Kings Bread, others of his Linen, others of laying the Cloth, and others of his
Fruit, which till the time of the late King Lewis the XIII, was kept in the
Fruit-Office; and others to look after his Wine and Water.

The Wine-Couriers are, whenever the King goes a Hunting, or elsewhere for his
pleasure, to carry after his Majesty, a Cloak-Bag furnished with Napkins, Bread,
Knives, baked things, Fruit and Sweetmeats, and two Flagons of Wine and Water.
The Conductors of the Hackny of the Goblet, when his Majesty is traveling
along the Country, carry after him a Horse laden with Linen, Bread, Fruit,
Sweetmeats, a Cup for the King, a Taster, Knives, Salt, and other necessaries
to lay the Cloth for the Kings Dinner and Supper, for fear the Grooms, and
Carriages appointed for that purpose should not come up time enough with his
Majesty: for better understanding of which, I have set down a particular
account of the small things that are ordinarily delivered to these two Officers
last named when the King goes abroad: which they call the Menu.

The Officers of the Goblet, on such occasions, deliver to the Wine-Courier,
two Portugal, or China Oranges, two ordinary Lemons, two Sweet Lemons, six
choice Apples, and in their Seasons, Heart-Cherries, Peaches, and other Fruits,
for which they are allowed forty pence, or three shillings four pence English.

The Pastry-Cook of the Mouth, furnishes him with two great Biskets, six
Perdrigon Prunes, six preserved Apricocks with Ears, and two Slices of
Citron-Peel, for which, he is allowed fifty pence, or four shillings two pence
English.

To the Conductor of the Hackney, are given six Loaves, value eleven pence, six
Quart Bottles of Wine valued at four Livers eight pence, and one Denier or
twelfth part of a penny, which is about seven shillings and four pence, English.

The Pastry-Cook of the Mouth, gives him twenty great Biskets, at eight pence a
piece, six dozen of little Cabbages, at a Crown; the Officers of the Pantry of
the Mouth, six packets of dry Sweetmeats, at a Crown and six pence, six
Packets of Pastills, at the same value, six China-Oranges, at half a Crown: On
Fish-Days the Pastry-Cook gives over and above, a Pie of Bon Chretien Pears,
value forty pence. One Pie of beaten Eggs of like price, two great Cream
Cheese-Tarts, at a Crown, two great Cream Cakes at forty pence, twenty four
Cheese-Cakes, at forty eight pence, twenty four Brioches.

Besides which, are carried six dozen of Loaves and six dozen of Bottles of
Wine, upon two Horses, furnished out by the Court-Bakers, and Vintners.

2. Of the Kitchen of the Mouth, or the Kings own Kitchen.
The Officers of the Kings own Kitchen, are, two Ushers in Ordinary, that serve
half a year each by turns, whose Salary is 1200 l.

Eight other Ushers that serve quarterly, who have each 600 l.

Four Master Cooks, 600 l. a piece.

Four Hastners, Roasting-Cooks, each 400 l. paid by the Treasurers of the
Household, and 15 l. at the Chamber of Deniers.

Four Pottagers, or Boiling-Cooks, likewise at 400 l. Wages.

Four Pastry-Cooks, at 300 l. each.

Three Children of the Kitchen, or Under-Cooks in Ordinary, 300 l. Wages, at
the Treasurers of the Household, and 24 l. each, at the Chamber of Deniers.

Four Porters serving by turns, two every six Months; who have each 300 l.
Wages, at the said Treasurers, 91 l. 10 d. at the Denier-Chamber, and 150 l.
for furnishing and keeping the Kitchen Furniture, besides 12 l. a quarter.

One Groom of the Chase in Ordinary, who has 1200 l. Wages, 500 l. Liveries, at
the Treasure Royal, his Diet at Court the whole year, and several other profits.

Two Advertisers serving six Months each, at 300 l.

Four Carriers of the armed Chair and Table for the Mouth, each 400 l.

Six Serdeau's, of which before.

Three Landrers of the Kitchen of the Mouth, and of the common Kitchen, who
have each 300 l. Wages at the Treasurers of the Households and 414 l. 16 d. at
the Denier-Chamber.

The Duties of the Officers of the Kitchen of the Mouth.
The Ushers of the Mouth receive the Orders from the Superior Officers, and
give them to the other Officers. They receive the Meat, and give an account of
what is served up: They carry the King his Broth, and his Breakfast every
Morning. The Master Cooks after them, is next in place, and has Charge of the
Entries, or first Dishes. The Hastners, or Rosting-Cooks, tend the Rost-meat.
The Potagers, or Boiling-Cooks, the Broths; the Porters are those that bring
the Wood and Water; they likewise bring and keep clean the ordinary
Kitchin-Furniture. The Groom of the Cupboard carries with him provision for one
Meal, while the King is traveling in the Country; The Groom of the Chase, in
Ordinary, carries with him, on a Horse, cold Meats for the King, and serves
them himself to his Majesty. The Advertisers follow the King along the
Countries, to give notice when he is to be at any place, and at what hour he
intends to Dine or Sup.

The Menu, or particulars of what is delivered to the Groom of the Chase when
he waits, are four dozen of Loaves, at 4 l. 8 d. a quarter of Veal, of 16 l. at
4 l. and a quarter of Mutton of 12 l. at 3 l. both sliced in Bread; 7 pounds of
Salt Beef, and a Gammon of Bacon sliced in Bread; a quarter of Veal whole of 16
l. and a quarter of Mutton of 12 pound likewise whole at 3 l. a hot Turky-Pie,
containing two Turkies, at 6 l. 15 d. a Partridge-Pie of three Partridges, 6 l.
15 d. eight larded Fowls in Bread 14 l.

On Fish-Dayes, four dozen of Bread, at 4 l. 8 d. and 300 hard Eggs, at 12 l.

Thus much for the Officers that are concerned about preparing the Kings own
Meat and Drink, we shall place next those that belong to his Family, with the
other Officers that are dependances on both. Which are called the common
Officers, because they furnish and serve the whole Household.

Of the rest of the seven Offices, called the Common-Offices, or Offices of the
whole Household. And first,
3. Of the Common-Pantry.
In the, Common-Pantry, which is the third of the seven, there are thirteen
Chief-Pantlers, who had formerly 400 l. a piece years, but at present, but 300
l.

Twelve Aids or Helpers, who formerly had 300 l. but now but 225 l.

Six Grooms, who have each 600 l.

Two Landrers, who have each 200 l. Wages at the Treasurers of the Households,
and 576 l. 9 d. at the Denier-Chamber.

The three Servants of the Pantry, of ancient establishment, whereof one is
called the Deliverer, have allowed them at the Denier-Chamber for furnishing
the Tables, 720, reckoning therein 60 l. of augmentation, for the New Table of
the Great Master, and the Chamberlains Table.

4. In the Common Buttry.
There are twenty Chief-Butlers, who formerly had 400 l. and now have but 300
l. a piece yearly allowance.

Twelve Aids, or Helpers, who formerly had 300 l. but now but 225 l. yearly
Wages.

One Master of the Cellars, who has 400 l. Wages and his Diet at Court all the
year.

Four Grooms of the Bottles, serving by turns, two each half year, at 600 l.
Wages.

Two Grooms of the Vessels, who have now 600 l. and formerly 660 l. Wages.

In the Account-Book, or Establishment of the Chamber of Deniers, the Grooms of
the Common Buttry have 125 l. allowance every quarter for what they furnished
in ordinary.

The Servants of the Common Buttry, have 64 l. 10 pence a quarter for what they
ordinarily furnish, and the Servant Deliverer of the Common-Buttry, has over
and above 72 l.

4. In the Common Kitchen, otherwise called, The Great-Common Kitchen.
There are twelve Ushers who had 400 l. but now but 300 l. Wages.

Eight Master-Cooks, at the same Wages.

Twelve Hastners, or Rosting-Cooks, at the same allowance, paid them by the
Treasurers of the Household, and 8 l. a piece besides, at the Chamber of Deniers.

Eight Boiling-Cooks, or Pottagers, at the same allowance, besides 12 l. a
piece at the Chamber of Deniers.

Twelve Children of the Kitchen, or Under-Cooks, at the same allowance as the
Boiling-Cooks.

Four Pastry-Cooks at 300 l. a piece.

Two Herbmen, who have 200 l. a piece paid as Wages by the Treasurers of the
Household, and 300 l. more augmentation Money at the Chamber of Deniers, because
of their ordinary Groom.

Two Keepers of the Vessels, at 600 l.

Eight other Ushers of the Common-Kitchin, who had formerly 300 l. but now but
225 l. Wages.

Three Grooms of the Cupboard, serving each four Months a piece, at 600 l.

Four Grooms of the Spits, at 600 l.

Two Falotiers, or Faggot-Porters, that serve six Months a piece. They have 75
l. for every Burden, paid by the Treasurers of the Household, and 1098 l. at the
Chamber of Deniers, besides 732 l. more at the Dauphins.

Three Landrers, which are the same that serve the Kitchen of the Mouth, at 300
l.

One Brasier, who is allowed at the Chamber of Deniers, for furnishing and
keeping in order, the necessary Vessels of that kind, belonging to the service
of the Goblet; the new Table of the Great Master, and that of the Great
Chamberlain, and of the Great and Little Common-Kitchins, 1720 l. yearly, which
is 430 l. a quarter.

The four Turn-Spits of the Great-Common Kitchins, have at the Chamber of
Deniers, 30 l. a piece for a Suit of Clothes.

6. In the Common-Fruitry there are
One Chief-Fruiterer in Ordinary, at 1200 l.

Twelve other Chief Fruiterers, at 400 l. each.

Four Grooms, at 600 l.

7. In the Fuel, or Wood-Office, that furnishes Wood, and other Fuel in the
Kings Household.
Are twenty chief Masters of the Fuel-Office, who had formerly 400 l. and have
now but 300 l. Wages at the Kings, and 75 l. at the Dauphins.

Fifteen Aids, or Helpers, who had formerly 300 l. have now but 225 l. at the
Kings, and 50 l. at the Dauphins.

The Duty of the Fuel-Officers, is to furnish all the Wood that is burnt in the
Kings House, as well in his Majesty's own Chamber, Antichamber, and Closet, as
in his Kitchen, and in all the other Offices, and all the Halls, not excepting
the Halls of the Guards, and in both the French, and Suisse Guard-Chambers.
They likewise furnish what Coal and Straw is necessary: They have the
privilege of going first in to the King; for they go in and light a Fire in
the Kings Chamber, a little before his Majesty is waked, so that by that means
they have the first Entry, as they call it, to his Person; They are likewise to
take care the whole day of all the Fires made in the Kings Apartment, and stay
till he goes to Bed. When the King is traveling, they make the second Trusse
of his Bed, that is, they sold the second and third Quilt of the Kings Bed,
after the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber have folded the first, and the Sheets;
It Is their right to put the Dauphin to Table, he having no Table-Carrier.

When the King, or the Dauphin have occasion to wash, either their Feet, or
their whole Bodies in a Bath, the Fuel-Officers are to heat and pour in the
Water, and while the King or Dauphin are in the Bath, when any Perfumes are to
be burnt, one of the said Officers is to hold the hot Pan on which the Perfumes
are cast. When any Officer of the Kings Household is Arrested, or made Prisoner,
the Fuel-Officers are charged with the Prisoner, and the Fuel-Office is made
their Prison. It Is at this Office, that the Kings Visits the Poor on
Maundy-Thursday, By his Chief Physician, and others, and the Chyrurgion of the
Household, wipes their Feet.

If the King happen to eat with another King, or Queen, the King of France, as
performing the Honors due from a Person in his own House, to a Stranger his
equal, will yield to that Crowned Head, his Cadenat, that is, his own Plate and
Service, (which is the greatest piece of honor of the Table) together with his
Captain of the Guards, and his Chair; and then it would be the Fuel-Officers
Duty, to put the King of France to Table, that is to say, to present his Most
Christian Majesty a Chair, and take it away again, when he rises from Table, as
it was determined at Fountainbleau, at the Marriage of the Lady Marie-Lewise of
Orleans to the King of Spain, who in Quality of Queen of Spain, eat several
days with the King.

Besides these, there is at the Fuel-Office, one Deliverer of the Wood, one
Porter that serves the Chamber with Wood, and three Servants of the Office.

The Kings Table-Carriers, and those of the Household, eat at the Fuel-Office.

The Kings Table-Carrier likewise gives the King his Chair when he Dines in
Public.

The two Table-Carriers of the Household, have 200 l. Wages paid by the
Treasurers of the Household, and 600 l. more, each at the Chamber of Deniers,
for their ordinary Furnitures.

There is likewise one Joyner in Ordinary, who among other things, furnishes
Box-Branches on Palm Sunday, at the Kings Chapel.

Two Chair-men for business.

In all these Offices, there are some Servants.

All the Officers of the seven Offices, have always privilege to wear a Sword
in the Louvre, or elsewhere, and to wait with their Swords by their sides, if
they please.

The five Offices of the Household are composed, as you see, of Chiefs, Aids and
Grooms, and are regulated after the same manner as those immediately belonging
to the King.

Besides the seven Offices, there is a new Kitchen, which was established in
the Month of September 1664. called the Little-Common Kitchen, to serve the
Great Masters, and Great Chamberlains new Table. Of which, we shall now name
the Officers.

Other Officers belonging to the seven Offices.
There are still some others that may be reckoned as belonging to, or dependant
on the seven Offices, as the Deliverer out of the Ice, who has his Place by
Commission, and receives at the Chamber of Deniers, for Wages, Diet, and all
together, half a Crown a day, paid by way of Extraordinary. He distributes Ice,
not only for the Kings Table, but for all the Tables of the Household, and to
the Princes and great Lords of the Court.

There are four Barber-Chyrurgions belonging to the Household, that are Sworn by
the Chief Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, who have 200 l. a piece yearly Wages on
the Book of the smaller Accounts, and 150 l. for dressing on occasion, the
Pages of the said Chamber.

They shave the poor Men on Maundy-Thursday, and wash their Feet.

They Accompany the Chief Physician, when he visits the said poor Men.

After these we may place the Purveyors, and the Merchants that furnish
necessaries, which are the Bakers, the Vintners, the Linen-Drapers, and others,
who keep to the bargain they have made with the Kings Officers, so long as they
please, and so long as no body offers to do it cheaper; but if they furnish any
thing that is not so good as it should be, the Masters, and Comptrollers of the
Household, and other Head-Officers may buy more elsewhere, and bate, or cause it
to be bated in the said Merchants Bills.

The Baker has 150 l. at the Chamber of Deniers for Covertures.

There are three Purveyors, who have 200 l. likewise, at the Chamber of
Deniers, for Covertures.

A Customary allowance called a Parists, for what he ordinarily furnishes, is
paid to the Baker, Vintner, and Purveyor, when they are obliged to go further
from Paris, than the distance specified in their Bargains.

The Vintner is likewise allowed for following the King or Dauphin out of the
Kingdom, when they stir out of it, according to what is agreed on in the
Contract made with them.

I shall add this one Remark, that when the Court is upon the march, there is
allowed for the House where the Goblet is lodged, 3 l. or a Crown, for the
Kitchen of the Mouth 5 l. for the two Common-Kitchins, both Great and Little, 3
l. each, for the Pastry-Cooks lodging 20 pence, and the like price for the
Housing taken up by the Common-Pantry, Buttry, and Pastry; as likewise by the
Fruitry, and Fuel-Office, which is called paying the De Roy, or allowance due
from the King, for House-room for his Offices.

The Officers of later Creation, for the service of the Great Masters, and
Great Chamberlains Table, are,
A Master of the Household Waiting at the Great Masters new Table, who has 1000
l. yearly.

Another Master of the Household Waiting at the Great Chamberlains new Table, at
600 l.

This latter has an Ordinary of Bread and Wine, allowed him in the
Establishment of the Household, and he takes his Ordinary of Meat upon what is
served off from this Table: He has inspection over the Officers of the
Little-Common Kitchen, and of the Fruitry, and over the Merchants that furnish
the necessaries, as far as concerns the service of the Great Chamberlains Table.

Four Ushers of the Little-Common Kitchen, serving each three Months by turns;
He that serves the first quarter, beginning from New-Years-Day, has 400 l. at
the Treasurers, and 100 l. at the Chamber of Deniers. He that serves the second
quarter, has 500 l. all at the Treasurers of the Household; He that serves the
third quarter, has likewise 500 l. at the same Treasurers; and he that serves
the last, has 400 l. at the said Treasurers, and 100 l. at the Chamber of
Deniers.

There are two Aids in Ordinary, at 400 l. Wages.

These Ushers and Aids, make ready the Meat for both the said new Tables.

Besides which there are,

One Porter belonging to the Little-Common Kitchen, who has for Cords, Pails
and Brooms, six pence a day.

One Servant of the Little-Common, who has 100 l. a year extraordinary Wages
allowed him, upon the last Bill of every quarter, because of his extraordinary
care and pains.

One Maker and Distiller of Waters for the Great Masters new Table, he has at
the Chamber of Deniers, for the Waters he ordinarily furnishes in the quarter
beginning in January, 150 l. and as much for the quarter ending in December.
But for each of the other Summer Quarters, he has 300 l. which makes in all 900
l. yearly.

One Groom of the same new Table, who has for furnishing Glasses, Caraffs, and
other things, 200 l.

One Keeper of the Vessels for the Great Masters Table, at 150 l.

One Butler belonging to the Great Chamberlain, at 600 l.

One Maker and Distiller of Waters, belonging to the same, at 900 l. as has he
that serves the Great Master.

One Groom of the Great Chamberlains Table, who has 200 l. for Glasses,
Caraffs, etc.

One Keeper of the Vessels, at 150 l.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Great Chamberlain, and all Officers under his dependence.

IF the honor of Officer, may be rated from the frequency, and nearness of
their approaches to the Kings Person, then certainly the Great Chamberlain must
needs have the greatest share therein of any, since it is at all times in his
power, to be near his Majesty, and that he has a very considerable Rank in all
the most Magnificent Solemnities.

This Office is almost as ancient as the beginning of this Monarchy, and one
may judge of its greatness by the Nobility of the Persons that always have
enjoyed it. He had formerly a great Jurisdiction over the Mercers and other
Trades that deal in Clothing, and for that purpose, he substituted under him a
Surveyor of those Merchandises, who was commonly called the King of the
Mercers, that is to say, their Syndic, or Comptroller, who also Examined the
Weights and Measures of the said Merchants: His Court of Justice was held at
the Marble Table in the Palais, or Palace at Paris, by a Mayor-Judge,
Commissionated by the Great Chamberlain, and some other Officers.

The Great Chamberlain was formerly of the Great Officers that Signed all
Charters, and Letters of Consequence, and has still a Right to sit in Judgment
with the King at the Trial of any Peers.

He had formerly the Keeping of the Kings Coffers and Treasury in his Chamber,
and had the management of the Exchequer, as he has to this day, in several
places, where the Camerlingue, or Chamberlain (for in different places, he is
differently styled) is likewise Treasurer, and receives all the Revenues; and
it belonged to him, or his Under-Treasurers, to carry Money about them for the
Kings Liberalities, and other necessary Expenses: He used to have for his Fee
the tenth part of what came into the Kings Coffers, and was wont to deal out
the Annual Gratuities to the Soldiers, and provide Presents for all
Ambassadors.

He has been indifferently styled, Cubicularius, Camerarius, or Cambellanus,
that is, Bedchamber Man, Chamber-man, or Chamberlain; But the Office of
Chamberlain, and Chamber-man, were afterward made distinct Offices, as, among
other proofs, will appear by an ancient duty upon Merchants, who paid 16 pence,
whereof ten pence went to the Chamberlain, and the other six to the
Chamber-Man; But the Office of Chamber-Man was suppressed in the Person of
Charles Duke of Orleans, Anno 1544. or to speak more properly, we may say, that
it assumed under Francis the First, the present Title it is now known under, of
Chief Gentleman of the Bedchamber.

The present Great Chamberlain is the Duke of Bouillon, who has yearly 3600 l.
under the name of Wages, and a Pension of 20000 l.

When the King sits on his Bed of Justice, or in a general Assembly of the
Estates, the Great Chamberlain Function and Privileges.
sits at his Feet, upon a Violet-Coloured Velvet Cushion, Embroidered with
Flower deluces of Gold. He is present at all Audiences of Ambassadors, where
takes his Place behind his Majesty's Chair of State, between the Chief
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, who is on his right, and the Great Master of the
Wardrobe, whose Place is on his left.

Anciently, in the Queens absence, he was wont to lie in the Kings Bedchamber.

Upon the Coronation-Day, he takes the Royal Buskins from the Abbot of St.
Denis, and puts them on the Kings Legs, and then invests him with the Dalmatick
Robe of Azure Blue, and with the Mantle Royal.

As the Great Chamberlains have the honor to be nearest the sacred Persons of
their Kings while they are alive; so when nature has exacted from them her
Tribute, and they come to die, they with the Chief Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber, interre their Bodies.

The homage done to the King, by any Dukes or other Persons of higher Rank,
holding their Lands, or Seignieuries of his Majesty, was anciently performed in
the Bedchamber, whither being Conducted by the Great Chamberlain, Bare-headed,
and without Sword, Belt, or Spurs; and kneeling down, and putting their hands
between the Kings Hands, they promised him Fealty and Homage.

Of which Ceremony, we have a fair Example, in Froissard, in the 25th Chapter
of the First Volume of his History, namely, in the Homage done by Edward the
Third King of England, to Philip de Valois, to whom being brought in, and in
the posture as aforesaid, the Great Chamberlain-tendered these words: You
become the Liege-Man of the King, my Lord, that here is, (as Duke of Guienne,
and Peer of France) and you promise Fealty and Loyalty to him, to bear: Say,
Yes: And the King of England, as Duke of Guienne, answered, Yes, and the King
received him for his Liege-Man: Thus Froissard, who likewise tells us, that
this Homage had better have been let alone, it being so Stomached by that
Courageous King, that it caused those long and bloody Wars between the two
Nations, of which all Histories resound, and which are hardly yet well extinct,
but lie couched under Embers, till opportunity shall raise them into new Flames.

At present, when any Marshal of France, Governor of a Town, Place, or
Province, or any other, is to take the Oath of Fidelity to the King, the
Marshal, or such other Person gives his Hat, Gloves, and Sword, to the Usher of
the Bedchamber, and then advancing toward the King, who expects him in his
Chair of State, he kneels down upon a Cushion, presented him by one of the
Chief Valets de Chamber, and putting his Hands between his Majesty's, when, the
said Oath being read to him by the Secretary, under whose Division his Place
is, he gives his assent in the manner aforesaid; and then rising up, and making
Obeisance to his Majesty, goes back, and takes again of the Usher of the
Bedchamber the things he left with him, to whom, as well as to some other
Officers of the Bedchamber, he makes an honorable Present.

The Great Chamberlains had formerly a Table furnished out of the Kings own
Kitchen, but the late Duke of Chevreuse, Great Chamberlain, agreed with the
Masters of the Household, to have instead of it, that which is still kept by
them, under the Name of the Great Chamberlains Table.

He has a Super-intendence over all the Officers of the Kings Bedchamber, of
his Wardrobe, of his Closets and Antichamber, when the King Dresses himself,
he gives him his Shirt, which honor, he parts not with, to any, but to the
Sons of France, the Princes of the Blood, or Sons Legitimate of France. When
the King eats in his Bedchamber, it is his Duty to wait on him, and give him
his Napkin; and in short, he performs all the Honors and Chief Ceremonies of
the Bedchamber.

At all Solemnities, Balls, and other Assemblies, as likewise at Chapel, when
the King goes to hear a Sermon, one of the Yeomen of the Bedchamber brings
always a Chair out of the Kings Chamber for the Great Chamber, placing it
behind the Kings, and another, for the Chief Gentleman of the Bedchamber.

Of the four Chief-Gentlemen of the Bedchamber.
The Chief Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, which now are four, exercise as I have
said, by turns, under that new Title, the Office that was formerly performed by
the Camerier, or Chamber-Man.

There was at first but two of them, but the late King Lewis the XIII. made
them up four.

They serve By turns each one their Year.

The present Chief Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, are,

1. The Duke of Aumont. 2. The Duke of Gevres. 3. The Duke of Crequi. 4. The
Duke of St. Aignan.

They take the Oath of Fidelity to the King in Their Functions and Privileges.
Person, and he of them, that is in Waiting, Sweats all the other Officers of
the Bedchamber, that are admitted into his years Waiting. In the absence of
the Great Chamberlain they supply his Place in all things. They give Order to
the Usher, what Persons he is to let in, and deliver Certificates of their
Service, to all the Officers of the Bedchamber: They perform likewise many
other Duties, at the Kings rising, going to Bed, and Dressing. He that is in
Waiting, lodges in the Louvre: The King does them the Honor to give them a
Place in his own Coach.

They used formerly to lie in the Kings Bedchamber, as appears by the 9th and
82d Articles of the Ordinance of Charles the Seventh, that are addressed thus,
To the Chamberlains lying in our Bedchamber, etc.

They bespeak all the first Mourning at Court, and all Cloths and Habits used
in Masks, Balls, and Plays, and other Divertisements for his Majesty.

They have the sole ordering of all the Expenses allotted in the
Establishments, or Account-Books of the Argenterie, or Privy-Purse, for the
Kings Person or otherwise; as likewise of those allowed in the Establishments
for the Kings Pocket Expenses, and affairs of his Bedchamber: Under them, are
the Intendants, Comptrollers, and the Treasurers General of the Kings
Privy-Purse, and of the Pocket Expenses, and the rest of the Officers of the
Bedchamber.

It is to be noted, That there are many, that out of courtesy are styled
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, that have neither Place, nor Salary, as such; and
many Gentlemen in Ordinary of the Kings Household, of which we shall speak in
their proper place.

Next these, are the Pages of the Bedchamber, who are in number twenty four,
and serve constantly all the year long, each Chief Gentleman being allowed six
of them, though they may, if they please, take a greater number; over whom, the
King, for better regulation, maintains Governors, and Under-Governours, and
Masters of all sorts, to teach them all Exercises requisite for Persons of
Quality.

These Pages go every Morning and Evening, with the other Officers of the
Bedchamber, into the Kings said Chamber, to give his Majesty his Slippers; and
on Evenings, and Mornings too, (when it is dark) they carry white Wax-Flambo's
before his Majesty, when he walks on Foot out of his Antichamber, or when he
crosses, either on Foot, or in a Sedan, the Courts of any of his Palaces; and
in Summer they carry over him, an Vmbrello.

In the Armies, where the King is present, they serve as Aids de Camp, under
the Kings own Aids de Camp, as likewise do the Pages of the Kings Great and
Lesser Stables.

Of other Inferior Officers of the Bedchamber.
There are four Officers that are called the Ordinary, or Chief Valets de
Chamber, which last Title, though omitted in their Patents, was since confirmed
to them by a Brief from his Majesty. Their places are worth counting all
things, about 2000. Crowns a Year. They serve indifferently, as they can agree,
one in the place of another, and have all things common among them, though the
Eldest usually chooses his Quarter. They perform several honorable Duties in
the Chamber, as keeping the Door of the Council, and giving the accustomed
Orders to the Ushers, in the absence of the Chief Gentlemen, etc. They lie at
the Kings Beds Feet, and keep the Keys of his Trunks; They are allowed at
present, in Money for their Table 1750 l. each.

Under these, there are thirty two other Valets de Chamber, that serve
quarterly, eight each Quarter, their Salary is 660 l. yearly; they diet at the
Table, called the Valets de Chambres Table.

The quality of Esquires has been confirmed to them by several Orders, and
particularly by an Order of the Council of State of the 25th of April 1669. By
which the Sieur de la Faye, one of the Kings Valets de Chamber, was maintained
in the said Quality of Esquire. They perform several Functions about the King,
when he is Dressing, or Undressing; as, giving him his Chair, holding his
Morning-Gown, and putting it on his Shoulders, presenting the Looking-Glass,
etc. They make the Kings Bed, the Upholsters standing at the Beds-Feet to help
them. The Valet de Chamber, that is in Waiting, is to keep all day within the
Rails of the Alcove, to watch the Kings Bed. They are to see the Officer of the
Goblet taste the Wine and Bread that he brings up to the Kings Chamber, before
it is presented to his Majesty: When the Court is on the march in the Country,
one of the Valets de Chamber, goes before, to conduct the Kings Bed; and is
then allowed a Crown a Day Extraordinary. When the King quits only for a few
days, any of his Royal Palaces, the Valet de Chamber that stays there, to keep
the Kings Bed, is allowed a Crown a Day for his Diet.

The three Valets de Chamber, that wait on the Dauphin, have each of them
likewise, a Crown a Day for their Diet.

The last year the King suppressed all the Supernumerary Valets de Chamber, that
waited but every other year.

The Vshers.
There are sixteen Ushers of the Chamber, that serve Quaterly, four each
quarter. They have 660 l. Salary, and 300 l. gratuity. In their Patents they
are written Esquires. As soon as the King is out of his Bed, and has got on his
Morning-Gown, and is set down in his Chair, the Ushers in Waiting come into his
Chamber, and one of them taking immediately possession of the Door, takes
notice what persons of Quality present themselves to come in, which having
observed, as soon as the King has changed his Shirt, he lets in the Nobility
and the Officers, in order, as he sees them more or less qualified. If any
speak too loud in the Chamber, the Usher Commands Silence. They carry Flambo's
overlaid with Vermilion gilt, before his Majesty, when he goes out or in any
where, or from Chamber to Chamber, or when he goes up or down Stairs, in any of
the Apartments of the Louvre, but when he goes any further into the Courts,
they quit him at the Door, and leave only the Pages to light him, to whom it
only belongs.

The Ushers have the Privilege, to wait with their Swords by their sides, and
their Cloaks on their Shoulders.

Upon the Annual Festivals, and on all Days of Solemnity, as at Te Deums, on
the Days of the Kings Majority, Coronation, or Marriage, when he touches for
the Evil, when he follows the Processions, when he fits on his Bed of Justice
in Parliament, or at the Creation of the Knights of his Orders, and at all the
Kings first Entries into any Towns, two of these Ushers carry before his
Majesty two silver guilt Maces, letting the tops of the said Maces, lean gently
on their Shoulders; and every time they carry these Maces, there is due to them
a Fee of 150 l. which is punctually paid them, by express Order, at the
Treasure-Royal: But when the King goes to Parliament, besides the 150 l. they
have out of the Treasure Royal, the Chief President Orders a like sum to be
paid them out of the Fines. In like manner, at the Kings first Entry into any
Cities, there is due to them from the Officers of the said Town, a Mark of
Gold, being the value of 400 l. besides their said constant Fee of 150 l. out
of the Treasure Royal.

These two Maces are carried every where after the King in the Chests of the
Wardrobe. At Coronations, and Creations of Knights, the two Ushers that bear
the Maces, are habited in white Satin Doublets, with Sleeves slashed in
several rows, and their Shifts swelling out of the said slashes, with
Trunk-Breeches, and Cloaks of the same, with silk Pearl-Colour'd Stockings,
Shoes covered with white Satin, and white Velvet, or Satin Caps, or Bonnets.
They have their share in the Fees and Presents given by Governors and
Lieutenants, of Towns or Provinces, Great Officers of the Crown, and those of
the Kings Household, the Chief Presidents of Parliaments, the Eschevins, or
Sheriffs of Paris, or others, when at their several admissions, they take the
Oath of Fidelity to his Majesty.

It Is the Ushers Duty, to make them that are in the Chamber get out of the way,
whether it be to keep them from standing in his Majesty's light, when he is
Dressing, or Undressing him, or to clear his passage when he goes from his
Chair to his Praying-Desk, from that to his Closet, or when he goes from one
side of his Chamber to the other.

No Body ought to have his Hat on in the Kings Bedchamber, though it be at
certain hours when there is but two or three Officers there. And the Ushers are
to see too, that no Body Combs themselves there, or sit down upon the Seats,
the Table, or the Rails of the Alcove. They have their Ordinary at the old
Table of the Great Master, which is now that of the Masters of the Household,
and those four that are in Waiting, have every day to their Breakfast, a Bottle
of Wine, and a Loaf; They are allowed every day out of the Eruitry, a Flambo of
white Wax of half a pound weight.

On Council-Days, if the Council be held in the Bedchamber, they go from his
Majesty, to give notice to the Secretaries of State, and in the absence of the
chief Valets de Chambres, they keep the Doors of the Council Chamger. They have
the Honor to carry in their Arms the Children of France, during their Infancy.

The two Ushers of the Chamber, that wait at the Dauphins, have each of them a
Crown a day for their Diet; one of the four Ushers that are in Waiting at the
Kings, goes every day and waits on the Duke of Burgundy, and he that stays with
that Prince, in the Kings absence, has a Crown a Day for his Diet: and the
Officers of the Kings Counting House, or Green-Cloth, diminish so much as his
Ordinary comes to, at the Table, he should otherwise eat it, and discount it to
his Majesty's profit. Another Usher likewise appointed to wait on the Duke of
Anjou, has the like allowance, which will be the rule for all the Children the
Dauphin shall have.

When the Usher asks any one, that would come in, his Name, whoever he be, he
ought not to take it ill, because he is obliged by his Office, to know who he
lets in.

It is to be observed, that any person that would enter into the Bedchamber,
the Antichamber, and the Closets, when the Doors are shut, must scratch gently
at the Door, and not knock hard, and when he would go out, he is not to open
the Door himself, but to call to the Usher to open it for him.

When the King, any Queens, Children of France, and their Wives, or any
Ambassadors, that go to, or come from Audience, come in or go out of the
Chamber, the Usher presently opens to them both the Leaves of the Door, the
same is done by the Usher of the Antichamber, and by the Sentinel at the Door
of the Guard-Chamber.

There are besides, two Ushers of the Closet, that wait six Months each, who
have 660 l. Salary, and a gratuity of 600 l. at the Treasure Royal. They eat at
the Masters of the Households Table.

If on a Council-Day, the Council be held in any of the Closets, then it is the
Usher of the Closets Duty, to give notice of it from the King, to the
Secretaries of State.

There two Ushers of the Antichamber, who have a yearly Salary of 500 l. each.
They eat at the Valets de Chambres Table, and are allowed Bread and Wine too
for their Breakfast.

At New-years-tide, the Queen, when there is one, gives for a New Years Gift, 4
l to the Ushers, a 100 l. at each Station, that is to say 100 l. among the
Ushers of the Antichamber, as much to him that keeps the Closet, and as much
among those of the Bedchamber. By which means, he that keeps the Cabinet that
day, and that is in waiting the first half year beginning in January, has as
much alone, as the two Ushers of the Antichamber, and the four Ushers of the
Bedchamber. And formerly, when the two Ushers of the Antichamber waited by
turns, each their half year; he whose turn it was to wait at New-years-tide,
had the whole 100 l. to himself, but since they have been both made ordinary,
and serve all the year round, the said sum is usually parted among them; which
Order was made about twenty years ago.

The Porte-Manteau' s, or Cloak-Carriers.
Are twelve in number, and serve quarterly, three each quarter, and have yearly
660 l. Wages, upon the Establishment, and 120 l. gratuity at the Treasure
Royal: They are Esquires by their Places.

Over these there is one Porte-Manteau, or Cloak-Carrier in Ordinary, who has a
Salary of 1320 l. and his Diet at Court at the Kings Serdeau's, or
Water-Servers Table.

The Cloak-Carriers take the Oath of Fidelity before the Chief Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, then in Waiting; and take from him, Certificates of their Service.
They eat at the Valets de Chambre's Table. They are to be present every
Morning, at the Kings rising, when the King is on a Journey, or going any where
in the Country, when he goes a Hunting, a Walking, or to see any Musters; or
when in ill weather his Majesty passes through any open place a Foot, or a
Horseback, and in any other encounters where the Cloak-Carrier foresees his
Majesty may have occasion for his Cloak; Nay, if his Majesty does but step out
of his Apartments into the open Air, though it be but to cross the Courts of
his Palace, or walk in the Garden, the Cloak-Carrier runs immediately to the
Wardrobe, and fetches his Majesty's Cloak, and keeps close by him with it, to
be ready to give it him whenever he calls for it. At certain Ceremonies, where
his Majesty usually has a Cloak of State, as at a Ball, etc. Every time his
Majesty has a mind to put it off, or on, it is the Cloak-Carriers Office to do
it for him.

Besides the Cloak, these Cloak-Carriers are obliged to take and keep in
Custody all other Clothes, or other loose things the Kings puts off only for
the present, with intention to use them again the same day, as his Sword, his
Gloves, his Hat, his Muff, his Cane, etc. and to be always nigh at hand to give
him them; So that by this means, they have Entry into almost all places where
the King goes: But if the King puts off any of these things with intent to use
them no more that day, then the Officers of the Wardrobe take charge of them,
and not the Cloak-Carriers: And as for his Sword, there is something more of
Ceremony observed in keeping, or holding of that; for sometimes it belongs to
the Cloak-Carriers, and sometimes to the Gentlemen of the Querry to do it: for
when his Majesty wears Spurs, it belongs to the Gentleman of the Querry then in
Waiting to carry his Majesty's Sword, but when the King goes out of his House
in Shoes only, the Cloak-Carrier carries his Sword as far as the steps of the
outward Door, and further if the King walks on Foot, or goes out in a Coach
with but two Horses; but if he mounts on Horseback, or goes out in a Coach and
six Horses, then whether the King wears Spurs or no, the Cloak-Carrier delivers
the Sword into the hands of the Gentleman of the Querry, as soon as he comes to
the said steps, who when they come back, if the King wear no Spurs, returns the
Sword again to the Cloak Carrier, as soon as his Majesty lights from his Horse,
or out of his Coach; but if he wear Spurs, then the Gentleman of the Querry
parts not with the Sword till the Kings Spurs be put off.

The Cloak-Carriers take Horse in the Court of the Louvre, when the King goes
out, and follow him back again into the Louvre in the same manner, when he
returns.

When the King plays at Tennis, they present the Balls to the King, and keep
account of them; and they reckon with the Master of the Tennis-Court, for the
Expenses made during the time his Majesty was playing, because the King always
pays them, whether he win or lose.

The Cloak-Carrier that waits on the Dauphin, is allowed a Crown a Day for his
Diet.

The Arquebuse, or Fire-arms-Carriers.
Are two in number, and wait by turns, each his half year. They have each of
them 1100 l. paid them by the Treasurer of the Privy-Purse, or Pocket-Expences,
as well for Wages, as for Powder, Shot, etc. for Hunting, besides a gratuity of
300 l. at the Treasure Royal. All the Kings old Hunting Arms are their Fees, as
Fowling-Pieces, Pistols, etc. They eat at the Valets de Chambre's Table.

They take Horse in the Louvre, and follow the King back again thither, in the
same manner, as likewise, at present, do several other Officers.

There is likewise one * Mall-Carrier in Ordinary, who is likewise Valet de
Chamber to the King, who A Stick used in the Pallmall.
is allowed yearly 400 l. Salary, paid out of the Privy-Purse 240 l. gratuity,
at the Treasure Royal, and 549 l. for his Diet, at the Denier-Chamber. When the
King goes to play at the Pall Mall, he goes to the Chests of the Wardrobe, and
takes out for him, a Mall, some Bowls, and other Implements used in that sport.

Of other Officers, who have, or take at least, the Title of Valets de Chamber,
and Diet at their Table.
There are eight Barbers qualified Valets de Chamber, who jointly Exercise the
same Office that was formerly enjoyed but by one, under the Title of
Chief-Barber, which Title they all eight retain, and part the Wages and
Gratuities of the said Office among them, by virtue of a Brief granted them in
the year 1669.

Besides which, they have 700 l. Wages, paid by the Treasurers of the Household,
150 l. gratuity at the Treasure Royal, and 100 l. for furnishing Combs and
Sweet Powder. At the Dauphins, they have half as much Wages as they have at the
Kings, and 150 l. Gratuity, all at the Treasure Royal. Besides a Crown a Day
for their Diet.

They have the Privilege, to keep by themselves, or their Deputies, open Shop
in any Town of the Kingdom they will choose, not excepting Paris it self, in the
same manner as any Master Chyrurgion of Paris may do. They commonly let out
this their Privilege at Paris, for 100 Crowns a year: they also let out apart
the Privilege of Chief Barber at Paris, at 37 l. 10 d. each place.

Each of these Barbers are allowed to keep, if they please, two Prentices or
Journey-men in their Shops, that understand Chyrurgery; but the Kings
Chyrurgeons can keep none in their Shops that meddle with the Barbers or
Perriwig-Makers Trade, because nothing should divert from arriving to
perfection in Chyrurgery, which is supposed to require a Man's whole application.

Over these, there are two Barbers in Ordinary, who have a Salary of 800 l. a
year each.

The Duty of all these is, to Comb the Kings Head, Morning and Evening, to
Shave him, and to rub and dry him when he comes out of the Bath or Stove, and
when he has been playing at Tennis.

There is one Operatour for Teeth, who has in all, for Wages, Diet, and
Gratuity, 11295 l. yearly.

He furnishes Roots and Oprate.

There are three Bone-Setters that serve by turns, four Months a piece, they
have each a Salary of 600 l.

And one Operatour for the Stone, who has a like Salary:

These eat at the Valets de Chambre's Table.

There are likewise eight Upholsters, that serve quarterly, and in their
Certificates of Service, are called Valets de Chamber.

Their Salary yearly is 300 l. and 37 l. 10 d. Gratuity.

Their Office is every day to help the Valets de Chamber to make the Kings Bed.

They are obliged to take charge of the Kings Household Stuff, in the time of
their Waiting, when his Majesty is abroad in the Country, or in the Field, and
to put up or take down his Furniture.

When the Court is on the march into the Country, or the Field, there always
goes to a first and second Chamber, that is, Furniture of all forts for two
Chambers, because one would not be enough: The first of these Chambers, or the
first Suit of Furniture, is sent away always the Night before the King begins
his Journey, that so the King, when he comes next day to the place where he is
to lie at, may find his Chamber ready furnished, and the next day the Furniture
for the second Chamber keeps on its march outright to the second Stage of the
Journey, and so along to the end of the Journey, and back again; and of the two
Upholsters that are then in Waiting, one conducts the first Chamber, and the
other the second.

He that waits at the Dauphins, is allowed forty pence, or ten Groats a day for
his Diet.

There are likewise four Clocks, or Watchmakers, that in their Patents are
styled Valets de Chamber, and eat at their Table: their Salary is 200 l. a
piece.

Of the Yeomen of the Chamber.
There are six Yeomen in Ordinary, of the Chamber, they have, under the notion
of Wages, together with other allowances, 658 l. yearly.

They wait always in the Chamber, to be ready to receive the Orders of their
Superiors, or in their absence, from the King himself. They take care of the
Wax-Lights in the Kings Chamber, and in his other Apartments, and what is left
of them is their Fees every where but at Versailles. They open the Bedchamber
Door every Morning, before the Ushers come.

They have their share in all Gratuities given by Governors and Lieutenants of
Provinces, etc. when they take the Oath of Fidelity to the King in his
Bedchamber as is aforesaid. They have a Table a part, and in the year 1675,
his Majesty by fresh Patents was pleased to confirm all former Grants made to
them: they, as other Officers of the Bedchamber, are Sworn by the
Chief-Gentlemen of the said Chamber. When the King, or any other persons of
Quality, play at any Game in the Kings Bedchamber, or any where else in his
Apartments, they have the profits of the Box, unless it be at Versailles.

They are to make ready several necessary things in the Chamber, as Tables,
Carpets, and Seats for the Councils that are held in the Kings Chamber, and for
the Council of Finances, or of the Treasury, which is likewise held in his
Majesty's Chamber; and they furnish Pen, Ink, Paper, and Sand, for which they
are allowed 200 Crowns; they lie always near the Kings Chamber, and just by his
Chests, or Trunks, they go and carry word to the Officers of the Kitchen, when
his Majesty has a mind to have any Broth, or to Breakfast; and to the Officers
of the Wardrobe to bring the Kings Clothes; and every Night, they light the
Lamp that is placed in a Corner of the Chamber, and burns all Night.

There likewise belong to the Bedchamber, two Chair-men for business, who have
600 l. Salary out of the Privy-Purse, and 200 l. Gratuity, at the Treasure
Royal.

The Table-Carrier likewise carries a Chair of State out of the Bedchamber,
for the King, when he goes to High-Mass, Tenebras, or elsewhere.

There is one Rubber in Ordinary of the Kings Chamber and Closets, who enjoys
his place by Commission. Who has 540 l. yearly, paid him by the Chief Valets de
Chamber.

The Porters of the Bedchamber,
Are nine, who carry and remove on all occasions, the Kings Beds, and other
Furniture of his Chamber and Wardrobe. They serve quarterly, three the first
quarter, beginning at New-Years-Tide, and two every of the other quarters.
Their yearly allowance, counting all things, amounts to 340 l. a year. They
have some Servants under them. Besides, there is a Captain of the Mules of the
Chamber, who has several Servants under him, that Conduct and Load and Unload
the Chests of the Kings Chamber, and Wardrobe.

Other Officers assuming also the Title of Valets de Chamber,
Are, the Painters, Shoomakers, Joyners, Glasiers, Lock-smiths, Carvers, and
other like Tradesmen, and Artists, as likewise others belonging to the
Wardrobe, etc.

Of the Wardrobe, or the manner of the Kings Dressing and Undressing.
There is at present but one Great Master of the Wardrobe. He has likewise the
Honor to have place in his Majesty's Coach. He has by way of Salary, together
with other allowances, 19600 l. yearly.

He has the Charge of the Kings Cloths, Linen, and Shoes and Stockings, and
what he leaves off he has for his Fees.

In the absence of the Princes, the Great Chamberlain, and the Chief Gentlemen
of the Bedchamber, he gives the King his Shirt, and in the Morning, when his
Majesty Dresses himself, he puts on his Wast-Coat, his Blue-Ribban, and his
strait Coat, and presents him his Sword, and at Night when he is going to Bed,
he presents him his Night Wastcoat, Cap, and Handkercher, and asks him what
Cloths he pleases to wear the next day.

You are to take notice, That the Kings Handkercher is always presented him
upon a Vermilion guilt Salver, which is a kind of Plate-Stand.

Upon great Festival and Solemn Days, he fastens on his Cloak the Collers of
his Orders, after he is Dressed.

He has an Apartment in the Kings Lodgings.

What place he has at Audiences and other Solemnities, I have already told
under the Articles of the Great Chamberlain, and chief Gentlemen.

Next, are two Masters in Ordinary of the Wardrobe, that serve by turns, each
of them his year. Of their Salary and other allowances, I find no account.

They take the Oath of Fidelity to the King in Person. And in the absence of
the Great Master of the Wardrobe, and his Superiors, they give the King his
Shirt, and do other things that he should do. They are likewise present at
Audiences of Ambassadors, and mount upon the highest part of the Cloth of
State. He of them that is in waiting, has an Apartment in the Kings Lodgings.
In the Morning when the King rises, he presents him his Cravat, his Gloves, his
Cane and his Hat. The King himself empties the Pockets of the Suit he leaves
off, into those of the Suit he intends to put on, but the Master of the
Wardrobe is to hold those Pockets to him while he empties them. At Night, when
the King goes out of his Closet, the Master of the Wardrobe waits for him at
the Door, and takes his Gloves, his Cane, his Hat, his Belt and Sword.

When his Majesty goes to Bed, he first kneels down at his Praying-Desk, which
is by his Bedside, upon a Cushion laid for him by his Almoner, and when he has
said his Prayers, he comes back and sits down in his Chair, where the Master of
the Wardrobe, draws off his Strait-Coat, and Vest, and Blue-Ribban, as likewise
his Cravat.

There are four Chief Valets of the Wardrobe that wait quarterly; they present
his Majesty his Socks and Garters in the Morning, and at Night, tie the Ribbans
of his Shirt. Their Salary, and other allowances from the King, amount to 2935
l. yearly, and from the Dauphin to 862 l.

Sixteen other Valets of the Wardrobe, that are allowed by the King a Salary of
520 l. and their Diet at the Valets de Chambres Table; and at the Dauphins when
they wait there, a Gratuity of 260 l. and a Crown a day for their diet.

Over these there is one Valet of the Wardrobe in Ordinary, whose Salary is
1200 l.

The Valets of the Wardrobe bring the King his Cloths, and their particular
Office is, when the King rises, to give him his Breeches, his Stockings, and
his Boots when he puts on any: They always draw off the Shoe, Stocking, or Boot
from his Majesty's left Leg. Besides this, they give the great Master, or the
other Masters of the Wardrobe the Cloths they are to dress his Majesty with,
and present and put them on themselves in their absence, or in the absence of
the chief Valets of the Wardrobe, on all other occasions, when the King shifts
any of his Cloths in the day time, or when he plays at Tennis, or comes from
Hunting, the Valets of the Wardrobe perform the same Duties.

At Night when the King is going to Bed, and in the Morning, when he rises
before day, the Chief Valet de Chamber, gives one of the Lords then present,
that the King names to him, the Wax-Light to hold, whilst his Majesty is
Dressing or Undressing.

There is one Mail-Carrier, who has for Wages, Diet, and other allowances, 2405
l. yearly.

When the King is on the march, he is obliged to mount on Horseback with his
Mail covered with a Horse-Cloth Embroidred with his Majesty's Arms and Motto,
in gold. In this Mail, he carries a Suit of Cloths, Linen, Ribbans, a loose
Gown, and other things necessary to shift his Majesty. He is mounted at the
Kings Stables, and has fresh Horses provided for him at every Stage, where the
King takes any, that he may be able to follow him, and not be obliged to quit
him.

There are four Yeomen in Ordinary of the Wardrobe, they have care of all the
Kings Cloths and Linen: they have a yearly allowance of 80 Crowns paid them
quarterly at the Treasure Royal; and at the years end, the Great Master of the
Wardrobe gives them the greatest part of the Cloths his Majesty left off that
year. They also have the keeping of several wearing things set with precious
Stones, as of Swords garnished with Diamonds, Crosses of the Kings Orders
likewise set with Diamonds, and the like rich Cloths. They eat at the Valets de
Chambre's Table. All the whole Body of the Wardrobe, that is, all the Officers
of it, have the privilege of the first Entry, that is, they are of the number
of those, that first enter into the Kings Chamber, even before the King is out
of his Bed, or before he be come out of the Queens Chamber (when there is one)
that they may have in readiness his Majesty's Cloths.

The Tailors.
Are three in number, their yearly allowance, counting Wages, Gratuities, and
all things, is 1200 l.

They make all the Kings Cloths, and one of them is to be always at the Kings
rising, to be ready to do any thing belonging to his Function, if there be
need, and they always put on the Kings new Cloths the first time he wears them.

There is one Starcher of the Body, whose Salary is 600 l. and he has his Diet
at Court.

And two Landrers of the Body serving six Months each, whose Salary is 528 l.
15 d.

There are besides these, several other Officers for the Kings Cloths, as
Embroiderers, Furriers, Linnen-Drapers, and others, that furnish the Silver and
Platework: His Majesty by a Brief dated the 25th of July 1673. having given
leave to the Great Master of the Wardrobe, to entertain Tradesmen of all sorts,
that contribute to the furnishing of the Wardrobe, to enter them upon the Books
of the Establishment, and let them enjoy all the Privileges of Tablers in the
Kings Household; of which there are about 222 retained, all at the rate of 60 l.
yearly Salary.

The Intendants and Comptrollers General of the Chamber-Treasury, and
Privy-Purse.
They regulate all the Expenses of the Chamber and Wardrobe. There are two of
them.

Their Wages and Fees are fixed in the Establishments of the ordinary Expenses
of the Chamber-Treasury, besides which they are allowed 1200 l. yearly each for
their Diet, which is paid at the Chamber of Deniers.

They are called Intendants and Comptrollers of the Chamber-Treasury, and of
the Privy-Purse. They examine the particulars of all that is brought into, or
delivered out of the Chamber-Treasury, and the Privy-Purse, and all the
ordinary and extraordinary Expenses thereunto belonging, as well for the
person, as besides the Person of the King, and keep a Register of them, of
which they give an account, first before the Chief Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber, and afterward to the Chamber of Accounts, in the accustomed
manner, according to the Rolls, particular Accounts, and Acquittances
comptrolled. The expense for the Kings Person, comprehends all Cloths, Linen,
and Jewels, or other Ornaments for his Majesty's own Wearing. The expense,
besides his Person, comprehends all Furniture, and Silver, or Plate-work for
the Kings Apartments, and all Extraordinary Expenses made at Balls, Comedies,
Mascarades, Carouzels, Tournaments, and other Divertisements; as likewise at
Christenings, Consecrations, and Coronation of Kings and Queens, Marriages,
Funeral Pomps, Buryings, Services for them when dead, and Anniversaries.

They take the Oath of Fidelity before the Chancellor, and at the Chamber of
Accounts, where they are sworn likewise to return into the said Chamber, at the
end of every Year, their Comptrol of the Receipt and Expense, both Ordinary, and
Extraordinary, of the Chamber-Treasury and Privy-Purse.

Of the Officers of the Cabinets, or Closets; and first, of the Closet of
Dispatches.
In the Closet, or Cabinet of Business, and Dispatches, which by way of
Excellence, is simply called, the Cabinet: There are four Secretaries, which in
the Book of Establishment are styled, Secretaries of the Chamber, and Closet,
who have for their Salary, Diet, and all things, 9250 l. yearly.

They Style themselves Councillors in Ordinary to the King in his Councils.

They serve the King in all his private Dispatches.

The Couriers of the Closet are appointed by the Secretaries of State, and sent
about on several businesses and dispatches.

Of the Closet of Books.
The King has a Closet of Books, called otherwise, the Library of the Kings
Person, in the Palace of the Louvre at Paris, to which, by Letters Patents of
the Month of August in 1658. All Persons that print any Books by Privilege,
are bound to bring two Copies of the said Books: The Keeper of it has a Salary
of 1200 l.

He has likewise one Closet of Rarities, and a Library left him by his Uncle
Gaston, late Duke of Orleans, and another Library called the Kings Public
Library, which are both now kept by one Person, under the Title of Intendant,
and Keeper of the Kings Library, and of his Closet of Manuscripts, Medals, and
Rarities, both ancient and modern, who has a yearly Salary of 2400 l. and 1800
l. for his Diet.

All that print Books by Privilege, are likewise bound to bring two Copies
more of every the said Books to this Library.

There is likewise, one Master of the Library, styled otherwise the Great
Master of the Kings Libraries, who has a Salary of 1200 l.

After the Closets and Libraries of Books, it will not be amiss to place the
Lecturers, Interpreters and Historiographers kept by his Majesty, his
Governors that brought him up, and his Masters of Exercises.

There are two Lecturers of the Kings Chamber and Closet, who are allowed
yearly for their Salary and Diet 2600 l. each.

There are several Interpreters of Languages, and Historiographers, who have
each 500 l. yearly Stipend.

He who was Governor to this present King in his Minority, had a Salary of
48000 l. yearly; under whom there were two Under-Governours, whose Salary was
7500 l. each.

He had likewise several Masters for all sorts of Exercises, as for
Mathematics, Fencing, Writing, Designing, Dancing, Vaulting on Horseback,
playing on the Lute, Guitarre, etc.

There is one Master of the Tennis, who has a Salary of 1200 l. Next is,

The Closet of Arms.
The Keeper of which, is styled, the Guardian, and Artillery-Keeper in Ordinary
to the King, and has a Salary of 400 l. Then

The Closet of Antiquities.
Where there are a great many rare Marble Figures. The Keeper of which, has 300
l. Salary.

To this belong

One Chief Painter, the Famous Monsieur le Brun, Director, or Super-Intendant
of the Kings Closets and Pictures, and of the Manufactures at the Gobelins at
Paris, and Chancellor and Principal Rector of the Academy of Painting and
Sculpture; who has 1200 l. Salary, and 2000 l. for his Diet: And

One Painter in Watercolors, at 600 l. Salary.

There are still some other Companies reckoned as belonging to the Chamber; as
first those that have care of the

Greyhounds of the Chamber.
The Captain, or Sergeant of these, has for his Salary, and keeping the Dogs,
1548 l. paid by the Treasurer of the Privy-Purse.

There are three Yeomen Keepers of the Greyhounds, that have 120 l. Salary,
and 186 l. Bord-Wages. Next are

The Birds of the Chamber.
Consisting of two Flights, one for the Fields, and another for the Mag-Pie;
The places belonging to the keeping of which, have been Independent of the
Great Falkners Office, from the time of Henry the Great, and upwards.

To the first Flight, viz. For the Fields, belong one Chief, or Sergeant, who
is styled, Captain and Chief of the flight of the Kings Chamber, for the
Fields, and has a Salary of 750 l, and 323 l. for the keeping of six Birds.

One Master-Falconer, who has 300 l.

One Pricker, or Marker of the flight, at 250 l. Salary.

One Officer for the buying of Hawks, and their Furniture, at 490 l.

More, allowed for the Hens of the flight, 140 l.

One Groom-Keeper of the Spaniels of the Kings Chamber for the said Flight, who
has for his Salary, and for the maintenance of eighteen Dogs, and himself, 1900
l. Belonging to the

Flight of the Magpie.
There is likewise one Captain and Chief, at 500 l. Salary, besides an
allowance of 273 l. 15 d. yearly, for the feeding of five Hawks at 3 d. a day a
piece.

One Master-Falconer, at 300 l.

One Pricker, at 250 l.

Another Pricker, at 214 l.

One Falconer-Fowler, who has for his Salary, and for furnishing fresh Birds,
450 l. yearly. Besides these,

There was a new Flight of Birds set up in 1676, under the Title of the
Falconry in Ordinary, for all sorts of Birds to fly all the year, and at the
Army it self, for the maintenance of which, the Captain or Sergeant of them, is
allowed out of the Kings own Cash-Box, 16000 l. which is paid by the Chief
Valets de Chamber. There are likewise,

The little Dogs of the Kings Chamber.
Whose Keeper has 1446 l. Salary, and 200 l. for a Livery-Coat. He keeps the
Dogs that are given the King for Hunting, as Setting-Dogs, and Dogs for
Shooting, Flying, etc.

The Kings Pastry-Cook delivers out every day, seven Biskets for the Kings
little Dogs.

As for those, who in their Certificates of Service, are called the Trumpeters
and Drummers of the Chamber, because they are entered in the Books of the
Establishment of the great Stable, and are sworn by the Great Master of the
Horse; I shall rather speak of them, when I come to treat of the Great Stable.

Of the Antichamber.
Before you come to the Kings Chamber, there is an Antichamber, into which the
Usher lets no Body enter, but those he has order to let in, or that have
business there.

Note, That no person ought to walk up and down in the Antichamber.

When the King eats in public, the Table is commonly spread for him in the
Antichamber, and there, whether it be at Dinner or Supper, he is commonly
served with Ceremony.

After having treated of the Bedchamber, Wardrobe, and Bedchamber, it will be
next most proper to speak of the

Keepers of the Household Stuff, or movables above Stairs, and their under
Officers.
There is one Intendant and Comptroller General of the Household Stuff and
Movables of the Crown; whose Salary by a Brief of the 16th of May, in 1667.
were fixed at 3600 l. yearly.

One Keeper-General of the Movables of the Crown, who has for his own Salary,
and for keeping two men under him, 2000 l.

Three Yeomen Keepers, at 200 l. a piece.

Two Pack-Carriers, and a Porter.

One Keeper of the Movables and Furniture, for the King, and Ambassadors, at
600 l.

There remain still three Articles belonging to the Chamber, which may properly
enough follow here, viz. The Music of the Chamber, the Gentlemen in Ordinary
of the Household, and the Officers of Health, as the Physicians, Chyrurgeons,
etc.

Of the Music of the Chamber.
This Music serves the King commonly at Nights when he goes to Bed, and at his
Dinner; and at Hymns of Praises and Thanks Sung on Festival Days, and on
Corpus-Christi Day, they alone Play and Sing at the reposing Altars erected for
that Solemnity.

At great Ceremonies, it joins with the Chappel-Musick, as at the Kings
Coronation, and Marriage, at the Creation of Knights, at Funeral Pomps and
Tenebras, and is placed always on the side of the Epistle.

There are two Super-Intendants of the Music, that serve by turns, half a year
a piece, who have a yearly Salary of 660 l. and an allowance of 131 l. 12 d. a
Month, for their Diet.

The Super-Intendant of the Musicks Office, is to examine the Voices and
Instruments that compose it, that so his Majesty may have good Music.

All that is to be sung by this Music, is first to be concerted in his
presence, and he may, if he please, keep a Page with him.

There are two Masters of the Children of the Music, who have the charge of
keeping and instructing the three Pages of the Music of the Chamber; and have
a Salary of 720 l.

These Masters in the absence of the Super-intendant, officiate for him.

There is one Composer of the Music, who may, if he please, be always doing,
and beating the Measures of his Works, before they come to be examined by the
Super-Intendant; He that now enjoys this place, is the Famous Baptist Lully, an
Italian by Nation, whose Salary is 600 l.

There are besides, several Singers and Players on Instruments belonging to
this Music, who have each a Salary of 600 l. and an allowance of 800 l. for
their Diet, and 80 Crowns for their Horses to follow the Court.

There is likewise a Band of Violins, called still the great Band of 24, though
they be at present 25, who have each a Salary of 365 l. and play at the Kings
Dinner, and at Balls and Comedies.

And another lesser Band, called the little Violins, in number 21, who have
each 600 l. Salary.

They follow the King along the Country, and commonly play at his Supper, and
at Balls, and other his Majesty's Recreations; with whom, at certain
Ceremonies, as at Coronations, Entries into Towns, Marriages and other great
Solemnities and Rejoicings, the other Band of the Violins of the great Stables,
together with the Hoboys, and other Music, of which we shall speak in their
place, are made to play.

There is likewise one Usher in Ordinary, and Advertiser of the Balets, and one
Keeper of the Musick-Instruments, instead of the two Dwarfs which were used to
be specified in the Book of Establishment, who have each a Salary of 300 l.

Note that, whether it be to insinuate the Grandeur of the Kings and Sons of
France, above all other Sovereign Princes, or for some other reason, is
uncertain; it is the Custom in the Court of France, that when the Music of the
Kings Chamber, by his Majesty's Order, goes to play before any of the Princes
of the Blood, except the Sons of France, or before any other Princes, though
they be Sovereign, if those Princes put on their Hats, the Music of the Kings
Chamber put on their Hats too. Thus they did, before the Duke of Lorrain, at
Nantes, in the year 1626. but at Perpignan in the year 1642. the Prince of
Morgues, being told of this Privilege, choser rather to hear the Music
Bare-headed: The same thing was observed at the Palace of Mazarin, before the
Princes of Modena and Mantua, in presence of the late Cardinal Mazarin.

Of the Gentlemen in Ordinary of the Kings Household.
They were Created by Henry the Third to the number of 48; but Henry the Great
reduced them to 24.

They are entered upon the Book of Establishment, and divided into two Bodies,
as serving each their half year, although they observe not so exactly that
Order in Waiting.

The last King Lewis the XIII. having exiled one of these Gentlemen, and given
his place to another, the Queen Anne of Austria being Regent, re-establisht him
that was Exiled, without Discarding the other that held his place, so that, and
since that, another place was added, by way of recompense, to a Gentleman for
Voyages he had made to Constantinople, both which places are still continued,
so that there are at present 26, but the number to which Henry the IV. reduced
them, was but 24.

They ought to keep near the Kings Person, to receive his Commands; and when
the King has any business to negotiate in Foreign Countries, any Troops to be
conducted to the Army, or to be disposed of into Winter Quarters; when he has
occasion to have his pleasure Communicated in the Provinces of his Kingdom, and
in the Parliaments and Sovereign Courts, he commonly makes use of these
Gentlemen in Ordinary. He likewise makes use of them in all Complements of
Congratulation or Condoleance he has a mind to send to other Kings and
Sovereign Princes upon any subject of Joy or Affliction befallen them; or when
he would sound their intentions in any actions that seem to have been done by
their Ministers, and owned by them; as also when he is pleased so far to honor
any of the Princes and great Lords of his Kingdom, so far as to send to visit
them, or to present them any Dignities, Offices, or Marks of Honor from him.
When the King goes to the Army, they have the honor to be his Aids de Camp,
and if any Prisoners of note be taken, his Majesty charges them with the
Conduct of them so far as to the Fortresses where his pleasure is to have them
kept. They are also appointed by the King to attend on Princes and Princesses
Exiled, that come into France. At the Funeral Solemnities of any Children of
France, they have the Honor to hold up the Corners of the Pall. The King
usually commits to them the Government of some young Prince or other.

They have every of them a Salary of 2000 l. a year which is paid them at the
Treasure-Royal, upon an establishment apart.

They had formerly too, a Table to themselves; but at present they eat at the
old Table of the Great Master, otherwise called the Table of the Masters of the
Household.

They had once a Chief over them, who was the Constable of Luynes, who had been
one of them, but they desired his Majesty, they might have no more.

Nor has this Order of Gentlemen only produced one Constable, but several
Marshals of France, and Knights of the King Orders; as the Marshal de Toiras,
the Marshal de Marillac, and several others.

And because in all Books of Establishments made for the Kings Household, the
Physicians and other Officers relating to the preservation or recovery of
health, are always placed next after those of the Chamber; we shall therefore
observe the same Order, and speak now

Of the Kings Physicians, and other Officers of Health.
Under these two Titles are comprehended, First, The Physicians. 2. The
Chyrurgions. 3. The Apothecaries.

1. The Physicians are
The Chief Physician has a Salary of 3000 l, 2000 l. Board-Wages, at the
Chamber of Deniers, 16000 l. for his Maintenance, 3000 l. for his Coach, and
abundance of other Gratuities and Perquisites.

He has a very great Power, and can License any to practice Physic, though
they never passed the formalities of taking Degrees in that Science.

Note, That the Chief Physician sometimes gives Orders in the Kitchen, what
Diet shall be provided for his Majesty, and how, when he is under a Course of
Physic.

The first Physicians of the King, the Queen, the Dauphin, and Dauphiness,
though they be not Doctors of the Faculty of Paris, as very frequently they are
not, yet when they go to the Physic School at Paris, in their White-Sattin
Robes, are received at the Door, by the Dean of that Body, accompanied with
some Batchellors of Physic, with the Beadles before them.

There is one Physician in Ordinary, who is to attend on the Kings Person, in
the absence of the Chief Physician; who has 1800 l. Salary upon the
Establishment, paid at the Treasure Royal, and 1500 l. Board-Wages paid at the
Chamber of Deniers.

And eight other Physicians, serving two every Quarter, who have each of them a
Salary of 1200 l. paid at the Treasury Royal, and 1098 l. Bord-Wages, at the
Chamber of Deniers, at the rate of a Crown a Day.

These in their several turns of Waiting, are always to be present at the Kings
rising and going to Bed, and at his Meals, though he be never so well.

And when the King touches for the Evil, and washes the poor peoples Feet on
Maundy-Thursday, they or their Superiors, are first to visit the Persons that
present themselves for Cure: And every time the King Touches, these Physicians
have at the Chamber of Deniers, each of them an allowance of 17 l. 9 d. and 4
Deniers, in lieu of a former allowance of a dozen of Bread, two Quarts of
Table-Wine, and six Larded Fowls.

There are besides, four Spagyrical, or Chemical Physicians, who have each a
Salary of 1200 l. and several Honorary or Titular Physicians.

2. The Chyrurgions are,
1. The Chief Chyrurgion, who is like wise Guardian of the Charters and
Privileges of the Chyrurgions and Barbers of the whole Kingdom; and has a very
great Power. He has a Salary of a 1000 l. paid by the Treasurers of the
Household, and 1277 l. Board-Wages, paid at the Chamber of Deniers; besides
large and frequent Gratuities and License-Money, and Presents, from all the
Chyrurgions of the Kingdom. He has an Apartment in the Kings own Lodgings.

One Chyrurgion in Ordinary, who has a Salary of 1000 l. paid by the Treasurers
of the Household, and 500 l. Board-Wages at the Chamber of Deniers.

Eight Chyrurgions waiting quarterly, two every quarter, who have every of them
600 l. Salary, 300 l. gratuity at the Treasure Royal, and 200 l. Board-Wages,
at the Chamber of Deniers; Besides what is paid them by those that rent the
Shops of them, they have Privilege to keep in Paris, or in any other Town they
shall choose their dwelling House in. And every time the King Touches, they have
the same allowance that the Physicians have, as we have said on the same
occasions.

The Chyrurgions are likewise to be present at the Kings Meals, and at his
rising and going to Bed, as are the Physicians; and besides, are obliged to
follow his Majesty on Hunting, for fear of any accident: and when he is upon
the march into the Country, or the Field; they are always to keepnigh the Kings
Coach.

There is one Chyrurgion-Major, of the Kings Armies, and Camps, and many others
that are only Titular, and never wait as such.

The Kings Chyrugions and Apothecaries have the Privilege to keep open Shop in
Paris, or elsewhere, which they commonly let out, as we have said, to others.

3. The Apothecaries.
Are four Chiefs, who have a Salary of 1000 l. and 600 l. more allowed them for
their Groom. They serve quarterly, every one their quarter, and have every one
his Aid or Helper.

These Aids, or Helpers, being likewise four, have every one of them a Salary
of 200 l. paid by the Treasurers of the Household, and 266 l. 13 d. four Deniers
Board-Wages, at the Chamber of Deniers.

Note, That a Denier is the twelfth part of a penny, or the third of a
farthing. Besides which, both the Chiefs and they have other allowances, as
follows.

1. The Head, or Chief Apothecary that waits the first quarter of the year,
beginning at Newyears Tide, is allowed, instead of his Diet and some other
things he used to have, 1070 l. in Money, and 42 l. more for furnishing Sugar
to the Kings Kitchen, on the 42 Fish-Days that happen in his quarter, at 20 d.
a day; and his Aid, 180 l. Augmentation Money at the Chamber of Deniers.

2. He that waits the second quarter, is allowed for the same Considerations,
940 l. and 43 l. for furnishing Sugar to the Kings Kitchen, on the 43 Meager,
or Fish-Days that happen in his quarter, at the rate of 20 d. a day; and his
Aid is paid 182 l. at the Chamber of Deniers.

3. He that waits the third quarter, has upon the account aforesaid 940 l. and
29 l. for Sugar on the 29 Fish-Days in his quarter. His Aid has 184 l. at the
Chamber of Deniers.

4. He that waits the last quarter, has for Board-Wages, and other things, as
abovesaid, 1000 l. and 29 l. for Sugar, for so many Fish-Days happening in his
quarter.

And his Aid has an augmentation of 184 l. at the Chamber of Deniers.

It is only since 1682. that the Ordinary, formerly allowed the Apothecaries in
specie, was turned into Money.

The Apothecary that attends on the Duke of Burgundy, or any other of the
Dauphins Children, is allowed, during the time of his Waiting, 100 d. a day for
his own, and his Man's Diet.

Note, That in the Books of the Establishments, the Physicians, Chyrurgions,
and Apothecaries, are styled only Maitres, or Masters, which is a Title beneath
that of a Gentleman, so much less esteem do they put upon the Science of
Physic in France, than they do in England.

The Apothecaries furnish, not only Medicines, but also some kind of Comfits
into the Coffers of the Chamber, and other Compositions of Aniseed, of Fennel,
and of Citron-Peel, and Spirit of Wine, and some other necessary Liquors,
without being obliged to the Formality of tasting any of them: They make
Sweet-Bags for the Kings Cloths, Linen, and Perriwigs.

There is always a Carriage of Apothecaries Ware, that follows the King.

There are besides these, several Apothecaries Distillers, and other
Supernumeraries, who have no certain times allowed them for waiting, but only
serve occasionally; And many Operators, Herbalists, and others.

Of the Barber-Chyrurgions, etc. that serve the Household, and the Chamber, we
have already spoken.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Great Master of the Horse, and of the Kings Stables.

THE Present Great Master of the Horse is Louis de Lorrain Count of Armagnac,
his Standing Salary is 3600 l. besides which, he has 2400 l. Board-Wages, upon
the Establishment of the Great Stables, and 6000 l. Board-Wages more, upon the
Establishment of the Chamber of Deniers; and many other Fees and Perquisites.

It was formerly the Great, or High Constable of Antiquity of this Office.
France, that had the Super-intendance over the Kings Stables, who therefore
was called Comes Stabuli, that is, Count of the Stable; but when that Great
Officer came to be entrusted with the general Command of the Armies, the Care
of the Kings Horses was wholly left to him who then was called Escuier, that
is, Usher or Squire, who was an Officer, that under the said Count of the
Stable, or Constable, took care of the Horses.

For some time, there were several of these Squires, or Master of the Horse, of
equal Command in the Kings Stables, as in the time of Philip the Long, when
there was no Great Master, but only four Masters of the Horse entered in the
Book of the Establishment; for though the same King in 1319. made one Henry de
Braybant, Great and Chief Marshal of his Stables, yet he had not the Title of
Great Master, neither do we find any mention of the said Title, till the reign
of Charles the Seventh, who made Pothon de Saintrailles, and Tanneguy du
Chatel, Great Squires, or Masters of the Horse of France.

The Great Master of the Horse, or Grand Squire, Present Functions and
Privileges.
or Querry of France (for so his Title imports in French,) carries, as a Mark
of his Office, the Royal Sword in the Scabbard, with the Belt, both which are
covered with Purple-Velvet, set with Flower deluces of Massy Gold, and the
Handle of it is of Massy Gold, with Flower-deluces of the same: the Buckles of
the Belt are likewise of Gold: And he bears the Figure of the said Sword on
each side of his Coat of Arms.

He takes the Oath of Fidelity to the King Himself, Oath.
and he receives it from almost all the rest of the Officers of the Stables.

He has, by his place, the power of Deposing of almost all the vacant Offices
in the great and little Stable, of the Haras, or Nursery of Horses, and their
Dependencies: As of the Places of Gentlemen of the Horse, or Querries of his
Majesty's Great Stable, of Bearers of the Swords of State, of Heralds, and
Pursuivants at Arms, of Cloak-Carriers, and Carriers of Gabans, or Felt-Coats,
or Cloaks, of Governor, Under-Governour, and Tutor of the Pages of the
Stables, of the Almoners, Chief Valets, Harbingers, Coach-men, Farriers, Great
Footmen, Grooms, and other places of Officers that actually serve in the great
and little Stables, and in the Haras, or Nursery of Horses; of the Ordinary and
Extraordinary Riders of both Stables; of the Hoboys, Violins, Bag-Pipers,
Trumpeters, Drummers, and Flutes, and of all Tradesmen and Workmen, that make
or furnish any thing to either of the Kings Stables. And though the Great
Master happen to be employed elsewhere, out of Court, or out of France it self;
nay, though he should happen to fall under the Kings Displeasure, and be made a
Prisoner of State, yet till the very Day of his Death, he has ever been known
to retain the power of Disposing of the said places; the Respect of the Kings
of France, to the dignity of this Office being so great, that they have not yet
taken it from any in possession of it, till they took their Lives; as was well
seen in the time of the late King Lewis the Thirteenth, during the Disgrace of
Monsieur de Belle-garde, and the Imprisonment of Monsieur de Cinq-mars.

The Great Master of the Horse, has the management of all Moneys allowed for
the Expenses of the Kings Stables, and Nursery of Horses, as likewise for the
maintenance of the Gentlemen-Querries, Pages and Officers serving, and retained
in the Stables, and of the Great-Horses, Race-Horses, and Horses belonging to
the Kings Coaches and Wagons; and for the Wages, Fees, Gratuities, and
Payments of all the Officers of the Stables, and of the Merchants or Tradesmen,
for necessaries they have furnished for any use thereunto belonging; as also
for Liveries and other Cloths ordered for any of the said Officers; and for the
Hoquetons, or Coats, Strait-Coats, and Cloaks of the Kings Life-guard-men, for
the Coats of his Guard of 100 Suissers, for the Strait-Coats of Guards of the
Gate, for the Coats called Hoquetons of the Guards, of the Provost of the
Household, and for the Campagn-Coats of the Musketeers; and lastly, for the
Expenses of Coaches, Wagons, and Coverings of the Mules of the Kings Chamber,
and of the other Offices of his Household.

All the Officers abovenamed are sworn by him, and cannot enjoy any
Privileges and Exemptions annexed to their places, till they be Entered upon
the Establishments that are fixed and signed by him.

No Querry, or Professor of Horsemanship, can set up an Academy to instruct
young Gentlemen in Warlike Exercises, or any other things proper for noble
persons to learn, without the Order and Permission of the Great Querry, or
Master of the Horse of France, first obtained.

The Office of Postmaster General was annexed to that of Great Master of the
Horse, but was dismembered from it by Henry the Great, and still remains so,
being at present enjoyed by the Great Secretary of State, Monsieur Louvois, who
has, as Postmaster General, 1200 l. a year Board-Wages, paid at the Chamber of
Deniers.

The late King had once promised Monsieur Cinq-mars, then Great Master of the
Horse, to re-annex the Post-Masters Office to that of the Great Master of the
Horse; but the said Monsieur Cinq-mars being afterward Imprisoned and Executed
for High Treason, that intention came to nothing.

The Great Master of the Horse has the Honor to have place in his Majesty's
Coach, next the Princes of the Blood; and when he is abroad on Horseback, he
rides next his Person. He makes use of the Pages, Footmen and Horses of the
Kings Stables, at his pleasure.

When the King is on the march for any Warlike Expedition, or in the Body of an
Army, the Great Stable is lodged nearest him, before the little Stable, but in
any Journey, wherein he marches not upon any Warlike design, nor in a Body of
an Army; the little Stable is placed nearest his Majesty's Lodgings.

When the King makes his first Entry on Horseback; into any City within his
Kingdom, or into any Conquered Town, where he is to be received with great
Ceremony, the Great Master of the Horse rides directly before the Kings Person,
carrying his Majesty's Royal Sword in a Sheath of Purple-Velvet, set with
Flower-deluces of Massy Gold, hung in a Belt of the same Stuff and Color, and
on a Horse Caparison'd with the same. And the Canopy born over his Majesty's
Head; on that occasion, is his Fee.

He rode in this manner, at the Solemnity made for the Majority, and at the
Entry of their Majesty's into Paris; and it is to be noted likewise, that at
the Ceremony of the Majority, he took his Seat in the Palais, or
Parliament House, on the right hand of the Great Chamberlain, who always sits
at the Feet of the Kings Bed of Justice.

He also bears the said Sword at Funeral Solemnities. At the public Entries of
Kings, and other great Solemnities.

He Orders the Trumpeters, Hoboys, Violins, Flutes, Tabourins, Sackbuts,
Cornets and Drums, to sound and Play, for the greater State and Solemnity of
the Feast.

At the Kings Death, all the Horses of the Stables and Nursery, and all the
Harness and Furniture belonging to them, fall to the Great Master of the Horse.

Every time the King Orders any Money for making any new Coaches for himself,
he grants out a Warrant for a thousand Crowns, to the Great Master of the
Horse, for a new Coach for him too.

All new Horses that are brought to Paris, do, or ought to go and do homage to
the King, at his Great Stables, that is, ought first to be carried and shown to
the Great Master of the Horse, before they are offered to Sale, who retains such
of them, as he thinks his Majesty may have need of, or that may be useful for
his Service; paying very justly a good price for them to the Owners.

There are, as we have already hinted, two Stables, a greater and a lesser, we
shall first speak

Of the Great Stable.
He that has charge of the Great Stable, next under the Great Master of the
Horse, and Officiates in his absence, is called the first or chief Querry, or
Master of the Great Stable. He has a Salary of 600 l. and 265 l. Board-Wages.

He is Sworn by the Great Querry, or Master of the Horse, and is put in by him,
as are the other Officers of the Kings Stables, in the Book of Establishment.
He is styled only Querry, or Gentleman of the Horse in Ordinary, of the Great
Stable.

He has his Lodgings in the Buildings belonging to the Great Stable.

The other Officers of the Great Stable, may be divided into three ranks, or
sorts, 1. The persons and Officers that daily serve at the Great Stable; 2.
Those that belong to the Haras, or Nursery of Horses; And 3. The Officers of
Ceremony, or those Officers of the said Great Stable, that are made use of only
at Great Ceremonies.

1. Then the Officers actually serving at the Great Stables, are
Three Querries or Gentlemen of the Horse in Ordinary, who have each, a Salary
of 400 l. and 500 l. Board-Wages.

They instruct and teach the Pages, and one of them had the Honor to teach the
Dauphin to ride.

There are a great number of others so called, but seldom any are seen to serve
but these.

Three Under-Querries.

Nineteen Pages, for there is pay allowed but for so many in the Books of the
Establishment, though there be commonly many more, that they be augmented and
diminished at pleasure.

The Pages are instructed in Riding, Fencing, and all other Exercises fit for
Gentlemen.

One Governor in Ordinary of the Pages.

Two Under-Governours.

One Tutor in Ordinary.

One Almoner, or Chaplain, in Ordinary.

They have besides, for other things,

A Master of the Mathematics, a Master to teach them Fencing, and other
Warlike Exercises; a Dancing Master, a Vaulting-Master for both Stables, a
Writing-Master, and a Master to teach them to design.

One Cash-Keeper, and Provider.

And one Genealogist of the Stables.

This last Office was Created by Letters Patents bearing date the 22th of
September, 1643. To draw up and examine the proofs of all the Pages admitted
into the Kings great or little Stable: Which Letters express, that his Majesty
had set up that Office, to prevent for the future, the introducing of any
abuses in the admission of the Querries and Pages, that the service and honor
of his Royal House, obliged him to retain in his Stables, and to know by that
means, the true Extraction of all such as should present themselves to be
admitted; who by the Exercises there practiced, were to add the happiness of
being useful to him, and the State, to the goodness of their Birth; that so
according to the intention of the Kings Predecessors, no person might be
admitted into that Body, unless he were a Gentleman both by Name and Arms, at
least by four Paternal Descents, or Generations. Next, there are

Four Chief Valets, or Waiting-men of the Pages.

Two Ushers of the Kitchen, with their

Two Aids, or Helpers.

One Chief, or Head of the Office; with his Aid, or Helper.

Forty two Great Footmen, of the Great Stable, who serve two quarters in the
year, by turns, twenty one every other quarter, having a Salary for every
quarter they serve, of 250 l. 10 d. a piece, so that in all they have every one
501 l. a year.

These Footmen sometimes carry up the Kings Meat, as in the Army, at little
Huntings, or Huntings of small Game, and on all Days and occasions of Ceremony,
as on Twelfth-Day, and when the King treated the Popes Legate, and the Suisser
Ambassadors; and then the Pages fill the Drink, and serve as Cup-Bearers.

Eight Harbingers, who have a Salary of 165 l. Ten Coachmen, and Conductors of
Wagons, and Coach-Waggons, at 180 l. Salary; and three Postilions, who are
allowed 2600 l. for their Clothes; and eight Farriers.

Forty Masters, or Head-Grooms, at 180 l. and fifty Aids, or Helping-Grooms,
and several Riders.

There are besides many other Officers and Retainers belonging to the Kings
Stables, as Physicians, Chyrurgions, Apothecaries, Fencing-Masters, Vaulters,
Cooks, Landrers and others.

There are 160 Horses in the Great Stable, the keeping of which, with what is
expended in Medicines for them, and Spurs, Shoes, Harness, Sadles, Caparisons,
Horse-Cloaths, Bits, Bridles, and other Furniture, must needs amount to a very
considerable sum.

There is one Keeper of the Movables, of the Great Stable, and a vast number
of Tradesmen that furnish necessaries to both Stables, as Horse-Merchants,
Sadlers, Coach-Makers, Wheel-wrights, Armorers, Sword-Cutlers, Drapers,
Tailors, Linen Drapers, and others.

Some Officers of the Household have Livery Horses kept for them at the Great
Stable, as the Mail-Carrier, or else they are allowed Money for their Horses,
and Stabling, as the Conductor of the Hackny, the Advertiser, the Yeoman or
Groom of the Bottles, the Groom of the Vessels, and the Groom of the Fruitry.

2. The Haras, or Nursery
Of Horses, consists of a great number of Horses of the Kings own Breed, and
reared under the care of his Officers for that purpose, viz. of Stallions,
Mares, Colts and others, which are kept at a place called St. Ledger, near
Montfort L' amaury.

Over these there is one Chief Querry, or Master, who is called the Captain of
the Haras, or Nursery of Horses.

Fourteen Keepers of the Haras, or Nursery, who have 130 l. 18 d. yearly
Salary, two Grooms, at 128 l. 15 d. and their Aids or Helpers, and the Farriers
that shoe the Horses, who have each 50 l. Chyrurgions and Apothecaries, at 100
l. and several other Officers of the Nursery, and one Physician of the Officers.

3. The Officers of Ceremony, or that serve at Ceremonies, are
First, The Heralds at Arms, who are thirty in number, whereof the first is
King at Arms, and is Styled Mont-joye St. Denis.

The other twenty nine are Dukes at Arms, and take the Names of several
Provinces, in the Order following.

Titles of Heralds.
Of Burgundy. Of Alencon. Of Brittany. Of Poitou. Of Artois. Of Ango^uleme. Of
Berry. Of Guienne: Of Picardie. Of Champagne. Of Orleans. Of Provence. Of
Anjou. Of Valois. Of Languedoc. Of Tolouze. Of Auvergne. Of Normandy. Of
Lyonnois, or the County of Lions. Of Dauphine, or the Dauphinate. Of Bresse. Of
Navarre. Of Perigord. Of Xaintonge. Of Tourain. Of Bourbonnois, or the Country
of Bourbon. Of Alsatia. Of Chorolois. Of Roussillon.
Their Wages are different. There are besides, several Pursuivants, whose
Salaries are likewise different.

At all public Ceremonies, the King at Arms, and the rest of the Heralds, are
clad with their Coats of Arms of Violet-Coloured Velvet, died upon Crimson, set
before and behind, with three Flower deluces of Gold, and as many on each
Sleeve, whereon the name of their Province is Embroidered in Letters of gold:
And the King at Arms, Mount-joye St. Denis, wears on his Coat, for distinction,
a Crown Royal over the said Flower-deluces. They wear Bonnets of Black-Velvet,
with a golden Hat-band, and in Ceremonies of Peace, they use only Buskins, but
in those of War, they wear Boots. At Funeral Pomps of Kings or Princes, they
wear over their said Coats of Arms, long Mourning Robes, trailing on the
ground, and bear a Staff called a Caducee, covered with Blue-Velvet, and
Embroidered with Flower-deluces of gold: They also bear every of them one of
the Kings Medals about their Necks: The Pursuivants are habited almost in the
same manner, only they bear no Staves, as having no Commands themselves, but
being only the Aids and Assistants of the Heralds.

Their Office is to Declare War, or publish Peace, to Summon Towns to yield, to
assist at solemn Oaths, in the general Assemblies of the three Estates, at the
Swearing of Treaties of Peace, and renewing of Alliances; at Coronations, where
they bestow Largesses on the People, of Gold and Silver Pieces; and at Funeral
Solemnities of Kings, Queens, Princes, and Princesses of the Blood.

They march before the King, when he goes to make his Offering, on his
Coronation-Day: They assist at all Marriages of Kings and Queens, at the
Ceremonies of the Knights of the Holy Ghost; at Royal Feasts, as also at all
Christnings of the Children of France, where likewise they make Largesses to
the people, of pieces of gold and silver: And at the Obsequies of Kings, or
Royal Persons, there are always two Heralds that wait day and night at the Feet
of the Bed of State, where the Body of the Deceased, or his Effigies in Wax,
lies, to present the sprinkling Brush to the Princes, Prelates, and others of
the Quality, required for that Ceremony, that come to throw holy Water on the
said Body or Effigies. They have likewise many other Functions at those
Funerals.

There is likewise one Judge of the Arms and Blasons of France, who is likewise
Yeoman at Arms in the great Stable, in which latter quality, he has a Salary of
450 l. yearly.

Secondly, There are several Sword-Bearers of State, who have each, a Salary of
500 l. Cloak-Carriers, who have 300 l. and Porte-Gabans, or Felt-Cloak
Carriers, who have 220 l. yearly Salary.

Thirdly, There are twelve Trumpeters, called the Trumpeters of the Chamber, as
likewise are the Drummers, of which there is a like number, who have every one
180 l. and the Cromorns, or of the Chamber, twelve Violins, Hoboys, Sackbuts
and Cornets, at the like pay. Eight Players on Flutes, Tabours, and Bagpipes,
serving two every quarter, at 120 l. one Player on the Base Cromorne, and
Trumpet Marine, and one Treble Cromorne. They have all Livery-Coats, and are
employed at all Balls, Balets, and Comedies, and in the Apartments of the Kings
House, or elsewhere, where there is occasion: There are also two of them in the
Music of the Chapel, at present, the six Cromornes are, 1. The
Basse-Cromorne. 2. The Counter-Tenour-Cromorne. 3. The Treble-Cromorne. 4. The
Tenour-Cromorne. 5. The fifth of Cromorne. 6. A Base-Cromorne.

Of the little Stable, and first, Of the first or chief Querry, or Master of
the Horse, and of the other Querries, or Gentlemen of the Horse, quarterly
Waiters.
The first or chief Querry, or Master of the Horse here, has the charge of the
Kings lesser Stable, that is to say, of all the Horses, Coaches, Caleches,
running Chairs drawn by Men, and Sedans, that he uses upon his daily and
ordinary occasions. He Commands the Pages and Footmen of the little Stable, and
makes use of them as he pleases; He takes the Oath of Fidelity to the King
himself.

This Office is almost as ancient as that of the Great Querry, or Master of the
Horse, it self: For, as we find, that under Charles the Seventh, one Pothon de
Santrailles, was made Great-Querry, or Master of the Horse; so we read too,
that Lewis the Eleventh, his immediate Successor, had at his Coronation, in
1461. one Joachim Rouauld, that was his Chief-Querry, or Gentleman of the
Horse. The present Salary of the Chief-Querry, is 3000 l. and 876 l. more,
Board-Wages. The other

Querries, or Gentlemen of the Horse, are
One Querry in Ordinary, who has 1200 l. Salary upon the Establishment of the
Household, and 1765 l. at the Great Stable, Board-Wages for himself, and two
Pages; and a Pension of 2000 l. at the Treasure Royal.

Twenty Querries Quarterly Waiters, who have every one a Salary of but 350 l.
though they are Entered on the Books at 700 l. They wait five every Quarter, and
are Sworn by the Great Master of the Kings Household.

The Querry that is in Waiting, is to attend at the Kings waking, to know of
his Majesty, whether he will please to ride out that day, or no; And if the
King be to ride a Hunting, and to wear Boots, he is to put on his Spurs, and he
likewise pulls them off most commonly.

As soon as his Majesty has his Spurs on, it belongs to the Querry in Waiting
to take his Sword, when he puts it off, as we have already mentioned in
speaking of the Cloak-Carriers.

The Querry in Waiting, together with the Lieutenant or Ensign of the Guards,
eat at the old Table of the Great Master, as do the rest of his Companions,
during their Quarters Waiting; and he that waits on the Dauphin, has his Diet
at his Highnesses Serdeau's, or Water-Servers.

They follow the King all the day long, and enter with him every where, unless
it be into the Council Chamber, or when his Majesty has a mind to be private,
in a Chamber by himself, and then they wait in the next Chamber to it.

When the King rides abroad, a Horseback, or in a Coach, the Querry follows
next after the Kings Horse, or Coach, that in case his Majesty should fall, or
otherwise need his help, he may be ready to help him up, and remount him, or
lend him his hand when he has a mind to alight, or remount; which is his
peculiar Office; so that when his Majesty passes through any narrow passage,
whether it be in Hunting, or otherwise, the Querry is to follow immediately
after the King, and to pass in those Rencounters, before the Captain, or
Officer of the Guards himself, then upon Duty.

The Querry likewise often leads his Majesty, when he is walking.

Upon a day of Battle, it is the Querries Office, to put on the Kings Armor.

At Funerals of Kings, one of the Querries carries the Spurs, another the
Gantlets, a third the Coat of Arms of France, Encompassed with the Collars of
the Kings Order, and a fourth holds up the other end of the Coat of Arms; And
the chief Querry, or in his absence the eldest Querry, carries the Helmet, or
Headpiece, adorned with a Crest-Royal.

The five Querries in Waiting that Quarter, march a breast, all in Mourning,
next after the Hearse, or Wagon of Arms, which is drawn with Horses covered
with Black-Velvet, set with Crosses of White-Satin; having about them, several
Pages in Mourning.

There are in the little Stable almost the same kind, and the same number of
Officers as in the great one, viz.

Three Querries in Ordinary, where the Court is, and a fourth, at Paris.

The Pages there, at present, are twenty five, besides two Hunting Pages.

All the Pages the King has, in his Chamber, Stables, or elsewhere, serve in
the Armies as Aides de Camp, under His Majesty's own Aides de Camp.

The Pages of the little Stable, when it is dark, always carry before the King,
a white Wax-Flambo, and when he goes a Hunting, they help the Arquebuse, or
Arms-Carrier, to carry his Majesty's Fowling-pieces, or Fusils.

One Governor of the Pages.

One Tutor of the Pages, who has a Salary of 225 l. and an annual gratuity of
200 l. and his Lodging and Diet at the little Stable, a Horse at command, and a
Servant in a Livery to wait on him.

One Almoner, or Chaplain of the little Stable, who has a Salary of 400 l. and
his Lodging and Diet, with a Horse and a Servant, at the little Stable.

Four chief Valets, or Waiting-men of the Pages, waiting Quarterly, who have
every one 75 l. Wages, and 50 l. gratuity.

One Cash-Keeper or Play Master, who has a Salary of 300 l. and an annual
gratuity of 1200 l. besides his Diet, Lodging, and Horse in the said little
Stable.

One Physician, four Chyrurgions, one Apothecary, one Vaulting-Master, two
Dancing-Masters, two Fencing-Masters.

One Ambling-Master, one Porte-Gaban, or Felt-Cloke Carrier.

They have also other Masters to teach them all other necessary Exercises, as
for the Mathematics, Designing, Blazoning and Writing, and handling the Pike
and Musket, etc.

Four Harbingers, Quarterly Waiters; who have every one of them a Salary of 165
l. and a gratuity of 100 l. with their Diet, Lodging, and each of them a Horse.

One Usher in Ordinary, of the Kitchen.

Two Servants or Grooms of the Pages in Ordinary.

Seventeen Footmen in Ordinary of the little Stable, which are only so by
Commission, and not as standing Officers.

Four working Farriers quarterly Waiters; twelve Masters or Head-Grooms,
Quarterly Waiters, by six every other Quarter, and 50 Aids, or Helpers.

Several Chair-men, or Sedan-men.

The King has at present, twenty five gallant Sets of Horses, consisting of ten
Horses apiece, and as many Master-Coachmen, or Drivers of Coaches and Calcehes,
with their Postillions and Servants.

To know what Livery Officers belong to the Great, and what to the little
Stable, as well Pages, as Footmen and others, you must take notice which way
their Coat-Pockets are made; for the Officers of the Great-Stables Pockets are
slit Crossways their Liveries, and the others long-ways, downward.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Chief-Surveyor, or Super-Intendant of the Royal Buildings, and of the
Architects and other Officers under him; and of the Keepers of the Kings
Houses, Parks, and Forests.

THE Super-Intendant is styled Super-Intendent, and General Orderer of the
Buildings of the Royal Houses, and of his Majesty's Gardens and Tapstries, and
of the Arts and Manufactures of France; of which last, he is the Great
Monopolizer under the King, and is at present, Monsieur Louvois, Secretary of
State.

He is sworn at the Chamber of Accounts, in which he has both Voice, and Place;
Monsieur Louvois, when he was sworn, took his place there above the Dean of the
Masters of the Accounts.

There are three other Intendents, or Surveyors of the Building, that serve
yearly, every one his year, at 6000 l. Salary.

Three Comptrollers of the Buildings, who have each of them a Salary of 5500 l.

One Chief Architect, who has a Salary of 6000 l. and a gratuity of 4000 l.

Two Treasurers.

Of the Royal Houses, and first, of the Louvre.
This Palace was called the Louvre, that is to say, as some will have it
L'oeeuvre, that is, The Work, by way of Excellence, as if it were a
Masterpiece of Architecture; and from that the French call all their Kings
Palaces, and those of other Kings in other Countries, Louvres, in ordinary
Speech.

The old Palace of the Louvre at Paris, was begun by the Predecessors of Philip
Augustus, and was finished in his Reign, in the year 1214. of which Building
there still remained in the time of Francis the First, a Tower called the Iron
Tower, which was in the middle of the Court, which the said King caused to be
demolished, because it darkened the Palace.

In the year 1364. Charles the Fifth rebuilt and enlarged that Palace, of which
the Porches are still remaining.

About the year 1545, Francis the First begun to build the Great Hall of the
Louvre, which was finished by Henry the Second in 1548 Charles the Ninth, and
Henry the Third, continued this Building; but Henry the Great built those
Magnificent and long Galleries that go from the Louvre to the Tuilleries, by
the Waterside, and the Gallery of the Painters, which was burnt down by a Fire
that happened on the 6th of February, 1661. which likewise did some damage to
the other Galleries; but all has been since repaired.

Queen Catharine of Medicis, built the Apartment that Fronts the Tuilleries in
1564. Lewis the Thirteenth built the other side of the old Court of the Louvre,
and the Continuation of it from the Great Dome in the middle, under which the
Council of Finances, and of the Farms is held.

Lewis the Great, at present happily reigning, has built on both sides of the
old Louvre, what remained unfinished; He likewise has built a Dome at the
Corner of his Chamber, and of the Gallery of the Painters, which is, as we have
said, at present, rebuilt, and larger than it was before: Besides, he has
rebuilt the whole Palace of the Tuilleries, and the Hall of the Machines, or
Engines: And he has likewise caused much to be done in the enclosure of the
first Court of the Louvre, at the Portal, and in several other places.

There are at the Palace of the Louvre, as at all other Royal Houses,
A Captain of the Palace, who has a Salary of 1200 l. upon the Revenues of
Paris.

A Lieutenant, at 400 l. Salary out of the same Revenues.

A Keeper of the Palace of the Louvre, who is Porter of the first and second
Gates, who has a Salary of 120 l. paid out of the Crown-Revenues of Paris.

A Keeper of the Tennis-Court.

One Gardener.

Four Morte-Paies, or Standing Guards, that wear the Kings Livery, who have
every one a Salary of 90 l. upon the general Revenue of Paris: several Porters,
and a Clock-Keeper, that have Wages and Diet, and enjoy the usual Privileges
of the Kings menial Servants.

A Captain of the Tuilleries, and two Keepers. A Gardener and Designer in
Ordinary of the Tuillery-Garden, a Keeper of the Orange-Garden of the
Tuilleries, a Porter of the Gate of the Queens Walk, toward Chaillot: A
Gardener of the Nursery of Trees, at Roll, established there in 1670, who is
Director of all the Designs or Plots of Trees in the Royal Houses.

In the Warren of the Louvre, are these following Officers.
A Bailiff and Captain of the Game of the Warren of the Louvre, a Lieutenant
General, and one other Lieutenant of the Game of the said Warren.

The Kings Proctor or Attorney for the Game of the said Warren. One Deputy
Lieutenant General, and one Exempt; and one Keeper of the Palace Royal, built
by Cardinal Richelieu.

The Captains and other Officers belonging to the other Royal Houses are, as
follows.
1. The Palace or Castle of Madrid, which was built by Francis the First, in
1530. at his return from his Imprisonment in Spain, after the Pattern of the
Palace at Madrid, that had been his Prison; has these Officers,

A Captain, who is styled Captain of the Game and Castle of Madrid, of the Wood
of Boulogne, the Bridge of St. Cloud, the Plain of St. Denis, and its
Appurtenances and Forrestes of the said places.

A Lieutenant General of the said Game, with a Deputy-Lieutenant.

The Kings Proctor, and his Substitute.

An Exemt, thirty Guards of the Game, Horse and Foot, for the Wood of Boulogne,
and three Leagues round about it.

Four Porters of the Park, or Wood of Boulogne.

Of St. Germains en Lay.
2. The old Castle of St. Germains en Lay, was founded by Charles the Fifth,
but the Church and the Priory were built before, by King Robert, who died in
1080. In it are these Officers.

A Captain and Governor of the Castles, Parks, Forests, Woods, and Thickets of
St. Germain en Lay, of the Plains and places depending thereon, of the Pack of
Hounds of St. Jamme, of the Town and Bridge of Poissy, who is also Captain and
Judge of the Game, within the extent of the said Captainship, who has a Salary
of 1200 l. paid by the Treasurers of the Game.

There is likewise, under the Super-intendant, a Comptroller of the Building of
St. Germain en Lay.

The Castle of St. Germains en Lay, consists of two Castles, so called, the
old and the new.

To the old one, which was lately very splendidly rebuilt and enlarged, belong
these Officers.

A Keeper of the said Castle, and of the Clock and other movables of the same,
who has a Salary of 400 l. paid by the Treasurers of the Buildings.

One Chaplain, who has a standing Salary of 2000 l. yearly, 900 l. for Tabling,
two Priests under him, instead of two Clerks allowed formerly, and 400 l. for a
Servant in the Vestry: Which two Priests, besides their Diet, have a yearly
allowance each, of 400 l. The said two Priests, by turns, say Mass for the
King, after the Chaplain has said his, on his day, and have their Lodging in
the said Castle, or Palace.

One Porter, at 100 l. Salary, paid by the Treasurers of the Buildings.

Twelve Morte-Paies, or standing Guards, at 60 l. a piece yearly Salary, paid
by the Treasurers of the Game, and two Gardiners.

In the New Castle of St. Germain en Lay, are,
A Keeper of the said Castle, and Movables of the same.

A Governor and Keeper of the old Great Cage, who has a Salary of 1455 l. paid
at the Treasure Royal.

Another Keeper of the new Cage, with the same Salary.

Two Porters at 100 l. Salary, paid by the Treasurers of the Buildings.

An Intendant or Surveyor of the Grottoes, who has a Salary of 3600 l.

A Gardener of the Garden-Plots and Hillocks, or Mounts, at 700 l. Salary, paid
by the Treasurers of the Buildings; another Gardner of the Garden next the
Park, at 400 l. Salary paid by the same Treasurers: and a Gardner of the
Bowling-Green, at 900 l. Salary, paid by the same Treasurers.

A Keeper of the Park, and of the Pleasure-House called le Val, or the Vale,
who has a Salary of 300 l. paid likewise by the same.

A Painter at 200 l. a Carpenter, a Joyner, a Lock-smith, and a Mason, at 30 l.
Salary, each.

A Keeper of the Dog-Kennel, who has 240 l. Salary.

A Keeper of the Tennis-Court, who has no Salary, but only his Lodging, and the
profits of the said Tennis-Court.

A Keeper of the Hall, and movables of the Chancery there, who has a Salary of
1000 l. paid him by the Treasurers of the Seal, out of the profits of the said
Seal: this Office was established in 1631. and is in the Kings Gift. This
Keeper has both his Lodging and Diet there.

A Keeper of the little Stable, at 400 l. Salary.

A Lieutenant, and two Deputy Lieutenants of the same, whereof the first has a
Salary of 600 l. and the two others of 300 l. a-piece, paid by the re^s of the
Game.

A Proctor for the King.

Four Exempts, a Recorder, an Inspector or Overseer by Commission: several
Huntsmen, and twenty eight Guards of the Game on Foot, and twelve on Horseback.

A Master of the Waters and Forests, a Lieutenant, a Proctor for the King for
the said Waters and Forests, a Hammer-Keeper, a Recorder, and about sixteen
Guards of the Forest.

Of Fountain-Bleau.
We find in History, that Lewis the Seventh, called the Young, built the
Chapel of St. Saturnine, in the Oval-Court of the Palace of Fountain-bleau, in
the year 1160. In it, there is one Captain or Governor, who is styled Captain,
Keeper, and Governor of the Forest of Bievre, and of the Borough and
Castle-Royal of Fountain-bleau: particular Master of the Waters and Forests of
the Bailywick of Melun, and Provostship of Moret; and Captain of the Game of
the said places, and of the Woods and Thickets of Brie, and Captain, Master,
and Keeper of the Keys of the House, Castle, Gardens, Parks, Fountains, and
Channels, or Canals of Fountain-bleau. Next are, First, Several Officers of the
Buildings, and Keepers of the Apartments and Pavillons, or distinct Bodies of
Buildings thereunto belonging: Secondly, For the Game; and Thirdly, For the
Waters and Forests of the same.

The Officers of the Buildings, and Keepers of the Apartments and Houses;
Next under the General Super-intendant of the Buildings, of the Royal Houses
of France, are the three Comptrollers-General of the said Buildings, and under
them one particular Comptroller of the Buildings established at Fountain-bleau.

One Keeper of the Apartments of his Majesty, and of the Dauphin, for the
Oval-Court, for the Court of the Fountain of Perseus, and for the new Apartment
of the Queens toward the Court of the White Horse.

One Scavenger, or Sweeper of the Courts, at 400 l. Salary.

Two Keepers of the Garden-Plot of Orange Trees.

One Keeper of the White-Horse-Court.

One Clock-Keeper, and one Keeper of the Tennis-Court, next the said
White-Horse-Court; and one Porter of the said Court.

In the House of the Reverend Fathers Maturins, there are,

One Minister, or Superior, and seven Religious Men, whereof five are to be
Priests, and are allowed 300 l. apiece, yearly, for their Clothes, besides
their Diet: But the Reverend Father Minister takes care generally to keep a
greater number there, especially when the Court is there. The said Reverend
Father Minister is titulary so of St. Saturnins Chapel, which is the low
Chapel in the Oval-Court, and in that Quality has his ordinary allowed him in
specie, when the Court is at Fountain-bleau.

There is one Keeper of the Court of the Kitchins, one Keeper of the Lord
Chamberlains Pavillon or House, behind the said Court, at the Corner of the
Garden-Plot of the Tyber, who has a Salary of 900 l. for keeping the one half
of the said Garden-Plot; one Keeper of the Foundery, or Founding-House,
belonging to the said Palace, or Castle-Royal.

One Keeper of the Hotel, or House of Conde, joining to the said Foundry, or
Founding-House. One Keeper of the Buildings of the Gate toward the Pell-mell,
at the end of the Causey of the Moat, or of the House of the Colonel-General of
the Infantry, since the suppression of the said Office in 1661, who is allowed
900 l. for maintaining the other half of the Garden-Plot of the Tyber, and 50
l. for maintaining the Causey. This Pavillon, or Body of Building, was formerly
called, the Constableship, and was the Lodging of the Lord High Constable.

One Keeper of the little Stable, one Keeper of the Hounds and Dog-Kennel; and
a Keeper of the Pell-mell.

One Gardener of the Gardens of the Moat, and of the Pines and Keeper of the
Hotel, or House of St. Aignan, in the same place.

One Gardener of the Gardens of the Queens Stables, formerly called the Gardens
of the Trout-Ponds, or Canals, round about the Fountain that gives the name to
Fountain-bleau; and one other Gardner of the Gardens of the Queens Stables
behind the said Fountain; and one cleanser of the Channels, or Canals of the
Garden of Pines, and of the said Gardens of the Queens Stables.

One Keeper of the Hotel of the Great Ferrara, toward the great Gate of the
Court of the White-Horse, where lodge several Officers of Monsieur the Kings
Brother.

One Keeper of the Hotel de Guise, where the Intendant, Comptroller, and
Treasurer of the said Buildings lodge.

One Keeper of the Queens Stables in the Borough.

One Keeper of the Chancery-House, on the back of which, are several Shops, of
which, one of the Kings Officers has the letting. One Keeper of the Great
Falconers Lodging and Office, called, La Coudre, which joins to the Park, and
is without the Walls of it, toward the Borough, or Town of Fountain-bleau.

The Great Stable, which used to be placed at La Coudre, is now lodged at the
Heronrie.

In the Park,
There is one Porter and Keeper of the Park.

There are eight Gates to go into the Park, and in it are these Buildings,

1. The Heronrie, where the Great Stable is, of which, there is one Keeper. The
Great Falconer lodged there formerly, but now, at La Coudre.

2. The Midway House, or the Pheasant-House, where the Hay made in the Park,
is laid up; of which there is a Keeper under the Captain of the Castle.

3. The House of the Gardner of the Fruit Trees of the Park.

4. The Menagerie, or Bird-House of the Park, of which there is a Keeper, who
is likewise Master of the Game or Chase of Cormorants.

There is likewise a Gardener of the Great Palisado's of the Park, that lodges
at the Heronrie.

5. At the end of the Canal, toward the Parish of Avon, is the House of the
Fathers of the Charity: there are ordinarily in it four religious men, and two
extraordinary, when the Court is at Fountain-bleau, and a single man Gardener.
There are six Beds founded and maintained for sick people.

There is a Captain of the Boats upon the Great Canal, who is Keeper also of
the Flags, Ornaments, and other necessary movables for the said Vessels:

Besides, There is one Keeper of the Antiquities, one Painter to take care of
all the Pictures there, who is lodged with the Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs; one Glasier, one Joiner, one Lock-Smith, one Plummer, and one Mason
and Coverer.

Besides the abovesaid Buildings, the Kings of France, have built several
Hotels, or Houses, designed for the residence of several Offices, or Bodies of
Offices: as the Hotel or House for the Life-guards, on one side of the
Chancery, the Scotch-House behind the Church for the first Company of the
Life-guards, which is still called the Scotch-Company and Colonebrie: The Kings
Gensd' arms, or Men at Arms, have likewise a House at Fountain-bleau.

The Guards of the Provostship of the Kings Household, have likewise a House at
Fountain-bleau, which was given them by some former Kings, and is called the
Hotel, or House of the Provost-ship: The Officers of the said Guards have
nothing to do with the said House, but it belongs only to the Soldiers of that
Guard that put in a Keeper, who is to look after it, and do all smaller
Reparations to it; the said Keeper has the profit arising, by the disposal of
the vacant places in the Stable thereunto belonging; and when the said Keepers
place comes to be vacant, the Guards quarterly Waiters for that quarter,
dispose of it.

The Officers for the Game, and for Hunting, are,
One Lieutenant of the Game.

Another Lieutenant in Brie, where there is a particular Court of Justice under
the Captain of the Game or Chaces of Fountain-bleau, for the Commodity of those
that cannot so conveniently come to plead at Fountain-bleau.

A Deputy-Lieutenant of the Game, at 400 l. Salary.

The Forest of Fountain-bleau, or of Bievre, is divided into eight several
Cantons, or Quarters, every one of which, has its particular Keeper of the Wood
for the Game. There was formerly too, a particular Wolf-Hunter for the Forest
of Bievre.

The Officers for the Waters and Forests, are
A Lieutenant.

A Proctor for the King.

A Hammer-Keeper.

A Register, or Recorder.

A General-Keeper of the Woods and Forests, or Sergeant Traverser, at 300 l.
Salary.

A Fountaneer, to look after the Fountains, Grottes, and Cascades; one Keeper
of the Swans and Carps, in the Canals, Ponds, and Basins there.

Forty six Guards, viz. Sixteen Horse, and thirty Foot; whereof the Horse are
paid an allowance of 300 l. and the Foot 60 l. each, yearly, by the Captain: and

One Usher Auditor, called otherwise the Sergeant dangerous.

The Castle of Compiegne
Was Rebuilt by Charles the Bald, in the year 876, because his Father Lewis the
Debonnaire, or the Gracious, his Grandfather Charles the Great, and his
Great-Grand-Father Charles Martel, used often to reside there. It appears too,
that even before that, Clotaire, the first Grandchild to Clovis, retired into
the Town of Compiegne, and died there in the year 564. There are belonging to
it, a Captain, who is called Captain, Keeper and Governor of the House, City,
and Castle-Royal of Compiegne, and Captain of the Game, or Chaces, of the
Forest of Cuise les Compiegne. A Master of the Waters and Forests, a Keeper of
the Tennis-Court, and other Officers.

Of the Castle of Vincennes.
In 1183. Philip Augustus enclosed the Park of Vincennes with Walls: The Castle
of Vincennes was afterward begun to be built by Philip de Valois in 1337. and
continued in 1361. from the height of the Causey to the third Story, and was at
length finished by Charles the Fifth. Belonging to this, there are a Captain
and Governor of the Castle and Park of Vincennes, and of the Game and Chaces
there: This Government was created in 1676. The twelve Officers and Keepers of
the Game hereunder mentioned, are put in all by his nomination, viz.

A Lieutenant, and a Deputy-Lieutenant, four Horse, and three Foot-Guards, a
Fox-Hunter and Cooper.

A Proctor for the King, a Register, or Recorder.

They enjoy their places by Patent from the King, though they be named by the
Captain-Governour, and their Jurisdiction extends it self over eleven Villages,
and their Territories. Lastly, There is one Keeper of the Castle and movables.

In the Castle of the Bastille at Paris, where Prisoners of State are kept,
there are
One Captain-Governour, several standing-Guards, one Chaplain, one Physician,
one Apothecary, which Office was Created the 17th of February, 1647. with power
of ordering a Committimus, under the Great-Seal; and one Chyrurgeon. Over the
Arsenal which belongs to it, there is likewise one Great Master of the
Artillery, and several other Officers.

Of the Palace of Versailles.
This is a Palace, in a manner, wholly reared by this King, chosen in a
situation naturally bad, the better to show his Magnificence: For there is no
Water naturally comes thither, but all forced, yet are there the most sumptuous
and magnificent Waterworks perhaps in the World, and in the greatest number,
which are all fed by Water brought by Wells, Machines and Pipes, a prodigious
distance.

There is one Intendant of the Palace of Versailles, of Trianon, of the Parks,
and of the other Lands and Lordships of Versailles and Marly. The Description
of it would take up a Volume it self, it being the glory of all the Royal
Buildings and Gardens of France: It has a Canal, where there are several
Galleys, Ships, and Gondola's, and has abundance of like Officers and Keepers
belonging to it, as there is at Fountain-bleau; which it was made to outvie.
Here is all the present Kings delight.

In the Month of April in 1682. The King established there twelve Clergymen to
serve the Chapel of the Palace, and two other persons, of which, six were to
be Priests, and six Clerks, and two Lay-Brothers. All these fourteen persons,
are at present, of the Congregation of the Mission. And in 1683. the King
retained and settled a Printer there, who has a Salary of 300 l. a year.

Of the Castle of Monceaux.
Catharine of Medicis, Wife to Henry the Second, who was not King of France,
till the year 1547. Built at Monceaux, a House truly Royal, and made a
Magnificent Seat of a Country place it was before. There is belonging to it, a
Governour-Captain, and Keeper of the Castle of Monceaux, and Captain of the
Game of the Warren of Meaux, and the Plains belonging to it; and under him, a
Keeper of the Castle, and movables of the same: And another Keeper of the
Great Lower Court.

Of the Castle of Chambor.
There was a Castle at Chambor, built in old time, by the Counts of Blois: But
the Castle now standing, was built by Francis the First.

There is a Governor of it, and Captain of the Game: A Lieutenant, and a
Deputy-Lieutenant.

One Keeper, and one Porter of the Castle.

One Master of the Waters and Forests.

One Provost, who is Counselor and particular Lieutenant of Blois.

One Proctor for the King.

A Recorder.

Four Ordinary Guards, and one Huntsman, and the Porters of the several Gates
of the Park, in number six.

One Keeper of the Decoy, or Duck-Pond.

And under the Super-intendant of the Buildings, there are two Surveyors or
Comptrollers.

Of the Castle of Blois.
Though this Palace belongs to Monsieur, the Kings Brother, yet his Majesty
disposes of all the Offices and Places belonging to it. There are in it,

One Keeper of the Castle, one Porter, one Keeper of the Keys of the
Lower-Court, four Horse-Guards, two Foot-guards; one Pheasant-Hunter; two
Gardners and Keepers of the upper and lower Gardens.

Of Plessis les Tours.
In this Palace, died Lewis XI. in 1483. There is belonging to it, a Governor,
and some other Officers.

There are several other Royal Houses and Palaces, which are at present
slighted, and not looked after.

The present King bearing the Sun for his Devise, Monsieuer le Brun, his Chief
Painter, has represented in a piece of Tapistry of twelve pieces, so many Royal
Houses, alluding to the several Celestial Houses that King of Planets passes
through; with the name and sign of each Month.

1. For January, on the top of the whole Tapstry, is expressed the Louvre, with
the Sign Aquarius.

2. For February, the Palace Royal, with the Hall of the Balls; and the Sign
Pisces.

3. For March, the Castle of Madrid, in the Wood of Boulogne, with a
representation of the Hunting of the Deer, with the Sign Aries.

4. For April, Versailles, with the Sign Taurus.

5. For May, that side of the New Castle of St. Germain en Lay, toward the
River, with the Sign Gemini.

6. For June, that side of Fountain-bleau toward the Garden-Plot of the Tyber,
with the Sign Cancer.

7. For July, the Castle of Vincennes, with the Sign Leo.

8. For August, the Palace of Marimont in Flanders, near Mons; which was the
House of Archduke Leopold, with the Sign Virgo: But this House was restored
again to the Spaniards, by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678.

9. For September, the Castle of Chambor, with the Sign Libra.

10. For October, the Palace of the Tuilleries, with the Sign Scorpio.

11. For November, the Castle of Blois, with the Sign Sagittarius

12. For December, the Palace of Monceaux, with the Sign Capricorn: There are
several Royal Houses not expressed there, as that of Compiegne, Plessis les
Tours, etc.

Besides the particular Officers of all these Palaces, and their Appurtenances,
there are two other General Officers for all of them, viz.

1. An Intendant or Surveyor-General of the Kings Waters and Fountains in all
his Houses Royal: He it is that gives out all the Orders to the Workmen about
all Works to be done to the Waters, Grottes, and artificial Waterworks in any
of them; He has Officers under him at Paris, that take care of the Aque-ducts:
He has a Salary of 3000 l.

2. An Intendant of the Devises and Inscriptions upon Royal Edifices: which was
an Office of great esteem in the time of Francis the First.

In his Patent he is styled Intendant of the Inscriptions of the Royal and
public Buildings, of inventions of Trophies, designs and draughts of Painting,
Emblems, Descriptions, and other Decorations, made in the Chambers, Closets,
Galleries, Gardens and Houses Royal; as also of those which are to be made upon
the Portals, and of Triumphal Arches and other Works for the solemn Entries of
their Majesty's into any Towns, or upon any other account whatsoever. He has a
Salary of 1800 l. paid Quarterly at the Treasure Royal.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Great Marshal of the Lodgings, or Knight-Harbinger, and of the other
Marshals of the Lodgings, and Harbingers.

THE Great Marshal of the Lodgings is Monsieur Lewis Doger de Cavoye; he has
3000 l. Salary, 4000 l. Board-Wages at the Chamber of Deniers, 600 l. a Month
extraordinary allowance, and several other perquisites.

His Office is, to receive the Kings Orders concerning his Lodging, and those
of his Court, and to communicate them to the other Marshals of the Lodgings and
Harbingers.

There are twelve Marshals of the Lodgings, or chief Harbingers, who have every
one a Salary of 800 l. a yearly gratuity of 400 l. and 900 l. extraordinary;
and when the Court is on the march, a hundred pence a day for their Diet, which
is paid them from the day they have Orders to set out. They serve quarterly,
three every quarter, and in the time of their Waiting, have their Diet at three
different Tables; the first at the old Table of the Great Master, the second at
the Table of the Masters of the Household, and the third at the Almoners Table.
They have besides, in the Armies, every one their rations, or allowances of
Ammunition-Bread.

They are sworn by the Great Marshal of the Lodgings, or Knight-Harbinger, and
bear in the Kings House Canes after the fashion of a Majors Staff, or else a
Staff garnished with Silver at top and bottom, with the Arms of his Majesty on
the Pommel, and this Inscription, N..... Marshal of the Kings Lodgings. The
Staff of the Great Marshal of the Lodgings is garnished with Silver, both on
the handle and the top, having on the Pommel or Handle, the Arms of France, and
the rest of the Handle set with Flower-deluces, wrought in Diamonds.

Three Marshals of the Lodgings, or chief Harbingers, and four other
Harbingers, when they come out of Waiting with the King, enter into Waiting
with the Dauphin, and have there the same allowance they had with the King.

There were formerly four Harbingers of the Body, but they were suppressed in
1680. in whose room, the King established eight Harbingers in Ordinary,
quarterly Waiters, who wait two every quarter, so that whereas there were
before but forty, there are now forty eight Harbingers quarterly Waiters,
serving by twelve a quarter, which have every of them, a Salary of 240 l. 120
l. gratuity, 450 l. extraordinary, and when the Court is on the march, a Crown
a day for their Diet, from the day they set out; and in the Armies their
rations of Ammunition-Bread.

The places of all these are in the Kings Gift, and they are all sworn by the
Great Marshal, or Knight-Harbinger of the Lodgings.

At the beginning of every quarter, the three Marshals of the Kings Lodgings in
Waiting, agree together, to separate the twelve Harbingers for that quarter
into three Bands, allotting four to each Band.

1. One of these Harbingers, who is ordinarily the eldest or Foreman, makes
according to the style of this Court, the Body, or the Gross, that is to say,
it is he, that in the presence of the Marshal of the Lodgings, or chief
Harbinger, marks out with Chalk; First, The Kings, or the Kings and Queens
joint Apartments. Secondly, The Offices. Thirdly, The eating Halls, or
Dining-rooms, and Fourthly, The Apartments of those that are preferred in the
Kings Lodgings.

First, By the Kings Apartments, are meant, the Kings Bed-Camber, Antichamber,
Closet, Wardrobe, Guard-Chamber, and other necessary Apartments for the Kings
or Queens persons.

Secondly, By the Offices, are meant the seven Offices, as the Goblet, the
Kitchen, etc. afore-described.

Thirdly, By the Eating-Halls, or Dining-rooms, are meant, the Hall of the new
Table of the Great Master, otherwise called the Hall of Monsieur the Duke; and
that of the Great Chamberlains Table; which two Tables ought to be within the
Kings Lodgings, when there is room enough, or else, as near as may be: Next the
Hall of the Great Masters old Table, and that of Masters of the Households,
which are sometimes called the first and second Tables of the said Masters; The
Serdeau's Hall, or the Kings voiding Hall, the Almoners Hall, the Quarterly
Waiters, Valets de Chambers, or Bed-Chamber-mens Hall: There was likewise the
Chief Valets de Chambres, or Bed-Chamber-mens Hall, but it was taken away on
the first of January 1681.

Fourthly, Under the name of the Preferred in the Kings Lodgings, are
comprehended, the Great or High Chamberlain, the Chief-Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, the Great Master of the Wardrobe, the Captain of the Guards, and
the Master of the Wardrobe. In case the Lodging be so scanty, that after the
King is Lodged, there remain but one single Apartment, the Captain of the
Guards ought to have the preference of it before all others, and if there
remain two, then the Chief-Gentleman of the Bedchamber is to have the First,
and the Captain of the Guards the second; but if there be three, then the Great
Chamberlain is to have the preference before the two others.

When the Queen marches with the King, the Marshals, or chief Harbingers of the
Kings Lodgings, after they have given Order for marking out Apartments for the
Queen, are to cause other Apartments to be Chalked out in their Majesty's
Lodgings, for her Ladies, in this Order; viz. First, For the Super-intendant,
or Stewardess of the Queens Household. Secondly, For the Lady of Honor.
Thirdly, For the Tire-Woman, or Dressing-Lady. Fourthly, For the Ladies of the
Palace. Fifthly, For the Chief-Gentlewoman of the Bedchamber. And sixthly, For
the other Gentlewomen of the Bedchamber: And if after the Queen be lodged,
there remain but one Apartment more, then the Chief-Gentlewoman of the
Bedchamber, ought to have it before any of the other Ladies, and
Female-Officers.

The Harbinger which makes the Body, when there is room enough, marks out to in
the same House, Apartments for the Chief-Physician, Chyrurgion and Apothecary
of the Body.

The Harbingers of the Queens Body, or of the Dauphins, or Monsieurs, cannot
Chalk out any thing that belongs to that they call the service of the Body: But
it belongs to the Kings Harbinger that makes or heads the Body to do it, so
that they cannot mark any places for the seven Offices, but those that are
appointed them by the Kings Harbinger that makes the Body, that is, as is above
explained, that is, the Eldest, or Foreman of the Band, or Company.

2. Another Harbinger is to take care to chalk out all the Ranks, and
Preferred, without the Kings Lodgings: By the Ranks, are meant, First, The
Lodgings for the Princes. Secondly, For the Great Officers. Thirdly, For the
Dukes and Peers. Fourthly, For the Marshals of France, the Secretaries,
Ministers of State, and other Persons of Quality: And by the preferred without
the Kings Lodgings, are meant those Lords, or other Great Persons, who are
recommended to be lodged in the Town, by the Kings express order.

Note, That the same Harbinger that makes the Body, very often marks to the
Lodgings, for the Ranks, and abovesaid preferred persons.

3. Another Harbinger marks out the Ordinary of the Kings Household, that is,
Lodgings for the Officers of it, viz. For the first or chief Almoner, for the
chief Master of the Household, for the Master of the Household in Ordinary, for
the Captain of the Guards of the Gate, for the Lieutenant and Ensigns of the
Life-guards, and generally, for all the other Officers of the Kings Household.

It often happens, that besides the Harbinger that marks out the Stables in the
Town, there is another that takes up Stables in the Neighboring Villages, and
provides Lodgings for the Equipages.

The King generally is prevailed on, with much facility, to grant to the
Marshals of his Lodgings, and his other Harbingers, Reversions of their Places,
in favor not only of their Sons, but of their Grand-Sons, Sons-in-Law,
Brother, and Nephews.

He also grants them Briefs, impouring them to retain or stop a certain sum to
be deducted out of the yearly Revenue of their places, and paid by their
Successors, for their Wives, if they have no Children, for their Daughters; if
they have no Sons, or if they have neither Wives nor Children, for the younger
Brethren of their Family.

At the first Entries made by Kings into any Cities of their Kingdom, the
Officers of the Town are to pay a certain sum as a Fee, to the Marshals and
Harbingers of the Kings Lodgings, or else the one half of the profits of the
Triumphal Arches, Porches, Tapistries, and all the Decorations, is to fall to
the Marshals, and the other to the Harbingers of the said Lodgings.

The Marshals of the Queens Lodgings, and of those of the Dauphiness, of
Monsieur, of Madame, and the particular Harbingers of the Princes of the Blood,
of the Chancery, and of other Bodies, as also the Men or Messengers sent by
other Princes, Dukes and Peers, and other great Lords, to take up their
Lodgings, receive their Quarters or Lodgings from the Marshals and Harbingers
in Ordinary of the Kings Household.

Whenever Monsieur, or Madame, happen to be traveling in Company with the
Queen, or the Dauphiness, when the King is not there, then the Marshals or
Harbingers of the Queen or Dauphinesses Lodgings, are to appoint Monsieurs, or
Madams Harbingers, what Lodgings and Quarters they are to take up.

The Marshals and Harbingers in Ordinary of the Kings Lodgings, are reputed to
be of the Body of the Kings Gend'armes, or Men at Arms, as having been formerly
drawn out of the ancient Companies of the said Gend'armes; and the late King
Lewis the Thirteenth, (who under-stood exactly well the original of all the
different Offices of his Household) gave the Marshals of his Lodgings place in,
and incorporated them into his Company of Gend'armes, at the Head of which, his
Majesty usually fights on a day of Battle, or on any other occasion; and made
the Harbingers serve in his Company of Musketeers, at the Siege of Corbie, to
which service he summoned all his whole Household, that is, the Arrire-ban of
his Household, which he placed by themselves in his Army.

This said number of Gend'armes detached out of the ancient Companies, was
usually sent before, to provide Lodging and Quarters for his Majesty, and the
Troops that were with him: And still to this day, the Marshals of the Kings
Lodgings, both in Town and Country, give out the Orders for the quartering of
the French Life-guards, of the hundred Suissers of the Gend'armes of the light
Horse, of the Musketeers, of the Regiments of the French and Swisse-guards,
when all the said Troops attend the King in his march.

And in effect, the Marshals of the Lodgings in France, are what the
Quarter Masters are in Germany, who rise to the Highest Commands in Armies.

The Marshals and Harbingers of the Kings Lodgings, were formerly likewise
Marshals or Quarter Masters of the Camps and Armies, and the same persons that
provided Lodgings for the Kings Household, always took up Quarters to for the
Armies, as have done several of them that are still living: But some of their
Body, in the time of the late King Lewis the Thirteenth, got themselves made
Marshals, peculiarly of the Camps and Armies, and got Patents of it, as of a
distinct Office; notwithstanding which, the Marshals and Harbingers of the
Lodgings of the Household, serve still in the Armies, either in the absence of
the others who have Patents, as is said, for being Camp-Marshals, or
Quarter Masters, or when the number of these others is not sufficient for all
the Armies the King has on Foot. When the King is in an Army, the Marshals of
the Lodgings of his Household, have privilege to take at least two thirds of
the room, to lodge his Majesty, and all the Officers of the Royal Houses; and
it was Ordered by the King, that the remaining third should be disposed of by
the said Marshals of the Lodgings, or Quarter Masters of the Camps and Armies,
for the general Officers and other Officers in the Army, necessary to be near
his Majesty's Person: I say, the Marshals of the Kings Lodgings have power to
take up at least two thirds for the King, because, if after they have divided
the whole into three equal parts, there should remain two, or but one Lodging
over and above; those one or two so over and above, or supernumerary, are to be
taken up likewise for his Majesty and his Court, that they may be scanted. As
for Example, It is true, that where there is but thirty Lodgings, the Marshals
of the Lodgings of the Household are to take but twenty, and the general
Officers of the Army are to have the other ten; but of fifty Lodgings, or
Lodgments, the Marshals of the Kings Lodgings will take thirty four, and the
general Officers of the Army will have but sixteen, and of forty Lodgments, the
Kings Marshals will have twenty seven, and leave the general Officers but
thirteen.

By the ancient Order, according to the Rules made for that purpose, none but
the Kings Harbingers can mark out Lodgings with white Chalk, those of the
Princes and others being obliged for distinctions sake to mark out theirs with
a yellow Crayon; with this further difference, that the Kings mark only is put
upon the Street-Doors, and the others only upon the Doors of particular
Chambers within side the House.

The Order observed in Quartering in an Army.
In an Army, where the King is Present, the first Quarter is for him, or where
he is not, for the General, and the next belongs to a Marshal of France to
choose, or if there be two Marshals of France there together, then he that
Commands that Day or Week, is to have the Choice, for sometimes they agree to
Command by turns, one one Day, or one Week, and another another: But if there
happen to be more than two together, without having any Command there, then
they choose their Quarters according to their standing; And next to the Marshals
of France, the Dukes and Peers take place; for in Armies, Dukes and Peers are
Lodged always after Marshals of France. But in following the Court, out of an
Army, this Order is observed; First their Majesty's are Lodged, then other
Royal Persons, then the Princes and Princesses, then the Great Officers of the
Crown, after them the Dukes and Peers, and lastly, the Marshals of France. The
Chancellor is Lodged next after the Princes, and in marking his Lodging, the
word Pour, or for is used, the meaning of which, we have already explained;
Besides all which, which are called the Ranks, there are the Preferred, of
which we have spoken.

The Marshals and Harbingers of the Kings Lodgings, are also employed by his
Majesty's special Command, to provide Lodgings for the Assemblies of the States
General of the Kingdom, when any are called, or for the States of any
particular Province, when the King is to be present at them; as likewise for
the Assemblies of the Clergy, which is to be understood when they assemble in
any other place but Paris, for there no Lodgings are marked for them.

Likewise when the persons composing any Sovereign Courts, or other public
Bodies, are to meet at St. Denis in France, by the Kings Order, and according
to Custom, to assist at the Funeral Pomps or Solemnities made at the Burials,
or Anniversary Services for Kings, Queens, and Princes, or Princesses of the
Blood, or others, the Marshals and Harbingers of the Kings Lodgings go thither
some days before to provide them Lodgings.

The King too usually sends the said Marshals and Harbingers of his Lodgings,
to meet Foreign Princes, and Princesses, that come into, or pass through his
Kingdom, to order and prepare Lodgings for them every where as they pass.

The Title and Quality of Squires has been conferred and confirmed upon the
Marshals and Harbingers in Ordinary of the Kings Lodgings, by several Orders of
the Council of State. Next, the Marshals and Harbingers of the Lodgings, is the
Captain of the Guides, with his Company, who is a necessary Officer in Journies.

Of the Captain of the Guides.
The Office of Captain of the Guides, for the Conducting of his Majesty,
formerly enjoyed by one, is now exercised by two Brothers, who part between
them the following Salary and Profits, viz. 2000 l. Salary paid quarterly by
the Treasurers of the Household, 600 l. a Month extraordinary during any Voyage
or Journey, and 300 l. when the Court is at any of the Royal Houses; they eat
at the Kings Serdeau's, or Water-Servers Table, with the Gentlemen Waiters.

The Captain of the Guides, when the King is on his march along the Country, is
always to keep by one of the Boots or Portals of the Kings Coach, to be ready
to tell his Majesty the names of the places, Cities, Castles, Towns and
Villages upon the Road, if he ask them, or resolve any other Question
concerning them.

There are commonly at least two Guides on Horseback, that wear the Kings
Livery, that ride a little before his Majesty to Conduct him, and place
themselves ordinarily at the head of the Light Horse.

If there be any need of repairing the Highways for the Kings Passage, the
Captain of the Guides usually lays out what is needful for that purpose, and is
repaid again at the Treasure-Royal.

For fear the Officers of the Goblet, or of the Mouth, should fail to come up
to the place where the King is to eat, when he is traveling along the Country,
the Captain of the Guides sometimes gives them notice, in what part of the Way
his Majesty has a mind to Dine.

He has power to settle Guides, to Conduct his Majesty in every Town of the
Kingdom, and after he has given his Grants to the said Guides, they are
admitted as such, before the Marshals of France.

These Guides wear the Kings Livery, and are exempted from Billeting of
Soldiers.

The Captain of the Guides is sworn by the High Constable of France, when there
is one, or otherwise, by the Eldest Marshal of France.

Of some other Officers necessary in Journies, which depend on the Great Master
of the Household, viz.
One Waggon-Master of the Kings Equipage, that Conducts all the Equipage, and
commands all the Captains, and takes his Orders from the Office of the Household.

This Office was Created in 1668. He has an allowance of 100 l. a Month out of
the Chamber of Deniers when the Court is on its march along the Country, and 50
l. a Month when it is at Paris; and 400 l. besides, extraordinary Wages, for
the extraordinary pains he takes for the Kings Service, in doing what is
ordered him by the Office, allowed him upon the last Bill of every Quarter.

One Aid, or Helping Waggon-Master, whose Office was also Created the same year
1668. who has, when the Court is at Paris, 25 l. a Month, and when it is on the
march, 50 l. a Month allowed him at the Chamber of Deniers: We have already
spoken of the Captain of the Mules of the Chamber, in speaking of the said
Chamber, of which he depends.

Two Captains of the Carriages of the Kings Household, who have a Salary of 300
l. a piece paid by the Treasurers of the Household; and besides, at the Chamber
of Deniers, an allowance to them, for the maintenance of fifty ordinary Horses,
at the rate of 23 d. a day, for each Horse 57 l. 10 d. a day, or 21045 l. a
year.

They Conduct all the Carriages of the seven Offices, when the Court marches,
either in Person, or by their Servants.

One Captain-Keeper, and Guardian-General of the Tents and Pavilions of the
Court, and of his Majesty's Pavilions of War, who has a Salary of 800 l. and 50
l. a Month extraordinary in time of Service; and

One Keeper of the Tents of the Courts of the Kitchins, and of his Majesty's
Stables, who is allowed 50 l. a Month at Paris, and 100 l. a Month in the
Country, at the Chamber of Deniers.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Judge of the Kings Court and Retinue, who is the Provost of the
Household, or Great Provost of France.

THE Provost of the Kings Household, or Great Provost of France, is the ordinary
Judge of the Kings Household.

The Title of Great Provost implies two things: For first, He is Judge of the
Kings Household, and Secondly, He is Captain of a Company of a hundred Guards,
called the Guards of the Provostship, which is another part of his Office in
the Kings House: We shall speak of him here only as in the first quality,
reserving the latter till we come to the Military Officers of the Household.

His Office is one of the ancientest of the Kings Household, and one may say,
that in the Jurisdiction which he retains of administering Justice to all the
Kings Officers, and other Persons that follow the Court, he has succeeded the
ancient Count, or Mayor of the Palace, which was an Office that begun with the
Monarchy it self.

He is sworn by the King himself, and is received into the Great Council, where
he takes place as Secretary of State.

He has the Privilege to choose his Lodging after the Princes, Dukes and Peers,
and Marshals of France have chosen theirs; for which reason, he is called, the
last in the Ranks.

He has a Salary of 2000 l. and an annual Gratuity of 8000 l.

All the Officers of the Provost-ship are received by his Majesty upon the
nomination of the Great Provost, and afterward take out Letters from the King,
under the Great Seal, directed to the Great Council, where they are admitted
upon those Letters, and qualified Judges.

The Great Provost Judges of all matters, both Civil and Criminal, happening
between the Officers of the Kings Household among themselves, or between them
and others which are not so.

The Jurisdiction of the Provostship of the Household, is the ordinary Court of
Justice for the Kings Household, and therefore from the beginning was ordered to
be kept in the Louvre, that so the Kings Officers, and others of his Court and
Retinue, having their natural Judge within the Kings House, might not be
diverted from the service of his Majesty; for some years, the place where the
Provosts Court used to be kept, being taken up by the Queen Mother, it was
transferred to the Fort-Eveque, or Bishops-Fort. At present, the Officers of
the Provostship, have their Auditory, in the enclosure of the Great
Council Chamger; there they have their Hall of Audience, their Council Chamger,
their Civil and Criminal Records, or Registers, and there is the Office of the
Ushers of the Provostship.

The present King, by a Brief bearing date the 8th of September, 1658.
declared, that he would settle the Seat or Court of the Jurisdiction of the
Provost of the Household, re-established in the Louvre, and that he would cause
a convenient place there to be marked out, and set apart for that purpose.

The said Court is kept there three times a Week, viz. on Tuesday, Thursday,
and Saturday-Mornings.

People plead there by a Proctor, as in other Courts, but in a more summary and
concise way. In civil matters there lies an Appeal from it, to the Great
Council, but in matters Criminal, the Great Provost Judges without Appeal, as
well as the Masters of Requests, and those of the Great Council.

The Officers of the Kings Household, and those of his Court and Retinue, may by
special privilege, bring all their Causes into this Court, whether they be
Civil or Criminal, since the Court was chiefly erected in their favor: There
needs no Committimus to cite any one that belongs to, or follows the Court, but
only an assignation, or warning, taken out of the Provosts Court, by virtue of
a Commission out of the Registry there. But as the said persons have the
privilege to bring their actions against their Debtors in this Court, or to
appeal from their Prosecutors, thither they may do it, if they please, by
virtue of their Committimus, and at their choice, bring their Causes, either
before the Masters of the Requests of the Palace, or of the Requests of the
Household, or before the Provost of the Household.

The Great Provost only has power to apply Seals, make Inventories, and do all
other acts of Justice in the Louvre, and in the Galleries and other places
thereunto belonging, and in other Royal Houses within fourteen Leagues distance
of Paris, as it was determined a Contradictory Sentence of the Council of the
25 of March 1650. given in favor of the Officers of the Provostship of the
Household, against the Officers of the Chatelet. He may also take cognizance of
all crimes and particular offenses, and other Causes, pro or con, any way
relating to the people of the Court, and of the Kings Retinne, and belonging to
the Royal Houses, and against Vagabonds, and of several other Cases, with the
consent and advice of the other Provosts.

When he follows the Court any where, he Taxes and sets a price upon all
Provisions, gives assistance for taking of Lodgings, if any resistance be made,
and does other things necessary for the civil Government there, by his
Lieutenants of the Long Robe, or in their absence, by the Lieutenants and
Exempts of the short Robe, who call to their assistance, the Officers or
Magistrates, and chief Inhabitants of the place.

When the Court takes a Journey, the Great Provost Commands a sufficient number
of Tradesmen and Handicrafts-men to follow it, to whom he grants Letters of
Privilege, by which they are obliged to furnish the Court, and its Retinue,
with all necessaries, who are called the Privileged Tradesmen, and by virtue
of the said Letters, are empowered to keep open Shop in Paris, or elsewhere,
and enjoy several other Exemptions.

Of the Officers of Judicature belonging to the Provostship of the Household.
For the better administration of Justice to the Officers of the Kings
Household, and to the rest of his Court and Retinue, the great Provost has under
him two Lieutenants which are put in by the King, but named by the Great
Provost, and are admitted as such, in the Great Council, where they are sworn.

There was formerly but one Lieutenant General, the other being but a
particular Lieutenant, but by an Edict of the Month of September, registered in
the Great Council the 7th of November following, the King made these two
Offices equal; so that at present, there are two Lieutenants-General for both
Civil and Criminal matters, they have each of them 400 l. Salary, and 600 l.
gratuity.

The first of these exercises his Office the first six Months of the Year,
where the Kings Court is, and the other six Months he keeps the Provosts Court
at Paris, within the Enclosure of the Great Council Chamger when the King is
abroad, and the Great-Council at Paris.

The other serves the latter six Months of the Year at the Kings Court, and the
first six Months keeps the Provosts Court at Paris, for the causes of those
that are Officers of any Royal Houses within his Precinct, and privileged
persons and others.

So that there is always two Seats or Courts of Justice of the Great Provost,
one at Paris, for the better expedition of the Causes of the Officers, and
privileged Persons belonging to the Royal Houses, and another where the Court
is, when his Majesty is not in Paris, as he never is to stay.

Note, That the two Lieutenants, the Kings Proctor, and the Register of the
Provosts Court, are allowed each of them, at the Salt-Granary at Paris, two
Minots of Free-Salt, that is, for paying only some ancient Duties.

The Kings Proctor there, has a Salary of 400 l. 75 l. Augmentation-Money, and
a gratuity of 1200 l. He serves all the year round, and has a Substitute. There
is one Register in chief, both for Civil and Criminal matters, who has 104 l.
Salary, and 400l. gratuity. He has under him two Commis, or Deputies, that have
the privilege to wear both Gowns and Caps, at Audiences; and two other
Deputies, to take informations under the Lieutenants of the Short-Robe, in the
Field, and out of the Kings Quarter; and then they are obliged within twenty
four hours, to put up their informations into the Registry or Recorders Office,
and to cause their Prisoners to be brought up to be Examined by the Lieutenants
of the Long-Robe, and in their absence, by the Lieutenants and Exempts of the
short one, who only have power to take cognizance of, and judge criminal Causes
among the Kings Retainers, and in his Quarter.

All the Officers abovementioned are Commoners or Tablers in the Kings
Household, and on the four chief Festivals of the year, are allowed Bread, Wine
and Meat, Candles on Candlemas, and Corpus Christi days, and Prayer-Books and
Cloth in the Holy Week.

There are also twelve Proctors called Postulants. One Chief Usher, and twelve
other Ushers that wear the Kings Livery, and carry in their hands a blue Wand,
with Flower-deluces at the end. They are Exempt from Taxes, Subsidies, and
Loans, and enjoy all the other Privileges of the Commoners of the Kings
Household.

There are likewise two Notaries, and Keepers of the Royal Notes, that follow
the Court; And

One Usher Trumpeter at 272 l. 10 d. Salary. And

One Executioner of Criminal Sentences.

Besides these, there are other Officers as they call them, of the Short-Robe,
that are a kind of Medium between Civil and Military Officers, which we shall
add here, viz.

One Lieutenant General.

Four Lieutenants, officiating each two quarters in a year, who have a Salary
of 400 l. and a gratuity of 600 l.

Four other Lieutenants quarterly Waiters.

The Lieutenant of the quarter, beginning in January, has the liberty, if he
will, to serve and bear the Staff in the quarter beginning in July, he of July
quarter in January, he of April in October, and he of October in April.

In the absence of the Great Provost, they receive Orders immediately from the
King.

When the Lieutenant of the Sword, or of the Short-Robe, of the Provosts Court,
has a mind to go up to the Seat of the Audiences at Paris, he sits on the right
hand of the Lieutenant General that is of the Long-Robe, and that presides
there, and the Kings Proctor, as a Counselor by his place, sits on his left:
This has been practiced several times, and lately, on Saturday the 30th of
August, 1681. When the Sieur Barbier, Lieutenant General of the Long-Robe, had
at his right hand, the Sieur Tournier, Lieutenant of the Short-Robe, and the
Sieur Le Roy de Gomberville, Proctor for the King, on his left; and in the
absence of the Lieutenant General of the Long-Robe, the Lieutenant of the Sword
presides, and has the Kings Proctor on his left hand.

There is likewise another Lieutenant of the Provostship, that ordinarily waits
on the Chancellor, where he has his Diet, and 5500 l. Salary and gratuity.

They are likewise Commoners of the Household, and enjoy the same Privileges
with other Officers of the same.

As for the Exempts and Guards belonging to the Provostship, we shall speak of
them among the Military Officers of the Kings Household.

There are belonging to the Provostship, besides these, one Chaplain, called
the Chaplain of St. Barbara.

One Marshal, or Harbinger of the Lodgings.

Three Treasurers of the Provost-ship, that pay all the Officers of it, both
Civil and Military; they serve by turns, each one his year.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Great Master, the Master, and Aid or Assistant, of the Ceremonies.

THE Great Master of the Ceremonies of France is Jule Armand Colbert, Marquess
of Blainville, he was sworn the 30th of January, 1685. His Salary is 3000 l.

He is sworn by the Great Master of the Household, under him there is

One Master of the Ceremonies, who has 2000 l. Salary, and is likewise sworn by
the Great Master of the Household; and

One Aid, or Assistant of the Ceremonies, at 600 l. Salary.

The Great Master, Master and Assistant, or Aid of the Ceremonies, exercise
their Offices jointly at Royal Solemnities, bearing in their hands, a Staff of
Ceremony, covered with black Velvet, with the handle and top tipped with Ivory.

The Assistant of Ceremonies is also sworn by the Great Master of the Household.

They are to be present at Coronations of Kings, and at the opening of
Assemblies of the Estates, at Christnings, and Marriages of Kings and Princes,
at the first and last Audiences of Ambassadors, both Ordinary and
Extraordinary, at the conducting of Queens or Princesses, and at their
Obsequies and Funeral Pomps, where they order all, and take care to give every
one their Rank and Precedence due to their quality.

They are clad in different habits almost at every one of those different
Ceremonies.

When the Great Master, the Master, or the Aid of the Ceremonies, go to carry
any Order or Message to any of the Sovereign Courts, after they have saluted
them, they take their place among the Counselors, but with this difference,
that if it be the Great Master of the Ceremonies himself, he takes place above
the last Counselor, but if it be the Master in Ordinary, or his Aid, he takes
his Seat after them all; and then upon a sign made to him by the chief
President, he speaks to them from his Seat, with his Head covered, his Sword by
his side, and his Staff of Ceremonies in his hand.

At the first and last Audiences of Ambassadors, the Great Master, the Master,
or Aid of the Ceremonies, marches on the right hand of the Ambassador, a
little before him, from the bottom of the Stairs, to the Guard-Chamber, where
being come, he advances before him to give notice to his Majesty.

There is likewise an Exempt of the Kings Guards appointed to wait at
Ceremonies, who in the Book of the Establishment is called Major of the first
Company of the Guards, Commanded at present, by the Duke of Noailles.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Introductour of Ambassadors.

THere were formerly two of these Introductours or Conductours, but by the
present King, they were reduced to one, who is styled the sole Introductour of
Foreign Princes and Ambassadors to his Majesty, who at present is Monsieur
Michael de Chabenat, Knight and Count de Bonneville, etc.

His Salary is 1200 l. But he has another under him, at a like Salary.

The Introductour of Ambassadors, both for Audiences and all other things
relating to his Office, receives Orders only from the King: He conducts,
receives, and introduces into the Chamber of their Majesty's, or of the
Children of France, and Princes and Princesses of the Blood, any other Kings,
Sovereign Princes and Princesses, or Cardinals, Ambassadors, Ordinary and
Extraordinary, Gentlemen Envoys, Residents, Agents, Heads of the Orders,
Foreign Deputies, bearing any Character, or making any public Figure; and
generally all Foreign Persons of Quality, when they come to the Kings Palace
for Audience: He likewise Conducts the Wives of any such persons abovesaid, to
the like Audience of the Queen.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Secretary of the Household, and the Treasurers that pay the Officers of
it.

THE Secretary of the Household, who is at present, the Marquess of Seignelay,
the late Great Colberts Eldest Son, who has as Secretary of the Kings Household,
3000 l. Salary, and 1200 l. as Secretary of the Chamber, besides 6000 l.
Board-Wages, and 1200 l. for his first Commis, or Clerk. In all the Books of
Establishment, the Treasurers are placed after all the rest of the Household, in
this Order;

1. There are three Treasurers of the Epargne, or Spare Treasure, that is to
say, the Treasure of the Kings clear Money, all charges of the state born, that
are entitled Keepers of the Treasure Royal, they wait by turns, and pay all
the Treasurers of the Kings Household.

2. Three Treasurers of the Kings Offerings, Alms and Devotions; These
Treasurers have no Comptroller.

3. General Treasurers of the Household, that serve by turns every one his year,
they are allowed each 1800 l. Board-Wages, at the Chamber of Deniers.

It Is upon the Certificates of these Treasurers, that credit is given in all
the Provinces throughout the Kingdom, for maintaining the Kings Officers in
their Privileges, as Exemption from Taxes, Committimus, etc.

They take the Oath of Fidelity in the Chamber of Accounts.

To these belong two Comptrollers.

Three Treasurers of the Cash, or Pay-Office of the Chamber, serving by turns.

Three Treasurers of the Kings Pocket, or private Expenses, and of the affairs
of his Chamber.

They pay the Expenses of the Kings Clothes and Furniture, and the Fees allowed
several Officers for their Clothing.

We have already spoken of the Masters of the Chamber of Deniers, and the
Comptrollers-General, of the Cash or Pay-Office of the Chamber, and of the
private Expenses, in treating of the Chamber.

Two Treasurers of the Stables, that pay all the Expenses and Officers of the
Stables; and one Comptroller of the same.

Four Treasurers of every Company of Life-Guards, which make twelve in all,
besides the Quadriennial ones.

Three Treasurers of the hundred Suissers. Three Treasurers of the Provostship
of the Household, three Treasurers of the Gend'armes, or Men at Arms.

The Treasurers of the other Companies, as of the light Horse, the Musketeers,
the Gentlemen au bec de Corbin, or Gentlemen Pensioners.

Three Treasurers of the French-Guards, and their Comptrollers.

Three Treasurers of the Suisse-Guards.

The Treasurers of the casual Revenues.

Two General Treasurers of the Ordinary of the Wars, that pay all the old
Regiments.

The Treasurers of the Extraordinary of the Wars, that pay all the new
Regiments.

Three Treasurers of the Game, and of Hunting.

Three Treasurers of the Buildings.

One General Treasurer of the Vessels, or Navy.

One Treasurer of the Galleys.

A Treasurer of the Bridges and Causeys, and many others.

All these Treasurers receive their money every Month, at the Treasure Royal,
except those of the Life-Guards, who receive theirs once a Week; for as for
their other appointments, they are not paid till the Years end.

Note, That the Salaries and appointments of the Kings Officers cannot be stopped
in the hands of the Treasurers, according as it has been determined by several
Orders, and among others, by an Order of the Privy Council, of the 5th of June,
1657.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Kings Pleasures, and the Officers thereunto belonging.

FOrmerly, instead of the Great Huntsman, the Great Falconer, and the Great
Wolf-Hunter, there were only entered upon the Books of Establishment of the
Household, Hunters, Falconers, Partridge-Catchers, Fowlers, Wolf-Hunters, and
other Officers necessary for the Game. And there used to be two great
Hunting-Seasons observed in the Year, viz. at the risings of the Parliament, or
Assizes, which were held but twice a year.

I. Article.
Of the Great Hunter, or Huntsman.

This Officer has a Salary of 1200 l. 10000 l. appointment, and for his Dogs
6387 l. 10 d. which is in all 17587 l. 10 d. a year; besides other Gifts from
the King. Almost all the Offices and places here under-named are in his
disposal, when vacant.

He is sworn by the King himself, and gives Grants to the other Officers of the
Venery, or Hunting-Office.

He was formerly called, The Great Forester.

He has the super-intendance over all the Officers of the Kings Hunting-Office.
The first Great Hunter, was William de Gamaches, under Charles the Sixth, or
long before, as some will have it, one Hugues Sire, or Lord of Lesigems.

Under him are these Officers, viz.

One Lieutenant in Ordinary of the Hunting-Office, whose Salary is 1000 l.

Four Lieutenants Quarterly-Waiters, put in by the King, whose Salary is 1000 l.

Four other Lieutenants ordinarily Waiting at the said Office.

Four Deputy Lieutenants Quarterly-Waiters, at 500 l. Salary.

One other Deputy-Lieutenant.

Forty seven Gentlemen Hunters, and four other Gentlemen Hunters in Ordinary.

One Servant of the Dogs in Ordinary, on Horseback, Salary 400 l.

Four Servants of the Dogs in Ordinary, on Horseback, Quarterly-Waiters,
Salary 200 l.

Eighteen Servants of the Bloodhounds, at 150 l. Salary.

Fifteen Servants of the Dogs, Quarterly-Waiters, at 100 l. and two other
Servants of the Dogs, at 60 l.

Four Harbingers, at 150 l.

Four little Servants, or Boys in Ordinary, to look after the Dogs, that lie
under the same roof with them, at 80 l. apiece.

Two Pages, at 600 l.

Two Farriers, at 75 l.

One Chyrurgion, at 150 l.

One Gelder of Dogs, and Curer of Madness, at 75 l.

One Porter, or Carrier of the Hunting Bed.

Three General Treasurers beforementioned, whose Salary, with all other
profits, amounts yearly to 9300 l. each. They take the Title of Counselors to
the King.

Three Comptrollers of the Hunting-Office, of Hunting-Nets, and of the
Falconry, who have each 2065 l. 13 d. 4 deniers, Salary.

1. The first and chief Hunting of France, is that of the Red Deer. 2. That of
the Wild-Goat, and Fallow-Deer. 3. That of the Hare, and Fox. 4. That of the
Wolf. 5. That of the Wild-Boar.
There is a Pack of Hounds for the Wild-Goat, to which belong two Lieutenants,
who have 800 l. apiece yearly allowance.

One Baker, who has 60 l. Salary, and 4925 l. for feeding and maintaining the
Dogs.

Three Prickers, or Markers, who have 683 l. 6d. and 8 Deniers, or a halfpenny.

Three Foot-Servants of the Dogs, at 275 l. each, and several other Servants of
the Dogs, at 300 l. apiece.

One Page, at 600 l.

There is a Company of Horse-Guards of the Kings Pleasures, within the extent
of the Plains, Woods, and Thickets near, or within ten Leagues of the City of
Paris, under the Command of the Great Hunter, under whom there is

Lieutenant at 600 l. and a Deputy Lieutenant at 300 l. yearly Salary;

And six Archers, or Horse-Guards, at 150 l. a Man.

There is likewise, a Pack of Scotch-Hounds, for the Hare; to which belong

A Lieutenant, who has 1000 l. Salary, and 150 l. for a Page.

A Baker, at 60 l. a Pricker, or Marker of the Dogs, who has 647 l. 10 d.
Salary, and 70 l. for Clothes. A foot Servant of the Dogs, at 216 l. and a Page
as abovesaid.

Other Offices relating to Hunting, are
1. Those that belong to a Pack of Running-Hounds, to the number of 70; of
which there is a Captain, whose Appointments, besides his Pensions, amount
yearly to 13338 l. 10 d. He has also his particular Officers under him; he has
likewise the Fallow-Deer Dogs, and other Dogs for the Hare, which have been
established under the care of this Officer, ever since the last Kings time,
under the name of the Roasters, whereas before, it was the Fox-Dogs.

2. The Greyhounds of Champagne, or Champain, to which belong a Captain, who
has a yearly allowance of 2567 l. for himself, his Dogs, and four Servants to
look after them.

Article II.
Of the Captain General of the Hunting-Nets, and of the Equipage for Hunting
the Wild-Boar.

The Title of this Officer is, Captain General of the Kings Hunting-Nets,
Tents, and Pavilions, and of the Equipage of the Wild-Boar.

He is sworn by the King himself; He has 1200 l. standing Salary, 3972 l. 12 d.
Appointment, 3200 l. for maintaining the Carriage of the Nets, 1500 l. for
Clothing fifteen small Officers, 1400 l. for Coating fourteen Guards 2196 l.
for feeding forty Running-Hounds, 1464 l. for keeping twelve Great Greyhounds,
or lusty Dogs, in all, 14932 l. 10 d. He is allowed besides, several other
sums for particular Expenses.

He delivers out the Grants to all the Officers of the Hunting, and of the
Equipage for Hunting the Wild-Boar, all those places being at his disposal.

The Hunting of the Wild-Boar, may be managed four several ways. 1. The first
way is to kill them with Swords and Darts when they are taken in the Nets. 2.
The second, is to take them with Greyhounds, when they are in the said Nets:
The Ladies may take their part of the Divertisement, either of these two first
ways; for they may be placed out of danger, within the small enclosure of the
Nets. 3. The third way is to hunt the Wild-Boar with the Dog called Vautray, or
Tumbler. 4. And the fourth and last way is to take him by force; but these two
last sorts of Hunting are very toilsome, and not without danger.

When the King is a Hunting the Wild-Boar within the enclosure of the Nets, it
belongs to the Captain General of this Equipage, to present his Majesty a
Sword, or Darts to kill him; and none of his Courtiers are to take any Darts,
unless expressly Commanded by the King.

The Captain of this Equipage, goes or sends by the Kings Order, into all the
Forests and Thickets of France, where he thinks fit, to take with his
Hunting-Nets, Red-Deer, Does, or Fawns, to stock the Parks of any Royal House.

There are two Lieutenants of this Equipage serving each half a year by turns,
at 900 l. Salary apiece; and * two other Lieutenants in Ordinary, * two
Deputy Lieutenants half yearly Waiters, at 600 l. and * two Deputy Lieutenants
in Ordinary.

Eight Gentlemen in Ordinary of the Equipage, the two first of which have 360
l. and the six others 300 l. apiece.

All the abovenamed Officers of the Nets, may use the Title of Esquires.

* Four Prickers, or Markers in Ordinary, at 300 l. each.

Six Servants of the Bloodhounds, at 360 l.

Three Keepers of the Greyhounds, at 200 l. and * four other Servants of the
Dogs ordinarily looking to them, who are to lie in the Dog-Kennel, and two
Keepers of the Great Greyhounds, at 300 l. Two other Keepers of the Great
Greyhounds, at 200 l.

One Commissary of the Nets, at 300 l. and one Commissary Net-mender, at 200 l.
one Harbinger, 200 l. one Captain of the Carriage, 400 l. one Baker, and one
Farrier, at 200 l. each. Twenty Archers, or Guards of the Hunting-Nets, whereof
the six first have 300 l. and the other fourteen but 250 l. apiece, * one
Gelder of the Dogs, and Curer of Madness; * fifteen small Officers ordinarily
Waiting, and fourteen Keepers of the Hunting Nets.

Note, The Officers above-marked with a Star, are not mentioned in the
Establishment of the Court of Aids.

When the King goes a Hunting, he has always by him his Arquebuse, or
Arms-Bearer, that prepares him Arms ready charged. We have already mentioned
them among the Officers of the Chamber.

It is remarkable, that when the Dogs are to run, the Captains of the Packs
then to run, are to present the Staff or Wand, the mark of their Office, to the
Great Hunter, and he, to the King; as also, when the Deer, or any other Game is
taken, the Pricker cuts off the Foot, which he gives to his Captain, the
Captain, to the Great Hunter, and he presents it to the King.

There are besides the Great Hunter, and those under him, several other
Captains of the Game established in several Forests and Warrens, of which we
have spoken in the Chapter of the Royal Buildings and Houses.

There is likewise a Lieutenant of the Long-Robe, belonging to the Court of
Justice of the Captainship of the Waters and Forests.

The other Captains of Forests are to be seen at length, in the Sieur de
Salnove's Book of Hunting.

By a Declaration of the first of January, 1644. the King established, besides
these, three General Keepers of the Game and Pleasures of his Majesty,
throughout the whole extent of the Kingdom of France.

The Officers of the Hunting-Office, or the Game, enjoy the same Privileges as
the Commoners or Tablers of the Kings Household.

Article III.
Of the Great Falconer.

The Great Falconer of France has the super-intendance over all the Kings
Falconers, and is sworn by the King. He has 200 l. standing Wages, 3000 l.
Appointment, 6000 l. as chief over a Flight of Hawks for the Crow, and for
maintenance of the said Flight, 4000 l. for keeping four Pages, 3000 l. for
necessary Furniture and Implements for the Hawks, and 6000 l. for buying of
Hawks. In all 22200 l.

He disposes of all the vacant Offices of Chiefs, or Captains of the several
Flights of Hawks, and it is by his consent, that those who have them, resign
them, excepting only those of the Heads or Chiefs of the Flights of the Kings
Chamber and Closet, already spoken of, which are in the Kings Gift. The Great
Falconer also disposes of all other vacancies of places entered in the Books of
Establishment of the Falconry, as also, of the Keepers of the Hawks Nests in
the Forests of Compiegne, Aigue, Val Dragon, and Grand Trempo, and of Lions,
Ardennes, Perseigne, and Descouves, and other Forests: And he Commissionates
what persons he pleases, to lay Snares for, and take Birds of Prey, in all
places, Plains, and Thickets, in the Kings Domain, or Crown Lands.

All Hawk-Merchants, both French and Foreigners, are bound under pain of
Confiscation of their Birds, to come and present them to the Great Falconer,
for him to take his choice out of, for the King, before they can have
permission to sell any elsewhere.

If his Majesty, being a Hawking, has a mind to have the pleasure to fly a Hawk
himself, the Chiefs or Heads put in by the Great Falconer, present the Bird to
the Great Falconer, who places it on the Kings Fist; and likewise, when the
Prey is taken, the Pricker gives the Head of it to his Chief, and he to the
Great Falconer, who presents it to the King.

An Account of several Flights of Hawks, belonging to the Kings Falconry. And
first
1. Of the Flight for the Kite, there is a Captain, or Chief, who is also
Lieutenant General of the Great Falconry, who has for this, and the following
Flight, 1400 l.

A Lieutenant- Aid, at 300 l.

One Master Falconer, at 300 l. five Prickers, at 250 l. and one Porte-Duc, or
Decoy-Bearer, at 250 l.

A second Flight for the Kite,

With the same number of Officers, and like Salaries and Appointments.

When the Captain of these Flights of Hawks, takes a black Kite, in the Kings
Presence, then he is to have the Kings Horse, his loose Gown, and his Slippers,
for his Fees, which are redeemed of him for 100 Crowns, or about 25 l. English
in money.

The Flight at the Kite, is performed with Ger-Falcons, Tiercelets, or Tassels,
and sometimes Sakers; and there is always a Decoy to draw the Kite to a
reasonable height, to give him to the Hawks.

When after the Kite is taken, the Hawks, as usually, are to have their Fees
given them with all the speed imaginable, a Hen is put into their Talons, and
the Kites Legs broken, that he may not hurt them. The Kite is very rare in
France.

2. Of the Flight of Hawks for the Heron,

There is a Chief, or Captain, at 700 l. Salary, who is also Captain of the
Guards, or Keepers of the Hawks-Nests in Burgundy and Bresse, and Commands over
all the Flights, for Heron, throughout the Kingdom; a Lieutenant- Aid, and two
Master Falconers. at 300 l. each, and eight Prickers, at 250 l. which amounts
in all, to 3600 l.

The Flight at the Heron, is performed with the same kind of Hawks as that at
the Kite; it is done two several ways;

To make the Herons Mount when there found on the ground, two or three Pistols,
or Fowling-Pieces are let off, to force them to rise, and then a Bird is let
fly at him, which is called in French, Haussepied, or a Raise-Foot, and when he
is mounted a good height, other Birds are let out, which go and fight with the
Hausse-pied, and draw the Heron downward; thene are always shagged Greyhounds
in readiness too, bred up to this sort of Game, to go into the Water, and fetch
the Heron to the Falconer, when it fall there, or to kill him when he falls on
dry ground, for fear he should hurt the Hawks; this first Heron being thus
killed, whilst the Falconers of the first Flight are curing their Hawks, and
giving them their usual Fees, other Falconers, who are to have a second Flight
always ready, are to let them fly at the other Herons, which commonly keep
hovering over the place where they are curing or feeding their Hawks: the
second way is, to fly Hawks at the Heron in her passage, as they term it, that
is, at a reasonable height, while she is going to, or coming from Fishing, to
her young ones. When a Heron is discovered upon the ground, or upon the Wing,
the usual cry is, a la Volte, that is, to the Vault.

3. There are two Flights for the Crow, of the first of which, there is

A Captain, at 700 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, and a Master Falconer, at 300 l. each,
twenty Prickers, at 250 l. apiece, which amounts in all to 6300 l.

Of the second Flight, there is likewise,

A Captain, at 700 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, at 300 l. seven Prickers, at 250 l.
each, a Decoy-Bearer, amounting in all, to 3000 l.

The Flight at the Crow is performed with a Falcon, or a Tassel of a Gerfalcon.
The Crow is enticed and drawn into the Plain with a Decoy, and as soon as she
is got into the Plain, the Falconers cry out, Corneille en bean, that is, the
Crow flies fair, and then as the Crow turns back on the Decoy, they commonly
let fly at her, first a Tassel of a Gerfalcon, which is the Guide, and then
two Falcons afterward. The Crow being attacked, endeavors to save her self,
either by soaring aloft, or retiring toward her hold; when she soars aloft, no
luring, or any other term is to be used; and when she gets to her hold, if she
can be forced out of it, then the cry is, Hal, Hal, Hal.

4. There is one Flight for the Fields, or for the Partridge, to which belong,

A Captain, at 700 l. a Master Falconer, at 300 l. and three Prickers, at 250
l. which amounts in all, to 1750 l.

The Flight for the Fields, or at the Partridge, is performed with Falcons,
Tassels of Falcons, Sakers, Sakerets, Lanners, Lannerets, Alets, Goshawks,
Tassels of Goshawks, Spar-Hawks, Tassel Sper-Hawks, Merlins, and Malots. There
are two ways of flying at the Partridge; first, with a sort of Hawks that turn
and maintain the flight along with the Dogs, and that will hold out half a
League outright, continually upon the Wing; Secondly, with Hawks called
Blockers, which are let fly as soon as the Partridges rise, and drive them full
sweep to their hold, where they light upon a Branch, or on the top of a House,
and where the Falconer goes and serves them with Dogs. Every time the Partridge
rises, the cry is, Guereaux.

4. A Flight for the River, or at the Duck, to which belong

A Captain, or Chief, at 500 l. a Lieutenant Aid, at 300 l. and four Prickers,
at 250 l. each, which amounts in all, to 1800 l.

The Birds that are used for the Flight at the Duck, are the strong Hawks, and
Haggard Hawks, that are let fly into a Moat, or Brook where Ducks are. First,
the cunningest and most staid Bird is let fly to chase the Change, and then
two others, and when they are well turned, the Ducks are let out which the
Hawks knock on the Head, or force into another Moat. Every time the Ducks move
away, the cry is, Ila, Ila, Ila, or Stou, Stou, Stou, like the Flemings, and
for fear any should go too nigh the Water, they cry, horse l'eau, that is, keep
off the Water.

5. A Flight for the Mag-Pie, to which belong

A Captain, or Chief, at 500 l. and two Prickers, at 250 l. each.

The Flight at the Mag-Pie is performed with Tassels of Gerfalcons. First, the
most beaten and staid Tassel is let fly to chase likewise the change, and then
the other Hawks are let out, and the Magple is shown them, that endeavors to
save her self from Tree to Tree, or from Bush to Bush, from which she is forced
away, and every time she is forced out, the cry is, Houya, Houya.

In speaking of the Flight at the Mag Pie, Pigeon, or Crow, by the term of
chacing the change, is meant forcing the said several Birds out of the Plain.

6. A Flight for the Hare, to which belong

A Captain, or Chief, at 500 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, at 300 l.

The Flight at the Hare is performed with a Ger-falcon, and any sorry Greyhound
to help the Hawk sometimes.

The Hawks and Flights belonging to the Kings Cabinet, entered on the
Establishment of the Great Falconry, are
1. A Flight for the Crow, to which belong

A Captain, or Chief, at 700 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, at 300 l. a Master-Falconer,
at 300 l. six Prickers, at 250 l. each, and a Porte-Duc, or Decoy-Bearer, at
250 l.

Allowed besides, for the keeping of sixteen Hawks, at 3 d. apiece a day, 873
l. 5 d. And to the Keeper of the Perch of the said Flight, and that looks after
the Hawks that are not carried out, at the rate of 15 d. a day, 273 l. 15 d.
besides 36 l. more for Shoes, which amounts in all, to 4233 l.

2. A Flight for the Mag-Pie, to which belong

A Captain or Chief, at 700 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, and a Master-Falconer, at 300
l. each, three Prickers, at 250 l. apiece.

More allowed, for the feeding and keeping of eight Hawks, and for buying them
838 l.

And to the Keeper of the Perch of the said Flight, who likewise looks after
the Hawks that are not carried out, 273 l. and 36 l. for Shoes, which amounts
in all, to 3197 l. 15 d.

3. A Flight for the Pigeon, to which belong

A Captain or Chief, at 700 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, at 300 l. and three Prickers,
at 250 l. apiece. More allowed for

Keeping eight Hawks and buying them 838 l. and keeping eighteen Spaniels, at 4
d. a day each, 1314.

To the Servant that looks after the said Spaniels, 273 l. 15 d. besides 36 l.
for Shoes, and

To the Keeper of the Perch of the said Flight, and of the Hawks that are not
carried out 273 l. 15 d. and 36 l. for Shoes; which amounts in all to 4521 l.
10 d.

4. A Flight of Merlins, to which belong

A Captain, or Chief, at 700 l. a Lieutenant-Aid, and a Master-Falconer, at 300
l. each, two Prickers, at 250 l. each, more allowed for keeping and feeding
eight Hawks, 438 l. and to the Keeper of the Perch, and of the Hawks that are
not carried out, 273 l. 15 d. and 36 l. for Shoes; which amounts in all to 2547
l. 15 d.

The Merlins are made use of to fly at the young Partridge, whilst the light
Hawks are mewing or casting their Feathers; they are used likewise for the
Quail, the Blackbird, the Sky-Lark, and other small Birds, as likewise to fly
at the Pigeon Brow-strung.

The Flight with the Merlins is particular to the Kings Cabinet, being in no
other Royal Falconry but that of the Cabinet. This Flight is performed from the
Fist, that is, when they are minded to let fly at a young Partridge, they
attack her not till the Dogs have raised her, and there is no difference in the
way of flying this little Bird, and the Falcon called a Blocker, but only that
one may carry a Merlin without Hood-winking, upon the Fist, whereas a Falcon
must be always carried Hood-winked, whether it be let fly one way or the
other. In flying at the Blackbird, and other small Birds, they use Poles to
beat them out of the Hedges, and Cross-Bowes to have the pleasure of killing
them, when they cannot be got out of their holds, or shelters, where they are
attacked. Of all the several sorts of Birds that the Merlins are used to fly
at, none is more delightful, gives more diversion, or shows more the eagerness
and courage of the Merlins, than the Sky-Larks; because they commonly endeavor
to save themselves by soaring aloft, and so draw the Courageous Merlins up to
the very Clouds, from whence they force them to descend, and to endeavor to
light in some Thicket, or some other shelter, which before they can reach, the
Merlins commonly take them. The manner of flying them at the Pigeon
Brow-strung, is thus: two strings are passed through the lower Eylids of the
Pigeon, and then tied so together above her Head, so that her Eylids are drawn
up, that she cannot see downwards at all, but only upward, and then she is
thrown with the hand as high into the Air as a Man can throw her, where seeing
no way but upward, she is forced to soar upwards by spirts, and when she is
mounted reasonably high, the Falconers send the Merlins, who overtake her, and
never leave pursuing her, till they have fastened on her, and brought her down;
which sort of scuffle lasts very often a great while, and gives the most
pleasure.

The total sum of the expense of the four Flights belonging to the Cabinet
amounts to 14500 l. besides what is allowed for the buying of the Hawks, for
the Crow, and the Merlins, the Hens, and other charges.

Other Officers of the Great Falconry.
After the Great Falconer, and the Captains or Chiefs of the different Flights
of Hawks abovementioned, there are besides,

Twenty five Gentlemen of the Falconry, of which the five first have 300 l.
yearly Salary, and the others but 90 l.

A Secretary of the Falconry, at 300 l. a Marshal of the Lodgings, or Chief
Harbinger, 400 l. He commonly goes and receives Orders of his Majesty when he
pleases to go a Hunting, two other Harbingers, at 300 l. each, one Chyrurgion,
at 250 l. and one Apothecary, at 300 l.

All the Officers abovenamed enjoy the same Privileges as those that are
Commoners in his Majesty's Household.

Article IV.
Of the Great Wolf-Hunter.

The Great Wolf-Hunter has the super-intendance over the Wolf-Hunting. He has
1200 l. standing Salary, and 8500 l. by way of Pension, Appointments, and
Wages, as Counselor of State. Under him, there are two Lieutenants, and one
Deputy-Lieutenant of the Wolf-Hunting, who have each 1000 l. Salary.

Other particular Lieutenants and under Officers in being, divided into four
Provinces, are
1. A Lieutenant of the Wolf-Hunting in the Provostship of Paris. 2. A
Lieutenant within the extent of the Countries of Anjou and Maint. 3. A
Lieutenant for the Bayliwick of the Country of Auxerre, all which have a Salary
of 150 l. each. 4. Besides which, there is a fourth Lieutenant without Title,
who has 450 l. Salary.
Two Wolf-Hunters, at 300 l. each, two Servants of the Bloodhounds, at 150 l.
two Servants of the Fleet-hounds, 120 l. one Head-Servant to keep and teach the
young Bloodhounds, 90 l. two other Servants to keep and feed the young
Greyhounds, and other young Dogs, 90 l. each, eight Keepers of the Great
Greyhounds, or Irish Greyhounds, of which four belong to the Kings Chamber, 260
l. Salary each, and 1095 l. for keeping the said Dogs, four Sergeants
Wolf-Hunters, at 80 l. each, a Baker to make the Dogs Bread, 60 l. and a
Captain of the Carriage, at 180 l. Salary, and 1035 l. for maintaining his
Carriage.

Besides these several Hunting Games, there is another Hunting, or rather
Fishing Divertisement, which is performed with Cormorants, of which there is
one that has the oversight in the Park at Fountain-bleau.

After the several Divertisement of Hunting, we may place that of the
Tennis-Court.

There is one sole Master Palmer, or Tennis-Court Master, and Racket-Bearer to
the King in his Royal Houses, who presents the Racket to the King, but when the
Dauphin is there, he gives it to the Dauphin, who presents it to the King.

He has a Fee of 50 l. paid by him by the Chief Valet, or Yeoman of the
Chamber, every time the King or the Dauphin plays, and a Lewis of gold, being
about the value of 17 s. 4 d. English, every time the King or the Dauphin
changes Rackets. There are likewise five Markers of the Court, or
Racketeer-Palmers to the King, following the Court.

They have a golden Lewis profit, every time the King or the Dauphin plays,
paid by the Chief Valet, or Yeoman of the Bedchamber: Besides, they are paid
out of the Privy-Purse, four Pistols on New-Years-Day, as much on May Day, and
as much on St. Lewis's Day, each Pistol consisting of but 7 l. French, or 11 s.
8 d. English.

Note, That the same Palmers and Markers wait too when the King or the Dauphin
play at Shittle-Cock with Rackets.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Privileged Tradesmen and Handicraftsmen following the Court, and
furnishing it with all kind of Merchandises.

FIrst, There are twenty Wine-Merchants selling Wine, both by Wholesale, and
Retail, Fourteen Vintners, or Sutlers, Four Glassmen, Twenty Butchers, Twenty
six Poultrers, Rosting-Cooks, and Fishmongers, Eight Pastry-Cooks, Twelve
Sellers of Hog-meat, Ten Bakers, Two Sellers of Ginger-Bread and Starch, Ten
Verdurier-Fruitrers, or Sellers of Herbs and Fruits, Four Confectioners,
Fourteen Cooks for Extraordinary Entertainments, and to work in the Houses of
the chief Courtiers. Eight Violins; Four Chyrurgions, Six Apothecaries, Twenty
six Tailors, Twenty six Mercers, Jewellers, and Grocers, Eight Linnen-Drapers,
Nine Glovers and Perfumers, Fourteen Shoemakers, Nine Cobblers, otherwise more
decently by them named Solers of Shoes, Eight Skinners, or Furriers, Six
Curriers and Belt-makers, Six Embroiderers, Eight Lace-Sellers, Four
Haberdashers of small Wares, or Jacks of all Trades, Two Feather-men, Six
Sellers of second-hand Stockings, Four Brokers, Two Farthingale-makers, Two
Sellers of Parchment, Five Hatters, Six Girdlers, Eight Sword-Curlers, Three
Spurriers, Ten Sadlers, Four Cutters and Scratchers, Two Joiners, Two Clock,
and Watchmakers, Two Goldsmiths, Two Booksellers, Twelve Furnishers of Hay,
Straw and Oats, Four Armorers, Six Arquebusiers, or Gun-smiths, Two Painters,
and two Guilders and Engravers.

All these Tradesmen have their Grants from the Provost of the Household, who is
Great Provost of France, who is Judge, Guardian and Conservatour of their
Privileges, and in their Grants, they are declared free, acquitted and exempt
from all Duties exacted at Bridges, Ports, Passages, Importation, Exportation,
and all Gabels, and other Duties or Impositions whatsoever.

The first privileged Merchants that follow the Court, are the twelve
Wine-Merchants, called, the Celler of twelve, besides their Deputy, or
Deputies, which they keep at the Celler called, the Celler of twelve: These
Wine-Merchants commonly attend very diligently at Paris, and at the Royal
Houses nigh Paris; but in Journies, and at Fountainbleau it self, which passes
with them for a Journey, two of these Master Wine-Merchants, serve either two
whole Months together, or else, the space of two Months at several times; as
for Example, if the two in Waiting, had served but one Month at Fountainbleau,
the same two are obliged to serve out another Month the first Journey that is
taken.

These places are sold for about 25000 l. apiece, and the Officers possessing
them, have so confirmed them to themselves by agreement with the Great Provost,
that when they die, he disposes not of their places, but gives leave to the
next Heir, either to succeed in them, or to sell them; but for this Privilege,
every one of the twelve pay him an annual Tribute of 400 l. which is a kind of
a Paulette, or Continuation-Fee.

They have the sole Privilege of selling Wine in Bottles to those that follow
the Court.

The twenty five Vintners or Sutlers that follow the Court, are lodged always
at the Sign of the White-Cross, and are bound to dress Victuals for people, as
well as to sell Wine, whereas the Wine-Merchants of the Cellar of twelve, sell
only Wine. Their Places are sold at about 12000 l.

There is a Chaplain of all the Merchants following the Court, commonly called,
the Chaplain of St. Barbara, which says Mass for them every Sunday, at present,
at the Convent of the Penitent Women, or of the Order of St. Mary Magdalen at
Paris; where every of them, in his turn, presents the Holy-Bread.

Note, That none of these Privileged Merchants and Artisans, nor those neither
of the Kings Wardrobe, and other Royal Houses, can enjoy their Privileges any
otherwise but from the day their Grants or Commissions were registered in the
Register-Book of the Provost-ship of the Household, as it has been determined by
an Order of both the Privy and Great Council.

There are likewise several other Tradesmen set down in the Book of
Establishment, as the Printer for Music, and others.

Before we end this Chapter of the Privileged Merchants, it is not amiss to
add this remark, that besides these there are others called Veterans, or old
Standers, who after a long times service, though they quit their places, still
enjoy the same Privileges as when they were actually in Office, as some do
that were formerly the Kings Barbers, who still enjoy their Privileges, and by
virtue of the same, keep open Shop. But they commonly, when they go off, get
Letters from the King, whereby they are declared Veterans.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Privileges of the Commoners, or those that are tabled in the Kings
Household.

THE Domestic Officers and Commoners of the Kings Household, and other Royal
Households, have from all Antiquity, enjoyed several Privileges and Immunities,
but because it would be too tedious to recite all the Decrees and Declarations
made and repeated several times, in confirmation of their Privileges, we shall
only quote some of the latest date, which will be as significant as if they
were all inserted at length.

Privileges common to all the Kings menial Officers and Servants in general.
First, As to their exemption from Taxes, though that privilege has been
sometimes suspended in time of War, but it was re-established again by a
Declaration of the 26th of November, 1643. which was verified in the Court of
Aids, the 10th of December the same year; which exempts the said Officers from
paying Taxes, Taillons, or lesser Taxes, Subsistance-money, in lieu of
Billeting Soldiers, and all extraordinary Impositions for any thing of their
own growth: But he that would enjoy this exemption, must get an Extract of his
being entered on the Establishment, which is at the Court of Aids, Signed by the
Register or Recorder of that Court in the usual manner; and he must be
registered as such in the Office of his Election, and published in his Parish
Church.

The Declaration runs thus.
Having considered that it would be in some sort to debase the Luster of the
Royal Family, and of our Blood, to retrench the Privileges of the Officers
thereunto belonging, and deprive them of that mark of honor to the tenderness
of their affection, and the fidelity of their services, for these causes,
notwithstanding the Edict of November, 1640. We Declare, that all our Domestic
Servants and Commoners, the four Companies of our Life-Guards, the Archers, or
Guards of the Provostship of our Household, the hundred Suissers of our Guard,
the Officers of our Stables, Hunting, Falconry, and Wolf-Hunting; those of the
Queen Regent, our most honored Lady and Mother; of the late Queen Mary, our
most honored Lady and Grandmother; of our Dearest Brother, the Duke of Anjou;
of our Dearest Uncle, the Duke of Orleans, and of our Dearest Aunt the Duchess
of Orleans, his Wife at present living, and of his former Wife deceased, of our
Dearest Cousin her Daughter; and of our Dearest Cousin, the Prince of Conde; of
our Companies of Gensdarmes, or Men at Arms, and light Horsemen, consisting of
two hundred Men apiece; the Company of our Guard of Musketeers on Horseback,
and that of the Guards of our said Lady and Mother, named and comprised in the
Establishments to be by us Signed and agreed to, and Counter-signed by our
Secretary of State, and of our Commandments, who has the department of our
Household, shall enjoy the Privileges and Exemptions granted and given to them
in all times, and from all Antiquity, because of their Services; and the same
we grant to their Widows as long as they shall continue so.

Provided nevertheless, that if any of the aforesaid Officers shall make any
Traffic with Merchandises, and keep Inns, or manure any more than one Farm of
their own, and that with their own hands; or hold any Farms of others, whether
in their own Names, or in those of their Domestics, or Servants, they shall be
liable to be taxed toward our Taxes in every of the Parishes where the Lands
or Heritages, by them so manured, shall lie.

In another Declaration given at Poitiers, in the Month of January, 1652. His
Majesty says, We confirm by these Presents, all the Privileges, Franchises,
Liberties, Immunities, Exemptions, and Affranchisements granted to the Officers
of the Royal Households entered upon the Establishments of the Court of Aids, and
to their Widows during their Widow-hood: Willing, that they be henceforward
held, quit, and exempt from all manner of contributions, whether it be Loans
general, or particular, made or to be made, as well by us, as by any of the
Cities of our Kingdom; likewise for furnishing Provisions or Ammunition for the
War, for Fortifications, Reparations, Charges, and Conducts, Taxes, Aids, and
Impositions, etc. and of all other Subsidies, Dues, charges and subventions in
general whatever they be, made or to be made, in any sort, and on any occasion
whatsoever, though it be not here particularly specified and declared.

They are exempt from the Duty, called the Duty of Aids, for the Wines of the
product of their own grounds, by a Decree of the Council of State of the 16th
of December, 1654.

By a Decree of the Council of State of the 20th of January, 1644. The King
declares his intentions to be, that no Officers shall enjoy Privileges and
Exemptions from Taxes, but those that actually serve, and that receive at least
60 l. for their Wages and Appointments; and not a great number of honorary and
titular Officers that have obtained Briefs of some Offices, but serve not, and
have no Wages; nor the Keepers of the Plains, and of the Game which his Majesty
pretends shall be taxed with the common Taxes, excepting the Keepers of the
Game of St. Germains, Fountainbleau, Blois, Limours, Mont^^^hery, and Boisgency.

There are a great many other Decrees and Orders, that say almost the same
thing; the Decree of the Counsel of State of the 14th of March, 1654.
maintaining the Kings Officers, those of the Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou,
and of the Duke and Duchess of Orleans, exempt from the greater and lesser
Taxes, Subsistence money, etc. and other public charges. There are other
Decrees of the Great Council, in Conformity to the Edicts and Declarations of
the King of the 22th of February, 1673. and the first of March, 1675. importing
an Exemption from Lodging or Billeting of Soldiers, for the Officers of the
Royal Households, their Persons, their Houses, Farms, Tenements, Farmers,
Domestics and Servants.

There are likewise several Decrees and Declarations in favor of the Queens
Household in particular, and of that of Monsieur, and of some of their Officers,
as also for those of the late Duke of Orleans.

The Kings Declaration of the last of January, 1647. which was Registered in the
Court of Aids, the 19th of March the same year, imports a reestablishment of
the Privileges and Exemptions of the Widows and Veterans of the Officers of
the Royal Households in the same manner as the Commoners of his Majesty's own
Household enjoy the same.

In a Declaration set forth by the King in the Month of July, 1653. It is said,
that the said Officers possess fully and entirely their Officers, so as that
the Coheirs with them, in other things, cannot pretend any share therein,
either upon their Salaries, or upon the value of their Offices, if sold; which
being in the Kings sole Disposition, cannot be reputed of the nature of those
goods that are liable to be divided among the Heirs and Successors of Families.

As for what concerns the point of Precedence of the Kings Officers; and of the
rank they ought to have in public Assemblies, whether general or particular;
several Kings by their Declarations, and Decrees, have Ordered, that they shall
march and place themselves immediately after the Counselors of the Bailiwicks,
Seneschals, and presidial Courts, before the Officers of the Elections, of the
Salt-Granaries, Judges not Royal, and all others that are inferior in degree
to the said Counselors, as it was Ordained by Henry the Fourth, by a
Declaration of the 22th of March, 1605. in favor of the Valets, or Yeomen of
the Bedchamber, and other Officers of the Chamber, Cabinet, and Antichamber;
and by Lewis XIII. First, By a Declaration of the 27th of July, 1613. in favor
of the Marshals of the Lodgings, the Harbingers of the Body, and the Harbingers
in Ordinary to his Majesty; Secondly, By another of the 20th of December,
verified in the Great Council, in favor of the Life-Guards; And thirdly, By
his Letters Patents of the 12th of February, 1618. and by a Decree of the Great
Council, dated the 27th of May, 1630. and by the present King, by another
Decree of the said Council, of the 29th of May, 1653.

The Privileges of the Court-Clergy.
The Clergy of the Kings Household, and other Royal Households, have the
Privilege to be always reputed resident at their Benefices, during the time of
their Service, and are allowed two Months to go to and come from their
Benefices; and that, by several Bulls of Popes, Declarations of Kings, Decrees
of Parliament, of the Great and Privy Council, etc. And they are paid the full
Revenues of their Canonries, though they have not the Stage, that is, the usual
time of Residence, and Officiating there, from which they are exempt.

The Privileges of the Chyrurgions.
By a Declaration of Lewis the Thirteenth, in favor of his Chyrurgions, viz.
to his Chief Chyrurgion in Ordinary, and to eight other Chyrurgions in
Ordinary, quarterly Waiters, they are privileged to keep, or cause to be kept
open Shop, and set out a Chyrurgeons Sign with the Kings Arms, Exclusive to all
Chyrurgeons, who are forbid to molest them under pain of being fined 3000 l.
and paying all Costs, Damages, and Interest, in Case of Contravention, which
concludes thus; Given at Paris, the 26th of August, in the year of our Lord,
1636. and of our Reign the Twenty Seventh. Signed Lewis, and Lower, De Lomenie.
And on the side is written the Registring of it in the Parliament of Paris, the
28th of March, 1637. Collationed, or Compared, and Signed, Farcette. Which is
confirmed by a Decree of Verification in Parliament, the 18th of July, 1637.

There is a Declaration of the late Queen Mother, for her four Chyrurgions, of
the 20th of October, 1637. Verified by a Decree of the 20th of April, 1638.

Another Declaration of the late Duke of Orleans, for five of his Chyrurgeons,
of the 26th of February, 1638. Verified by a Decree of the 7th of September,
1638. And lastly,

Another Declaration of the late Prince of Conde, for four of his Chyrurgeons,
of the 29th of January, 1639. Verified by a Decree of the 23d of March
following.

Besides which, there is an Order of the Court for the Master-Chyrurgeons at
Paris, Importing a Confirmation of the Declarations made in their favor in
1642.

The Privileges of the Lifeguard Men.
By a Decree, or Order of the Privy Council, bearing date the 27th of June,
1651. given against the Court of Aids of Rouen, after several Suits of Law, the
Kings Life-guards are maintained in their Quality of Squires, and in their
exemption from Taxes, and all other Impositions.

A like Sentence was given by the Council of State, the 4th of June, 1653. in
favor of the Guards of the Gate.

Other Privileges belonging to all the Officers of the Kings, and other Royal
Houses.
All the Officers, and menial Servants of the Kings, and of other Royal
Households, excepting a few, whose Offices are too mean, are noble, that is, are
Gentlemen by their Places, if they be not so otherwise, as long as they are in
Place, and may bear a Crest above their Coats of Arms.

All the Officers of the seven Offices of the Chamber, and others, wait always
with their Swords by their sides, unless it be when they are troublesome to
them; and may wear them always, both in the Louvre, and elsewhere.

Most of the Officers have the Quality of Squires, if they be Swordmen, or of
Counselor, if Gown-Men, and are called, Officers in Ordinary, though they are
but Quarterly, or Half-yearly Waiters. They enjoy all the Privileges of
Gentility, Safeguards, exemption from Taxes, and other Duties, Committimus,
etc. as we have shown above.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Military Officers, and Troops of the Kings Household.

THE Kings of France have always kept several Guards for their Security, and to
preserve a Life, that is, the Lives of their Subjects.

We read in Gregory of Tours, in the eighth Chapter of his seventh Book, that
Gontran King of Orleans, or of the Burgundian part of France, seeing his two
Brothers, Sigebert King of Mets, or Austrasia, being that part of France
toward Germany, including Lorrain and the Neighboring Provinces, and
Chilperic King of Paris, and of Soissons, had been assassinated, placed a great
Guard about his Person, about the year 587. without which, he never went to
Church, or to his Recreations.

So upon different occasions, the Guards have been reinforced and augmented.

Philip Augustus being in the Holy Land in the year 1192. established Sergeants
at Arms, or Mace-Bearers, as may be seen in the Great Chronicles, where the Old
Historian, La Montagne, speaking of the Assasines, or rather Arsacides, a
Desperate sort of people of Syria, whom their Princes used to send to
assasinate the most courageous and active Princes among the Christians, uses
these words: When the King (says he) heard this news, be began to be fearful of
himself, and by advice of his Council, resolved to have his Person well
guarded, and chose Sergeants with Macis, well armed and accoutred, who were
night and day to attend him, to guard his Person. The said King made use of the
said Sergeants, at the Battle of Bouvines, who behaved themselves that day so
valiantly, that St. Lewis in the year 1229. founded for them, in memory of that
action, the Church of St. Catharine du Val, of the Scholars of Paris, according
to an Inscription to be seen upon two Stones at the entering into the said
Church, which contains these words: At the entreaty of the Sergeants at Arms,
Monsieur St. Lewis founded this Church, and laid the first stone of it, for Joy
of the Victory obtained at the Bridge of Bouvines, in the year 1214. The
Sergeants at Arms, then in being, had the keeping of the said Bridge, and vowed
to God, that if he would give them the Victory, they would found a Church, and
dedicate it to St. Catharine, which was performed accordingly: Where it is
remarkable, that there are four Sergeants at Arms, represented upon those two
Stones, but in a different manner: There are two upon one of them, holding in
their hands their Maces at Arms, and armed Cap-a-pee to represent the Sergeants
at Arms, as they were in the Army, and upon the other stone, there are two
more, whereof one is Clothed with a Coat with great Sleeves, cut in Labels,
wearing a Collar hanging down upon his Breast, and I suppose that signifies the
Usher at Arms, Waiting at the Door of the Chamber, (for still to this day, the
Ushers of the Chamber bear Maces on Festival days) to guard the Kings Person in
the Daytime; The other is wrapped up in a long Cloak well furred with shaggy
furr, with a Bonnet on his Head, and his Mace in his hand, which represents the
Sergeants at Arms that watched by night.

And Du Tillet, in his Chapter of the Marshals, page 282. writes, that some of
them were appointed to carry Maces before the King in the day time, and were
called Vshers at Arms, whose place is now supplied by the Ushers of the Kings
Chamber, and others to guard his Chamber in the night time.

These Guards then took their name from the Arms they used, and so when they
quitted the Mace to take the Bow they were called Archers.

Charles the Seventh entertained a Guard of Scotch selected out of the
Auxiliary Forces brought over to him by the Earls of Bucan, Douglas, and other
Scotch Lords, to drive the English out of France, Philip de Comines calls them
the Silver Guards, because their Coats or Jackets, called Hoquetons, were set
with spangles of Silver, and Goldsmiths Work.

Lewis the Eleventh, being at Puiseaux, on the 4th of September, 1474.
established a Company of a hundred Lanciers for his Guard, under the Command of
one Hector de Golart, who were every one of them to have in their Retinue, one
Man at Arms, and two Archers: But afterward he discharged the Lanoiers of
their Archers, and took them to himself, composing of them a little Lifeguard
of two hundred Archers, making one Lewis de Graville their Captain.

In the year 1479. when the same King began to grow Melancholy, and suspicious,
he set up another French Company of Guards, of which one Claudius de la Chatre
was Captain.

The same Lewis the Eleventh too, at the Recommendation of Charles the Seventh,
retained the Suissers in his Service, and in the year 1481. being at Tours, he
made an Alliance with them, and took a Company of that Nation, for the Ordinary
Guard of his Person.

Charles the Eight in 1497. set up a new Company of French Guards, of which,
James of Vendome, Vidame of Chartres was Captain.

Francis the first likewise in the year 1514. raised another Company of sixty
Archers, to which the next year, he added forty five more, under the Command of
Raoul de Vernon. But at length all these Companies were reduced to those now in
being whose Denominations differ as much from the others, as the Arms now in
use from those then in Mode.

The Kings Guards now in being, may be divided into two Bodies, according to
their Posts, viz. Into the Guards within the Louvre, or Palace, and the Guards
without the Louvre.

The Guards within the Louvre, are
1. The four Companies of the Life-guards, both Scotch and French. 2. The
Company of the hundred Suissers, who also are Guards in Ordinary of the Kings
Body. 3. The Guards of the Gate: and 4. The Guards of the Provost of the
Household.
The Guards without the Louvre, are
1. The Company of Gensdarmes, or Men at Arms. 2. The Company of Light
Horsemen.
The Foot, are
1. The two French and Suisse Regiments of Guards. 2. The two Companies of
Musketeers on Horseback: besides which, 3. There is a Band of a hundred
Gentlemen called the Gentlemen au bec de Corbin, or of the Ravens Beak, so
called from the Cutle-Axes they carry, which are like our Gentlemen Pensioners.
Of the Guards within the Louvre, and first, of the Life-Guards.
There are four Companies of Life-Guards, that wait by turns every one their
quarter. The first of these is the Duke of Noailles, who is likewise Captain of
the Scotch Company, which is the first and antientest Command in the Kingdom;
the second is the Marshal Duke of Duras, the third the Marshal Duke of
Luxemburg, and the fourth the Marshal de Lorges. The year in France beginning
always from New-Years-Day, the Duke of Noailles Commands the first quarter,
that begins then, and the rest successively, the other three quarters in the
order they are abovenamed in. Under them,

There are twelve Lieutenants waiting quarterly, three every quarter, besides
two others, whereof the first is a Major, received as a Lieutenant, who
precedes all the other Lieutenants, admitted since himself, and twelve Ensigns
serving in like manner, three every quarter.

Note, That the Ensign, or Lieutenant of the Guards, keep generally the old
Table of the Great Master of the Household, jointly with the Usher that day in
Waiting; and that the Officers abovenamed, viz. The Major, the three
Lieutenants, the three Ensigns, and the two Aid Majors then in Waiting, and
four Exempts eat at the said Old Table of the Great Master, or at that of the
Masters of the Household: But the Lieutenant, or Ensign that waits at the
Dauphins, is allowed half a Pistol a Day, for his Diet: There is also Diet
allowed at the Kings Serdeau's, or Water-Servers Table, for one Exempt more of
the Life-Guards, and for two Guards de la Manche, or of the Sleeve, and the
Dauphins Serdeau's, for the Exempt of the Guards that waits on him.

The Lieutenants and Ensigns are heads of Brigades in their Company.

There are two Aid-Majors, and four other Aid-Majors, Exempts of the Guards:
Forty eight Exempts being twelve to each Company, as many Brigadeers, and as
many Sub-Brigadeers.

There are several reformed Exempts, which yet enjoy the Privileges of their
Places during their Lives, and receive the same pay, but cannot sell their
Places.

These Guards wear Bandiliers of the same Color with the Banners of their
Company.

For those of the Company.
1. Of Noailles, wear White Bandiliers. 2. Of Duras, Blue 3. Of Luxemburg,
Green 4. Of De Lorge, Yellow

There are four Comptrollers Clerks of the Watch, and Secretaries of their
Companies, who have sometimes their Servants under them, who call the Watch
every Night. Every one of the said Clerks receives at the Chamber of Deniers
160 l. standing Wages, and 240 l. augmentation Money for Straw, Straw-Beds, and
paying the Carriage and Passage of themselves, and their necessary things.

There are twenty Trumpeters, five to every Company, whereof sixteen remain in
the said Companies, and the four others, called the Trumpeters of the Kings
Private-Pleasures, always follow the Watch about his Majesty, and never stir
from him; five Kettle-Drummers in Ordinary, of which one always follows the
Watch about his Majesty, the four others being equally distributed one to each
Company.

One Almoner in Ordinary to the four Companies.

One Chyrurgeon in Ordinary to the same Companies, who has 400 l. Salary, and
Privilege to keep open Shop, and

Four Treasurers, or Pay-Masters, viz. one to every Company.

The four Companies being thus described, we shall proceed to show next what
Order they observe in doing duty.

To take away all suspicion, and to make it impossible for a Captain to have
intelligence, or any secret Combination with all the people he has with him,
they are so intermixed, that the Captain that is in Waiting, has the
Lieutenants and Ensigns of another Captain; and the Guards themselves are
composed of a Medley of a certain number of Soldiers taken out of every
Company, to serve that quarter.

The Captains, the Major, the Lieutenants, Ensigns, Aid-Majors and Exempts of
these Companies, bear all a Staff of Command in their Hands in the Kings House,
and accompany his Majesty all the day long, a Foot, and a Horseback.

The Brigadeers have Partisans.

Note, That those that were formerly Great Exempts, had besides their Wages and
Gratuity, an allowance of fifty Crowns, which they went and received at their
quarters end, at the Epargne, or Spare-Treasure.

The King allows the Guards every day twenty four Quarts of Wine, and twenty
four Loaves, which the Clerk of the Watch of every Company causes to be brought
them, which was formerly distributed to them by equal Portions, Morning and
Night, viz. Twelve Quarts of Wine, and twelve Loaves every Morning, and as much
every Night when the King was in Bed, but now it is all dealt out to them in
the Morning, which Wine is called the Watch-Wine. They have allowed them,
besides this, on the four Great Feasts of the year, to every Company, two
Gallons of Table-Wine, twelve Loaves out of the Kings own Pantry, a Side of
Veal, a whole Sheep, and four Fowls; And in the Holy Week they have
Prayer-Books, and Linen Cloth given them; and on Candle-mass and
Corpus-Christi Days, Wax-Gandles; they enjoy the same Privileges as Commoners
of the Kings Household, and are Squires by their Places, that Quality having
been confirmed to them by several Declarations and Decrees.

Of the Guards, called the Guards de la Manche, or of the Sleeve.
They are twenty five in number, counting the Chief, or first Man at Arms of
France, who has 300 l. Salary. The other twenty four have 570 l. yearly
allowance, and their Diet at the Kings Serdeau's, or Water-Servers Table. They
are divided into six Brigades, allowing six to each Brigade.

When any of these Guards de la Manche, fail to come and do Duty, the King
causes their Places to be supplied by some of the Gentlemen of his Life-Guards.
They wait two and two always at the King's Sleeve, whence they have their Name,
only at Great Ceremonies, they are six. They are chosen out of the Scotch
Company of Guards.

Their particular Functions are as follows.
When the King is to go to any Church or Chapel, to hear Mass, Vespers,
Tenebres, or Sermon, or to assist at any Christning or Marriage, two Guards of
the Sleeve, or Manche, always goes thither before, and wait for the King, in
their white Hoquetons, or Jackets, set with Gold and Silver Spangles, with
Partisans, fringed with silver in their hands, with Damaskt Blades: When his
Majesty is come, they keep on each side of him, always standing, but only just
at the time of the Elevation, with their Faces toward the King, to have an Eye
on all sides, upon his Sacred Person.

When the King eats in public at home, either alone, or with the Queen, or any
other Royal Person, whether at Dinner or Supper, two Guards of the Sleeve,
Habited and Armed after the same manner, keep always on each side of him, in
the same posture, that is to say, standing upright, with their Faces turned
toward his Person.

Every two Nights in three, one of the Guards de la Manche, or of the Sleeve,
goes at Midnight to the Principal Gate of the Louvre, or of any other of the
Kings Palaees, some time before the Watch is called, that is to say, the
Officers and Guards that are to compose the Court of Guard, that are to do Duty
that Night at the Gate, where he receives the Keys from the hands of one of the
Guards of the Scotch Company, to whom only the Guards of the Gate deliver the
Keys at six a Clock every Night: And he is to keep these Keys till the Watch be
called, and then he is to shut all the Doors; and when he is called by the
Clerk of the Watch, to answer in Scotch, I am here, and at the same time, to
present the Keys to the Captain of the Guards then in Waiting, if he be present
when the Watch is called, or in his absence, to the Commander in Chief. But it
often happening, that after the Watch is called, there are still several
persons to go out of the Louvre.

The Guard of the Sleeve, opens it to all that would go out, and shuts it again
till it be time to shut it for good and all; which being come, after the
Brigadier, with a Torch in his hand, and accompanied by the Aid-Major, has
visited all places, and warned every one with a load Voice to go out, the Guard
of the Sleeve shuts all the Doors, and then taking with him the said Brigadeer
that carries the Torch, and the Aid-Major. He carries all the Keys to the
Captain then in Waiting, or in his absence, to him that supplies his place, and
puts them under his Bolster, in their presence: I say they do this every two
Nights in three, because, every third Night it is a Scotch Brigadeer that does
those Duties, and then the Guards of the Steeve begin again, till it come again
to the Brigadeer, and so all along. It is likewise a Scotch Brigadeer that goes
and takes the Keys again of the Captain or Commander every Morning, at six a
Clock.

The Guards of the Sleeve wait Monthly, two every Month.

On Maundy-Thursdays they wait for the King at the Door of the Hall, where the
usual Ceremony of the Day is performed, keeping always on each side of his
Majesty, during the time of the Sermon, and Absolution, and following him along
the Hall, while his Majesty is washing the poor Peoples Feet, and serving up
their Meat to the Table. When the King assists at any Processions, as on Corpus
Christi Day, Candlemas, Palm Sunday, and at the Assumption of our Lady, and
when he touches for the Evil, two Ushers of the Chamber bearing Maces, march
only before his Majesty, but the Guards of the Sleeve march close by his sides,
and when the Sacrament was carried in 1666. to the Queen Mother, Anne of
Austria, these Guards Accompanied the King all the way as he went on Foot from
the Louvre to the Church, and back again.

At Extraordinary Ceremonies, as when his Majesty is pleased to appear in an
Extraordinary manner in Parliament, at the Creation or Instalment of Knights,
at Coronations and Marriages of Kings, at the Christning of their Children, and
at Royal Funerals.

When his Majesty is minded to sit in Parliament, they go to the Palace, and
wait at the Door at the top of the Great Stairs called the May Pole Door, and
conduct him as far as the Entry of the Bar in the Great Chamber.

And when the King hears Mass at the Holy Chapel, as he commonly does before
he goes to Parliament, they wait on him at his sides in the manner
above-described, and when Mass is done, conduct him thence to the Great
Chamber, where they stay for him at the Entry of the Bar of the said Chamber,
whence when he comes out, they reconduct him to the top of the said Great
Stairs, or else to his Coach: At the Creation or Instalment of Knights, six of
these Guards wait for the King three days one after another, at the Door of the
House where the Assembly of the Knights is held, and Accompany the King step by
step, from thence, to the Church, and every time he moves from his place, they
march always close by his sides.

At the Coronation of any King, six Guards of the Sleeve, having under their
Hoquetons, or upper Jackets, short-truss'd white Satin-Coats, with Bonnets and
Silk stockings answerable, wait without the Door of the Kings Chamber, from
eight in the Morning, till his Majesty comes out to go to Church, whither, and
wherever else he goes, they continually accompany him.

At the Kings Wedding, they have new and very rich Hoquetons, or Jackets.

At the Kings Funeral, they wear Mourning Suits under their Hoquetons, or
Jackets, and keep guard night and day about the Body or Effigies of his Majesty
as long as it lies in State: They only are to put his Body into the Coffin;
and when the Body is transported to St. Denis Church, which as
Westminster-Abbey here is the place of the Sepulchers of the Kings of France,
they go before and wait for it in the Chapel where it is to be deposited, and
keep Guard about it, till it be put into the Vault, down into which, they only
are to carry it.

In all the Ceremonies and Solemnities abovementioned, they have always their
Partisans in their hands, and their Hoquetons, or Jackets on their backs, on
which, both before and behind, a Hercules's Club was wrought with these words
about it, Erit haec quoque cognita Monstris; And the Monsters shall also know,
or feel this; which was the Motto of Henry the Great: But in the year 1671.
Lewis the Fourteenth of that Name, at present Gloriously Reigning, caused his
own Devise and Motto to be wrought on the said Jackets, which is the Figure of
a Sun giving light to the World, with this Motto, Nec pluribus impar, that is,
Neither is he an unequal Match for many.

When the King makes his first Entry into any of the Cities in his Dominions,
there is due to each of the two Guards of the Sleeve then in Waiting, from the
Magistrates of the City, a Silver-Hilted Sword; The same Fees are due to them
from any Bishops or Prelates when they take the Oath of Fidelity to the King.

They are allowed the same allowance of Bread and Wine every day, as they have
that are upon the Watch, and have their Diet at the Kings Serdeaus, or
Water-Servers Table, with the Gentlemen-Waiters, and a little Chamber to lie
in, in the Guard-Chamber, if there be convenience for it.

The particular Duties and Prerogatives of the Captains of the Guards.
The Captains of the Guards are sworn by the King himself, and receive the Oath
themselves in the Guard-Chamber, from the Officers and Soldiers of the
Companies of Life-Guards under their Command.

The Captain of the Guards that is in Waiting, never leaves the King from the
times he rises, or goes forth of his Chamber, until his Majesty be in Bed, and
then he goes out into the Guard-Chamber, to see the Watch called, where upon
his Arrival, the Clerk of the Watch, with a loud Voice, calls over the Names of
the Guards that are to lie that Night in the Guard-Chamber; and then the said
Captain having taken notice who are wanting, he goes down to the Gate, and sets
the Watch, and then is Conducted to his own Apartment. The same Clerk of the
Watch calls over too the twelve Suissers, that are to lie at the upper end of
the said Guard-Chamber, in presence of the Officers of the Company of a hundred
Suissers, who after that, is in like manner Conducted to his Lodging.

The Captain of the French-Guards marches and keeps always immediately next the
King, and near his Person, where ever he be or goes, whether at Table, on
Horseback, and in a Coach, and any where else; without suffering any to step
between the King and him, that so nothing may hinder him from having always his
Eye upon His Majesty's Sacred Person. It Is true, that in a very narrow passage,
the Captain of the Guards lets the Querry pass before him, and nearer the Kings
Person, because he may have the convenience to assist his Majesty upon any
accident requiring his service.

The Lieutenant of the Guards marches almost always before the King, because
the Captain of the hundred Suissers, to whom-that Place is assigned, is most
commonly not there; but when he is there, then the Lieutenant of the Guards
places himself on the Kings right hand, and the Ensign on his left; but in the
absence of his Captain, he takes his place, and follows immediately behind his
Majesty.

The King honors the Captain of the Guards with a place in one of the Coaches,
or Caleches of the Body, and sometimes in the same Coach with himself; and if
his Majesty rides out on Horseback, the Captain of the Guards takes Horse in
the very Court of the Louvre, and at present, both the Officers and Soldiers
of the Life-Guards, wait for the King, ready mounted, in the Court of the
Louvre, for fear whilst they are waiting for him at one Door, he should go out
at another.

The Captain of the Guards in the time of his Waiting, always Lodges in the
Kings Palace, as near as may be conveniently to his Majesty's Chamber; and in
any of the Kings Palaces has the very first Apartment next the Kings, and
before all other Officers: At Night he keeps the Keys, as we have said, under
his Bolster.

When the King gives Audience to an Ambassador, the Captain of the Guards
receives him at the Guard-Chamber Door, and conducts him to the
Audience-Chamber; during the Audience he stands near the Rails, and when it is
done, he conducts the Ambassador back again, all along the Guard-Chamber, as
far as the Door, the Guards making a Lane for them all the way.

The Captain and Lieutenant of the Scotch Company may always take their place
near the King though they be not in Waiting.

When the Guards that remain of the four Companies of Life-Guards, that are not
in Waiting, or upon Duty, are drawn up (which is commonly called a Cornette of
the Guards) whether it be to follow the King, or for any other Service, they
are Commanded by the Scotch Lieutenant, as was seen when the King was going to
Marsal.

At the first Entries the King makes into any Cities of his Dominions, the
Scotch Officer in Waiting, takes for his Fees, the Silver Keys that the
Magistrates of the City come to present his Majesty; and besides, the said
Magistrates are to give two pieces of Velvet to the Scotch Captain, and one to
his Lieutenant, or in their absence, to such other Scotch Officers as Command
in their places.

The Guards of the Scotch Company only keep the Keys of the Doors of the Quires
of the Churches where his Majesty is, as also those of the Louvre, at Night,
which when the King is in Bed they carry to their Captain.

When his Majesty passes the Water in a Ferry or Boat, no other Guards but
those of the Scotch Company, are admitted into the Boat with him.

The Functions and Duties of the other Life-Guards.
The Lifeguard men are always to keep Guard immediately before the Kings
Antichamber.

There is always a Sentinel upon Duty at the entering into the Guard-Chamber, to
take notice of those that go in. This Sentinel stands there with his Carbine,
and sets open both the leaves of the Door when the King, Queen, any Royal
Person, or Ambassadors on Audience Days, are to pass in or out: Note likewise,
that when any Great Persons, as those of the Quality abovenamed, or the
Princes of the Blood, the Captains of the Life-Guards, or any other Lords of
high quality are to pass in or out, the Guards that are in the Guard-Chamber,
as soon as the Sentinel has given them notice of their approach by stamping
with his Foot on the Boards, betake themselves presently to their Arms, and
make a Lane toward the Entry, into the said Guard Chamber, to do honor to
those Great Persons as they pass; and as for their Captains, they Conduct them
also all along the Guard-Chamber, as far as the Door of the Antichamber.

The Sentinel is not to suffer any Soldier of the Regiment of Foot-Guards, to
come into the Guard Chamber with his Bandoleer, nor any of the Great Provosts
Guards, with their Jackets, or Hoquetons, nor any Lackeys, or Livery-men.

If a Guard keep a Door through which one has a mind to pass, one ought not to
open it ones self, though the Guard be at a distance from it, but to call
civilly to the Guard to open it.

The Life-Guards go every Morning at six a Clock, and take the Keys of the
Gates of the principal Court of the Royal Palace where the King lies, which
they keep from that time till six at Night, when the Guards of the Scotch
Company take it of them, as we have already showed.

At six a Clock at Night, the Exempt leads up the Company to the Gate, that is,
to keep Guard there all night, with a Tierce of the Scotch Company; and then
all the other Guards retire, as well those of the Gate, as those belonging to
the Provost of the Household.

They lie all in the Court of Guard, and from six a Clock at Night, that the
Guards of the Gate are relieved, there is but one Scotch Sentinel at the Gate,
till the King be in Bed, after which, the Brigadeer adds another Sentinel out
of a French Company, and this double Sentinel that is to watch all Night, is to
be relieved every hour by the Brigadeer.

There is also a Sentinel placed every night at the Door of the Guard-Chamber,
which should be relieved every hour, but commonly by agreement among
themselves, he that is first placed there, having watched half the night, wakes
another Guard, who is to do Duty the remaining part of the night, and so goes
to Bed. Always, both day and night, there are Sentinels drawn out of the
Foot-Guards, placed without the outward Gates of the Kings House, as we shall
show in due place.

If in the night time when all the Gates and Doors are shut, there happens to
come a Courier, or any other person charged with business of consequence to the
King, that is not to be delayed, the Guard that stands Sentinel, is to tell it
the Exempt, who is to go and tell the Captain; and then the Brigadeer, with a
Torch in his hand, and the Exempt and the Captain with two other Torches
carried before them, go all together to the Kings Lodgings, and calling upon
the Chief Gentleman of the Bed Chamber, desire of him, to know of his Majesty,
whether he be pleased to admit the said Courier, or other Person, to his Speech
and Presence.

When an Exempt goes to relieve the Watch, he is allowed half a Pistol a day
for his Diet.

The King ordinarily allows the Queen twelve of his French Guards, with an
Exempt, and six Suissers.

There are several Boys and Servants belonging to the Life-Guards, to make
their Beds, go on Errands, and fetch necessaries, etc.

After having spoken of the Life-Guards, it will not be improper to insert in
this place,

The Order observed in the Kings March, when he goes abroad, either a Foot, in
a Coach, or on Horseback, and the rank and place then observed, by the several
Officers about his Majesty.
When the King goes forth of his Palace in a Coach with two Horses, and
Accompanied with his Officers, this is the Order observed by them,

1. First, The Guards of the Gate, with their Officers at the head of them,
betake themselves to their Arms, and draw themselves up toward the Gate within
the nearest Court to the Palace, making there a Lane for his Majesty to pass
through.

2. Secondly, The Soldiers of the Foot Companies then upon Duty, both of the
French and Suisse-Guards, with their Officers at the head of them, and their
Colonels with their Pikes in their hands, make a Lane for the King to pass in
the middle of them, from the going out of the nearest Court to the Palace on
the outside, as far as ever they can reach, the French Guards placing
themselves on the right hand, and the Suissers on the left.

3. Thirdly, The hundred Suissers march in two Banks at the head of the
Coach-Horses, and before them march the Guards of the Provost of the Household.

And the Porte-Manteau, or Cloak-Bearer marches alone at the head of the
Horses, between the two Suissers, that close the two Ranks of the hundred
Suissers.

The Footmen march on both sides the forepart of the Coach, from the Horses
heads to the forepart of each Boot or Door of the Coach, and two of them hold
up only the two Fore-Buttons of the said Boots or Doors, unless it be when the
Life-Guards are on Horseback, and then four of them hold up all the four
Buttons: And when the Queen is in the Coach with the King, the Kings Footmen
keep at the right Boot or Door, and the Queens at the left; and when the King
sends the Footman that holds one of the Buttons, any where, his next Companion
takes it up.

The Life-Guards march behind, and on each side the Coach, from the hinder-part
of each Boot or Door, backwards, and if they be on foot, the two foremost of
them hold up the hinder Buttons, or Tassels of each Boot, or Door.

The Officer in chief of the Life-Guards, marches behind the Coach, on the
right hand, having the Querry in Waiting for that day, on his left.

At Entries made into Cities, the Trumpeters of the Chamber march likewise at
the head of the Kings Coach-Horses.

The Pages of the Chamber get up behind the Coach, or if it be night, the Pages
of the little Stable, ride on Horseback before the Coach-Horses, with each of
them a Flambo in his hand; because the King commonly marches something fast, he
is pleased to permit some of his own, and of the Queens Footmen, to get up
behind his Coach.

When the King makes any solemn Cavalcade, and rides in State, as at his
Majority, and at his public Entries into any great Towns or Cities, his
Footmen run on each side of him, from his Stirrup to his Horses head, and the
Life-Guards march likewise on each side, from his Stirrup backwards. When the
King walks on Foot, through the Courts of his Palace, or in the Streets, he is
Accompanied by a good number of his French, and Suisse Life-Guards, and of the
Great Provosts Guards, but when he is going into any of his Gardens to walk
there, all the said Guards withdraw and let him go, save only some few French
Life-Guards, and some Officers that follow him. But when the King goes out in
his Coach, or on Horseback, as he most commonly does, the Life-Guards, both
French and Suissers, come out of their Guard-Chambers in the Palace, and make a
Lane about the Coach or Horse, while his Majesty is getting up, or when he is
alighting at his return. The Great Provosts Guards place themselves likewise in
a rank on one side of his Majesty, with their Officers, and sometimes the Great
Provost himself at the head of them, holding the Staff of Command in his hand.
In Journeys, besides the French and Suisse Life-Guards, that always assist at
the Kings setting out, there are a great number of the Foot French and
Suisse-Guards, with their Officers, that place themselves round about the Coach
the King ears in, while he is taking his Repast, and that keep off the people,
and make Room for the Waiters to serve up the meat. When the King goes out to
any place, a little distance from his Palace, in the Town where he is, as at
Paris, when he goes from the Louvre, to Nostre Dame Church, or to the Palace,
or out upon any visit, or to any Opera, or Comedy abroad, the Guards go thither
first, and the Suissers wait for him at the great Gate of the place he is to go
to, making a Lane on both sides of it, for his Majesty to pass through when he
comes.

Of the Company of the hundred Suissers.
The Commander in Chief of the Company of the hundred Suissers, who is called
the Captain Colonel of the hundred Suissers of the Kings Ordinary Guard, is at
present, the Marquess of Tilladet, Lieutenant General of the Kings Armies, etc.
who was in the Month of July 1683. sent Envoy Extraordinary into England, to
Compliment his late Majesty of Great Britain, upon the Discovery of the last
Conspiracy against his Royal Person. He has 1200 l. standing Salary, 6000 l.
Board-Wages, 226 l. Pension, 300 l. at the Pay-Office of the Great Stable, 168
l. for the pay of three Suissers places allowed him, besides a considerable
Salary, as Counselor of State.

The better to comprehend the pay or Salary of the Officers of this Company,
you must Note, That they are paid by so many Suissers places, counting each
place at 14 d. a day, which is 256 l. a year, besides 4 d. a day paid by the
Captain, being 72 l. a year, and forty Crowns for a Suit of Clothes.

Upon solemn days, the Captain of the French Life-Guards marches behind his
Majesty, the better to have an Eye always on his Majesty's Person, and the
Captain of this Company of Suissers marches before him, so that they two secure
his Majesty's Person, both before and behind.

The Captain of the hundred Suissers is sworn by the King himself, and receives
the Oath of Fidelity from the other Officers of his Company, to whom he gives
grants of their places under his own Seal, excepting only the two Lieutenants,
that are put in by the King, and take out their Grants under the Great Seal.

There are under the Captain two Lieutenants, that do duty all the year round,
whereof one is a French, and the other a Suisse Lieutenant.

They are each of them allowed the pay of four Suissers places, which amounts
to 1024 l. and 480 l. each, for four Suits of Clothes, besides which, the
French Lieutenant is allowed 265 l. for his Diet, the Suisser Lieutenant having
his in specie, at the Masters of the Households Table.

There are two Ensigns half yearly Waiters, whereof one is French and the other
a Suisser, each of which, have 512 l. Salary, or the pay of two Suissers, and
240 l. for two Suits of Clothes. The Lieutenant and Eusign of the hundred
Suissers, eat at the Table of the Masters of the Household. Eight Exempts doing
duty quarterly, two every quarter, whereof four are French, and four Suissers.

The first of these has 754 l. yearly allowance, being French, the second 256
l. and 120 l. for a Suit of Clothes, being a Suisser; the third being French,
has 460 l. and 360 l. for three Suits of Clothes, which is in all 820 l. the
fourth being a Suisser, has 256 l. for one Suissers place, and 120 l. for a
Suit of Clothes; the fifth being also a Suisser, has 378 l. Salary, and 180 l.
for a Suit of Clothes and a half; the sixth being French, has 256 l. Salary,
and 120 l. for a Suit of Clothes; the seventh being a Suisser, has 666 l.
Salary, and 240 l. for two Suits of Clothes, which is in all, 906 l.

This Office in the Company of the hundred Suissers, was formerly called in
their tongue, Statthalter, that is to say, Deputy, or Vice-Lieutenant, and till
the year 1627. there, no other Exempt in this Company but one natural Suisser,
so called; the eighth and last, being French, has 256 l. Salary, and 120 l. for
a Suit of Clothes; the two Exempts that are upon Duty, eat at the Masters of
the Households Table, and one of them has the liberty, if he please, to go and
eat at that of the Serdeau, or Water-Server.

Four Harbingers quarterly Waiters, the first of which, that waits the first
quarter of the year, beginning in January, (...) 359 l. Salary, and sixty
Crowns for a Suit of Clothes and an half, which amounts in all, to 539 l. the
second has 384 l. Salary, and 60 Crowns for a Suit of Clothes and an half,
which is in all, 564 l. the third has 281 l. Salary, 72 l. more paid by the
Captain, and 120 l. for a Suit of Clothes, being in all, 473 l. the fourth and
last has 512 l. being the pay of two whole places, 240 l. for two Suits of
Clothes, and 144 l. more, paid by the Captain.

When these Harbingers meet all together at any Ceremony, the Harbinger for the
quarter, beginning in January, takes place of the other three, after whom
follows he that waits in the quarter beginning in October, then he that waits
in that beginning in April, and in the last place, he that waits in the quarter
beginning in July, during any Journey, the Harbinger in waiting is allowed a
Crown a Day for his Diet, which is paid him at the Chamber of Deniers, from the
day the King sets out, otherwise, he eats at the Serdeau's, or Water-Servers
Table.

There are besides these Officers, a hundred Suisse Soldiers, the pay of each
of these, is 14 d. a day and 4 d. more, paid by the Captain; and over and above
the said hundred, there is the same pay, and Livery-Coats allowed to ten more,
which places are filled up by those among the hundred, which being grown old,
and thought fit to be discharged from Service, are thus taken care for in their
latter days.

There is one Clerk of the Watch, who is to be a Suisse by Nation; who has 512
l. Salary, being two Suissers pay, 140 l. for two Suits of Clothes, and 160 l.
Board-Wages at the Chamber of Deniers.

This Company of Suissers then, is composed of a hundred Soldiers of that
Nation, reckoning in three Drummers and one Flute, besides the Clerk of the
Watch, and the abovesaid Officers; whereof the 96 that are Soldiers,
discounting the Drummers, and the Flute, are divided into six Divisions, or
Parcels called Escouades, consisting of sixteen men each, whereof one is chosen
by the Captain to be Corporal of the rest. There are two of these Divisions
ordinarily in Waiting at a time, that is to say, one by day, and the other by
night, which are relieved every Sunday, by two other Divisions, so that in
three Weeks time, the whole Company does Duty round, of which, each Couple of
Divisions are a Week upon Duty, and rest the other Fortnight.

The Division that does duty in the night, is called, the Division of the
Watch, whereof twelve are called the Suissers of the Straw-Bed, because in the
night they lie on the Straw-Beds, in the Guard-Chamber, among the French
Lifeguard Men. Those of the other Division, appointed for the Day-guard, a
little before night, go off the Guard in order out of the Kings Palace, with an
Officer at the head of them, and go and lie at their own Quarters; and the next
Morning, precisely at eight a Clock, they Rendevouz again at the Captains Door,
or some other place appointed them, and march in the same order back again into
the Kings Palace, with an Officer at the head of them, where they are received
by the twelve Suissers of the Watch, that have lain with the French Lifeguard
Men the foregoing Night, who receive them in Arms, making a Lane for them to
pass through in their Guard-Chamber: they are intermixed with the French Guards
out of Policy, to prevent Treachery; that if one Nation should be corrupted,
the other might discover them, or defeat their purpose. They lie but twelve of
them at a time in the French Guard-Chamber, because, by reason of their number,
there is hardly convenience for more; the others have a Hall apart, and
separated, as far as convenience will permit, from the French Guard-Chamber,
and remain there only in the day time, upon Sundays, and other Holy Days,
observed in the Diocese, where the Court happens to be, as likewise at some
Extraordinary Solemnities, as at the first and last Audiences of Ambassadors,
and other like occasions; all the six Divisions wait all together in a Body on
the King.

Out of this Company, the Captain, by the Kings Order, Selects six to wait on
the Queen (when there is one) viz. one out of every Division, who are then
Commanded by the Officer of the French Life-Guards then in Waiting on her
Majesty, which fix, besides their allowance in the Kings Service, have every
one 18 d. a day from the Queen, besides their Watch Bread, and Wine, and Wood
and Candle; and they always wear the Kings Livery, except when the Queen is a
Widow, and Regent of the King, and then they wear Mourning, and their number is
augmented to twelve. These places are commonly purchased of the Captain, by six
of the Company.

The Dauphiness is likewise allowed six Suissers, viz. one out of every
Division, drawn out for that purpose every Month by the Captain, who in the
time of their duty in that Service are allowed, besides the Kings pay, 10 d. a
day.

When the Court removes to any distance, leaving the Duke of Burgundy, or other
of the Dauphins Children behind, the Captain of this Company detaches six
Suisser's to wait on each of them.

One Suisser is likewise appointed by the King, to wait on the Lord High
Chancellor, who upon that account is exempted from going upon the Watch, and
other Military Functions of this Company.

The Great Master of the Horse also, who is the sole Orderer of all the
Liveries of the Kings Household, may keep a Suisse of his own in the same Livery
with the Kings, or if he pleases, he may take one of the hundred, but if he
take one of them, he so taken by him, must either in Person, or by some of his
Companions, perform his Watch, and other duties of the Company, when it comes
to his turn.

When the Chancellor dies, he that succeeds him is not obliged to make use of
the same Suisser that waited on his Predecessor, but may, if he please, ask
the King for any other he has a mind to.

The Captain of this Company has always one of the said Company too, to wait on
him.

There are three Treasurers that are paid by the King, to pay the hundred
Suissers every Month, their Months pay beforehand, so that on the first,
second, or at furthest, on the third day of every Month, the hundred Suissers
receive their full pay for the Month then begun, wheresoever the Court happens
to be.

There belong besides, to this Company, one Almoner, one Physician, one
Chyrurgeon, one Apothecary, one Merchant furnishing Cloth, Stuff, and other
necessaries for their Clothes, and three Tailors.

The Chyrurgeon, Apothecary and Tailors, have the privilege to keep open Shop
at Paris, or elsewhere, though not Masters, and the Tailors are allowed ten
Crowns for making each Suissers Suit.

At the Kings Coronation, the Commission Officers of this Company are Clothed
in White-Satin, with Cloth of Silver underneath the Slashes. The Harbingers are
in Blue, and the rest of the Suissers in Velvet. They are likewise allowed
Extraordinary habits at other great Solemnities, when their Colors march, as
at Kings Marriages, and Christnings of the Dauphins, or first Sons of France,
and at the first Entries of Kings and Queens into any of their great Towns or
Cities.

Ever since the year 1679. they have reassumed their ancient Habit, which they
wear every Sunday and Holy Day.

They wear Velvet Bonnets incircled round with Plumes of White Feathers, with
little tufts before, composed of four Sprigs of Feathers of the same Color;
starched Laced Ruffs, and Cloths flashed upon Taffety, which swells out of the
slashes; the Hilts of their Swords are gilt, and very large, and fastened to
them with E^^s, or rather other kind of Sword-Supporters, after the ancient
Mode, fringed on the sides, they wear Fringed-Gloves, Blue and Red Garters, and
Roses of the same Colored Ribbands on their Shoes; their great Coats called
Brandenburgs, are garnished with red and white Buttons, with Tails, all of the
Kings Livery; in one of their hands they bear Halbards, upon which is wrought a
golden Sun, which is the Kings Devise, or particular Emblem, and in the other
hand, great Canes garnisht with Silver at both ends.

They, with their Officers, march before the King when he is walking on Foot,
or passing leisurely along, either in his own House, or in the Town, where he
for the time being resides.

Every day when the King goes to Mass, the Suissers of this Company, place
themselves in two ranks, making a Lane from the Quire to the outward Door of
the Church or Chapel where he is; and on Sundays and Holy Days, they appear in
the same order, with their Velvet Bonnets, and Habits of Ceremony, or Holy Day
Clothes, with their Drums and their Flute, which they sound as soon as the King
comes, and march thus to the middle of the great Churches into which the King
goes, and to the very Door and enclosure of the Quire: the same Ceremony they
observe when his Majesty comes from Mass, or when he goes to, or comes from
Sermon.

Note, That the Drummers of this Company, beat full out for the King, and only
beat a Call for the Dauphin, or Dauphiness. When an Ambassador goes to his
Audience, the hundred Suissers, upon notice given them by the Introductour of
Ambassadors, place themselves in two Ranks, on each side the French
Guard-Chamber Door outward, and all along the Stairs going up, and when the
Ambassador is coming, the Drummer gives two or three little strokes upon his
Drum, to give them notice to betake themselves to their Arms.

Upon Days of great Solemnity, such as Coronation-Days, etc. they display their
Colors.

Every time the King goes out in a Coach, or on Horseback, or when he comes
back into the Court of his Palace where he there Lodges, these Suissers with an
Officer at the head of them, place themselves in ranks about his Majesty's
Coach or Horse, and keep off the people, if need be.

When a Te Deum is ordered to be sung at Nostre Dame Church at Paris, though
the King goes not thither, yet he customarily directs a private Letter to the
Captain, or Chief Officer, to send thither so many of this Company, as are
necessary for that occasion, as he does likewise on the same occasions, to the
Captain of the French Life-Guards.

At the Feasts the King makes at the Creation of the Knights of his Orders,
upon the second day of that Solemnity, the hundred Suissers serve up the Meat
to the Table, and have what comes off again for their pains.

Those of them that are upon the Watch, have their Watch-Bread, and Watch-Wine
every Morning and Evening, Candle, Wax, and a Watch-Torch every day, and
extraordinary allowances of Meat, on the four great Festivals of the Year:
Wax-Candles on Candlemas Day, some Linen Cloth on Maundy-Thursday,
Prayer-Books in the Holy Week, and Torches with the Kings Arms on them, on
Corpus Christi Day.

This Company of the hundred Suissers is one of the most ancient Companies of
the ordinary Guards of the Kings Body, and first Company composed of them since
their alliance with his Majesty; they having been established in France, ever
since the year 1481. when Lewis XI. Entertained them into his Service; being
very useful, both for their known Fidelity to their Trust, and the Manly
properness of their persons, both for the security of a King, and for the
setting forth his Grandeur.

This Company being a Corporation apart of it self, has its peculiar Court of
Justice within it self, kept by their own Officers, from whom their last Appeal
is to the Colonels and Captains of the Regiments of Guards of their own Nation.

They enjoy the same Privileges as do the French the Kings born Subjects: they
may purchase, inherit, and dispose of their Goods or Estates, by Sale, Deeds or
Gifts while living, or Wills at their Deaths, and their Wives, Children, or
next Kindred, may Inherit what they leave: Both themselves, and their Widows
and Children, are free from all Taxes, Subsidies, and Impositions, laid or to
be laid on the subject, under what name soever, and under what pretense soever,
though the King himself should have expressly ordered them himself, his Majesty
being unwilling to make use of his Power and Prerogative against them, because
of their great Services, and singular Fidelity: They are also free from
Watching and Warding, and keeping of Gates, as the Kings of France have always
been pleased to let them be ever since their first Alliance with them, which
have still been confirmed by all succeeding Treaties.

When any of the Officers of this Company dies, he is buried with the
Ceremonies and Solemnities used to Military Persons; his Sword and Commanders
Staff are placed something Cross-wise, on the top of the Biere, which is
carried in the midst of the Company, who all Accompany the Body, the Drums and
Flute making a mournful sound, as is usual at Funerals; when any of the common
Soldiers of them die, they are buried much after the same manner, only with
proportionably less Ceremonies, according to their Quality: The Swords of the
deceased belong to the Harbinger then in Waiting.

Besides the abovementioned Privileges enjoyed by this Company, there are two
other very particular and remarkable ones; the first is the right of being
lodged gratis all the year at Paris, and the second, the privilege of selling
Wine.

That Part or Quarter of Paris, that comprehends the Streets of Montorgueil, of
Montmarire, and other Neighboring Streets, is allotted for Lodging this
Company, though the King be not at Paris: And the Owner, or chief Tenants of
the Houses in those Streets, if their Houses be small, are bound to find a
Chamber ready furnished, at most but two stories high, for a common Suisse, and
to furnish all necessary Utensils, and those who have bigger Houses, are to
find an Officer two Chambers ready furnished, with a Stable and Coach-House, if
need be, and with all necessary Utensils, as Linen, Dishes, Pots and Pans,
etc. But generally the King having not for a long time resided at Paris, not
being like to do, the Owners, or chief Tenants of the said Houses, agree with
the said Suissers and Officers, for a certain yearly payment in Money, in
consideration of which, their Houses are free from this subjection, and the
Suissers, upon occasion, like Lodgings where else they please.

The Kings of France have granted to this Company thirteen Privileges, or an
Exemption to be enjoyed by thirteen Persons of their Body, from the Duties
usually paid by Vintners and Wine-Merchants. These thirteen Privileges are
enjoyed by twelve Suissers, among whom, are some Officers, and the Clerk of the
Watch: They are by virtue of the same, exempt from paying the Duty called the
Eighth, and generally from all other duties upon Wine, except the duty of the
Entry or Importation of those Wines they sell by retail. The Jurours of the
Wine-Sellers, pretend, that the number of Buts, or Pieces of Wine, which these
Privileged Suissers are to sell, is limited to 150, and they on the other side
say, they are not limited to any definite number, which is a Controversy as yet
undecided; the King abates 1400 l. a year to the Farmers of the Aids, for every
one of these thirteen Privileges, and yet they let them out but for 1000 l. or
thereabout, to those that hire them of them.

Formerly those of this Company that sold Wine, paid no more for selling Wine
with Napkins and Plates, that is, for selling Wine and Victuals too, than for
selling of it only by the Pot, so that they paid 27 d. on every Piece of Wine
less than the Vintners; but in the year 1658. the Company sold this Privilege,
which was called the little Privilege, to the Farmers of the Aids, for a
certain Annuity to be paid to their Captain, which is distributed among them at
the rate of 4 d. a day each Man, so that ever since that time, the hundred
Suissers, that before had but 14 d. a day, have now 18 d. a day.

Of the Guards of the Gate.
Of these Guards, there is a Captain, who has a Salary of 3000 l. paid by the
Treasurers of the Household, and 4000 l. Board-Wages, at the Chamber of Deniers.

He is sworn by the King himself, and receives from him the Staff of Command.
Under him are

Four Lieutenants quarterly Waiters, who enjoy their Places by Patent from the
King, but are sworn by the Great Master of the Household, and have each of them
500 l. Salary, and 50 l. Gratuity, and during the time of their Waiting, eat at
the Masters of the Households Table.

Fifty Guards of the Gate, that serve by Quarters, viz. Thirteen of them each
of the two first Quarters, and but twelve of each of the two last Quarters of
the year. They enjoy their Places too by Patent, and are sworn by their Captain.

They are reckoned among the first and most ancient Guards of the Household,
which is the reason that this Company is yet to this day entered upon the Book
of the General Establishment of the Household, and accordingly receive their pay
from the Treasurers of the Household, and not from peculiar Treasurers of their
own, as do the other Companies of Guards.

Every day, at six in the Morning, the Guards of the Gate, receive from the
hands of the Lifeguard Men, the Keys of the Gates of that Court where the
Kings Lodgings or Apartments are, within which, they place Sentinels, and at
six at Night they return the said Keys again to the Life-Guards; By the Court
where the Kings Lodgings are, I mean the principal Court of the Palace where he
is, as the Oval Court at Fountain-bleau.

He that stands Sentinel at the Gate, holds a Carbine on his shoulder, as do
all the rest of this Company that are on the Guard, who likewise stand to their
Arms, and place themselves in Ranks, making a Lane near the Gate, when his
Majesty, any other Royal Persons, or any Ambassadors in going to, or coming
from their first and last Audiences, are to pass by. They also stand to their
Arms in the same manner about the Gate, within the Court of the Louvre, or
other Royal Palace where the King is exercising the Company of Gentlemen
Musketeers, during the whole time of the said Exercise in that Court.

The Guards of the Gate are to let none pass into the Palace with Arms, but the
Life-Guards only; but are to stop all that offer to go in with Blunderbusses,
Firelocks, Pikes, Powder, or any other Arms but Swords.

They all wear blue Coats laced with large gold and silver Galoon, and trimmed
with Buttons of Massy Silver. Formerly they used to wear Jackets, or Hoquetons,
like those worn at present, by the Great Provosts Guards, save only, that upon
the four great Skirts of them, they had two Keys Embroidered Salter-wise, and
Swivels, which are both of Buff.

Their Belts, at present, are edged about with gold and silver Galoon; and in
the middle of their Swivels, there is before, and behind, a golden Flower
deluce, and an L of the same, for Lewis, being the Kings Name, and above them
two Keys placed Salteir-wise, and tied with a red Ribband, all which is wrought
in Embroidery, enterlaced with Palms and Laurels, and Crowned with a Crown
Royal.

The Guards of the Gate, in the time of their Waiting, never take off their
Swivels wherever he goes, unless it be when he goes into the Kings
Antichamber, or into the other Chambers, Closets, and Apartments of his
Majesty.

At the end of their Quarters Waiting, they receive 200 l. Wages from the
General Treasurer of the Household, and 40 l. Gratuity at the Treasure Royal.

At Easter, Whitsontide, All Saints, Christmas, Martlemas, and on
Shrove-Tuesday, they have Portions of Bread, Wine and Meat, from the King,
which gives them the privilege of Tablers, or Commoners of the Kings Household;
they that are in Waiting, at the like times, on the Queen, or the Dauphin, have
the same allowance from them.

At New Years Tide, the King gives them that are in Waiting that quarter, 50 l.
5 d, the Queen 32 l, and the Parliament of Paris as much, for which, they give
an Acquittance. The other Sovereign Courts likewise, and the Guildhall of
Paris, pay them some certain sums, for they give also Acquittances.

Upon St. Lewis's Day, which is his Majesty's peculiar Festival, the Kings
allow them 40 l. out of the Privy-Purse of the Chamber; Besides which, they
have a Fee of ten Crowns from the Treasurer of the Offerings every time the King
touches for the Evil: But however, on the four great Festivals of the year,
they are paid the said allowance on that account, whether the King touches or
no.

Those that are in Waiting, share amongst them, the Gifts and Liberalities made
to them, by the New Dukes, and Peers, and Marshals of France, and other
Officers of the Crown, at their first Entry into the Kings Palace in their
Coaches or Sedans, by virtue of their new Dignity.

They have likewise Wax-Candles at Candlemas, Torches on Corpus Christi Day,
and Prayer-Books in the Holy Week, given them.

They are Exempt from Taxes, and from the Imposition on Salt in those Provinces
where it is established, and from all Subsidies and Billeting of Soldiers:
They have the Privilege of Committimus, and take out Letters of State when
they have need of them.

By an Order of the Privy Council dated the 19th of November, 1668. the King
has confirmed the quality of Esquires to the Guards of the Gate; and by a
Declaration of the 17th of June, 1659. and Letters Patents of the 3d of May,
1675. registered in the Great Council on the 27th of July following. The King
was pleased to Order, that the Guards of the Gate should have the precedence in
all honors done in the Church, and in all other places and Assemblies, before
all the Officers of the Elections, of the Granaries of Salt, and Judges not
Royal, and in general, before all others inferior in degree, to the
Counselors of Bayliwicks, Seneschalsies, and Presidial Seats, or Courts of
Judicature.

Now, it being the Duty of the Guards of the Gate, in the Day time, and of the
Lifeguard Men from six a Clock at Night, to distinguish those to whom the King
is pleased to permit the Honor of going into the Louvre, or other of the Kings
Palaces, in their Coaches or Sedans, and to keep all others from entering in
that manner. It will not be amiss to subjoin in this place,

The Order and Rank of Precedence observed in admitting and placing of those to
whom the King permits the honor of entering into his Royal Palace in their
Coaches or Sedans.
No Body is to enter into the Kings Palace in a Coach, in the Morning before
their Majesty's be awake; and at Night, as soon as the King is in Bed, all the
Coaches within the Palace, are to go out, and Monsieurs is set up under the
Gate, or Porch of the Palace.

Next to the first Coaches, or Coaches of the Body of their Majesty's, and
other Coaches belonging to them, none but such Persons of the several Qualities
underneath specified, are privileged to enter into the Palace, in their
Coaches, or Sedans, viz.

1. All Princes, that is to say, Children of France, and their Children, the
other Princes of the Blood, the Bastard Princes that are Legitimated, and
Sovereign Stranger-Princes, and the Princesses their Wives, their Daughters,
and their Sisters, who may have a Coach covered with red Velvet, or black
Velvet, if they be in Mourning, with Covers of the same, and are allowed the
privilege of the Tabouret, that is, of sitting down on a low Stool in the
Queens Presence.

Lastly, Cardinals, as Princes of the Church, are comprehended likewise under
this Title.

2. Ambassadors, both Ordinary and Extraordinary, of Crowned Heads, that is to
say, of the Emperor, of all Kings, of some Sovereign Dukes, of some
Republics, and the Ambassadors Extraordinary of Malta, ever since the time of
Monsieur Souvray, and the Popes-Nuntio's or Legates; as likewise the Wives of
all such Ambassadors, who also may have Coaches covered with Velvet, and are
allowed the Honor of the Tabouret, or of sitting on a low Stool so called,
before the Queen Consort, or Dowager.

3. All Dukes and Peers of France, whether they be so by Letters Patents,
verified in the Parliament of Paris, or so only by Briefs and Patents not
verified, and the Dutchesses their Ladies, who may have Coaches covered with
Velvet, and have the honor of the Tabouret before the Queen.

And the six ancient Ecclesiastical Dukes and Peers, and Counts and Peers,
which you will find in the List of them in their proper place, as likewise
later ones, who are Dukes and Peers, as the Archbishop of Paris, etc.

4. The great Officers of the Crown, the Chancellor, the Keeper of the Seals,
the Marshals of France, and the Great Master of the Artillery: Where

Note, That the Wives of these great Officers have the privilege to go into
the Louvre in their Coaches or Sedans, but are not allowed the Honor of the
Tabouret before the Queen, though in the Queens Tiring-room, the Chancellours
Lady indeed is allowed a Tabouret, and the other great Officers Ladies only
Cushions to sit on before her Majesty.

The chief Officers likewise of both Sexes, have also the privilege of going
into the Palace, even in their own Coaches, as her Lady of Honor, her
Tiring-Lady, her Gentleman Usher, or Knight of Honor, and the Persons who have
the grant of the Reversions of the said Offices; as likewise the chief Officers
of both Sexes, of the Children of France, and even after any Queens Decease, or
after the Decease of any of the Children of France, the King being pleased to
continue, to their said chief Officers, their former Salaries, is pleased
likewise to continue to them withal, the privilege of going into his Palace in
their Coaches or Sedans.

Besides these, there are some, to whom by particular favor, the King permits
the same Honor.

When any of the abovesaid persons have a mind to go into the Palace in a
Chair, or Sedan, they may go in when they please, though it be before Day, or
though the King or Queen be sick or asleep; because Chairs make no noise as
Coaches do. And since the coming up of the Sedans or Chairs called Royal
Chairs, almost any private person is suffered to go in in those kind of Chairs,
as far as the bottom of the Kings Stairs.

When there is a Queen, her Maids of Honor go into the Palace in her Majesty's
Coach, as do now those belonging to the Dauphiness, in hers. And the Kings or
Queens Confessors, being in their Majesty's Coaches, enter likewise.

Note, That any of the forementioned persons, that have the privilege to go
into the Kings Palace in their own Coaches, may likewise go in any other Coach
as well as their own; and if their own Coach comes afterward to the Gate, the
Guards let it pass in with all those that are in it, but then as soon as that
is come in, the borrowed Coach, unless it be one belonging to a person of equal
Quality, is immediately to retire.

All the Coaches that enter into the Kings Palace, place themselves within the
Court of the Palace, nearer or further off the Stairs Foot of the Kings
Apartment, according to the Rank of Precedence the Masters or Ladies to whom
they belong, enjoy in France. So that if there chance to come a Prince, a Dukes
and Peers Coach must put back to give him place. They are sometimes placed in
several Ranks according to their different Qualities, but that is not very
exactly observed: the same Order and Ceremony observed in entering into the
Kings Palace, is in most particulars observed in going into any of the Palaces
belonging to the Children of France, or any other Royal Persons; But at the
Palaces of the other Princes, these Punctilio's are not so much insisted on.
Next the Guards of the Gate are

The Guards of the Great Provost of the Household.
We have already spoken of the Gown-Men, and other Officers under the Great
Provost, as Judge of the Kings Household, we must now treat of his Military
Officers and those under them.

The Great Provost is Captain of a Company of a hundred Men, who are called the
Guards of the Provost of the Household; these, are either Exempts, who are
twelve in number, one whereof is called the Exempt in Ordinary, and 88 common
Guards, who have all of them Salaries of 272 l. 10 d. apiece.

The Exempts serve quarterly, three every quarter, whereof four who are the
four first, or Foremen of every quarter, are called ancient Exempts, and have
besides their standing Wages, a gratuity of fifty Crowns, at the
Treasure-Royal; the four second, and next to them in every quarter, are
likewise allowed a gratuity of fifty Crowns out of the profits of the
Provostship of the Household, but the four last have only their bare Wages,
viz. 272 l. 10 d.

The other Guards serve quarterly too, 22. every quarter, and are allowed 60 l.
each, Extraordinary, when the King goes any Journey, and every one a certain
gratuity when the King touches for the Evil.

When the King goes forth of his Lodging, either on Foot, in a Chair, or in a
Coach with two Horses, the Great Provosts Guards march with their Officers at
the head of them, on Foot before his Majesty, immediately before the hundred
Suiffers, who march before the Coach-Horses, and when the Life-Guards mount on
Horseback, the Provosts Guards mount on Horseback too.

When the King goes out in a Coach with six Horses, these Guards Accompany him
not, but only place themselves in Ranks with their Officers at the head of
them, just by the Gate of the Kings Lodgings without, and make a Lane for his
Majesty to pass through; Sometimes on those occasions the Great Provost himself
is there, with his Commanders Staff in his hand: At St. Germains en Lay, and
at Fountain-bleau, there is a little Plot of ground, about the breadth of the
Ditch, before the Principal Gate of the chief Court of the Palace, where these
Guards, with their Officers, place themselves in Order, and make a Lane for his
Majesty to pass through when the King goes out in a Coach with six Horses: But
when the King is at any Palace, or other place, where no such convenience of
ground is to be found, then the Officers and Guards of the Provostship, mark
out for themselves, as much ground next without the Gate, as extends to the
length of a Pike, which the Regiments of French and Suisse-Guards, or other
Guards, are obliged to leave them, where they Post themselves in the manner
aforesaid.

Note, That the Sentinels already placed without the said Gate of the Palace,
whether they be taken out of the Regiments of French and Suisse-Guards, or
sometimes, in their absence, out of the Musketeers, the Gensdarmes, or Light
Horsemen, or out of any other Foot-Company, keep still in the same Post they
were placed in, close by the outside of the Gate, and the Officers and Guards
of the Provostship place themselves in Ranks on both sides of the way, from the
said Sentinels forward as far as a Pikes length, as is abovesaid, and next
them, stands the Colonel of the Regiment of Foot-Guards, or such other
Head-Officer, that Commands the Troops then upon the Guard without the Palace,
and then his Soldiers or Troopers placed in Ranks on each side the way.

These Guards wear Jackets, or Hoquetons, Embossed with massy silver upon a
ground of the Kings Colors, which are, Carnation, White and Blue, with the
Devise, or Emblem, of Henry the Great, being a Hercules's Club, with this
Motto, Erit haec quoque cognita Monstris, i. e. And the Monsters shall also
know, or feel this.

They go up and down the Kings House, to Execute the Orders relating to the
Policy and Government of it, and to clear it of Vagabond and suspicious Persons
that can give no good account of themselves, and attend to see whether the King
will send them into the Town, or any where out of the place where the Court
resides, to arrest any Body, or take them into Custody.

There are likewise two supernumerary Guards of the Provostship, that wait
constantly on the Chancellor, who have the same Salary as the others.

There is one Trumpeter, at 272 l. Salary, as for the other Officers, we have
named them in the other Chapter, where we have spoken of the Great Provost, as
Judge of the Household.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Guards without the Gate, and

I. Of the Gensdarms, or Men at Arms, of the Kings Guard.
THIS Company ought to consist of 220 Men at Arms, that do duty quarterly.

Their Captain is the King himself, under whom there is

A Lieutenant Captain, his pay in that quality, is 1380 l. besides which, the
King allows him the Captains pay, being 3280 l. and 2700 l. Extraordinary,
during their quarter.

Two Deputy Lieutenants, who have each of them 410 l. by the quarter, and 1350
l. Extraordinary during their quarter.

Three Ensigns, who have each of them 135 l. quarterly pay, and 1080 l.
Extraordinary during their quarter.

Three Guidons, who have the same pay.

Note, That the King in lieu of the Fees the Officers of this Company used to
have at the reception of any new Officers or Soldiers among them, and of the
right of disposing the places vacant by Death, gives them 26000 l. in Pensions,
viz. 13000 l. to the Lieutenant Captain, 5000 l. to the Deputy-Lieutenant, 4000
l. to the Ensign, and 4000 l. to the Guidon: So that for the future the places
in this Company will be given gratis upon any vacancy by Death; yet
notwithstanding that, the places of Men at Arms, are fixed places, and during
their Lives, they may dispose of them, and resign them to others, which the
Light Horsemen cannot do.

There are two Marshals of the Lodgings, or chief Quarter Masters, that have
each 85 l. pay, Quarterly, and 600 l. Extraordinary, Yearly.

One Commissary of the Conduct, or Muster-Master, whose ordinary pay is 3600 l.
besides 240 l. for Taxations, Ordinary and Extraordinary.

This Commissary Musters the Troop, and receives the Oaths, both of the
Officers and Soldiers of it.

When a Horseman, or Officer of Horse, is sworn by him, his Horse and his
Pistols are his Fees, and if he be a Foot-Officer, his Corslet and Sword. And
when he himself is sworn by a Marshal of France, he is to give the Captain six
Else of Black Velvet for his Fee.

The Commissaries of the Conduct, or Muster-Masters, have their place always
fixed on the left hand of the Commander in Chief, the Commissaries Horses Head
advancing as far as the Commanders Stirrup, both when they are on the march, or
engaged in a Battle: And whether they be in the Field, or quartered in Town or
Country, these Commissaries quarters are always next the Commanders, so that
they have always the second place in the Company; about which there are many
Rules and Orders.

Eight Brigadeers, there being four Brigades, and two Brigadeers to each.
Besides the pay, they have as other Horsemen of this Company, which is 680 l.
apiece, they have every one 600 l. Pension, and 300 l. gratification at the end
of their quarters service; And the eldest among them, that still does Service,
has 1000 l. Pension.

Eight Sub-Brigadeers, who besides the common pay of 680 l. have every one a
Pension of 500 l: Besides these, there is one Major.

Four Trumpeters, one Kettle-Drummer, one Harbinger, or Under-Quarter Master in
Ordinary, and another Extraordinary; one Almoner, or Chaplain, one Chyrurgeon,
one Sadler, one Farrier, all at 90 l. Salary apiece.

To pay all which, there is one Treasurer, and one Comptroller.

The whole Company consists of 220 Horsemen, besides the great and small
Officers, and the Footmen at Arms, and their pay is 680 l. apiece.

There are added to them, upon a new Roll, twenty others, who have the same pay.

The Devise or Emblem they bear in their Colors, is thunder falling from
Heaven with these Latin words, Quo Jubet Iratus Jupiter, i. e. Where angry
Jupiter Commands. The King has, besides these, other Companies of Gensdarmes in
his Armies, of which he is likewise Captain, but these only are retained for
the guard of his Person.

2. Of the Company of Light Horse.
This Company is likewise composed of 220 Masters, or Horsemen, that serve
quarterly. To this belong,

A Captain, who is the King.

A Lieutenant Captain, and two Deputy Lieutenants.

Four Cornets, whose pay is 187 l. 10 d. Two chief Quarter Masters, or Marshals
of the Lodgings, whereof, the first has 62 l. 10 d. and the other, 125 l. a
Month.

Two other Harbingers, or Quarter Masters, at 30 l. a Month each; one
Commissary of the Conduct, or Muster-Master; four chief Brigadeers, who besides
the ordinary pay of 30 d. or half a Crown a day all the year round, and 20 d. a
day more when they are upon actual duty, have every one 600 l. Pension, and 300
l. gratification at the end of their quarters Service: But the eldest of the
four has a Pension of 1000 l. Five other Brigadeers, who have the same pay as
the precedent ones, bating the 300 l. gratification. Eight Sub-Brigadeers, who
have every one 500 l. Pension, 30 d. or half a Crown a day, constant pay, and
20 d. a day more extraordinary, when they are actually on duty. Four
Standard-Bearers, who have the same pay as the Sub-Brigadeers.

One Aid-Major, and honorary Brigadeer, who Commands in no Quarter, but as
Brigadeer, has a Pension of 600 l.

Four Trumpeters, whose pay is 66 l. a quarter, and one Kettle-Drummer, at 200
l.

The Cavaliers, or Troopers of this Company, have 30 d. or half a Crown a day
ordinary pay, and 20 d. a day extraordinary, when they are upon duty.

There belong to them besides one Almoner, or Chaplain, who has 30 l. a Month
besides the ordinary pay; two Chyrurgeons, one Farrier, and one Sadler, at 30
l. a Month, each.

Their Extraordinary pay is paid out of the Kings own private Coffer; and their
ordinary pay by three Treasurers belonging to the Company.

The Devise or Emblem born in their Standards, is Thunderbolts destroying the
Giants, with this Motto, Sensere Gigantes, i. e. The Giants felt them.

3. Of the Regiments of Foot-Guards.
There are two Regiments of Foot-Guards, viz. First of French, and secondly,
another of Suissers.

The French Regiment consists of thirty Companies, of a hundred Men in a
Company, besides four Sergeants. These Companies are called by their Captains
Names. To this Regiment belong these Officers, viz. A Colonel, who is at
present, the Duke de la Feuillade, whose yearly pay is 10000 l. Each Company
has a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Deputy-Lieutenant, an Ensign, and four
Sergeants; and the Colonelry has three Lieutenants, three Deputy Lieutenants,
two Ensigns, and six Sergeants; there are likewise a Major, four Aid-Majors,
four Sub-Aid-Majors. The Captains being thirty in number, have 3000 l. a year
each, the Major as much, the two eldest Aid-Majors, 2500 l. each, the two
others but 2000 l. the Sub-Aid-Majors, have each of them 1100 l. pay, and 900
l. gratuity, the Lieutenants 1100 l. the Deputy, or Sub-Lieutenants 900 l. the
Ensigns 660 l. The first Lieutenant of the Colonelry, who is called the
Lieutenant-Captain, besides his Lieutenants pay, has also the pay of a Captain,
and the Captain of the first Company following, besides his Captains pay, has
the pay of a Lieutenant, as being Lieutenant Colonel. More belonging to this
Regiment are, two chief Muster-Masters, or Commissaries of the Conduct, and
four other Muster-Masters, two Marshals of the Lodgings, or Quarter Masters,
called the Marshals of the Lodgings of the French Guards, and of the Regiment
of Guards, one Provost of the French Bands, and of the Regiment of Guards, one
Lieutenant-Provost, one Register, twelve Archers, or Sergeants belonging to the
Provost, and one Executioner. One Auditour-General of the French Bands, two
Drum-Majors, one Sergeant appointed, or Pensioner, one Physician, with an Aid,
or Assistant, one Apothecary, one Chaplain, six Commissaries, and Comptrollers
for the War, two other new created Comptrollers, two General Treasurers of the
Extraordinaries for the War, and their Clerks or Deputies, and three other
General Treasurers for the ordinary pay of the said Regiment.

Note, That the French Regiment of Guards takes always the right hand of the
Regiment of the Suisse Guards, and when two Sentinels are placed, one French,
and the other Suisser, the Frenchman stands on the right hand side, which is
to be reckoned with relation to the Kings right hand, which changes, as he may
be going or coming; and on all ocsions, when his Majesty, or other great
Persons, to whom they owe honors, pass by, the French make a Rank on the right
hand, and the Suissers on the left hand of them: It is likewise remarkable,
that the Officers of the French Regiment wear gilt Corslets, and the Suissers
their only washed over with Silver. This Regiment is quartered in the several
Suburbs, and Neighboring Villages about Paris.

Of the Suisse-Regiment.
The Regiment of Suisse-Guards is composed of Suissers and Grisons, consisting
in all of ten Companies, to which is lately added a new Company, though they
have not yet been on duty near his Majesty's Person.

For the Conduct and Government of these,
There are Officers general, and Officers particular. The Officers general have
Command, not only over this Regiment, but over all those of this Nation in the
service of France.

The Officers General, are a Colonel-General of the Suissers and Grisons, who
is at present the Duke de Maine, the Kings Natural Legitimated Son by the
Duchess of Montespan, who has for himself, and twelve Halbardeers, that always
attend on his Person, 74088 l. a year, under whom, there is a
Lieutenant-Captain, a Lieutenant, a Deputy-Lieutenant, an Ensign, a Marshal of
the Lodgings, and another, called the Great Harbinger, or Quartermaster, an
Interpreter, a Chyrurgeon Major, and an Almoner, or Chaplain.

The General Company has likewise a Court of Justice apart from the Regiment,
which is the supreme one the Suissers have in France, and to which lies their
last appeal from other particular ones, as we have elsewhere noted, to which
belong a Great Judge, and other Assistants and necessary Officers.

To the Regiment of Suisse-Foot-Guards, belong, a Colonel, a
Lieutenant-Captain, or Colonel, another Lieutenant, a Deputy-Lieutenant, and an
Ensign; besides which, because in honor of the several Cantons and places
whence they come, the King is pleased to join several Captains and other
Officers of the same denomination with equal Commissions in one Company,
because the number of men many times brought by each singly, is not sufficient
to make a complete Company alone, there are eleven Captains, nine Lieutenants,
nine Deputy Lieutenants, and as many Ensigns, two Majors, one Muster-Master,
with title of Commissary of the Conduct, another Muster-Master called
Commissary of the Review or Muster of the ten Companies; one Marshal of the
Lodgings, or Quartermaster, and an Aid, one Interpreter, two Almoners, or
Chaplains, one Physician, one Chyrurgeon-Major, and one Auditour of the Bands.

This Regiment has likewise a peculiar Court of Justice, to which belong,

A Great Judge, a Great Provost, a Registrer, or Recorder, the particular
Judges of every Company, the little Provosts, twenty Archers, or Sergeants
belonging to the Great Judge, and an Executioner.

There are likewise three Treasurers, and four Comptrollers of the Regiment.

The Colonels pay of this Regiment, is 1160 l. a Month for himself, and 800 l.
8 d. a Month for the Officers of Justice, and each Captain receives Monthly for
himself, and his Officers, and to keep his Company complete, 4202 l. 2 d.

All the Officers and Soldiers, both of the French and Suisse Foot-Guards, are
obliged to stand to their Arms, and to place themselves in two Ranks, from the
Gate or Drawbridge outward, the French on the right hand, and the Suissers on
the left; the Captains appear at the head of their Companies, and as soon as
his Majesty comes, the Suisse-Captains put on their Back, and Breast-Pieces.

Note, That the Captain either of the French or Suisse Foot-Guards, whose turn
it is to be upon duty, or in his absence, one of his Officers, it is to take
care the Watchword be received and communicated in convenient time, and for
that end, he is, if he be a French Captain, to go to the Colonel General of the
French Foot-Guards, if a Suisser, to the Colonel-General of the Suissers, to
know of him whether he be pleased to go and wait on the King for the Word,
himself, if he Answers, Yes, he is to wait till he comes back, and take it of
him. if no, he is to go and take it of his Majesty Himself, and at his return,
to Communicate it first to the Colonel-General, and then to the rest of the
Officers concerned to know it.

When any Soldier of either of these Regiments of Foot-Guards, not being upon
duty, desires to enter into the Kings Palace, he is to to leave his Bandiliers
or Swivel with the Sentinel at the Gate.

4. Of the Musketeers on Horseback of the Kings Guard.
There are two Companies of Musketeers on Horseback, viz. The first Company
called formerly the Great Musketeers, which are 250 in number, and a second
Company formerly belonging to Cardinal Mazarine, whose number is not fixed.

Of the first Company of Musketeers.
This Company is divided into four Brigades: The Officers are, a Captain, who
is the King, a Lieutenant-Captain, a Deputy-Lieutenant, whose pay is 200 l. a
Month, an Ensign and a Cornet, whose Monthly pay is 150 l. to each; six
Marshals of the Lodgings, or chief Quarter Masters, the three first of which,
have every of them, besides the Monthly pay of 75 l. 400 Crowns yearly Pension,
and the other three only their bare pay. One Commissary of the Conduct, or
Muster-Master, four Brigadeers, who besides their ordinary pay, which to every
Man is 20 Crowns a Month, or 40 d. a day, have every of them a yearly Pension
of 500 l. Sixteen Sub-Brigadeers, who have the like pay as the former, and 300
l. yearly Pension, a Major, and an Aid-Major, two Standard-Bearers, who have
the same pay and Pension as the Sub-Brigadeers. Besides which there are three
other Harbingers or Quarter Masters, six Drummers, four Hoboys, one Almouer or
Chaplain, one Chyrurgeon, one Apothecary, one Farrier, one Sadler, and one
Armorer, whose pay is but fifteen Crowns a Month, or 30 d. a day.

The pay of the 250 Musketeers, is to every Man twenty Crowns a Month, or 40 d.
a day.

There are three Treasurers that belong to both the Companies, and under them,
one Play Master peculiar to this Company.

The Musketeers of the first Company have their Hats edged with gold Galoon,
and those of the second, with gold and silver.

Of the second Company of Musketeers, The Officers of this, are
A Captain, who is the King, with the like number of other Officers as the
first, with the like pay, bating only the three Fouriers, or
Under-Quarter-Masters, the Sadler, and the Armorer, which I find not in the
List of the Officers of this Company. They have likewise a Play Master of their
own, but the Treasurers are the same with those of the former. Their present
number is above 250. who have the same pay as those of the first Company.

The Musketeers of the first Company, are mounted all on white Horses, and
those of the second on black ones.

When the Musketeers do duty, or stand Sentinel in any of the passages about
the Kings Palace, they are allowed their diet in specie, that is to say, Bread,
Wine, and Portions of Meat.

Every Night the Lieutenant-Captain, the Deputy-Lieutenant, or other Commander
in chief of the Musketeers for the time being, waits on the King, to know of
his Majesty, whether he intends to go abroad the next day, that he may give
timely notice of it to the other Officers, and to the rest of the Company.

5. Of the Band of the Hundred Gentlemen, Au Bes de Corbin, or Gentlemen
Pensioners.
These Gentlemen, who are reckoned likewise among the Gentlemen in Ordinary of
the Kings Household, and are commonly called Becs de Corbin, or Ravens Beaks,
from the Falcions so called, they carry in their hands, were the first of all
others, instituted and established for the more secure and honorable guard of
the Kings Person; and because at first, and for a long time, their number was
but 100, though now for several Reigns together, they have been augmented to,
and continued at 200. complete, yet they still return the old name of the
hundred Gentlemen.

Upon days of Ceremony and Solemnity, they march two and two before the King,
with their Swords by their sides, and their Falcions called Becs de Corbin, or
Ravens Beaks in their hands. They attended and served in this manner at the
Coronation, and Wedding of the present King, and since at the Ceremony of the
Creation and Instalment of Knights in 1661. on which occasion, six of them
marched two and two before his Majesty, and went into the Quire of the
Augustins; the rest of them marched on each side of the Knights.

In any Battle, they are always to keep near the Kings Person; they are divided
into two Companies, the old one, and the new one, who have each of them their
Captain, Lieutenant, and other inferior Officers.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the other Royal Households.

AFter the Kings Household, follow the other Royal Households, which are
regulated ad instar, or according to the Model of the King's.

Both the Queen Mother, and the late Queen being dead, we shall say nothing of
their Households, save only, that their surviving Domestics, and menial
Servants, as we have already remarked, still do, and will enjoy their old
Privileges as long as they live.

Note, That the Queen Mother, Anne-Marie-Mauritte of Austria, of happy Memory,
died at the Louvre, the 20th of January, 1666. at the Age of 64 years; and the
late Queen Marie-Teresa of Austria, Daughter to Philip the Fourth of Spain, of
happy Memory, died at Versailles, the 30th of July, 1683. at the Age of 45
years.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Dauphins Household. To which belong,

1. FIrst, or chief Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and Master of his Wardrobe,
formerly his Governor, who is the Duke of Montausier, whose Salary is 4000 l.
a Month, i. e. 48000 l. per Annum.

A Sub-Governour sworn by the Governor, whose Salary is 7500 l. A Tutour sworn
by the King, who is the Famous Bishop of Meaux, formerly Bishop of Condom; his
Salary is 12000 l.

A Sub-Tutour, at 6000 l.

Two Gentlemen of the Sleeve, who are sworn by the Governor, who have each of
them a Salary of 6000 l.

One Secretary.

One chief Valet de Chamber, or Waiting Man, one chief Physician, that attends
all the year, who is Monsieur Petit, Doctor Regent of the Faculty of Paris,
sworn by the Kings Chief Physician, In his Patent, he is styled Counselor of
State, he has for standing Wages, Board-Wages, and other Fees, above 13000 l.
yearly; for he has 1800 l. yearly standing-Wages, paid by the General Treasurer
of the Kings Household, half a Pistol a day, or 1825 l. yearly Board-Wages, paid
by the Master of the Chamber of Deniers, 8000 l. Pension, paid at the Treasure
Royal, which amounts in all, to 11625 l. Besides which, he has Meat for his
Broth, consisting of twelve pounds of Meat, viz. Beef, Mutton and Veal in equal
portions, and a Fat, valued at 37 d. and six deniers, or a halfpenny, the King
allowing for the whole, 4 l. 17 d. halfpenny a day, which he receives all in
money, on those days the Officers of the Dauphins Mouth make ready no Victuals
for him, as usually in Journies, etc. But upon other days when they dress
Victuals for him, the said Officers give him but a Crown a day, and a certain
portion of Meat for his Dinner and Supper, agreed upon between him and them: He
has likewise a Loaf, called the Loaf of Essay, or tasting Loaf, and a Bottle of
Wine, called the Bottle of Essay, or the tasting Bottle, every day, from the
Kings Baker and Wine-Merchant.

One Chyrurgeon in Ordinary, who has 1000 l. standing Wages, and half a Pistol
a day, or 1825 l. Board-Wages.

One Barber in Ordinary, who has 700 l. standing Wages, and a Crown a day; or
1098 l. Board-Wages.

One Cash-Keeper, or Play Master, for the Dauphin, and all the Children of
France, at 400 l. standing Wages, and 1464 l. Board-Wages.

One Arquebuse, or Armor-bearer, whose appointments amounts to 2200 l.

For Hunting, one chief Hunter, a Pack of Hounds with Officers belonging to it,
for the Hare; and his Highness taking a fancy lately for Wolf-Hunting, since
the year 1682. maintains for that sport, a Pack of a hundred Hounds, and twenty
Saddle Horses, four Lieutenants in Ordinary, four Prickers, or Huntsmen, two
Servants of the Bloodhounds, etc.

The four Lieutenants in Ordinary have each of them 1500 l. yearly appointments
paid them out of the Dauphins own private Money-Box, or Privy-Purse, by the
hands of his said Highnesses chief Valet de Chamber, or Waiting-Man: Both they,
and the rest under them, are Commanded by the Grand Louveteer, or Wolf-Hunter
of France.

Two Yeomen, or Grooms of the Bedchamber, who have each of them 400 l.
standing Wages out of the Privy-Purse of the Kings Bedchamber, 180 l.
gratuity, at the Treasure-Royal, and 732 l. Board-Wages, at the rate of 40 d. a
day.

One Master of the Mathematics, at 1500 l. Salary, who is the Famous Monsieur
Blondel, who was formerly Envoy Extraordinary to the Northern Kings, to the
Princes Electours of the Empire, and the Grand Signior.

One Reader.

One Master Designer, who has 300 l. standing Wages paid by the Treasurer of
the Household 1200 l. Board-Wages, at the Chamber of Deniers, and 1200 l.
Gratuity, at the Treasure Royal.

One Writing-Master 1200 l. one Fencing-Master 1800 l. one Dancing Master, who
has 2000 l. standing Salary out of the Privy-Purse, and 100 Crowns
Extraordinary, when his Highness is abroad in the Country, or in the Field.

One Musick-Master, who has 600 l. out of his Highnesses own Privy-Purse.

Three Yeomen, or Grooms of the Wardrobe, who have every one 732 l.
Board-Wages, at the rate of 40 d. a day, and 240 l. gratuity at the Treasure
Royal.

One Landress of the Body, 600 l. and

One Starcher of the Body, at 1000 l. yearly Salary, standing and Board-Wages.

One Porter, or Burden-Carrier of the Bedchamber, who has 30 d. or half a
Crown a day, or 549 l a year Board-Wages.

The King being minded to place several Persons of Quality about the Dauphin,
continually to attend him, as his Gentlemen in Ordinary, without creating any
fixed Offices or Places of that nature, made choice for that purpose of nine
Lords of his Court, viz. the Count de Torigny, the Marquess of Florensac, the
Count of St. Maure, the Chevalier de Grignan, the Marquess of Dangeau, the
Count of Chivergny, the Marquess of Thiange de ChalenCay, the Marquess d' Vrfe,
and the Marquess d' Antain.

His Highness had three chief Pages, called the Children of Honor, of whom
there remains but one, who is at present Bishop and Duke of Laon, and one of
the ancient Ecclesiastical Peers of France. These Lords, or Gentlemen of
Honor, have every of them a Pension of 2000 Crowns: When the Marshals of the
Lodgings, or chief Harbingers, mark them out Lodgings when they follow the
Court, they style them Gentlemen of Honor to the Dauphin. Besides these, there
are two Gentlemen, that have been Pages to his Highness, to whom the King gives
3000 l. Pension, and two present Pages of his Bedchamber, a Governor of the
Pages, who has 2000 l. out of the Privy-Purse, one Servant or Groom of the
Pages, and a Sub-Groom, one chief Master of the Horse, and twelve Footmen.

Other Officers belonging to the King, that after their Quarters Service to his
Majesty, go and serve the Dauphin. Officers under the Great Almoner,
An Almoner, a Chaplain, a Clerk of the Chapel, and a Groom of the Chapel.

Under the Great Master of the Household.
One Master of the Household, two Gentlemen Waiters, the Masters of the Chamber
of Deniers, and the Comptrollers-General of the Kings Household, are likewise so
at the same time to the Dauphins, and send thither one Comptroller, one Clerk
or Deputy of the Chamber of Deniers, and two Clerks Deputies of the
General-Comptrollers, serving six Months each. Two Chiefs of the Goblet, viz.
One Chief Pantler, and one Chief Butler of the Mouth, and one Aid to them both.

The Officers of the Goblet are allowed 3 l. or a Crown augmentation for every
Meal the Dauphin eats in private.

The said Officers are moreover allowed for Salt, Pepper, Herbs, and other
things for the dressing of their own diet, because his Highness keeps no common
Kitchen, 45 l. every Quarter.

There are two Grooms, or Yeomen of the Goblet, who have for furnishing Cups,
Glasses, and other things for his Highnesses Table, 36 l. a quarter, and 50 l.
a piece for Clothes every year.

An Usher of the Mouth, who has 150 l. Wages, and 40 d. augmentation to furnish
inter-Messes at every Meal his Highness eats at his own private Table.

One Master Cook, at 150 l. Wages, one Rosting-Cook, and one Boiling-Cook, at
100 l. Wages, each; these three have besides, for looking after the Vessels, 30
l. quarterly, and the Rosting-Cook 6 l. a quarter more for furnishing great
Knives; one Porter of the Mouth, who has 75 l. standing Wages, and 36 l.
quarterly, for furnishing and looking after Pots and Pans, Cords, Pails, and
Brooms, etc.

The Grooms and Porters of the Goblet, and of the Mouth, are allowed 6 l. a
quarter for Straw; and the three Grooms of the Kitchen have each of them 50 l.
a year for Clothes.

They that serve under them, as Children of the Kitchen, have each of them 8 l.
a quarter, for Larding Pins, and Packthred.

An Usher of the Hall.

A Serdeau, or Water-Server, who is allowed for Salt, Knives, Cups, Glasses,
and other things for the last Course, together with his Wages, 600 l. And his
Servant under him, is allowed 50 l. more for a Suit of Clothes.

One Chief, or Head of the Wood-Yard, or Fuel-Office, and one Aid, or Helper.

The Officers of the Fuel-Office, or Wood-Yard, are allowed for Straw every
Month, 6 l. each, which is 144 l. a year, and for Salt, Pepper, Herbs, and
other things necessary for dressing their Diet, because his Highness has no
common Kitchen, 45 l. a quarter; And the Aid of the Fueller, or chief of the
Wood-Yard, having no standing Wages assigned him in the Establishment, is
allowed in lieu thereof 50 l. a quarter; and the Groom of the Wood-Yard has 50
l. yearly, for a Suit of Clothes.

One Linnen-Draper and Landrer for Table-Linnen, and other Linen belonging to
the said Offices, that waits all the year, and a Servant under him who is
allowed 50 l. a year for Clothes.

Officers that come out of the Kings Chamber, and Wardrobe.
Two Ushers of the Chamber, four Valets de Chamber, or Waiting-men of the
Chamber, one Cloak Carrier, one Barber in Ordinary, and one other every four
Months from among the Kings.

They have every one 466 l. 13 d. 4 Deniers, standing Wages, and 200 l.
gratuity, but their Board-Wages are different, he that waits the four first
Months, which are reckoned from October, has 369 l. the second 360 l. and the
third and last, 366 l. Board-Wages.

One Upholster, one Chief Valet, or Yeoman of the Wardrobe, and two other
Valets, or Yeomen of the Wardrobe.

Officers of Health.
One Chyrurgeon, who has 600 l. Wages, or gratuity, and 5 l. a day for his
Diet, which is in all 455 l. a quarter.

One Apothecary, who has likewise 5 l. a day, and an Aid or Helper, whom he is
to Diet.

Officers under the Kings Great Master of the Horse.
One of the Kings Chief Querries, and two of his Querries in Ordinary of the
Great Stable, and some time ago the four Eldest Pages of the Kings Great
Stables, used to attend at the Dauphins Stable, and Exercise the Horses.

Officers of the Kings Guards, attending the Dauphin, are
Either a Lieutenant, or an Ensign of the Life-Guards by turns, who are allowed
half a Pistol a day, or 450 l. a quarter for their Diet.

One Exempt, one Brigadeer, one Sub-Brigadeer, Fifty French Life-Guard-Men, and
six Suissers.

The Clerks of the Watch too, both of the French Life-Guards, and of the
hundred Suissers, are allowed for furnishing Straw, and Straw-Beds, and for
Carriage of things and persons for the Dauphins Service, 50 l. a quarter, i. e.
200 l. a year.

Four Guards of the Gate, one Exempt, and four or six Guards of the
Provostship, when his Highness is not with the King. Besides these Guards drawn
out of the Kings, the Dauphin has

One Company of Gensdarmes, or Men at Arms, and one Company of Light Horse, of
whom he is Captain, who have their Lieutenant-Captains, their
Deputy Lieutenants, and other inferior respective Officers.

Both these Companies are called Dauphins, the Company of Men at Arms, being
called, the Dauphin-Men at Arms, and that of the Light Horse, the Dauphin
Light Horse: He has likewise a Regiment of Horse, a Regiment of Foot, and a
Regiment of Dragoons.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Dauphinesses Household. Her Ecclesiastical Officers, are

A Chief Almoner, who is the Bishop of Meaux, Wages 200 l. An Almoner in
Ordinary, 180 l. Four other Almoners, 150 l. each. A Confessor in Ordinary,
180 l. His Brother, or Companion, 90 l. One Chaplain in Ordinary, 120 l. Four
other Chaplains, at 120 l. each. Four Clerks of the Chapel, 100 l each. A
Confessor for the Household, 120 l. Four Grooms of the Chapel, 100 l. each.

The Ladies and other Female Officers of her Bedchamber, are
A Lady of Honor, who is the Duchess of Arpajon, of the Family of Harcourt,
whose Salary is 1200 l.

Two Tiring Ladies, who are the Marshal of Rocheforts Lady, and the Famous
Marchioness of Maintenon, who have 600 l each.

The Mother or Governess of the Maids, 600 l. who is the Marchioness of
Montchevreuil.

Two Under Governesses, who have each of them 400 l. standing Wages, and a
gratuity or Pension of 1000 l.

The Lady of Honor of the Dauphiness, has the privilege to put in one of her
Daughters, as Chief Maid of Honor to her Highnesses, who is not subject to the
Governess or Sub-Governess of the other Maids of Honor, and takes Place above
the rest in the Coach, and at all Ceremonies and Solemnities.

Her Highnesses Chevaliers, or Knight of Honors Daughter, may likewise place
her self among her Maids of Honor, especially at Great Ceremonies; And
accordingly we find, that the Princess of Harcourt, Daughter to the Count de
Brancas, Knight of Honor to the Queen Mother, often assisted with her said
Majesty's other Maids of Honor, at the Ceremony performed by her Majesty, of
washing the poor Peoples Feet, and serving them on Maundy Thursdays.

Six Maids of Honor.

One Chief Waiting Gentlewoman, at 300 l. Salary, eleven other Waiting
Gentlewomen, at 120 l. each, and one Landress of the Body.

Other Officers of her Chamber, of the Male Sex, are
A Knight of Honor, or Chief Gentleman Usher, whose Salary is 1200 l. of whom
we shall speak further, under the Article of her Highnesses Stables: He that at
present enjoys this place, is the Marquess d'Angeau, one of the Gentlemen of
Honor to the Dauphin.

One Usher in Ordinary of the Chamber, whose Salary is 300 l. Four Ushers
quarterly Waiters, at 180 l. each. Two Ushers of the Cabinet, or Closet, half
yearly Waiters, 150 l. each. Two Ushers of the Antichamber, who have the same
Salary. One Chief Valet de Chamber, at 300 l. One Valet, or Yeoman of the
Chamber in Ordinary, 200 l. Sixteen other Valets, or Yeomen of the Chamber
quarterly Waiters, at 180 l. each.

One Porte-Manteau, or Glove-Carrier in Ordinary, 180 l. Three Grooms in
Ordinary of the Chamber, and of the Closet, at 100 l. each.

The Officers of the Wardrobe, are
A Master of the Wardrobe, at 300 l. Salary; A Yeoman of the Wardrobe in
Ordinary, and three other Yeomen of the Wardrobe, who have each, 150 l. Salary,
one Woman's Tailor, four Upholsters, one Keeper of the Movables or Furniture,
180 l. one Player on the Virginals, 400 l. one Singing Master, one
Dancing Master, at 400 l. Salary each. One Clock-Maker, and Clock-Keeper in
Ordinary, 300 l, one Shoemaker 110 l, two Joyners, at 60 l. each, one Chairman
for business, 300 l. two Porters, or Burden-Carriers of the Chamber, at 60 l.
each, one Groom or Servant in Ordinary, to rub the Floors within the Rails in
her Highnesses Apartments.

Her Officers of Health, are
One Chief Physician, who has 600 l. standing Wages, and 6000 l. Pension; His
name is Monsieur Moreau, Doctor of Physic, of the faculty of Paris, and one
other Physician for the Household, at 300 l. One Chief Chyrurgeon, or Chyrurgeon
of the Body, 200 l. One Chyrurgeon in Ordinary, and two other Chyrurgeons
waiting by the half year, at 120 l. Salary every one; One Apothecary of the
Body, who has 300 l. Salary for himself, and 80 l. for his Servant, and one
Apothecary for the Household, at 300 l.

Of the Masters of the Household, and other Officers of the Household, and of the
Offices called the seven Offices.
The Chief Master of the Household is the Count de Chamarande, under whom there
are

One Master of the Household in Ordinary, whose Salary is 600 l. Four other
Masters of the Household quarterly Waiters, at 500 l. each.

One Gentleman-Waiter in Ordinary, 800 l. Twelve other Gentlemen-Waiters,
waiting quarterly, four every quarter, who have every of them 400 l. Salary.

Two General Comptrollers, waiting half-yearly, 350 l. each.

One Comptroller in Ordinary, who has 400 l. standing Wages, 1800 l.
Board-Wages, his Diet at Court all the year round, and 240 l. as a Fee for
Paper; and four Comptrollers of the Offices, at 200 l. each. In the Offices
called

The seven Offices, are these Officers.
1. In the Office of the Goblet, which consists of the Pantry of the Mouth, and
the Buttry of the Mouth, are these Officers.
To the Pantry of the Mouth, or her Highnesses own Pantry, belong

Four Chiefs, at 180 l. yearly Salary to each; Four Aids, or Helpers, 120 l.
each; Four Grooms 150 l. each; One Landress of the Goblet, and Pantry of the
Mouth, at 120 l. Salary.

In the Buttry of the Mouth, are

Four Chiefs, four Aids, and four Grooms, who have the same pay as those of the
Pantry; and four Wine-Couriers, at 75 l. each.

2. In the Kitchen of the Month, or the Dauphinesses own Kitchen, are
Two Ushers in Ordinary, waiting by the half year, 400 l. each; four other
Ushers quarterly Waiters, at 160 l. each; two Master-Cooks, 140 l. each; four
Boiling, and four Rosting-Cooks, 120 l. each; four Pastry-Cooks, 100 l. each;
four Children of the Kitchen, at 60 l. each; four Galopins, or Under-Cooks in
Ordinary, at 60 l. each; one Keeper of the Vessels in Ordinary, who is to give
security for, and to make good what Vessels shall be lost; four other Ushers,
60 l. each; two Grooms, or Yeomen in Ordinary, 300 l. each; One Landress to
wash the Linen belonging both to the Kitchen of the Mouth, and the Common
Kitchen of the Household, whose Salary is 120 l. Four Serdeau's, or
Water-Servers, 80 l. each; One Master of the Household to take care of the Table
of the Chief Master of the Household, or the Dauphinesses Table of Honor, whose
Salary is 400 l.

3. In the Common Pantry, or Pantry of the Household, are
Eight Chiefs, at 160 l. and eight Aids, at 120 l. yearly Salary to each; One
Groom, or Yeoman in Ordinary, at 300 l. and one Landrer, at 120 l.

4. In the Common Buttry, are
Eight Chiefs, and eight Aids, who have the same pay as the former; one Groom,
or Yeoman in Ordinary of the Vessels, and one Groom or Yeoman in Ordinary of
the Bottles, at 300 l. each.

5. In the Common Kitchen, are
Four Ushers, at 160 l. each; four Masters, or Head-Cooks, at 140 l. four
Boiling-Cooks, and four Rosting-Cooks, all at 120 l. each; four Children of the
Kitchen, and two Galopins, or Under-Cooks in Ordinary, at 60 l. each; four
Porters, who serve by the half year, viz. Two each half year, whereof one waits
at the Great Common, and the other at the little Common, with each of them a
Servant; they have each of them a Salary of 30 l. paid by the Treasurers of the
Household, and an allowance besides of 6 l. a Month, and Bread and Wine. Two
Verduriers, or Herbmen, serving by the half year, at 80 l. each; and one
Herbman in Ordinary, that waits all the year, and holds his place by
Commission, who has 30 l. yearly paid by the Treasurers of the Household, 9 l. a
Month, and Bread and Wine all the year; one Keeper of the Vessels, who is to
give security, and make good what is lost, at 360 l. four other Ushers of the
Kitchen, 60 l. each; one Yeoman, or Groom of the Cupboard, and one Yeoman of
the Spits; 300 l. each; and one Merchant Brasier, or Tinker, 60 l.

Note, That the Officers of the little Common, or little Kitchen of her
Highnesses Household, dress the Meat for her Highnesses Table of Honor, kept by
the Chief Master of her Household, for that of the Ladies of Honor, and for
that of Mrs. Besola, Waiting-Gentlewoman to her Highness.

6. In the Fruitry, are
Eight Chiefs, at 100 l. eight Aids, at 60 l. and one Yeoman in Ordinary, at
300 l. Salary.

7. In the Wood-Yard; or Fuel-Office, are
Four Chiefs, at 100 l. eight Aids at 60 l. and one Chair and Table-Carrier in
Ordinary, at 360 l. Salary.

After the seven Offices, it will not be improper to place the following
Officers, viz.

One Baker at 60 l. one Captain, or Master of the Carriage belonging to the
seven Offices, and to the Chamber of Deniers, at 60 l. four Ushers of the Hall,
at 120 l. four Ushers of the Office, or Counting House, at 100 l. two Marshals
of the Hall of the Maids of Honor, at 80 l. one Marshal of the Women belonging
to the Maids of Honor, at 60 l. one Usher of the Hall of the said Maids of
Honor, at 60 l. and four Tailors belonging to the Maids of Honor, who have
also 60 l. each.

Of the Officers of her Hignesses Stable.
Though the Knight of Honor, or Chief Gentleman Usher to her Highness, belongs
properly to her Privy-Chamber, yet because his Function of handing her
Highness, is sometimes performed by the Chief Querry, or Master of the Horse,
and other Querries belonging to her Stables; and because he not only receives
the Oath of Allegiance from the Querry in Ordinary, and the other Querries; and
on certain occasions gives Orders to the Officers of the Stables, he likewise
may be reckoned the Chief Officer there, as well as in the Privy-Chamber, and
her Highnesses whole Household.

The Knight of Honor, or Chief Gentleman Usher, receives likewise the Oath of
Allegiance from the Master of the Household in Ordinary, and from the other
Masters of the Household, or Stewards quarterly Waiters, from the
Gentlemen-Waiters in Ordinary, and those Waiting quarterly, from the
General-Comptrollers, and from the Comptrollers-Clerks of Offices, waiting both
in Ordinary and Quarterly, from the Almoner of her Highnesses Household, called
the Almoner of St. Roch; from the Marshals of the Lodgings, or Chief
Harbingers, from the other Harbingers, both of the Body, and of the Household,
and from the Porters; and in the Book of the Establishment of her Highnesses
Household, he is placed before the Chief Master of the Household, and is the
first Officer of the Masculine Sex belonging to her Highness.

The Chief Gentleman, or Master of the Horse to her Highness, has a Salary of
800 l. and is at present, Marshal of Bellesonds. He keeps four Footmen in the
Dauphinesses Livery, which are allowed 365 l. apiece Wages and their Diet, and
120 l. toward Clothes and other little things; under the Chief Querry, or
Master of the Horse, there are,

One Querry in Ordinary, at 600 l. and four Querries quarterly Waiters, at 400
l. yearly Salary; one Querry Cavalcadour, or Rider, who Commands in the Stable
in the absence of the Chief Master of the Horse, and that tenders his hand to
the Dauphiness in the absence of the Querry in Ordinary, and of the other
Querries quarterly Waiters: He has 400 l. standing Wages, 800 l. Board-Wages,
200 l. for a Servant, and 600 l. in lieu of Fees at the admission of Pages; and
is allowed a Horse out of her Highnesses Stables every time he has a mind to
ride out.

One Cash-Keeper, or Play Master of the Stable, who has 90 l. standing Wages,
and 800 l. Board-Wages: Four Manteau-Carriers waiting quarterly, who have each
150 l. yearly Wages, 91 l. 5 d. for their Diet during their Quarters waiting,
and 60 l. gratuity; and while they are in waiting, they have Horses allowed
them out of the Stable.

Four Harbingers quarterly Waiters, who have 150 l. standing Wages, and 20 d. a
day, or 91 l. 5 d. during their quarters waiting for their Diet, and 60 l.
gratuity, and in their Waiting time they are allowed Horses out of the Stable
when her Highness goes abroad into the Country.

One Head Groom in Ordinary, who has 600 l. for his Wages and Diet, and 84 l.
more in lesser Fees.

Four other Head-Grooms, who have each 365 l. for Wages and Diet, a Livery-Coat
once in two years, and 86 l. more in other little Fees and Allowances. Under
them there are several other helping Grooms.

Four Farriers, at 90 l. each: they serve quarterly, and during their quarters
service, are allowed besides 450 l. for Shoing and Physicking the Horses, and
16 d. a day for a Journey-Man, or Servant; and both they and their Servants,
wear her Highnesses Livery, and are allowed Horses out of her Stable, when her
Highness Travels.

One Keeper of the Movables, and of the Keys of the Wardrobe of the Stables,
who has 240 l. standing Wages, and 365 l. Board-Wages, and is lodged at the
Stables, and is allowed a Horse when her Highness Travels.

Other Officers belonging to the Stables, are
Two Chyrurgeons serving by the half year, at 200 l. One Upholster, who is to
furnish 71 Beds, at 3 d. a Bed, who holds his place only as long as no Body
shall offer to do it cheaper. Four Tailors by Commission, who are paid at a
certain rate for all the Clothes they make for the menial Servants of the
Stable; and six other Tradesmen, who are allowed only 110 l. apiece bare Wages,
without any further allowance for their work.

Of her Highnesses Coaches, Chairs or Sedans, and Litters, and the necessary
Servants belonging to them.
The Dauphiness had from the beginning two Coaches called the Coaches of the
Body, and since the Queens Death, the King has added a third: To the first
belong two Coachmen, and one Postilion, and to the two others, one Coachman,
and one Postilion to each. The two Coachmen belonging to the first, serve
quarterly, every other quarterly: Both the Coachmen and Postilions of her
Highnesses Body, and those of her other Coaches, have all the same standing
Wages, Profits and Appointments; that is to say, the Coachmen have 365 l. each,
standing Wages, a Suit of Clothes every year, and a great Coat or Cloak every
two years, and 125 l. in other little Fees and Profits, and the Postilions the
same standing Wages, the same allowance of Clothes, and 82 l. besides in other
little Fees and Appointments.

Her Highness has one Chair or Sedan, to which belong four Chair, or Sedan-Men,
who have every of them 365 l. standing Wages, a Suit of Clothes every year, and
a Coat or Cloak every two years; 50 l. in other little Fees, and 60 l.
gratuity, by an Order for that purpose.

Two Litters of the Body, and another, to each of which belong two Muleteers,
who have the same Wages and Appointments, the one as the other; viz. 365 l.
standing Wages, a Suit of Clothes every year, and a great Coat or Cloak every
two years, and 66 l. in other small Fees and Appointments.

Her Highness has besides, one Coach called, the Querries Coach, one called the
waiting Gentle women's Coach, one called the Maids of Honors Coach, one called
the Maids of Honors Women's Coach, and three other Coaches, who have each of
them a Coachman and Postilion, with the same Wages and Appointments as
abovesaid.

To the Waiting Gentle-Women belong four Footmen, who have every of them 72 l.
standing Wages, a Doublet and Trunk-Breeches every year, and a Coat or Cloak
every two years, and 50 l. in other little Fees and Allowances.

To the Maids of Honor belong likewise two Footmen, who have the same Wages,
and other profits, as her Highnesses own Footmen.

Of her Highnesses Pages and Footmen.
There is one Governor of the Pages, who has 200 l. standing Wages, 200 l.
Gratuity, and 600 l. in lieu of the ancient Fees allowed at the admission of
new Pages, now taken away; besides which, he has a Table all the year long, a
Servant and a Horse maintained, and his Firing and Candle.

The Pages are twelve in number, who have all their Diet, Firing, Washing,
Lodging, and Horses at the Stable, where they are also waited on and instructed
in all gentile and noble accomplishments, and have every of them besides, 260
l. standing Wages, besides their Livery-Suits every year, and Cloaks every two
years.

Note, That the Queens and Dauphinesses Pages have hanging Sleeves behind their
Doublets, as have the Pages of the Kings Bedchamber.

There is one Tutour of the Pages, who has 320 l. standing Wages, and his
Lodging, Diet, and washing with them; he is allowed two Billets, or Logs, and
two Fagots, during the six Winter-Months, and two Faggots only during the six
other Months, and every day, a quarter of a pound of Candles: He has for his
Fees, what the Pages leave off, and 20 l. out of what is allowed for every of
their Shoes and Stockings.

One Almoner or Chaplain of the Pages, who has his Diet there, and his Fire and
Candle all the year, and a Servant and a Horse maintained for his Service.

One Professor of the Mathematics, 300 l. One Fencing-Master 180 l.

One Vaulting-Master, one Writing-Master, and one Dancing Master, at 180 l.
each.

There are two Servants of the Pages; they have a Suit and Cloak out of those
the Pages leave off, and what the Pages please to give them at their Admission,
and the profit of the Flambeaux.

One Landrer of the Pages, who holds his place by Commission.

One Master of the Household, or Marshal of the Table of the Pages; Sixteen
Footmen serving quarterly, eight every other quarter, who have every of them
365 l. standing Wages, one Doublet, and one pair of Trunk-Breeches every year
in Summer, one Cloak every two years, and 130 l. in other little Fees and
Perquisites, besides their Fees for Vmbrellas, their New Years Gifts, etc.

And lastly, There is one Porter of the Stable.

Of the Marshals of the Lodgings, and Harbingers.
There are four Marshals of the Lodgings, or Chief Harbingers, at 400 l. each.
Four Harbingers of the Body, at 200 l. and eight Harbingers in Ordinary, at 150
l. each; four Porters 120 l.

Of the Officers of the House, Treasure, Lands, and Business.
There is one Intendant-General of all these, whose Salary is 6000 l. One
Intendant of the House, who has in Wages, and other Appointments, 8000 l. One
Secretary of the Commandments, House, and Finances or Treasures, at 3000 l.
Pension. The Secretary of the Commandments, is styled in the Brief, or Grant of
his Place, Counselor of State.

And lastly, One General-Treasurer of the Household, whose Salary is 4000 l.

Of her Highnesses Guards.
The King allows the Dauphiness for her Guard, one Exempt, and eight of his
Life-guards, and two of his hundred Suissers.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Servants and Domestics belonging to the Dauphins Children.

Though there remain commonly above six or seven of the hundred Suissers with
these Princes, yet there are but four of them allowed every one their Loaf and
Quart of Wine out of the Common Pantry, and Buttry, or Cellar; But the Courts
of Guards, whether of French or Suissers, are always allowed Wood according to
their number; if they be a whole Company, or half a one, or but the third part
of one, they are allowed Wood proportionably.

The Duke of Anjou has an Under-Governess, one Chief Waiting-Gentlewoman, and
four Waiting-Gentlewomen, that till his Birth, belonged to the Duke of
Burgundy, and four others, who have all the same Salary as the Duke of
Burgundy's, two Nurses, one Porter of the Movables of the Chamber, one
Kitchin-Woman, one Valet de Chamber, and one other Servant of the Chamber, who
have all the same pay as the like Officers at the Duke of Burgundies: Besides
these Domestics, there are diverse other Officers belonging to the King, that
in their turns wait on the Dauphins Children, viz. One Chaplain and Clerk of
the Chapel, and Oratory of his Majesty, who assist at the Mass, that is said
every day in the Chamber of the said Princes.

The Chief Physician, or some other in his place, visits them every day; the
Ushers of the Kings Chamber, keep the Doors of their Chamber too: the Exempt in
Ordinary remaining with his Highness of Burgundy, is Monsieur de Coeurlis,
Exempt of the Kings Life-Guards; besides whom there are some Lifeguard Men,
and several Footmen.

When the Dauphins Children stay at Versailles, or at any other Royal Palace,
when the King removes from thence to any other of his Houses, his Majesty
leaves with them, a Brigadeer in Ordinary, a Brigadeer in Waiting, a
Sub-Brigadeer, and six Lifeguard Men. What the Functions and Duties of these
several Officers and Servants are, we have in other places of the Book, already
described.

Though there remain commonly above six or seven of the hundred Suissers with
these Princes, yet there are but four of them allowed every one their Loaf and
Quart of Wine out of the Common Pantry, and Buttry, or Cellar; But the Courts
of Guards, whether of French or Suissers, are always allowed Wood according to
their number; if they be a whole Company, or half a one, or but the third part
of one, they are allowed Wood proportionably.

The Duke of Berry has Domestics and Servants of the same nature, and their
pay is the same with those belonging to his Elder Brethren, after whose Models
all the Households of the Dauphins Children, how many soever he may have, will
be framed.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Monsieurs, or his Royal Highness the Duke of Orleans his Household, and
First,

Of his Ecclesiastical Officers, who are
A Chief Almoner, who is the Bishop of Manse, whose Salary is 2000 l.

One Confessor 2000 l. One Master of the Oratory 1200 l. One Master of the
Chapel and Music, 900 l. standing Wages, and 600 l. Board-Wages: One Almoner
in Ordinary, 700 l. standing Wages, and 500 l. Gratulty; Four Almoners
quarterly Waiters, at 240 l. each, and four other Honorary, or Titular Almoners
at the same allowance: One Preacher in Ordinary 600 l. One Chaplain in Ordinary
400 l. Four other Chaplains quarterly Waiters, at 200 l. each; One Clerk of the
Chapel in Ordinary, 240 l. Four Clerks of the Chapel quarterly Waiters, at
100 l. each; Two Grooms of the Chapel serving by the half year, at 300 l.
each; and one Almoner, and one Confessor for the Household, 60 l. each.

Of the Officers of the Bedchamber, and above Stairs.
There are two Chief Gentlemen of the Chamber, that wait by turns every other
year, whose Salary is 3000 l. each. They are at present the Count of Tonerre
for this year, and the Marquess of Chatillon for the next.

One Chief Chamberlain in Ordinary, at 2400 l. who is the Chevalier de
Liscouet: Four other Chief Chamberlains Quarterly Waiters, 2000 l. each: Nine
Chief Chamberlains for Business, at 2000 l. each: Nine Gentlemen of the
Chamber, 1000 l. each: One Introductour, or Conductour of Ambassadors, 2000 l.
One Chief Gentleman in Ordinary, 1800 l. Thirty six other Gentlemen in Ordinary
quarterly Waiters, at nine a quarter, 500 l. each; One Governor of the Pages
of the Chamber 400 l. Four Servants of the Pages 200 l. each, and one
Dancing Master for the Pages.

The Officers of Health, are
One Chief Physician, whose Salary is 2000 l. Four Physicians waiting quarterly
500 l. each: Three other consulting Physicians, 400 l. each. One Apothecary,
both of the Body and of the Household, 1800 l. and his Aid 600 l. One Chief
Chyrurgeon 1800 l. One Chyrurgeon in Ordinary 800 l. Eight other Chyrurgeons
waiting quarterly, 300 l. each. One Chyrurgeon for the Household, 300 l. One
Operatour for the Teeth, 600 l. One Barber in Ordinary of the Chamber, 500 l.
Four other Barbers of the Chamber quarterly Waiters, at 300 l. Wages, and 100
l. for what they furnish, as Rasors, Washballs, and one Barber for Bathes and
Stoves, 150 l.

Other Officers of the Chamber.
Two General Comptrollers of the smaller Expenses of the Chamber, private
Coffer, and Stable, 1200 l. Four Chief Valets de Chamber, or Waiting men in
Ordinary serving quarterly, and lying in the Chamber, and keeping the Keys of
it, 600 l. each. Eight Ushers of the Chamber, 400 l. One Usher of the Closet in
Ordinary, 500 l. One Usher of the Chamber in Ordinary, and four Ushers of the
Closet, at 500 l. each. Four Ushers of the Antichamber, 300 l. Valet de
Chamber, or Waiting-man in Ordinary of the Chamber, 500 l. Sixteen other Valets
de Chamber, waiting quarterly, 400 l. One Painter in Ordinary, 600 l. One
Cloak-Carrier in Ordinary, 600 l. Four other Cloak-Carriers waiting quarterly,
400 l. Four Servants of the Chamber, 200 l. Two other Servants of the Chamber,
200 l. paid out of the Privy-Purse. Four Upholsters, 150 l. Four Chairmen for
business, 150 l. Four Carriers of the Beds and Coffers of the Chamber serving
two each half year, 75 l. Two Landrers, 100 l. each: Two Semstresses serving by
the half year, 60 l. each; Four Arquebuse, or Arms-Bearers, 400 l. One Keeper
of the Closet of Arms, 200 l. and one Captain of the Mules, 450 l.

In the Music of the Chamber, there are
One Master and Intendant of the Music, 1000 l, and twelve Musicians in
Ordinary, 600 l. viz. Two Counter-Tenours, two Low-Tenours, two High-Tenours,
two Base, two Treble-Viols, one Base-Viol, and one for the Harpsichals.

In the Wardrobe.
Two Masters of the Wardrobe, who have each a Salary of 4500 l. and a third
under them. Four Chief Valets, or Yeomen of the Wardrobe, who keep the Keys of
the Coffers, 600 l. Twelve other Valets or Yeomen, 300 l.

One Starcher. Four Servants or Grooms of the Wardrobe, 200 l. each; Two
Tailors of the Body, 120 l. and two other Tailors: One Mall-Carrier in
Ordinary, 600 l. One Keeper of the Closet of Rarities, 1200 l. One Sweeper, 500
l.

Of the Masters of the Household, Gentlemen-Waiters, and of the Officers of the
Chamber of Deniers, seven Offices, etc.
There is one Chief Master, or Steward of the Household, 2000 l. One Master in
Ordinary, 1200 l. Four Masters quarterly Waiters, 800 l. Two General
Comptrollers, 700 l. One Gentleman-Waiter in Ordinary, 800 l. Twelve other
Gentlemen Waiters serving quarterly, 600 l. each: One Comptroller in Ordinary,
1000 l. Four Comptrollers Clerks of Offices, 300 l. Four Ushers of the Hall
waiting quarterly, 200 l. each.

In the seven Offices, and 1. In the Pantry of the Mouth, and of the Household,
Are eight Chiefs, or Head Pantlers, at 200 l. Salary a piece, and as many
Aids, or Helpers, at 150 l. each. Two Grooms or Yeomen of the Pantry, 600 l.
One Yeoman of the Vessels in Ordinary, 600 l.

Note, That the Heads and their Aids, or Helpers, both of the Pantry, and
Buttry of the Mouth, and the Ushers, or their Aids of the Kitchen of the Mouth,
when Monsieur eats in his Chamber, or in his Bed, have the honor to serve him
in his Chamber or Bed, in case neither his Highnesses Chief Gentleman of his
Highnesses Chamber, nor the Master of his Wardrobe chance to be there; and
would not yield the performance of that Function to the Chief Valet, or Yeoman
of the Chamber; and besides, even in those very places, they wait with their
Swords by their sides, at least, the Chiefs and their Helpers of the Pantry and
Buttry of the Mouth.

In the Kitchen of the Mouth there are
One Usher in Ordinary, and four other Ushers, at 170 l. each. Four Aids 160 l.
Two Children of the Kitchen of the Mouth, 100 l. One Keeper in Ordinary of the
Vessels, both of the Kitchen of the Mouth, and the common Kitchen, 600 l. Four
Porters in the Kitchen of the Mouth, 100 l. Four Ushers of the Kitchen of the
Mouth, 100 l. One Yeoman-Keeper of the Cupboard, 600 l. One Yeoman or Groom of
the Spits in Ordinary, 600 l. Two Pastry-Cooks of the Mouth, 60 l. and some
other Servants.

In the Kitchen of the Household, or Common Kitchen, are
Four Ushers, at 340 l. each, and four Aids, at 170 l. Two Children of the
Kitchen, 100 l. Four Porters, 100 l. Four other Ushers, 100 l. A Yeoman of the
Spits in Ordinary, 600 l. Four Serdeau's, or Water-Servers, 120 l. Four
Verduriers, or Herb-men, 600 l. and two Falotiers, or Carriers of great Fagots
so called, 75 l.

In the Fruitery, are
Four Chiefs, 260 l. Four Aids, 150 l. and four Yeomen, or Grooms, 600 l.

In the Fuel-Office, or Wood-yard, are
Four Heads, 260 l. Four Aids, 160 l. Four Ushers of the Offices, to serve the
Tables, 200 l. Four Carriers of Tables and Chairs, 100 l. Four other
Table-Carriers for the Household, 100 l. Two Bakers, 60 l. and two Purveyours,
60 l.

Officers belonging to his Highnesses Stables, are
One Chief Master of the Horse, or Qeurry, who is the Marquess of Effiat, whose
Salary is 2400 l. Two Querries in Ordinary that Command in the Stable in the
absence of the Master of the Horse, or Chief Querry, at 2000 l. each; and four
Querries waiting Quarterly, at 700 l. each. One Almoner, 200 l. Twelve Pages
One Governor and Tutour of the Pages, who has 450 l. standing Wages, and 600
l. gratuity. One Dancing Master. One Fencing-Master. One Lute-Master, and one
Mathematick-Master, at 200 l. each: Two Servants of the Pages, 75 l. Seventeen
Footmen who are allowed 22 d. a day, or 401 l. 10 d. a year for their Diet,
Linen, Shoes and Stockings, and all other things, but their Livery-Cloaths,
which are given them by his Royal Highness; when any of them shall die, their
number is to be reduced to sixteen. Besides which, there are two other Footmen
that are allowed but 16 d. a day, and their Livery-Cloaths, as above: Four
Master, or Head-Grooms, serving two each half year, 100 l. Four Farriers, 60 l.
One Captain, or Sergeant of the Carriage, 200 l. Four Captains, or Sergeants of
the Guides 300 l.

His Highness has two Coaches, a first Coach called the Coach of the Body, or
Monsieurs own Coach; and a second, to each of which belong two Coachmen and one
Postilion; the Coachmens Salary is 200 l. and the Postilions, 150 l.

There is likewise a Coachman of the Isabella Horses, who has 100 l. and a
Postilion, who has 75 l. Salary. One Conductor, and one Postilion of the
Wagon, who have each of them 100 l. Three Tailors 60 l. One Play Master, or
Cash-Keeper, 400 l. One Physician, 600 l. Two Apothecaries serving by the half
year, 60 l. One Chyrurgeon in Ordinary, 200 l. Four other Barber-Chyrurgeons,
serving Quarterly, 60 l. Two Ushers Cavalcadours, or Riders, 400 l. One
Cuirasse, or Armor-bearer, 200 l. One Keeper of the Stables, and of the
Movables thereunto belonging, 300 l. Two Sadlers and Mail Carriers, 100 l.
Four Harbingers of the Stable, 200 l. Two Chair-men, who are allowed 20 d. a
day, or 370 l. yearly, besides their Liveries; Two Sho-Makers, 60 l. One
Wheel-wright, and one Spurrier, at 60 l. each.

Of other Tradesmen and Artificers furnishing necessaries to his Highness and
his Household.
There are twelve, viz. One Embroiderer, one Joyner of the Chamber, one other
Joyner, one Silk-man, one Clock, or Watch-Maker, one Lace-Merchant, one Hatter,
one Sword-Cutler, and Enricher of Arms, one Feather-man, one Draper, one
Grocer, one Sho-maker in Ordinary, and one Printer in Ordinary to the King, and
his Royal Highness, at Orleans.

The Marshals and Harbingers of the Lodgings for his Highness, and his
Household, are
One Chief Marshal of the Lodgings, who has 2000 l. Salary. One Marshal of the
Lodgings in Ordinary, 800 l. Eight other Marshals of the Lodgings Quarterly
Waiters, 500 l. Four Harbingers of the Body, 250 l. Eight other Harbingers for
the Household, 200 l.

Officers belonging to his Highnesses Council, are
One Chancellor and Keeper of the Seal, whose Salary is 8000 l. One Chief
Counselor in the said Council, 2000 l. Six other Counselors, 1200 l. Six
Masters of Requests, 300 l. One General Proctor, 1000 l. One Advocate in his
Highnesses Privy Council, 400 l. One Advocate in Parliament, 300 l. Two
Substitutes of the General Proctor, 100 l. Two Ushers of the Council, serving
by the half year, 300 l. Two Audienciers, or Auditors, Keepers of the Rolls of
the Chancery, waiting by the half year, 400 l. One Chafe-Wax, 500 l. One
Harbinger of his Royal Highnesses Chancery and Council, 60 l. Two Sollicitors
of business, 1200 l. Two Secretaries of the Commandments of the Household, and
of the Treasury, 1800 l. Two Secretaries of the Closet, 600 l. One General
Super-Intendant, or Surveyor-General of his Highnesses Lands and Revenues, 8000
l. One Interpreter for Foreign Languages, 200 l. One Historiographer, 600 l.
Three Couriers of the Closet, 360 l. Ten Secretaries of the Finances, or
Treasury, 600 l. Two Intendants of his Royal Highnesses Houses, Lands and
Revenues 2400 l. One Comptroller General of the Finances, or Revenues, waiting
by the half year, 2400 l. and one General Treasurer of the Household and
Revenues, whose Salary is 4800 l. Besides which

Over the Waters and Forests, there is
One Super-Intendant, or Overseer, great Master Inquisitour, and
General-Reformer of the Waters and Forests belonging to the Apanage, or
Portion, and other Lands belonging to his R. Highness, who is Mansieur Rose,
Secretary of the Kings Cabinet, and President of the Chamber of Accounts, whose
Salary is 4000 l.

Over the Buildings, there is
One Chief Super-Intendant, or Surveyor of the Buildings and Gardens, 3000 l.
one other Intendant of the Buildings and Gardens, 600 l. One General
Comptroller, 1000 l. One Architect, 600 l. there was likewise formerly, a
Carpenter, a Mason, and a Chief Gardener.

Other Expenses his R. Highness is at for his Houses and Gardens, are
To the Keeper of the Palace of St. Clou, 3600 l. to two Gardiners, 8000 l. To
the Gardener of the Kitchen, or Pot-Hearb Garden, 3200 l. To the Gardener of
the Garden Plot of Apollo, 1000 l. To the Dean of St. Clou, for Lands enclosed
within the Park, 100 l. To the Chapter of St. Clou, 100 l. To the Chaplain of
St. Eustace's Chapel, 46 l. To the Curate of Sevre, in lieu of Tithes, 100 l.
To the Receiver of the Rents of the Archbishopric of Paris, for the Rent of
the little Mill, called le Moulin du Tillet, 425 l. for keeping in repair the
Tiling and Slates of the said Palace of St. Clou, of the Tillet, of the
Dependances of Colombe, and of the House at St. Germains, and at Versailles,
1500 l. To the Keeper of the House at Sevre, 500 l. To those that look after
the Gardens of the said House, 1000 l. To the Keeper of the Gate and Grate of
the Palace and Garden of St. Clou, 300 l. To a Mole-Catcher, 600 l. To the
Gardener of the Great House at Colombe, 600 l. and to the Gardener of the
little House at the same place, 200 l. The total amounting to 21271 l.

Officers of Hunting, and of the Game, belonging to his R. Highness, are
First for the Deer.
One Chief Hunter, or Huntsman, 1000 l. Four Lieutenants, 800 l. Three
Gentlemen in Ordinary, 1200 l. Three Gentlemen Prickers in Ordinary, 273 l. 15
d. One Servant of the Dogs on Horseback, 547 l. 10 d. Six lusty Servants of the
Dogs in Ordinary, 273 l. 15 d. Two little Boys to look after the Fleet-Hounds,
219 l. Three Servants in Ordinary of the Bloud-Hounds. Four Harbingers, 150 l.
One Chyrurgeon in Ordinary, 200 l. Three Horse-Grooms in Ordinary, 219 l. and
one Farrier, 150 l.

For Wild Goat-Hunting.
One Chief Hunter, 1000 l. Two Lieutenants waiting by the half year, 800 l.
Three Prickers in Ordinary, 273 l. 15 d. One Servant in Ordinary of the Dogs,
on Horseback, 540 l. and 10 d. Four lusty Servants in Ordinary, of the Dogs,
avg l. 15 d. Two little Boys to look after the setting Dog, 519 l. Three
Servants of the Bloodhounds, 273 l. and 15 d. One Horse-Groom in Ordinary, 219
l. and one Farrier, 150 l.

For Fox-Hunting.
One Chief Hunter. And for

Wolf-Hunting.
One Chief Hunter, at 1000 l. Salary each. One Lieutenant, 600 l. One Pricker,
547 l. and 10 d. Two Servants of the Dogs, 219 l. Three other Servants to lead
on the three Brace of Gray-Hounds, 273 l. 15 d. Two Servants of the
Bloodhounds, at the same Wages.

For the Toils, or Nets.
One Captain, or Sergeant of the Toils, 1200 l. and one Servant of the Dogs,
273 l. 15 d.

For the Hare.
One Chief, or Sergeant of the Pack of Hounds, 1200 l. Two Servants of the
Gray-Hounds, 60 l.

For Hawking.
One Chief Falconer, 1000 l.

For Flying at the Crow.
One Master-Falconer, 250 l. Five Prickers, 250 l. One Decoy-Carrier, 250 l.
One Surgeon of the Falconry, 250 l.

For Flying at the Magpie.
One Master-Falconer, 300 l. and two Prickers, 250 l.

For the Flight in the Fields, or at the Partridge.
One Chief, or Sergeant of the Hawks, 1000 l. One Master-Falconer, 300 l. and
one Pricker, 300 l.

Of the Hawks of the Closet.
There is one Chief, or Sergeant, whose Salary is 2000 l.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of his R. Highnesses Military Officers, and first of his French Life-Guards.

OF these there are two Captains, serving by turns, every other Quarter, who
are the Marquess de Maulny, and the Marquess de la Fare, who have each of them
6000 l. for Wages and Pensions, 2000 l. by way of Supplement to their Wages,
and 3000 l. toward the new mounting themselves: Four Lieutenants who have each
of them 250 l. standing Wages, and 750 l. Pension; Four Ensigns, at 300 l.
standing Wages, and 900 l. Pension. Four old Exempts, at 400 l. standing Wages,
and 150 l. Pension. Four other Exempts, at 400 l. standing Wages. Two Exempts
waiting by turns, six Months apiece, on Madame his Highnesses Lady, at 600 l.
and four other Exempts of his R. Highnesses Life-Guards, waiting ordinarily on
the Duke of Chartres, their R. Highnesses Son, at 400 l. Wages; Four Marshals
of the Lodgings, or chief Harbingers at 400 l. Ninety six Lifeguard Men in two
Companies: over whom there are two Brigadeers, who have 1200 l. each, and two
Sub-Brigadeers, at 1000 l. each.

On New Years Day in the Year 1669. Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, took into the
number of his Guards, twelve Knights of the Order of St. Lazarus, who are as
'twere the Cadets, or younger Brethren of the Life-Guards. Besides all these,
there is a Clerk of the Watch, who has 200 l. Salary, and 1000 l. to furnish
Straw-Beds, one Receiver and Play Master, and one Treasurer of this Company, who
have each a Salary of 1000 l. One Surgeon 200 l. and two Trumpeters, who
have for Wages, and to mount and remount them, 1000 l. each; and one
Kettle-Drummer, who has likewise 1000 l. They all are Esquires by their Places.

In his Suisse Life-Guards there are
Two Captains, who have each 3200 l. standing Wages, and 1500 l. Pension; they
are at present, the Chevalier de Liscouet, and the Marquess de Foix de Rabat.
Three Lieutenants, at 1000 l. each. Two Ensigns, one French, and the other a
Suisser. Eight Exempts, of which, there are but sour entered upon the
Establishment, viz. Two French, and two Suissers; they serve quarterly, two
every quarter. Two Harbingers, or Quarter Masters, whereof the first has 332 l.
and the other but 256 l. Salary. One Clerk of the Watch, who has 662 l. and one
Surgeon, 200 l. The Company consists of 36 Suisse Soldiers, which are
divided into two Divisions, their pay is 21 l. 6 d and 8 deniers, or about
three Farthings a Month, being 256 l. a year; and lastly, There is one Drummer,
one Flute, and one Tailor.

To the Guards of the Gate, There belong
One Captain, at 2000 l. Salary. Two Lieutenants, 600 l. each; and sixteen
Guards of the Gate, at 200 l. each.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Madame's Household.

IN the Household of Madame, or of her Royal Highness the Duchess of Orleans,
according to the Establishment, ordered by her Self in Person for this present
year. There are

First, These Ecclesiastical Officers, viz.
One Chief Almoner, who has for standing Wages, Board-Wages, and Pensions, 3000
l. One Almoner in Ordinary, for standing and Board-Wages, 1380 l. Four Almoners
waiting quarterly, at 140 l. apiece: One Confessor and Preacher in Ordinary,
1200 l. who is the R. Father Jourdan, a Jesuit. One Chaplain in Ordinary, and
four other Chaplains waiting quarterly, at 100 l. each. Four Clerks of the
Chapel waiting quarterly, 90 l. each. One Groom of the Chapel, who has for
his Wages, and to hire Horses when her Highness Travels, 400 l. One Almoner of
the Household, who has 100 l. Wages, and 66 l. for what he furnishes: One
Confessor of the Household, who has 100 l. and one Preacher of the Household.

In her Highnesses Chamber, and above Stairs, are these Officers of the Female
Sex:
Viz. First, In Quality of Ladies.
One Super-Intendant, or Chief Stewardess of the Household, who is the Duchess
of Vantadour, First Lady of Honor. who for standing Wages, Board-Wages, and
Pension, has 8000 l. yearly, and is in that quality, first Lady of Honor.

2. One Tiring Lady, who is the Lady Durasfort, who has for all things 6000 l.
Salary; being the second Lady of Honor.

2. Mother or Governess of the Maids, who has 800 l. and an Under-Governess,
who has 550 l. Salary, and five Maids of Honor, who have 150 l. each.

Secondly, In Quality of Waiting-Gentlewomen.
One Chief Waiting-Gentlewoman, and thirteen others, who have every of them 100
l. Salary. One Landress for Madames own Linen, at 75 l. One Starcher, 500 l.
and four Women to wait on the Maids of Honor, 90 l. each.

After these of the Male Sex, are
One Usher in Ordinary of the Chamber, at 200 l. Four Ushers of the Chamber, at
160 l. each. Four Ushers of the Closet, at 150 l. each. Four Ushers of the
Antichamber, at 160 l. each. Two Valets de Chamber, or Yeomen of the Chamber
in Ordinary, 300 l. Eight other Valets de Chamber, quarterly Waiters, 160 l.
each.

Three Boys, or mean Servants of the Chamber, 140 l. each. Two Semstresses and
Landresses serving by the half-year, at 60 l. each. One Chief Physician, who
has 6000 l. Salary. One Physician in Ordinary of the Household, 1500 l. One
Apothecary of the Body, of the Household, and of the Stable, who has for
standing and Board-Wages 1800 l. One Surgeon of the Body, who has for Wages
and Board-Wages, 2000 l. Two Surgeons of the Household, 150 l. each.

In the Wardrobe, are
One Master of the Wardrobe, 600 l. One Valet, or Yeoman in Ordinary, 200 l.
Four other Yeomen of the Wardrobe, at 140 l. each. Two Tailors, viz. One for
her Highnesses own Person, and the other for her Maids of Honor: One Manto, or
Glove-Carrier, 600 l.

Officers paid out of the Chamber of Deniers, are
The Knight of Honor, or Chief Gentleman Usher, who is the Marquess of
Rongere, whose Salary is 6000 l. One Chief Master, or Steward of the Household,
4000 l. One Master of the Household in Ordinary, 2000 l. Four Masters of the
Household waiting quarterly, at 600 l. each. Two General Comptrollers of the
Household, and of the Treasury of the Chamber, or Privy-Purse, 1000 l. each. One
Gentleman-Waiter in Ordinary, 1200 l. Eight Gentlemen-Waiters serving
quarterly, 300 l. each. Three Comptrollers-Clerks of Offices, serving by turns
four Months apiece, 400 l. each. One Comptroller in Ordinary, 800 l. Four
Ushers of the Hall, 100 l. each: In the Pantry, four Chiefs serving quarterly,
160 l. each. Four Aids, 100 l. each; and one Yeoman, or Groom of the Pantry,
400 l. In the Buttry, four Chiefs, 150 l. each; Four Aids, 100 l. each, and one
Groom, or Yeoman, 400 l.

In the Kitchen.
Four Ushers waiting by the half year, two each half year, 150 l. each, whereof
two are for the Kitchen of the Mouth, and two for the Common Kitchen. Four
Aids, viz. Two for the Mouth, and two for the Common Kitchen, 100 l. each.
Three Children of the Kitchen in Ordinary, whereof two are for the Mouth, and
two for the Common Kitchen, 60 l. apiece. Four Porters in the Kitchen, two for
the one, and two for the other Kitchen, 60 l. each. Four other Ushers of the
two Kitchins, two for the one, and two for the other, 60 l. each. Two Keepers
in Ordinary of the Vessels, 400 l. each; whereof one is for the Mouth, and the
other for the Common Kitchen: In the Common Kitchen, One Yeoman Keeper of the
Cupboard in Ordinary, 400 l. One Wine-Courier, 250 l. One Yeoman of the Spits
for the Mouth, and another for the Common Kitchen, whereof the first has a
Salary of 400 l. and the other but 60 l. One Pastry-Cook, and two Verduriers,
or Herb-men, who have each 60 l. The Verduriers, or Herbmen serve by turns,
each his half year. Four Serdeaus, or Water-Servers, 100 l. each: In the
Fruitery, two Chiefs serving each their half year, 120 l. Two Aids, 60 l. each.
One Groom, or Yeoman of the Fruitery, 400 l. Four Ushers of the Office, waiting
quarterly, 100 l. each. In the Woodyard, or Fuel-Office, Four Chiefs waiting
quarterly, 100 l. each. Four Aids, at 60 l. each. Two Table, and Chair-Carriers
of the Body, 160 l. each; they serve by turns, half a year apiece: Two
Table-Carriers for the Household, 160 l. each. Two Marshals of the Ladies of
Honor, 100 l. each. Two Ushers of the said Maids of Honors Hall, 100 l. each.
One Valet de Chamber, or Waiting-man of the Maids of Honor, 75 l. One Keeper
of the Movables, and Jewels, 160 l. Two Upholsters, 100 l. each. One Chairman
for business, 100 l. Two Porters, or burden Bearers of the Chamber, and two
Purveyours, all at 60 l. each. Two Faloteers, or Carriers of great Fagots, 60
l. each. Eleven Tradesmen and Artificers, dwelling at Paris, that furnish
several necessaries to her Highnesses Household, who have 60 l. Salary apiece,
viz. One Shomaker in Ordinary, one Shomaker of the Wardrobe, one Jeweller, one
Shomaker of the Stable, one Joyner, one Linnen-Draper, one Needle-Maker, one
Herb-man, and Orange-Merchant, one Grocer, one Pin-Maker, and one Baker.

There are four Marshals of the Lodgings, or Chief Harbingers, at 150 l. each.

In the Stable, are
One Chief Querry, or Master of the Horse, who has in all, for his Appointments
and Board-Wages, 5445 l. Two Querries in Ordinary, 2000 l. each. Four Querries
quarterly Waiters, 500 l. each. Six Pages. Two Querries Cavalcadours, or
Riders, 546 l. each. One Comptroller General of the Stable, 1200 l. One
Secretary of her R. Highnesses Commandments, 4200 l. One Intendant, or
Surveyour of the House and Revenues. Six other Secretaries, 300 l. each. Two
Sollicitours of Affairs, 500 l. One Treasurer of the Household, whose Salary is
3000 l.

Other Officers of the Stable.
Ten Great Footmen, who have every of them 20 d. a day, that is 366 l. a year,
besides their Summer and Winter Clothes. One Footman belonging to the Maids of
Honor, who is allowed 20 d. a day, or 366 l. a year. Two Manto-Carriers, at
292 l. each. Two Coaches, the first called the Coach of the Body, and a second
Coach, who have each of them one Coachman, and one Postilion; the Coachman of
the first Coach, has 200 l. Salary, and he of the second, 150 l. and the
Postilions have each of them 100 l. Besides which, there is a Coach for the
Maids of Honor, and another for the Waiting-Gentlewomen, to each of which,
belong one Coachman and one Postilion, who have every of them 100 l. Salary:
One Head-Groom in Ordinary, 100 l. Two Chair-men 365 l. each. Two Farriers 100
l. each. One Keeper of the Movables of the Stable, 100 l. Two Tailors, one
Flock-Bed-Maker, one Wheel-wright, at 60 l. each. One Surgeon, 220 l. One
Barber to trim the Pages, 100 l. One Dancing Master, and one Fencing-Master, at
200 l. each. One Governor of the Pages, 300 l. One Almoner in Ordinary, and
Tutor of the Pages, 200 l. One Servant of the Pages, 100 l. And lastly, One
Play Master, or Cash-Keeper of the Stable, whose Salary is 100 l.

We have already spoken of the Duke of Chartres.

THE Present State OF FRANCE. PART II.
Of the Nobility of France.
CHAP. I.
Of the Nobility in General.

IN France, as in most other Countries, not only those which are Princes,
Peers, and Great Lords, but all Gentlemen of ancient Descent, and that are
enobled by the King, are reckoned into the Body of the Nobility; and there the
King often gives Letters of Nobility, as they are called, whereby he
constitutes the person receiving them Noble, or makes him a Gentleman, without
Conferring upon him any particular Title of Honor, 1
contrary to the practice used in England: It is to be noted too, that there,
neither Arts nor Sciences ennoble, neither Lawyers, nor Physicians, nor
Divines, being accounted noble, or Gentlemen, unless they be otherwise so, or
enjoy some Place, or Dignity, that gives them the Title of Lord, which is only
temporary and personal.

The Chief Privileges of Nobles, or Gentlemen, are to be Exempt from Taxes,
and to enjoy some other immunities, and be capable of enjoying Dignities, and
rising to Honor. If they take Church Dignities, or addict themselves to the
Law, they derogate not from their Nobility, though they increase it not, but if
they follow any Trade or Commerce, or marry with any Family, not Noble, they
derogate and lose their quality; and till of late, those that meddled with
Sea-Affairs, were reckoned to derogate likewise, but that being found
prejudicial to the Improvement of the Power of France by Sea, It was Ordered by
the present King, having concerns in public Companies, such as the East India
Company, that studying or practicing Sea-Experience, should not only not
derogate, but be encouraged with Privileges; and accordingly appointed public
Schools and Nurseries in several Marine Places, with good Endowments, wherein a
considerable number of the younger Sons of the meaner Nobility, might be
instructed in Navigation and Maritime Affairs, and trained up to make useful
Sea-Officers: So that now the younger Sons, or Cadets of the Gentry, are either
provided for in the Church, with Ecclesiastical Dignities, or raise themselves
by Military employs, by Sea or Land, not so many as formerly affecting the
civil ones, because they are such as are often enjoyed by the Sons of rich
Citizens, or Farmers of Taxes, whom they a little disdain for Companions.

The Nobility or Gentry in France is the most numerous of any Kingdom of the
World, they being reckoned above ten thousand able Bodies, and generally well
educated in all accomplishments that may make them serviceable to their
Country, and in them consists the Kings chief Force; and he is, in some
respects, as absolute over them, as over the Peasants: for though they pay no
Taxes, and cannot be legally compelled to take Arms, unless upon an Invasion,
or imminent danger; yet it is by Custom, thought so disgraceful for any
Principals or Heads of greater Families, not to attend the King, and spend what
they have in his Court, or Service; or for Cadets, or younger Brothers, not
provided for in the Church, to follow any thing but the Wars, by which only in
a manner all Nobility was ever acquired there, that the King can never want
Soldiers among them: It being almost impracticable for a Gentleman, any thing
considerable, to live privately, or retired there, unless he thrust himself
into a Convent.

CHAP. II.
Of Dukes and Peers.

OF Dukes and of Peers severally, and of such as are both Dukes and Peers,
there are six or seven sorts.

1. The Ancient Dukes and Peers: 2. The Dukes and Peers, verified in the
Parliament of Paris, as both Dukes and Peers. 3. Such as are verified in the
said Parliament, only as Dukes. 4. The Dukes, or the Dukes and Peers that are
verified as such in other Parliaments than that of Paris, which is the only
true Court of Peers. 5. Those who are Dukes and Peers only by Patent under the
Great Seal, not verified, or past yet in any Parliament. 6. The Dukes and Peers
by Brief, as the House of Clermont-Tonnerre.

Besides which, there are some Dukes of Foreign Creations, as in the County of
Avignon, under the Pope; and several other Persons, who though they be no
Princes nor Princesses, yet are suffered by his Majesty, to enjoy the Honors of
the Louvre, as to enter into the Louvre in their Coaches, and their Ladies have
the privilege of the Low-stool, or Tabouret, before the Queen, without having
any Duchy, or Patent for any.

CHAP. III.
Of the ancient Peers of France.

THE Ancient Peers were formerly twelve, viz. Six Ecclesiastical Peers, and six
Secular ones: The six Ecclesiastical ones are still in being, and are these;
viz. 1. The Archbishop and Duke of Reims, and first Peer of France, who is at
present Charles-Maurice le Teliier, Brother to the Marquess of Louvois, first
Minister of State: 2. The Bishop and Duke of Langres, who is Louis-Marie-Armand
de Simianes de Gordes. 4. The Bishop and Count of Beauvais, who is named
Toussaint de Fourbin de Janson. 5. The Bishop and Count of Chaalons in
Champain, Lewis Antony of Noailles, of the Family of the Duke of that Name: 6.
The Bishop and Count of Noyon, named Francis of Clermont-Tonnerre.

The six secular ones that are now only represented, were
The Dukes of Burgundy, Normandy, Guyenne.
And Counts of Toulouze, Flanders, and Champain.

The Quality of the twelve ancient Peers of France, is at present but a kind of
Ceremonial Dignity, by virtue of which, those that possess it, have a certain
Rank or Precedence in France, at the Consecration and Coronation of Kings, have
Place in Parliament, and in the general Assembly of Estates, and enjoy the
Honors of the Louvre: Their first Institution is so uncertain, that it is
impossible to gather out of History their true Original, some attributing it to
Hugh Capet, and some to Charlemaine, or Charles the Great: But the Original of
the Name and Functions of the Peers of France can properly be derived from
nothing else, then from the common use and custom of Fiess and Tenures, which
is, that the Vassals holding moveable Fiefs fully and directly of the same
Lord, are called Pares Curiae aut Domus, which is as much as to say, Peers of
the Fiefs, or of the Court, that are to assist when the Lord takes possession
of his Land; to be present at those days, when causes relating to the Fiefs,
are pleaded and judged, and have several other rights which are analogically
common to them with our Peers of France, who in like manner assist at the
Consecration and Coronation of the King, who is the supreme Lord, are
Counselors in his Court of Parliament, which for this reason is called the
Court of Peers; so that in a word, the Peers of France are but as Tenants that
hold of the Monarchy, and depend immediately on the Crown; such as were the
seven Peers in the time of Lewis the Young, in the year 1179, or in the time of
Hugh Capet, who reunited to the Crown, the Duchy and Peerage of France, or of
Paris, which he possessed before he was King: So that there remained after
that, but six ancient Peers, that were Seculars, to which at several times, by
degrees, were afterward added six other Ecclesiastical Peers, over whom, Lewis
the Young, gave the Primacy to the Archbishop of Reims, with the Prerogative of
Consecrating and Crowning the Kings: Since the time of the said Lewis the
Young, the number of twelve Peers, at those great Ceremonies, has been always
continued till the present; But the Secular Peers are as we have said, only
represented on that occasion, there being none now that bear any of those
Titles, but only now lately the Duke of Burgundy, Eldest Son to the Dauphin,
and the Count of Toulouze, one of the Kings Natural Legitimated Sons.

Their several Functions at the Kings Consecration, and Coronation, are these:

The Archbishop of Reims Consecrates, or anoints the King with the Oil of the
Holy Ampull, or Viol, kept in the Cathedral of that Name, from Age to Age, only
for that purpose: The Bishop of Laon carries the said Viol; the Bishop of
Langres carries the Scepter; the Bishop of Beauvais, the Mantle Royal, the
Bishop of Chaalons, the Ring; the Bishop of Noyons, the Belt: The Duke of
Burgundy carries the Crown Royal, and girds on the Kings Sword; the Duke of
Guyenne carries the first square Banner, the Duke of Normandy the Second; the
Count of Toulouze, the Spurs; the Count of Champain, the Banner Royal, or
Standard of War; the Count of Flanders, the Kings Sword.

On the day of the Consecration and Coronation, and during the Ceremony, these
Peers wear a Circle of gold in form of a Crown: Now because of the six Secular
Peerages, there are now five reunited to the Crown, and that of Flanders is
likewise in part reunited, and in part remains still in foreign hands,
therefore there are on such occasions six Princes, or great Lords chosen to
represent them, and to perform their Functions.

The Order observed at the Coronation of the present King Lewis the Fourteenth,
now happily Reigning, which was on the 7th of June, 1654. was as follows.

The Ecclesiastical Peers, that officiated on that occasion, were
1. Anne-Marie de Levis de Ventadour, late Archbishop of Bourges, instead of
the Bishop and Duke of Laon. 2. Francis de Harlay, then Archbishop of Rouen,
and at present of Paris, for the Bishop and Duke of Laugres. 3. Nicholas Choart
de Buzanval, late Bishop and Count of Beauvais. 4. Henry de Baradat, late
Bishop and Count of Noyon. 5. Felix Vialar de Hearse, late Bishop and Count of
Chaalons. 6. The late Bishop of Soissons, as first Suffragan of Reims, anointed
the King, being assisted by the Bishop of Amiens, as Deacon, and by Monsieur de
Bourlon, now Bishop of Soissons, but then but Coadjutour to the said
Bishopric, as Subdeacon: The other Bishops that were likewise assistants
there, were the Bishops of Rennes, Coutances, of Rhodes, of St. Paul irois
Chateaux, or three Castles, of Agde, and of Leon.

Cardinal Grimaldi, performed the Office of Great Almoner of France, because of
the absence of Cardinal Barberin: The Hostages given for the Holy Ampull, or
Viol, were the Marquesses of Vardes, of Richelieu, of Biron, and of Coislin,
since Duke; and Monsieur de Manciny, at present Duke of Nevers, held up the
Kings Train.

Those who represented the Secular Peers, were
1. The Duke of Anjou, now Duke of Orleans, represented the Duke of Burgundy.
2. The late Duke of Vendome, the Duke of Aquitain, or Guyenne. 3. The late Duke
of Elbeuf, the Duke of Normandy. 4. The late Duke of Epernon, the Count of
Champagne. 5. The Duke of Rouanez Gouffier, the Count of Flanders. 6. The Duke
of Bournorville, the Count de Toulouze.

The late Marshal d' Etrees performed the Office of High Constable; the late
Marshal d' Hospital carried the Scepter; the late Marshal du Plessis-Pralin,
the Crown; the late Marshal d' Aumont, the hand of Justice: The late Chancelour
Seguier, officiated his own place; the Marshal Duke of Villeroy, performed the
Office of Great Master, or High Steward of France; the late Duke of Joyeuse,
did his Office of High Chamberlain: and the Count de Vivonne, who had the
Reversion of one of the places of chief Gentleman of the Bedchamber, after the
Duke of Mortemar his Father, performed the Function of First or Chief
Chamberlain. He is at present Marshal Duke de Vivonne.

CHAP. IV.
Of the particular Lords, that are at present Dukes and Peers, according to the
Order of their Verification, being in all 29.

Names of the Dukedoms, and the date of their Verification.
1. USes, in 1572. 2. Ventadour, in 1594. 3. Suilly, in 1606. 4. Luynes, in
1619. 5. Les diguieres, in 1620. 6. Brissac, in 1620. 7. Chaunes, in 1631. 8.
Richelieu, in 1631. 9. St. Simon, in 1635. 10. La Rochefoucault, in 1637. 11.
La Force, in 1637. 12. Aiguillon, in 1638. 13. Rohan, in 1645. 14. Piney de
Luxemburg, in 1662. 15. Etrees, in 1663. 16. Gramont, in 1663. 17. Mazarin, in
1663. 18. Villeroy, in 1663. 19. Mortemar, in 1663. 20. Poix Crequy, in 1663.
21. St. Aiguan, in 1663. 22. Rendan de Foix, in 1663. 23. Tremes, at present
Gevres, in 1663. 24. Noailles, in 1663. 25. Coislin, in 1663. 26. Plessis
Pralin, in 1665. 27. Aumont, in 1665. 28. Seneterre, in 1665. 29. Montausier,
in 1665.
Names of the present Dukes of the aforesaid Dukedoms.
1. Emanuel de Crussol. 2. Lewis-Charles de Levis. 3. Maximilian Peter Francis
de Bethune. 4. Lewis Charles d' Albert. 5. John Francis Paul de Bonne de Creqy
de Blanchefort, etc. 6. Henry Albert de Cosse. 7. Charles d' Albret, alias d'
Ailly. 8. John Armand de plessis de Vignerod. 9. Claudius de St. Simon. 10.
Francis de la Rochefoucault. 11. James Nompar de Caumont. 12. Marie-Magdalen
Teresa of Vignerod. 13. Lewis de Rohan Chabot. 14. Francis Henry de
Montmorency. 15. Francis Hannibal d' Etrees. 16. Antony Charles de Gramont. 17.
Armand Charles de la Port de Mazarini. 18. Francis de Neuville. 19. Lewis
Victor de Rochechouart. 20. Charles de Creqy. 21. Francis de Beauvilliers. 22.
Henry-Charles de Foix. 23. Leon Potier. 24. Lewis Anne Julius of Noailles. 25.
Armand du Cambout. 26. Augustus de Choiseul du plessis pralin. 27. Lewis-Marie
de Aumont de Roche-baron. 28. Henry de Senneterre. 29. Charles de St. Maure.
Rouanez en Forets was Erected into a Duchy, and the Letters verified in
Parliament, in 1567. There are also Patents making the same a Peerage, which
are not verified.

This Dukedom is possessed by Francis d' Aubusson de la Fenillade. Marshal of
France.

The Dukedom of Chevreuse, is confirmed as such by Letters Patents, verified
the 16th of May, 1668. which confirm to the present Duke the Enjoyment of all
Honors and Precedences due to it when it was first Created.

CHAP. V.
Of Dutchies, or Dutchies and Peerages, verified as such in other Parliaments,
and not at Paris.

Dukedoms.
1. LOngueville and Estouteville, verified in the 2. Parliament of Rouen, 1505.
and Estouteville, in 1534. 3. Villars Dutche and Peerage, verified in the
Parliament of Provence, the Duchy in 1628, and the Peerage in 1657, and
presented the same year in that of Paris, but not verified. 4. Pondevaux,
verified in the Parliament of Dijon. 5. Carignan, verified at Mets in 1662.
Present Dukes of the aforesaid Dukedoms.
1. John Lewis Charles of Orleans, called the Abbot of Orleans. 2. Lewis de
Brancars. 3. Philip Eugenius de Gorrevod. 4. Lewis Thomas of Savoy, Count of
Soissons, and Duke of Carignan.
CHAP. VI.
Of Dukes and Peers whose Patents are not yet verified.

THere are several Letters Patents for Dutchies and Peerages, which are not yet
verified, notwithstanding which non verification, because the persons
possessing them, will during their Lives enjoy all Honors belonging to them,
we shall insert them, being 11. in all.

Dutchies.
1. Bournonville, Erected in 1600. 2. Cardonne, in 1642. 3. Arpajon, in 1651.
4. Pavan la Vieville, in 1652. 5. Nogent le Rotrou d' Orval, in 1652. 6. Duras,
in 1668. 7. Bethune Charots, in 1672. 8. The Archbishopric of Paris, in 1674.
9. De Lude, in 1675. 10. La Roche Guyon, in 1679. 11. Roquelaure, in 1683.
The present Dukes.
1. Ambrose of Bournonville. 2. Lewise de Pry, Duchess Dowager, and Heiress.
3. Lewis d' Arpajon. 4. Charles de la Vieville. 5. Francis de Bethun. 6. James
Henry de Duras-fort. 7. Armand de Bethune. 8. Francis Harlay de Chanvallon. 9.
Henry de Daillon, dead last year without Issue. 10. Francis de la
Rochefoucault, Great Hunter of France. 11. Antony Gaston.
There is still one Duchy, which is only so by Brief, which is that of
Clermont Tonnerre, now Extinct: But all the foregoing ones are so by Patent
under the Great Seal.

CHAP. VII.
Of all the Dutchies and Peerages more exactly, as well of those extinct as not
extinct.

WE have named all those that are present Dukes, Dukes and Peers of France; but
for more ample satisfaction, we shall set down all the Dutchies, and Peerages,
as likewise, all the Dutchies and Peerages, and all the simple Dutchies,
whether enjoyed at present, or reunited to the Crown, or Extinct, according to
the Order of their Erection.

For there are some Lands, as we have already noted, that are Erected only into
simple Dukedoms, or into both Dukedoms and Peerages, according to the Tenor of
the Patents of their Erection.

Ordinarily none but Heirs Male succeed to these Honors, and if the Lands, so
Erected, fall to Female Heirs, they return to the quality they had before so
Erected, and the Honor reverts to the King, and to revive it, new Patents must
be obtained from the King; yet there are some Dutchies, that by special Favor
of the King, expressed in the Patents of their Erection, that descend likewise
to Females, as that of Nevers, at its first Erection, and those of Beaumont le
Vicomte, of Mayenne, of Mercoeur, of Rethelois, of Joyeuse, of Epernon, of
Elboeuf, of Richelieu, of Aiguillon, and of Biron, which is Extinct.

A List of the Dutchies and Peerages, with the time of their Creation, and the
persons that possess such of them as are not either extinct, or reunited,
according to the Order of their verification in the Parliament.
Philip the Fair Erected

Britany into a Dukedom and Peerage, in 1297. which was united by the Marriage
of Anne the last Heiress to the French King.

Charles the Fourth, called the Fair, Erected

La March into a Duchy, in 1327. which was made a County and Peerage by
Philip the Long, in 1316. It is reunited to the Crown.

Philip of Valois Erected

Bourbon into a simple Duchy, in 1329. It was given to the late Prince of
Conde, whose Grandchild now bears the Title.

Orleans, into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1344. It was given in Apanage to the
Kings only Brother King John Erected

Anjou into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1350. It is now the Apanage and Title of
the Dauphins second Son.

Bar le Duc, made a simple Duchy in 1357. and reunited to the Crown by a
Donation verified in Parliament, in 1662.

Berry, a simple Duchy, and ancient County, Erected in 1360. and given to the
Dauphins third and last Son.

Touraine, made a simple Duchy, and reunited to the Crown.

Auvergne, made a simple Duchy, in 1360. It was reunited to the Crown, but
since given to the House of Bouillon, under the Title of County, in exchange of
the Principalities of Sedan, etc. by a Contract verified in 1652.

Charles the Sixth Erected

Valois into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1402. and is a part of the Apanage of the
Duke of Orleans, the Kings Brother.

Nemours, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1404. It was bought by the Dukes of
Nemour, of the House of Savoy, for 100000 Livers, of Francis the First, in
1528. It now belongs to the Duke of Orleans.

Alencon, of an ancient County, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1413. It belongs
at present to the Duchess Dowager of Guise.

Lewis the Twelfth Erected

Longueville, into a simple Duchy, of which we have spoke already.

Francis the first Erected

Vendome into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1514. It is at present, possessed by the
Duke of that Name, of whom we have spoken among the Princes.

Chatelleraud, of an ancient County, made a Dukedom and Peerage in 1514. which
was given to, and sometime possessed by the Hamiltons of Scotland, but is now
enjoyed by Mademoiselle of Montpensier, the Kings Aunt.

Angouleme, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1515. Extinct.

Dunois, Erected into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1525. by the Queen Regent,
Mother to Francis the First, but not verified in Parliament.

Guise, made a Duchy and Peerage in 1527. and verified in 1528. It belongs to
Mademoiselle de Guise, of whom, among the Princes.

Chartres, Erected into a simple Duchy, by Francis the First, in 1528.
together with Montargis and Gisors. It belongs to the Duke of Orleans.

Estouteville, a simple Duchy Erected in 1534. of which already.

Etampes, a simple Duchy, made a County and Peerage in 1326. and afterward, a
Duchy, in 1536. It belongs now to the Duke of Vendome, given to that House
first by Queen Margarite.

Montpensier, made a Duchy and Peerage in 538. confirmed as to the Peerage in
1608. It belongs to Mademoiselle Anne-Marie Lewise of Orleans, the Kings Aunt.

Beaumont le Sonnois, or Beaumont le Vicomte, made a simple Duchy in 1543. It
is now reunited to the Crown.

Henry the Second Erected

Aumale into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1547. and verified the next year, and
confirmed in 1631.

Albret Erected in 1556. which was reunited to the Crown, but since given to
the House of Bouillon, by a Contract verified in 1652.

Beaupreau, a simple Duchy, Erected in 1562. it belongs to the Duke of Brissac.

Chateau Thierry, together with Chatillon sur Marne, and that of Epernay,
Erected in 1566. given likewise to the House of Bouillon, without reverting to
the Crown for want of Heirs Male.

Penthievre, in Britany, made a Duchy and Peerage in 1569. It belongs to the
House of Vendome.

Evreux, first a County and Peerage in 1316. and since made a simple Duchy in
1569. reunited since that to the Crown, and lastly, given to the House of
Bouillon in 1652.

Uses, of which we have spoken.

Mayenne, formerly a Duchy and Peerage, in 1573. It now belongs to the Duke
Mazarin.

Mercoeur, Erected first into a Principality, in 1563. and after into a Duchy
and Peerage, in 1569. but not verified in the Parliament of Paris, in 1676. It
belongs now to the Duke of Vendome.

St. Fargeau, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1569. and Registered in Parliament
the same year: It belongs now to Mademoiselle of Orleans, of Montpensier.

Henry the Third Erected

Loudun into a simple Duchy, in 1589. It belongs to the House of Tremouille.

Joyeuse, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1581. It belongs to the Duchess
Dowager of Guise.

Epernon, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1581. and verified in Parliament the
same year: This Honor is now extinct, but the Lands belong to M. John B. de
Goth de Rouillac.

Elbeuf, made a Duchy and Peerage, in 1581. and verified in 1582. the present
Duke of Elbeuf is mentioned among the Princes.

Brienne, is a simple Duchy, Erected in 1587. but the Patents are not yet
verified.

Montbazon, made a Duchy and Peerage in 1588. and verified the next year: It
was an ancient Barony: It belongs to M. de Montbazon Prince of Guimene, at
present, head of the Eldest Branch of the House of Rohan.

Ventadour, of this we have spoken.

Henry the Fourth Erected

Beaufort into a Duchy and Peerage, in 1578. and after into a Duchy and
Peerage, in 1597. It belongs now to the Duke of Vendome.

Crouy, Erected into a Duchy, in 1598. now extinct. But the Lands belong to
the Descendants of Charles de Crouy, Duke of Arscot.

Thouars, an ancient Vicounty, made a Duchy by Charles the Ninth, and a
Peerage by Henry the Great in 1595. and verified as such in 1599. It belongs to
the House of Tremouille.

Suilly sur Loire: of which we have spoken.

Lewis the Thirteenth Erected

Damville, into a Duchy and Peerage in 1610. the Honor is now extinct, but
the Lands belong to the Duke of Ventadour.

Chateau-roux, made a Duchy and Peerage in 1616. It belongs to the Prince of
Conde.

Maille Luynes, of which we have spoken.

Les diguieres, already mentioned.

Brissac, spoken of before.

Magnelers, was made a Duchy and Peerage in 1587, and 1588. under the name of
Halwin, and revived in 1611. under the name of Candale: It is now Extinct.

Chaunes, of this we have spoken. As likewise of Villars, Richelieu and
Pondevaux.

La Valette, made a Duchy and Peerage in 1622. and verified as such, in 1631.

Montmorency, made a Duchy and Peerage in 1551. by Henry the Second, together
with Ecouan, Chantilly, etc. and verified in Parliament the same year: It
belongs to the Prince of Conde.

Raise, a Duchy and Peerage, revived in 1634. by Lewis the Thirteenth, verified
the same year, in favor of Peter de Gondy, General of the Galleys, upon his
Marrying his Cousin Frances de Gondy, Heiress of the Duchy.

Fronsac, a Duchy and Peerage, Erected, or rather revived in 1634. and
Registered the same year. It belongs to the Duke of Richelieu.

Of the Dutchies of St. Simon, La Rochefoucault, La Force, and Aiguillon, we
have already spoken.

Valentinois, was a Duchy and Peerage united to the Crown, but given by Lewis
the Thirteenth to the Prince of Monaco, by Letters Patents verified in
Parliament in the year 1642.

Rohan, is a Duchy and Peerage, Erected first by Henry the Great, in 1603. and
revived again in 1645. It belongs to Madam de Rohan, Widow of Henry de Chabot.

Nevers, is a Duchy and Peerage revived in 1660. in favor of Cardinal
Mazarin, and belongs now to M. de Mancini.

Of Piney Luxemburg we have spoken, as likewise, of the Duchy of Carignan.

Verneuil, a Duchy and Peerage, Erected in 1652, and verified in 1663. Extinct.

Of Etrees and Gramont, we have treated already.

La Meilleraye, verified in 1663. It belongs to Duke Mazarin.

Rethelois Mazarini, revived again in favor of Armand de Mazarini, and
verified in Parliament, in 1663.

Of Villeroy, Mortemar, Creqy, St. Aignan, and Foix-Rendan, we have spoken
above.

Liancourt, was verified as a Duchy and Peerage in 1663. but Erected in 1643.
It belongs to the Prince of Marsillac.

Of Tremes, or Gevres, and of Noailles, and Coislin, we have treated elsewhere.

These fourteen last Dukes have all place in the Order abovesaid, as if their
Patents had all been verified on the 15th of December in 1663. though there be
some days difference in the date.

Of Polizy, called otherwise Choiseul, and Plessis Pralin, and of the Dutchies
of Aumont, Senneterre, and Montausier, we have already spoken.

La Valiere, otherwise called Vaujours, is a Duchy and Peerage, Erected in
1667. in favor of Mademoiselle de la Valiere, and verified in Parliament the
same: It now belongs to her Daughter the Princess of Conti.

Of Rouanez, and Chevreuse, we have likewise spoken apart.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Ancient Counties and Baronies, Erected formerly into Peerages, most of
which since reunited to the Crown.

POitou, a County and Peerage, Erected by Lewis Hutin, in 1315.

The County of Beaumont le Roger, made a Peerage by Philip de Valois, in 1338.
Given to the House of Bouillon.

The County of Mortaigne, made a Peerage in 1331. by Philip de Valois.

The County and Peerage of Clermont, by the same, in the same year.

The County and Peerage of Macon, in 1359. by Charles Dolphin and Regen, while
his Father was absent in England.

The County and Peerage of Maine, in 1360. by King John.

The County and Peerage of Soissons, by Charles the Sixth, in 1404. enjoyed by
a Prince of the House of Savoy.

The County and Peerage of Saintonge, or Xaintonge, in 1428. by Charles the
Seventh.

The County and Peerage of Auxerre, by Charles the Seventh, in 1435, and
verified in 1436.

The County and Peerage of Foix, by Charles the Seventh, in 1458.

The County and Peerage of Eu, by the same, in 1458. It belongs to Mademoiselle
of Orleans of Monpensier.

The County and Peerage De Foret, held by the Dukes of Bourbonnois.

The County of Perch, Erected into a Peerage, by Charles the Ninth, in 1566.

The County and Peerage of Dreux, Erected by the same in 1569.

The County and Peerage of Evreux, given to the House of Bouillon, in 1652.

Baronies and Peerages reunited to the Crown.
Chateauneuf in Timerais, held so by Charles of Valois, and Charles his Son, in
1314.

Mante and Meulan, Erected by Philip de Valois, Coucy, Perone, Montdidier, Roye
and Ham, by Charles the Sixth, in 1404.

Mortaigne near Tournay, by Charles the Sixth, in 1407.

Beaujolois, held in Peerage by Peter Duke of Bourbonois.

La Fere in Tartenois, Erected by Lewis the Twelfth, in 1507.

Colomiers, is an ancient Peerage, and a principal Member of the Duchy of
Nemours. It was lately revived again in favor of the late Duke of Longueville,
but now Extinct.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Orders of Knighthood in France.

THE Orders of Knighthood were always used as honorable recompenses, and marks
of the Kings favor to such as had signalized their service to their Prince and
the State: Kings likewise have been used to confer them on such as have the
honor to be of Kin, or allied to them, or considerable persons in the State.

It being needless to speak here of all the Orders of Knighthood that have been
instituted in France, it will be sufficient to tell you, that there was
formerly the Order of the Star Instituted, [in memory of the Star that
Conducted the three Kings, or wise Men of the East to Bethlehem] by Robert the
Devout, King of France, in the year 1022. which is attributed to by some, to
Hugh Capet, but more commonly to King John, because after a long disuse, he
reestablished it in the year 1351.

The Knights of this Order were the Figure of a Star wrought in gold, with five
rays upon their left Breasts: The Great Collar of the Order was made like a
Chain of gold wreathed with three Links, fastened or knotted together with Roses
of the same, Enameled with white and red; and in the time of King John, the
Knights wore at the end of the said Collar, or upon their Cloaks, a golden Star
with this Inscription or Motto, Monstrant Regibus:stra viam. This Order growing
common, as some say, even in the time of King John, the Restorer of it, and
others, in the time of Charles the Seventh, and thereupon observed by Lewis the
XI. to be grown into contempt with the people, the said King tototally suppressed
it, by taking the Collar of the Order, in presence of several of the Knights of
it, and putting it, with a Black Ribband, about the Neck of his Captain of the
Watch, which is even to this day a badge of that Office, from whence he is
styled, le Chevalier du Guet, or Knight of the Watch; upon which, nobler
persons disdaining to own it any longer, the Order ceased.

CHAP. X.
Of the Orders of Knighthood, at present subsisting, called, the Kings Orders.

AT present there are only two Orders of Knighthood subsisting, viz. of St.
Michael, and of the Holy Ghost, which are usually called, the Kings Orders.

The Order of St. Michael was Instituted the first day of August, in the year
1469. by King Lewis the XI. in honor of St. Michael the Archangel. He
Ordained, that this Order should consist of thirty six Knights, which should be
obliged in accepting it, to quit all other Orders they might have received from
Foreign Princes, unless they were Emperors, Kings, or other Sovereign Princes,
who only were privileged to wear it together with the other Orders, of which
themselves were Chiefs or Sovereigns; with a Proviso nevertheless, that the
Brotherhood, by common consent, might modifie this regulation, according to
their pleasure: And in like manner, he provided, that the Kings of France
should be. free to wear the Orders of other Princes with this Order.

The Knights of this Order wear a golden Collar, wrought all in the form of
double Sea-Shells, interlaced one with another, in true Lovers Knots, composed
of double points of silk tag'd with gold, at the end of which, hangs a Medal,
on which, is Engraven a Rock, upon which is figured St. Michael Fighting with
the Dragon: But Francis the First changed these Laces, called true Lovers
Knots, into Cords of gold of the fashion of those worn by the Cordelier Friars,
because he bore the name of the Founder of that Order.

All the Knights of the Holy Ghost are obliged by way of preparation, to take
this Order the Eve before they are to take that of the Holy Ghost; for which
reason, their Arms are Encompassed with the Collars of both the Orders, and
they are called Knights of the Kings Orders, in the plural number.

Of the whole number of those that had formerly received the Order of St.
Michael, the King selected and retained a hundred on the 12th of January, 1665.
of which a List was Printed, since which, his Majesty has reformed several of
them, as you may see in the following List.

The Order of the Holy Ghost was Instituted at Paris, on New Years Day, in the
year 1579. by Henry the Third, King of France and Poland, as an Eternal-Mark
of! his Piety, and thankful acknowledgment he desired to render to Almighty
God, for the repeated and signal Favors he had received from him on the day of
Pentecost, or of his sending the Holy Ghost; for that on that day he was Born,
was Elected King of Poland, and succeeded to the Crown of France by the Death
of Charles the Ninth. He likewise stinted the number of these Knights to thirty
six; but their number has now been a long time unlimited: the late King Lewis
the Thirteenth in the year 1633. at Fountainbleau, gave the Order to fifty of
his Lords; and at the last Promotion that was made in 1662. there were
Installed threescore and ten.

The Knights of this Order wear at present a silver Cross set on
Orange-Coloured Velvet upon the left side of their Cloaks and Suits, in the
midst of which, is a Dove Embroidered in silver, with rays of Silver, and at
the Corners, Flowerdeluces also of Silver, with another Cross all of gold hung
about their Necks with a Sky-colored Ribband, which Cross is Enameld with
white on the sides, having at the Corners Flowerdeluces, and in the middle, the
Figure of a Dove on both sides.

The Great Collar of this Order is composed of Flowerdeluces of gold Crowned
with golden Flames, Enameld with red, enterlaced with three Ciphers likewise of
gold, Enameled with white: The first Cipher is an H and a double A all double,
which may be read upward or downward, the H standing for Henry the Third, the
Letter L for Lewise of Lorrain his Wife, and another for something, which is as
yet a mystery. The Cross of the Order is of Gold, in the midst of which, there
is a Dove Enameld with white on one side, and on the other side, the Image of
St. Michael. On the last of June, in the year 1594. Henry the Great took out of
the Collar of the Order, the Ciphers of Henry the Third his Predecessor, and
caused to be put in their place, Trophies of Arms interlaced together, and
intermingled with Crowned H's. Some assert, that this Order was first
Instituted by King Lewis of Scicily, and that Henry the Third did but renew it.

The Knights upon the day of their reception, or Instalment, are clad in Cloth
of Silver with Breeches tuckt up, white Silk Stockings, and Pumps of white
Velvet, their Bonnets of Black-Velvet, and their Cloaks made with a Cape after
the ancient Fashion, of Black-Velvet uncut, and their Ruffs stiff-starched:
When they are received, their Capes are taken off, and a long Green-Velvet
Cloak is put on their Shoulders, trailing on the ground, wrought all over with
Trophies of gold for the Knights, and Flames for the Officers, and lined with
Orange-Coloured Satin.

They kneel down before the King, who taking their joined hands between his
own, strikes them gently over the Shoulders with his Sword, and Kisses them on
the Cheek.

When the King Confers this Order in any Church, he goes and sits down near the
Altar, in the middle of the Officers of the Order; then the Great Master of the
Ceremonies of the Order, Accompanied with the Usher and the Herald, goes and
gives notice to the Lords which are to receive the Order, who presently advance
toward his Majesty, one after the other, or else by two and two, and kneeling
down, take the usual Oath, holding their two hands between his Majesty's, in
the manner aforesaid, and touching the Book of the Holy Gospels, which is held
by the Chancellor: After which, the Provost and Great Master of the
Ceremonies, present the King with Cloaks and Mantles to Invest the Knights, and
then his Majesty taking the Collars of the Order from the hands of the High
Treasurer, puts them about the Knights Necks, saying to them these words, Take
from our hand the Collar of our Order of the blessed Holy Ghost, etc. In the
Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Knights of the Order, and Militia of the Holy Ghost.

1. THE King, Sovereign of the Order.

2. The Dauphin, to whom the Officers of the Order carried the Blue-Ribband,
presently after his Birth, on the first of November, 1661. Since which, the
King made him Knight on New Years Day in 1682.

3. The Duke of Burgundy, to whom the Great Treasurer of the Order, being the
Marquess of Seignelay, carried the Cross and Blue-Ribband, presently after his
Birth, on the 6th of August, 1682.

4. The Duke of Anjou had it likewise presently after his Birth, on the 19th of
December, 1683. And

5. The Duke of Berry, soon after he was Born, on the last of August, 1686.

6. The Duke of Orleans, who had likewise the Blue-Ribband soon after his
Birth, and was afterward made Knight.

Where note, that the Kings Sons, Grandchildren, or Brothers, are Born
Knights, and wear the Blue-Ribband presently after their Birth, though they be
not fully and actually received as such, till the King thinks fit.

The last King made a Promotion of Knights of this Order, in the year 1633. of
which, remain only two Knights, viz. the Duke of St. Simon, and the Marquess of
St. Simon.

Of the Knights promoted in 1662.
The Present King, with the greatest Ceremony, that perhaps was ever practiced
on the like occasion, made a Promotion of several Knights of this Order, in the
year 1662. in which number were two Princes of the Blood, nine Prelates, and
fifty nine other great Persons and Commanders: Besides, the King sent the
Collar of his Orders of his Ambassadors at Rome and in Spain, to Julius
Cesarini, Duke of Castel-Nove, a Roman Baron, and to the Prince of Conty,
Father of the present Prince of that Name, and to the seven other Lords, absent
in the Southern Parts of France, who repairing immediately, to the then Prince
of Conty, who was Governor of Languedoc, and kept his Residence at Pezenas,
were Installed the same year in Notre-Dame Church at Pezenas, with the same
Ceremonies that had been used in the Great Augustines Church at Paris; the
Order being Conferred on them by the Duke d' Arpajon, who was sent thither on
purpose by the King, where Monsieur Martineau, and des Pres, as Herald and
Usher of the Orders, officiated their Places.

Some days before the Ceremony of Installing the said Knights at Paris, the
King gave the Cross of the Order of the Holy Ghost to the late Duke of Beaufort
in the Month of December 1661. who was then going out upon an Expedition to
Sea, who upon his return in 1663. received the Collar of the Order from his
Majesty, upon the Feast of the Assumption in the Chapel of Germains en Lay.

Those of them that are still alive, are
1. Prince of the Blood. 1. The Prince of Conde.
Prelates. 1. The Archbishop of Arles. 2. The Bishop of Mets. 3. The Archbishop
of Paris. 4. The Archbishop of Lions.
Other Commanders are 1. The Duke de Chaunes. 2. The Duke de Luynes. 3. The
Duke de Crequy. 4. The Duke of Nevers. 5. The Duke of St. Aignan. 6. The
Marquess de Vardes. 7. The Count de Beringhen. 8. The Duke de Montausier. 9.
The Marquess de Polignac. 10. The Marquess de Pompadour. 11. The Marquess de
Gamaches. 12. The Marshal, Count d' Estrades. 13. The Count de Guitault.

The rest are dead.

Since that, his Majesty was pleased to Confer the said Order on the Duke of
Mecklenburg, on the first of November, 1664. in the Chapel of the Louvre.

The Great Almoner of France, who is a Commander of the Kings Orders by his
Place, and who is at present the Cardinal of Bouillon, took the Oath in that
quality, the 12th of December, 1671.

On the 29th of September, being St. Michaels Day, in the year 1675. the Duke
of Nevers, by Commission from the King, gave the Order of the Holy Ghost, to
the Duke of Bracciano, of the House of the Vrsini, to the Duke of Sforza, and
to the Prince de Sonnino, Brother to the Constable of Colonna, at Rome.

On the 17th of December, 1675. the King, and the Knights of his Orders, begun
to wear the Blue Ribband over their Coats, whereas before they always wore it
underneath; and the next day, the King held a Chapter of the Order, wherein the
Present King of Poland, and the Marquess of Bethune, who has the Honor to be
his Brother-in-Law, were proposed and admitted into the Order, and the latter
of the two received the Order from the Kings hand on Sunday the 22th of
December, in the Chapel, at the Palace of St. Germains en Lay.

You may please to observe, that formerly those two Lords that held up the two
ends of the Communion-Cloth, on his Majesty's side, whilst his Majesty was
kneeling before the Altar to receive the Sacrament, were ordinarily two Knights
of the Orders, but now it is not so much regarded, whether they be Knights or
no; And if the Dauphin happen to be in presence, then he alone holds up both
the ends of the said Cloth on the Kings side; and did so several times before
he was made Knight, and when he was but a Blue-Ribband Man, and but a Candidate
of the Order.

All Knights of these Orders, Assistant at the Kings Consecration and
Coronation, especially the next day after, when his Majesty receives the Habit,
and the Collars of the Orders, from the hands of the Archbishop of Reims, or
such other Prelate that Consecrated him.

The Knights of the Kings Orders, upon the Festival Days of the Order, go in
the Morning, to the Kings Chamber, and march two and two before him, from his
Chamber to the Chapel: And if upon such days, his Majesty chances to go to
some Church, that is any thing distant, then the Knights go beforehand to the
said Church, where they receive the King at the Door on the inside; and then
all the Knights march by two and two before his Majesty, with their Officers at
the head of them, accompanying him to his praying Desk; and the King commonly
giving them leave to sit down, they go and seat themselves in the places
prepared for them.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Officers of the Kings Orders.

1. THere is the Chancellor of the Order, who is M. de Louvois.

2. The Provost and Master of the Ceremonies, M. the President Meme, Brother to
the Count d' Avaux.

3. The Great Treasurer, the Marquess of Seignelay.

4. The Secretary, M. Chateau-neuf.

These four Great Officers wear the Cross of the Order fastened to a
Blue-Ribband, and put about their Necks, and Embroidered on their Clothes, as
do the Knights.

5. The Herald King at Arms of the Order, is Bernard Martineau, called M. du
Pont.

6. The Usher of the Order is M. des Pres.

7. The Under-Treasurer of the Order is M. Damond.

Besides which, there are two General Comptrollers; Their Office is, to receive
the Deniers of the mark of gold of the Offices of France, of which the
Under-Treasurer gives up an account every year before the Great Treasurer of
the Order.

They are also Officers of the Order, and may wear the Cross of the Holy Ghost,
though with some distinction, and enjoy the same Privileges as do the other
Officers that were Created at the first Institution of the Order.

There is likewise a Genealogist of the Kings Orders, who is M. Cotignon de
Chauvry, Chief President of the Court of Moneys.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the number of the Knights of the Kings Order, under the Title of the Order
and Militia of St. Michael, in the Year, 1678. with other things concerning
both this Order and the Additional Orders of Notre Dame de Mont-Carmel, and of
St. Lazarus of Jerusalem.

THE Knights of the Order of St. Michael, in the year 1678. were seventy four
in number.

The two eldest of these, enjoy the Privilege of Committimus, under the Great
Seal.

The King has named since other Knights in the room of those Deceased, and to
complete the number of a hundred, to which his Majesty reduced it, by the
reformation he made in the year 1665. who will be received in the first general
Chapter, which shall be held by the Kings Order, when they have made proof of
their Nobility and good Services.

His Majesty has been pleased to honor some Strangers with the Collar of this
Order, and among others, the Count of Padua, M. Vbaldo Cima d' Ozimo, at Rome,
and the late Dutch Admiral Ruyter: But Strangers are not comprehended in the
said number of a hundred.

In the year 1666. The King Commissionated the late Duke of Noailles, Peer of
France, and Captain of his Life-guards, M. de Beringhen, Chief Querry, and
Commander of his Orders, and the late Mr. Colbert Secretary of State,
Comptroller General of the^ Finances, and then Commander, and great Treasurer
of his Orders, to survey and examine the Proofs and Evidences of the Nobility
of the Knights of the Order of St. Michael, which were put into the hands of
Mr. Cotignon de Chauvry, Genealogist of the Kings Orders.

The King commonly Commissionates one of the Knights of his Orders to assist at
the general Chapters of his Order of St. Michael, and to receive those which
are to be received, with the usual Ceremonies, according to the intention of
his Majesty, after they have made due proof of their noble Extraction, and of
their Services: And at the holding of every General Chapter, the King sends a
new Commission to one of the Knights of the Holy Ghost; and though his Majesty
be pleased to continue sometimes the same Person, yet he may change, if he
please, at every new Chapter; for he of the said Knights of the Holy Ghost that
is named for that purpose, can plead no prescription from thence, for his being
continued perpetual Commissioner of this Order of St. Michael.

In the year 1608. King Henry the Great Instituted an Order, which he named the
Order of Notre Dame de Mont-Carmel, i. e. of our Lady of Mount-Carmel, in
memory of the ancient Order of the Dukes of Bourbon, dedicated to the B.
Virgin; and in the Month of October the same year, he joined thereto, the
ancient Order of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem.

It is composed all of French Gentlemen.

They wear a Golden-Cross Cantoned, or quartered with four Flower-deluces edged
with a white Hem, in the midst of which, on one side, upon a white Enamel, is
represented the Virgin, and on the other, a St. Lazarus upon an Enamel of
Green. This Cross is tied to a Flame-Coloured Ribband.

The Great Priors, and other great Officers of this Order, wear this Cross tied
to a great large Flame-Coloured Ribband tied Scarf-wise, and on the left side
of their Cloaks, or Coats, another Cross, composed of four Flames, Cantoned
with four Flower-deluces, and in the middle, the Image of the B. Virgin,
Environed with Rays of Gold, all in Embroidery.

The Present King, Confirmed the Rights, Estates, Commanderies, Privileges and
Exemptions of this Order, in the Month of April, 1664. and in December, 1672.

The King is likewise Chief, and Sovereign of this Order.

On the 8th of January, 1668. the Marquess of Nerestang took the usual Oath to
the King, for the Office of Great Master of the Royal Order of Notre Dame de
Mont-Carmel, and of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem, both on this side of, and beyond
the Seas: After which, his Majesty put on upon him the Collar and Cross, in the
Presence of his principal Lords; and at the same time, he took his leave of his
Majesty, to go and Command a Squadron of Ships designed for the Guard of the
Coasts of Brittany: But he voluntarily resigned this Office into the Kings
hands again in 1673.

The Marquess of Louvois was received Vicar General of this Order the 18th of
February, 1673. at the Carmelites Convent, called les Carmes des Billettes,
where the Assemblies and Ceremonies of the Order are kept and Celebrated.

On New Years Day, in the year 1669. the Duke of Orleans received into the
number of his Life-guards twelve Knights of St. Lazarus, which are as 'twere
the Cadets, or young Noblemen of his Guards.

There are five great Priories, and 140. Commanderies of this Order, viz. 28
Commanderies to each Great Priory, to which his Majesty commonly nominates some
of his Land, or Sea-Officers, or Commanders, which have been wounded, or which
have rendered him considerable Services.

The General and Conventual House of this Order, is the Commandery of Boigni
near Orleans.

The Great Priories are as follows.
1. The Grand Priory of Normandy: the Grand Prior is the Chevalier de
Montchevrueil, Colonel of the Kings Regiment, and Brigadier; his Seat is at the
Mont aux Malades, or Mount of the sick people, near Rouen.

2. The Great Priory of Brittany: the Great Prior is the Chevalier de Chateau
Regnaud, Commander of a Squadron of Men of War: He resides at Auray, and has
annexed to his other Commanderies, that of Blois.

3. The Great Priory of Bargundy: the Great Prior is M. de Bullonde: His Seat
is at Dijon.

4. The Great Priory of Flanders: the Great Prior is M. de la Rabliere, Marshal
in the Camps and Armies of the King and Commander of Lile, where his Seat is.

5. The Great Priory of Languedoc: the Great Prior is M. de Rivarolles.

The Council established for taking cognizance of the affairs of this Order,
sits in the Arsenal at Paris, those that compose it are
1. The Marquess of Louvois, Vicar General, and President of the Order. 2.
Florent d' Argouges, Chancellor of the Order, received in 1685. 3. M. Du
Verdier, Proctor-General of the Order received in 1672. 4. De Turmenies Sieur
de Naintel, Treasurer of the Order. 5. Camus de Beaulieu, Secretary and
Recorder of the Order. 6. M. William Seguier, Dean of the Order, received in
1638. 7. The R. Father TousseinT St. Luke Carmelite, Almoner of the Order,
received in 1664.
And five Counselors.

Besides this, there is also a Chamber-Royal established at the same Arsenal,
that takes cognizance of the reunion of Estates, and of the property of stocks
of Money, Heritage, and other rights which have been usurped upon this Order,
and alienated from the designed use; which said Royal Chamber is composed of
nine Counselors, to whom are subservient, one General Proctor, who has his
Deputy, or Substitute, and one Registrer or Recorder.

Besides these abovesaid Orders of Knighthood, there are in France, many
Knights of Malta, and Great Priors and Commanders of that Order, that possess
there many rich Lordships, with great Privileges and Immunities, for that they
are obliged, by their Order, to expose themselves continually for the common
defense of Christendom against the Turks and Infidels: But there being Books
enough that treat ex professo, very largely and particularly of them. It will
be needless for me to insist upon any further description of them, in this
small Book.

In old time, before these particular Orders of Knighthood were instituted,
this word Chevalier, or Knight, was used to signify some great precedent
merit, from whence it comes to pass, that Gentlemen of Quality, and of ancient
Families, still to this day, assume that Quality, and write themselves Messire,
N. Knight, and Lord of Messire, being a Title intimating Nobility, and
Chevalier, or Knight, being reckoned a worthier Title than that of their
Mannours, or Seignieuries, of which they are Lords.

And of these Knights, there were two sorts, or Orders, viz. Bannerets, and
Batchellours: the Banneret was he that could raise men enough of his own
Vassals to follow his Banner; the Batchellour was such a one as went to the
Wars under another Man's Banner: and under these, was the Esquire, which is a
quality still taken by the last and lowest rank of Nobility there.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the general Dignities of the Kingdom; and first, of the High Constable.

THE High Constable was the first of all the Officers of the Crown, and next to
the King, was Sovereign Head of the Armies of France, and took place
immediately next after the Princes of the Blood, chiefly in Parliament. At
first, he was no more than the Great Master of the Horse is now, as appears by
the Etymology of the word, which is, Comes Stabuli, i. e. Count of the Stable:
On the sides of his Coat of Arms, he bore as a mark of his Dignity, two naked
Swords, with the points upward, held by a right hand armed, with a Gantlet
coming out of a Cloud: He was sworn by the King himself.

At public Entries of Kings, the Constable marched foremost before his
Majesty, on his right hand, holding a naked Sword; And when the King sat on
his Bed of Justice, or in the Assembly of the general Estates, he sat before
him on his right hand.

The Power of this Officer was much augmented by the Successors of Hugh Capet,
when the Office of Mayor of the Palace was suppressed, and though there were
Constables before Hugh Capet, yet they had till then, no power in the Armies:
If we may believe M. du Tillet, who sets down the Constables, according to
their Succession, the first to be found in History, was Froger of Chalons,
under Lewis the Gross, who therefore may well be called the first Constable, he
being the first that ever enjoyed that large power the Constables enjoyed after
that time, to whose Command in the Armies, the very Princes of the Blood were
subjected.

He that first Exalted the Power of Constable to a Sovereign Command over all
the men of War, not excepting the Princes of the Blood, was Matthew the second,
Baron of Montmorency.

The Constable had right to take a days pay, as his Fee, of all Military
Persons entered into the Kings pay, at the first payment they received, and of
the Horse and Foot that were under the Command of the Master or Clerk of the
Cross-Bow-men, and in general, of all those that were paid by the Treasurers of
the Wars, except only the Princes of the Blood and their Domestics, that
served in the War at their own Expenses, and the Officers and Soldiers at Sea.

It was Treason to offend the Constable, as it was Judged in the Case of Peter
de Craon, who had attempted upon the Life of Oliver de Clisson, High Constable.

The Jurisdiction, or Court held at the Marble Table, is called the
Constablerie and Marshalsey, and though the Office of Constable was suppressed by
a Declaration of the last King, in 1627. after the Death of the then Duke de
Lesdiguieres, the last Constable, yet so much of his Jurisdiction and Power, as
was exercised at the Marble Table, remains still in the hands of the Marshals
of France, that were formerly but his Lieutenants.

The number of Constables is differently related by the Annalists, who as
little agree in the Order of their Succession. There is still, always in the
Armies, a Provost of the Constablery, that gives out Passports, and has
jurisdiction and power to take cognizance of all Disorders of Men of War, and
to decide all differences arising among them, as likewise over all Traitors and
Deserters of the Army: He also sets the price of Victuals, and enjoys many
other Privileges.

By an Order of the 13th of March, 1627. and another of the 23d of April, in
1643. The late King suppressed the Offices of High Constable, and Colonel-General
of the Infantry of France, with a Provision for the future, that they should
never be renewed again upon what pretense soever: and the suppression of that
of Colonel-General of the Infantry, was again confirmed the 23d of July 1661.

The first or eldest Marshal of France Officiates the duty of Constable, and
may as such, bear on one side of his Coat of Arms, a naked Sword, and the
Commanders Staff on the other, as Marshal.

The other Prerogatives belonging to this Office, may be seen in the relation
of M. du Tillet.

Before we conclude this Chapter, it will not be impertinent the following
Article of the Privileges of this High Office found in the Registers of the
Chamber of Accounts in a Bag called Spalia, and expressed in old French.

Item, The Constable is to have his Chamber at Court, near the King, wherever
his Majesty be; and in his Chamber, is to have twelve Stools, and twelve
Cushions, and Billets for his fire; and he is to have a certain allowance of
Wine, and two pound of small Candles, and a Torch by Night, to conduct him to
his House, or into the Town, which are to be redelivered next Morning to the
Fruiterer: And he is to have thirty six Loaves, and one Pot of Wine for himself
placed near the Stand, and two Barrels for his Chamber, one toward the Door,
and the other toward the ends, and of every Mess, cookt or raw, as much as is
necessary, and a Stable for four-Horses.

Item, If a Castle, or Forteress be taken, or do yield, the Horses, Harness,
Provisions, and all other things found therein, belong to the Constable, except
the Gold, and the persons that belong to the King, and the Artillery that
belongs to the Master of the Cross-Bow-Men.

There has been sometimes made a Lieutenant General, representing the Kings
Person throughout the Kingdom, which is an Authority almost equal to the
Constables, though held only by Commission: There was one of these made in
1560. under Charles the Ninth, and the late Duke of Orleans enjoyed the same
Dignity in the Minority of the present King Lemis the Great.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Marshals of France.

IT will be no easy matter to tell you precisely, at what time the Office of
Marshal of France was first Instituted, because the Historians that have made
mention of it, are not agreed about that point. John le Feron, that writes
their History, makes them to have begun under Clovis the second, Son of
Dagobert, in the person of one Girard Count of Dammartin; some others attribute
their first Creation to Hugh Capet: But I can subscribe to neither of these
opinions, my first reason is, because John de Feron has not the approbation of
all those well skilled in History; my second, that after having perused over
the most part of the French Annalists, I can find no mention made of any
Marshals of France till the time of Philip the First, neither was it by History
that I found out the name in that Reign, but by reading the Records of the
Foundation of the Church of St. Martin des Champs, or of St. Martins in the
Fields, in Paris, dated in the year 1067. Signed by his Majesty and other
Lords, and afterward by Guy and Anselm, Marshals of France, without the
addition of any other Sur-names.

This Charter which cannot be charged with Forgery, induces me to believe, that
there were always some of that name and Dignity, ever since their first
Creation, which agrees with the opinion of M. Du Tillet; but because it is more
commonly believed, that they were always the Lieutenants of the Constables, I
shall not absolutely contradict it, and because the Office of Constable was
then but the fourth Dignity in the Kingdom, and that their Command extended but
over a part of the Kings Cavalry, I cannot be persuaded that the Marshals of
France have always been Generals of Armies: The Office of Constable became the
first Dignity of France, by the Valor of Matthew of Montmorency, who in the
time of Philip Augustus, gained the Battle of Bovines, against the joint Forces
of the Emperor Otho, and the King of England, who were then Armed and Leagued
together against that Great Prince: And then it was, that the Dignity of
Marshal of France raised it self to that Luster which it keeps to this day; for
whereas they were before but Lieutenants of the Constable in the Kings Stables
only, they from that time his Lieutenants also in the Command of the Armies,
and since the suppression of that Dignity, exercise the whole remainder of the
Authority annexed to it, which is conferred upon them, by putting a Staff of
Command into their hands.

The Marshals of France bear, as a mark of their Dignity, two Azure Staves, set
with Flower-deluces of gold, passed Salteir-wise, behind their Coats of Arms.

Their Offices depend wholly of the Crown, and they are Sworn for them by the
King himself: They are commonly given as recompenses to Eminent Commanders, for
some great Military Exploits, and are not Hereditary: They cannot be deprived
of the Title of their Dignities, but with the loss of their Lives, only they
may be suspended from the Exercise of their Office. They are not obliged to
take any Oath in Parliament no more than was the Constable.

The Provosts of the Marshals, or Provost Marshals, are Royal Judges,
established in every Province under the Authority and dependence of the
Marshals of France.

They have Jurisdiction over all Vagabonds and people that are no
Housekeepers; and in many Cases, over them that are Housekeepers too, if they
commit any Robberies on the Highway, if they be Incendiaries, Coiners of false
money, or be guilty of wilful Murder, and other Crimes.

The Marshals of France were at first but two in number, but since that, the
necessity of Affairs has given occasion sometimes to the doubling of that
number. There were four under Charles the Seventh, who were afterward reduced
to the old number: Francis the First, finding himself obliged to maintain three
or four Armies, to oppose the great Enemies, which he had always to deal with,
revived again the number of four, and soon after added a fifth, who was Francis
of Montmorency, Son of the Constable of that Name, by way of recompense to his
Father, for the Office of Great Master of France, which he had resigned by his
Orders to the Duke of Guise, but with this condition, that this fifth place
should be suppressed upon the Death of the First of the five that should die: The
Duke of Mayenne made three during the time he was head of the League; and Henry
the Great, when by the acknowledgment of his Subjects he came to be peaceable
Possessour of the Kingdom, Created two of those three Marshals of France, viz.
Urban de Laval, Sieur de Bois Dauphin, and Claudius de la Chartre: Lewis the
Thirteenth never limited the number of them, and the Present has augmented it
with several new ones: Those of them that are still alive, and that keep the
Court of the Constablery at the Marble Table; are these that follow, according
to the years of their Promotion: Being

The Marshals.
De Crequi, in 1668. De Bellefonds, in 1668. D' Humieres, in 1668. De
Schonberg, in gone now to Portugal. 1675. De Duras, in 1675. De Vivonne, in
1675. De la Feuillade, in 1675. De Luxembourg, in 1675. De Lorge, in 1676. D'
Etrees, in 1681.
Every of these Marshals is styled Monseigneur-Messire, or My Lord Messire, in
the List of them in the Court of the Constablerie, and Marshals of France, in
the Palace at Paris, which Title of Messire implies ancient Nobility, personal
and eminent worth, and something of a Sovereign Command.

The Marshals of France deceased, whose Memory is still fresh, were
The Marshals.
De Guebriant, deceased in 1643. De Bassompiere, in 1646. Two Marshals de
Chatillon, whereof one died in 1646, the other in 1649. De Gassion, in 1647. De
Chaune, in 1649. De Breze, in 1650. De Rantzau, in 1650. De la Force, in 1652.
De Schonberg, in 1656. De la Mothe Houdancourt, in 1657. De Hocquincourt, in
1658. De Castelnau, in 1658. De Foucault, in 1659. De l' Hopital, in 1660. De
Fabert, in 1662. De la Meillerage, in 1664. De Clerambaut, in 1665. D'
Estampes, in 1668. D' Aumont, in 1669. D' Etrees, in 1670. De Schulembergz, in
1671. The Famous de Turenne, in 1675. De Plessis Pralin, in 1675. De Rochefort,
in 1676. D' Albret, in 1676. De la Force the Son, in 1678. De Grammont, in
1678. De Grancy, in 1680. De la Ferte Senneterre, in 1681. De Navailles, in
1684. De Estrades, in February, in 1686.
There are several Widows of Marshals of France, which still enjoy the Honors
of the Louvre, and other Privileges we have mentioned to belong to them.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Colonels-General, Camp-Masters, etc.

AFter the Death of the Duke d' Epernon, which happened on the 23d of July, 1661.
the Office of Colonel-General of the Infantry, was suppressed.

The Colonel-General used to bear behind his Coat of Arms, as a mark of his
Office, four or six Standards of the Kings Colors, which are White, Carnation,
and Blue.

The Colonel-General of the light Horse, is the Count of Auvergne, Marquess of
Bergopzoom, Lieutenant General of the Kings Armies: And the Camp-Master General
is at present the Baron de Monctar, the Lieutenant Colonel, is M. John d'
Estampes, Baron of Bellebrune.

The Colonel-General of the Suissers and Grisons, is the Prince de Maine.

Monsieur de Mazarques, was Colonel-General of the Corsicans, but at present
there are no Corsicans in the service: And the Baron D' Eguenfeld was
Colonel-General of the Foreign Troops, but since his departure, there has been
no other substituted.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Troops of the Kings Household, of the Gensdarmes, of the Light Horse,
and of the other Regiments of Cavalry, and Infantry.

THE first Troops of Cavalry are those of the Kings-Houshold, of the
Life-Guards, Gensdarmes, the Light Horse of the Kings Guard, and the Musketeers
on Horseback, which is called the Kings Household, to which there is lately
joined a Company of Granadeers on Horseback, Commanded by Mr. Riotort: We have
set down before, the four Companies of the Life-Guards, the Company of
Gensd'armes, or Men at Arms, that are of the Kings Guard, of which the King is
Captain, and the Prince de Soubize, Lieutenant-Captain, as likewise, the
Company of Light Horse of the Kings-Guard, and another Company of Gensd'armes,
Commanded by the Duke de Chevreuse, as Captain-Lieutenant, and the two
Companies of Musketeers on Horseback.

We come now to the other Forces.

First there is the little Gend'armerie, or that which is simply called, the
Gend'armerie, without other addition, which comprehends, 1. The Scotch
Gensd'armes. 2. The English Gend'armes. 3. The Burgundian Gend'armes. 4. The
Flemish Gend'armes. 5. The Queens Gend'armes. 6. The Queens Light Horse. 7. The
Dauphins Gend'armes. 8. The Dauphins Light Horse. 9. The Gend'arms of Anjou.
10. The Gend'arms of Orleans. 11. The Light Horse of Orleans. Monsieur de St.
Germain, is Provost of the little Gend'armerie.

The Princes, or eldest Sons of the Kings of Great Britain, having as Princes
of Scotland, a right to the Command of a Cavalry in France, there was a Company
of the Kings Scotch Gensd'armes, Commanded by the Duke of York, as Duke of
Albany, and in his absence, by the Marquess of Livourne, as Captain-Lieutenant:
The Baron of Thauriac, was Sub-Lieutenant, the Ensign the Count d'Onseigne, and
the Guidon, Monsieur Champrond.

2. The English Gensd'armes, which are now most Irish, whose
Captain-Lieutenant, the Count de la Guette, the Sub-Lieutenant, the Chevalier
de Crollis, the Ensign Mr. O Brian, and the Guidon, the Marquess of Beavau.

3. The Burgundian Gend'arms, whose Captain Lieutenant, is the Marquess of
Flamanville.

4. The Company of Flemmish Gensd'arms, Created the 22d of November, 1673. the
Count de Masin, is Captain-Lieutenant, M. Gouffier de Rosamelle, Sub-Lieutenant.

The King is Captain of all the abovesaid Companies, whose Captain-Lieutenants
Command over all the Camp-Masters.

The Queens have also their Companies of Gensd'arms, and Light Horse, and so
has the Dauphin, besides which, there are the Gensd'arms of Anjou, and the
Gensd'arms, and Light Horse of Orleans.

The Marquess of Lanion, Governor of Vannes in Brittany, is Captain-Lieutenant
of the Queens Gensd'arms: Next, are the Light Horse of Burgundy and Flanders.

Note, That the Light Horse Men are so called, because they formerly wore only
Back and Breast-Pieces, to distinguish them from the Gensd'arms, or Men at
Arms, that were completely Armed with Back, Breast, Arms, and Thigh Pieces.

The other Regiments of Light Horse, are likewise Armed in the same manner as
the aforesaid Light Horse.

When they march in Battle Array, five or six Regiments of Cavalry are formed
into a Brigade, under the Command of an old Camp-Master, who is then called a
Brigadeer.

There is a Brigadeer General of the Cavalry.

Every Regiment of Cavalry contains nine Companies more or less, and in every
Company, there is a Captain, a Lieutenant, and a Cornet.

The Regiments of Light Horse are called by the Names of their Camp-Masters.

There is a Commissary-General of the Cavalry, who is the Count of Montrevel.

There are thirteen Regiments of Dragoons; the Marquess of Boufflers,
Lieutenant General of the Kings Armies, is Colonel-General of the Dragoons; the
Count de Tesse is Camp-Master General; the other Colonels of the Dragoons, are
Monsieur de Tilladet, M. de Roncherolles, M. de Longueval, M. de Barbezieres;
the Marquess de la Breteche, Governor of Hombourg, the Chevalier de Tesse, M.
de Chevilly, M. N. And the Major General is M. Bruyset.

As for the Infantry, or Foot, after the two Regiments of Guards, the French
and Suissers, the other Regiments are divided; first into old Bodies, that bear
the Names of the principal Provinces of France, as the Regiments of Picardie,
Champagne, Piemont, Navarre, Normandy, the Sea Regiment: Where Note, that the
Regiment of Picardie has always the Precedence, and those of Piemont, Champagne
and Navarre, have each their year one after another, and after them is the
Norman, or Sea Regiments: Next are the little old Bodies, viz. The Regiments of
Auvergne, Bourbonnois, Sault, Le Roy, Feuquieres, and Vaube-Cour; and after
them the New Regiments. The old Regiments are kept always standing in time of
Peace, only the number of Men is reformed and reduced to thirty or forty in a
Company; but the Officers are retained, that they may be always in readiness to
complete their Companies again to their full number, whenever occasion shall
be. The new Regiments, which almost always bear the names of their several
Camp-Masters, consist commonly of fewer Men then the old ones, and are
oftentimes reformed or disbanded in time of Peace.

Besides these, the King has several Regiments of Foreign Foot, which are
composed of Germans, Scotch, Irish, Italians, Liegeois, and others, and
particularly of Suissers, of which, there are six, or seven thousand in France.

And lastly, There is the Company of Fuzileers of Flanders, consisting of sixty
Men, Commanded by the Chevalier de Montelet.

The Kings Field Regiment consists of sixty seven Companies.

We have already spoken both of the French and Suisse Regiments of Guards, and
of their Officers. We shall now speak of the others.

Colonels of the Infantry.
Of the Regiments of
Picardie, the Marquess d' Harcourt-Beuvron. Champagne, M. le Bailly Colbert.
Navarre, the Duke de Rocheguion. Piemont, the Marquess de Rebe. Normandy, the
Count de Guiscard. Feuquieres, the Marquess of Feuquieres. The Sea Regiment,
the Marquess of Liancourt. Bourbonois, the Marquess de Refuge. Auvergne, the
Marquess de Prele Nicolaii. Sault, the Duke de Lediguieres. Vaube-Court, the
Count of that Name. The Kings, the Chevalier de Montchevreuil. Royal, the
Marquess de Crequi. Poitou, M. de Guenegaud, the Marquess of Biville. Lyonnois,
the Marquess d' Alincourt. Dauphin, the Marquess d' Vxelles. Crussol, the Duke
d' Vzais. Touraine, the Marquess d' Vsson. Anjou, the Marquess d' Hautefort. Le
Maine, the Duke, or Prince of that Name. Dampierre, the Marquess of that Name.
Louvigni, the Duke of Grammont. Grancey, the Marquess of that Name. The Queens,
the Marquess de Crenan, Brigadeer, and Surveyor-General of the Infantry.
Bouligneux, M. de Bouligneux. Royal, of the Fleet, or Vessels, the Marquess de
Gandelu. Orleans, M. de Bailleul. Crown, the Chevalier de Genlis. Brittany, the
Marquess de Novion. Soissons, the Count of that Name, and under him, M.
Salieres. Artois, the Marquess d' Escots. La Chatre, the Marquess of that Name.
Vendome, the Duke of Vendome. La Saare, M. de Braque. La Fere, the Marquess de
la Fayette. Alsace, the Prince Palatin of Birkenfeld. Roussillon, M. de
Chimene. Conde, the Marquess de Neele. Anguyen, M. de Vilandry. Vieubourg, M.
de Vieubourg. Rouergue, the Marquess of Malauze. Burgundy, the Count de
Chamilly. Royal of the Sea, the Marquess de Nangis Brichanteau. Vermandois, the
Marquess de Soyecourt. Kings Fusileers, the Marshal d' Humieres, Great Master
of the Artillery, and under him, M. de Barville, with a Colonels Commission.
Languedoc, the Marquess de Puzingnan. Plessis-Belliere, the Chevalier, or
Knight of that Name. Jarze, the Marquess de Jarze. Clerambaut, the Marquess of
that Name. Castres, the Marquess de Castres, Governor of Montpelier. Le
Royal-Comtois, the Marquess de Bellefonds, Son to the Marshal. Larre, the
Marquess de Larre. Provence, M. de Magny de l' Anglee. Vivonne, the Marshal
Duke of that Name. Famechon, a Walloon Regiment, M. de Famechon. Royal Italian,
M. de Magalotti, Lieutenant General of the Kings Armies, and under him, his
Nephew, M. de Albergoti. Furstembourg, Count Ferdinand of Furstemburg. St.
Laurence, M. St. Laurence. L' Allemand, M. l' Allemand.
The Colonels of the six following Regiments, being all Suissers, give names to
their several Regiments as follows.
Herlac. Salis. Phipfer. Stoupp. Greder. Stoupp, the Younger.
Coningsmark, a German Regiment, Count Charles John of Coningsmark.

Guien, M. de Blanzac, Son to the Count de Roye.

Lorrain, the Marquess d' Hoquincourt.

In February, in the year 1684. the King raised three Regiments of Infantry
more, being those of Toulouze, under the Count de Toulouze, Great, or High
Admiral of France.

There were seven Regiments more Created the 30th of August, 1684.

Flanders, the Marquess of Folleville. Berry, the Marquess de Goezbriant.
Bearn, M. de Monchevrueil, Count of Mornay. Hainaut, M. de Pompone. Boulonois,
the Marquess de Vibrage. Angoumois, M de Prouy. Perigord, the Count de
Chamarande.
The Regiment of Bombardeers, Created the 31th of August, 1684. Whose Colonel
is the Great Master of the Artillery, and the Lieutenant Colonel, M. de Vigny,
with a Colonels Commission.

The six following Regiments were Created the 4th of September, 1684. viz.
those of
Saintonge, the Marquess de Bligny. Bigore, the Chevalier Pelot. Forets, the
Count de Chemerault de Barbezieres. Cambresis, the Marquess de Chateaurenaud in
Tourain. Tournesis, the Marquess de Brouilly de Pienne. Foix, the Marquess de
Blainville, Great Master of the Ceremonies.
The fourteen following Regiments were Created the 5th of September, 1684. viz.
those of
Bresse, the Count de Kercado. La March, the Marquess of By on. Quercy, the
Count d' Amanze. Brie, the Marquess de Charrots. Nivernois, the Count de Lusse,
of the Family of Montmorency. Soissonnoi^s, the Duke de Valentinois. N...... de
Grimaldi. Isle of France, the Marquess d' Antin. Vexin, the Chevalier d'
Hautefort de Montignac. Aunis, the Marquess de Polignac. Dauphine, or
Dauphinate, the Chevalier de Kercado. Vivarais, M de St. Pater. Luxemburg, M.
de Brancas. Bassigny, the Count de Mailly. Duke of Villars. Beaujolois, Created
the 17th of June, 1685. M. de Berulle. Beausse, M. de Pompadour, Marquess de
Lauriere. Ponthieu, Created in the Month of September, 1685. M. de Lomont.
So that in all, counting the two Regiments of Guards beforementioned, there
are 102 Regiments of Infantry, or Foot.

A List of the Camp-Masters of the Cavalry.
There are forty Regiments of Cavalry, whereof twelve consists of twelve
Companies apiece, and the rest but of eight. Those that consist of twelve, are
the Colonels Generals, those of the Camp-Master and Commissary-General, the
Kings seven Regiments, and those of Tilladet and Coningsmark. The Regiments of
Cavalry take place according to the Eldership of the date of the Commissions of
their Camp-Masters, excepting the three general ones, and those that go under
the name of his Majesty, or of some of the Princes of the Blood.

The Camp-Masters of the Cavalry.
1. In the Colonels Regiment, the Count d' Auvergne, Colonel-General of the
Cavalry, and under him the Marquess de Musse. 2. In the Commissary-Generals
Regiment, the Marquess of Montrevel, Commissary-General of the Cavalry. 3. In
the Camp-Master Generals Regiment, the Baron de Monclar, Camp-Master General of
the Light Horse. 4 In the Royal Regiment, the Count de Bourg, Lieutenant
Camp-Master. 5. In the Kings Regiment, the Marquess de Beaufort. 6. In the
Royal Foreign Regiment, the Count de Coligny. 7. In the Regiment of the Kings
Cuirassiers, the Marquess de Mongon. 8. In the Royal Regiment of Cravots, or
Croats, the Count de Roucy. 9. In the Royal Piemont Regiment, the Marquess de
Rivarolles. 10. In the Royal Regiment of Rousillon, the Count de Montfort. 11.
In the Queens Regiment, the Count de Rousillon. 12. In the Dauphins Regiment,
the Marquess de St. Gelais. 13. In the Dauphins Foreign Regiment, the Chevalier
de la Vrilliere. 14. In the Duke of Burgundies Regiment, the Marquess de
Houdetot. 15. In the Orleans Regiment, the Marquess de Vatteville. 16. In the
Regiment of Conde, the Marquess de Toiras. 17. In the Regiment of Anguien,
Monsieur de Saintrailles. 18. In the Regiment of Tilladet, the Marquess de
Tilladet. 19. In the Regiment of Villeroy, the Duke of that Name. 20. In the
Regiment of Grignan, the Chevalier de Grignan. 21. In the Regiment of St.
Aignan, the Duke de Beauvilliers, Chief of the Council-Royal of the Finances,
or Revenues. 22. In the Coningsmark Regiment, Count Otho William of
Coningsmark, Marshal of Suedeland, etc. and under him M. la Mote-Paillas.
In the other Regiments there are several Camp-Masters incorporated, whose
Companies are reformed, or reduced into one.

Colonels of the Dragoons.
The Colonel-General, the Marquess de Boufflers. The Camp-Master General, the
Count de Tesse. The Regiment of the Colonel-General, is Commanded by the Count
de St. Florentin. The Regiment Royal, by the Marquess d' Alegre. The Queens
Regiment, by the Marquess de Murce. The Dauphins Regiment, by the Count de
Longueval.
The following Regiments, viz. those
Of Gramont of the County of Burgundy, by the Count de Gramont. Of Barbezieres,
by the Marquess de Barbesieres. Of Peissonel, by M. de Peissonel. Of Land, by
M. de la Land. Of Chevilly, by M. de Chevilly. Of Tesse, by the Chevalier de
Tesse. Of Asfeld, by the Baron d' Asfeld, Brigadeer of the Dragoons. De
Fimarcon, by the Marquess of that Name.
The aforementioned Regiments of Foot consist some of more, and some of fewer
Bataillons, and every Bataillon is composed of fifteen Companies, and of one
Company of Granadeers, except only the two Regiments of Guards, French and
Suissers, and the six other Suisse Regiments.

As to the Order observed in the Command of the Armies of France, they are
always Commanded by one General in Chief, who has under him two
Lieutenant-Generals, who Command by turns every other day, and under them there
are two Camp, or Field-Marshals, that change in the same manner, beginning with
the Elder of the two. When the King Commands his Armies in Person, he has
always two, or four Marshals of France under him: And when any Prince of the
Blood Commands them, he has commonly two Marshals of France under him.

Every General has four Adjutants, or Aids de Camp, to carry about his Orders,
which are commonly young Noblemen, or sometimes old Officers.

A Lieutenant General has at least two Aids de Camp, and the Marshals de Camp,
or Field-Marshals, have each of them one: Formerly there were Battle-Marshals
in every Army, but at present there are none, only Mr. de Fougerais is one, as
being such by Title of a standing Office, though without acting as such: Next
are the Brigadeers, who are chosen from among the Camp-Masters of oldest
standing, to Command Brigades composed of five or six Regiments of Horse, Foot,
and Dragoons: Next them are the Camp-Masters that Command over the several
Regiments of Horse, and the Colonels in the Foot-Regiments, and then the
Lieutenant-Colonels, a Major, and the Aid, or Adjutant-Majors, in the
Foot-Regiments, but in the Cavalry, the Major is the second Person; Next are
the Captains of every Company, and in Companies of Light Horse; under every
Captain there is a Lieutenant and a Corner, but in Companies of Gensd'arms, or
of Foot, there are Lieutenants, and after them Ensigns instead of Cornets.

As for the Quarter Masters, or Marshals of the Lodgings of the Armies; There
is one Quartermaster General of the Cavalry, who is M. de St. Martin, who
enjoys it by Title of a standing Office, who has under him several Adjutants,
and Fouriers, or Under-Quarter-Masters: In the Body of the Infantry of every
Army, there is a Major General of the Brigades, from whom the Majors of every
Brigade receive their Orders; Then there is a Quartermaster for every
Regiment, who having known from his Superiors the Quarters allotted to his
Regiment, divides and shares them out among the several Companies, and Orders
the Quarter Masters of each Company to lodge the Captains, Officers, and
Soldiers accordingly.

The four Quarter Masters General at present of the Kings Camps and Armies are,
M. Fougueux, M. de l' Anglee, M. Bole, and M. du Verger: when they are in the
Armies, they have every one two Harbingers, or Quarter Masters under them, who
are paid by the King.

There is likewise one standing Fourier, or Harbinger of the Kings Camps and
Armies, who is the Sieur de Couty. Now, because there often have happened
differences and contests among the Officers of Horse, and those of Foot
concerning place, and precedence of Command. It is ordered, that when they are
both Encamped on a Plain, the Officers of Horse shall have the Command, but
when they are Posted in any Enclosure, Retrenchment, or Barricado, in any
place, then the Foot-Officers shall have the chief Command.

Note, That in former time, when the French King went to Fight, they marched
under the white Cornet of France, Accompanied with several Lords Volunteers:
But now it is no more in use. This white Cornet was different from the Colonels
Cornet of the Cavalry, which is also white.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Great Master of the Artillery.

THE Present Great Master of the Artillery of France, is Lewis de Crevant de
Humieres, Marshal of France, who is styled, Great Master of the Artillery of
France, and Super-Intendant General of the Powder and Saltpeter; he is
likewise Governor and Lieutenant General of Flanders, and of the other
Conquests made in the Low Countries since the Pyrenean Treaty; He took the
usual Oath for this Office in September, 1685.

The Great Master of the Artillery, bears for a mark of his Office, under his
Coat of Arms, two Canons, or Culverins, mounted on their Carriages.

Before the Invention of Canon, there was a Great Master of the Cross-bows, and
Battery-Men, called Cranqueneers, who had the Super-intendance over all the
Officers and Machines for Battery: The Cranquins were certain Engines then in
use for Battering the Walls and Gates of Towns, not unlike those we read of in
the stories of all Nations of those and elder times. It is the common opinion,
that this Office has been ever since the time of St. Lewis, and in 1411, under
Charles the Sixth, the Sieur de Hangest was Great Master of the Crossbow-Men;
in lieu of which afterward was substituted a Captain General of the Powder of
the Artillery; which Title was used till the time of Henry the Great, who in
the year 1610. Erected it into an Office of the Crown, under the Title of
Great-Master, in favor of Maximilian de Bethune, Duke of Suilly, his Favorite.

At present in every Army of France, there is a Lieutenant of the Artillery,
that has Command over all the Equipage of the Artillery, and takes care of its
conducting, who depends of the Great Master.

The Great Master has the super-intendance over all the Officers of the
Artillery, as Canoneers, Pioneers, Wheel-wrights, Rope-Makers, and other small
Officers, of which he keeps a Muster-Roll in all the Kings Armies, in every one
of which, he has his Lieutenants, although in Cases belonging to their Offices,
the Marshals of France have likewise a Command over the said Officers: It is
the Great Master of the Artillery that gives Order for making all works in the
Armies, as well at Sieges of Towns, and in their Marches, and he has power over
all the Arsenals of France: He has also the charge of most of the Tents and
Pavilions of the Army, and has the Seat of his Jurisdiction in the Arsenal at
Paris.

The Great Master of the Artillery is always Colonel of the Kings Fusileers.

All cast Metal found in Conquered Towns, or rebellious places, at their
taking, belongs to the Great Master of the Artillery, as his Fee, who sometimes
commands the very Bells to be taken down from the Steeples.

There are Lieutenant-Generals of the Artillery in the several Provinces, and
in every Army, the principal at present, are the Marquess de la Frezeliere, M.
de Vigny, Lieutenant Colonel of the Fusileers, and Bombardeers, and M. de Mets,
Lieutenant General of the Artillery of Flanders.

There is likewise, a Comptroller General of the Artillery, M. Camus de Clos,
Intendant of Catalonia; a Treasurer-General, M. Stephen Landais; a
Guard-General, M. Michael Pelletier; a Commissary General of the Powder, M.....
a Secretary-General, M. Joachim Fautrier; another Secretary, M. Lewis Rousseau;
and lastly, one Bailiff of the Artillery, and of the Arsenal, M. Noel Eustace
Pean de Chesnay.

And because the King of France has his Wars by Sea, as well as by Land, having
treated of the Constable and the Marshals of France, who have succeeded in his
Authority, who are the chief Commanders of his Armies by Land, we shall now
proceed to speak of the Admiral, who has the chief Command over the Naval
Forces, and all Maritime-Affairs.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Admiral, and of the Maritime Forces.

THE present Admiral of France is the Count of Toulouze, Lewis-Alexander of
Bourbon, Legitimated of France, who is styled Admiral, or Great Master of the
Seas, and chief and super-intendant of the Commerce and Navigation of France,
being Constituted so in the Month of November, 1683.

The Great Admiral bears, for a mark of his Charge, two Anchors passed
Salteir-Wise, behind his Coat of Arms.

The Admiral is one of the Officers of the Crown, and Commands in the Wars at
Sea with the same Authority as did the Constable formerly, and at present the
Marshals of France, in those by Land; The Power of this Office is very Great,
and was much augmented by King Henry the Third, in favor of the Duke de
Joyeuse, one of his Favorites, that was then Admiral.

The Admiral grants out Commissions to Privateers to Arm and put out to Sea
against the Enemies of the State, and has Power to make Truce with them upon
the Sea, for three Weeks, of his own private Authority; without his leave no
Vessels can enter into any Port; he has the tenths of all the spoils taken at
Sea: He is Judge in all Maritime Causes, and the Appeals from his Sentences are
brought to the Parliament of Paris; but he has no Place there by virtue of his
Office. His Chief Court is kept at the Marble Table in the Palace at Paris,
whither Appeals are brought from the Judges of his inferior Courts; and he has
his Officers, that take cognizance of all Delinquencies and Differences that
arise, as well about Contracts and Agreements, made either for Warlike Affairs,
or for Merchandise, Fishing, and all other things whatever, whether Civil or
Criminal, putting in under him what Lieutenant he pleases, he gives safe
Conducts and Pass-Ports by Sea, and Licenses for Herring-Fishing and other
Fishing, and causes Watch and Ward to be kept on the Seacoasts, when there is
occasion, by those who are subject to that Duty; and appoints Men of War to
guard the Fisher-Boats in time of Herring-Fishing.

The Name of Admiral was borrowed from the Arabians, who came by Sea, pouring
in like an Inundation, on the Christians in Europe, and after having roved over
all the Seas of this Quarter of the World, Conquered Spain, and from thence
made descents into France, by the Coasts of Guienne and Poitou; during the
space of such long Wars, the French had frequent Communication with them, and
he that Commanded in Chief over all the other Commanders of that so potent and
formidable Naval Army, being commonly called in the Arabian Tongue, Amiral
Musulmin, that is to say, Prince of the True Believers, (for so those Infidels
affect to call themselves) the French, who retained only the first Syllables of
that Name, took occasion out of the corruption of it to form the name of
Amiral, i. e. Admiral, which is the Title they have ever since applied to their
chief Commanders, or Generals at Sea.

All Ships of War are to bear their Admirals Colors, and the Admirals own Ship
bears a square White Flag, upon her Mainmast, and a Lanthorn in his Poop.

He has a Sovereign Command over the Seas of France, especially over all that
part of the Ocean, and of the Mediterranean, near the Coasts of France, and
over all the Ships of War, and Naval Forces.

The first Admiral that we read of was one Lehery, or according to some, one
Rotland, under Charles the Great, called by Eginard, Praefectus Maris. This
Office was formerly held only by Commission, and the first that possessed it by
Patent, as a standing Office, was Enguerrand, Sire, or Lord of Coucy, under
Philip the Hardy, in 1273. though according to some others, it was not made a
standing Office, till the year 1369, under Charles the Fifth, and the first
Admiral, according to that account, was Amaury Vicount of Narbon.

There were several Admirals belonging to France, whilst the Kings of France
remained unpossest of many of the Maritime Provinces, for there were the
Admirals of Normandy, Brittany, Guienne, and Provence: the Admiral of Normandy,
who was since the Reunion, called the Admiral of France, Commanded from
Callis, to St. Michaels Mount; He of Brittany from St. Michaels Mount to Raz;
He of Guienne, from Raz to Bayonne; and he of Provence, from Perpignan, to the
River of Genua: About this Admiralty of Provence there arose a great contest in
the last Kings time, between the Duke of Guise, who pretended to that
Admiralty, and the Cardinal of Richelieu, who put an end to the Dispute, by
prevailing with the King, totally to suppress the Office of Admiralty, and to
Erect instead of it another, under the Title of Great Master, Chief, and
Super-Intendant General of the Navigation and Commerce of France, which he did
by a Declaration in the Month of January, 1627. The said Cardinal gave it
afterward by his Will and Testament to the Son of the Marshal de Breze, Duke of
Fronsac, who when he took the accustomed Oath for it in Parliament, in the year
1648. reassumed the Title of Admiral, but he being killed at the Siege of
Orbitello, this Office was exercised in the Name of the Queen Regent, under the
Title of Great Master of the Navigation of France; but since that, the Title of
Admiral has been reannexed to those other newer ones.

The Admiral of France, as having Command over two Seas, viz. the Ocean, and
the Mediterranean, bears as a mark of his Dignity, two golden Anchors passed
Salteir-wise behind his Coat of Arms, hanging upon, and fastened to two Cables;
the Vice Admiral likewise bears the same. The Great Admiral has 30000 l. yearly
appointment, raised out of the duties of Anchorage, and other Revenues.

Next to the Admiral, there is likewise a Vice Admiral of France, who is at
present the Marshal d' Etrees, and his Son in Reversion.

There are three Lieutenant-Generals of the Naval Forces, viz. 1. Abraham du
Queen, Marquess du Bouchet Valgrand, under the name of Du Queen. 2. The
Marquess de Preuilly d' Humieres. 3. The Chevalier de Tourville.

And seven Chiefs, or Commanders of Squadrons, viz. 1. Monsieur Gabaret. 2. The
Count de Chateaurenaud, Great Prior of Brittany, of the Order of St. Lizarus.
3. The Marquess d' Amfreville. 4. The Chevalier de Sourdis. 5. The Chevalier de
Bethune. 6. M. Villette de Murce. 7. M. Forant, who was lately the eldest among
the Captains of single Vessels.

Besides the Marquess de Seignelay, who as one of the four Principal
Secretaries of State, has the Maritime Affairs under his department; there are
two Intendant Generals of the Marine Affairs; under whom, there are two
Intendants of the Levant, or East, who are M. Brodard for the Galliet, residing
at Marseilles, and M. Girardin Sieur de Vauvray, residing at Toulon; likewise
four Intendants for the Western Sea, or Ocean, viz. 1. M. Arnoux de Muin,
residing at Rochefort, Rochelle, and Brouage. 2. M. de Champy Desclouzonne,
residing at Breast in Brittany. 3. M. Patouillet, at Dunkirk, and 4. M. de
Fargis Montmor, at Havre de Grace.

The Secretary General of the Admiralty, or Maritime Affairs, is M. de la
Grange. The Treasurers General of the Admiralty, are 1. M. Lubert for the Men
of War, and 2. M. de Bellinzani, for the Galleys.

There are likewise Comptrollers of the Admiralty.

The Admiral has, upon any Vacancies happening, by Death or otherwise, the
nomination of all Judges, Lieutenants general or particular, Counselors,
Receivers, Advocates, Proctors, Registrers or Recorders, Sergeants, and other
Officers of the Admiralty, both at the Supreme Court of Admiralty held at the
Marble Table, and at the particular ones held in Picardy, Normandy, and
Brittany.

The King has at present, 150 Ships of War, and 30 Galleys, besides tenders,
etc. The Royal Docks for Building Ships in France, are only at Breast,
Rochefort, and Toulon.

For the better furnishing the Royal Fleet with Almoners, or Chaplains, the
King has established a Community, or Seminary of Priests, in the Burrow of
Folgoet in Brittany.

CHAP. XX.
Of the General of the Galleys.

THE Kingdom of France being washed with two Seas, viz. on one side with the
Great Ocean, and on the other, toward the South, with the Mediterranean; upon
this last are kept the Galleys, as a more proper Shipping for that Sea, whose
Port and Harbor is Marseilles, over which, there is a Chief, called the
General of the Galleys.

The General of the Galleys is sometimes called the Admiral of the Levant, or
East, as says the Sieur de la Popeliniere, who has composed a Book particularly
of the Admiral of France.

The present General of the Galleys, is Lewis Victor de Rochechouard de
Mortemar, Duke de Vivonne, Marshal of France, Governor of Champain, and late
Viceroy in Sicily, during the Revolutions of Messina: He is as such, styled
General of the Galleys, and Lieutenant General in the Seas, and Naval Armies of
the Levant, he was sworn General of the Galleys in the Month of December, 1669.
His Son the Duke of Mortemar, Married a Daughter of the late M. Colbert,
Minister of State, has the Reversion of his Fathers Place, and in the year,
1681. Commanded alone himself the Galleys of France.

Charles the Ninth, by an Order of the 6th of April, 1562. Verified the 8th of
June, 1563. Declared Messire Rene of Lorrain, General of the Galleys, as well
in the Levant, as in the Western Seas, making him Chief General of all his
Galleys, Galiots, Fregats, Fusts and Brigantins; and giving him Command over
all Vessels and Ships, whether long or round, and authorizing him to cause due
obedience to be given him by all manner of ways, and in all places, where it
should concern the Duty of his Office.

The Lieutenant General of the Galleys, is the Chevalier de Noailles, Knight of
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, etc.

Thus having treated of the Military Officers, we come now to the Officers of
Justice, in the Kings Councels, which are likewise Officers General of the
whole Kingdom.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Kings Councels, and Ministers of State.

Of the Chancellor of France.
THE Chancellor is the Head-Officer of Justice, and of the Kings Councels, and
into his hands he has wholly deposited it, that he may distribute and dispense
it impartially to all his Subjects, with the same Power and Authority as he
might do himself in Person: for this reason the Seals of France are committed
to his Custody, which he makes use of in the Administration of Justice, and in
conferring of Gifts, Graces and Offices, as he thinks most reasonable for the
good of the State. He presides in the Kings Councels. It Is he that on all
occasions declares the Kings Pleasure; and when his Majesty goes to Parliament,
to sit on his Bed or Throne of Judgment, he sits before his Majesty on his left
hand. He wears a Robe of red Velvet lined with Scarlet Satin; and at public
Ceremonies, a Cap fashioned like a Mortar, covered with gold, and adorned with
Pearls and precious Stones: Before him march the Ushers of the Chancellery,
carrying on their Shoulders Maces of guilt Silver, and the rest of the Ushers
after them.

The present Chancellor is M. Lewis de Boucherat, Knight, Lord of Compans, and
other places, who after having Officiated the Places of Corrector of the
Accounts, of Counselor in the Parliament, and Commissary in the Requests of
the Palace Master of Requests, Intendant of Justice, or Lord Chief Justice in
Languedoc, Honorary Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, and both
Counselor of State, and Counselor in the Council Royal several years, and
rendered very considerable Services to the State, and so acquired the universal
approbation of all people by his indefatigable Industry, and his great Capacity
and Zeal for the service of his Majesty, and of the public, was at length,
upon all these Considerations named to the Chancellorship, by his Majesty, on
the Feast of All Saints, in the year 1685. who was pleased to Seal his Patents,
deliver him the Seals, and swear him into the said high and important Office
the 3d of November following.

The Chancellor of France bears, as a mark of his Dignity, a Mortar-fashioned
Cap of Cloth of gold set with Ermines, upon the Crest of his Arms, out of
which, with the Figure of a Queen coming out of it, representing the Kingdom of
France, holding in her right hand, a Scepter, and in her left the Great Seals
of the Kingdom: and behind his Coat of Arms, two great Vermilion gilt silver
Maces, passed Salteir-wise, with a Scarlet Mantle set with rays of gold toward
the top, and furred with Ermines.

This Office was instituted, as some say, by Clotair the First, and the first
Chancellor was Bodin in the year 562. He was anciently called the Great
Referendary and Keeper of the Royal Ring and Seal.

When a Keeper of the Great Seal is made at any time, he has the same Authority
given him as a Chancellor, only with this difference, that a Chancellor is
not deposable, but by arraigning him at the Bar, and taking away his Life,
whereas the Keeper of the Seals is an Officer changeable at the Kings Pleasure.

The Original of the word Chancellor comes from this: All Letters Patents and
Charters formerly passing through his hands, when they were not well drawn up,
or that any thing were found in them not conformable to Law and Custom, he used
to cross them out, by drawing certain strokes and bars cross them,
Lattice-wise, which in Latin are called Cancelli, from whence comes the word
Cancellare, and the English word at this day used to signify making void any
Writings, viz. to Cancel, and from thence, the word, Chancellor: Sometimes he
is called for distinctions sake, Summus Cancellarius, i. e. High Chancellor,
because there were and are several other Chancellours.

We shall speak of the other Officers of the Chancery, when we have described
the Kings Councils.

CHAP. XXII.
A general State and account of the Kings Councils, and of the persons that
compose them.

THE Affairs happening daily, being different and various, different Councils
have been provided to debate and resolve them in; as the Council of War, the
Council of Dispatches, the Council of State, and of the Finances, or Revenues.

Of the Council of War.
The Great Council of War sits commonly in the Kings Chamber, where he himself,
unless some great indisposition hinder him, is present, with such Princes of
the Blood, Marshals of France, and Great Lords, as he thinks fit, for their
experience in Military Affairs, to assist thereat.

Of the Council of Dispatches, and the Secretaries of State.
This Council is kept in the Kings Chamber, in his Majesty's Presence, and at
it are usually present, the Dauphin, Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, the Lord
Chancellor, the four principal Secretaries of State, and those that have the
grant of the reversion of their Offices. The matters there treated of, are the
affairs of the Provinces, and all other things, both Foreign and Domestic, of
which the Secretaries of State then present, make their Reports, who likewise
are to keep Memorials of all the resolutions taken there; and are afterward to
see them duly dispatched, according to their several Departments, or Provinces.

There are four Principal Secretaries of State, and of the Commandments of his
Majesty, who divide among them all the affairs of the Kingdom, and have every
one their several Functions and business, according to their respective
departments.

These four Secretaries at present are

1. Michael-Francis le Tellier, Son to the late Chancellor of France, Marquess
of Louvois: He is likewise Knight Commander, and Chancellor of the Kings
Orders of Knighthood, Great Vicar General of the Order of Notre-Dame of Mount
Carmel, and of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem, Postmaster General, and
Super-intendant, and Orderer General of the Royal Buildings, and Protector of
the Royal Academy of Painting, and Sculpture.

2. John-Baptist Colbert Knight, Marquess of Seignelay, etc. Son of the late
great Minister of State of that Name. He is likewise President, perpetual
Chief, and Director-General of the Company of the Commerce of the East Indies,
and Great Treasurer of the Kings Orders of Knighthood.

3. Peter-Baltasar Phylippeaux de la Vrilliere, Marquess of Chateau-neuf upon
the Loire.

4. Charles Colbert Knight, and Marquess of Croissy, who is likewise Secretary
of the Kings Orders and Finances, President a Mortier, or President, wearing
the Mortar Fashioned Cap in the Parliament of Paris, formerly Ambassador in
England, and since Plenipotentiary at the Treaty of Nimmeguen, and in Bavaria
for the Marriage of the Dauphin.

Their Departments are as follows.

The Departments of the aforesaid four Principal Secretaries of State, are thus
laid out.
1. Mr. Louvois has for his Department,

The three Months of February, June, and October, and the affairs of

Poitou, la March, Catalonia and Rousillon, Pignerol, Lorain, and the three
Bishoprics, Alsatia, the places yielded, or Conquered in Flanders, Artois and
Hainaut, the Fortifications of the Places Conquered or recovered: all affairs
relating to War, the Tax called the Taillon, the Artillery, the Fortifications
of the said Generalities, the Buildings and Royal Houses, and the Arts and
Manufactures of France.

In this Department are the Parliament of Mets, the Sovereign Councils of
Perpignan, Pignerol, Tournay, Alsatia, and the Provincial Council of Artois.

2. M. Seignelays Department comprises,

The Months of January, May and September, and the affairs of

Paris, and the Isle of France, and Soissonnois, as far as Noyon, the Countries
of Orleans and Blois, the Fortifications of all Maritime Places, and other
Places within the Kingdom, the Kings Household, the Clergy, the Admiralty and
Sea-Affairs, Commerce both within and without the Kingdom, Manufactures out of
the Kingdom, the Galleys, the East and West India Companies, and the Company of
Senegal, and other Countries within the Limits of their Patents, the Breeding
Horses and Pensions.

In this Department there is only the Parliament of Paris.

3. Monsieur de Chateau-neufs Department comprises,

The Months of April, August, and December, and the affairs of

Languedoc both higher and lower, and the County of Foix, High and Low Guienne,
as far as Fontarabie, Perigort, Rouerge, and Quercy; Brouage, the Country of
Aunix, the Town and Government of Rochelle, Re and Oleron; Tourain, Anjou,
Maine, Perch, and the County of Laval, Bourbonnois, Nivernois, High and Low
Auvergne, Picardie and the Country of Boulogne, Normandy, Rouen, Caen and
Alencon; Burgundy, Bresse, Bugey, Valtomey and Gex; and in general, all Affairs
relating to the Reformed Religion.

In this Department are the Parliaments of Toulouze, Bourdeaux, Rouen, Dijon,
and Besancon.

4. Monsieur Colbert de Croissy's Department contains,

The Months of March, July, and November, and the affairs of

Champagne and Brie, Provence, Brittany, Berry, Limousin, Angoumois, Xaintonge,
Lyonnois, and Dauphine, Navarre, Bearn, Bigorre, the Principality of Sedan,
Foreign Countries, and Pensions.

In this Department, are the Parliaments of Aix, Grenoble, Rennes, and Pau.

The Months set down under the name of each Secretary of State, are those in
which their turn is to dispatch all Letters, or Patents, for all the
Liberalities, Gifts, and Benefices granted by the King in those Months.

The Parliaments contained within each Department are set down likewise under
them, to show, that the Dispatches the King sends to any of the said
Parliaments, must all pass through the hands of that Secretary of State, in
whose Department they are; and that the Deputies sent by the said Parliaments,
or States of the Provinces therein specified to the King, are Conducted to
their Audiences, by the Secretaries of State, to whose Department they belong.

In the time of Henry the second, for the speedier Expedition of the many
Affairs of State then depending, there were six Secretaries of State chosen,
with this Proviso, that the two first Vacancies among should not be filled up:
In that manner were the Secretaries of State established, and reduced to the
number of four, as they continue to this day.

Rules made by the King at Fountainbleau, for the Establishment of a
Council-Royal, for his Finances, or Revenues. With an account of the persons it
consists of, and the Order kept and observed in it.
The King having, after it had pleased God to give Peace to his People,
seriously considered the ill condition of the Revenues of his Kingdom, and the
Causes from whence it proceeded, His Majesty being willing to prevent the same
inconvenience for the future, resolved upon the present Regulation, and
Declaration of his will and pleasure therein.

First, His Majesty has suppressed for ever the Commission of Super-intendant of
his Finances, or Revenues, with all the Functions annexed to it.

And his Majesty well knowing, he could no way give greater marks of his love
to his People, than by taking to himself the care and administration of his
Revenues, for the more effectual retrenching of all the abuses crept thereinto,
and practiced till now; His said Majesty has resolved to call to his assistance
a Council, composed of Persons of known Ability and Honesty, by whose advice he
will act in the said Administration, and Execute all those Affairs which were
used to be formerly resolved on and put in Execution by the Super-intendant
alone.

The said Council shall be called the Council-Royal of the Finances, or
Revenues, and shall be composed of one Chief, under the Authority, and in the
Presence of his Majesty, (when the Chancellor shall not be present in the said
Council) and of three Counselors, whereof one shall be Intendant of the
Finances, His Majesty reserving to himself, the power to call in the
Chancellor when he shall think fit; at which times he shall take Place and
Precedence there, according to his Dignity, as Chief of all the Kings Councils.

His Majesty reserves to himself the Sealing and Passing of all Orders,
touching the Expenses accountable, and the Moneys employed, as well for private
Expenses, or Bills remitted any where, and Interest, and all other Expenses
whatever.

The Books and Accounts of the Disbursement of his Revenues, as well those
arising from the general Receipts, as from the Farms, Woods, Crown Lands, and
all other Moneys of what nature soever, shall be returned by the Intendant of
the Finances, under whose Department they shall be, with his Advices and
Reasons concerning the Changes fit to be made therein, into the hands of the
said Council-Royal, who are to make report thereof to his Majesty, and receive
his Orders thereupon, after which the said Accounts shall be passed and signed
by the said Intendant, and returned into the hands of him that made the Report,
in Order to be Signed by his Majesty, and by the Honorable Persons of the said
Council, in such Place and Order as his Majesty shall appoint.

The Intendant of the Finances, that shall have the Honor to be of the said
Council-Royal, shall have the Exchequer, or Treasure-Royal, under his
Department, and consequently shall keep the Register of the whole, that shall
be received, or disbursed, which he shall Communicate to no Person whatever,
without express Order from his said Majesty.

All Orders shall be returned into his hands, to be reported to his Majesty,
and shall be Registered, and Paraphed, or marked on the sides by him, and
afterward passed by the Treasurers of the Exchequer, whose turn it shall be to
be in Office that year.

The said Intendant shall take all the Accounts of the Farms, of the general
Receipts, of the Woods, Crown Lands, Extraordinary Affairs, and all other
Receipts of what nature soever, in order to making a Report thereof himself to
the said Council-Royal, that the said Accounts may be ratified and signed
first, by his Majesty, and then by those of the said Council-Royal.

All Demands that shall be made of any new Offices within his Majesty's
Dominions, shall be reported to, and resolved on in the said Council-Royal.

And as to all those Affairs which used to be dedebated and determined in the
Council of Finances, and which were customarily signed by the Lord Chancellor,
his Majesty will hold the said Council on such a day as he shall think fit to
appoint, at which the Lord Chancellor shall be present, in order to the
Examination and Determination of the said Affairs, viz.

The Brevets concerning the Taxes which shall afterward be signed by his
Majesty, and by all those who shall have the honor to be present at the said
Council.

All Ordinances for laying any Impositions on the people, of what nature or
quality soever they be, shall be reported to the said Council, in order to be
passed.

The Printed Papers to be posted up, containing the Conditions of letting out
the Farms, shall be examined and agreed on in the said Council-Royal, and after
that, the Farms shall be published, the offers received, and the said Farms
adjudged to the fairest Bidders, in the Ordinary Council of the Finances.

All Treaties or Bargains for Extraordinary Affairs, All Orders of Loan, and
other Orders of like nature, shall be reported, examined, and agreed on in the
said Council-Royal, and afterward signed and passed in the same form that has
been always hitherto practiced.

The Rolls of the Exchequer, as well as of the Expenses accountable, as of the
ready Money, shall be Examined and stated in the said Council-Royal, at which,
at that time, shall be present the same Persons that used to be present on such
occasions; after which, they shall be signed by his Majesty, and all those that
shall be present thereat.

No Diminution shall be granted upon the Farms, general Receipts, and
extraordinary affairs, of what nature soever they be, unless it be in the
presence of his Majesty in the said Council-Royal.

All which affairs shall be examined and resolved on in the said Council-Royal,
which shall be composed, as is abovesaid, of the Lord Chancellor as Chief, and
of three other Counselors in the said Council.

His Majesty wills, and means, that the President or Chief of the said Council
shall assemble all those that shall have the honor to be of it, once a Week,
together with the other Directors, Comptrollers General, and Intendants of the
Finances, to examine all Affairs relating to the Finances, as was wont to be
practiced in the lesser Directions under the Super-intendants, excepting only
those above reserved to the said Council-Royal; and particularly to examine and
deliberate on all the means imaginable to increase the ordinary Revenues of his
Majesty, to diminish, and if it be possible, wholly to remove all the Causes of
the Diminutions of the Fanners, and the insolvencies that happen in the general
Receipts, and to use all careful endeavors, that the said Impositions may be
collected and brought in within the time prescribed by the Ordinances; that so
those Expenses, whose payment his Majesty shall assign upon the said
Impositions, may be punctually paid and discharged.

All the affairs that shall be examined in the lesser Directions, shall be
afterward reported in the Grand Directions, in order to be therein resolved
on, in the accustomed Form, and that has been hitherto used.

The Councils of the Finances, and Grand Directions shall be held as formerly,
provided however, that none of those matters be treated on there, that are here
above-reserved to the Council-Royal of the Finances.

In all the Councils, the Chief or President of the said Councils shall take
the same place, that the Super-intendants of the Finances were wont to take
there, and as for the other Councillors of State, they shall take place,
according to the order of date of the Brevets, or Patents, by which they are
constituted Councillors of State.

All the Orders, and other Dispatches of the Council of Finances, shall be
signed by the said President, or Chief, and three Councillors belonging to the
said Council-Royal.

His Majesty wills, that at the opening of every Session of his Council-Royal,
Report shall always be made of the accounts of some one of the Farms, of the
general Receipts, in order to the Examination of the impediments the Farmers
meet with, in Collecting the Revenues of their Farms, and of what just and
reasonable means, there may be used to augment them, that so his Majesty may
interpose his Royal Authority for making the best of them.

His Majesty reserves to himself the Power to Change, Augment, or diminish this
present Regulation, as the necessity of his Service shall require.

Given at Fountain bleau, the 15th of September, 1661. Signed Lewis, and Lower
de Guenegaud.

The Persons of which the Council-Royal of Finances is composed at present, are
the Lord Chancellours of France, Chief, or President, M. Pelletier,
Comptroller General of the Finances, who succeeded the late Mr. Colbert, Mr.
Pussort, and Mr. D' Argouges.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Council of State, and of the Masters of Requests.

THE Present King Ordered by the first Article of his Regulation, dated the
first of January, 1673. That the Council of State should be composed, of the
Lord Chancellor and Lord Keeper of the Seats, of 21 Councillors of State in
Ordinary, whereof three are to be Churchmen, and three Swordmen; of the
Comptroller General of the Finances, of the two Intendants of the Finances, all
of them in Ordinary, and of twelve other Councillors in State, that shall
serve half-yearly.

The present Comptroller General of the Finances, is Claudius le Pelletier,
Honorary Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, formerly Counselor of State
in Ordinary, who was advanced to this Great Office upon the Death of the late
Mr. Colbert.

The two Intendants of the Finances, are

Michael le Pelletier de Sousy, Counselor of State, And Francis le Tonnelier
de Breteuil, also Counselor of State.
By the 85th Article of the new Regulation, the Advocates of the Councils, that
were formerly 200, were reduced to 170, the present Dean of them, is Mr.
Caussan.

The new Departments of the Comptroller General, and of the Intendants of the
Finances, are these.
1. To Mr. Pelletier, the Comptroller General, belong,

The Revenue of Commerce and Trade.

The united Farms, viz.

The Gabelles of France.

The Aids and Entries.

The Parties Casual, or Casual Revenues.

The five Great Farms.

The Convoy of Bordeaux.

The Patents of Languedoc, and other little Farms.

The Revenue arising from the Barrage and Pavement of Paris.

The Revenues of Burgundy, Britany, and Languedoc.

The Turcies and Levies.

The Extraordinary Revenues for the War.

Those of the Artillery.

The Revenues raised on the Clergy.

Of Coinage.

Of the Provostship of Nants.

Of the Bridges and Causeys.

Of the Kings and Queens Domains, or Crown Lands.

Of the Waters and Forests.

2. Mr. Pelletier de Souzy, has

The Gabelles of Provence, and Dauphine, and the Customs of Valence.

The Gabelles of Languedoc, and the Country of Lions.

The Gabelles and Quarantieme, or fortieth of Lions.

The Gabelles of Mets, Toul, and Verdun.

The Farm of the nine Livers, and eighteen pence of Picardie.

The Farm of Ingrande.

The Revenue of Fish, Paper and Beer.

That of Ashes.

Of the marking of Iron.

Of the Grants and Gifts of Cities.

The Revenues of Provence, and Navarre.

Of Artois, and other Conquered Places.

Of Mets, Toul, and Verdun.

Of the Parliament of Paris.

Of the Grand Council.

Of the Leagues of the Suiffers.

The Rents upon the Guildhall, or Townhouse of Paris.

3. Mr. De Breteuil, has

The eighteen Generalities of the Countries of Election.

The greater and lesser Tax, called the Taille and Taillon.

The Revenue of the Chamber of Accounts, or Counting-Chamber at Paris.

That of the Court of Aids at Paris.

There are four Secretaries of the Council, who are M. Berrier, M. de
Beauchamol, M. Ranchin, and M. Coquille: And M. Bartillat, and M. Du Mets, with
the Title of Commissionated Keepers of the Treasure-Royal, exercise by turns,
what was formerly exercised by three Persons, with the Title of Treasurers of
the Main Treasury, or Exchequer, called L' Epargne, or Spare Revenue.

There are eighty Masters of Requests in Ordinary of the Kings Household, that
officiate quarterly.

The Officers called les Gens du Roy, are
One Proctor-General M. Lewis Maboul, who likewise performs the Function of
Advocate-General.

One Advocate-General, M. Francis-Nicholas Berthelot.

The Secretaries of the Court of Finances, are the same with those of the
Council of State.

There are four Secretaries-Registrers of the Privy Council; four Commissioners
of the Register of the Council, and four Registrers-Keepers of the
Council-Bags: all officiating quarterly. And one Chief Registrer of the
Requests of the Household.

There are eight Ushers, or Door-Keepers in Ordinary belonging to the Kings
Councils; and eight other Ushers of the Requests of the Household.

There is also held another Council called the Council of Parties, because it
was established to take cognizance of the Processes or Suits moved by
particular Parties one among another, whether it be upon their Appeals from the
Judges of a particular Jurisdiction, or of a Parliament, or any other entire
Jurisdiction; or for particular Affairs between City and City; or between one
private Person and another, that this Council has called before it, or of which
it has reserved the cognizance to it self.

The Counselors of State that sit in this Council of Parties, or in the
Council of the Finances, are for the most part, Persons that have served a long
time in other Courts, or Jurisdictions, as in the Parliament, Grand-Council,
and even in the very Body of the Masters of Requests, or in Embassies to
Foreign Princes and States: Those of the last sort enjoy the Quality and
Pension of Councillors of State, at their return from their Ambassages, but
yet have not all Entrance into the Council: Some of them serve there all the
year, and some but six Months, their Salary, when they serve all the year, is
2000 Crowns to each: They are sworn by the Chancellor.

Anciently there were three Masters of Requests taken out of the Body of the
Parliament, that used to stand at the Door of the Kings Lodgings, leaning with
their Elbows on the Rails, ready to receive all Requests or Petitions, that
people had a mind to present to the King: And if they were businesses of no
great consequence, they commonly dispatched them immediately, but if they were
of Consequence, then they made report of them to the King, when he was in his
Chamber, or when he was going to Mass, or a walking: And when business begun to
increase, they waited no more at the Door, but near the Kings Person, who
committed to their Examination, all the Petitions that were presented him. They
usually had Lodgings in the Kings Palace, and were tabled at Court.

They at present, take cognizance in their Court, of Masters of the Requests of
the Household, of the personal and possessory Causes of the Crown-Officers, and
of the Officers that are Commoners and Tabled in the Royal Households, and
others that have the privilege of Committimus. There lies an Appeal from them
to the Parliament of Paris, unless it be when a Sovereign Jurisdiction is given
them by a solemn remission of any cause to them by the Council of State.

They serve likewise in the Chancery, and in the Council of State, where they
report and sign all Petitions that come thither, and have extraordinary
Commissions in the Provinces where they are Intendants of Justice, of Policy,
and of the Finances, or Revenues; as also in the Armies where they have a very
great Authority and Power: They have power to preside in the place of the
Presidents in all Seneschalchies and Baily-wicks.

The Habit used by the Masters of Requests, at great Ceremonies and
Solemnities, is a Scarlet-Gown, as being of the Body of the Parliaments, where
they have Entrance, Place, and Voice, or freedom of Suffrage, and opinion
deliberative.

When the Masters of Requests march all in a Body, accompanying the
Chancellor, as they did in the year 1660. at the Kings solemn Entry; they wear
as they did then, black Velvet-Gowns, with golden Girdles, and Hat-Bands.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Grand Council.

THE Grand Council, being at its Original, or first Institution, the only
Councils of the Kings of France, the Princes of the Blood, Officers of the
Crown, and chief Presidents of the superior Courts, used to style themselves
Councillors of it. Afterward the Title of Counselor to the King in his
Councils, was taken up instead of it, as soon as a plurality of Councils was
erected. The Grand Council was reduced by Charles the Eighth, to 17
Councillors, and one Proctor-General, and since augmented by Lewis the
Twelfth, with three Councillors, to make up the number of twenty, and that
served by the half year; since that, the Advocates-General, and the Presidents
were added thereto, and the number of Councillors augmented from time to time,
by new Creations, insomuch, that at present, this Company is composed of eight
Presidents, serving by turns, four each half year; 54 Councillors, serving by
turns, 27 each half year, two Advocates-General serving half a year apiece; and
one Proctor-General who only is perperpetual. The half-yearly waiting times of
the Councillors, begin in October, and April. Besides these there are fourteen
Councillors of Honor, or Titular Councillors in the Grand Council, who are
Candidates as it were of it, and succeed in the Vacancies. There are likewise
twelve Substitutes; or Deputies, one Registrer or Recorder in Chief, five
Secretaries, one Chief or first Usher, twenty other Ushers, and 23 Proctors.

The Jurisdiction of the Grand Council extends throughout all the whole
Monarchy and Dominions of the King. At its first beginning, it had power to
judge of Appeals from, and of the Regulations of Judges, and of the nullities
and contrarieties of Sentences; of which Regulations of Judges, and
contrarieties of Sentences, it still takes Cognizance; as also of the
Jurisdiction of Presidials, and of the Provosts of the Merchants, and of
whatsoever depends thereon, concerning the Honor, Function, and Regulation of
their Offices. It also takes Cognizance of all matters concerning Consistorial
Benefices, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, and Conventual Priories, and
in general, of all other Benefices, that are at the Kings Nomination,
Presentation, Collation, or other Disposal whatsoever, as well in respect of
the Title to them, as of the Pensions charged on their Revenues, excepting the
Regal Right, or Due. It also takes Cognizance of the Duties belonging to the
King from Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, upon the account of his joyful
arrival to the Crown, and of those due from Archbishops and Bishops, when at
their Instalments and Consecrations they swear Fidelity to the King; of those
arising from the Indults, or Fees so called, of Cardinals, and other Prelates
of the Kingdom; from the Indult of the Officers of the Parliament of Paris.
From the appellations of the Provostship of the Household, of the Warren of the
Louvre, and from those of the Chamber of the General Reformation of the
Hospitals, and Houses for the sick in France, from the Commissions of the Chief
Physian, for the Reports of dead Bodies, drowned and wounded, and all Statutes,
or Orders of the said Chief Physician, concerning Pharmacy; from the Execution
of, or offenses against the Statutes, or Orders of the Kings Chief Barber; and
from Appeals concerning the Persons, Estates or Privileges of the Great Orders
of the Kingdom, as are those of Chiny, the Cistercians, the premonstrated
Monks, Grandmont, the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, Fontevrault, and St. John of
Jerusalem.

From the withdrawing, concealing and imbezeling Ecclesiastical Goods or
Estates, and Immunities and Franchises, or Liberties of Ecclesiastic Persons;
and from several Appeals concerning the ancient Substitutions of the Great
Houses of the Kingdom.

The Solemn and Ceremonial Habits used in the Grand Council, are Robes of
Black-Velvet, for the Presidents, and Black-Satin Robes, for the Councillors,
Advocates, and Proctor-General, and the Recorder, or Registrer.

The Great Council is a Court, that Judges without Appeal, and that follows the
King, whenever it pleases his Majesty.

The place where the Grand Council is held, is in the Cloister of the Church of
St. Germains l' Auxerrois, at Paris, near the Louvre.

And because the Chancellor is not only the Head and Chief of all the Kings
Councils, but also the Head of the Chancery, since he has the Seals in keeping.

Now we have treated of the several Councils, it will be most proper in the
next place, to speak of the Officers of the Chancery in their order, and to
explain what their Offices are.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Councillors and Secretaries of the King, House, and Crown of France,
and of their Finances, or Revenues.

THE Councillors, so styled as above, are in number 240, and have his Majesty
for the Chieftain, and Sovereign Protector of their Company, ever since the
first Institution of it; and his Majesty has the first Purse of the profits of
the Seal.

The first of them is called their Dean.

These Secretaries-Councellours were reduced and united into one only Body and
Company, by an Edict of the Month of April, 1672. by which they are maintained
in all their ancient Privileges and Exemptions: of this number, are the four
Principal Secretaries of State, the four Secretaries of the Council of the
Finances, or Revenues; the four Registrers of the Council of Parties, and the
Chief Registrers, or Recorders of the superior Companies of the Kingdom. Their
principal Function is to be present and assisting at the application of the
Seal, and to dispatch and sign all Letters, that are presented to the Lord
Chancellor to be sealed; they read to him all Letters of Pardon, Remission,
and other Graces and Favors, which he grants or refuses. The Chancellor is
Judge of all matters that relate to their Places and Functions, and the
Sentences given by them in Council, run in this tenor, The King in his
Council, by the advice of the Lord Chancellor, has Ordered, and does Order,
etc.

All the Offices of the Chanceries throughout the Kingdom, excepting only those
of the great Audiancers of France, the 240 Secretaries of the King, and some
others, are at the disposal and nomination of the Chancellor, and of his
Parties Casual.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Great, or High Chancery of France.

FIrst, There are in it, four Great Audiencers that officiate quarterly, each
one in their quarter.

The Great Audiencers of France, are the first Officers of the Seal. Their
principal Function is to view and examine the Letters that are to be sealed,
which are to be carried or sent to them the day before they are to be sealed,
by the Kings Secretaries abovesaid, that they may present them and report them
to the Chancellor, and tax them at the Control.

The four Great Audiencers of France, the four Comptrollers-General, the four
Keepers of the Rolls of the Offices of France, the four Conservatours of the A
Security given to save harmless, or for the true Title of Lands, etc.
Hypotheques, and the Treasurers of the Seal, are by their places, Secretaries
to the King, perform the Functions of such, and enjoy all their Privileges and
Exemptions.

There are four Comptrollers-General of the Audience of the Chancery of France,
that serve likewise quarterly.

The principal Function of the Comptroller General of the Chancery of France,
in the time of his Waiting, is to take and lay before the Wax-Chafer, the
Letters that are ready for the Seal, and when they are sealed, to receive them
again from the hands of the Wax-Chafer, and put them into the Chest for that
purpose, without imbezeling or fliding aside any one of them. And he is to put
to his Comptroll, and Paraphe or Mark all along the sides, after the Great
Audiencer has taxed them, as it was Ordered by the Edict of the Month of April
in 1664.

There are four Keepers of the Rolls of the Offices of France, that officiate
likewise quarterly.

Their Chief Function is, to have and keep the Rolls and Registers of all the
Offices of France that are sealed, of what nature soever they be. The Kings
Secretaries, that dispatch them, are to send or carry the said Letters to them
before they pass the Seal, that they may present them, and make their Report of
them to the Chancellor: It is in their hands that all oppositions to the
sealing of them, or dispatching them in the Offices, whether it be upon the
account of a Hypotheque, or any other title or pretense are, to be made; of
which they keep a Register, and for which they are responsable, in Case the
Offices be sealed, contrary to those oppositions, because, that if the said
Offices, that is, what passes in them, should be sealed without being charged
with those oppositions, they would be discharged of all Hypotheques.

There are under these four Deputy-Keepers of the Rolls, whose places are
united to theirs.

There are four Conservatours of the Hypotheques, or of the Rents upon the
Townhouse, or Guildhall, and on the augmentations of Wages, that officiate
quarterly.

Their Duty is to do the same thing in relation to the Rents and augmentations
of Wages, that the Keepers of the Rolls do in respect of the Offices; that is
to say, to present and report to the Chancellor, all Letters of Ratification,
of the acquisition or purchase of those Rents, or augmentations of Wages, that
the Kings Secretaries have dispatched and signed, to receive the oppositions
made against the sealing and dispatching the said Letters, whether it be on the
account of Hypotheques, or Titles; and they are to keep a Register of them, and
make mention of them upon the said Letters, that they may not be sealed without
being charged with the said oppositions, because they are responsible for them,
and that if they should be sealed without opposition, the Acquirers, or
Purchasers, would be discharged of all Duties, and Hypotheques, according to
the Edicts and Declarations set forth or that purpose, and have the same
Security as they could have by a Decree in a Court of Justice.

These Conservatours have likewise four Principal Deputies, whose places are
united to theirs.

There are four Keepers and Depositaries of the Minutes of the Expeditions of
the Chancery, that serve quarterly.

Their Chief Office is, to keep a Register of the Letters that are sealed in
the Chancery of France, and to keep the Minutes of them that are signed by the
Kings Secretaries, that dispatched them, and to place the Registring of them,
and the date, on the backside of the principal Letters, and to put the Visa, or
attestation of view, on the backside of the ordinary, and common ones, as it
was ordered by the Edict of the Creation of the said Offices.

There is at present but one Treasurer of the Seal, though there be several
Commissioners, or Deputies under him, whose places are united to his.

There are four Wax-Chasers, and Hereditary Sealers, that serve by the quarter
in the Great Chancery of France, and by the Month, in the Chancery of Paris.

The Office of these Wax-Chasers, is upon Sealing-Days, to go into the great
Chancery of France, and fetch the Seals out of the Chancellours Closet, to
carry them thence before him to the Sealing-Table, and when the Seal is open,
to Seal with it.

Of the Vshers.
In all times, there has been a Royal Usher bearing a Mace, that used to
execute the Kings Orders: This Officer was Created and made a standing Officer,
under the Title of Usher in Ordinary in the Chancery of France, in the Month of
December, in the year 1473. to wait on the Person of the Chancellor, and
Execute his Orders, as likewise, the Sentences and Ordinances of the Council,
and of the superior Courts: He was then the sole Usher of the Council, the
Grand Council, and the Court of Chancery, being then the only Council the King
had; he was afterward made first Usher of the Grand Council: In 1597. there was
Created another Usher in Ordinary to the King in the Great Chancery of France,
and in the Month of March 1655. two more, with the same qualities, Honors,
Rights, Powers, Functions and Privileges as the old one. These four Officers,
at great and solemn Ceremonies, are to wear Robes of Violet-Crimson Velvet,
with double hanging Sleeves; and in their Ordinary Service, Black Velvet Gowns,
with a Bonnet, or Cap of the same, and a golden Chain about their Necks,
adorned with golden Flower-deluces. They carry the four Maces next before the
Chancellor. They are to be always attending in his Palace to receive his
Orders; and on sealing days they meet in his Chamber, to accompany him, when he
goes to the Sealing room, they march before with their golden Chains on, and
the Wax-Chafer in the midst of them, carrying the Trunk where the Seals are
laid up, into the Hall, where the Table for that purpose is made ready; and as
soon as the Chancellor is seated in the Sealing-Hall, they are to shut the
Door, and to suffer none to come in but those Officers that are Privileged so
to do. They Command Silence in the said Hall, and when the Sealing is over,
Conduct the Chancellor back again into his Chamber with the same Order.

And because they were anciently the first Ushers of the Council, that always
used to execute all Orders from the King, and Sentences and Expeditions of the
Council, as well whilst attending the Court, as in the Provinces and Superior
Courts, they still hold Society, and keep one common Purse with the now Ushers
of the Council, for and of all Fees for signification and other Executions of
the Kings and Chancellours Orders. Their Places are in the gift of the
Chancellor, and pay him an annual Duty.

There is one Harbinger of the Chancery of France, who is put in by the Great
Audiencers and Comptrollers-General of the Chancery, and pays them an annual
Duty.

He is to go one of the foremost with the Marshals of the Lodgings of France,
when the Chancellor follows the Court, and takes his Departments or Lodgings
from the Marshals of the Lodgings of France, which afterward he distributes and
shares out among the Great Audiencers, Comptrollers-General, and other Officers
of the Great Chancery: He has a right or share distribution of Fees in the
Sealing-Office, but he meddles not with Lodging the Council.

There are two Trunk-Carriers in the Chancery of France, that serve by the half
year; who are put in by the Great Audiencers, and Comptrollers General of the
said Chancery, and pay them an annual Duty. Their Function is, to go, and take,
and receive the Chancellours Order, what day he pleases to pitch on for a
Sealing day, and to give notice of it to the Great Audiencer, the
Comptroller General, and other Officers, whose presence is necessary in the
Sealing-Office.

They prepare the Table, the Trunks, the Carpets, and the Chairs, on
Sealing-Days, they take away and shut the Trunks; they pass the silk and
strings through the Letters and Charters, and they have a right to a share in
the distribution of the Fees and Perquisites that happen in their six Months
waiting.

There are two Wax-Furnishers of the Great Chancery. And one Hereditary Servant
Wax-Chaser of all the Chanceries of France, who has power to put in Deputies
under him in the other Chanceries, although he that now is, has reserved to
himself this Privilege, only in the Chancery of Paris, and some others.

The Function of this Officer, is to take care on Sealing-Days, to heat the
Water to soften the Wax, which he tempers and works behind the Wax-Chaser, and
then lays it in bits before him, big enough for a Seal. As a necessary Officer,
he has his Lodging at the Court, and at the Chancellours, when he follows him.
He has a share in the distribution of Fees at the Sealing-Office.

There is one Messenger of the Great Chancery, whose particular care it is to
go to the Register Office of the Grand Council, and take out the Sentences or
Decrees that are to be sealed in Chancery. He then carries them to the
Seal-Office, takes them out when Sealed, and returns them into the Proctors
hands, who give him something for his pains. In time of any Court-Journies, or
Voyages. He has privilege to come and go, to and from Court, and to carry all
sorts of Letters and Packets: He is put in by a Patent from the King.

All these Officers of the Great Chancery, enjoy the same Privileges as the
Kings Sec^retaries, and those that are tabled in his Majesty's Household,
according to a Declaration, and List, or Account of them verified in the Court
of Aids at Paris.

Next to the Great, or High Chancery of France, are those established near the
Parliaments. The Masters of Requests preside in those Chanceries, and keep the
Seals of them, when they are present there.

The Chancery of Paris, is the greatest and antientest of them all: It is
composed of four Audiencers, of four Comptrollers, that officiate quarterly,
and of twelve Referendaries, and some other Officers.

The Function of the Refendaries, is to make Report of all Letters to that
Master of Requests that keeps the Seal, to sign them at the bottom, when they
find them civil, and furnished with all the Clauses required by the Ordinances;
or to subjoin in the same place the refutata, or Confutations of them, if they
contain any unusual Clauses, or be ill digested and drawn up.

King Francis the First, by his Edict of Creation in the Month of February,
1522. gave them the Quality or Title of Councellours-Reporters, and
Referendaries: and Henry the Second, in the Month of July, 1556. granted them
Place and Voice in the Presidials, in consideration that they were Learned, and
had been admitted to the practice of the Laws, before the Masters of Requests.

Note, That the four Wax-Chafers of the Great Chancery, are the same that
perform the like Function in the Chancery of Paris.

The Letters Sealed in the Chancery of Paris, are ordinarily executable only
within the Limits of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament: But yet it has
sometimes happened, that when the Chancellor was obliged to follow the King in a
long Journey, and carry the Great Seal with him, that then, by virtue of a
Declaration from the King to that end, the Letters which should have passed the
Great Seal, were only Sealed in the Chancery of Paris, and thence transmitted
to, and Executed in the other Parliaments of the Kingdom.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Ecclesiastical Division of France, into Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, and of its Clergy.

THE Kings Collates, or Presents within his Dominions, to 18 Archbishopricks,
107 Bishoprics, to about 750 Abbeys of Men, besides those that have been
united to other Communities, or Benefices, and to above 200 Abbeys of Nuns; and
as the Conquests of Majesty increase, so the number of Benefices in his
nomination, must needs proportionably increase too.

The Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics, according to their Alphabetical Order
are these.
The 18 Archbishopricks are
1. AIx. 2. Alby. 3. Ambrun. 4. Arles. 5. Auch. 6. Besancon. 7. Bourdeaux. 8.
Bourges. 9. Cambray. 10. Lions. 11. Narbon. 12. Paris. 13. Reims. 14. Rouen.
15. Sens. 16. Toulouze. 17. Tours. 18. Vienna.
The 107 Bishoprics are
1. AGde. 2. Again. 3. Air. 4. Alet. 5. Amiens. 6. Angiers. 7. Angouleme. 8.
Apt. 9. Arras. 10. Auranche. 11. Autun. 12. Auxerre. 13. Bayeux. 14. Bayonne.
15. Bazas. 16. Beauvais. 17. Bellay. 18. Bethlehem. 19. Beziers. 20. Boulogne.
21. St. Brien. 22. Cahors. 23. Carcassone. 24. Castres. 25. Cisteron. 26.
Chaalons. 27. Chartres. 28. Clermont. 29. Cominges. 30. Condom. 31.
Cornouaille. 32. Conserans. 33. Coutance. 34. De Dax. 35. Digne. 36. Dol. 37.
Evreux. 38. De Helne, or Perpignan. 39. St. Flour. 40. Frejus. 41. Gap. 42.
Geneva. 43. Glandeve. 44. Grace. 45. Grenoble. 46. Laitoure. 47. Langres. 48.
Laon. 49. Lavaur. 50. Leon. 51. Lescar. 52. Limoges. 53. Lizieux. 54. Lodeve.
55. Lombez. 56. Lucon. 57. Macon. 58. St. Malo. 59. Mande. 60. Du Man's. 61.
Marseilles. 62. Meaux. 63. Mets. 64. Mire-Poix. 65. Montauban. 66. Montpellier.
67. Nantes. 68. Nevers. 69. Nice. 70. Nimes. 71. Noyon. 72. Oleron. 73. St.
Omer. 74. Orange. 75. Orleans. 76. Pamiers. 77. St. Papoul. 78. St. Paul trois
Chateaux, or St. Paul 3 Castles. 79. Perigueux, Perpignan, vide Elne. 80.
Poitiers. 81. St. Pol de Lion. 82. St. Pons de Tomiers. 83. Le Puy. 84. Rennes.
85. Rieux. 86. Riez. 87. La Rochelle. 88. Rodez. 89. Saints, or Yaintes. 90.
Sars. 91. Sarlat. 92. Senez. 93. Senlis. 94. Soissons. 95. Strasburg. 96.
Tarbas. 97. Toul. 98. Toulon. 99. Tournay. 100. Treguier. 101. Troyes. 102.
Vabres. 103. Valenco and Die. 104. Vannes. 105. Vence. 106. Verdun. 107.
Viviers. 108. Vzais. 109. Ypres.
Where Note, That Valence and Die is a double Title, and the Bishoprics of
Geneva and Nice, belong to the Duke of Savoy, and are only named, because part
of them lie in the Territories of the King of France.

Now they follow according to the Order they are commonly placed in.
1. And first, because Paris is the Capital City of the Kingdom, the ordinary
Residence of our Kings; and of the whole Court, the Seat of the first and most
August Parliament, of the first University of Europe, and of so many Famous and
Illustrious Men, I have thought fit to so many other Prerogatives and
Primacies, which it has above all other Cities of France, to add that of naming
it first among the Archbishopricks, though it be but of late Creation, with its
three Suffragans, which could not well be separated from it.

In placing the rest we shall follow the Ancient Division, Secundum Notitiam
Imperii, and the Order of that considerable Book called, Gallia Christiana; or
Description of France since made Christian.

1. The Archbishopric of Paris, has three Bishoprics within its Jurisdiction,
viz. Chartres, Meaux, and Orleans. The present Archbishop is Francis de Harlay,
Duke and Peer of France, Provisour of the Sorbonne, etc. A Person of noble
Extraction, Learned, Eloquent, and very Courteous.

The Bishop of Chartres, is Ferdinand de Neufville, Counselor of State in
Ordinary, etc.

The present Bishop of Meaux, is James Benign Bossuet, late Preceptor, or
Tutor, to the Dauphin, Famous for Controversy.

The Bishop of Orleans, is Peter de Cambout de Coislin, first Almoner to the
King, etc.

There are in this Archbishopric, 39 Abbeys of Men, besides five united to
others, and 32 Nunneries.

2. The Archbishopric of Lions comprehends four Bishoprics, viz. Autun,
Langres, Chaalon, and Macon.

The Archbishop, is Archbishop, and Count, and Primate of the Gauls; and is at
present, Camillus de Neufville de Ville-roy, Lieutenant Governor for the King
in the Country of Lions, etc. The Cathedral of that City is very considerable,
the Canons of it being styled Counts of Lions, and being obliged for their
admission to make proof, that they are noble by five Generations, both on their
Fathers and Mothers side.

The Bishop of Autun, who is by his Dignity perpetual President of he States of
Burgundy, and Administrator of both the Spiritualties and Temporalties of the
Archishoprick of Lions, when the Sea is vacant, etc. is Gabriel de Roquette,
etc.

The Bishop of Langres, who is Bishop and Duke of Langres, and one of the
ancient Peers of France, is at present, Lewis Armand de Simianes de Gordes, etc.

The Bishop of Chalons, on Saone, being both Bishop and Count, is Henry Felix
de Tassy, etc.

The Bishop of Macon is named Michael Cassagnet de Tilladet, etc.

In this Archbishopric, there are 49 Convents of Men, besides four united, and
sixteen Nunneries, besides one united.

3. The Archbishopric of Rouen contains six Bishoprics, viz. Those of Bayeux,
Auranches, Evreux, Sais, Lisieux, and Coutance.

This Archbishop is Primate of Normandy, etc. and is at present named Rouxel
de Medavy de Grancey, and is one of the Councillors of State in Ordinary.

The Bishop of Bayeux, is Francis de Nesmond, Dr. of Sorbon, etc.

The Bishop of Auranches, is Gabriel Philip of Froulay de Tesse, etc.

The Bishop of Evreux, is James Potier de Novion.

The Bishop of Sais, is Maturin Savary, etc.

The Bishop of Lisieux, being Bishop and Count, is named Leonard Govion de
Matignon.

And lastly, the Bishop of Coutance, is Charles-Francis de Lomenie de Brienne,
etc.

In this Archbishopric, there are 66 Convents of Men, besides one united, and
fourteen Nunneries.

4. The Archbishopric of Tours contains eleven Bishoprics: The present
Archbishop is Michael Amelot, etc. The other Bishops, are.

1. The Bishop of Du Man's, Lewis de la Vergne, Montenar de Tressan, etc. 2. The
Bishop of Angers, Henry Arnaud, etc. 3. The Bishop of Rennes, John Baptist de
Beaumanoi^ de Lavardin, etc. 4. The Bishop of Nants, Giles de Beauvau du Rivau.
5. The Bishop of Cornouaille, who is both Bishop and Count, and is named
Francis de Coetlogon. 6. The Bishop of Vannes, Peter-Lewis, Caset de Vautorte.
7. The Bishop of St. Pol de Leon, who is both Bishop and Count, Peter Neboux de
la Brouss: 8. The Bishop of Treguier, being both Bishop and Count, whose name
is Francis-Ignatius de Bagliou de Saillant, formerly a Priest of the Oratory:
9. The Bishop of St. Brieu, Lewis-Marcellus of Coetlogon: 10. The Bishop of St.
Malo, Sebastian de Guemaduc: 11. The Bishop of Dol, who is both Bishop and
Count, Matthew Moreau.

This Archbishopric has within its extent 71 Convents of Men, and 13
Nunneries, among which is the famous Collegiate Abbey of St. Martin of Tours, of
which the Kings of France are Abbots.

5. The Archbishopric of Sens contains four Bishoprics: the present
Archbishop, who is styled, Primate of the Gauls, and of Germany, is Hardouin
Fortin de la Hoguette, etc. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of Troyes,
Francis Bouthillier de Chavilly, Doctor of Sorbon, etc. 2. The Bishop of
Auxerre, Andrew Colbert, likewise Doctor of Sorbon, etc. 3. The Bishop of
Nevers, Edward Vallot, etc. 4. The Bishop of Bethleem, Francis de Bataillet.
This Bishop has his Seat of Residence in the Town of Clamecy, otherwise called
Bethleem, situated in Nivernois, within the extent of the Diocese of Auxerre.

In this Archbishopric, there are 44 Convents of Men, besides two united, and
15 Nunneries, besides one united.

6. Under the Archbishopric of Treves in Germany, are three Bishoprics
belonging to France, which are,

1. Mets, of which George Aubusson de la Feuillade, Prince of the Holy Empire,
is Prince and Bishop. 2. Of Toul, of which James de Fieux, Doctor in Divinity
of the College of Navarre, is Bishop and Count. 3. The Bishopric of Verdun,
of which Hippolyte de Bethune is likewise Bishop and Count, and Prince of the
Holy Empire.

In the extent of these three Bishoprics, there are 42 Convents of Men, and 9
Nunneries.

6. In the Archbishopric of Reims, there are eight Bishoprics.

The Archbishop of Reims is Duke of the same, and first of the Peers of France,
that Consecrates and Anoints the Most Christian Kings, and is Legate, by his
Dignity, of the Holy Apostolic See, and Primate of Gaul Belgic. He that now
is, is named Charles Maurice le Tellier, Son to the late Chancellor, and
Brother to Mr. Louvois. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of Soissons, Peter
Daniel Huet, Under-Preceptor, or Sub-Tutor to the Dauphin. 2. The Bishop of
Chalons, on the Marne, who is also Count and Peer of France, and is named Lewis
Anthony de Noailles. 3. The Bishop of Laon, who is Bishop and Duke of the same,
and Peer of France; whose name is John d' Etrees. 4. The Bishop of Senlis, who
is Denis Sanguin. 5. The Bishop of Beauvais, who is Count and Chatelain too. of
Beauvais, etc. and is named Toussainr de Fourbin, who has been twice
Ambassador in Poland. 6. The Bishop of Amiens, who is Francis Faure, Preacher
formerly to the late Queen. 7. The Bishop and Count of Noyon, and Peer of
France, is Francis de Clermont de Tonnerre. 8. The Bishop of Boulogne, is
Claudius le Tonnelier de Breteuil.

In this Archbishopric, there are 118 Convents of Religious Men, and 30
Nunneries, besides several ruined by the Wars.

Note, That the Prior of St. Remy of Reims in this Diocese, is obliged to carry
the Holy Viol to the Ceremony of Consecrating, or Anointing the Kings of France.

8. The Archbishopric of Cambray, includes four Bishoprics.

The present Archibishop, and Duke of Cambray, who is likewise Prince of the
Empire, and Count of Cambresis, or the County of Cambray, is James Theodore de
Brias. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of Arras, who is President by his
Dignity, of the States of Artois; his name is, Guy de Seve de Rochechouart. 2.
The Bishop of Tournay, Gilbert de Choiseul du Plessin Pralin. 3. The Bishop of
St. Omer, Lewis-Alphonsus de Valbelle. 4. The Bishop of Ypres, James de Lieres.

There are in this Archbishopric, 48 Convents of Men, and 29 Nunneries.

The Archbishopric of Besancon in the Franche County, has under it but one
Suffragan Bishop.

The present Archbishop is Antony-Peter de Gramant. The Suffragan being called
the Bishop of Bellay, is Peter de Laurens.

There are in this Archbishopric, 23 Convents of Men, and four Nunneries.

9. The Archbishopric of Vienna, contains four Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop is, Henry de Villars, Prior and Lord of Aispagnac. The
other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop and Count of Geneva, John d' Aranton, d'
Alaix. His Residence at present is at Anecy. This Bishopric is in the Gift of
the Duke of Savoy. In it is the Abbey of Hautecombe, which is the place where
the Dukes of Savoy are Intombed. 2. The Bishop and Count of Grenoble, who is
President by his Dignity, of the States of the Dauphinate, is Stephen le Camus.
3. The Bishop and Count of Viviers, etc. is Lewis Francis de la Baume de suze.
4. The Bishop and Count of the double Bishopric of Valence and Die, is Daniel
de Conac.

In this Archbishopric there are 23 Convents of Men, and eight Nunneries.

10. The Archbishopric of Arles comprehends four Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, who is styled Prince and Primate, is Adheimar de
Monteil de Grignan. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of Marseilles,
Charles-Gaspar-William de Vintimille de St. Luc.

2. The Bishop and Count of St. Paul Trois-Chateaux, or St. Paul-Three-Castles,
Lewis Aube de Roquemartin. 3. The Bishop and Lord of Toulon, Armand-Lewis
Bonnin de Chalucet. 4. The Bishop of Orange, John-James d' Obeillo.

In this Archbishopric, there are three Convents of Men, and four Nunneries.

11. The Archbishopric of Bourges, has under it five Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, who is styled Patriarch and Primate of the Aquitains,
is Michael Phelippeaux de la Vrilliere; the other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of
Clermont, who is N...... 2. The Bishop of Limoges, Lewis d' Vrfe. 3. The Bishop
of Puy, and Count of Velay, who is an immediate Suffragan to the Sea of Rome,
Armand de Bethune. 4. The Bishop and Count of Tulles, Humbert Ancelin. 5. The
Bishop of St. Flour, Jerome de la Mothe Houdancourt.

There are in this Archbishopric, 66 Convents of Men, comprehending some
united, and 17 Nunneries.

12. The Archbishopric of Alby contains five Bishoprics.

The Archbishop is lately dead.

This Archbishopric was Erected in 1678. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop
and Count of Rodes, Paul-Philip de Lezay de Lusignan. 2. The Bishop of Castres,
Augustine de Maupeou. 3. The Bishop of Cahors, who is likewise Count and Baron
of the same, Henry-William de Jay. 4. The Bishop and Count of Vabres, Lewis de
Baradat. 5. The Bishop of Mande, and Count of Givaudan, Francis-Placidus de
Baudry de Piencourt.

In this Archbishopric, there are sixteen Convents of Men, and eight Nunneries.

13. The Archbishopric of Bourdeaux, has under it nine Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, who is likewise Primate of Aquitain, is Lewis de
Bourlemont d' Anglures The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop and Count of Again,
Julius Mascaron, Preacher in Ordinary to the King. 2. The Bishop of Angouleme,
Francis de Perigard. 3. The Bishop of Saints, William de Plessis, de Get de
la Brunetiere. 4. The Bishop of Poitiers, Armand de Quincay. 5. The Bishop of
Perigueux, William le Boux, Preacher in Ordinary to the King. 6. The Bishop of
Condom, James de Matignon. 7. The Bishop of Rochelle, Henry de Laval
Bois-Dauphin de Sable. 8. The Bishop and Baron of Lucon, Henry de Barillon. 9.
The Bishop of Sarlat, Francis de Salagnac de la Mothe-Fenelon.

In this Archbishopric there are 95 Convents of Men, and eight Nunneries.

14. The Archbishopric of Auch comprehends ten Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, is Anne-Tristan de la Baume du Suze. The other Bishops
are, 1. The Bishop of Dax, Leon de la Lane. 2. The Bishop of Laitoure, Hugh de
Bar. 3. The Bishop of Cominges, Lewis de Rechignevoisin de Guron. 4. The Bishop
of Couserans, Gabriel de St. Esteve. 5. The Bishop and Lord of Air, Armand
Bazon de Bezons. 6. The Bishop of Bazas, James Joseph de Gourgues. 7. The
Bishop of Tarbes, Francis de Poudeux. 8. The Bishop and Lord of Oleron, Charles
de Sallettes. 9. The Bishop of Lescar, Dominick Desclaux de Mesplees; this
Prelate is President of the States of Bearn, first Counselor in the
Parliament of Navarre, and first Baron of Bearn. 10. The Bishop of Bayonne,
Gaspar de la Roque Prielle.

In this Archbishopric, there are 32 Convents of Religious Men, and four
Nunneries.

16. The Archbishopric of Narbon, has under it nine Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, is Peter de Bonzi, Cardinal of that Name. The
Archbishops of this Sec. are Primates and Presidents by their Dignity, of the
States of Languedoc. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of Bezieres,
John-Armand Rotondi de Biscaras. 2. The Bishop and Count of Agde, Lewis
Foucquet. 3. The Bishop of Carcassone, Lewis-Joseph Adhemar de Monteil de
Grignan. 4. The Bishop of Nimes, John Seguier la Verriere. 5. The Bishop of
Montpelier, and Count de Melguel, and Mont-serrant, Charles de Pradel. 6. The
Bishop of Lodeve, and Count of Mont-brun, Charles Antony de la Guard de
Chambona. 7. The Bishop of Vsais, Michael Poneet de la Riviere. 8. The Bishop
of St. Pons de Tomitrs, Peter-John-Francis de Persin de Mont-Gaillard. 9. The
Bishop and Count of Alet, Victor Meliand.

In this Archbishopric, there are 24 Convents of Men, and seven Nunneries.

17. The Archbishopric of Toulouze contains seven Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, is Joseph de Montpezat de Carbon. The other Bishops
are, 1. The Bishop of Pamiers, Francis de Camps. 2. The Bishop of Montauban,
John Baptist Michael Colbert de Villacerf. 3. The Bishop of Mire-Poix, Peter de
la Broue. The Bishop of Lavaur, whose name is Esprit, or Spirit Flechier,
Almoner in Ordinary to the Dauphiness. 5. The Bishop of Rieux, Antony-Francis
de Berrier, Provost of St. Stevens of Toulouze. 6. The Bishop of Lombes, named
Don Come Roger, formerly General of the A sort of Cistercian Monks.
Feuillantines. 7. The Bishop of Papoul, Francis de Barthelmy de Gramont.

In this Archbishopric, there are fourteen Convents of Men, and but one
Nunnery which was ruined by the Civil Wars.

18. The Archbishopric of Aix comprehends five Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, is Charles le Goulx de la Berchere. The other Bishops
are, 1. The Bishop and Prince of Apt, John de Gaillard. 2. The Bishop of Ries,
N...... de Marais. 3. The Bishop of Frejus, Luke D' aquin. 4. The Bishop and
Count of Gap, Charles Benign Herve. 5. The Bishop of Cisteron, Lewis de
Thomassin.

In this Archibishoprick, there are five Convents of Men, and three Nunneries.
There was another Nunnery, but it is now demolished.

19. The Archbishopric of Ambrun contains six Bishoprics.

The present Archbishop, who is styled Prince of the same, is Charles Brulart
de Genlis. The other Bishops are, 1. The Bishop of Digne, Francis le Tellier.
2. The Bishop of Grace, John Baltasar de Cabanus de Viens 3. The Bishop of
Vence...... 4. The Bishop of Glandeve, Francis Verjus. 5. The Bishop of Senes,
Lewis-Anne Aubert de Villeserin, Commander of the Order of St. Michael. 6. The
Bishop of Nice, under the Duke of Savoy, N..... Moret, who is also styled Count
de Drap. Besides these, There are in Spain, Germany, and America,

1. The Bishopric of Helne in Rousillon, within the Archbishopric of
Terragona in Spain, now transferred to Perpignan: The present Bishop is Lewis
Habert de Montmort, Grand Inquisitour for the King in those parts. In this
Bishopric there are six Convents and Abbeys.

2. The Bishopric of Strasburg; whose present Bishop and Prince, is William
Egon of Furstemberg. The Abbey of Munster in the Gregorian-Vally, in the Diocese
of Basil, is likewise in the French Territories.

3. Kebec, being the Capital Town of New France in the West Indies, was Erected
into a Bishopric in 1674. by Pope Clement the Tenth, and the Abbeys of Maubec,
and of l' Etree in France, were united to it, for its better support: The
Bishop of it, is the Abbot of Chevrieres of St. Valier.

Other French Bishops, in partibus Infidelium, are 1. The Bishop of Heliopolis,
Francis Pallu, Vicar and Missionary Apostolic, and Administrator-General of
China; who with the Abbot de Lyonne, the younger, and eight other
Ecclesiastical Persons, Embarked at Breast the 25th of March 1681. for Surat,
intending thence to go to the Kingdoms of China, Tunquin, Siam, Camboya, Lao,
and Cochinchina. 2. The Bishop of Caesaropolis, Francis Piquet, Native of
Lions, who was formerly Consul for the French Nation at Aleppo, for nine years
space: He is now Apostolical Vicar in the Levant, and chiefly at Bagdat, or
Babylan on the Tigris, where he at present is, with M. Casmont de Nerac, Priest
of the Oratory: They Embarked at Toulon, the 11th of September, 1679. to go for
Aleppo, the Capital City of Syria.

The Gallican Church is composed of these Prelates, who all of them style
themselves Councillors of the King, in both his Councils, viz. Of State, and
his Privy Council, though they have no ordinary right to sit there, unless they
be called by an express Commission: They are all Doctors, either in Divinity,
or Law: The manner how they swear Allegiance to the King, and the Form of their
Oath we have already described.

Once in five years the Clergy hold Assemblies, which they call the Lesser
Assemblies, and once in ten years their greater Assemblies, which are more
numerous: Besides these, the King, upon Direction to the Chief Prelates, calls
extraordinary Assemblies of them, as lately; and sometimes a National Synod is
Convoked: These Assemblies consist of some Prelates, and some Deputies of the
Clergy, chosen out of the most qualified among them. In these Assemblies most
affairs relating to the Church and Clergy are debated, and Represented, if need
be, to the King, to whom at every Session, they give a considerable sum of
Money.

The last Assembly was held in 1685. There are also besides these, in France,
the Great Priours of Malta, which are the Great Priour of France, the Great
Priour of St. Giles's, or of Provence, the Great Priours of Champagne,
Aquitain, and Auvergne, and the Knights and Commanders of Malta, all which are
of the Body of the Clergy.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Governments in France.

HAving spoken of France, as divided into Arch-bishopricks and Bishoprics,
being next to speak of it as divided into Governments, I shall observe the same
Order, that was Decreed and observed in the Assembly of the General Estates
held in 1614. after several Contestations concerning this point, as thinking it
better and more authentic than any other I could follow. And as for the New
Conquests, I have ranked them according to the Order observed by the Ministers
and Secretaries of State. According to which Order, they are in all 17
Governments, besides some other particular Governments, and those in America.
And are thus Ranked.

The general Governments in France, and its Acquisitions.
1. PAris, and the Isle of France. 2. Burgundy, Duchy and County. 3.
Normandy. 4. Guienne. 5. Britanny. 6. Champagne. 7. Languedoc. 8. Picardie,
and Flanders. 9. Dauphine, or Dauphinate. 10. Provence. 11. Lyonnois, or
Country of Lions. 12. Orleans, and the Dependances. 13. Navarre, and Bearn. 14.
Alsatia. 15. Three Bishoprics. 16. Lorrain. 17. Rousillon.
1. Paris, and the Isle of France.

Countries, Towns, Places, and Governors.
1. Town, Provostship, and Vicounty of Paris. The Duke of Gevres.

2. The Hospital Royal of Invalides, or Maimed Soldiers.

The Sieur St. Martin, Knight of the Royal and Military Orders of Notre Dame de
Mont Carmel, etc.

3. Isle of France, and Country of Soissons.

The new Duke D' Etrees, and the Count de Chamel, Lieutenant General.

4. The Provost of Paris.

M. de Bullion de Bonelle.

5. Valois.

The Duke de Gevres Bailiff.

6. Of the Towns and Cittadels of Laon, Neyon, and Soissons: and Kings
Lieutenants, at Laon, at Soissons.

The Duke D' Etrees, Governor.

M. de la Simonie.

M. Fourcher.

7. Beauvais, and Country of that Name.

The Count de Marets, Governor of the Town, and Lieutenant of the Country.

8. Marle.

M. Moreau.

9. Ribemont.

M. De la Tour.

10. Town, Castle, and Captainry of Compiegne.

The Marshal d' Humieres.

11. The Captainry, or Captainship, of Villiers Coterets.

The Duke D' Etrees.

12. Senlis.

The Marquess de St. Simon.

Note, That all Governors of Provinces, are styled Lieutenants-General, though
there be under them another Lieutenant General of the same Province, and
sometimes several.

2. Of the Government of Burgundy.

Countries, Towns, Places, and Governors, Captains, etc.
1. Burgundy and Bresse, Bugey, Valtomey, and Gex.

The Governor General, is the present Prince of Conde.

2. In the Bayliwick of Dijon, Chatillon, Barsurseine, La Montagne, and the
Vicounty of Auxonne, which is the first Lieutenant General of Burgundy.

The Count d' Amanze, Lieutenant General.

And the Count d' Armagnac, Seneschal.

3. In the Bayliwick of Chalon.

James Duble, Marquess of Vxelles, Lieutenant General.

And the Marquess of Tavanes, Seneschal.

4. In the Bayliwick of Macon.

The Marquess d' Antragues, both Lieutenant General, and Seneschal.

5. In the Bayliwicks of Auxois, Auxerrois, and Autunes.

Nicolas de Chaugy, Count of Rousillon.

6. Of Bresse, Bugey, Valtomey, and Gex.

The Marquess d' Entremons, Lieutenant General and Seneschal.

Of the County of Burgundy, or Franche Comte, which though lately Conquered, is
placed with the former.

The Marshal Duke of Duras Governour-General.

And Rene de la Tour de Gouvernet, Lieutenant General.

7. Besancon, taken in 1674.

Duke of Duras Governor.

M. de Clerans, Lieutenant.

8. Citadel of Besancon.

M. de Moncaut.

9. Fort of St. Steven.

M.......

10. Fort Griffon.

M. Polastre.

11. Dole, taken in 1674.

M. de la Feuillee, Governor.

M. Philippe, Lieutenant.

12. Salins.

The Marquess de la Freziliere, Governor.

M. de Salieres, Lieutenant.

13. The two Forts of St. Andrew.

M. de Bartin d' Escarlian, Governor.

M. de Bourbitou, Lieutenant.

14. Fort of Belin.

M. Olivier, Commander.

15. Castle of Joug, and Town of Pontarlier.

M. de la Platier, Governor.

M. de St. Maurice, Lieutenant.

16. Castle of Blamont.

M. Bertrandi, Commander.

17. Castle of Montheliard.

M. de Lansberg.

3. Government of Normandy.

Countries, Towns, Places, Governors, Lieutenants, etc.
1. Province of Normandy.

The Duke of Montausier, Governour-General.

2. High Normandy.

The Marquess de Beuvron, Lieutenant General.

3. Low Normandy.

The Count of Torigny.

There are five Under-Lieutenants for the King, viz.

1. In the Baylywicks of Rouen, and Caux.

The Duke of Gevres.

2. In those of Evreux, and Alencon.

The Marquess de L' aigle.

3. In that of Cotentin.

The Marquess de Canizy.

4. In that of Caen.

The Marquess de la Luzerne.

5. In that of Gisors.

The Marquess de Flavacourt.

Of other particular places here follow the Governors.

1. Rouen.

The Duke de Montauzier.

2. Old Palace of Rouen.

The Marquess of Beuvron.

3. Bayliwick of Rouen.

The Count of Torigny.

4. The Bridge of the Arch called the Pont de L' Arche.

M. Druel, under the Duke of Montausier.

5. Dieppe, and Fort de Polet.

Under the same, M. de Tierceville Mahaut, Lieutenant.

6. Fecamp.

M. de Ratabon, Lieutenant.

7. Havre de Grace, which is Independent, and has the Rank of the Government of
a Province.

The Duke of St. Aignan, who is also Lieutenant General of Montiervilliers, and
Harfleur.

8. Honfleur.

The Marquess of Esears.

9. Caen, Town and Castle.

The Count de Congny, Lieutenant and Bailiff.

10. Cherbourg, and St. Lo.

M. de Matignon.

11. Coutance.

M. de Bellouze, Governor:

12. Granville.

M. d' Estienville.

13. Auranche.

M. de Carbonel, Governor.

The Marquess of Ranes, Bailiff.

14. Falaise.

The Marquess of Putange.

15. Argentan.

The Count de Grance.

16. Alencon.

M. de Boulemer de Lare, Governor and Bailiff.

4. Government of Guienne.

Countries, Towns, Places, Governors, Lieutenants, etc.
In this Government there are two Lieutenants, and a Sub-Lieutenant General,
viz.

1. In the generality of Bourdeaux, or Lower Guienne.

The Count of Montalgu.

2. In the Upper Guienne, or generality of Montauban.

The Marquess d' Ambres.

3. In the Countries of Again and Condom, and one or two additional Elections.

The Count de la Serre d' Aubiterre, also Seneschal of the said Countries.

The Governors of the particular Places are as follows.

1. Bourdeaux.

N...... perpetual Mayor of the same.

2. The Seneschal of the same is,

The Marquess of Montferrant, Great Seneschal of Guienne.

3. The second Seneschal of Guienne, of Albret and Bazas, is

The Count de Lauguac.

4. Castle-Trumpet, or Chateau-Trompette.

The Count of Montaigu.

5. Castle, Town, and County of Blaye.

The Duke de St. Simon.

6. Laitoure, Town and Citadel.

The Duke of Roquelaure, Governor.

M. de Savaillant, Lieutenant.

7. Dax.

The Marquess de Poyane, Governor.

M. St. Pee, Lieutenant.

8. Bayonne, Capital of Biscay, and the adjacent Places.

1. Of the Town and Castle.

The Duke of Gramont.

2. Lieutenant of the Town, and Commander of the Citadel.

M. Denou de St. Martin.

3. The Seneschal of Biscay.

The Duke of Gramont.

4. The Seneschal of the Country and County of Bigorre.

M. Le.....

5. The Seneschal of Armagnac.

The Marquess de la Valette.

6. The Seneschal of Albret.

The Duke de Bouillon.

Of Xaintonge, and Country of Angouleme.

1. The Governour-General.

The Duke of Vsais.

2. The Lieutenant General in both.

The Count of Jarnac.

3. The Seneschal of Xaintonge.

The Count de Blenac.

4. The Seneschal of the Country of Angouleme.

The Count de Blenac.

The Governors of the principal Places in these are

1. Of Angouleme and Xaintes.

The Duke of Vsais.

2. Of Coignac.

The Count of Aubigny.

3. Of the Limosin, or Country of Limoges, Upper and Lower.

The Count of Auvergne.

4. The Lieutenants-General.

The Marquess of Pompadour, and the Marquess D' Vrse.

5. The Seneschal of the same.

The Marquess of Saillant.

6. The Governor of Limoges.

M. de Niert.

7. The Governor and Seneschal of Perigord.

The Marquess de Laurieres.

8. Of Quercy, the Seneschal.

The Marquess de St. Alvere de Lostanges.

9. The Lieutenant General.

The Marquess de Bournazel.

5. Government of Brittany.

Countries, Towns, Places, Governors, Lieutenants, etc.
In this Government there are

1. A Governour-General.

The Duke de Channes.

2. A Lieutenant General of Brittany.

The Marquess of Lavardin.

3. A Lieutenant General in the Town, Castle, and County of Nantes, which is an
Independent Government.

The Marquess de Molas de Rosmadec.

4. A Lieutenant for his Majesty in High Brittany.

The Marquess of Coethogon, who is also Governor of Rennes.

5. The Lieutenant of Low Brittany.

The Marquess de la Cost.

6. Of St. Malo.

The Marquess de Guemadeuc.

7. Dinan.

M. des Alleurs. Vitre.

M. de St. Laurent. Breast.

M. de Chazeron. Quimper.

M. de Bien Assis. Port Louis, or Port Lewis.

The Duke Mazarini. Belle-Isle.

M. de Louvat.

6. In the Government of Champagne, and Brie.

Countries, Towns, Places, Governors, Lieutenants, etc.
The General Governors are

1. The Governor General.

The Marshal Duke de Vivonne and Mortemar.

2. In the Bayliwicks of Reims.

The Marquess of..... first Lieutenant General in Champagne.

3. In the Bayliwicks of Troyes and Langres, and in the Town of Troyes.

The Marquess de Pralin is Lieutenant General.

4. In the Department of Vitry, St. Dizier, Joinville, St. Menehould, Chaumont,
Bar sur Aube, Nogent, Vezelay, and Lieu-Voisin.

The Marquess de Choiseul Reau. pre, also Governor of Dinan, is
Lieutenant General.

5. In Brie, the Lieutenant General is

The Count de Belloy.

6. The Bailiff of Troyes is

M. L' Argentier de Chapelaine.

7. The Bailiff of Chateau-Thierry.

The Duke of Bouillon.

The Governors of other principal Towns, and Frontier places are these.

1. Of Troyes.

The Marquess of Pralin.

2. Chaalons.

The Count de Vaubecourt.

3. Reims, with Title of Captain.

The Count de L' Hery Francis Cauchon.

4. Langres.

The Marquess de Franciers de Choiseul,

5. Chaument in Bassigny.

The Marquess of Renel.

6. Mazarini, or Rhetel.

M. de Verneuil.

7. Chateau-Porcien.

M. de Vandeuil.

8. Rocroy.

M. de la Hilliere.

9. Of the Town and Citadel of Mezieres.

M. D' Auge Governor, and the Chevalier de Montoron, Lieutenant.

10. Of Charleville, and the Citadel of Mont-Olympe.

The Marquess de Palaiseau, Governor.

M. de la Hay, Lieutenant.

11. Sedan, in the Town.

The Count de la Boulie, Governor.

M. de Terms, Lieutenant.

In the Castle.

M. de Servigny.

12. Town and Citadel of Stenay.

The Count de Bourlemont, Governor.

M. de Chavigni, Lieutenant.

13. St. Menehoud.

M. de Neuchelle, Governor.

14. Vitry.

The Marquess de Villars, Governor, and M. de Joncar, Major.

15. Bar sur Aube.

M. De Noisy, Governor.

16. Epernay.

The Marquess de Puysteux, Governor, and M. de Perchape, Lieutenant.

7. In the Government of Languedoc, are those General Governors and
Lieutenants.

1. The General and Head Governor.

The Duke de Maine, natural Son to the King. Under whom Commands.

The Duke de Noailles.

2. The Lieutenant General of the Upper Languedoc.

The Marquess of Cauvisson. He resides at Toulouze.

3. The Lieutenant of the Lower Languedoc.

The Marquess of Montanegues, Residing at Montpelier.

4. The Lieutenant General of the Country of Vivarais, and Governor of the
Town and Citadel of Pont St. Esprit, or Bridge of the Holy Spirit.

The Count de Roure, Residing at the said Town of Pont St. Esprit.

In the Government of the Countries and Provinces of Foix, D' Arnezan and
Andore, depending of this Government, are

1. A Governor and Lieutenant General for the King in the said Province of
Foix, Sovereign Lands of Danezan and Andore, Baronies of Gibel and Hauterive,
etc. Captain, and Governor of the Town and Castle of Foix, and Seneschal of
the same, as also Seneschal of Carcassone, Beziers, and Limoux, under whom are
M. Le......

2. The Seneschal of Nimes.

The Marquess de Montfrin.

3. The Seneschal and Governor of Toulouze, and Albigeois.

The Marquess of Cornusson.

4. The Bailiff of Velay.

The Marquess de Chatte.

5. The Bailiff of Gevodian.

The Marquess of Morange.

6. The Bailiff of Vivarais.

The Marquess of Vaugue.

7. Governor of Le Puy.

The Marquess de Polignac.

Other Governors of Frontier Places, depending of this Government, are

1. Of the Town and Citadel of Montpelier.

The Marquess de Castres.

2. Somieres.

M. de St. Rut.

3. Aiguemortes, Governor, and A certain Jurisdiction so called.
Viguier.

The Marquess de Vardes.

4. Pont St. Esprit.

The Count de Route, Governor, and the Chevalier de Montanegues, Lieutenant.

5. Narbon.

M. de Merinville, Governor.

M. de Moransane, Lieutenant.

6. Carcassone, Town and Castle.

M. de Bezons, Governor.

7. Brescon.

The Baron de la Fare.

8. Pequay.

M. de Brissac.

9. The Castle of St. Andrew.

The Marquess de la Roche.

8. In the Government of Picardie, these principal Governments, 1. Picardie it
self. 2. The Countries of Artois and Hainault, or old Conquests, Thirdly, and
lastly, Flanders, or the New Conquests.

1. In Picardie, there is a General Governor, who is likewise Governor of
Hainault, and the Country and County of Artois, and of the Town and Citadel of
Montreuil: Being The Duke of Elbeuf.

2. A Lieutenant General, in Picardie and Hainau't.

The Duke of Bethune.

3. A Lieutenant General, in Artois.

The Count de Nanere.

The Governors of the Frontier Towns and Places in Picardie, are these.

1. Of Amiens, the Governor and Bailiff is M. de Bar.

2. Abbeville.

Is now governed by its own Mayors.

3. Boulogue, and the Country of that Name, the Governor is

The Duke d' Aumont.

The Lieutenant. M. de Colambert.

The Seneschal. The Duke d' Etrees.

4. Ardres.

M. de Rouville, Governor.

M. de Tonadoux, Lieutenant.

5. Town and Citadel of Callice.

Duke de Bethune, Governor.

M. de St. Benoit, Lieutenant.

6. Fort de Nieulay.

Duke of Bethune.

7. Gravelines.

M. de Mets, Governor.

M. de St. Benoit, Lieutenant.

8. Dunkirk, Town, Fortress, and Dependances.

The Son to the late Marshal d' Estrades, Governor.

Lieutenant in the Town. M. de la Bercantiere.

Of the Citadel. M. de St. Leon, Governor. M. Tibaut, Lieutenant.

9. Fort Lewis, near Dunkirk.

M. de la Baroniere, Commander.

10. St. Valery sur Sum, the Avowed Lord, Vicount, and Governor, is

The Marquess de Gamaches.

11. Guise.

M. de la Fyte.

12. St. Quentin.

M. de Pradel, Governor: M. d' Abancourt, Lieutenant.

13. The Bailiff of Vermandois.

The Marquess d' Olizy.

14. Peronne, Mondidier, and Roye.

The Marquess d' Hoquincourt, Governor; and under him, at Montdidier, M. d'
Estrade.

15. The Town and Citadel of Montreuil.

The Duke d' Elbeuf.

In the Country of Artois, are these Governments.

1. Arras.

The Count de Nancre, Lieutenant-Governour.

In the Town and Citadel. M. de la Pleniere Herbert, Governor. M. de Siffredi.

2. The Great Bailiff of Artois.

.............

3. Bethune, Town and Castle.

............ Governor. M. de Limbeuf, Lieutenant.

4. Air.

The Famous M. de Calvo, Governor. M. de St. Quentin, Lieutenant.

5. The Fort St. Francis of Air.

The Sieur de la Tour, Commander.

6. St. Omer.

The Marquess de Choiseul, Governor. The Sieur Raousset, Lieutenant.

7. Hedin.

............ Governor. M. de Villepaux, Lieutenant.

8. Bapaume.

M d' Orty, Governor. M. Drouart, Lieutenant.

In Hainault, are

1. Landrecy.

The Marquess de Lignie, Governor. M. de Barthe, Lieutenant.

2. Quesnoy. M. de Rancher, Governor. M. de Rougon, the Kings Engineer,
Lieutenant.

3. Avenes. The Count Carle de Broglio, Governor. M. d' Amors, Lieutenant.

In the New-Conquests in Flanders, are these Governments.

Countries, Towns, Places, Governors, Lieutenants, etc.
1. The Governor General of Flanders, and of all the Conquests made since the
Pyrenean Treaty, in 1659. The Marshal d' Humieres.

2. A Lieutenant General. The Count of Montbron.

The more particular Governments are

1. Town of L' Isle. The Marshal d' Humieres, Governor. The Famous Marquess de
la Rabliere, Commander under him.

Citadel. M. de Vaubant, Governor. M. de Morillon, Lieutenant. M. de la
Mothe, Major.

Fort St. Sauveur, or St. Savior. M. de Belloy, Commander.

Town. The Count de Maulevrier-Colbert, Governor. M. de Courcelles, Lieutenant.

2. Tournay Citadel. M. de Megrigny, Governor. The Count du Repair,
Lieutenant.

3. Douay Town, and Citadel. M. de Pomereu, Governor. M. d' Ernemont,
Lieutenant.

Of the Fort de Scarpe. M. le Chevalier du Repair, Commander.

4. Cambray, Town and Citadel, with Country and County of that Name. M. de
Montbron, Governor. M. de Dreux, Lieutenant in the Town. M. Parisot Ingenieur,
Major.

Citadel of Cambray. M. de Tilleul, Under Governor. M. de Frene, Lieutenant.

5. Town and Citadel of Courtray. The Marquess d' Vxelles, Governor.

6. Dixmuyde. M.......

7. Valenciennes. M. Magalotti, Count de Bardi, Governor. M. de Vincent,
Lieutenant.

8. Bouchain. The Commander de Fenix, Governor. M. de Couvrelle, Lieutenant.

9. Conde. M. de Betou, Governor. M. de la Bergerie, Lieutenant.

10. Redoubt of Stincelles. M. d' Angeli, Commander.

11. Phillipville. The Count de Madaillan, Governor. M. de la Cost,
Lieutenant.

12. Dinant, in the Country of Liege. The Marquess de Choiseul-Beau-Pre,
Governor.

Dinant-Castle. M. de St. Martin, Commander.

13. Charlemont. M. de Reveillon, Governor. M. de Boutencourt, Lieutenant.

14. Mexin. M. de Pertuis, Governor. M. des Crochets, Lieutenant.

15. Maubeuge. The Famed Count de Montal, Governor. M. de la Mothe, Lieutenant.

16. Ypres. The Marquess de la Trousse, Governor. M. de la Neuville,
Lieutenant.

Fort of Kenoque. M. de Bugnet, Commander.

17. Bergue St. Vinox. M. de Boquemare, Governor. M. de Passillon, Lieutenant.

Fort St. Francis de Bergue. M. Pomarin, Commander.

9. In the Government of Dauphine, or Dauphinate, are these general Governors.

1. Chief General Governor. The Marshal, Duke de la Feuillade.

2. The Lieutenant General, and Seneschal. The Count de Tallard.

The Governors of the Frontier places, are

1. Of the Town and Citadel of Grenoble. The Marquess de Marcieu.

2. Of the Town and Citadel of Valence. The Count de Moncha.

3. Montlimart Town and Citadel. The Count de Vireville.

4. Of the Fort de Barault. The Marquess de Genlis.

5. Exille. M. de St. Mars.

10. In the Government of Provence, are

1. The Governor General of the Country and County of Provence. The Duke of
Vendome.

2. The Lieutenant General. The Count de Grignan.

3. The Great Seneschal of Provence. The Marquess d' Oraison.

4. The Great Seneschal of Arles. The Marquess de Boche.

The Governors of the Frontier places belonging to this Government, are

1. The Towers of Toulon, Commanding them and the Town. The Duke of Vendome. M.
de Courcelles, under the said Duke.

2. The City of Marseilles. M. de Piles de Forville, Captain of the Galleys.

3. Of the Isles of the Chateau, or Gastle d' If, Pomene, and Ratoneau. M. de
Coste-Chaude, Brother to the former.

4. Of the Citadel of Marseilles, and the Fort St. John. The Count de
Beringhen.

5. The Seneschal of the Jurisdictions and Precinct of Marseilles, is The
Marquess de Valbelle.

Of Notre Dame de Guard. M. de Besmaux, is Governor.

Of the Isles of St. Margaret, and St. Honoratus. M...... Governor.

Of Antibe. The Marquess de Janson.

11. In the Government of Lyonnois, or the Country of Lions, and of its
Forests, and the Country of Beaujolois.

1. The Governor and Seneschal, is The young Duke of Villars.

2. The Lieutenant General of Lyonnois, the Forests and Beaujolois, is The
Archbishop of Lions, and his little Nephew, the Marquess d' Alincourt, in
Reversion.

3. The Bailiff of Lyonnois, and Seneschal of the same Province, is The Count
de la Chaize.

4. The Bailiff of St. Stephen in the Forests, that acts at Montbrison, is The
Marquess d' Vrfe.

5. The Bailiff of Beaujolois, is The Marquess de Sify.

To this Government belongs too, the Country of Auvergne, in which are

1. The Governor General. The Duke of Bouillon.

2. Two Lieutenants-General, viz. A Lieutenant General of High Auvergne. The
Chevalier de Noailles, who is likewise Lieutenant General of the Galleys.

3. Two Seneschals, viz Of Riom. The Count d' Alegre.

Of Clermont. The Marquess of Canillac.

Another Dependence is the Province of La March, in which are

1. A Governor of both the Higher and Lower Province of that Name. The
Marquess de St. Germain de Beaupre.

2. The Lieutenant General. The Marquess de la Val-Montmorency.

3. The Seneschal of Gueret. M. de L' Epau.

4. The Seneschal of Dorat. M. de Saint. Fair.

Another Dependence, is the Country of Bourbon, called Bourbonnois, in which are

1. A Governor General. The Marquess de la Valiere.

2. A Lieutenant General. The Marquess of Levis, Count of Charlus.

12. In the Government of the Country of Orleans, which is called the
Government of the Countries of Orleans, Blois, Dune, Sologne, Chartrain, and
Vendome, are comprehended likewise, besides what are mentioned in the Title;
The Provinces of Poitou, Anjou, Touraine, or Country of Tours; The Country of
Saumur, and the Government of Rochelle; The Isle of Oleron and Re; The Province
of Maine, with le Perch, and the Country of Laval: Of Berry, and of the
Country called Nivernois: which we shall take in Order.

1. Then the Governor General of what is mentioned in the Title, is The
Marquess d' Alluy.

2. The Lieutenant General of Orleannois, or Country of Orleans, is M. de Laud.

3. The Bailiff. The Marquess d' Avarez.

4. The Lieutenant General of the Country of Blois, or Blesois. The Marquess de
Thois.

5. The Bailiff of the same is M. de Somery, Governor of Chambor.

6. The Lieutenant General of the Country of Chartres. The Chevalier de Bethune
d' Orval.

7. The Bailiff of Chartres. M. de Servin.

8. The Bailiff of Chateauneuf. The Count de la Salle.

9. The Governor of Orleans. The Marquess d' Alluye.

10. The Governor of Chartres. The Marquess of Chatillon.

In the Province of Poitou, are

1. A Governor General of High and Low Poitou, and the Countries of Loudun,
and Chatelleraut.

The Duke de la Vieuville.

2. Two Lieutenants-General, viz. In High Poitou, and the Countries abovesaid.

The Count de Parabere.

In Low Poitou.

The Count de Pardaillan.

3. Two Seneschals of the Country of Poitou, viz. one residing at Poitiers.

The Count d' Olonne, de la Tremouille.

And another at Civray, and Maixant.

M. de la Parisiere.

4. The Governor, and Lieutenant General at Poitiers.

The Marquess de la Breteche.

5. Loudun; the Governor.

M. de Pyolens.

6. Chatelleraut, the Governor.

The Marquess of Rivau.

In the Province of Anjou, are

1. A Governor General.

The Count d' Armagnac.

2. A Lieutenant General.

The Marquess de Varenne.

3. A Seneschal.

The Marquess de Sable.

4. The Governor of the Castle of Angers.

M. D' Antichamb.

5. Of the Pont, or Bridge of Ce.

M. de la Fons, Governor.

In Touraine, or the Country of Tours, are these Governors.

1. The Governor in chief of Touraine, and of the Town of Tours.

The Marquess d' Anjeau.

2. The Lieutenant General.

The Marquess de Rusilly.

3. The Bailiff of Tours, and Chinon.

The Marquess de Givry.

4. The Bailiff of Loches.

The Marshal d' Humieres.

5. Amboise, Town and Castle.

The Marquess d' Alluye, Governor and Bailiff.

Of the Country of Saumur, of which depend Saumur, Richelieu and Mirebeau, the
Governor of Rochelle, and the Country of Aunis, and

The Count de Cominges, Governor also of Saumur.

1. The Governor General.

M.......

2. The Lieutenant General.

M. Millet, Sub-Governour to the Dauphin.

3. The Grand Seneschal.

The Count de Motes.

4. Of the Town, Towers, and Haven of Rochelle.

M. de Guiry, Governor.

5.......

M. du Sauzage.

6. Isle and Citadel of Oleron.

The Count de la Vaugade, Governor.

7. Isle de Re, and Fort de Pres.

M. d' Aubarede, Governor.

In the Province of Le Main le Perch and Laval, there are

1. A Governor General.

The Marquess de Ferraques.

2. A Lieutenant General.

The Count de Tesse.

3. A Seneschal.

The Baron of Liscuet.

In the Province of Berry, there are

1. A Governor in Chief.

The Prince de Soubize.

2. A Lieutenant General, that is likewise Seneschal.

The Count de Crouy de Gaucourt.

In the Country of Nivernois, are

1. A Governor in Chief.

The Duke of Nevers.

2. A Lieutenant General.

The Baron de Joux, who is Marquess of Vielbourg, and Count de Miene.

Other Countries and Governments Incorporated and Reunited to the Crown of
France.

13. The Government of Navarre, and Bearn, in which there are

1. A Chief Governor and Lieutenant General. The Duke of Gramont.

2. A Lieutenant General of Bearn. The Marquess de Rebenac de Feuquieres.

14. In the Government of Alsatia, are

1. A Chief Governor, both of High and Low Alsatia, who is Governor also of
Brisac Town, Citadel and Castle, and of La Fere, Vitre, and Port-Lewis.

The Duke de Mazarini.

2. A Lieutenant General.

The Duke of Montausier.

3. In their Absence, he that Commands in all Alsatia, is

M. de Monclar.

4. Of Strasburg.

The Marquess de Chamilly, Governor.

5. Of the Town of Brisac.

M. de la Chetardi, Governor.

M. de Farges, Lieutenant.

6. Hunningen near Bale.

The Marquess de Puisieux, Governor.

M. de la Sabliere, Lieutenant.

7. Schelestadt.

M. de Gondreville, Governor.

M. de la Provenchere, Lieutenant.

8. Beffort.

M. St. Just, Governor.

M. de Dampiere, Lieutenant.

9. La Petite Pierce.

M. Charle, Commander.

10. Friburg, Capital City of Brisgau, Town and Castle.

M. Du Fay, Governor.

In the Town.

M. de Barege, Lieutenant.

In the Castle.

M. de Roais, Commander.

15. In the Government of the three Bishoprics, Mets, Toul, and Verdun, there
are

In the Country and Bishopric of Mets, there are

1. A Chief Governor.

The Duke de la Ferte-Senneterre.

2. A Lieutenant General.

The Count de Vaubecourt.

3. Town and Citadel.

The Duke de la Ferte, Governor.

M. le Roy, Commander.

In the Town.

M. de Givry, Lieutenant.

In the Citadel.

M. de Beraut, Lieutenant.

2. In the Province, County, and Bishopric of Toul, there are

1. A Governor in Chief.

The Duke de Choiseul du Plessis Pralin.

2. A Lieutenant General. The Count de Feuquieres.

3. Hombourg, Town and Castle. The Marquess de la Breteche, Governor. M. de la
Gardette, Commander.

4. Bich, Town and Castle. M. de Breteche, Governor. M. de la Guierle,
Lieutenant.

5. Marsal. The Marquess de la Tournelle, Governor. M. de France, Lieutenant.

6. Faltsburg, and Sareburg. M. de Chamarande, Governor. M. de Boesse,
Lieutenant of Sareburg.

7. Littemberg. M. Bertrandi, Commander.

8. Castle of Landzcroon. M. de Siffredi, Commander.

3. In the Province, County, and Bishopric of Toul, there are

1. A Governor in Chief. The Count de Pas de Feuquieres.

2. A Lieutenant. M. de Pimodan.

4. In the Country of Verdun, are

1. The Governor in Chief. The Count de Vaubecourt.

Town and Citadel of Verdun. The Marquess de Feuquieres, Governor in Chief.

2. In the Town. M. des Crochets, Lieutenant.

In the Citadel. M. de la Pornerie, Lieutenant.

16. In the Government of Lorrain, and the Country of Bar, there are

1. A Governor in Chief............

2. Nancy. The Marquess de Joyeuse, Governor.

3. Longvy. M. de Matthieu de Castelas, Governor.

4. Saar-Louis. M. de Choisy, Governor. The Chevalier Perrin, Lieutenant.

5. Castle of Traerback, near Saar-Louis. M. de Bar, Commander.

In Luxemburg and its Dependances, which are placed under this Government, are

1. Luxemburg, taken in 1684. The Marquess de Lambert, Governor.

2. Castle of Rodenac, near Thionville. M. de la Brugere, Commander.

3. Thionville. M. d' Espagne, Governor. M. d' Argele, Lieutenant.

4. Montmidy. The Marquess de Vandy, Governor. M. de Haulles, Lieutenant.

17. In the Government of the County of Rousillon, and other Acquisitions
toward Spain, are

1. A Governor in Chief. The Duke de Noailles.

2. A Lieutenant General. The Count de Chazeron.

The Governors of the Frontier Places are

1. Of the Town and Citadel of Perpignan. The Duke de Noailles, Governor.

In the Town. M. de la Robertiere, Lieutenant.

In the Citadel. M. de la Caussade, Lieutenant.

2. Colioure. The Chevalier d' Aubeterre, Governor. M. de Marsolier,
Lieutenant.

3. Salces. M. de St. Abre, Governor. M. de Manse, Lieutenant.

4. Bellegarde. M. du Breuil, Commander. M. Pitoux, Lieutenant.

5. Mont-Louis, or Mount Lewis. Urban de Fortia, Governor. M. de Long-Pre,
Lieutenant.

Ville-Franche. M. Fisicat, Governor. M. Perlan de Sagne, Lieutenant.

6. Of the Fort and Village of the Baths, or Les Bains, and the Town of Arles.
M. de Boirre-Cloux, Commander.

7. Pratz de Moliou. M. de la Caze, Commander.

There is besides, in Piedmont, the Province Town, and Citadel of Pignerol,
and Forts of St. Brigitte, and of Perouse, with the Valleys, Countries, and
Dependances of it, of which

1. The Governor General is The Marquess de Herleville.

The Lieutenant. M. de Vercantiere.

In the Citadel. M. de la Mothe de la Myre-Rissan.

2. Cazal, the Capital, of which is Montferrat.

Under the Duke of Mantua. Don Pedro de Gonzaga.

The Governor is The Dukes Natural Uncle.

The Governor of the Citadel, and French Troops is M. de Catinat.

The Lieutenant. M. de L' Isle.

The Commissary of War, Policy, etc. M. de Chassenay.

3. Of Morgues, or Monaco. Under the Prince, who is Governor and Captain of
it, the

Kings Lieutenant is M. de la Ronsiere.

The Ordinary General, and Provincial-Commissary for the War, and for the
Conduct and Mustering of the Troops in Garrison, at Pignerol, and in all the
aforesaid Places, and Dependances, is the aforesaid M. de Chassenay de Luynes.

In America.

1. The Governor, or Commander of New France is The Marquess of Nonville.

2. Of the Islands. The Count de Blenac.

Towns that remain to the King by the Pyrenean Treaty, made in 1659.
Arras, Hesdin, Bapaume, Bethune, Lilers, Lens, St. Paul, Terouane, Pas,
Graveline, Fort of St. Philip, Sluys, and Hannuin, Bourburg, St. Venant,
Landrecy, Le Quesnoy, and all their Bayliwicks; Marienburg, and Philip-ville,
in Exchange of La Bassee, and St. Vinox, (which latter is since too, in the
French Possession) Avenne, Thionville, Montmidy, and Damvilliers; The
Provostships of Ivy, of Chavancy, of Marville, Rocroy le Catelet, and Limchamp:
The County of Rousillon, and that of Conflans, and that part of the County of
Cerdana, on this side the Pyreneans: Upper and Lower Alsatia, Suntgau, the
County of Ferrette, Brisac, and its Dependencies.

The King, after he had caused the Fortifications of Nancy to be demolished,
had by a Treaty of Peace restored the late Duke of Lorrain to the Possession of
the Duchy of Lorrain, and to those Towns, Places, and Countries, that he
formerly possessed, depending of the three Bishoprics of Mets, Toul, and Verdun,
excepting Moienvie, the whole Duchy of Bar, the County of Clermont, the Places
of Stenay, Dun, and Jamets, and of the three Bishoprics.

And since that, the said late Duke, last Deceased, Resigned to the King of
France, his Propriety and Sovereignty, of the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar;
which Donation was verified in the Parliament, in the Month of February, 1662.

By the Treaty of Peace at Aix la Chapelle, the 2d of May, 1668. It is
stipulated,
That the M. C. King shall retain, remain seized of, and enjoy effectively, all
the Places, Forts, Parts, Towns and Posts, that his Arms have occupied, or
Fortified, during the Campaign of the preceding year, viz. The Fortress of
Charleroy, the Towns of Binch, and Aethe, the Places of Doway (including the
Fort of Scarp) Tournay, Oudenarde, L'Isle, Armentieres, Courtray, Bergues and
Furnes; and of the whole extent of their Bayliwicks, Chatellanies, or
Castellanies, Territories, Governments, Provostships, Appurtenances,
Dependencies and Annexions, by what name soever they be called; with the same
rights of Sovereignty, Propriety, Rights of Regality, Patronage, Guardianship,
Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives, and Preeminences over the Bishoprics,
Cathedral Churches, and other Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Cures, and other
Benefices within the Extent of those Countries.

The Fortifications of several places, in which there is now no Governor, have
been demolished, as those of Chateau-Renaut, and Linchamp, Donchery,
Damvilliers, Jamets, R^^, Corbie, Furnes, Armentieres, Binch, Sirk, Moienvie,
Mouzon, Gray, Huy, St. Venant, etc.

By the Treaty of Peace concluded between France and Spain, at Nimmeguen, the
17th of September, 1678.
The Most Christian King is to enjoy effectively, the whole County of Burgundy,
commonly called the Franche Comte, and the Towns, Places, and Countries thereon
depending; including therein the Town of Besancon, and its District, or
Precinct; as also the Towns of Valenciennes, and its Dependances, Bouchain and
its Dependances, Cambray, and Cambresis, or the Country of Cambray, Air, St.
Omer, and their Dependances, Ypres, and its Castellany, Warwick, and Warneton,
on the Lys, Poperinghen, Bailleul, and Cassel, with their Dependancies, Bavay
and Maubenge, with their Dependancies, besides the Town of Dinant; and in case
the King of Spain be not able to obtain of the Bishop and Chapter of Liege, the
Cession of Dinant, with the consent of the Emperor and Empire, with a year to
be reckoned from the day of the date of the Ratification of the Treaty of Peace
between the Emperor and the Most Christian King, the King of Spain obliges
himself, and promises to yield the Town of Charlemont to the King of France:

And some Villages there were to be Exchanged.

By the Treaty of Peace concluded at Nimmeguen, the 5th of February, 1679. the
Town and Citadel of Friburg in Brisgaw, with the three Villages, Lehn,
Metthausen and Kirchzart, and their Banlieus, or Liberties, is to remain to the
King of France: And the passage from Brisac to Friburg, is to remain free to
his M. C. Majesty, over the Lands of his Imperial Majesty, and of the Empire,
by the Ordinary Road, called Landrass.

The Duke of Lorrain is thereby re-established in the possession of Lorrain,
excepting first, the Town of Nancy, and its Banlieu, or Jurisdiction; in lieu
of which Town the King of France is to give him the Town and Banlieu of Toul,
which he warrants him to be of equal extent and value: In the second place,
except four Highways of the breadth of half a Lorrain League, which shall lead
from Nancy into Alsatia, to Vesoul in the Franche Comte, to Mets, and to St.
Dizier. And all the Borroughs, Villages, Lands, and their Dependancies, which
shall be found within the extent of the said Highways of half a Leagues
breadth, with all Rights, as well of Superiority and Sovereignty, as of
Propriety, shall belong to his Most Christian Majesty. Thirdly, The Town and
Provostship of Longui, and its Dependancies, shall remain to his Most Christian
Majesty, who yields to him in Exchange, another Provostship of the same extent
and value in one of the three Bishoprics.

Remarks concerning the Governors of Provinces.
The Governors and Lieutenants for the King in the Provinces, are what the
Dukes were formerly, and the Governors of Towns, what the Earls or Counts
were. Under every Duke there were twelve Counts, and over all the Dukes, there
was one that was styled Duke of the Dukes, or Duke of France, who was the Mayor
of the Palace: The said Qualities of Dukes and Counts became Hereditary under
Hugh Capet, who having made himself King, every one of the other Great Men
would needs make himself Master and Proprietour of the Government of which he
was in Possession. Hugh Capet to have their good will, winked at this
Usurpation, but yet being not willing on the other side, that the Royal
Authority should remain always Clouded, he assembled all these Dukes, and made
an Agreement with them, by which he left them a lawful Succession to all their
respective States, but with condition however, that for lack of Heirs Male to
succeed in a Right Line, or when the Possessours of them should happen to be
Attainted and Convinced of the Crime of Felony, they should return to the Crown.

They that are well read in History, have, without doubt, remarked the return
of all these parcels to their principle by the one or the other of these
reasons. And because the Quality of Mayor of the Palace, or of Count of Paris
in which the first was Confounded, had served him as it had done to Pepin, for
a step to arrive to the Throne, he suppressed that too at the same time, for the
better securing of the Crown to his Successors.

The Governors and Lieutenants for the King, in the Provinces, have under them
the Governors of Towns, as the Dukes had the Counts; but with this difference,
that the number of Governors of Towns that are under each Governor of a
Province, is not determined, one Province having more Towns, and another fewer.
The Power of the Governors and Lieutenants-General of Provinces, is altogether
like that of the ancient Dukes and Counts; which is, to keep in the Kings
Obeisance the Provinces and Places given them in Custody, to maintain them in
Peace and Tranquillity, to have Power or Command over their Arms, to defend them
against Enemies, and against Seditious attempts, to keep the places well
fortified and provided with what is needful, and assist the Execution of
Justice, every one in his respective Government. But at the beginning, when
these Governors were first established, there were none but only in the
Frontier Towns; but because in the time of the Civil Wars, all the Provinces
became Frontier, there was a necessity of placing Governors, not only in the
Provinces, but in all the Towns.

Their Commissions are verified in the Parliaments of their respective
Provinces, in which the Governors of the same Provinces have place, ordinarily
next after the Chief Presidents. They are only simple Commissions, whose
Continuation depends only of the Kings sole Pleasure, though some years past,
there were crept in some abuses in this affair, and the Governors were become,
as it were, Hereditary.

Note, That all the Lieutenants-General of Provinces, and Lieutenants of
particular Towns and Places, are styled Lieutenants for the King, because they
are put in by the King, and have no dependence on the Chief Governor, under
whose Command they are.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of France, as divided into Parliaments, Courts judging without Appeal, and
other Courts of Justice.

1. Of the Administration of Justice, and the first Institution of Parliaments.
JUstice was formerly administered by the Kings themselves, who rendered it in
Person to their People; but Affairs multiplying every day more and more, the
Kings were obliged to ease themselves of that Burden, reserving to themselves
only the Cognizance of Affairs of State. And for the Administration of Ordinary
Justice, he established a certain Council, which they called, a Parliament,
which judged and decided all Causes and Affairs, both Civil and Criminal,
between Man and Man; and that without Appeal, in which, were present, all the
Peers of France, both Ecclesiastical and Secular: This Parliament followed the
King in all his Voyages; and consequently, for that reason, was in those times,
Ambulatory. It was first Instituted by Pepin in the year 757, and was doubtless
the same thing that the Privy Council is now. But at length the Kings parted
with this Council in favor of their people; And Philip the Fair was the first
that made the Parliament Sedentary, and gave them a part of his Palace at
Paris, to be the Seat of that August Senate, which by the Integrity of its
Decrees and Sentences, has acquired so great a Reputation among all Nations,
that Popes, Emperors, Kings, and Foreign Princes, have voluntarily submitted
their differences to their Judgments; as may be seen by several Examples in
History, and among others, by that of the Emperor Frederick, with Pope
Innocent the Fourth, and of the King of Castile with the King of Portugal.

King Philip the Fair, following the Example of his Predecessors, Ordained
there should be only two Sessions of the Parliament, viz. At the Feasts of
Easter, and All Saints, and distinguished them into two Chambers, of which one
because it judged of the most important matters, was called the Grand Vault, or
Grand Chamber, and the other, the Chamber of Inquests, or Inquiries.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Institution of all the Parliaments of France, and of the extent of
their Jurisdiction, with the present number of the Chief Presidents, and other
Counselors.

THere are in France, and its Dominions, 11 Parliaments, viz. 1. Paris. 2.
Toulouze. 3. Rouen. 4. Grenoble. 5. Bourdeaux. 6. Dijon. 7. Aix. 8. Rennes, now
Vannes. 9. Pau. 10. Mets. 11. Besancon.

1. The Parliament of Paris, as we have already told you, was Instituted by
Pepin, in the year 757, and made Sedentary at Paris, by Philip the Fair, in
1302.

When there was but one Parliament, People came thither from all parts of the
Kingdom, to plead.

The Provinces out of which Causes are at present brought to Paris, are, The
Isle of France, La Beausse, Higher and Lower, Sologne Berry, Auvergne, Lyonois,
Forets, the Countries of Aunis, and Rochel, Anjou, Angoumois, Maine, Perch,
Picardie, Champain, Brie, Tourain, Nivernois, Bourbonnois, and Maconnois, and
Tournay, with the Adjacent Country.

The Lands also Erected into Dutchies and Peerages, are also obliged to Answer
at the Parliament of Paris, which is the Court of the Peers.

The Chief President of this Parliament, is M. Nicholas Potier de Novion.

2. That of Toulouze, Instituted by Philip the Fair in the year 1302. and made
Sedentary by Charles the Seventh, in 1443.

This Parliaments Jurisdiction extends over High and Low Languedoc, High and
Low Vivarais, Velay, Gevaudan. And the Countries of Albigeois, Rouergue,
Laurageois, Quercy, Foix, and a part of the Lower Gascony.

The first, or Chief President is, M. Gaspard de Fieubet.

3. Rouen, which is the Sovereign Court of Normandy, was Established under the
name of an Exchequer, by Philip the Fair, in 1302. and was made perpetual by
Lewis the Twelfth, in 1499. though it bore not the name of a Parliament, till
the Reign of Francis the First, in the year 1515.

It extends to all the whole Province of Normandy.

The Chief President is, M. N.... d' Amfreville.

4. Grenoble, Instituted by Charles the Seventh, in 1452. and at the same time
made Sedentary.

It comprehends Dauphine, or the Dauphinate.

The Chief President is M. Nicholas de Prunier.

5. Bourdeaux, (which sits at present, at Marmande) Instituted in 1462. by
Lewis the Eleventh, and at the same time made Sedentary.

This Parliament has under it the Countries of Bourdeaux, Medoc, Saintonge,
Perigord, Limosin, Basadois, Agenois, Condomois, Albret, Lands, Upper Gascony,
and part of Biscay.

The Chief President is named M. Charles-Denys, d'Olide.

6. Dijon, Instituted in the year 1476. by Lewis the Eleventh, and made
Sedentary at the same time.

It is only for the Duchy of Burgundy.

The Chief President is M. Nicholas Brulard des Bordes.

7. Aix, Established by Lewis the Twelfth in 1501. and made Sedentary at the
same time.

This Parliament is for all Provence, by which name it is also called.

The Chief President is M. Arnold Marin.

1. Rennes, held at present at Vannes, by Henry the Second, and made Sedentary
at the same time in the year 1553. It was removed to Vannes, in October 1675.

This Parliament is called the Parliament of Brittany, because there is no
other Provence, under its Jurisdiction. It is Semestral, i e. One half of the
Counselors serve the first six Months, and the other half the last six Months.

The Chief President is M. Lewis Philipeaux de Pontchartrain.

9. Pau, Instituted and made Sedentary in 1519. by Henry the First, King of
Navarre, and Prince of Bearn, Great Grandfather to Henry the Great, King of
France, and Navarre.

It comprehends the Bishoprics of Lescars and Oleron.

The Chief President is M. N. Dalon.

10. Mets, Instituted by Lewis the Thirteenth, in the year 1633. and made
Sedentary at the same time.

It is for the Country of Messin, and the three Imperial Towns of Mets, Toul
and Verdun.

The Chief President is M. William de Seve.

11. Besancon, the present King re-established the Parliament for the County of
Burgundy, or Franche Comte, first at Dole, the 17th of June 1674. and since
that removed it to Besancon.

The Chief President is M.... Jobelot.

The Parliament of Rouen was for a time made Semestral, or six Monthly, after
the Rebellion that happened in Normandy in 1640. But since that, that
Alteration was abolished, and the Parliament restored to the State it was in
before.

The Parliament of Aix was once likewise made Semestral.

To the Parliaments may be added the other Sovereign Councils, which though
they are not dignified with the Title of Parliaments, yet give Sentence without
Appeal: which are

1. The Council of Rousillon, the Counselors of which, wear Scarlet Robes; The
Chief President there, is M. de Sagare, who is likewise Keeper of the Kings
Seal there, Commissary of the Crown Lands, and Judge of the General Captainry,
or Government.

2. The Council at Arras, which is Sovereign in Civil Causes.

3. That of Tournay.

4. That of Pignerol.

5. That of Alsatia, transferred from Ensisheim to Brisac, the 23d of September
1675.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Parliament of Paris, called by way of Excellence, The Parliament.

THE Court of Parliament of Paris, is composed of ten Chambers, viz. The Grand
Chamber. The Tournelle-Civil, the Tournelle-Criminal, Five Chambers of
Inquests, and two Chambers of the Requests of the Palace.

The Presidents au Mortier, or of the Mortar-Cap, so called, from the Fashion
of the Caps they wear, which are made in the Form of a Mortar, when they give
Audience, and the Counselors when they march in Ceremony, or Assemble about
public Affairs, in presence of the King, are Clothed in Scarlet, with Facings
of Black-Velvet; which was wont to be practiced at the pronouncing of the
solemn Sentences, four times a year, viz. The Day before Christmas Eve, the
Tuesday before Easter, the Day before the Eve of Whitsunday, and the 7th of
September.

At their return from giving Audience, the Chief President, and the Presidents,
au Mortier, are Reconducted by the Ushers in Waiting, with their Wands in their
hands, to the Higher Holy Chapel.

The Officers of the Parliament, and other Officers of Judicature, are habited
all alike, viz. In Cassocks, or long Close-Bodied Coats, and Square-Caps.

At the first Institution of the Parliament, one Moiety of the Counselors were
of the Both Swordmen and Gown-men.
Short Robe, and the other Moiety of the Long, but at present, they are all of
the Long.

The particular solemn Ceremonial Habits of the Court of Parliament, are, for
the Presidents, Scarlet Mantles, Furred, with their Mortar-Fashioned Caps. The
Chief President wears two gold Galoons upon his Mortar-Cap, by way of
distinction from the other Presidents, who have but one Galoon.

The Counselors, and the Advocates, and Proctors General, wear Scarlet Robes,
red Chaperons, or little Hats Furred with Ermines. The Chief Recorder, or
Registrer, a Scarlet Robe, with its Epitoge, or small Cloak; and the Register
or Recorder of the Presentations, and the four Notaries and Secretaries of the
Court, wear also Scarlet Robes; and the Chief Usher a Scarlet Gown, with a Cap
of Cloth of gold.

Formerly, All the Bishops of France had ordinarily Place and Voice in
Parliament: They still use the Title of Councillors to the King in his
Councils. The Archbishop of Paris, and the Abbot of St. Denis in France, are
Counselors by their Places in this Parliament, where they place in ordinary,
and a deliberative Voice. Four of the Masters of Requests have likewise the
same Privilege, as also the Honorary Counselors of this Parliament.

The Parliament of Paris has this particular preeminence above the rest, that
it alone is called, the Court of the Peers, where the Dukes and Peers of France
ought to be sworn, and where they are to be judged too, when they are impeacht
of any Crime; And though in the last Reign it was seen, that de facto, the
Marshal de Marillac was Judged by Delegated Commissaries, and the Duke of
Montmorency, by the Parliament of Toulouze, the Parliament of Paris pretends,
That these two Acts were done against their Privileges.

Secondly, The Counselors of the Parliament of Paris, pretend a Privilege to
sit in all the other Parliaments, without allowing the same Privilege
reciprocally to the Counselors of the other Parliaments, in the Parliament of
Paris; yet it is to be remarked, That the Privilege of sitting in the
Parliament of Paris was granted to the Counselors of the Parliament of
Toulouze, by an Ordinance of Charles the Seventh, in the year 1454. which the
Parliament of Paris refused to verify; whereupon, the Parliament of Toulouze
made a Decree in the year 1466. by which they Ordained, That the Counselors of
the Parliament of Paris, should have no Admittance into the Parliament of
Toulouze, till they had obeyed the abovesaid Ordinance, made in their Favor:
Thirdly, The other Parliaments, not having that extent of Jurisdiction as the
Parliament of Paris, have but one Chamber of Inquests, the Parliament of
Toulouze but two, whereas the Parliament of Paris has six.

The Parliament of Paris; opens every year the next day after St. Martins Day,
in this manner, The whole Body being in their Scarlet Robes, go to a solemn
Mass, Celebrated on that occasion, in the Great Hall of the Palace; after
which, the Advocates and Proctors are sworn in the Grand Chamber, and the
Bishop that said Mass, has that day Place, and a deliberative Voice among them.
The Parliament continues sitting from that time till the 7th of September,
after which follows the Vacations: During which Recess nevertheless, there sits
a Chamber called the Chamber of the Vacations, which takes Cognizance of those
Causes that require speedy dispatch, and Criminal Affairs.

In the five Chambers of Inquests, all Processes, or Suits, are Judged,
concluded, and received by Writing, that they may the better discern whether
the Appeals made to this High Court of Parliament, be made reasonably or no.

The fourteen Presidents of the Chambers of Inquests, and of those of the
Requests, which are two, are but Counselors that have accepted that
Commission, and when the Parliament is met, and marches in State, they take
place among those of the Grand Chamber, according to a Regulation of Parliament
of the 1st of September, 1677. By which it is Ordained, That in Assemblies,
Processions, and other public Solemnities, these Presidents shall be preceded
only by two Counselors of the Grand Chamber, of which the first is to be
Titular, and the second may be only Honorary: As for the Presidents of the
Inquests and Requests among themselves, they are to take place in their march,
according to their standing, and the order of their admission.

The Court called the Tournelle-Civil, established by Lewis the Great, in 1667,
and 1669. Judges of all Appeals in civil matters, to the value of 1000. Livers,
or Pounds French, and of an Estate of 50 Livers yearly rent. It is composed of
one President wearing the Mortar-Cap, six Counselors of the Grand Chamber, and
of four Counselors out of every Chamber of Inquests, who go thither by turns
once in three Months. The Kings Declaration for this purpose, of the year 1669.
bears date the 11th of August, and was Registered in Parliament, and in the
Chamber of Accounts, the 13th of August.

The Tournelle-Criminal, Judges of all Appeals in Criminal matters, excepting
those made by Gentlemen, and other persons of State, which are to be judged in
the Grand Chamber, it is called the Tournelle, because it is composed of two
Presidents, with Mortar-Caps, ten Lay-Counsellers of the Grand Chamber, and of
two Counselors out of every Chamber of Inquests, which go thither every one,
Tour a Tour, that is, in their respective turns, once in three Months,
excepting only those of the Grand Chamber, which are there six Months, from
whence it is called the Tournelle: At present there are four Presidents with
Mortar-Caps.

The two Chambers of Requests of the Palace are of the Body of the Parliament,
according to what Charles the Fifth writ to Cardinal Vivazer in the year 1450.
where he says, that the Requests are de Gremio Curiae. They Judge of all
personal Possessory and mixed Causes between privileged persons, that have
Committimus's, whether they be Officers that are Commoners at Court, or others.
There likewise the Requests of the Household, composed of the Masters of
Request, we have spoken of above, who take a like cognizance of the Causes of
privileged persons that enjoy Committimus's, at whose choice it is to plead,
either before the Masters of the Requests of the Household, or before those of
the Palace.

In old time Justice was administered without Appeal, by the Bailiffs and
Seneschals, that the King sent into the respective Provinces for that purpose,
which were chosen out of the ablest Sages of the Law, of his Household; but
since the Parliaments have been Instituted, or made fixed and sedentary,
Appeals are admitted to the Parliaments from the Sentences rendered by the said
Bailiffs and Seneschals.

In fine, the Parliament at present, consists in all,

1. Of one Chief, or first President, who is named Nicholas Potier, Knight,
Lord of Novion, etc. and seven other Presidents, called Presidents, au Mortier,
or wearing Mortar-Fashioned Caps; who are John de Coigneux, Marquess of
Montmeliand, etc. Lewis de Bailleul, Marquess of Chateau-Gontier; John-James de
Mesmes, Count d' Avaux; John de Longueville, Marquess of Maisons; Charles
Colbert, Brother to the late Great Minister of State of that Name, formerly
Ambassador in England, and at Nimmeguen, etc. and at present Secretary and
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs; and lastly, Lewis de Mole, Lord of
Champlatreux, of thirty Clerks, or Clergymen Counselors, of Lay-Counsellers,
of two Advocates, and one Proctor-General, of 19 Substitutes or Deputies, of
three Registrers, or Recorders, in the Chief Registers Office, viz. One
Recorder Civil, and Prothonotary in Chief, one Recorder of the Presentations,
and one Recorder Criminal; and of eight other Secretaries and Notaries, called
the Notaries and Secretaries of the King, and of the Parliament; two Recorders
for the Audiences and Council of the Tournelle; five other Deputy Recorders in
the five Chambers of Inquests, one Recorder in Chief of the Requests of the
Palace, two other Deputy Recorders under him in each of the two Chambers of
Requests. 1. First, or Chief Usher; twenty eight other Ushers of the
Parliament, and of the Chambers of Inquests, and of the Tournelle: Eight Ushers
of the Requests of the Palace. The number of Advocates is not fixed, but the
Proctors are four hundred in number, they have both of them a Dean over them.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Chamber of Accounts.

THE Chamber of Accounts is composed of 1. First, or Chief President, ten other
Presidents, seventy Masters of the Accounts, thirty Correctors, and seventy
four Auditors, one Advocate, and one Proctor-General for the King, one
Comptroller General of the Remains; two Chief Recorders, who are styled the
Kings Secretaries; two Book-Keepers; one Chief Usher, thirty other Ushers;
twenty nine Proctors; one Commissioner for the Receipt of the Duties, called the
Spices of the Accounts: one Receiver of small necessities of the Chamber; and
three Receivers and Payers of Wages. The Presidents, Masters, Correctors, and
Auditors, are of the Long Robe, if they have taken any Degrees in Law, and of
the short Robe if not; but however, they have all used the Long Robe, since the
Late Queens Entry into Paris, in 1660.

Four of the Masters of the Accounts are Secretaries to the King, sharing each
a Purse, in the Great or High Chancery of France.

The Chief President, and the three eldest Presidents, that serve half-yearly,
keep always in the Grand Office, and the two last, that serve by the half year,
keep the second Office. The Masters serve alternatively, and by turns; that is
to say, the eldest Master of that half year, officiates in the Grand Office, in
January, March, and May, and in the second in February, April, and June; the
second Master of the same half year, serves in the Grand Office, in February,
April, and June, and in the second, in January, March and May; and so forward
the third and fourth Masters; which same order is practiced in the other half
year, Commencing in July.

The Chief President of this Chamber at present, is Nicholas Nicolai, Marquess
of Goussainville.

This Chamber was established at Paris, according to the Register of the Sieur
de Just, under the reign of St. Lewis, since which, Philip the Fair, when he
made the Parliament Sedentary at Paris, reestablisht that at the same time: At
its first establishment, it consisted but of two Presidents, of which the
first, who was a Clergyman, was ordinarily some Archbishop or Bishop, and the
other a Layman, or for the most part they were both Clergymen, of six Masters
of Accounts, viz. Three Clergymen, and three Laymen. Philip the Long added
thereto, another Master Clergyman, that there night be always two in the
Chamber to hear the Accounts, and two below, to correct them: and eight Clerks,
two of which were to keep the accounts, one to keep the Journal for Registring
Affairs, and the five other to look after the business of the Examination of
the Accounts, according to the Ordinance of the 6th of January, 1319. Since
that, Charles the Fair added another Lay-Master, and another Clergyman Master.
Lewis the XI. Established the second Office, Created a third President, and
augmented the number of Masters; so that till the time of Francis the First,
the Chamber of Accounts was composed but of three Presidents, twelve Masters,
and sixteen Clerks, since called Auditors; to whom Henry the second gave the
Quality, or style of Councillors to the King, with privilege of having a
Voice and opinion deliberative, under whose reign it was made Semestral, or to
be distinguished by six Months alternative service. In the year 1410. there
were Created two Correctors, which were chosen out of the number of the
Masters, who had the same Salaries, Privileges and Honors as the Masters, and
place in the Office.

The solemn and Ceremonial Habits of those of this Chamber, are as follows: The
Presidents wear Robes of Black-Velvet, the Master of the Accounts, of
Black-Satin; Correctors of Accounts, of Black Damask; the Auditors, of Black
Taffaty; the Advocates and Proctors-General, of Black-Satin; the
Comptroller General of the Remains, of Black Taffaty; the Recorders, Black
Damask, the Chief Usher of Black Taffaty.

This Chamber has been in so much estimation, that the most important affairs
of the State, of the Finances, or Revenues, and of Justice, were there debated;
and thither were cited the principal Officers of the Crown, and of the
Parliament. And Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, Princes, Constables, and
other great Persons, used to sit in it: And in the year 1497. It had the honor
to have for its President, James of Bourbon, a Prince of the Blood; several
Kings have honored it with their Presence, as Philip of Valois, who during his
absence into Flanders, left his Seal in their Keeping, and gave them Power and
Authority to distribute his Graces and Favors; nay, and to grant Letters of
Pardon, or abolition of Crimes, as amply as he himself might have done: The
same happened under the reigns of Charles the Fifth and Sixth, and of Lewis the
Twelfth, in the years 1330, 1359, 1381, and 1498. At that time, it was not only
a supreme Court to judge of all Causes, Criminal, or Civil, relating to the
Finances, or Revenue, but also of those concerning the Policy and Direction, or
surveying and maintaining of Bridges, Causeys, and Highways.

This Chamber Registers the Oaths of Fidelity, or Allegiance, taken by
Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, and others in Royal Abbeys, and of Heads or
Chiefs of Orders, that are subject to the rights called the Regalia, which
cease not till the day they be registered in this Chamber; and the Fruits and
Profits of these Benefices belong to the King from the day of the Decease of
the Archbishop, Bishop, or Abbot, till the day of the Registring of the Oath of
a new Successor. Which fruits St. Lewis gave toward the maintenance of the
Holy Chapel, viz. One Moiety to the Canons, and the other for the maintenance
of the Structure of the said Chapel, and of the Houses of its Dependence, of
which the Gentlemen Officers of the Chamber of Accounts are the Orderers and
Directors. At present, by Letters verified in this Chamber, the King returns
these Regalia, or Regal Rights, to the Archbishops and Bishops, as soon as they
have taken the usual Oaths of Fidelity, and as soon as the Counselors
Auditors of this Chamber, to whom alone that Privilege belongs, have
delivered out their expedition, or dispatch of them.

This Chamber examines, closes, and casts up and fixes the accounts of the
Treasure Royal, those of the Kings Household, of the other Royal Households, and
of all the Officers that are accountable, and have the managing of receipts and
expenses.

The other Chambers of accounts are obliged to send every year to that of
Paris, duplicates of the accounts of their respective Provinces, that so they
may there have a general knowledge of the Finances, or Revenues, and
accordingly make the necessary Verifications and Corrections of the Accounts of
the Treasure Royal, and of the Officers that are accountable, and that take
there their Assignations.

This Chamber receives Fealty and Homage of the Vassals of Principalities,
Dutchies, Peerages, Marquisates, Counties, Vicounties, Baronies, and
Chatellanies, or Captainships, and may receive the like of all that hold
movables Fees, or Fiefs, depending on the Crown; it has the keeping of all the
acknowledgments, and numbrings of all those under its Jurisdiction, and even of
the Fealties and Homages of the Fiefs, or Fees, which the Treasurers of France
are to receive. It Registers the Declarations of War, Treaties of Peace,
Contracts of Marriage of the Kings, and Children of France, with their
Apanages, or Portions, all Re-unions, and Alienations of Crown Lands, Letters
of Naturalization, and Amortising, Legitimations, Gifts, Pensions, Gratuities,
and generally all Letters of Grace or Pardon: And the Creations of Dutchies,
Peerages, Principalities, Marquisates, Counties, Vicounties, Baronies,
Chatellanies, and Courts of High Justice, together with all Letters of
ennobling, and Confirmations and Restorations of Nobility; having the power not
only to pass and verify the gift of it, but to liquidate, or discharge the
Kings Finance, or Revenue, for the Indemnity thereby from the Kings Dues, as
also, that of the Parishes in which the new ennobled persons, were Taxable
before the said Letters; and for that reason, the Title of their Nobility, is
and must necessarily be established by the verification of this Chamber.

All verifications are made here too, for the noble Partages, or Portions of
noble, or Gentlemen's Children, in the Parliaments, and for the Exemptions from
Taxes at the Court of Aids.

The Children of France have power to erect a Chamber of accounts in the
principal place of their Appanages, or Lands allotted them for their
maintenance, but they cease in case they happen to Revert to the Crown, for
want of Heirs Male; And they most commonly oblige their Treasurers to give up
their Accounts in the Chamber of Accounts at Paris.

This Chamber likewise verifies all Privileges granted to Towns, or Provinces,
Amortisings, Affranchisements, or Freedoms, Naturalizations, Permissions for
Fairs and Markets, Gifts, Sales, and Engagements of Crown Lands.

The Presidents, Masters of Accounts, Correctors, Auditors, Kings People, that
is, his Advocates and Proctor-General, and Treasurers of France, are subject to
be examined at every Semestral, or half yearly Assembly. The other Proctors, as
also the Ushers, are likewise subject to an Examination, but not before any
other then Commissioners, expressly deputed for that purpose.

The first, or Chief President, and the other Presidents of this Chamber, are
reconducted by the Ushers in Waiting for the time being, with their Wands in
their hands, till they come before the Lower Holy Chapel.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Court of Aids.

THE Court of Aids is composed of six Presidents, and of forty Councillors,
divided into three Chambers: In the first, is the first, or Chief President,
and the eldest of the other Presidents, with fifteen Councellers of the longest
standing: In the second Chamber, there are two Presidents, and thirteen
Councellers; and in the third, two Presidents and twelve Councellers.

The Court of Aids was erected soon after the Parliament was made Sedentary at
Paris. And excepting only the Parliaments of Paris and Toulouze, it precedes in
antiquity all the other Parliaments. It was established after a general
Assembly of the Estates under King John, about the year 1355. by Charles the
Fifth then Dauphin, and by virtue of a particular Prerogative, the Books of
Accounts of the Royal Households, and of those of the Princes of the Blood, are
Registered in this Court. And all the Officers named upon the Rolls of the said
Books, have no other supreme Judges to have recourse to in relation to the
Aids, or Taxes, but those of this Court, though their Seats or Dwellings be
within the Precincts of the Jurisdiction of the other Courts of Aids.

The Jurisdiction of the Court of Aids, extends to take cognizance off, and
judge without Appeal, of all Causes relating to the Taxes, Aids, Gabelles, and
Impositions, and of all Farms, and Dues to the King: the Cognizance of Titles
of Nobility, does likewise belong to this Court.

Their Solemn Habits are thus. The Presidents wear Black-Velvet Robes, and the
Councellers, and Advocates, and Proctors-General, Scarlet ones.

The Chief President of this Court, at his rising from Audience, is Reconducted
as far as the Higher Holy Chapel, by the Ushers then in Waiting.

Next to the Court of Aids at Paris, that of Montpelier was established by
Charles the Seventh, in 1437. it is joined to the Chamber of Accounts of the
same Country: That of Rouen is for Normandy; that of Glermont-Monferrand in
Auvergne, was established by Henry the second in 1557. There is another at
Bourdeaux, for Guienne; That of Provence is joined to the Chamber of Accounts
for the same Country; There is likewise one at Grenoble in the Dauphinate, and
another in Burgundy, that is joined to the Chamber of Accounts at Dijon.

The present Chief President of this Court, is Nicholas le Camus, Lord of La
Grange, etc. and besides the forty Councellers, there are belonging to it, two
Advocates, and one Proctor-General, four Substitutes, two Recorders, or
Registers, four Secretaries; one Chief Usher, and seven other Ushers; and three
Honorary Councellers.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of the Court of Moneys, or Coynage.

UNder the very first Race of our Kings, there were three Generals of the
Moneys of France, who were made Sedentary at Paris, at the same time as the
Parliament. The like Offices were Created in the reign of Philip the Fair, and
in some other Reigns, and annexed to the Chamber of Accounts, from these
Generals of the Moneys or Coins, as they are styled, were separated in the year
1358. They have judged, without Appeal, both in Civil and Criminal matters,
within their Jurisdiction, ever since the year 1551. under Henry the Second,
who gave them the Title of the Court of the Moneys, or Coinage. They take place
in all Solemnities, next after the Court of Aids.

Their Habits on solemn occasions are these; the Presidents wear Black-Velvet
Robes, the Councellers, the Kings Advocates, and Proctor-General, and the Chief
Recorder, Black-Satin ones, and the Chief, or first Usher, one of Black Taffaty.

This Court gives Audience on Wednesdays and Saturdays, to the Advocates and
Proctors of the Parliament; and sits in a Room above the Chamber of Accounts,
from whence the Chief President of it, is reconducted every day, by the Ushers,
as far as the bottom of the great Stairs, before the lower Holy Chapel, as is
the Chief President of the Chamber of Accounts. This Court Judges without
Appeal, of all Causes relating to Moneys, Metals, Mines and Weights, and the
Officers and Artificers employed therein; as also of all things that concern
the fabric, title, currantness, value and policy, or regulation of all Moneys
or Coins; and receives the Appeals made from the Judgments, or Sentences of the
Chambers of the Moneys, and of other Judges depending of it.

There are two Presidents, and several Counselors, whose Offices are fixed,
that go every year to visit the Provinces. In this Court are kept, with great
care, the Original Standard weights of France, from which are taken those of
the several Towns of the Kingdom. One of the Councellers, who is at present, M.
Chassebras du Breau, has been deputed and authorized ever since the year 1668.
to look after the keeping a general Uniformity in all the Weights and marks of
France; and accordingly, causes all public weights, when they are conformable
to the Kings Standard, to be marked with the Kings mark, which is a
Flower-deluce; and that Gratis, and without exacting any Fees.

The present Chief President of this Court, is Nicho'as Cotignon de Chauvry,
Lord of Chawvry, and of Breuil, etc. There are besides, eight other Presidents,
twenty nine Councellers, two Advocates, and one Proctor-General, one
Substitute, or Deputy to the Proctor-General, who is likewise the Kings Proctor
in the general Provostship of the Moneys of France; and one other Substitute,
who is likewise an Assessour in the general Provostship of the Moneys, or Mint:
One Recorder, or Registrer in Chief, one Chief Usher, and seventeen other
Ushers; besides which, there is a Provost-General of the Moneys or Mint, and
Marshalsy of France, who takes place after the last Counselor, when he comes
thither to bring the Criminal Processes to be judged, that he has drawn up and
taken information of.

There are likewise several Lieutenants, and Exempts, one Assessour, some
Registrers, and sixty Archers, or Guards.

In the year 1685. the King established a Hall, and Chamber, or Court for the
Mint, in the Town of Lisle, for the Provinces of Flanders, Artois, Hainault,
Luxemburg, the Town and Country of Lisle, and Towns of Tournay and Cambray, and
the Countries of their Name.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Treasurers of France.

THE Treasurers General of France, whose Institution is almost as ancient as
the Monarchy, were Erected into generalities, about the year 1450. which were
established in diverse parts of the Kingdom, to judge of all matters relating to
the Crown Lands, and the Kings Revenues. They are of the Body of the Sovereign
Companies, or Courts, and enjoy the same Privileges as the Chamber of
Accounts, in which they have Place, sitting, Voice, and opinion deliberative,
or freedom of debating, as they have likewise in the Court of Aids, when they
go thither about any important affairs. They have likewise place and sitting in
the Parliament with the Councillors, when it is necessary for them to go
thither for the Kings business, or that of the public, and are Commissaries by
their Places, of the Sovereign Chambers of the frank, or free Fiefs, or
Tenures, of the Crown Lands, etc. They are reckoned among the Kings Domestic
Officers, that are Commoners in his Household, and enjoy all Privileges as
such. And in that Quality they are sworn to the King, by the Chancellor,
before they are admitted to their Offices. They give out all Orders concerning
the Buildings and Reparations of all Royal Houses, of Palaces where Courts of
Justice are held of Presidials, Bayliwicks, Seneschalsies, Provostships, and
other Royal Jurisdictions, and of Bridges, Causeys, Pavements, and other
public works; but the Palace of the Louvre, and some other Royal Houses, were
dismembered from their Office and Care, when the Sieur de Fourey, Treasurer of
France, at Paris, caused the Office of Super-intendant of the Buildings to be
Erected, of which he got himself provided by Patent, selling his former place
of Treasurer of France.

All Letters of ennobling, restoration of Blood, Naturalization, Legitimation,
Aubaine, or Grant of deceased Strangers Goods or Estates, Disinheritance,
Erections of Lands into Baronies, Marquisates, Counties and Dutchies; and all
Letters of Donation, Impost or Toll, Pensions, and other Letters concerning the
Kings Crown Lands, are to be addressed to them to be Registered in their Office.

All Levies of Taxes are to be made by virtue of Letters Patents addressed to
them, after they have given in to the King, and the Lords of his Council, the
Departments made by them of the Taxes upon the Elections, in Execution of the
Brief, or Brevets, his Majesty directs every year to them, for that effect;
upon which Letters they make Remonstrances to his Majesty, when need requires,
and send their annexed Schedules, or Bills, and Commands to the Persons
Elected, to lay Impositions accordingly on the Parishes within their respective
Elections. That Imposition is made in the generality of Paris, by the
Treasurers of France, and other Commissaries distributed throughout the several
Elections depending of that generality, whither they go and preside, in order
to make a Regulation of the said Taxes, together with the Officers thereto
belonging. They afterward send to the general and particular Receivers, the
Accounts, or Calculations, of recovering or collecting the said Taxes, in order
to their receiving them.

The same method is to be used in levying all the other Moneys raised in the
Kingdom, of what nature soever they be.

There are two Receivers-General of the Finances, or Revenues in the generality
of Paris, and two Comptrollers-General of the Domain, or Crown Lands, and
Treasure; which were Commissionated in 1670.

All the Officers of the Elections of the Granaries of Salt, and all the
Officers concerned in the Accounts of the general, or particular receipts
thereof, or the Commissioners for the Receipt of the Royal Deniers, or Moneys,
are admitted and sworn by these Treasurers, and give up their Accounts there
truly and exactly before they give them up to the Chamber of Accounts.

They are great Seers, or Surveyours, and have the Direction, Economy, and
Policy of the Surveys, particularly of that of Paris, as well for the
Highways, and for hindering all Enterprises that may be made in them, as for
the Buildings, and all advances, jettings out, encumbrances, and nuisances of
Highways, Views, or Prospects, and public ways and passages; And all Letters
Patent for the removal, changing, and stopping up, or enclosing of Highways,
and the like matters, are addressed to them, as persons to whom the Cognizance
of the Cause belongs, and the parties therein concerned, are cited, and plead
before them, where Justice is rendered them without further Appeal.

There are twenty three Generalities in the Kingdom of France, and twenty three
Treasurers of France in every Office, the first of which, is at Paris, in the
Palace near St. Michael's Chapel. These Treasurers meet on Mondays, Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Fridays in the Morning; and every Saturday, the Commissioners
for the Pavements, likewise meet. In Vacation time they meet but twice a Week,
viz. on Tuesdays and Fridays.

These Treasurers-General of France, and of the Finances, or Revenues, and
Grands Seers, or Surveyours in the generality of Paris, are as follows.

There are four Presidents, 19 Councellers-Treasurers, two Advocates, and one
Proctor-General for the King, one Recorder, or Register, one Chief Usher and
Housekeeper, and five other Ushers.

Of the Chamber of the Treasury.
In the Great Hall of the Palace, is the Chamber of the Treasury, which
privately, or exclusively to all other Judges, takes cognizance of the payment
of the Dues and Farms of the Crown Lands, and of the differences arising on
that subject. Of the Duties of Abeine, or deceased Strangers Estates, of
Bastardise, disinheriting, and of the Fines and Amerciaments awarded by the
Decrees of the Parliament, and all incidents arising thence, from which there
lay an Appeal to the Parliament.

The Officers of the Chamber of the Treasury have another Chamber besides, in
the Office of the Treasurers of France, where they assemble sometimes. The
Treasurers of France are the Presidents of this Chamber of the Treasury, or
when they think good, they go and preside at the Audiences and Processes, or
Suits managed in Writing: And those of Paris give Law to the Councellers of the
Treasury, when they present themselves for Admission; and some among them, on
set days, for that purpose, go and examine them, and afterward admit them.

Their Days of Audience, are Wednesdays and Saturdays, at which times, the
Advocates and Proctors of the Parliament go thither to plead.

The Officers of the Chamber of the Treasury, are, one Lieutenant General, who
is both for Civil and Criminal matters, and a particular Lieutenant, six
Councellers, one Advocate and Proctor for the King, one Recorder, or Registrer
in Chief, one Recorder of the Presentations and Comptrol, one Chief Usher, or
Housekeeper, and three other Ushers.

Next to the Treasurers of France, it will be most proper, next to speak of
those Jurisdictions which used to sit at the Marble-Table of the Palace, as
those of the Waters and Forests, the Constablery, and Marshals of France, of
the Admiralty, etc.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Waters and Forests.

THE Jurisdiction of the Waters and Forests, is very ancient, and of a very
great extent. It was established to hinder the Abuses, Delinquencies, and
Misdemeanors, which might be committed in the Kings Woods, which are the
goodliest part of his Crown Lands; it likewise takes cognizance of the same
abuses committed in the Woods, belonging to the Princes of the Blood, and other
Noblemen, and to Prelates, Gentlemen, and other private Persons, as also to
Communities, or Corporations. It also takes cognizance, both primarily, and by
way of Appeal, of all Enterprises, or attempts made in Woods, Warrens, Rivers,
Isles, Islets, Mills, Fishings, Chaces, and of all Processes, or Suits, both
Civil and Criminal, arising upon those Accounts, between any Persons, of what
Quality soever, nay, and of those too that concern the very Fund, or propriety
it self in any of them, and all Regulations of Customs, thirds and tenths of
Forests and Woods, etc.

This Chamber is held in the Great Hall of the Palace, near the Parquet, or
Bar, of the Kings Advocates, and Proctor-General in the Parliament.

Its Jurisdiction extends farther than that of the Parliament of Paris; for
besides the Appeals of Masterships of the Game, and of the particular Courts of
Justice of private Lords, in relation to the Waters and Forests, that are
within the limits of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris, It receives
likewise those of the other Parliaments, where there is not as yet any Marble
Table; as of those of Grenoble, Bourdeaux, Dijon, Aix, Pau, and Mets. And it
has likewise an overruling Jurisdiction over the Waters and Forests of other
Parliaments. The principal Officers of the Masterships and Captainships of the
Game, and of the Louvetry, or Wolf-Hunting, are admitted in this Chamber, or
Court.

Dukes and Peers proceed in all Cases of this nature, in this Court rather than
in any other Chamber, for the Waters and Forests under other Parliaments,
although the things contested about, be situate within the extent of the
Jurisdiction of those other Parliaments. They have there too, the like
privilege as in the Grand Chamber, in which they can have no remedy for these
kinds of affairs, as they may have in all other Cases; because the Ordinances
made for this purpose attribute to this Court the full and plenary cognizance
of all Causes belonging to it, privatively and exclusively to all other Judges,
notwithstanding any Committimus, or any other privilege whatsoever. It is
divided into two sorts of Jurisdiction, viz. Ordinary and Extraordinary. From
the Ordinary Jurisdiction, Appeals may be made to the Parliament; but in the
Extraordinary Jurisdiction, all Processes, or Suits concerning Reformations,
Misdemeanors, Delinquencies and Degradations, relating to Woods, etc. are
Judged without Appeal, by the Chief President, with seven Councellers of the
Grand Chamber, and four of the Chief Officers of this Marble Table, upon the
Conclusions of the Kings Advocates. and Proctor-General of this Chamber.

When the Grand Masters of the Waters and Forests are pleased to come to this
Court, they commonly preside there, and the Judgments passed there are entitled
by their names in this manner.

The Grand Masters Chief Inquisitours, and Reformers of the Waters and Forests
of France, at their General Seat at the Marble Table of the Palace at Paris;
And in the Extraordinary Jurisdiction, they are styled, The Judges appointed by
the King, to judge finally, and without Appeal, of all Processes or Suits
concerning the Reformations of the Waters and Forests of France, at the
Judgment Seat of the Marble-Table of the Palace at Paris.

By a Declaration from the King Issued in the Month of December, 1675. and
Registered in Parliament, the 15th of June 1676.

The Great Masterships of the Waters and Forests of France, are divided into
eight Departments, of which seven are officiated by Commission, and that of the
Country of Orleans by Patent.

These Departments are

1. That of the Isle of France, Brie, Perch, the Country of Blois, Picardie,
and of the Conquered and Reconquer'd Countries. Of which, M. James Francis de
Joanne, is Grand Master. He is likewise Governor of Chambor, and Bailiff of
Blois.

2. The Department of Normandy, and Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Rouen;
the Grand Master, by Commission, is M. Feron the Father, Master of the Waters
and Forests at Compiegne.

3. In Tourain, Anjou, Maine, Poitou, Berry, the Country of Bourbon, Nivernois,
Aunix, Angouleme, Saintonge, la March, and Limosin; The Grand Master is M.
Florimond Huraut.

4. In the Country of Orleans, Mr. Peter L' Allemant, Lord of L' Estree, etc.
Lieutenant of the Town of Chaalons, is Grand Master by Patent.

5. In Champain, and within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Mets, the
Grand Master is Charles Renart of Buchsamberg.

6. In Burgundy, and Bresse, and Countries of Lions, Beaujoly, Forets, and
Auvergne, M. de Mauroy.

7. In the Government, and within the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of
Brittany, M. Savary.

8. In Guienne, the Lower Navarre, Soul, the Country of Labor, Languedoc,
Provence, and the Dauphinate; M. Froidour is Grand Master.

In Flanders; the Grand Master is M. le Feron du Plessis, the Son.

The Office of Master of the Waters and Forests of Hainaut, which was Created
in 1661 is possessed by M. Talon, first Yeoman of the Kings Wardrobe.

The Office of Grand Master of the Waters and Forests of France, was of very
ancient Institution, and possessed by two persons of Quality: Afterward, there
was but one till the year 1575. when Henry the third Created six, which have
since been augmented.

The present Officers of the Waters and Forests, at the Marble-Table at Paris,
are
A Lientenant-General, and another particular Lieutenant; six Councellers, one
Proctor, and one Advocate-General; two Recorders or Registers; two Ushers
Audiencers.

The ordinary days of Audience at this Chamber, or Court, are Wednesdays and
Saturdays in the Morning.

There is likewise a particular Mastership, of the Waters and Forests of Paris,
whose Court is kept in the Court of the Palace, from whence Appeals are made to
the abovesaid general Chamber of the Waters and Forests of France: This
particular Court is composed of one Master, one Lieutenant, one Proctor for the
King, and some other Officers.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Constablrie, and Marshalsy of France.

THE Constable and Marshals of France, are the Head and Chief Officers that
preside in this Court. It is the Ordinary Court of Justice for the Militia, or
Soldiery, both in Civil, Politic, and Criminal matters; and is the sole and
universal one for those matters throughout the whole extent of the Kingdom.
Their Sentences, from whence Appeals may be made to the Parliament, run in this
style: The Constables and Marshals of France, to all those who shall see these
present Letters, greeting, etc. Though at present there be no Constable,
because the eldest Marshal of France represents him, making together, with the
other Marshals, but one Body, of which he is Head. When the Marshals of France
Assemble about any differences between any of the Nobility, a person taken out
of his Majesty's Council, and chosen by his Majesty, out of those that are
proposed to him for that purpose, by the Marshals of France, who is commonly,
either a Counselor of State, or a Master of Requests, assists, together with
the eldest Marshal of France, then at Paris, at all Assemblies that are held
about the point of honor, and makes report of all Affairs that pass there. He
that are present officiates that office, is M. L' Advocat, Master of Requests.

The Constabirie has power to take cognizance of the Admission and Functions of
the Offices of all Provosts, whether general, provincial, or particular, and of
Bailiffs, Vice-Bayliffs, Vice-Seneschals, Lieutenants, Criminal of the
Short-Robe, Knights of the Watch, and their Lieutenants, Assessours, Kings
Proctors, Commissaries, and Comptrollers for the Musters, Treasurers of the
Pay, Receivers, Payers, and Registrers of the several Companies, in what part
of the Kingdom soever they be established. It likewise Judges of all Faults,
Abuses, and Misdemeanors, committed by any of the Officers of the War,
Soldiery, or Marshalfies. The Officers of the Long-Robe, belonging to this
Court, are a Lieutenant General, a Lieutenant particular, and a Proctor for the
King.

These three Officers, besides the Privileges which they enjoy, as being
esteemed Commoners of the Kings Household, are Squires by their Places.

There are several Ushers belonging to this Court, whereof four are always to
attend actually upon it.

Of the Provost of the Constablrie.
The present Provost is, M. Stephen Germain, Sieur de St. Germain, who is
styled, Provost-General of the Constablrie, and Marshalsy of France, and Judge
of the Camps and Armies of the King, he is likewise called, the Grand Provost
of the Constablrie. He has 2800 Livers, or Pounds, French, yearly Salary, and
his Lodging among the Retinue of the Court; and in the Camps and Armies, he is
lodged immediately next after the Marshal, or Quarter-Master-General of the
Lodgings of the Army. He names and presents to the King, all the Officers and
Guards of his Company, who upon his Nomination, obtain Grants of their several
Places in the Chancery. He has privilege to assist at the Examinations,
Admissions, and swearing of the Provosts of the Marshals of Provinces, and of
Vice-Bayliffs, Vice-Seneschals, and Lieutenants Criminal of the Short-Robe of
the Marshalsy, and in general, of all Officers of the Marshalsy of France, with
the Privilege of having a deliberative Voice, and a power of Inspection over
them. He Commands the Marshalsies, when they are called together, as when the
Kings calls a Ban, and Arriere Ban, that is, Summons the whole Body of the
Nobility to appear in Arms. He is to take care, all Military Ordinances be
observed, and takes cognizance of all Causes belonging to Provostships, and
others left to Extraordinary Judges. He is supreme Judge, without Appeal, in
all matters, whether Civil, Criminal, or Political, in the Camps and Armies,
where he sets a price upon Provisions, and gives Pass-Ports to Merchants,
Furnishers of Munition, Tradesmen and others following the Armies. He has under
him these following Officers, viz.

Three ancient Lieutenants, whereof one is to be of the Long-Robe, who have
each of them 800 Livers yearly Salary; two Lieutenants of later Creation,
whereof one has 500, and the other 600 Livers yearly Salary.

One Proctor for the King, at 1200 Livers Salary; He has power to substitute
Deputies under him in other Marshalsies, where there is no Proctor for the
King: Four Exemts, who have 200 Livers Salary each, one Register, at 300
Livers, and 48 Guards, reckoning in the Trumpeter, at 200 Livers each yearly
Stipend.

To this Company belong a Commissary for the Musters, whose Salary is 600
Livers, and a Comptroller for the same, at 300 Livers yearly stipend. When they
are in the Army, these Officers have Extraordinary allowances over and above
their standing Pay, viz. The Lieutenant 150 Livers, the Kings Proctor 100
Livers, the Exempts 60 Livers apiece, the Registrer 60 Livers, and the Guards,
25 Livers each.

When there are several Armies in the Field, the Grand Provost of the
Constablrie, serves in the Army Royal, or principal Army, and his Lieutenants
in the other Armies.

The Sword-Officers of this Company, Mount the Guard, and do service about the
person of the eldest Marshal of France, as Representing the Constable. They are
appointed for the Guard, and keeping in Custody, persons of Quality, Gentlemen
and Officers, that have quarrels one with another; And the Provost of the
Constablry assists with the eldest Marshal of France, at all Assemblies held
upon occasion of such quarrels.

The Guards wear Hoquetons, or Short-Coats, wrought with Massie-Silver upon a
blue ground; and for their Device, the first Letter of the Kings Name being a
Crowned L between two Right Hands, Armed with Gantlets set with Flower-deluces
coming out of a Cloud, and holding each a naked Sword, with the point upwards,
with these words about it, Non sine Numine, i. e. not without a Deity, or
Divine Power, which kind of Sword is called the Sword of the Constablrie.

These Officers are of the Body of the Gend'armerie, or Men at Arms, and have
been hitherto maintained in the quality and privileges of Commoners of the
Kings Household: The last Letters to this effect, bear date the 22d of February,
1653.

There are also belonging to this Court and Company, one Chief Assessour, and
one Chief Usher to serve Warrants and Orders, who have each 300 Livers yearly
Salary.

There is likewise a Provost-General of the Moneys or Mint, and Marshalsies of
France, named Augustin-Nicholas Langlois; who has under him, several
Lieutenants, and Exempts, one Registrer, and 60 Archers, or Guards, who have
power to serve and execute Orders and Warrants.

The Provost-General of the Isle of France, is Francis de Francini de Grand'
Maisons; He has under him, four Lieutenants, eight Exempts, one Registrer, and
ten Guards called Archers, on Horseback, divided into six Brigades, all about
the Neighborhood of Paris, for the security of the Country.

The Provost of Senlis, is Nicholas Bordereau.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the Admiralty of France, and other Courts kept within the enclosure of the
Palace. And first,

Of the Admiralty of France, and of Guienne.
THis Court was formerly held too, at the Marble Table, but is at present kept
in the great Hall of the Palace, on that side next the Dauphins Hall. It takes
cognizance of all Affairs relating to the Admiralty, and the splitting of
Vessels, Shipwracks, and Commerce on the Sea, both primarily, and by way of
Appeal, and of the abuses and misdemeanors committed by the Officers of the
particular subordinate Courts of Admiralty, and of other Officers of Maritime
Affairs.

The particular Courts from whence Appeals are made to this, are those of
Rochelle, the Sands of Olonne, Marans, Callice, Boulog^e, Montreuil, Abbeville,
St. Valery, Eu, and Hault.

The present Officers belonging to it, are

A Lieutenant General, who is the Sieur de Marbrelle, and a Lieutenant
particular; four Counselors, one Proctor for the King, one Recorder, or
Registrer; and one Chief Usher.

The Days of Audience in this Court, are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.

There are likewise other Chambers, or Courts of Admiralty, at Rouen,
Bourdeaux, in Brittany, and at Dunkirk, and other places.

Of the Court of the Great Pantler of France.
This Court takes cognizance of all regulations among the Bakers, who are
admitted there.

To it belong,

A Lieutenant general and particular, Mayor and Guardian of the Great Pantry of
France, who is Nicholas Petit-Jean, or Little John; one Proctor for the King,
one Registrer, one Chief Usher, and 13 Ushers Audiencers, that reside some at
Paris, and some in the Countries

The Audience Days in this Court, are Mundays, and Saturdays.

Of the Bailywick of the Palace.
In this Court, are these Officers, viz.

A Bailiff, who is Claudius Pelot; a Lieutenant General, a Proctor for the
King, and a Registrer. This Court judges of all differences arising in the
Halls, and Court of the Palace.

The Court of the Masonry,
Is kept over the Dauphins Hall, to it belong. Three Counselors, who are
Judges general of all Masons work in France.

The Court called the Court of the Bazoche.
For the regulation of the Clerks of the Palace, and the Court for matters of
Justice relating to importing and vending of Seafish, are still held too,
within the enclosure of the Palace.

And thus having spoke of the Courts of Judicature that are held within the
enclosure of the Palace, we shall next treat of the others held without it, and
particularly of the Chatelet, or Castle of Paris. Which is the ordinary Court
of Justice of the City of Paris, and the most considerable presidial Court in
the Kingdom.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the Chatelet, or Castle of Paris.

THE Administration of Justice for the Town, Provostship and Vicounty of Paris,
is exercised under the Name of the Provost of Paris, and in case of vacancy,
the Kings Proctor General of the Parliament, is Guardian by his place, of this
Provostship, and all Acts passing there, during that time, run in his name.

The Officers thereto belonging, are

A Provost, called the Provost of Paris, who is Charles-Denis de Bullion,
Marquess of Gallerdon, etc. He had the Grant of this Office the 15th of
February, 1685. and took the usual Oath for it in Parliament, on the 22d of
May-following, and the same day was solemnly Installed in the Chatelet, and put
into possession thereof, by one of the Presidents, a Mortier, the Dean of the
Lay-Counsellours of the Parliament, and the eldest Clergyman Counselor of
the Grand Chamber. He has 8000 Livers yearly Sallary and allowance.

All Judgments and Sentences, given in the Chatelet, and all acts of Notaries
run in his Name; the Assembly of the Nobility of the Provostship of Paris, for
the Arriere-^an is held in his House, and it belongs to him to Conduct them to
the Army. This Office was always exercised by Persons of great Quality and
Reputation. Under him there are the following Officers, viz. A Lieutenant
Civil, who is John le Camus, Honorary Master of Requests, a Lieutenant for the
Policy, or Government of the City, Gabriel-Nicholas de la Reynie; a Lieutenant
Criminal, James Defita; two particular Lieutenants, Fifty six Counselors,
four Advocates, and one Proctor for the King; Eight Substitutes, two Honorary
Counselors; one Chief Recorder, or Registrer, with diverse other Registrers,
both for Civil and Criminal Affairs, and for Audiences, Insinuations,
Presentations, and other matters; one Chief Usher Audiencer, and several other
Ushers Audiencers: There are likewise belonging to it two Counselors,
Judges-Auditours to decide small Suits, not amounting to above the sum of 25
Livers; one Registrer in Chief of the Auditors, and one Chief Usher, and two
other Ushers-Audiencers of the said Auditors; 48 Commissaries, and 113
Notaries: Together with the Proctors, Ushers on Porseback, and Ushers carrying
Wands, and the Ushers of the Provostship of Paris.

By the Edicts and Declarations of the present King, Registered in Parliament
the 7th of September, 1684. The Court of the New Chatelet, Created in 1674. was
reunited to that of the old one; and accordingly, the Offices of Provost, of
Lieutenant General Civil, and Lieutenant General Criminal, were suppressed, as
likewise that of Kings Proctor of the old Chatelet.

The Lieutenant Criminal of the Short-Robe, of the Provostship and Vicounty of
Paris, is Reny Chrisanthe le Clear, Baron of Sauteray, etc. He has under him,
four Lieutenants, seven Exempts, and 100 Archers, or Guards, which are also
Ushers at the Chatelet: The Provost of the Isle of France, of whom we have
already spoken, has also under him several Lieutenants, Exempts and Archers, or
Guards for the Execution of his Sentences and Judgments.

The Knight of the Watch, has likewise under him, four Lieutenants, eight
Exempts, one Registrer, one Comptroller, and Clerk of the Watch, one Guidon, 40
Archers, or Guards on Horseback, and 100 on Foot, that wear blue Hoquetons, or
Jackets, set with Stars of Silver. Besides which number, there is a recruit, as
well of Horse and Foot, which is much stronger in Winter than in Summer.

As for the solemn and Ceremonial Habits of the Officers of the Chatelet, they
are these; The three Lieutenants-General, the Kings Advocates and Proctors,
wear Scarlet-Robes, and the Counselors black ones.

Formerly there were several little Courts of Judicature, held by the several
Lords, who had their peculiar Jurisdictions in the City, Suburbs and Banlieu,
or Liberties of Paris; which were suppressed upon the Creation of the Court of
the new Chatelet, in the Month of February, 1674* and their Jurisdictions
incorporated into the Courts of the old and new Chatelets, which are now made
but one, as is abovesaid.

Having spoken of the ordinary Jurisdiction of the City, we will proceed next
to treat of the ordinary Jurisdiction for the Taxes, Aids, and other Dues to
the King, which is the ordinary Court of Justice for Pari, as it comprehends a
certain Territory, in which Taxes are levied by Officers, Elected for that
purpose, which is thence called an Election: where all Causes, relating to the
said Levies, or Taxes, are pleaded primarily, and at the first instance, as
they term it.

CHAP. XL.
Of the Election of Paris.

THE Election of Paris comprehends 440 Parishes: The Officers of the Court of
this Election, who sit in the Court of the Palace, Assess and Rate the Taxes,
and judge all differences which arise about Taxes, Aids, Entries, or Duties of
Importation of Goods or Merchandises into Paris, and about the five great
Farms; and in general, all contestations that happen about the Imposition and
Levying the Kings Revenues, of what nature soever they be, excepting only those
of the Kings Crown Lands, and Gabelles, or Revenue on Salt. The Appeals from
their Sentences are made to the Court of Aids.

The days of Audience for the Kings Farms, are Mundays and Thursdays in the
Morning, and for the Taxes, on Wednesdays and Saturdays in the Morning.

The Officers belonging to the Court of the Election of Paris, are,
A President, who is Laurence de Chenevieres, one Lieutenant, one Assessour,
sixteen Counselors Elect, one Advocate and Proctor for the King, one
Substitute, two Registrers, one Chief Usher, three Ushers-Audiencers, eight
Ushers of the Taxes, and eight Proctors.

There are also in this Election, two Receivers of Taxes, etc. One Honorary
Counselor Elect.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the Granary of Salt at Paris.

THE Magazin, or Granary of Salt at Paris, is near the River at the end of the
Pontneuf, or New-Bridge, where the Seat of the Court is established, that was
Erected to judge of all Contestations happening about the Gabells, or Duties on
Salt, and about the distribution of it, and levying his Majesty's Duties.
Appeals are made from this Court, to the Court of Aids: The Audience days in
this Court, are Wednesdays and Saturdays, and in Winter, Mundays too, from the
first of October, to the first of February, on the same days the Salt is
distributed out to the people, in the Afternoon.

The Officers belonging to this Court, are
Two Presidents, three Granateers, or Granary-Keepers, three Comptrollers, two
Lieutenants, two Comptrollers, and Keepers of the Measures; two Advocates, and
two Proctors for the King; three Registrers, these Registrers may make Deputies
for the exercise of their Offices; three Ushers Audiencers, six Ushers and
Sergeants of the Gabels, eight Proctors, thirty Measures of Salt, sixty
Carriers, or Porters of Salt, whereof thirty are of old, and thirty of new
Creation; they are called the sworn Hanouards, ten Runners of Salt, ten
Bruisers, twelve Comptrollers, and Visiters of the Barillage, or Barels of the
Salt Pits, and Salt-Fish; one Receiver at the Salt Granary, and one
Commissioner for business, one Captain, one Lieutenant, some Brigadeers, and
fifteen Guards, both on Horseback and on Foot. Next to the ordinary Royal
Courts of Judicature, follow those of the City.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Guildhall, or Townhouse of Paris.

NExt to the Governor of Paris, who is now the Duke de Gevres, the other
Officers of the Guildhall, or Townhouse, called the Hotel de Ville, are

The Provost of the Merchants, who is at present, M. de Fourcy, President of
the third Chamber of Inquests; four Echevins, who are in the nature of
Sheriffs, twenty six Counselors of the City, the Kings Proctor for the City,
one Recorder, one Receiver for the City, sixteen Quarteniers, together with
Dixeniers, or Decurions, and Cinquanteniers, which are certain Officers which
are set over Wards and Precincts, distinguished into the different numbers of
16, 10, and 50. intimated in the Titles aforegoing.

There are 300 Guards, called Archers, belonging to the City, who are divided
into three Companies; their Colonel is John Fournier.

There are likewise several Officers for Policy, and keeping good Order, as
well for the Merchandises and Wares brought thither, and for regulation of
their Conveyance by the River, and of all things vended at the several Keys,
and other places of Sale.

The Provost of the Merchants, who is as 'twere the Mayor of the City, has a
Jurisdiction in ordinary, at the first Suit, as well over the Rents of the
City, and over all causes and differences between the Townsmen, and the
Officers of the City, in things relating to the Policy, or good order of it, or
about the Wages and Salaries of the Officers.

These City-Magistrates set prices on all Wares, and have the oversight and
inspection of all the Ports or Keys, and of all Wheat, or other Grain, Wine,
Wood, Coal, Billets, Hay, Fish, Apples, Nuts, and other Commodities. The
Officers of the Chatelet, as we have remarked above, are likewise Judges in
matter of Policy, and good Order, and have power to set a price on Commodities.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of the Judges Consuls.

THE Judges, who are called Judges and Consuls, hold their Court of Judicature
behind the Church of St. Mederick. They take cognizance of all Causes that
relate to trading, or dealing between Merchant and Merchant, or Letters of
Exchange, Promises, Obligations, or Contracts made between Partners, or
Associates, for Merchandises, of what nature or condition soever they be. Their
Jurisdiction was established at Paris, by King Charles the Ninth, in the year
1563. Their Sentences may be appealed from, to the Parliament, when the sum in
question amounts to above 500 Livers.

For this Court, there is an Election, made every year, of one Judge, and four
Consuls, out of the Body of the Merchants, who, before they enter upon the
exercise of their Functions, take the usual Oath at the Parliament; there
belong further to this Court, one Registrer, and four Ushers.

There was formerly another Court, called the Citizens Parlour, to which this
Court succeeded; and there are still six Officers, that retain the Title of
Sergeants of the Citizens Parlour.

The Merchants have still a place where they meet, in the Palace, underneath
the Dauphins Hall, to confer about their Affairs, which is much in the nature
of the public Changes, at Lions, Rouen, Toulouze, and London.

The six principal and original Bodies, or Corporations of Merchants in Paris
which are like the Companies in London, under which all the other Trades are
comprehended, are 1. The Drapers. 2. The Spicers, or Grocers and Apothecaries.
3. The Mercers. 4. The Skinners, or Furriers. 5. The Bonneteers, or Cap-Makers.
And 6. The Goldsmiths. The Booksellers and Wine-Merchants, enjoy also the like
Privileges as those of the six Companies.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of the Generalities of France.

THE Generalities are the general Offices of the Treasurers General of France,
established for the facilitating the receiving and levying of the Moneys
arising from Taxes, and other Impositions, called by the name of Taillons, or
lesser Taxes, and subsistence Money: They are in number twenty three in all,
viz. Seventeen that are divided into Elections, and six of the Countries,
governed by their peculiar Assemblies of Estates, which are not divided into
Elections, but Assemble their own Estates, something like the Parliaments of
England, to impose and assess the sum the King Demands, and afterward levy it
themselves, and transmit it to the Treasure Royal.

The seventeen Generalities of the Provinces of Election, with their several
Elections, are as follows.
1. The Generality of Paris contains 20 Elections, and 1904 Parishes. 2. That
of Orleans, 12 Elections, and 1148 Parishes. 3. Of Noulins, 9 Elections, and
1170 Parishes. 4. Of AlenCon, 9 Elections, and 1276 Parishes. 5. Of Chaalons,
11 Elections, and 2294 Parishes. 6. Of Soissons, 7 Elections, and 1088
Parishes. 7. Of Rouen, 12 Elections, and 1623 Parishes. 8. Of Caen, 9
Elections, and 1008 Parishes. 9. Of Limoges, 7 Elections, and 1268 Parishes.
10. Of Poitiers, 9 Elections, and 1164 Parishes. 11. Of Bourges, 4 Elections,
and 566 Parishes. 12. Of Riom in Auvergne, 8 Elections, and 827 Parishes. 13.
Of Bourdeaux, 9 Elections, and 2995 Parishes. 14. Of Montauban, 11 Elections,
and 951 Parishes. 15. Of Amiens, 6 Elections, and 1260 Parishes. 16. Of Tours,
16 Elections, and 1539 Parishes. 17. Of Lions, 5 Elections, and 865 Parishes.
The Generalities of the Countries governed by Estates, are
1. The Generality of Nantes for Brittany, in which no number of Parishes is
specified.

2. Of Nontpelier, which is divided into 11 Diocesses, instead of Elections,
and contains 1466 Parishes; in it are three particular Receivers.

3. Of Toulouze, which besides the Town, in which there is a particular
Receiver, is divided into 11 Diocesses, which have each of them three
particular Receivers, and contain 1013 Parishes.

4. Of Dijon, in which are 1761 Parishes.

5. Of Grenoble, which has six Elections, and one particular receiving Office
at Briancon, and contains 604 Parishes.

6. Of Aix, in which are 17 little Governments, called Vigueries, and 644
Parishes, and three particular Receivers of the Rents of the Crown Lands,
reckoning in that of Cisteron, and the particular Receiver of the Rents of the
Crown Lands, at Aix.

CHAP. XLV.
Of the Order observed in Levying Taxes.

AS soon as the sum his Majesty is pleased to impose on his people, is
resolved on in his Royal-Council, Commissions are sent to the
Treasurers-General of France, established in the Offices of the several
Generalities: Which Commissions enjoin the said Treasurers General, to divide
the sum which they are Commanded to levy upon the Elections, within the extent
of their respective Generalities, into as just and equal proportions as they
possibly can; which done, they send them to the Elects, who are the Judges of
the Elections, (which we have already described in speaking of the Election of
Paris) with an Order annexed thereunto, by which they are Commanded to levy
just such a sum, neither more nor less, within the extent of their Elections.
The Elects thereupon, assemble, and draw up Tax-Rolls, by which they assess the
Cities, Boroughs, and Villages, within their several Elections, and afterward
send those Rolls to every Parish, who choose Collectors of the said Taxes out of
the Inhabitants of the same Parishes. Which Collectors are obliged again to
make particular Rolls for their Parishes, and to assess every one of the
Inhabitants of the same, in such just proportions, according to their
respective abilities and capacities, as will make up the sum charged on their
Parishes, and then to levy the money so assessed, and carry it to the Receivers
of the Taxes for every Election, and they again are to return it to the General
Receivers of their Generality, who transmit it to the Treasure Royal.

The Taxes are paid only by those of the third Estate of the Kingdom, that is
to say, by the Inhabitants called Roturiers, who are no Gentlemen, dwelling in
Town not Free, and in Boroughs and Villages, according to the proportion of
Goods they have that are Taxable, of what nature soever they be, and in what
place soever situate, except in Languedoc, where only Lands and immovable
Goods are taxable, so that the Roturiers, or Peasants, pay nothing for the
noble Fiefs, or Lands they hold there in Knights Fee, but on the contrary, the
Gentlemen pay for the Lands they hold in Villenage there, because the Taxes
there are real, and not personal.

Churchmen, Gentlemen, and Persons ennobled by Patent, are exempt from Taxes,
as likewise are the Officers of the Sovereign Courts of Judicature, the Kings
Secretaries, the Officers that are Commoners of the Kings Household, that serve
there actually, either by the quarter, or the half year, and which receive at
least 60 Livers yearly Salary, and whose names are in the Rolls, or Books of
Accounts, Registered in the Court of Aids; and the Veterans, or superannuated
Persons and Widows of the above-specified Officers, during their Widow-hood,
provided nevertheless, they make no Traffic of any thing but what is of the
growth of their own Lands, which they may sell freely, but they are debarred
from Farming any Lands of other Persons, without paying.

The Officers of the presidial Courts, Bayliwicks, Seneschalsies, Provostships,
Vigueries, Waters and Forests, Customs of things Exported. Elections, Salt
Granaries, and of all other Courts of Judicature, and Jurisdictions in the
Kingdom, are exempt from Taxes, and from Watching and Warding, as is amply
expressed in his present Majesty's Declaration of the Month of February, 1674.

The Citizens of Paris, and of other free or privileged Towns, are likewise
exempt from Taxes. The Imposition called the Taillon, or little Tax, was
established by Henry the second in the year 1549. to augment the pay of the
Soldiers: This Duty is paid by the same persons that pay the Taxes, and with
the same compulsion, and amounts to about a third part of the Income of the
Taxes.

Subsistence Money is another Duty, which has been begun to be levied but of
late years. It is so called, because it is raised for the subsistence of the
Soldiers in their Winter Quarters; upon payment of which, people were for a
while exempted from lodging Soldiers, in Winter time. This Duty is paid too in
the same manner as the two former. These Duties are called Real, in respect of
Patrimonial Goods, personal in respect of ones place of Habitation, and mixed,
in respect of the proportion of peoples ability, or sufficiency; to distinguish
them from the Aids, which are only Impositions real, as we shall afterward
further explain.

The five Farms called the Great, or Gross Farms of France, consist in several
Duties and Customs exacted for Importation, and Exportation of several
Merchandises.

These Farms concern most, the Provinces of Normandy, Picardy, Champagne, and
Burgundy.

Of the Aids.
By the name of Aids, are understood the Duties the King takes upon all sorts
of Merchandises, except Salt.

Under this name formerly, were comprehended all manner of Impositions levied
on the people, for extraordinary expenses, which the Revenue arising out of the
Kings Domain, or Crowns Lands, was not sufficient to defray; and in this sense,
under the name of Aids, were understood, the Taxes, Gabels, Tenths, and other
Impositions.

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Gabels.

THE Duties the King takes upon Salt, are called the Gabels. It is hard to find
the original of them, so ancient are they; only we find, that Philip the Long,
about the year 1318. took a The sixth part of a Penny.
double upon every pound of Salt; and that under Charles the Fifth; this Duty
was already united to the Domain, or Revenue of the Crown Lands, contrary to
the opinion of those that attribute the establishment of it, to Philip de
Valois. In the Ordinance of King Francis the First, made in the year 1542. It
is said, that a A Measure being something above half a Bushel.
Muid of Salt shall be sold for 20 Livers. The Gabels, or Duties on Salt were
sold by Henry the Second, to the Inhabitants of the Countries of Poitou,
Xaintonge, Aunis, Angouleme, Higher and Lower Limosin, and the Higher and Lower
March of Perigord, in the year 1553. and those Provinces, for that reason are
called the Countries of free Salt: The Town of Callice, and the Reconquer'd
Countries, when they came from under the Dominion of the English, to return to
the Obedience of the French Monarchs, demanded likewise the same privilege of
having their Salt free.

There are three Parties, or Divisions for the Gabels, viz. 1. That of the
Country of Lions, or Languedoc. 2. That of the Dauphinate, and Provence. And 3.
That of the rest of France, which is called the Grand Party. The Farmers of the
Gabels are obliged to buy all the Salt at the Salt Pits, at a certain price, to
pay there the Kings Duties, and to convey it at their own Charges, Perils, and
Fortunes, to the Granaries established by the King, where they are to deliver
out the Salt to the People, by a Commissioner for that purpose.

There are certain Officers established over the several Granaries, which are,
One President, two Granateers, or Granary-Keepers, three Comptrollers, and one
Advocate, and one Proctor for the King, who issue Process out against such as
make bad Salt, and judge of the goodness of the Salt, and of the quantity
requisite for the extent-of their Jurisdiction, look after the Weights and
Measures, and take care it be not sold above the Kings set price. The Salt is
distributed two ways, viz. By way of Imposition, or voluntarily, according to
the discretion and will of the Buyers. They that Inhabit within the extent of
the Granaries of Impost, which are fixed in the Frontier Parts of the Kingdom,
or that live near the Countries, that have the privilege of free Salt, from
whence Salt may be easily brought to them, are obliged to take every year, a
certain quantity of Salt, proportionable to their Family, but at the voluntary
Granaries, every one takes but what he pleases; And so you see, that the Gabel
is personal at the Granaries of Imposts, and real only at the Voluntary
Granaries.

CHAP. XLVII.
A List of the other receiving Offices, the Moneys and Incomes of which, are
yearly returned into the Exchequer, or Treasure Royal.

1. THE Forain of Languedoe, and of Provence.

2. The five Great, or Gross Farms.

3. The Convoy of Bourdeaux.

4. The Customs of Bayonne.

5. The Farm of Brouage.

6. The Growths, or Products of Ingrande.

7. The Farm of the River of Seine, at the places granted out.

8. The 9 Livers, and 18 pence of Picardie.

9. The ancient 10 pence of Paris.

10. The new 10 pence of Paris.

11. The 30 Sols, or Pence of Paris.

12. The Domain, or Crown Lands of Languedoc.

13. The ancient Crown Lands of Navarre.

14. The new Crown Lands of Navarre.

15. The Lands of Queen Margaret.

16. The Crown Lands of Chateau-Regnault.

17. The Crown Lands of the Queen Mother.

18. The Iron Farm.

19. The Farms of the Duties on Paper, and the Comptrol of the Offices relating
to it.

20. The Duties on Ashes, Gravel and Soder.

21. The Customs of Lions.

22. The Sale of the Forests and Woods of the Isle of France, Generality of
Paris, and of Soissons, Orleans, Tours, Chaalons, Rouen, Caen, and County of
Perch.

Part of the Crown Lands, whose Revenues were formerly received by the
Receivers-General of some Generalities.

The Parties Casual, or Casual Revenue.

The Frank Fiefs, or Freehold; and several other Duties and Revenues.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the Treasury-Royal, of the Keeper of the Treasury-Royal, and of the
Treasurers of the Parties Casual, or Casual Revenue.

THE Treasure-Royal, or Exchequer, formerly called L' Epargne, or
Spare-Treasury, is in France what the Aerarium Populi was at Rome. It is as
'twere a Sea, into which all the Receiving Offices, as well general as
particular, of the Taxes, Taillons, Subfistance-Money, and in fine, of the
Kings whole Revenue, like so many Rivulets and Rivers, discharge themselves;
and in which, all the Treasurers established for the payment and delivering the
Kings Money, come and take the sums needful for the Administration of their
several Offices; as for the expenses of the Royal Households, for the payment of
the Soldiery, who have their Treasurers, both Ordinary and Extraordinary,
which are the Treasurers for the Ordinary, and the Treasurers for the
Extraordinary Expenses of the Wars; The Treasurers of the Navy, who have charge
of the payment of the Naval Army, and of all the Ships the King puts to Sea;
The Treasurers of the Fortifications; The Pay-Masters of the Rents of the
Guildhall, or Townhouse of Paris; and the Pay-Masters of the Officers of the
Sovereign Courts, with many others.

The Treasurer of the Epargne, or Spare-Treasure, was put in the place of the
Ancient Receiver-General, by Francis the First. Henry the second made that
Office Alternative, so that in his time, there were two; The Late King Lewis
the Thirteenth made it Triennial, as he did all the other Offices that were
accountable, or handled Money, and during this Kings Minority, they were about
to make it Quadriennial, or to be executed by four, every one in his year, as
likewise all the other accountable Offices. The King used to style them the
Counselors and Treasurers of his Epargne, or Spare-Treasure.

They that possessed these Offices, had 12000 Livers Salary, and three A Denier
is the twelfth part of a Penny.
Deniers out of every Liver they handled, and every time they handled it,
whether in receiving, or paying it, and so took the said Deniers every time any
Money was brought to, or carried out of the said Treasury, which amounted to a
very great sum. At present this Office is alternatively executed by M. Steven
Jehannot de Bartillat, and M. Gedeon de Mets, under the Title of Keepers of the
Treasury-Royal.

The Keepers of the Treasury-Royal usually pays every year, all the Gifts and
Gratuities given by the King, or otherwise they give in lieu of them,
assignations or Bills, acquitting the Parties of so much as the King has been
pleased to grant them.

There are three Offices of Treasurer of the Parties Casual, or Casual Revenue,
viz. The ancient one, the Alternative one, and a Quadriennial one, was going to
be established, but that the three first bought off this fourth Office.
Formerly, there was but one at the time of the establishment of the venality of
accountable Offices, by Lewis the Twelfth. Their Office is to receive all the
Money arising from the Sale of Offices; but since the time of Henry the Great,
several Offices are become Hereditary, upon condition of paying every year a
certain Duty or Fee, which is therefore called the annual Duty, or the
Paulette. But if it happen, that any Officer, having not paid the aforesaid
Duty, die before he resign his Office, or survives not forty days after his
Resignation of it, then the Treasurer of the Parties Casual, has power to
dispose of the Office for the Kings profit.

The Sieur Peter Richer, Treasurer of the Kings Casual Revenues, at present
exercises alone the three forementioned Offices.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of the Universities of France.

1. PAris is the most famous University in the whole Kingdom, whether it be for
Divinity, Law, Physic, the Arts, or several other Exercicises: after Paris are
reckoned these following Universities, viz. Those

2. Of Toulouse.

3. Bourdeaux.

4. Poitiers.

5. Orleans, famous for the Civil Law.

6. Bourges.

7. Angers.

8. Caen.

9. Montpelier, famous for Physic.

10. Cahors.

11. Nants.

12. Reims.

13. Valence.

14. Aix.

15. Avignon.

16. Pont a Mousson.

17. Perpignan.

18. Douay.

19. Dole.

20. Fribourg in Brisgan.

And besides these, there are several other Towns in the Kingdom, where there
are very good Colleges, though they bear not the Title of Universities, as at
Rouen, Tournon, and la Fleche, where the Jesuits, or other Communities,
instruct Youth: There is one likewise at Juilly, managed by the Fathers of the
Oratory, who have diverse others in several Towns.

But to inform you of the exercises performed in all these Universities, it
will be enough to give you the Description of those done in the University of
Paris, which is the Mother of the Rest, after whose pattern, the others are
modeled.

Of the Exercises used in the University of Paris.
In this University, are reckoned four distinct chief Faculties, which are
called the four Faculties, which are, 1. The Faculty of Theology, or Divinity.
2. The Faculty of Law. 3. The Faculty of Physic. And 4. The Faculty of Arts.
We shall speak.

CHAP. L.
1. Of the Faculty of Theology, or Divinity.

THeology has always flourished in this University, ever since its first
Institution, but it has been more especially in recommendation since the time
of Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, that died in 1164. who is commonly called,
the Master of the Sentences, because he composed a Book of them. It flourished
much too here in the time of St. Thomas Aquinas, about the year 1265 who
composed a Summary of Divinity, and several other works; and now in Vogue and
Reputation more than ever. Although they have privilege to teach Divinity in
other Universities, yet there are no where more Renowned Schools for that
Faculty, than in the Colleges of the Sorbonne and Navarre. The greatest part
of the Doctors have not fixed in any House, or College, yet there are many of
the House and Society of Sorbonne, and many of the House of Navarre: But those
that only take their Degrees there, are only Doctors of the Sorbonne, or of
Navarre, and not of the House.

There are some likewise, that have only the privilege to claim Hospitality in
the House of the Sorbonne, who are called either Sorbonici Hospites,
Sorbon-Guests, or e familia Sorbonica, of the Family of Sorbonne, but not
Socii, Fellows of the Society of Sorbonne.

As the House of the Sorbon, founded in 1254. in the time of St. Lewis, by one
Robert de Sorbonne, is the most famous in its kind, for persons of most Eminent
Learning and Virtue that compose its Society; the Beauty of its magnificent
Building adds a Luster to it. The admirable Structure of its Grand Halls where
Acts are kept, and Lectures Read, as well as that of the whole Body of the
House, but more especially of its Church, in which there is a Dome of a very
extraordinary and lofty height, sufficiently set forth the Magnificence of the
late Cardinal Duke of Richelieu, who has immortalised himself by this work, and
made of it as 'twere a Temple, Dedicated to his Memory. He lies there Buried,
having been Provisour of the said House. The Provisour, both of the House of
Sorbonne, and of that of Navarre, at present, is the Archbishop of Paris.

CHAP. LI.
2. Of the Faculty of Law.

IN ancient time, all Churchmen and Councellers were Commanded to instruct
themselves well in the Canonical Constitutions, for fear they should ignorantly
offend against any of them.

The Schools called the Decretal Schools, where at the present the Canon Law is
taught, and of late time, the Civil Law too, are in the Street called, la Rue
de St. Jean de Beauvais.

There are six Regents that read public Lectures, viz. Three on Mornings, and
three in the Afternoons.

The present King has newly set up a Chair for the teaching of the French, or
Municipal Law at Paris, in the College of the three Nations: Mr. Launay, one
of the ancient Advocates is the Lecturer, having sworn by the Chancellor, in
the Month of November, 1680.

At Bourdeaux there is likewise another Professor of the French Law,
established in the Month of July, 1681. And there is another at Cahors.

CHAP. LII.
3. Of the Faculty of Physic.

THE third Faculty is that of Physic, which is as ancient as the Institution
of the University. Several eminent Persons have made this Science flourish in
this University since its Institution, and among others, the Learned Fernelius,
Chief Physician to King Henry the Second.

The Physic Schools are in the Rue de la Bucherie, where they have been ever
since the year 1469. and in the year 1608. a Great Anatomical Theater was
Erected there.

There is besides, one Demonstratour, and Operatour of the interior parts of
Plants, and of all other Medicines, and of Chyrurgical Operations, at the Kings
Physick-Garden at Paris, who is Joseph du Verney, Physician of the Academy of
Sciences.

CHAP. LIII.
4. Of the Faculty of Arts, of the Rector, and of the four Nations.

THE Faculty of Arts is the Mother of all the Rest, and for which Schools were
first Founded.

The Head of the whole University, who is called the Rector, is always chosen
out of this Body, and never out of the other Faculties: This Rector has so
great a power over the other Faculties, that he can make them cease all public
Acts and Lectures; and on the days he makes his solemn Processions, which is
four times a year, he forbids the Preachers to go up into the Pulpit. For these
solemn Processions, all the Faculties assemble in the Maturins Convent, in the
Rue St. Jaques, and from thence march in order, to the Church appointed by the
Rector, who is accompanied thither by the Doctors of the three superior
Faculties, by the Masters of Arts, and a great number of Religious Men. He
being the Head of that University, which the Kings of France treat as their
Eldest Daughter, as it is reported, takes place of all sorts of Persons,
excepting the Princes of the Blood, and ought at public Acts in his
University, take place of the Popes Nuntio, of Ambassadors, Cardinals, and the
Dukes and Peers of France. At the Funeral Obsequies of Kings, he marches side
by side in an equal Rank with the Archbishop of Paris.

Whilst he injoys this Dignity, he wears a Violet-Coloured Girdle, the trimming
of his Gloves is also of Violet-Colour. His solemn Habit is a Violet-Coloured
Gown, with a silk Girdle of the same Color, with golden Tassels, at the end of
which hangs a Purse of Violet-Coloured Velvet, called an Escarcelle, trimmed
with gold Buttons and Galoon. He wears over his Gown a little Mantle of white
Ermine, which reaches down, round about, half way his Arms.

This Dignity is Elective, and lasts but three Months, unless it be thought
convenient (as sometimes it happens) to continue it to one Person, two or three
times together.

The Faculty of Arts is divided into four Nations, which are, 1. The Nation of
France. 2. The Nation of Picardie. 3. The Nation of Normandy. And 4. The Nation
of Germany. The Titles, or Epithetes, assumed by these several Nations, when
their Proctor speaks for them in public Assemblies, are, 1. Honoranda Gallorum
Natio, the Honorable Nation of the French. 2. Fidelissima Picardorum Natio,
the most Loyal, or Faithful Nation of the Picards. 3. Veneranda Normannorum
Natio, the Venerable Nation of the Normans. And 4. Constantissima Germanorum
Natio, the most constant Nation of the Germans.

The three superior Faculties likewise, when they speak, have their peculiar
Titles; for the Faculty of Divinity styles it self, Sacra Theologiae Facultas,
the Sacred Faculty of Divinity; the Faculty of Law, Consultissima Decretorum
Facultas, the most wise Faculty of the Decrees; and the Faculty of Physic,
Saluberrima Medicorum Facultas, the most wholesome Faculty of the Physicians.

There are in this University, many Colleges, in which are maintained several
Regents, and Lecturers, and Professors, that teach the Humanities, or Learning
of the lesser Schools, which they do by Classes, and the Sciences, Tongues, and
Philosophy. So that in this University, is taught all in one House, whatever is
taught, both in the inferior Schools, and Universities of England. So that
there is no need of fitting youth beforehand, in inferior Schools, for
Universities in France, as in England, they running through the whole Circle of
Learning in one College; where for better help to youth, there is a different
Regent in every Classis, which are all in distinct Rooms; and they have
Preceptors, or Tutors besides to help them in their Exercises. There are
maintained in these Colleges too some few Foundation Scholars called
Boursiers, or Bursers, but the Colleges subsist most by Pensioners, or
Borders; and it is free for any of what Nation soever to lie any where in the
Town, and yet go and learn in the Classes, and hear Lectures, upon doing which,
they have as much privilege to take their Degrees, as those that reside in
Colleges, so that the number of Students lying in the Town, do vastly exceed
that of those that reside in Colleges; And the number of them is indeed
prodigiously great; the Youth not only of all Provinces of France, but of all
other Europaean Nations, flocking hither to study. Besides what is performed in
the Colleges, that depend of the University. There are likewise Lecturers and
Professors of Royal Foundation, for teaching of the Oriental Tongues, viz. The
Greek, Hebrew, Arabian, Syriack, Caldean, Samaritan, and other Tongues; as also
the Mathematics, and Physic, as also Philosophy, Rhetoric, and the Latin
Tongue, all which, are performed in the Royal College, by Professors paid by
the King.

Philosophy is also taught there in French by some Persons, as of late by the
deceased M. de L' Eclache, with success enough. There are also Academies for
Natural Philosophy: Some parts of the Mathematics are also taught there by
private Men, as Geography by Mr. Sanson, and others, etc. There are also many
Masters of the Modern and living Tongues.

It is also worth our remark, that at certain times in the year, there are
several particular and extraordinary Exercises performed in Paris; As in the
Nave of the Church of St. Germains Abbey, there is every Sunday, a Flemish
Sermon Preached at half an hour past two in the Afternoon; a Latin Sermon at
the Great Cordeliers Church, on St. Bonaventures Day, as likewise at the
Augustins, Bernardins, and Jacobins, on the Days of St. Austin, St. Bernard,
and St. Dominick; and on the Day of Quasimodo, there is a High Mass sung in
Greek, in the Cordeliers Church, for the Confraternity of the Pilgrims of
Jerusalem and of the Holy Sepulcher, in the middle of which, there is a Greek
Sermon. Likewise Note, that in the College of Beauvais, and in that only,
there are every Year public Acts and Disputations in Greek.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of the Historiographers of France.

THE Office of Historiographer of France is possessed, or pretended to, by three
sorts of persons, viz.

1. Those that actually write as such, and are Entered upon the Kings Books for
such. 2. Such, as though they be enterd as such, upon the Kings Books, have as
yet written nothing; and thirdly, Such as have only taken out Patents, but are
not enterd in the Book; or such as only assume the title. I shall mention only
those of the first sort, which are,

1. The two Brothers de St. Marthe, who have given to the public, a general
History of the Prelates of France, in four Volumns, under the Title of Gallia
Christiana; and continue the Genealogicat History of the House, or Royal Family
of France, containing and including all the Sovereign Families of Europe; as
likewise, the Genealogical History of the House of Tremoille, and several other
Works.

2. M. de Chene, Son of the Famous Andrew du Chene, who has published the
Continuation of the Historians of France begun by his Father; and the History
of the Cardinals and Chancellours of France.

Other Writers, that though they have not the Title of Historiographers, yet
write Histories, and other commendable Curiosities, are M. Blenchard, M.
Justel, the two Valois, M. de la Roque, M. Doujat, M. de Varillas, and several
others.

The Journal des Scavans, or Philosophical Transactions, is done by the Abbot
de la Roque.

The Journal of the Palace, by M. Blondeau, and M Gueret.

The Mercury Gallant, by M. Vize.

CHAP. LV.
Of the Academy of France, or Society of the Virtuosi.

THis Famous Company, or Society of Learned Men, which is in France, what the
Royal Society is in England, and is called, the French Academy, was Instituted
by Letters Patents, granted by the late King Lewis the Thirteenth, Verified in
Parliament, in the Month of July, 1637.

The King has been pleased, in the said Patents, to grant them the same
Privileges, as his own Domestic Officers enjoy: Their Causes are committed to
the Masters of Requests of the Household, or else of the Palace at Paris, by
virtue of a Committimus under the Great Seal, they are exempt from being
Administratours or Guardians, and from doing service at the Guards of the Gates
of the Towns where they reside.

The first Function, or Duty enjoined by their Patent, is to promote the
Embellishment and Purity of the French Tongue, which was the chief design of
the late Cardinal Richlieu, the first Protector of their Society; and because
in the time of his Ministry, by reason of the great Sway and Authority he bore,
every Body strove to please him, many persons of great Quality would needs be
admitted of this his new Erected Society. The late Chancellor M. Seguier, was
placed over them as their Director, who after the Cardinals Death, became their
Protector: Since whose Decease, his present Majesty has been pleased to do them
the Honor to be their Protector himself, and has given them leave to Assemble
in one of the Halls of the Louvre, or of his Palace in Paris.

The number of the Members of this Society, is limited to forty.

The Names of the present Members, that are most to be remarked, are those.
M. John Douiat, Dean of the Doctors, Regenes of Law, who is Dean of the
Academy.

Francis Tallement Chief Almoner to the Duchess of Orleans.

Fra^^is Charpentier, Advocate in Parliament.

Armand de Gambout, Duke de Coislin Peer of France.

These four as eldest of the Society, have the privilege of Committimus under
the Great Seal. The others to be noted, are,

Paul Pellisson Fontanier, Master of Requests, etc.

Philip de Chaumont, formerly Bishop of Dax, etc.

The Cardinal d' Etrees.

Roger de Rabutia, Count de Bussy.

Jaints Tetu, Abbot of Bellival.

Paul Tallement,: Prior of St. Albin.

Francis Seraphim Reguier des Marais, Secretary, to the Academy.

Peter Cureau de la Chamber, Curate of St. Bartholomews in Paris.

The Archbishop of Paris.

The Bishop of Meaux.

Esprit Flechier, Bishop of Lavaur.

John Racine, Treasurer of France, in the Generality of Moulins.

John Galois, Abbot of St. Martin des Cores.

Lewis de Courcillon de Dangtau, Abbot of Fountain-Daniel, etc. and Chamberlain
to the Pope.

Nichelas Boileau, Author of the Satyrs.

Thomas Corneille, Son of the famous Peter Corneille.

The most remarkable persons of this Academy, that have signalized themselves
by their works, and are deceased since the Institution of this Society, were
M. Maynard. M. Malleville. M. Voiture. M. Boissat. M. Scudery. Boilean. M. des
Marets. The Famous Peter Corneille. M. Vaugelas. M. Balzac. M. Serizay. M. St.
Amand. M. d' Ablancourt. Hardouin de Perefixe, late Archbishop of Paris. M. de
Gomberville. M. de Mezeray.
We expect daily from this Illustrious Society, a French Grammar and
Dictionary, by which people may be directed how to speak and write French
correctly.

Queen Christine of Suedeland honored this Society with a visit, to which she
was Conducted by the late Chancellor Seguier, on Monday the 11th of March,
1658. They performed before her Majesty in their ordinary places, their usual
Exercises and Conferences, with which her Majesty signified her self highly
satisfied.

On the 8th of June, 1669. there was a Royal Academy established at Arles,
composed of twenty Gentlemen Natives, and Inhabitants of the same City, with
the like Privileges as have those of Paris; of which, the Duke of St. Aignan
is Protector. The Patents for that purpose, were verified the same day, in the
Parliament of Provence, since which, in the year 1677. their number was
augmented to twenty.

One of these, named M. de Guion, is writing the History of the present King in
Latin.

There is also an Academy Royal at Soissons, established there in the Month of
June, 1675. of which, the Cardinal d' Etrees is Protector.

Another at Ville-Franche in Beaujolois, of which, the Archbishop of Lions is
Protector.

And another at Nimes, which was opened the 8th of September, 1682.

CHAP. LVI.
Of Dignities without the Kingdom.

The Ambassadors of France in Foreign Countries, are
1. AT Rome, the Marquess de Lavardin.

2. In Spain, the Marquess de Feuquieres, Counselor of State in Ordinary,
Ambassador Extraordinary.

3. In England, M. Barillon.

4. In Portugal, M. Amelot de Gournay, Ambassador Extraordinary.

5. In Denmark, the Count de Chiverny.

6. In Holland, the Count d' Avaux.

7. In Savoy, the Marquess d' Arcy, Ambassador.

8. At Venice, M. de la Hay Ventelet, formerly Ambassador in Turkey.

9. In Suisserland, M. Tambonneau.

10. At Constantinople, M. Girardin.

Note, That the Ambassadors sent to Rome, the Empire, Spain and England, are
usually chosen out of the Great Lords of the Court; and those sent to Venice,
Holland, and Suisserland, are generally Gown-men, or Lawyers: the Ambassador of
Savoy is sometimes of one sort, and sometimes of the other, and so is he of
Constantinople; but if he be a Gown-man, he must on that occasion, wear a Sword.

The Residents, Envoys, or Agents, which are sent to the Princes and Republics
of Germany and Italy, are likewise sometimes of one sort, and sometimes of the
other, according to occasion.

11. The Marquess of Bethune is now Ambassador Extraordinary to the King of
Poland.

The Envoys, Residents, and other Ministers of lesser Character abroad; are
1. At Rome, the Abbot d' Hervault, Auditor of the Rota for France. 2. At the
Emperors Court, M. de la Vauguyon, Envoy Extraordinary. 3. At the Diet of
Ratisbonne, and other Assemblies of the Empire, the Count de Crecy is
Plenipotentiary. 4. At the Elector of Mayence, or Ments's Court, M. Fourcher,
Envoy Extraordinary. 5. With the Elector of Cologne, M. de Gravel, is Envoy
Extraordinary. 6. In Bavaria, the Envoy Extraordinary is M....... 7. To the
Elector Palatin, the Envoy Extraordinary is the Abbot Morell, Counselor in
the Parliament. 8. To the Elector of Saxony, the Envoy Extraordinary, or
Resident, is M...... 9. To the Elector of Brandenburg, the Envoy Extraordinary,
is the Count de Rebenac-Feuquieres. 10. To the Duke of Zell, and Princes of the
House of Brunswick and Lunenburg, the Marquess de Bourgeauville, is Envoy
Extraordinary. 11. To the Duke of Wirtemberg, and other German Princes within
the Circles of Suabia and Franconia, M. de Juvigny is Envoy Extraordinary. 12.
To the Landgravesse of Hesse, and Chapter of Munster, M....... 13. At Siege,
the Resident is M. de la Renaudiere. 14. At Hamborough, the Abbot Bidal. 15. At
Geneva, M. du Pre. 16. The Envoy Extraordinary to the Duke of Mantua, is the
Sieur de la Guilletrie. 17. At Genoa, the Envoy Extraordinary is M. de Seve.
18. At Florence, the Abbot de Strozzi.
The Agents and Consuls.
At Rome, the French Agent is, the Abbot Beneditti.

There are several other Agents and Consuls abroad in places of Traffic, as in
Aleppo, Smirna, Grand Cairo, etc.

Having spoken of the French Ambassadors abroad, it will not be amiss to add
the Ambassadors of other Princes and States in that Court.

The Foreign Ambassadors and Ministers then, at present in the Court of France,
are
1. From Rome, M. Ranucci, Nuntio Extraordinary from the Pope. 2. From Venice,
M. Girolamo Venier, Ambassador. 3. From Savoy, the Marquess de Ferrero, etc.
Ambassador. 4. From the States General of Holland, M. de Starembourg Vassenar,
Ambassador Extraordinary. 5. From Malta, the Bailiff de Hauteville, etc.
Ambassador from the Grand Master of Malta.
Envoys according to the Order of their arrival in France.
1. From Portugal, Dom Salvador Taborda, Envoy Extraordinary. 2. From Sweden,
M. Liliencroot. 3. From Denmark, M. Meyercroon. 4. From Spain, M. Delval. 5.
From the Emperor, Count Cobkowitz. Envoy Extraordinary. 6. From England, Mr.
Skeleton, Envoy Extraordinary.
Other Envoys, and Residents, are
1. The Resident of the Elector of Cologne, and States of Liege, M. Waldorf. 2.
An Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Brandenburg, M. Spanheim. 3. From
the Duke of Mantua, the Count Balliani. 4. The Envoy of Modena, is the Abbot
Rizini. 5. The Envoy Extraordinary of Genoa, is the Marquess Girardo Spinola.
The Agents are
1. An Auditor of the Nunciature, the Abbot Laury. 2. The Agent for the Elector
Palatine, and other Princes of the Empire, is M. John le Breton. 3. And for the
Elector of Brandenburg, the Hans Towns, and Landgraviate of Hessen, M. Bek.
And for the Dukes of Weymar, M.....

When one Ambassador is relieved, or succeeded by another, at the arrival of
the new they both go together to Court, whereas they are going to their
Audience, he that is relieved, still takes the upper hand of the new one; but
when they come back from their Audience, the new Comer, or Successor, takes
place of the other: But if an Ambassador only in Ordinary be sent to relieve
one that is Ambassador Extraordinary, the Extraordinary Ambassador takes the
upper hand, both in going to, and coming from Audience.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ACademy of France Page. 510 Admiral of France 371 Admiralty of France 482
Administration of Justice 451 Aids 496 Air of France 5 Almoner of France, Great
61 Almoner of France, First, etc. 66 Ambassadors of France 513 -- in France 515
Antichamber 134 Apothecaries, Kings 141 Arch-Bishopricks 404 Archbishops 406
Arquebuse, or Firearms Carrier 120 Attire 17
B.
BAilywick of the Palace 483 Bastile 170 Birds of the Chamber 132 Bishoprics
404 Bishops 406 Buildings 10
C.
CAmp-Master 356 Captains of the Guards 234 -- of the Guides 184 Carver 80
Castle of Blois 172 -- of Chambor ibid. -- of Compiegne 169 -- of Monceaux 171
-- of Plessis le Tours 173 -- of Vincennes 170 Cavalry of France 357
Ceremonies, etc. 151 Chamber of Accounts 461 -- of the Treasury 473 Chamberlain
of France 107 Chancery of France 397 Chatelet, or Castle of Paris 484 Children
of France 24 Chyrurgions, Kings 140 Clergy of Kings Household 73 Climate of
France 2 Cloak-Carriers 118 Closet of Antiquities 131 -- of Arms ibid. -- of
Books 130 -- of Dispatches ibid. Commodities of France 5 Common Buttry 99 --
Fruitery 101 -- Kitchen 100 -- Pantry 99 Complexion of the French 15
Comptrollers of the Counting House 90 -- of the Privy-Purse 129 Computation 18
Constable of France 348 Constablry 478 Councils of the King 379 -- of
Dispatches 380 -- of Finances, or Revenues 383 -- called the Grand-Council 393
-- of State 388 -- of War 379 Counselors and Secretaries of the Finances, or
Revenues of France 396 Counties and Baronies, etc. reunited to the Crown 331
Counting House 89 Court of Aids 466 -- of Bazoche 484 -- of Moneys, or Coynage
468 -- of Masonry 483 Cupbearer 80
D.
DAuphin of France 24 -- his Household 272 -- his Childrens Servants 292
Dauphiness 25 -- her Household 280 Diet of the French 16 Dimensions of France 2
Division of France ibid. Dogs of the Kings Chamber 133 Dukes and Peers 315
Dukes and Peers, with the Names of their Dukedoms, and the date of their
Verification 320 Dukes and Peers, whose Patents are not yet verified 323
Dutchies, or Dutchies and Peerages not verified at Paris 322 Dutchies and
Peerages Extinct, and not Extinct 324
E.
ELection of Paris 487
F.
FAculty of Arts 505 -- of Divinity 502 -- of Law 504 -- of Physic ibid.
Family of de la Tour d' Auvergne, of which was the Famous Godfrey of Bouillon
49 Family of Grimaldi de Mourgues, or of the Prince of Monaco in Italy 51
Family of Rohan 52 Family of Tremoille 56 Fuel, or Wood-Office 101 Flight of
the Magpie 133 Foot-Guards 265 Fountainbleau 164
G.
GAbels 496 Genealogy of the Royal Branch of Bourbon 21 General of the Galleys
375 Generalities of France 491 Gens d' Arms, or Men at Arms of the Kings-Guard
261, 357 Gentlemen-Waiters 81 Gentlemen of the Bedchamber 111 Gentlemen of the
Kings-Houshold 137 Gentlemen Pensioners 271 Goblet, or Kings own Buttry 93
Governments in France 417 Granary of Salt, at Paris 488 Greyhounds of the
Chamber 132 Guards de la Manche, or of the Sleeve 230 -- of the Gate 252 -- of
the great Provost of the Household 259 -- without the Gate 261 Guildhall, or
Townhouse of Paris 489
H.
HArbingers, or Fouriers 58 Hawking 203 Heralds at Arms 152 Historiographers of
France 508 House of Longueville 38 -- of Lorrain 39 -- of Savoy, settled in
France 46 Hunting 198
I.
INfantry 357 Inhabitants 11 Introductor of Ambassadors 194 Institution of
Parliaments in France 451, 452 Judges Consuls 490
K.
KIng now Reigning 9 Kings Household 61 Kings Pleasures 197 Kitchen of the Mouth
96 Knights of the Holy Ghost 337 Knights of the Order of St. Michael, of Mont
Carmel, and of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem 343
L.
LAnguage of France 14 Laws 11 Legitimated Children of Henry the Great, and
their Descendants 35 Legitimated Children of the present King 33 Life-Guard-Men
237 Light Horse of the Kings Guard 264 Light Horse 357 Lords in France, that
bear the style of Princes 59 Louvre 159
M.
MAdame, and her Family 28 -- her Household 307 Madrid Palace 161 Manners of the
French 11 Maritime Forces 371 Marshals of France 351 Marshals of the Lodgings,
etc. 175 Marshalsy of France 478 Master of the Kings Household, Great 74 Master
of the Kings Household, First 77 Master of the Artillery 368 Master of the
Ceremonies 193 Master of the Horse 143 Masters of Requests 388 Measures of the
French 8 Military Officers of the Kings Households 223 Money 7 Monsieur and his
Family 28 -- his Household 294 -- his Guards 305 Music of the Kings Chapel 72
-- of the Chamber 135 Musketeers on Horseback of the Kings Guards 269
N.
NAmes and Surnames 17 Name of France 1 Name of the King 19 Nobility of France
313 Number of the Inhabitants 14 Numbering, the French Manner 18 Nursery of
Horses, or the Haras 151
O.
OAth of Allegiance taken by the Bishops 65 Officers under the title of Valet
de Chambres 121, 124 Officers for Journeys 185 Officers of the Kings Orders 341
Officers, whose Incomes are yearly returned into the Exchequer, or Treasure
Royal 498 Order observed when the King dines in public 83 Order of the Kings
March 239 Orders of Knighthood in France 333 Orders of Knighthood, called, the
Kings Orders 334 Order of Quartering an Army 182
P.
PAntler 80, 483 Park 167 Parliament of Paris 455 Peers of France 315, 316
Physicians, Kings 139 Porters of the Bedchamber 124 Precedence in the Kings
Court 256 Prerogative of the King 19 Princes of the Blood 29 Privileges of the
Commoners Tabled in the Kings Household 216 -- of Chyrurgions 221 -- of the
Court Clergy 220 -- of Lifeguard-Men 222 -- of all the Kings Officers ibid.
Provost of France 186 Punishments in France 14
Q.
QUerries 154
R.
REcreations 17 Religion 11 Riches of France 6 Royal Houses 159 Royal Households
272
S.
SEcretary of State 380 -- of the Households 195 Seven Offices 93 Soil of France
5 St. Germains en Lay 162 Stables, Kings 148 Stature of the French 15
Stranger-Princes in France 39 Style of the King 20 Suisse Guards 241 --
Regiment 266 Surveyor of Royal Buildings 158
T.
TAxes 493 Tailors, Kings 128 Title of the King 21 Trade of France 6 Tradesmen
following the Court 213 Treasurers of France 470 Treasury-Royal 499 Troops of
the Kings Household, and Officers 223, 357
V.
VAlets de Chamber 113 Versailles 171 Virtuosi of France 510 Universities of
France 501 Ushers of the Chamber 114
W.
WAterservers, or Serdeau's 82 Waters and Forests 474 Woolf-Hunting 211
Y.
YEomen of the Chamber 123

