A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, October 12. 1690.

By WILLIAM BEVERIDGE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Northcott, at the Mariner and Anchor adjoining to
St. Peter's-Alley, in Cornhill, 1690.

(...) more among us; yet we must not therefore think that they are ceased to
be, or to live: For still their Souls are all as really alive in the other
World, as we are now in this. And as it is with us here, that some live ill,
and others well: So it is with them too; only in an higher degree. For some,
and as we have just cause to fear, the greatest part of them live with the
Fiends of Hell in the infernal pit, where they have no light, nothing but
darkness and horror to the utmost extremity round about them: where they are
always weeping and wailing and gnashing their teeth, fretting and tormenting
themselves at the remembrance of their former sins and follies: where, as
Christ himself has told us, The Mar. 9. 44.
worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched: that is, their Consciences like
greedy and insatiable worms are always gnawing, and the fire of God's wrath is
continually burning in their Breasts, never to be quenched or abated. They
cannot forbear thinking of what they have done, though every thought cuts them
to their very hearts, and seems ready to split them in sunder.

They cannot forbear looking upon God, although they can see nothing in him but
the wrath and anger which they themselves have kindled; which so incenses and
enrageth their minds, that they are all in a flame with fury and indignation at
themselves for it. By which means they are continually, as it were, upon a
wrack, distorted, afflicted, distracted, confounded; hurried about from place
to place, but can find no rest, no quiet; every thing is uneasy and
troublesome to them: yea they are a burden to themselves, they cannot endure
themselves, but wish ten thousand times they had been better, or had never been
at all, or could cease to be, or could be any thing but what they are. But all
in vain. And which is worst of all, they do not only suffer the extremity of
pain and anguish at present, but they can see no end of it: yea they see there
will be no end at all, being fully assured that this must be their portion for
ever.

Whereas on the other side, there are others, who are not only free from all
the miseries and torments which those poor creatures undergo, but always live
in Heaven, in light, and love, and joy, and peace, and glory, the highest that
they are able to imagine or desire; being brisk and lively, cheerful and
pleasant, holy and happy all over. And that too (as we shall see more
presently) not only now and then, but continually; nor for some time only, but
to all eternity.

Now we who are still upon Earth, are as yet in neither of these states,
neither so extremely miserable as the first are, nor so perfectly happy as
those are we spoke of last: but, as it were, in the middle between both. But so
soon as ever we depart out of this life, we shall be immediately in one of
them, as certainly as we are now here. And I do not question but that you all
hope for and desire the latter, even to live with those blessed Souls which
enjoy perpetual rest and felicity in the other world: And that one great end of
your coming hither at this time, is to learn what you must do in order to it.
And verily ye do well to take all opportunities you can get, of being assisted
and directed in it. For it is a great thing that you propose to your selves,
which can never be attained without much care and pains about it And you are
not certain how long time you have to do it in, but most certain it is not
very long. But blessed be God, you are all as yet in a capacity of obtaining
it, and it is your own fault if any of you shall happen to miss of it. For
Almighty God plainly shows how desirous he is to have you live with him, and so
be happy in the other world, in that he is still pleased to afford you all the
means that he has appointed for that purpose: Witness your meeting together
here at this time, to join together in Prayer to his Divine Goodness for his
assistance in the pursuit of it; and to be put in mind of the course and method
which you are to take for the accomplishment of so great and good an end.
Concerning which therefore I shall give you the best and plainest directions I
can from the words which I have now read. In which we may observe,

I. What kind of persons they are, who are or shall be happy in the other
world; they are Saints.

II. The happiness they enjoy there, here called the inheritance of the Saints
in light.

III. They who desire to enjoy that happiness must be duly qualified for it, or
as it is here expressed, made meet to be partakers of it.

IV. All who are so qualified, must ascribe it wholly unto God, and give him
thanks for it, as we see here S. Paul does, Giving thanks to the Father, who
has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

First therefore as to the persons who live so happily in the other world, they
are here called Saints. It is the inheritance of the Saints, of all the Saints
and of them only. It is proper and peculiar to them, so that none else have any
right or title to it, nor can ever have any part or portion in it. And that
there is such a company and society of men in the world, which are truly called
Saints, cannot be denied by any Christian; it being one of the Articles of our
Creed, wherein we profess to believe, there is a Communion of Saints. And
unless we be of that Communion, we can never partake of the inheritance of the
Saints.

But the great question is, what it is to be a Saint? or who may be truly and
properly called Saints, men of holiness, or holy men, as the word signifies?
But this we can never fully understand, unless we first state the true notion
of Sanctity or Holiness, from whence they are so called. Now Holiness or
Sanctity in its highest perfection, is one of the perfections of God himself,
who often calls himself The holy one of Israel, and sometimes absolutely, the
holy one. And as he sometimes swears by himself, at other times he swears by
his holiness: Psalm. 89. 35. Amos 4. 2.
whereby he gives us to understand, that he himself is holiness, or, which is
all one, Holiness is himself, his own divine Nature or Essence. And that is the
reason why they who partake of his holiness, are said to partake of his Heb.
12. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
divine nature.

And hence it is, that when the holy Angels would celebrate the praises of the
most high God in the highest manner they can, they cry, Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord of Hosts, the whole Isa. 6. 3. Rev. 4. 8.
earth is full of his glory. And hence also it is, that when God designed to
make Man after his own image, as like him as a creature could be, he made him
perfectly holy. And now that this image is defaced in us, if it be restored
again to any man, so that he becomes a new man, he is said to be created after
God, that is, after the likeness of God, in righteousness Ephesians. 4. 24.
and true holiness. So that this is the great perfection, wherein we were at
first made, and ought again to become like to God our Maker, who therefore
commands us to be holy as he is holy. As he who has called you is holy, 1 Pet.
1. 15.
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. From whence it appears, that
though we cannot be holy in the same measure as God is, who is so without and
beyond all measure; yet we should be so after the same manner as he is, or
rather our holiness should be of the same kind or nature with his, and as like
it, as it is possible for it to be.

Hence therefore as Holiness, when attributed to God, denotes the purity and
excellency of his divine nature, whereby he is exalted above all things else:
so when attributed to men, it signifies the purity and excellency of their
nature, whereby they are refined and raised up above the rest of mankind. This
the Apostle teaches us, where he opposes holiness to uncleanness, saying, God
has not 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. And David, where he calls the
Saints that are upon earth, the excellent; implying, that Saints Psalm. 16. 3.
as such, excel all other persons, by reason of their holiness, that is the
highest excellency which their nature is capable of. Which therefore does not
consist in any particular Acts or Habits either of the soul or body, or both
together, but in the rectitude or due temperament of our nature in general. And
indeed Holiness, properly so called, is nothing else, but that pure and
excellent frame or disposition of the whole man, whereby all the faculties of
the soul and members of the body, are reduced to their primitive constitution,
and become such as God at first made, and would still have them to be; exerting
themselves in their respective places and offices, according to those rules
which he has set them. So that to our perfecting Holiness, as the Apostle
speaks, in the fear of God, there is required a right and clear understanding,
a sound judgment, a pure heart, an obedient will, a good conscience, and
regular affections, placed every one upon its proper objects in a due manner.
And wheresoever the Soul (if I may so speak) is thus all of a-piece, all over
such as God would have it to be, and so agreeable to his divine will, there is
true holiness, and such a one may be truly said to be holy, yea to be holy as
God is holy, as being pure and excellent according to his finite capacity, as
God himself is in his infinite perfections.

Now the true notion of holiness or sanctity being thus briefly stated, we may
easily understand what kind of persons those be, which are here called Saints.
For in order to a man's being a true Saint, He must first have so much
knowledge of God and Christ, as is necessary to the possessing of his mind with
a due sense of his divine Majesty, and with right apprehensions of the great
mystery of our Salvation by Jesus Christ. He must have a sound judgment in all
things, especially in the fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, and in
all the necessary duties required in the Gospel. He must have a pure and
sincere heart, in believing all those Articles as revealed, and in performing
all such duties as required by God. He must have a good conscience, a
conscience void of all offense both toward God and toward men. He must have a
pliable and obedient will, ready upon all occasions to choose whatsoever his
understanding, rightly informed, dictates to be good, and to refuse whatsoever
he apprehends to be evil. He must keep his affections all in their proper
order, fixed constantly upon such objects which they were at first fitted and
designed for. He must hate, abhor, and shun all manner of sin, upon that
account only because it is sin, or the transgression of God's law, and be
heartily troubled that he was ever guilty of it. He must love God with all his
heart and soul, and so above all things in the world besides. He must bear no
grudg, hatred, malice, or illwill against any person upon earth, but love his
neighbor as himself. He must hunger and thirst after righteousness, and desire
nothing so much as to serve and please God, and so to have his love and favor,
whatsoever it costs him. He must not fear them which can kill the body, but him
only who is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. He must trust in the
Lord with all his heart, and support himself under all the circumstances and
occurrences of this life, with an humble confidence of his goodness and mercy
in Jesus Christ. He must rejoice in the Lord always, both when he has and when
he has not any thing else to rejoice in. He must be sober and temperate, meek
and humble, gentle and peaceable, faithful to his word, true to his friend,
loving to his enemy, charitable to the poor, kind and merciful, and just to
all. In brief, he must be steadfast, unmovable, always 1 Cor. 15. 58.
abounding in the work of the Lord, as knowing that his labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

And that he may be sure of. For he who has attained to such an excellent
temper as this is, is certainly a real and true Saint, and therefore shall as
certainly partake of that transcendent happiness, which is here called the
Inheritance of the Saints in light. It is called an Inheritance, or, as the
word signifies also, a lot, in allusion to that type of Heaven, the land of
Canaan, which was divided among all the Children of Israel by lot, and is all
along in the Old Testament called their Inheritance. And so certainly is Heaven
in a proper and literal sense, the Inheritance of the Saints. For they being
all regenerate and born again of God, are properly his Children, and as the
Apostle rightly argues, If children, then heirs; Romans 8. 17.
heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. So that all the Saints or Sons of
God, in whatsoever age or place they were born again from the beginning to the
end of the world, they are all coheirs, and so have an equal right and title
to this Inheritance; not only to some part of it, but to the whole, and all and
every one of them equally possess it all. It is not like an earthly
inheritance, that is divided among the coheirs, some taking one part of it and
some another: But every one that has any share in this heavenly inheritance,
enjoys it all himself, as much as if he was the sole heir, and there were none
else to partake of it but himself.

Neither are the Saints joynt-heirs only with one another, but, as the Apostle
there speaks, with Christ himself. And if so, their inheritance must needs be
very large, For Christ is appointed heir of all things. And if Heb. 1. 2.
they be joynt-heirs with him, as be sure they are, every one of them must
inherit all things too as he does. And so be sure they do. For God himself
asserts it, saying, He that overcomes, shall inherit all things: Rev. 21. 7.
And I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. Where we may observe both the
vast extent of this inheritance of the Saints, and likewise the reason of it.
As to its extent, it is not confined to a Parish, or County, or Kingdom upon
Earth, no, not to the whole Earth, nor to the Moon nor Sun, nor to any Star,
nor to all the Stars of Heaven, nor to the whole Heavens where they are, nor
yet to the greatest part of the Creation, but extends it self to the whole. For
they inherit all things; all things that are good or amiable, all things that
are pleasing or delightsome, all things that are necessary or convenient for
them. All things they can desire or hope for, all things they can love or take
comfort in, all things that can any way contribute to their happiness: As all
things in the whole world shall do one way or other.

For even while they are upon Earth, all things work together for their good,
how much more when they come to Heaven? Where they shall clearly see, how all
things that ever happened to them through the whole course of their lives,
concurred to bring them thither: and so will be matter of joy and comfort to
them, when they are there. By which means, they will then take pleasure, not
only in all the devotions, alms, and good works, they ever performed, but
likewise in all the losses, crosses, disappointments, pains, sicknesses, and
troubles of all sorts that ever befell them. Yea and in all things, that God
ever made, or did, or suffered to be done in the world. For all things are
theirs, even while they are here below, as St. Paul assures the Saints at
Corinth, saying, All things are yours: 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come, all are yours. All things are settled upon
them at their new birth, and when they come to full age, that is, as soon as
they get to Heaven, they will have the actual possession of all things, and
then must needs enjoy whatsoever any thing in the world can afford them. And
what is there in the world, but what affords the Saints in Heaven something to
delight and please them? The Heaven of Heavens affords them most commodious and
pleasant Mansions. All the holy Angels there afford them their most ag eeable
company and conversation. All the Devils and damned in Hell afford them matter
of praise and thankfulness to God, that they are not there. All the glorious
lights in the firmament, afford them a most delicious prospect. In short, All
the Animals, and Plants, and Earths, and Stones, and Metals, and Minerals, and
whatsoever else God ever made, either in Heaven or Earth, afford them a clear
and perfect view of his divine perfections, which cannot but affect their
hearts with the highest transports of joy and wonder.

Thus does every Saint in Heaven inherit all things. All things are his. And it
is no marvail, for God himself is his. As it follows in the place before
quoted, He shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son. He shall be my Son, that is the reason he is an heir; I will be his God,
that is the reason that he inherits all things For he who has him that has all
things, cannot but have all things in him. Yea infinitely more than all things
else; all things that God has made being in a manner nothing in comparison of
him that made them. Who therefore to complete the happiness of his Saints, does
not only give them all he has, but even himself too, saying, I will be their
God, or rather, as the words signify, I will be God to them. By virtue of
which promise they enjoy not only whatsoever God has made or done, but
likewise whatsoever he is, even all those infinite, eternal, incomprehensible
Perfections which are concentred in him.

But here I must confess my self at a loss, not knowing how to conceive, much
less to express either how the Saints in heaven enjoy God, or how great an
happiness that is to them? Only in general we know they see God face to face,
as not only St. Paul, but 1 Cor. 13. 12.
likewise St. John aquaints us, saying, Beloved, now we are the Sons of God:
And it does not yet 1 John 3 2.
appear what we shall be. But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is.

From whence it is evident, that they see God, not only as manifesting himself
in his creatures, but as he is in himself. Which blessed sight, must needs fill
them with the highest joys their finite nature is able to bear. To see Wisdom,
and Power, and Greatness, and Goodness, and Justice, and Mercy, and Immensity,
and Eternity; to see the Lord of Hosts, the chiefest, the only Good; to see God
himself, unvailing himself, and shining forth in all his Glory before them, yea
to see him smiling, as it were, upon them, rejoicing over them, meaning himself
as well-pleased with them! Who is able to conceive how much their blessed Souls
are affected, delighted, transported with this blessed sight? None certainly
but only they that have it. They know, yea they feel it to be the greatest, the
only perfect happiness they can possibly enjoy. And that all things else could
never satisfy their desires and so make them happy, without this: whereas this
would do it without all things else. It being impossible for them to desire any
thing, but what they have in God, infinite Goodness it self. In whom, by
consequence, all their inclinations meet as in their proper center; and so
their Minds are always at rest and quiet, and their Souls full as they can hold
of solid and substantial joy, which makes them break forth continually into
Praises and Hallelujahs to Almighty God, and to the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne, who purchased such a glorious Inheritance as this is for them, and
settled it upon them for evermore.

But how can these things be? How is it possible for the Saints in Heaven to
see God? To that the Apostle answers in my Text, by calling it, the Inheritance
of the Saints in light. It is true, All men are born at first spiritually
blind, and so generally live in the dark, seeing no more of God or any
spiritual object, than as if there was no such thing in being. But when a man
is born again, his eyes are opened, and he is turned from darkness to light, as
Act. 26. 18.
well as from the power of Satan unto God. And therefore all such are called,
the Children 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.
of light; and the Children of the day; because they have a mavelous light
(as St. Peter calls 1 Pet. 2. 9.
it) constantly shining in them, whereby they discover many glorious things,
which lie perfectly hid to all other mortals. By this Elisha's servant, when
his eyes were opened, saw the Mountain full of Horses and Chariots of fire, 2
Reg. 6. 17.
even a whole Legion of the heavenly Host, round about his Master. By this St.
Stephen saw the Heavens opened, and Christ standing at Act. 7. 55, 56.
the right hand of God; yea by this Moses saw him that is invisible, God
himself. And thus Heb. 11. 27.
all that are real Saints, being the Children of light, see more or less of
God; at least so much as to make them love, and desire, and fear, and trust on
him above all things in the world. Indeed they cannot see his face and live, as
he Exodus 33. 20.
himself told Moses: But they see him as Moses did, in his back-parts, in his
works, the effects and products of his divine Perfections. And the reason why
they cannot see his face and live in this world, is because they are still in
their imperfect state, and therefore cannot possibly have a perfect sight of so
glorious a being; or if they had, it would strike them dead, for they could not
possibly bear it; or as Job expresses it, by reason of his highness they Job
31. 23.
could not endure, so as to live under it. But seeing God himself says, that
no man shall see his face, and live; he thereby gives us to understand, that
some shall see his face when they are dead, and departed out of this life.

And so questionless do all the Saints that are in Heaven. For they live in a
City which has no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine Rev. 21. 23.
in it: For the glory of God does lighten it, and the lamb is the light
thereof. Or as the Prophet Isaiah words it, The Lord is to them an everlasting
Isa. 60. 19.
light. So that as the Sun is to us upon Earth, the fountain of all that light
whereby we see any object here below; so to the Saints that are above in
Heaven, God himself is pleased to issue forth light immediately from himself,
which exceeds the light of the Sun, infinitely more than that exceeds the
glimmering of a Glo-worm. Neither does it only shine, as the Sun does, upon
them, but into them, and so enlightens themselves too, as well as all things
that are about them. And what is there in the world which they cannot see by
such a glorious, such an infinite light as this is? By this light they see not
only the superficies, but the very substance and contexture of every creature
they have a mind to look upon, as exactly as if it was perfectly anatomized and
laid open before them. By this, they see the several virtues, qualities, and
operations of things here below, and the great ends and purposes for which they
are designed. By this, they see the causes of the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, and other great Phoenomena of nature, which so much puzzle Philosophy, and
make it but a mere conjecture. By this, they see the secret and wonderful
Powers that God has put into all Animals and Vegetables, of propagating their
respective Species, so that none of them ever did, or can ever fail to be in
the world. By this, they see both the composition and the several motions of
the Sun and all the other Planets, as well as fixed Stars, and what influences
they have upon terrestrial bodies. By this, they see the wise establishment of
second Causes, how they depend upon one another, and all upon the first. The
sight of which, and suchlike things, must needs be an extraordinary pleasure
to them; by reason of the most admirable Art and Contrivance they observe in
them; and also because their faculties are by this means employed to the proper
uses, for which they were made, and to which they therefore tend. For as God
made all things for the manifestation of his own glory, he endued men with
reason on purpose, that they might behold and admire the glory of those
Perfections, which he manifested in them. And hence it is, that (all things
naturally tending to their end) all men naturally desire to know, and many
apply their minds wholly to find out such things as those are. And if they can
but guess at any of them with the least show of reason, or so much as
probability, they are mightily pleased with it. But what a pleasure then must
it be, to have a full view and prospect of them, and of that infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness which appears in them, as the Saints in Heaven have, by
that light which shines upon their inheritance?

Moreover, by this light they look back upon their former lives, and see the
steady hand of providence ordering and overruling, not only the greater
occurrences, but even the least circumstances in them; and the holy Spirit of
God making some use or other of every one of them, to work them over to
himself. By this, they see God's infinite love and goodness to his Church
militant here on earth, in all the straits and difficulties he brings it into,
and how good and necessary it is for it, that every thing should be just as it
is.

By this, they see the holy Angels and all their fellow Citizens in the new
Jerusalem, and converse familiarly with them, as we do with one another. By
this, they see their ever blessed Savior, the eternal Son of God in their
nature exalted at the right hand of the Father, far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named in Heaven or
Earth. By this, they see all the glory which the Father has given him, as he
himself once prayed they might. Joh. 17. 24.
Yea by this they see the most high God face to face, even as we see the Sun,
by his own light: and that too, as clearly, as fully, as perfectly as it is
possible for creatures to do it. Which so refreshes, enlivens, elevates, and
cheers their Spirits, that they are always rejoicing and singing, and praising
God; admiring, adoring, magnifying and giving thanks to his almighty,
all-glorious, and all-gracious Majesty, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for his
creating, redeeming, and sanctifying them so as to bring them through the
various changes and chances of this mortal life, to such an inheritance,
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, eternal in the heavens, in
glory, in bliss, in light it self.

And now we are got upon the Mount, how well may we say with the Apostles, It
is good Matt. 17. 4.
for us to be here: Let us set up our Tents, and dwell continually upon the
Contemplation of this glorious inheritance of the Saints in light! But alas!
how far as yet are we distant from it? how unworthy of it? how unmeet for it?
What a deal of work have we to do, before we can get thither? But, blessed be
God, we are in the ready way, living in such a Church wherein we have all
things that can be desired in order to it. Let us not then despair, but use the
utmost of our care and study to qualify our selves aright for it, and we
cannot miss of it.

For which purpose therefore let us consider in the next place, how we may be
rightly qualified, or, as the Apostle here speaks, made meet to be partakers of
this inheritance of the Saints in light?

Where we may observe by the way, that the Apostle here supposes, or rather
takes it for granted, that all men are not meet for it. Than which nothing can
be more certain. None being meet to partake of the inheritance of the Saints,
but only they who are Saints themselves. God himself has excluded all others
from it, by his eternal and irrevocable decree, that without holiness no man
shall see the Lord. And indeed, none but Saints are Heb. 12. 14.
subjects capable of it. For all others being still in their natural and
sinful estate, their minds are so stuffed with vicious and gross humors, that
they cannot see the light; and so wholly inclined and bent upon sensual
objects, that they can take no pleasure in the joys of Heaven. But rather being
altogether unclean and carnal, they have an utter aversion, if not an
antipathy, against such pure and spiritual delights, as being directly contrary
to their corrupt nature. Insomuch that Heaven it self would seem more like Hell
than Heaven to them. The place would seem melancholy, the company irksome, the
work tedious, the light troublesome, every thing uneasy and disagreeable.

As suppose it should please Almighty God to take us all up immediately from
this place into the highest Heavens, and there set us all just at our Savior's
elbow. All such who are real Saints among us, who love God above all things,
how glad would they be to see him they love? to see their Savior shining in
all his glory? How suddenly would they strike up with the Choir of Heaven in
singing forth the praises of him that brought them thither? What infinite
pleasure would they take in the place, the work, the company, and every thing
they see there? But as for others, who are still in their sins, and mind only
earthly things, how sad and disconsolate would they be? they would wonder to
see the Saints so pleasant and joyful; for as for their parts, they can see
nothing there, which they care for. In the midst of light, they would be still
in darkness: In sorrow, in the midst of joys. They cannot hear that heavenly
music; or if they did, it would sound harsh, all discords to them. They cannot
taste of those spiritual dainties; or if they did, they could not relish, nor
find any sweetness in them. They cannot see the face of God; or if they did,
they would not be pleased, but terrified and confounded at it; and wish with
all their souls to be out of that sad place again, that they might mind the
business, and enjoy the pleasures they like better. If that be Heaven, they
never desire to come there any more. And all because they want that principle
of true grace and holiness, which should make them Saints, and so capacitate
them for the enjoyment of those holy pleasures, without which a blind man may
as well delight in Pictures, the deaf in Music, yea a brute beast in
Metaphysics, as they in Heaven or in God himself.

By this therefore we may see how necessary it is to be holy before we can be
happy; pure in heart, before we can see God; real and true Saints, before we
can partake of their inheritance in light. And by consequence, as ever we
desire to go to Heaven when we dye, we must take care while we live, to get our
Hearts purged from all corrupt affections, our Minds enlightened, and our Souls
sanctified throughout, and inclined wholly unto God, so as to prefer him at
least in some degree before all things else; that so we may go out of this
world, rightly disposed and fitted to behold the light of his countenance, and
to solace our selves in it, as the highest object of our Souls desires. And
then we may be sure that our desires shall be fully satisfied: For our Souls
will be no sooner loosned from our Bodies, but they will be immediately carried
up to Heaven, and there partake of the inheritance of the Saints in light. And
at the last day, our bodies shall be united to our souls again, and then both
in soul and body, we shall enjoy all we can desire for evermore.

But who is sufficient for these things? How can we who were born, and have
lived so long in Sin, ever be made so pure and holy, as to be meet to live with
Saints and Angels, with Christ and God himself in the world to come? It is, I
confess, no easy matter: but howsoever it is possible for every one here
present to be so. Nay more than that, none of us can fail of it, unless we be
failing to our selves in our endeavors after it. As we may easily perceive, if
we do but consider how others have been; and so how we our selves may be
sanctified or made Saints, if we do but set our selves in good earnest about it.

For which end, we may observe, that this being too great a work for us to do
by our own strength, the eternal Son of God himself was pleased to undertake it
for us. And for that purpose, having taken our nature upon him, he gave himself
for us, as to redeem us from all iniquity, so to purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2. 14.
And so he is made unto us, Wisdom as well as Righteousness; Sanctification as
well as Redemption; 1 Cor. 1. 30.
that as we are justified and redeemed from our sins, so we may be made wise
and holy through him; who is the fountain as of all the good things we do or
can enjoy, so likewise of all the goodness and virtue we are or can be endued
with. It all flows from him; who therefore tells us, that without him we can do
nothing. But by him, Joh. 15. 5.
there is nothing but we can do. As St. Paul found by experience, saying, I can
do all Phil. 4. 13.
things through Christ which strengthens me.

Hence therefore if we desire to be made holy, we must apply our selves to
Christ, who although he be now in Heaven as to his Humane Nature, yet he is
always present with us here below, both in his Divine Person, and also by his
Holy Spirit, and so is ready upon all occasions to assist us in our endeavors
after piety, and to crown them with that success, as to make us sincerely
pious. For which purpose, as he sanctified our humane nature in general by
assuming it into his divine person; so he sanctifies our humane persons in
particular, by making us partakers of his divine nature: which he does, by
sending his Holy Spirit, of the same divine nature with himself, into our
Hearts, which by degrees makes us also holy and spiritual, and so in our
capacities, like unto himself, and partakers of his own nature.

Now the great thing which he requires of us, in order to his doing this great
work for us, is, that we believe in him. For he himself says, that we are
sanctified by faith that is Act. 26. 18.
in him. Not by believing only his Gospel in general to be true, but by
believing particularly in himself, so as to have a sure trust and confidence on
him, to give us such illuminations and assistances of his Holy Spirit, whereby
we may be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
and so be made sincerely, as he is infinitely pure and holy. And indeed this is
the first and great thing that we ought to believe and trust in our Savior
for: and that which is the foundation of all our other expectations from him.
For we have no ground to expect either pardon or any other blessing at his
hands, until we repent and be converted But if we firmly believe and depend
upon him in the first place for grace to repent and turn to God, and so to
become holy and new creatures, according to the promises that he has made us
to that purpose; as he will then most certainly perform such promises to us, so
all the other blessings that he has purchased for us, will then follow in
course. For if we be truly sanctified and made holy, then our sins will be all
pardoned, our persons justified, our duties accepted, God reconciled to us, and
at length our Souls eternally saved. But all these things depend upon our being
first sanctified by him, as that does upon our believing in him.

But Faith, as the Apostle says, is the Gift Ephesians. 2. 8.
of God; and therefore if we desire to believe so as to be sanctified, we must
ask and expect it from him, in the use of those means which he has appointed
both for the begetting and increasing of it. We must read, and hear, and
meditate upon his Holy Word. We must fast and pray, and receive the Sacrament
of our Lord's Supper. For these are the ordinary means which God has
established in his Church, whereby to make known himself unto us, to convince
us of the truth and certainty of his Promises, and so work and confirm in us a
true belief of them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, which for that purpose
does continually assist and influence the administration and performance of
such duties; which therefore are not only holy duties in themselves, but the
means too whereby we may become holy.

But for that purpose, we must perform, not only one or more, but all of them,
so as to go through the whole course that God has prescribed for the healing
of our spiritual distempers, and for the restoring us to a sound frame and
constitution of mind, wherein, as I have shown, the nature of true holiness
properly consists.

And that we must do too, not only now and then, but through the whole course
of our lives, so as to be constantly, as much as possibly we can, employed in
some or other of these holy exercises; not in a careless and superficial
manner, but heartily, sincerely, earnestly, as for our lives; for our lives,
our eternal lives in a great measure depend upon it. For it is by our continual
exercise of those holy duties and the Grace of God always accompanying of them,
that our hearts are insensibly taken off from sin and the world, and raised up
higher and higher toward God and Heaven, till at length our whole Souls being
sanctified by a quick and lively Faith in Christ, we are made meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

And what cause have they who are so, to give thanks, as St. Paul here does, to
God the Father for it? For the whole of our Salvation from first to last, must
be ascribed unto him. It is begun, continued, and ended all in him. For it was
he, who so loved the world, that he gave Joh. 3. 16.
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life. It was he, who spared not this his Son, but Romans 8.
32.
delivered him up to be tempted, to be scourged, to be spit upon, to be
arraigned, condemned, crucified, and all for us and for our Salvation. It was
he, who having raised up this his Act. 3. 26.
Son Jesus, sent him to bless us, by turning every one of us from his
iniquities. And made him 2 Cor. 5. 21.
who knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. It was he, who has exalted him with his own Act. 5. 31.
right hand, to be both a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance and
remission of sins. It is he, who has passed by the greatest part of mankind,
and has revealed himself and his Son to us, the unworthiest of all his
creatures. It was he, who caused us to be born and bred within the Pale of his
Holy Catholic Church, and in one of the soundest and purest parts of it upon
the face of the whole Earth. It is he, who still continues the means of grace
to us, and us to them, and his blessing both to them and us. It is he, who
gives us his holy spirit, to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to quicken us
with newness of life; to raise up our minds from the world, and fix them upon
himself; to keep us from evil, and to enable us to do, or suffer any thing we
can for his sake. It is he, who calls upon us continually by the ministry of
his Word, to repent and believe the Gospel, and gives us grace to do it. In a
word, It is he, who has sent me, the unworthiest of all his ministers, at this
time to acquaint you in his Name, how ye may be meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light; and it is he alone can make you so.

And therefore all who are so made, may well join with the Choire of Heaven, in
those Seraphick Anthems we find them singing in the Revelations, Salvation to
our God which sits Revel. 7. 10, 12.
upon the throne, and to the Lamb. Amen; Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and
ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

