A SHORT VIEW of the Praelaticall Church of ENGLAND: Wherein is set forth the
horrible abuses in Discipline and Government, laid open in ten SECTIONS by
way of Quare and Petition, the several heads whereof are set down in the next
Page. Whereunto is added a short draught of Church Government.

EZEKIEL. 34. 3, 4, 10. Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel that feed themselves.

Ye eat the Fat and cloth you with the Wool, ye kill them that are fed,
but ye feed not the flock, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled
them.

Behold I am against the Shepherds, and I will require my flock at their
hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall they feed
themselves any more.

Printed in the year. MDCXLI.

SECTION, I. OF the title of the Church and why it is called Prelaticall.
SECTION, II. Of the principal persons in this Prelaticall Church and their
Dependents. SECTION, III. Of the means to support their Prelaticall
greatness. SECTION, IV. Of the Prelaticall rule and government, and the ends
they aim at. SECTION, V. Of the Prelaticall visitations. SECTION, VI. Of the
Prelaticall Churches, and the dependents on them. SECTION, VII. Of the
Prelaticall Service. SECTION, VIII. Of the Prelaticall Ministry. SECTION, IX.
Of the Prelaticall Convocation. SECTION, X. Of the great and manifold evils of
these Prelaticall governments.
A SHORT VIEW OF THE Prelaticall Church of ENGLAND.
SECTION. I. Of the title Church, and why it is called Prelaticall.
THe Church of England now so called* is the Church of our Prelates, and may be
rightly termed the Prelaticall or Hierarchicall Church of England, received
from Rome, the seat of Antichrist, and set up here after he Protestants fell
off from that Papal Church, for it is framed of Prelates, and also of a
Prelaticall Clergy, and only ruled by them.

QVAERE.
Whither any such Church was ever in the Apostles days, or any time shortly
after within 2 or 300. years?

Whither any such Church be among any of the reformed Churches: or any where
else, but under the Pope, the Beast which has two horns like a Lamb, but
speaks like a Dragon, Rev. 13?

Whither therefore, it be guided by the Spirit of Christ, or by the Spirit of
Antichrist?

Whither God has ever permitted any mortal men frame a Church after their
wisdom?

For when he gave
1 The Pattern for his Tabernacle to Moses, Exo. 25.9. and 26.30. Heb. 8.5. 2
The Pattern of his Temple to David, 1 Chr. 28.19 and verse 11, 12 13. 1 K.
6.38. 3 The Pattern of the rebuilding of it to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 43 10, 11.
He did not suffer MOSES nor DAVID, nor SOLOMON, nor the Prophet, nor any of
them, to attempt such a thing. Was he so careful for the type and shadow, and
not for the Antitype and substance?

Whither therefore a frame of a Church after an human devise may not be
altered, upon good reasons by lawful power?

The humble Petition.
That it may be considered of;
HOw according to the Romish fashion by the name of Church,

1 The Prelates understand only themselves, and (as they call them) their
Clergy.

2 Than they seclude the Nobles and Gentry, the whole House of Parliament, the
Upper, and Lower, from being of the Church, and so debar them from having any
right to meddle in Church matters.

When the title of Church monopolized to themselves, is taken in Scripture of
the New Testament?

Either for the Ministers and people together, Mat. 16. 18. Act. 12.1. and
13.1. and 9.31. and 15.22. and 14.27. and so usually.

Or for the people distinct from Ministers, Act. 14.23. where the people are
called the Church, before they had Pastors set over them; Where Pastors and
people are distinguished, there the people are called the Church, and not the
Ministers; the Ministers are said to be of the Church, and not the Church,
Rev. 18.2.1.8. The Churches denomination is from the people; who also are the
Lords Clergy, 1 Pet. 5.3. The word in English is Heritage, the Latin Cleri,
and in the Greek (...).

There is much complaint touching Monopolies in another nature, but this is
taken no notice of, and yet this Monoply is a Mystery of mischiefs, for by
this name of the Church assumed to themselves,

1 They dignifie very greatly their power, as may appear by the 20. Article of
Religion, which they have corrupted from that it was at first, set out in Anno
1561. and 1571.

2. They decree what they please without control, as is evident by their
former and late Canons.

3. They strike an awefulnesse in all sorts, under the sacred name of Church.

When the Church representative ought to be gathered of both sorts (as they be
now distinguished) of the Learned and Godly Laity, as well as of the Clergy.

Why should therefore (the whole Lords and Christian Spirits of the Gentry)
lose the right, into which the holy Ghost (by calling them and the rest his
Church) has invested them? In former times Parliaments have confirmed
Injunctions Ecclesiastical, and our Service Book, containing Gods worship,
matters of an high nature, and why not still so? And if the Nobles and Commons
can claim so much, as to ratify ye matters Ecclesiastical, being concluded
upon, I hope it is by perusal thereof before, else how can they in judgment
confirm them? And if they have wisdom from God to confirm them made, why
may not some chosen men be appointed to consult with the Convocation House
about the framing of those things which are to be set forth, seeing they very
much concern all? The Brethren at the great Council at Jerusalem, were not
shut out, while the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of a great
controversy in Divinity, and in making their decrees; but when they were sent
forth, they passed under their own name with the name of the brethren also,
Act. 15.6.22, 23. David consulted with the Laity, as well as with the Priests
and Levits, to bring up the Ark of God, 1 Chr. 13.1, 2.3. Hezekiah concerning
the keeping of the Passover, took counsel thereabout, not with the Priests
only, but with his Princes, and all the Congregation in Jerusalem, 2 Chro.
30.1, 2.

This Monopoly was not then learned among Gods ancient people, nor among the
holy Apostles in their days.

SECTION. II. Of the principal persons in this Prelaticall Church, and of
their Dependents upon them.
1 There are two Provincial Archbishops.
The one of the Province of York Metropolitan of England, the other of
Canterbury Metropolitan of all England.

Dependents on Canterbury.
1 His Princelike Retinue. 2 His Domesticke Chapleines, and the rest. 3
Household Servants. 4 All his Officers for temporalities, and the Revenues
thereof, which are very great. 5 All his Spiritual Officers under him, which
are these. 1 His Vicar General. 2 His Guardians of Spiritualities. 3 The Deane
of the Arches, with all the number depending upon them. 4 His many Courts* The
Court of Faculties. The Court of Audience, The Prerogative Court, The
Delegates. The Consistory in Paul's, The High Commission Court.


With the swarms of Attendance on these Courts, as
Advocates, Registers, Doctors, Proctours, Pursevants, Messengers, and
Apparitours, With all other belonging to them, all which come to many hundreds.
QVAERE.
WHither all or any of these, be of divine institution?

Whither the words of Christ forbidding to be gracious Lords, extend not to
these, Mat. 20, 25, 26. Luke, 22.25, 26. Mar. 10, 42, 43, 44, 45.

Whether any spiritual function ordained by Christ, stands in need of so
great a Prelate, and so great a dependence to discharge the duties thereof?

Whither this greatness has any time been the support of goodness, and of
good men in their places, or rather has not from this greatness risen great
troubles, as at this day, and much persecution, almost ever since the beginning
of reformation?

The humble Petition.
THat the immeasurable greatness of these gracious Lords might be abated, and
the number of those their dependents lessened.

That they might be made to show themselves Arch-teachers of Christ's Gospel,
and to attend unto some particular flock, to feed them.

That they might not be of Princes counsel, for commonly God leaves such to
become ill States men, because they do contrary to Christ's bidding. It shall
not be so with you, Mat. 20.26. Luke 21.25. Mar. 10.42. And for that they
neglect the sacred calling of the Ministry, which is to be of Christ's heavenly
Counsel, to give attendance unto temporal affairs, and to be of Earthly
Kings counsel.

II. There be twenty four Bishops, Diocesan Lord Bishops.
They are seated in several places throughout the Kingdom

Of these three are under York Carleile, Durham, and Chester.

All the rest are under Canterbury.

Dependents on these.
Their train of Domesticke Servants. Their Chapleines. Their Officers
concerning their temporalities. Their 24 Courts.
And hereto belonging.
26 Chancellours, with wayters on them. 24 Registers with their men. 24
Gentlemen Apparitours. 48 Proctours, if but two to a Court. 120 Apparitours at
least, more then a good many.
QVAERE.
WHither these Diocesan Bishops be jure divino, and have warrant from Scripture?

Whither St. Peter's speech reaches not to them, that they should not Lord it
over Gods heritage, by over ruling it, 1 Pet. 5.3?

Whither we cannot be as well without them, as all other reformed Churches; or
whither we will condemn those Churches for casting them out, or not receiving
them in?

Whether this be not a mock to say, no Bishop no King, seeing they also say,
no Ceremony no Bishop, therefore no Ceremony no King, what a weak standing
bring they a King unto? But a King is Gods ordinance, not so they? and in
Denmark has been a King and no Bishops this 100 years?

Whither Bishops wanting in Diocesses, upon vacancy some 10, some 20 years (as
some have been) may not be so for more years, and so for ever? And if they
may be wanting in a Diocese, why not in a Province, and so why not every where?

Whither may not our King, as lawfully cast them out, as did the King of
Denmark his Grandfather? Whither by their authority have they advanced true
religion, or upheld mere forms of it, shows, habites, gestures, and
Ceremonial observances, rather then the power of godliness?

What wickedness and vanity is suppressed by him, nay, what error, what vice,
Idolatry, and prophainnesse grows not under them?

What one made better by them in the ways of God?

What one brought to a pious reformation by their Citations, Excommunications,
and imposed penancies?

The humble Petition.
THat they be seated in Pastoral charges, every one over a particular flock,
as at first all* Bishops were, there to preach and teach the people, and so
their many dependents might be taken away.

That their Chancellours be removed from them, and their over swaying
masterfulnesse in their Courts be taken down, and cut off.

That they, their Officers, and their Courts, may be brought under some such
authority, as may rule over them question them, and duly censure them, when
there is just cause, and not suffer them to be like Kings, free without
command, or any power of censure at all over them. Is it fit they should judge
all, and be free from the Judgment of any?

3. There be threescore Archds. under these Bishops.
Dependents on these.
They have threescore Courts, to which do belong, Commissaries, Officials,
Surrogates.

60 Registers with their servants. 120 Proctours, if but two to every Court.
200 Apparitours at least.
The whole number appertaining to Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, with the
many peculiars are judged to be no fewer then ten thousand persons, which need
yearly two hundred thousand pounds to maintain them all, the greater and
inefriour ones, reckoning but 20 l. a man, when many have 100 l, a year, some
200 l. others more.

QVAERE.
Whither these swarms of Waspes be of necessary use in the spiritual Kingdom
of Christ?

Whether their Courts be reformative or deformative?

Whether there is any likelihood, that their gross abbuses of Gods Ordinances;
in sending out excommunications, and their commuting of penance, etc. can
please God, to bring an holy reformarion?

Whether it can be probably imagined, that those Courts can reform others, who
in themselves are so corrupt and mercenary, and will employ such base and lewd
companions in a spiritual business, as be the Apparitors, whom either they
cannot, or will not reform?

Whether their Courts being taken away, as in all other reformed Churches,
their want should be bewailed, and their setting up again be desired?

Whether the mass of money which is spent by these so many thousands, might not
well be spared, and far better employed,

The humble Petition.
THat these Courts be not longer permitted to take in so many thousand
presentiments every half year, only to make such gain of the people, as they
do, for they reform no men's persons, but plague their purses?

That some other way might be considered of agreeable to Gods Word, and the
godly practice of other Churches, for suppression of vice, and the maintenance
of virtue in every Parish.

That their lewd Apparitours, so many, and so many be not long suffered.

That in their Courts, their proceedings may be open to the hearing of all, and
that they lap not up businesses in secret, as their manner is to shut their
Consistory door, where they do as they please with delinquents.

That they delay not men in their Courts, forcing and vexing poor men to come
very often, before they can be dismissed, a grievous vexation to needy
laboring men.

SECTION III. Of the means to support their Prelaticall greatness.
These have their Lordly Palaces, and great houses.

They have their Ecclesiastical dignities, and Spiritual Offices and what do
thereto belong.

They have their Baronries, and the ample revenues thereof.

Viis and modis, such is their Income, as it cannot but amount to an hundred
(besides their adherents which in all amounts to four hundred thousand pounds
or thereabouts) and 40 thousand pounds per annum, if not more, so much their
greatness comes unto, as the State of a King may be supported not a little
therewith,

QVAERE.
Whether the true Officers of the Church need so much to bear up their train?

Whether Christ be better served by them, or followed of them?

Whether their studies are more bent to advance the Churches Spiritual good?

Whether are they more sequestered to the ways of God, to attend Gods service,
the reformation of ill men's lives, the setting forward those that are good in
the paths of grace?

Whether do they take the more time to apply themselves, to fasting, to
praying, to preaching and doing works of piety, and works of charity?

Whether do they not rather intrude into secular affairs, and into State
businesses, to the disgrace of the Nobles and Gentry of the Land, and the
peace thereof.

Whether are they more bold against sin, to suppress it in all sorts; or are
they not thereby the more Lordly minded to bear up themselves, and to crush
all them that justly find fault with what is amiss in them?

Whether are they not hereby higher from control, and less subject to any
censure, both they, and such as depend upon them?

Whether may not the King pare them, as well as did blessed Queen Elizabeth,
some of them in her days; or as King Henry did the Lord Abbots, and Lord
Priers with all their superfluous means: For those were of men, and so are
these, and not of God.

The humble Petition.
THat they be made to change their Palaces for Personage Houses, there to keep
Hospitality, and to feed the people with the word of life.

That their Baronries be taken from them, and so the Lordly title, and not be
suffered to sit any more in Parliament, as Lords there.

That their thousands be reduced to some hundreds, and so their Officers and
retinue made fewer. What need a true Pastor be so pompeous and Lordly great,
to do his Office for Christ, in preaching, and in other Spiritual duties.

SECTION. IV. Of the prelaticall Rule and Government.
Their rule is partly after the Canon Law, yet in force, and partly after their
own framed Canons and Articles, and not according to Gods Word.

The manner of their ruling is Lordly, and alone in their inferior Courts, and
in the high commission Court, their power is unlimited, citing, examining,
swearing, judgeing, fining, and imprisoning, as they please, one of the most
insufferable evils in this Kingdom.

The ends which they do aim at are.
I. To keep up their own greatness, even by exacting Oaths for it; as the
Oath of the canonical obedience, and the late Oath in the new canons.

II. To hold others in subjection under them, as they like best by citing to
their Courts; by hasty suspensions by rash and very abusive excommunications,
etc.

III. To enrich themselves gathering much money by all these means.

I. By ordained Deacons, and Ministers for money 4 times a year, by which they
put up yearly hundreds of pounds.

II. By instituting and inducting persons and Vicars, when benifices do fall,
and so scrape together much out of 9285 Livings, three pounds for every one
viis and modis, which in times come to many thousands.

III By making Rural Deanes yearly (where they be) in every Deanery: And for
the Oath taken; some pay 8. s. 6. d. or a Noble, but no benefit to the Deane at
all, but to execute Bishops Mandats.

IV. By granting Lycenses which ought to be free.

1 To beneficed men to preach in their own Cures; though at their ordination
they give them authority to preach; yet may they not afterward without 10. s.
for every Lycense; Look then how many lycensed Preachers there be (whether
they preach or no) so many 10s, is paid, suppose there be in 9285 Parishes but
six thousand of them, the sum comes to three thousand pounds. Thus they
pay money to have leave to discharge their highest duty of their Office.

2 To Curates, who must pay for a Lycense to read prayers in some place; for a
Lycense to preach, for a Lycense to keep School, undoing poor beginners
before they get any thing.

3 To Clerks of a Parish to be Clerks,

4 To Physicians to practice Physic.

5 To Midwives to do their Office, for they have skill in all trades and
professions to gain money.

6 To parties which are to be married, without banes asking, and in times
prohibited, and both for money allowed, yet against Law.

V. By absolving after a rash suspension, after a profane Excommunication, and
both for money.

VI. By aggravations, for money.

VII. By putting men to clear themselves by oath, with their Compurgatours for
money.

VIII. By imposing Penance, which the richer may commute for money, but the
miserable poor (doing their penance) cannot be freed from their Courts
without money though they beg for it, but must stand Excommunicated, and so
be shut out of the Church and given over to the Devil, for non-payment of
money.

IX, By willingly receiving any secret information (true or false) to call any
before them, putting them to the oath Ex officio to catch them and make them
pay money.

X. By interdicting of Churches and whole Congregations.

XI. By framing very many Articles, forcing Churchwardens to present upon oath,
that they may get money.

XII. By probates of Wills, and by granting Letters of Administrations.

XIII. By suits about Tithes, and long delaying thereof, much money is spent of
others, but gotten by them.

And thus a mass of money is scraped together of them, to the great vexation
of his Majesty's Subjects, especially of the meaner sort.

QVAERE.
Whether such a rule and authority, by such Canons, in such a manner, and for
such ends, can be approved of God, or any longer suffered of men?

Whether this be not to make money of Gods holy ordinances, and to gain by
sin? what hope of a blessing can there be by such a base kind of
Ecclesiastical pecuniarie governing?

Whether it be not fit and just to squeise such Spunges, and ravenous harpies,
by finding out their illegal courses, and punishing them?

The humble Petition.
THat they may not rule by the Cannon Law, which yet is in force (so far as
it touches not the Kings Supremacy) nor by their own devised Canons, but by
Gods word, and by such Canons as agree with the word, and are made with the
full consent of the Convocation, and confirmed by act of Parliament.

That in ruling they Lord it not alone, but that they sit with learned godly
and grave Assistants, keeping within the bounds of the Laws, doing neither
contrary to, nor besides them, nor yet dispense with any, as they do for
marrying without banes asking, and in times prohibited.

That they keep not their Courts in their own names, nor send out process,
summons, Citations, nor proceed to censure in their own Names or Style, nor
use only their own Seal of Office, and Arms as they do, thereby denying
their power to be derived from the King, this is an insufferable usurpation.

That they be made to acknowledge their authority not to be divine, but humane,
from the King, as has heretofore been fully acknowledged,

That the power of the high Commission in ministering the Oath ex Officio be
taken away, as also in all other inferior Courts, and that it may be a limited
power under Law, in all the proceedings in citing, examining, judgeing, fining,
and imprisoning, that so the complaints of Gods Ministers and others, may not
still cry alowd in the Lords ears, to bring down wrath: Who can but pity with
tears of blood, the insufferable misery of Mr. Peter Smart of Durham, for
preaching against setting up of Images and Altars, the severe bandling of Mr.
George Huntley Mr. Crowder; ministers and many others.

That by their high authority they may not be suffered to hinder such as be
troubled from taking the benefit of Regal courses to help themselves, and
neither Judges nor Lawyers be made so to fear, at the one sort dare not freely
plead for them, nor the other judge but with fear, as they ought not.

That seeing they are otherwise sufficiently provided for, they make not such
wicked gain in making and instituting Ministers in giving Lycenses, in
imposing penance, in absolving all the rest before named, to the great
grievance of his Majesty's Subjects, robbing them of a treasury of money, and
making sale of Gods holy Ordinances; Is there Symonie in buying a benefice, and
none in giving money for the use of Spiritual gifts?

That they make no encroachments upon the Subjects liberties, as they do,
proved fully by the Author of the Breviate.

SECTION. V. Of their Prelaticall Visitations.
These are pecuniary, merely for money.
I. Are Bishops Visitations, and in these: I. CHurchwardens of every Parish,
and Chapel are called, who receive a book of Articles to present by, if any
are wanting they are warned to appear at their Court, with Cost. These
Churchwardens pay for their book of Articles every year (though the very
same) and for other things, and for writing their presentiments by a Clarke
(which they themselves could do) 2s* 4d, which in 9285 Parishes comes to
1058l xis, viijd, besides Chapels, which be here and there many.
II. Ministers beneficed. These pay for Lycenses to preach, if they have none.
Then they pay for showing their Letters of Orders, their License to preach unto
the Register at every Bishops Visitation, though seen and allowed of before
xxd or thereabouts. After for procurations to the Bishop 4 s a piece, to the
Gentleman Apparitour 8d, but the abler sort xijd. Lastly, sometimes the Bishops
crave Benevolence, as the occasion is, but the sum they will set down.
Besides all these they pay Paschal tents or Synodals to the Archd. in the
Bishops visiting.
III. Curats. If they want Licenses to read, preach, or teach a School, then
they pay for them. Then for showing their Letters of orders, so that in 9285
Parishes, the sum will arise to some thousands of pounds. Thus they do at
Archbishops Visitations, but when an Archbishop comes newly to York, the
Parsons and Vicars, though never so poor under him, give him a tenth of their
living for a benevolence to help the Archbishop to settle himself in 5 or 6
thousand pounds a year, which extorted benevolence, if not paid him of the
poorest Vicar, the Reverend Father out of his mercifulness, will pitifully
afflict him in his Court.

II. Archdeacons Visitations. These be twice a year, here the Churchwardens
do as before.
The Ministers pay. At Easter Visitation their Paschal Rents or Synodals, which
sums are not alike to all, some pay 5 s. some less. At Michalmas they pay
procurations, some 7 s. some 10 s. some less, but it is judged, that Ministers
pay yearly at Visitations throughout the Land, 4 or 5 thousand pounds, some
reckon more.
And what is all this for: 1 To call every Minister by name, and to pay as is
aforesaid. 2 To call Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, or Posts (as some name
them) to take their Oaths, to make presentiments, that men may be brought into
their Courts, to get money.

QVAERE.
WHither these Visitations be after God or man?

Whither any can be hereby bettered by them either for life or doctrine?

Whither any reformed Churches keep such kind of Visitations and such a manner
of visiting?

Whither these be worthy of so many thousand pounds for calling such
visitations?

Whither such meetings be worthy the assembling together of so great a number
of the Clergy, and Laity?

The number out of 9285 Parishes, to wit, one Minister besides Curates, and 4
men, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, or Posts, besides 2 in every Chappelry are
above 45 thousand at one visitation, and both the number double is 90000, where
if they expend alike xijd. a man, for dinner and horsemeate, as usually they
do, the sum does arise in both the visitations throughout the Land to 4000.
and 500. pounds yearly.

Why should men cast away so much money yearly, year by year for upholding
them in such vain Visitations, injurious to others, and only gainefull to
themselves?

The humble Petition.
THat some way may be taken, to make more useful these Visitations, in calling
together so many thousands, than thus only to fill their purses.

That neither the Bishops, nor Archdeacons be permitted to frame Articles, so
unlawfully out of the Canons, with sundry of their own additions, as may
appear by comparing some of their Articles with the Canons, which every Parish
is bound to have, and so need none of their Articles.

That threescore and fourteen thousand men be not constrained to swear
threescore and fourteen thousand oaths yearly, as they do, to their souls
damnation without repentance?

For,

I. Not any do, nor can keep the oath in presenting, all offenses, faults,
defaults and crimes (as they call them) mentioned in so numerous Articles, and
so do forswear themselves, which breach of oath goes through the whole Land,
and with every oath goes a Curse.

II. If men should present for offenses, faults, and crimes, every thing
according to every Article, then they cursedly swear to present for sins,
offenses, faults, and crimes, which before the Almighty God are none, as for
instance.

A Minister to preach in his own charge without a Lycense, or in a Cloak.

A Father at Baptism to offer to the Minister his own Child, and undertake
for the Infants education, and so prevent an high presumption of others who may
be witnesses, but not undertakers, promising for the Child that which they
neither can, nor ever intend to do.

Some going to another Parish to hear Sermons (which at Baptism they are
exhorted unto) when they have none at home.

Some meeting together to read the Scripture, and good Books allowed to be
printed, to sing Psalms and pray together.

A poor man and in need to work upon an holy day for relief of his poor
family.

A Minister or a Deacon having unworthily taken those callings upon them to
leave the same upon trouble of conscience, because they find themselves to be
utterly unfit, and to betake themselves to some more fit course of life.

One for having his Hat on.

Another for not standing up at the Creed, others for not bowing, or not
putting the Hat off (which they may not have on) more at the name of JESUS,
than at Lord and Savior Christ.

These and other such like, who dare to present upon oath for sins, offenses,
faults, and crimes before God? And yet Churchwardens and Sidemen do so, to the
grievous wronging of their own souls.

Oh take pity, take pity of this their perjury and sinful swearing bringing a
curse upon them.

That a Bishop in his Visitations do go abroad to visit, and not force all
Ministers and many old men, to come to him many miles, when he is but one, and
they very many, for this is a making of them to visit him, and not he them, But
all is to spare his own pains and his own purse, that what he gets at such
Visitations, may be his without any expenses, Provident Prelates.

SECTION. VI. Of the Prelaticall Churches.
THe Prelaticall Churches, besides their private Chapels, are the great and
vast Cathedrals, or other Collegiate Churches,

Dependents on these are. 26 great Deanes, next unto Bishops with their
attendants and Servants. 5, 44 Canon Residents, and Prebendaries.


The rest also are many hundreds.

As Their Vicars. As Peticanons. As Singing men and boys, Choristers. As
Organists. As Gospellers and Epistelers. As Virgers, and who else appertain to
this idle and fat fraternity.
An 100. or 200. thousand pounds yearly in Lands, rents, Leases, and other
revenues, and profits do belong thereto.

QVAERE.
WHither such idle Droanes are worthy of so much for their service, such as it
is?

Whither Jesus Christ cannot be better served with far less cost, and better
pleased?

Whither all these thousands might not be better employed to greater good in
the training up of thousands in divine and human learning?

As thus,

I. That never a Deane have any Pastoral charge, but be continual resident at
the Cathedral Church, being a godly and learned Doctor, there to read twice
or thrice a week a Divinity Lecture, and interpret the Scriptures.

II. That all the Canon residents be also without Pastoral Charges, and that
they be learned, grave, and godly Divines, or else others in their stead,
chosen out of the Universities to assist the Doctor Deane in, and about
Spiritual and divine exercises, daily to study controversies, cases of
conscience, and some special tracts of divinity, etc. that other Ministers in
the Country may come thither for help, and for better information of judgment,
as need shall require.

III. That the greater part of the rest of the Prebendaries be turned into
special selected Scholars, Graduats out of either University, such as for
natural gifts, their learning in tongues and Arts, and pious disposition by
grace, do give very good hopes to become good Divines, and here trained up
under the Deane and the other Divines for the Ministry.

IV. That 7 of the best Prebendes be allotted to 7 learned men, to become
Schoolemasters to teach Scholars.

Every Schoolmaster to be accurately skillful in one Art, and secondly to have
ability withal to teach the said art to his Scholars with some speed.

The 1 To teach to write very fair. The 2 To teach Music. The 3 To teach
Grammar only. The 4 To teach Rhetoric. The 5 To teach Poetry. The 6 To teach
the Greek tongue. The 7 To teach the Hebrew.
That their Scholars may come thus furnished to the Universities, there to
learn Logic and other Arts, and to take the degrees of Schools.

Every Master must make known the aptness and untowardnesse of every
Scholar, that the Master may not be troubled with incapable Boys.

V. That the Vicars, Peticanons, singing men and boys, with the rest, be
turned into Scholars, ingenious Laddes, picked out here and there from among
mean men's Children, to be brought up under the aforenamed Schoolemasters, to
be after sent to the Universities, and maintained there by some of the Revenues
belonging to the Cathedrals, that so they may be taken thence, if they prove
not unworthy, and brought back again as places be void, to be trained up for
the Ministry.

By all these in the Cathedral Churches, Gods public worshiship, Morning and
Evening might be performed better than now it is.

And by this pious and profitable transformation of these Cathedrals.

1 When any Benefice falls void, hither may the Patrones come for a learned and
godly Minister taking his choice.

2. Jf any Pastor happen to be sick, or have just occasion to be absent,
hither may he send for one to supply his place for preaching and prayers, till
he be well, or return home.

Ware this so happily done, who could but approve thereof, if godly and wise
hearted.

The humble Petition.
THat the goodly revenues belonging to these Cathedrals, be employed to some
such good and godly use, as the wisdom of the State shall think fit, for
better advancement of Gods glory, Learning and Religion than now they be.

Thot the so many needless Probendaries might not be allowed, nor to take up
so great sums as some do, for preaching 2 or 3 Sermon a year, either by
themselves, or by some other, whom they can hire for a noble, or an angel a
time,

That the so many gifts of Livings, in the hands of Bishops, Deanes, Archdeans,
and the rest, be looked into, for better bestowing thereof, then they commonly
be.

SECTION. VII. Of the Prelaticall Service.
THe Prelaticall service, is the Cathedral service, consisting in these things.

1 In a long wearisome Liturgy, read after a singing manner, syllables and
words drawn out unto a tedious length, which Liturgy is formed out of three
Romish books, the Purtuys, the Breviarie, and the Mass book; so as King
JAMES said of it, That its an evil said Mass, from which it needs purging,
and from some vain repetitions, some Romish superstitions, some absurdities,
and from a corrupt translation of holy Scriptures, and other abuses thereof:

2 In an unedifying singing and piping on Organs.

3 In superstitious cringing to the name JESUS, toward the Altar, toward the
East.

4 In a formal observation of habites, Surplesses, Hoods, Copes, variety of
gestures and ceremonies, devotions, devised by men.

QVAERE.
Whether such a Service book (as the Papist Bristow called it, an apish
imitation of the Mass) be well pleasing unto God?

Why we should uphold such Service, which nourishes a bare reading Ministry,
nusles people in ignorance, and which no reformed Churches have received to use?

Why is it not suffered to be reformed, in such things as have been witnessed
against from the beginning of reformation, and for the reformations whereof,
thousands have petitioned, many hundreds have been suspended, deprived and
imprisoned.

Why is it that no end will be put to the misery of such who are men of tender
conscience, and do desire, God knows, to live in peace, seeing now a whole
Kingdom refuses it, and that with the danger of their utter undoing.

The humble Petition.
THat such a Liturgy might be framed, as may be freed from corruption, and
in such a form as may have no resemblance to the Romish service, for by this
Papists are but hardened and other fall away.

That no Ceremonies be ordained, but what may be found to agree with all the
Apostles rules, made for the use of things indifferent.

That the use of them be free, and not rigorously imposed, nor the failing
otherwise of painful and peaceable men to conform in some things, be more
severely looked after, and punished more sharply, than the gross enormities
of their conformitant Priests.

SECTION. VIII. Of the Prelaticall Ministry.
THe conformitant Priests (so they now are called) which properly belong to
this Prelaticall Church and come from cursed Rome, are these;

1 All dumb Ministers of which there be yet in the Land two or three thousand,
if not many more.

2 All Pluralists, of which there be very many in some Diocesses 30, in some
40. why should some have two other tot quotes, when worthy men have not one.

3 All Nonresidents, such are commonly these: Bishops which have Commendams.
Deanes. Archdeacons. Canon Residents in Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches.
Prebendaries some. Heads of some Colleges. Domesticke Chaplains.


4 All Curates which are,

Under Pluralists. Under Nonresidents. Under some idle Doctors, and some other
Parsons and Vicars. Under Lay and impropriate Parsons: the number of which are
3800 and odd, in this Kingdom.
5 All idle Droanes, monthly and quarterly Preachers, or which preach perhaps
once a year, or not at all, at home, though it may be now and then abroad.

6 All lewd and base ministers, as also the mere Worldlings, and Mammonists,
of which sort there be no fewer, than some thousands.

7 All Popishly affected, and all Arminians may be added to these, to make up
these Locusts, under their King Abbaddon and Apollyon.

QVAERE.
Whether these be sufferable in any reformed Church of Christ?

What care has been taken hitherto to reform this so great wickedness and
mischief to Gods people?

How many thousands perish under these for lack of knowledge, are their blood
of no price with men, whom Christ has purchased with his own blood?

The humble Petition.
THat there might be a speedy redress concerning these so much spoken against,
and written against, from time to time, disallowed of God, and all Christian
Churches (separated from the Church of Rome) and not tolerable in Christ his
Church, where he reigns by his own word, in his own ordinances, as he has
appointed.

SECTION IX. Of their Prelaticall Convocation.
I. This is a Provincial assembly, for the Province of Canterbury, which
consists of the Archbishop, the President, of all the other Bishops under him,
Deanes, Archdeacons with others, and of the two Ministers chosen out of every
Dyocesse, called the Clerks of the Convocation to the number of 40 and odd.

These Clerks should be chosen freely by the public consent and voice of all
the Ministers in every Diocesses, but the Prelates propound whom they list, or
like best for their purpose, and to ask voices, which are given to them of
many through fear, so as the choice is not free as it ought to be.

II. That which is intended to be done there, is contrived and hammered in the
head of the Archbishop, and some few with him, to which the rest of the
fearful Bishops do consent.

III. In the lower house, the Priests, Parsons, Vicars, those Clerks sit there
to gaze one on another, and to tell the Clock, waiting for their Lessons from
their Lords, the Prelates.

There is no freedom of voices, they dare not consult among themselves to
promote the cause of Christ, and to reform abuses.

The better sort are the fewest; and are, Either overawed by the greatest. Or
borne down by the worst.


So as they be made to consent to the making of such Canons as they would not,
and these are thrust upon us as the Constitutions of the Church of England.
When its nothing so, but of a strong faction of Prelates, and their adherents,
who set them forth; and obtrude them upon us unjustly.

IV. The Canons they make are many, not a few of them to uphold their
Prelaticall authority, and vnapprovable courses, many of them without warrant
from holy Scripture.

Some of them against Scripture, Some of them Superstitiously Ceremonious: Some
of them blind Canons, as these;
1. Against Popery and Superstition, but they tell us not what Popery is, what
Superstition is.

2 Against Socinianisme, but without declaring what that damnable heresy is;
almost every one of them needs examination, and to be rectified for the peace
of Gods people, and the Churches edification.

Note moreover, that in setting forth their so many Canons, there be none
charged against Armianisme, that Semipelagian heresy. None against the
Prelates themselves for their innovations and exorbitancies, as if they could
not err, nor ever do amiss.

Lastly before they break up, they look not to have their Canons ratified by
Parliament, as they ought, but do make themselves as Clergy men, only to be
the Church and not any else in the Land with them to be the Church; which should
not by godly wise men be digested.

V. To the dissolving of this their Convocation, they presume.

1 To make it a Synod, without a new call and Summons.

2 To give great sums out of all Parsons, and Vicars purses, under the name
of a benevolence, and yet rate every one at a certain sum, as a subsidy; and
that under the penalty of deprivation, and utter ruin of them, that do not
pay, setting forth a Book to this purpose, which they will that Lay men should
not see.

VI. After some space of time,

1 They collect Articles every Bishop in his Diocese, and every Archdeacon, in
his Archdeaconry out of those Canons, which Articles they impose upon all
Churchwardens and Sidemen, and by them to present upon oath.

Then if any thing happen to become questionable, touching the Canons or other
things, for and about their Church, their Service, and Ceremonies every Bishop
in his Dyocesse does take upon him to give a sense, and interpretation as he
pleases, on which we must rest, though they be never so absurd, and not take
the words as they be in the Letter, till there be an other Convocation to
decide the question and doubt arising, as they ought to do; and if men be not
satisfied, they labor to gain the help of Royal authority by some public
Declaration, to make good what they say and do, and so lap up all under the
authority of the Church.

QVAERE.
Whether such a Convocation can justly be approved?

Whether such Canons coming forth are to be held the Canons of the Church of
England?

Whether they be of all to be submitted unto, before they be confirmed by act
of Parliament?

Why more Canons are added, and not rather the other reformed?

Why they establish and countenance all their decrees, so as if they were of an
unchangeable nature ordained without error, and necessarily useful, ever and
every where.

The humble Petition.
THat his Majesty, the Noble Lords, the worthy Commons of the house of
Parliament, would carefully see that the Convocation be gathered lawfully, that
voices be free therein, without over-awing power, that nothing be there
decreed, but with a serious examination, and full consent of the house, and not
be permitted to pass without an act of Parliament.

For if this kind of Convocation, and their such proceedings, as have been, be
suffered to pass, they will Lord it over us still, and in the Church there will
never be peace.

Oh consider how in the Parliament they have been prevalent over their equals
and betters, in the Convocation then they must needs domineere over all their
underlings, on whom they can avenge themselves afterward, if they find any
wisely and with courage, to have affronted and crossed any of their intents and
purposes,

SECTION X. Of the great and manifold evils of the Prelaticall Governors.
THey bear up themselves mightily by their Revenues and Baronries,
strengthening themselves in their pomp, and in their pride, to overtop whom
they list.

They become as great Peers of the Land, and sit in Parliament with them
cheek by joole, to affront all the Nobles of the Kingdom, to bear down the
house of Commons, and perhaps to procure the dissolving of Parliaments, to the
great disturbance of the whole Kingdom and State.

They have raised up a bellum Episcopale, to dash two Kingdoms one against
another, to the shedding of much blood, if God in mercy prevent it not.

They keep up a Romish Hierarchy among us, full of corruption which they
suffer not to be reformed.

They uphold the forenamed sinful Prelaticall and Priestly Clergy, so as those
their Priests be conformable to all their rites and Ceremonies, they may in a
manner live as they list, and be supported against all those that shall attempt
their reformation.

They are pleased with the peoples ignorance, and their contentedness, resting
in a long read service without better instruction, holding reading to be
preaching, and preaching no part of divine service, that so such silly people
might be nufled in gross blindness, perishing for lack of knowledge.

They suppress Lectures and Sermons in the afternoon and allow no questions
in Catechizing, but only such as be in the very common Catechism much
hindering increase of knowledge.

They will permit no Minister to preach, or to expound in his own Parish
without paying for a License, for which when he has paid, they never care
whither he preach or no.

They will allow none of the people to seek for instruction, when they want it
at home, nor yet press the Minister to the discharge of his duty, but trouble
others.

They never trouble any Minister for neglect of his duty in preaching. But
diligent preachers they have a jealous eye over, and are ready to take an
occasion to vex them as not for their turn.

They sinfully trouble thousands of Churchwardens and Sidemen, making them
swear to their Articles, which cannot be observed.

They hinder prohibitions, stop the courses of Law, and terrify both Lawyers
and Judges.

They dare to fine and imprison without Law, going beyond all Spiritual power,
yea, the Laws of our Land.

They have ever been plotting to ensnare Christ's painful Ministers, that they
might root them out.

1. They pressed upon them subscription, and Ceremonies, and so cast out very
many.

II. They urge the oath ex officio, and by this they have undone not a few.

III. They procured the reading of the Declaration for profaning the Sabbath
our Lords day, and hereby many were suspended, excommunicated, and some
deprived.

IV. When they saw, that all these things would not bring to pass their
intended mischief, they lately framed a wicked Oath, to be tendered to all
Gods Ministers, which whosoever would not take, should be suspended first, and
after deprived.

Lastly, to make up the measure of their evils, they have illegally given a
Subsidy to be extorted from us, under the name of a benevolence, which
whosoever shall refuse to pay, is utterly undone according to their merciless
decree in a book published, which now they are loath should see the light, and
be read of any judicious, and religious Lay men.

They are the cause of the Division and Separation among us, by their Lordly
rule, their rigor in exacting conformity, and their cruel dealing with such
as do not obey their Lordly wills.

They suffer Papists and nourish Arminians in the besome of their Church, to
the disturbance and danger of the true Church of Christ, and this whole state.

They allow to vain people Revils, heathenish vanities, unchristian meetings*
and that on the Lords day to profane it, and have procured a Declaration for
the reading of this Licentious liberty in every Church, and such Ministers as
refused, they did suspend, excommunicate, and some they deprived. The like
never heard of in any Church of Christ.

They will have bowing to Altars, and yet permit notorious offenders, yea
Thieves and Murderers condemned, (if they have gotten pardons) to come to the
holy Sacrament, before satisfaction be given to the Congregation; yea
drunkards, blasphemous Swearers, infamous Adulterers, and other vile persons
may receive, and not be debarred, if they can satisfy their Courts, and free
themselves from thence, though they do not manifest their repentance to the
Congregation, eating and drinking the holy Sacrament unworthily to their own
damnation, a profaneness profaneness much to be lamented. They hunt after
greatness, not for goodness but for gain, and to withstand all good means
of reformation, and all the ways of redressing their corrupt courses, much to
the hinderance of the growth in religion, and of men's more religious
conversation and walking with God.

QVAERE.
Whither these evils are not such as may force all pious men to lay them to
heart, and to seek that they may be removed, as far as they are able, to
the utmost, that we may be freed from their unjustifiable courses and grievous
wrongs?

Whither we should not endeavor to introduce that which may better the
Ecclesiastical government, and bring this Prelaticall power within bounds, and
our selves from the intolerable Burden thereof.

The humble Petition.
THat for these so many great and grievous evils, they may be questioned and
caused to reform, or else be censured and punished: For,

They never had possession peaceably, but they have been,

1 Prayed against for a long time.

2 Preached against by many.

3 Written against by many, on this side, and beyond the Seas.

4 Testified against, by suffering suspension, excommunication, deprivation,
open punishment, to the cropping of ears, slitting of the Nose, standing on
the Pillory, imprisonment, and some have suffered death.

5 Withstood by the Sword.

And what now remains, but for their evils to be condemned by the honorable
and happy Assembly in Parliament.

That a better way of government might be thought off, after the wisdom of
God in men, tending not to the subversion of Ecclesiastical government, but to
moderate the now Governors, ease the Land of excess Charges, rid our selves
of these insufferable evils, weaken the Kingdom of Satan, advance the glory of
Christ, and procure our own peace and happiness.

A short draught of Church Government.
1. In every Parish.
THat there be a meeting of choice men, for wisdom gravity, and love of
Religion, to wit, Elders, and Overseers of the poor, in other Churches called
Deacons, the number more or fewer, as the place shall require.

These with their Pastor to come together as often as shall be judged fit, at
a set time and place, once a Month, to look unto all within the Parish,
concerning their religion, their honest behavior, and peaceable demeanure, and
to see all abuses reformed, according to the word of God, and according to the
good and Ecclesiastical laws, which shall be prescribed unto them.

This will free us from all weekly corrupt Courts, and free the people from
all burdensome expenses, and not suffer sin to reign as it does in every
Convocation.

2. In every Division or Circuit.
That there be a Presbytery of chosen Ministers, the best learned, the gravest,
and the godlyest men, to sit with the Superintendent or president.

The meeting to be appointed at a certain time and place once a quarter, and
in every meeting a new Election to be freely made, of those that shall be of
the Presbytery.

These are to see how the government is to be observed in Parishes, how
Ministers and Overseers do discharge their duties: at this meeting Ministers
gifts are to be showed and tried, that such as come thither may be edified and
instructed.

III. In every County.
That the Bishop be a Pastor over a particular Congregation, resident and
painful there, and with him out of the several Circuits be chosen a certain
number to be his assistants in this Assembly, once every half year.

In this to see how every presbytery with the superintendents or presidents
do demean themselves, to see offenses in them punished without all partiality.

Here worthy Ministers to be ordained, and without respect of persons: and here
the unworthy to be judged and censured, as they shall deserve, and the rest
encouraged.

IV. In every Province.
That there be a Provincial Synod gathered once a year of Pastoral Bishops,
godly and learned superintendents or presidents, and out of every County,
certain learned and grave Divines selected, and the number to be according to
the Circuits in every County.

In this to look into County Assemblies, and to see that all things be well
ordered according as they ought to be, that Bishops, superintendents or
presidents, demean themselves aright, or else to endure a censure as well as
others.

V. In the whole Nation.
That a general Assembly National be gathered once in 3 year, of chosen men,
to consult for the general good of all, to make Canons, and to establish
Ecclesiastical government.

Of the Excellency of this Government.
I. It may stand with a Monarchy, for what is here that justly can be said to
hinder it? II. It takes off all Prelaticall Lordly tyranny, for every part is
subordinate to another, the Parochial meeting to the Superintendent and his
Presbytery, this Presbytery to the County Assembly, this Assembly to the
Provincial Synod, and this to the National Convocation. III. It keeps
Bishops and Pastors to their Spiritual function, and suffers them not to
intermeddle in Civil and worldly affairs. IV. It sets up a learned and
preaching Ministry, and casts out the before mentioned Prelaticall destroying
Clergy. V. It furthers the power of Religion, in Families, Villages, Towns,
Cities, in Universities, and in Princes Palaces. VI. It Is Christ's government,
and easy yoke, freeing Gods people from great payments, as has before been
named, from all the corruptions of the Courts, which all the Land does groan
under, from that cruel Oath ex officio, and that unlimitted high Commission
grievous to be borne. Ir's a government that aymeth at godliness, and not at
greatness and gain. It makes none jealous of painful Pastors, none to be
offended at Christian meetings, as if they were Conventicles, none to envy
other men's graces, but stirs up to watch one over another, and freely to
admonish one another, to further one another to Heaven. It graceth very highly
the godly and learned Laity. Its grounded upon the word, proceeds by the
word, rejecting the Popish Canon Law, Popish Ceremonies, Popish superstitions,
and Idolatry, and all men's vain inventions, in Doctrine, Sacrament, worship,
and government of CHRIST.
The Conclusion of all is this, and the sum of my desire, viz. that there may
be a full Conformity in Doctrine, and Discipline, with the rest of the
Protestant Churches of Scotland, reformed Church of France, Geneva, etc.

1. For this will prevent future differences betwixt the two Nations.

2. Prevent the removeall of many of the Kings good subjects into other
Countries, with many other benefits.

This I humbly request to be taken into serious consideration, which being
done, will bring a blessing upon this Kingdom and Church.

Courteous Reader take notice, that in page 10. and Section 3d. that for four
hundred thousand pounds, read four hundred thousand pounds, per annum.

FJNIS.

