A Threefold TREATISE OF THE SABBATH;

distinctly divided into The PATRIARCHALL, SABBATH: MOSAICALL, SABBATH:
CHRISTIAN SABBATH:


For the better clearing and manifestation of the truth in this Controversy
concerning the weekly Sabbath.

By Richard Bernard Rectour of Batcombe.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, Exodus 20. 8. as the Lord thy God
has commanded thee, Deuteronomy. 5. 12.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

To the right Honorable the Lords Temporal in the High Court of Parliament.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the House of Commons.
more especially
To the Grand Committee for Religion. To the Committee for the Remonstrance. To
the Committee for Ministers maintenance and suppression of scandalous Ministers.
more particularly,
To the Knights, and Burgesses of Somersetshire, or Parliament Men dwelling in
that County, namely, Sir JOHN PAULETT, Knight Sir WILL. PORTMAN, Baronet Sir
JOHN STOWELL, Knight of the Bath. Sir RALPH HOPTON, Knight of the Bath. Sir
FRANCIS POPHAM, K. Sir EDWARD RODNEY, K. Sir PETER WROTH, K. Mr. DIGBY. Mr.
POPHAM. Mr. LUTTERILL. Mr. BASSET. Mr. SMITH. Mr. PHELIPS. Mr. PYNE. Mr. HUNT.
Mr. KIRTON. Mr. SEARLE. Mr. JOHN ASH.


Right Honorable Lords, and you the Honorable Assembly of the House of
Commons,
THere has been no Christian Church beyond the seas, departed from Rome, which
has given so much honorable respect unto the Lords day (our Christian
Sabbath) as we here in this our flourishing Kingdom and Nation: And it was
our glory so to honor the Lord Christ; and it will be our great unhappiness
to fail in this our Christian duty, so confirmed by Scripture, and the
general practice of all true worshippers of his glorious name throughout the
whole Christian world, the space of these sixteen hundred years.

Yet in this our time, and of late days, are stepped up among us certain
vain men, profane enough, who have attempted to deprive Christ Jesus of his
glory (in the religious observation of this day, grounded upon his glorious
Resurrection) and us of our spiritual consolation, in keeping an whole day set
apart for his worship and service.

For this end, books upon books have been written, and by license passed the
Press, to take away the morallity of the fourth Commandment, never, in any
age heretofore, doubted of; to make also people believe, that our Christian
Sabbath has no warrant from thence, and that it is not of divine institution,
but alterable from that first day of the week, equallizing their devised
holy days with it, and allowing also the like vain sports upon this day, as
upon the other days, calling such as religiously set the whole day apart for
holy uses, Sabbatarians, and Iudaizers, thus reproaching, and in their sense,
belying those that more truly honor Christ than they do.

And that they might securely go on in these their profane errors without
control, and persuade the more inconsiderate sort, that what they have
written, are truths, and unanswerable; they have stopped the means of printing
sound Antidotes to their empoysoned propositions, whereupon they have been
bold to insult over godly orthodox Divines, with too many words of insolency,
scorn, and much contempt; which they have borne with great patience, waiting
the Lords leisure till he should be pleased in his good time to give liberty
for the publishing of their learned labors, which have of long time lien by
them.

And now (blessed be God) the time is come, the way is made open by your
honorable wisdoms, goodness, power, and authority, for godly and learned men
to discover the vain boastings, and the folly of those evil ones, to the view
of all. Some of ours proceed polemically, and have made answer fully to the
best esteemed of those profane writers. Some only write positively, to
discover the truth, and to make it known in a plain way, that the meanest
capacity may be rightly informed: This way have I taken in this threefold
Treatise, humbly craving pardon for my bold presumption in presenting to your
honorable view these my weak endeavors.

But the cause is Christ's, and so deserves acceptance and promotion: God has
appointed you at this time, as his worthiest and meetest instruments for this
end: I cannot therefore seek for other Patrons in exalting the honor of
Christ, which by these men has been so dishonored, and his people so abused.
For the redress whereof, as you have nobly begun, so to proceed on to do ever
valiantly in the best service of your God, there shall not be wanting the
hearty and earnest prayers of

Your humble Servant and Suppliant RICHARD BERNARD.
London, March 26. 1641.
Faults to be corrected.
PAge 3. line 21. for grant read ground. page 50. l. 24. for reign read rain.
page 57. l. 12. for no read only. page 59. l. 12. for to read by. page 71. l.
6. for fourtum read quartum. page 73. l. 31. dele before. page 78. l. 28. for
John read Josua. page 95. l. 22. set and after the word rest. page 127. l. 21.
for plaucit read placuit.

The rest of the escapes I pray the Gentle Reader to correct.

The Contents of the Patriarchall Sabbath.
SECTION 1. OF the first Sabbath, and why called Patriarchall. SECT. 2. Of the
conceit of an Anticipation or Prolepsis, and what it is. SECT. 3. Arguments
against this Anticipation or Prolepsis. SECT. 4. Of another conceit concerning
Destination, and what it is, also confuted. SECT. 5. Of the true understanding
of the words in Genesis 2. 3. SECT. 6. That in Genesis 2. 3. is the Institution of
the Sabbath. SECT. 7. The Institution was binding, and required the observation
of the Sabbath, from the beginning. SECT. 8. The Sabbath was observed of Gods
people, before the Law given at Mount Sinai.
OF THE PATRIARCHALL SABBATH, AND THE ORIGINAL THEREOF.
Genesis 2. 3. And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it.
SECTION. I. Of the first Sabbath, and why called Patriarchall.
IN these words is the institution of the Sabbath before the Law given on Mount
Sinai.

I call it the Patriarchall Sabbath, because it was known and observed of the
holy Fathers, of Adam, and of the other Patriarchs, till Moses and Israel
received the Law. And to distinguish it from the Mosaicall and Christian
Sabbaths, of which in the two Treatises following.

Some there be, and more of late, than heretofore, that do deny the Sabbath to
be here instituted.

Because, say some of them, (for they be not all of one mind) that Moses
delivered the words by a figure called Anticipation or Prolepsis: Other some,
that they be words of destination, that in time to come the seventh day should
be blessed and sanctified to Israel for the Sabbath day; and so the words not
to be taken for a present Institution of the Sabbath day then.

So the Question is, whether the Sabbath day in this place of Genesis has its
first ground and establishment, and here its first institution.

Many of the Ancients, some of the learned Jewish Rabbis, very many
judicious Divines among us Protestants, and diverse learned Papists, do hold the
affirmative.

Some (few in comparison of the other) do hold the negative, upon the former
suppositions; suppositions I call them, for that they have no ground of Reason
from either the Letter, or Circumstance of the Text.

SECTION II. Of the conceit of an Anticipation or Prolepsis, and what it is.
TOstatus his conceit of an Anticipation in the words, was, says Catherinus,
ineptum commentum; and is indeed contrary to the plain meaning of Moses his
whole narration, and the letter of text.

Here its fit in the first place to show what is an Anticipation.

It Is the setting down of a thing in order of story before, which comes to be
so in order of time afterward.

The Reason of every such Anticipation is from the Penman of the History, who
writes down things not as they were of old at the first, but as they then
were, when he wrote the story.

Such an Anticipation here, some of them only so say, or do rest on others who
affirm it, without allegation of reasons for this their conception, and brain
birth.

But there is one of late who has produced his grounds for it.

1. Because, says he, the words may be thus translated:

And God has blessed the seventh day, and has sanctified it.

Perfecit and requievit, no advantage to be taken more in the word has
blessed, and has sanctified, than in saying, He blessed and sanctified.

Has, is but an English particle, and not of force in the Hebrew* in the
Greek, or Latin, which yet if we add to the other verbs, as, He has ended,
and has rested, speaking of that same time, would be absurd.



2. For that diverse places are named elsewhere, by an Anticipation, says he.



For in those other places, there evidently appears the grant of the
Prolepsis, why of necessity it should be so taken: there would else manifestly
be an untruth uttered, which cannot be here understood, when the words are
taken, as they be in the text, as then, and at that time so.

Yet these two reasons, (for no more I find) are only the weak under propers
of their fancy.

SECTION III. Arguments against this Anticipation or Prolepsis.
Argument 1.
WHere the words may be taken literally without danger of any untruth,
contradiction, or absurdity, there is no figure and anticipation.

For in a plain narration, to take the words figuratively, is to abuse the
Scripture, and to make it as a nose of wax.

But these words, He blessed and sanctified, applied to that self-same singular
day in which he rested, have in them no falsehood, no contradiction, no
absurdity: Therefore here is no Anticipation.

Let any show wherein the falsehood, the contradiction or obsurditie, in so
applying and understanding of the words is; if they cannot, they must give over
Abulensis commentum and figmentum.

Argument. 2.
EVery Prolepsis is only in places, or in the description of things, and
actions done by men, but not of Gods divine institution, no instance can be
given hereof.

But these words are not spoken of any place, nor act, nor thing of men, but an
act of Gods institution, who is said to bless and sanctify the day; and are
words of his divine institution. And therefore here is no Anticipation till it
can be proved, that one may so differ from all other in holy Story.

Argument. 3.
In every Anticipation, the name, act, or thing forespoken of in order of
Story, has its dependence, and rise from some thing following, yet before in
order of time. For this is an Anticipation, as is before showed: and it is most
true, in every such figure: See it in instances.

In Bethel is a prolepsis: Genesis 12. 8. from Genesis 28. 19.

In Gilead is a prolepsis: Genesis 31. 31. from Genesis 31. 47.

In Gilgal is a prolepsis: Josh. 4. 19. from Josh. 5. 9.

In Bochim is a prolepsis: Judge. 2. 1. from Judge. 2. 5.

In Exo: 16. 33, 34. which act was when the Tabernacle was built, and the
Testimony made afterward: Exo. 25. and 26. and 27. on which the truth of this
act of Aaron depends.

In 1. Sam. 17. 54. is a prolepsis, for the act of David here mentioned could
not be true, till afterward he won the strong hold of Zion, and got Jerusalem:
2. Sam. 5. 7.

In all these, and in every other prolepsis, there is such a dependence so
clear and evident, as none can doubt of the truth of the figure, except we
would faulty the narration with an untruth.

But now these words in Genesis 2. 3. have not their truth dependant upon any
thing after recorded in Scripture, which was before this act of God in time.

For who can say truly, and sollidly prove it, that the words in Exo. 20. 11.
were the institution of the Sabbath in time before this in Genesis.

For it is manifest that the Sabbath was kept before the promulgation of the Law.
Exo. 16. 30.

And again the words in Exo. 20. 11. show us, not what new thing God did then,
but what he had done, when he rested the seventh day, from his six days works
in the Creation,

For as God tells them what he had done in the very first six days in the
beginning, so he told them what he did that very seventh on which he rested
from his work; he blessed, and hallowed it, and made it the Sabbath.

Therefore its to be concluded, from the nature of a true Prolepsis, and the
dependence of that which is first spoken, upon that which makes it so in time,
that here is no Anticipation.

Argument. 4.
IN every Anticipation the thing so spoken of, is generally known to be come to
pass before the Penman wrote it: as those former instances do show.

If here then were a Prolepsis, Gods blessing and sanctifying the seventh day,
should have been known generally, and the institution before Moses time, who
wrote this history of Genesis.

If they will not acknowledge it was so known before Moses wrote Genesis, then
is there no Anticipation.

If they grant it to be generally known, then must they yield that the Sabbath
day was before the giving of the Law, and generally so known.

If they say it was known unto all Israel only after the giving of the Law;
then I ask them.

1. What Sabbath that was, which was known to Israel at the raining of Manna?

2. How they know that Moses wrote Genesis after the time of the giving of the
Law? If only it was generally known from that time, and not before, from
whence he must take occasion (as they say) to insert the words into the second
of Genesis and third verse, by way of a Parenthesis.

Argument 5.
THey have no ground whereupon to settle their Prolepsis: no Scripture have
ever any of them alleged, but either the sixteenth of Exodus or the twentieth,
and eleventh verse.

But in neither of these can they fetch their rise for it Not out of Exodus the
sixteenth, for there are no words of Gods blessing and sanctifying the day,
mentioned in all that chapter.

Not out of Exodus the twentieth, for the reasons forenamed in the third
argument: Therefore in the words Genesis 2. 3. is no Prolepsis.

Argument 6.
EVery Anticipation in holy Story has its ground for it within some convenient
space of time.

Usually and commonly the thing anticipated is recorded within the same book
where the Prolepsis is.

Sometime in the same chapter, Jud. 15. 14. 17. and 2. 1. 5. Genesis 31. 21. 47.

Sometime in the same verse of the chapter, as in Genesis 33. 17.

Sometime in the next chapter, as in Josh. 4. 19. and 5. 9.

Most usually in the same book, though somewhat farther off in chapters, as in
Genesis 12. 8. and 28. 19. yet the space then within a man's age.

Seldom in any other book, though sometime, as that in the first of Samuel 17.
54. and in the second of Sam. 5. 7. when there is a continuation of the story
of the same person, whose act is the ground of the Anticipation, as is clear
in this instance of David, where the Anticipation and the act of David are
within the term of his life.

But here is a supposed Anticipation, not of a few years, or the age of a man,
but the space of one world, for 1657 years, and then into another for the
space of 450 and odd years, in the whole 2450 and more years. A monstrous
birth of a leaping Prolepsis for so many generations, not to be assented unto.

Argument 7.
IN every true Prolepsis, the very self same singular thing is to be
understood in the Anticipation, and that whereon it depends: As Bethel in
Genesis 12. 8. is the self same in Genesis 28. 19. not another Bethel.

But the seventh day in Genesis 2. 3. is not the very self same singular and
individual seventh day in Exodus 20. 11. as it was confessed, but the same in
likeness, says one, and in successive revolution; but the nature of an
Anticipation does not admit of such a distinction. And here note further, that
the words of Exodus 20. 11. whence they do ground their Prolepsis, have not the
word seventh day in them: for in Exodus 20. 11. it is said, Wherefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it. But in Genesis 2. 3. it is said, He
blessed the seventh day: so as Moses kept not to the word precisely, as he
ought, if in Genesis 2. 3. there were a true Prolepsis. Therefore there is none.

Argument 8, and last.
EVery true Prolepsis is raised upon a sure ground, and not upon a mere and
uncertain supposition, as is manifest in all the former instances, and in any
other that may be produced.

But this Prolepsis is grounded upon a mere and uncertain supposition, which
is this, that Moses wrote his story of Genesis after he heard the Law
promulgated upon Mount Sinai, where he heard God to bless and sanctify the
seventh day to Israel: and therefore in writing of Genesis he occasionally
Pererius is of opinion, that Moses wrote Genesis in Midian: Eusebius. Casariensis
holds it written before the Israelites coming out of Egypt lib. 7. cap. 2. de
Praepa. Evang.
inserted the words in Genesis 2. 3. by way of a Parenthesis.

But till they can prove this, every one may see their sandy building, and
withal admire, that any learned men dare thus to wrestle with their wits to
overthrow a divine institution.

Thus much for this Anticipation.

SECTION. IV. Of another conceit concerning Destination, and what it is, also
confuted.
IT is clear that there is no Anticipation in the words, which some perhaps
well weighing, have devised another shift to darken the plain narration, that
here should not be conceived a present institution of the first Sabbath: and
this is by interpreting the words by way of Destination, which stiffely some
maintain contrary to the opinion and judgment of many learned men, as well
Papist as Protestant Divines as afterward shall be showed.

For better proceeding herein, to show the error, and to clear the truth: let
us see, first what they mean by Destination, to wit, Gods purpose and
intention to have the seventh 1 What is meant by Destination.
day mentioned in Genesis 2. 3. to be the Sabbath day in actual use, after the
giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai, 2450 years after Gods creation of the
world, and his resting on the first seventh day: this is their conceited
Destination of the day.

Next, before I come to their Reasons, let us see what they yield us.

First, that God bestowed a special prerogative, and preferment 2 Our
agreement.
upon the seventh day, setting it apart from the rest of the week: That this
was done (says a learned Opposite) we all agree, but when it was done is the
question.

Secondly, it is said further, that when God had ended his works, he ordained
and appointed that the seventh day, the day of his own rest, should be that
on which his Church should rest, and follow his example; and this was that
great blessing and prerogative bestowed on that day.

Thirdly, it is moreover granted, that the seventh day was from the beginning
the day of Gods rest, and might have been employed as the Lords Sabbath; and
some days doubtless were thus bestowed, and perhaps this.

Fourthly, and lastly, that the cause and reason of the Sabbaths
sanctification, (to wit, Gods rest) was from the beginning, though the
sanctification it self was a long time after

From all this note: First, that the seventh day was the day of Gods own rest;
Secondly, that this his rest was the cause or reason of the Sabbaths
sanctification; Thirdly, that as God actually rested, so he then actually
sanctified the day, deputed and consecrated it unto rest; Fourthly, that this
his rest was exemplarie, he ordayning and appointing that the Church should
follow his example; Fifthly, that he set it apart from the rest of the week;
Sixthly, and so bestowed upon it a special prerogative and perferment, and a
great blessing, which was his appointing it the day of the Churches resting and
following his example; Seventhly, that that day might have been employed as
the Lords Sabbath, that some days doubtless were thus employed, and perhaps,
the seventh day it self.

Thus far we accord, and if well weighed, it might easily overthrow their
discord from us, and bring them home to us: for our disagreement is only in
this:

We say, that all this which they yield, was for the time present, by way of
actual use and employment: 3. Our discord.
They say it was only by Destination, and Gods purpose to have it so, after he
should give his Law on Mount-Sinai, after the destruction of the old world, in
a new world, (as it were) after the Israelites delivery out of Egypt 2400
years from the worlds creation: How likely this is, let the indifferent Reader
judge. But let us see their reasons.

1 Argum.
Moses wrote Genesis after the giving of the 4. Our Opposites Reasons.
Law, as Beda and Abulensis, with others, say: Therefore Moses hearing the Law
of the Sabbath, wrote in Genesis 2. 3. of Gods purpose and intention, and of the
Destination of the Sabbaths sanctification, after the giving of the Law.

Genesis was written after the giving of the Law, Beda, Abulensis, say so;
Porerius and Eusebius Caesariensis say otherwise: Set opinions against
opinions. Secondly, there is no consequence from the Antecedent, Moses having
heard the Law, wrote therefore in Genesis 2. 3. of the Sabbaths Sanctification, by
Destination; here is a rope of sand indeed: for had he written those words in
Genesis for the instruction of the Israelites, why mentioned not he the Law of
God given at Sinai, to make more plain the Destination, and the fulfilling of
it? for reason would that he should have done so. Thirdly, if the words in
Genesis 2. 3 have reference to the Law, and are not dependent upon the verses
going before, why does not Moses in his writing of Exodus, mention some such
thing either in Exo. 16. or 20. where he writes of the Sabbath, or in other
places, where he mentions the seventh day? In Deu^^ronomie, chap. 5. where
he repeated the Laws, and gives a reason of the Lords commanding to keep his
Sabbath, verse. 15. where this Destination might aptly have been mentioned, yet
Moses speaks not a word thereof.

2 Argument,
Musculus does translate Sanctificatus by Destinatus, and Mr. Byfield observes
that the original Word signifies to prepare: Therefore the Sabbath had not an
actual existence in the world from the beginning: The Rest was from the
beginning, but the Sanctification it self was a long time after.

prepare, it signifies not so properly, but figuratively, and so used
somewhere, and so translated, as in Ier. 12. 3. but hardly in any other place
in the whole old Testament, taken in this sense. What reason is there to leave
the proper and most common acceptance, and take a figurative, and so rare a
signification of the word? Again, a word of many significations, must have the
signification given it, as may be approved by the circumstance of the Text, and
not (as we please) to apply it for our own purpose, without proof. Thirdly,
who knows not that to prepare, is for present use very often, see in Exo. 16.
5. Number. 23. 1. Ios. 1. 11 and Ester 5. 4. Psalm. 147. 8. Mark. 14. 12. 15.
therefore it is unsound, from a bare signification to conclude a future
Destination for a very long time after.

2 For Musculus expressing of it Destinatus: I answer first, that none
translateth the Text it self so. Iunius and Tremelius, Arias Montanus,
Pagnine, the Septuagint, the Chaelde paraphrase, the vulgar Edition; all of
them translate it by See Avernarius Schindlerus and the rest.
Sanctificavit, and none by Destinavit. Secondly, no where do the Dictionaries
express the Hebrew Word in Genesis 2. 3. by Destinavit, but by Significavit: Why
therefore should a singular expression by any on single man occasion any to
wrest a Text of Scripture, from its common and plain sense, to uphold a new
device? Thirdly, though Musculus does thus express the Word, does he
thereforecoyne such an interpretation? He does not. And therefore his
Destination is no more, but the setting apart of the day to be a Sabbath, to
ordain and choose it for that end. Fourthly, that none may be deceived by the
Word Destination, we must understand that there is a double Destination.

1 A future Destination for time and employment, the time longer on shorter, as
there is use of the thing destinated to future time, because the thing
destinated in Gods decree, has not existence or being before such a time. This
was the Destination of Cyrus spoken of by Esai 44. 28. and 45. 1. long before
he was borne, and when he was made King, in the first year of his reign, he
performed that which God had destinated him unto, Esdr. 1. 1. 2 Chronicles. 36. 22.
To this kind of Destination must be referred, Jeremy to be a Prophet before
he was borne: So John Baptist Christ's forerunner, and Saint Paul a chosen
vessel to bear Christ's name before the Gentiles and Kings, and Acts 9. 15.
the Children of Israel. And this Destination may be spoken of Christ ordained
to be the Messiah, and to show himself to be so in his appointed and
destinated time. Now this Destination is indeed nothing else, but Gods
preordination of a thing to be which has not either present being, or not
fitly the time come for the use and employment thereof; but neither of these
can be said of the day on which God rested, as is clear by what is before
ganted by our Adversaries.

2 Present Destination for time and employment, so also as the thing
Destinated, be for continuance, and may come to a greater solemnity, more at
one time than at another: as for example to evidence it in persons, places, and
times.

1 For persons, the Levites were destinated to the service of the Tabernacle,
and were actually admitted to the service thereof, presently upon their choice;
for they were fit, and the time seasonable for the use the Tabernacle.

2 For places, when the Tabernacle was made, it was destinated to the solemn
worship and service of God, and was presently employed; so was the Temple after
Solomon had built it.

3 For times, Abib, Exodus 12. 2. was appointed the beginning of Months, and
the fourteenth day of the Month destinated to the eating of the Passover; and
though it was to be continued for the times to come, and to be observed with
greater solemnity, yet then was it actually in use. So that with the
institution, there was the present observation, though with greater solemnity
afterward performed. Thus may we think of the first seventh day Sabbath, so
destinated for a Sabbath to be kept with greater solemnity, after Isreal's
deliverance out of Egypt; yet nothing hinders to believe, if we take what
before is granted, that there was a present observation of the day. What I
find to be objected against this, is answered in this Section afterward.

3. Argument,
Solemn Feasts, memorialls of Gods great mercies, were ordained in Sinai, but
destinated to be kept holy in Canaan. So that between the institution, and
observation may be a great distance. And therefore it is not unreasonable to
hold the observation of the first seventh day Sabbath to be deferred to the
time after the Law given.

Genesis, touching any future time, for the observation of it, for then the
fancied destination had been clear, and the question had been ended. Thirdly,
There was no reason for the keeping of some of those solemn Feasts, as the
feast of weeks, or of harvest: Exo. 34. 22. because in the wilderness they did
neither sow nor reap: So the Feast of Tabernacles after the gathering in of
corn and wine, Deuteronomy. 16. 13. because then they dwelt not in houses, to make
them boothes, to remember that in the Wilderness they so dwelt, for as yet
they were in Tents in the Wilderness; nor had they fields of corn nor
vineyards to gather in corn and wine. Therefore there was reason for
destinating the observation of those Feasts till afterward. But such sound
reasons of destinating the observation of the seventh day Sabbath for so many
hundred years are yet to seek: The Passover they kept when it was instituted,
and after, in the wilderness: Number. 9. 1. 5. and so no doubt other holy days
then instituted, such as then could be kept.

4. Argument,
The reason and ground of the observation of the Sabbath was not till Isreal's
coming out of Egypt; Deuteronomy. 5. 15. where it is said, that Israel was a servant
in Egypt, and that the Lord brought him out with a mighty hand; Therefore the
Lord his God commanded him to keep the Sabbath day: We see hence, that the
keeping of the day did depend on such a deliverance; therefore we may well
acknowledge a destination for the observation, till the ground of the
observation become to pass, which was not till then.

Exo. 20. 11. It is rendered as the only reason why God then commanded the
observation of the Sabbath; Nor did God himself give any other reason or ground
for the keeping of it holy, but only his blessing and sanctifying of the day on
which he did rest: Therefore this was the ground of observing the day; which
ground was laid down at the beginning of the world, as before is acknowledged;
and therefore there was no need of a destination to expect another ground for
the observation of the day so many hundred years after. Thirdly, Concerning
deliverance out of Egypt, it is prefaced by God himself before all the
Commandments, as a strong motive from his mercy, to move Israel to the
observation of every Commandment, and not of the fourth alone: For upon the
rehearsal of that benefit, the Lord gave them that his whole Law, consisting
of ten Commandments. Fourthly, the former part of verse 15. in Deuteronomy. 5. is to
be read as within a Parenthesis, so as the beginning of the later part of it,
at therefore, must have relation to rest mentioned in the end of the fourteenth
verse, and not to the deliverance out of Egypt, mentioned within the
parenthesis, as the ground of the Sabbath: for (if it be marked well) it
begins with remember that thou wast a servant, to move them to pity their
servants, as God in mercy pitied them, to bring them out of Egypt with so
strong an hand. So thus rightly understanding the text, it is altogether
impertinent to be brought for destinating the keeping of the seventh day, till
Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt. It is to be lamented that men of good
Learning should wrong Gods word with such a Misinterpretation, to uphold a
mere imaginary Destination, which neither Wit, nor Learning can make good.

5. Argu.
It is as clear as the Noonday, from Nehe. 9. 14. that the weekly Sabbath was
made known to the Israelites under Moses at Sinai, and not before unto their
Fathers: And therefore the place in Genesis must be understood by way of
destination.

Sinai, whereof it is said, that God made there the Sabbath known to Israel;
yet before that, Israel knew and kept the Sabbath in the wilderness of Sin.
Exo. 16. 1. 26. before they came to Sinai. Secondly, seeing they knew the
Sabbath before they came to Sinai, the words thou made known must not be
interpreted of a knowledge of bare information of that which they knew not
before, but of a knowledge of farther ratification at Sinai, for there his holy
Sabbath was made known to them,

1. By his own person, but before in Exodus 16. by Moses.

2. Now more certainly by a lively voice, and Gods own writing; when before it
was delivered by tradition to the Patriarchs, and not in writing.

3. More fully concerning the persons which were to observe it, not only the
Parents, Masters, and Magistrates, in their own persons, but their Sons,
Daughters, Men, and Maidservants, their Cattle, and the Stranger within the
gates.

4. The manner also prescribed, not to do any servile work on the day. These
things he made known unto them, and all this to all Israel at once by his voice
of Majesty from heaven, which was never done before, nor so made known to
their Fathers.

Lastly, if any yet will conceive it of such an informing them of which neither
they nor their Fathers ever knew before, I desire them plainly to show me, why
God should conceal from all the holy men of God, from Adam to Moses, his
resting on the seventh day, his setting it apart for a Sabbath, destinating it
for his Church to rest on, and to follow his example in time to come? Let any
one give any instance at any time where God really destinated any thing, time,
place, or person for future use, and did not make any acquainted with it to
live in expectation of it? There may be instances given to the contrary. Then
this will follow, that God destinating the seventh day for Sabbath in time to
come, as they say, the destination was made known to the Fathers, and therefore
they knew of a Sabbath before the time that Nehemiah speaks of, especially
considering, what an Opposite does freely acknowledge.

1. That the seventh day might have been employed as the Lords Sabbath. 2. That
some days, doubtless, were thus bestowed: And, 3. Perhaps that day: Could
then all the Fathers be simly ignorant of the seventh day Sabbath?
Thus have I showed the strongest arguments for destination that I can read of
in any of the last disputers for it. Now I come to the Reasons, against this
fained destination.

Reason 1.
EVery History is made of things existent, but if the words in Genesis 2. 3. be to
be understood of what God intended to do, and not what he then did, the words
should not be historically taken, but prophetically interpreted. But Moses
wrote in Genesis 2. 3. an history, as all the words before and after, and the
words themselves plainly laid down in the verse, fully demonstrate: Therefore
is there no Destination, except the destinated time to come were set down
expressly in the words historically, whereby it might be understood in the
history what then God did, and what plainly he appointed men to do
afterward: for so it lost not the nature of an historical narration, both in
telling of the thing done, and in the appointing of what should be done: if it
be, I say, with a clear expression, as is required in the nature of a Story.

Reason. 2.
THere is no Destination of that thing for future time only, which has actual
being, and aptness in it, for present employment: For future Destination is
only for deficiency in these two respects.

But the seventh day was from the beginning, the day of Gods rest, and the
ground of man's rest; (this is granted.) And that day had its ability, and every
way was as fit then for an holy Sabbath as ever it was afterward. This is true
(from the Adversaries grant) to wit, that from the beginning it might have
been employed as the Lords Sabbath, and perhaps had so; it then had an
aptness to be an holy Sabbath.

Therefore Destination for only time to come, is an idle imagination.

Reason 3.
IF it be, with a doubtless, that from the beginning some days were employed
as the Lords Sabbaths, and is granted for a truth: Then, without doubt, was the
seventh day from the beginning so employed as the Lords Sabbaths. For what day
could they so groundedly take for a Sabbath, as Gods only rest-day? or what
day could they so properly hold to be the Lords Sabbath, as his own day which
himself blessed and sanctified? as the Text says, and is denied of none.

Therefore the seventh day from the beginning, being bestowed as the Lords
Sabbath, the observers of the day, held it fit for present use, and conceived
it not in the words of the text a future destination for so long time, as is
groundlessely imagined.

Reason 4.
THat which belonged alike to all, from the worlds beginning to be observed by
all, the same to be passed over as not observeable of any, but destinated to a
peculiar sort, which should be borne after many generations, is not reasonably
conceived to be true, but to be held as a feigned untruth.

But such a thing is this imagined future destination: For it put off Adam,
Seth, all the holy men of God 1600 years before the Flood; Noah and Shem, with
the other holy Patriarchs till Abraham after the Flood; and from Abraham to
Moses, and to Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, from observing the day of Gods
rest, and therein the remembrance of the work, and Worlds creation alike,
belonging unto all; as if it had only concerned the Israelites, and not the
holy Fathers from the beginning; which none will aver I suppose. Therefore
this Destination is but a fiction.

Reason 5.
THe ground of the future Destination of the observation of the seventh day
being false, the Destination it self falls, and is false, as will be granted.

But the ground of this their Destination, which some lay to build it upon, is
false, (viz.) the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt; for their proof out of
Deuteronomy. 5. 15. fails them, as before is made manifest: Therefore there is no
such Destination as is pretended.

Reason 6.
IF God did on the seventh day actually rest, and at the same time actually
sanctified it, as is confessed to be for the present, the Churches Sabbath:
Then he put Adam into the right of actual use of the day, and not destinated
it only for the time to come: But Gods actual resting, was the ground of his
actual sanctifying of the day, and his actual sanctifying of the day, made it
ready for present use; neithe was there any thing that could hinder Adam from
observing of it at that present, for the Lords own Sabbath. And if it be
perhaps said, that a Father having many sons, may determine one to be his
heir, yet not presently put him into the possession:

I answer, that may be, because the Father will not dispossess himself, of
that himself stands in need of: And also that son may perhaps die before
him, and before his other brethren. Therefore is not this simily fit for this
purpose, neither does it any thing weaken the argument.

Reason 7.
THere is not the least intimation in the Text of any decree of a future
Destination, and deed to be done, but a plain narration of that which then was
done. For Moses says, God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. Again,
the words before, in verse second, concerning Gods ending his work, and his
resting on that seventh day, and the reason added to the reason in the words,
of verse third; why he blessed and sanctified it, bind the act of God to be
understood of the time then, and not of a time four and twenty hundred years
after.

Moreover Moses the Penman, wri^eth the Story of Gods resting, as an act done
then, as all acknowledge: so he speaks of his blessing and sanctifying the
first seventh day, as then blessed and sanctified. For he holds in all, the
same form of speech: He ended, he rested, he blessed, he sanctified: when he
did the former, he did the later, as the words show without any variation, at
the first reading of them, to any indifferent judgment. Lastly, no instance in
holy Writ can be produced to defend such a gloss, and to make such a comment
upon a Text so clear as this is: Let them bring forth any one Scripture, to
warrant such an interpretation in an Hystoricall narration.

Reason 8.
GOds work is ever the ground of every Festival, ordained for a remembrance
thereof, and solemnly to be kept of those of that time, when the work was
wrought; and not destinated to a day observed for many ages after: see for this
all the Festivalls in Scripture, ordained either by God or man. The work of God
had its present remembrance upon the institution of the day, when it was to be
observed for the memorial thereof.

It is absurdly unreasonable, to think that God working a work never to be
forgotten, will appoint a day to be observed for the remembrance thereof, to
none then living, but only to those who should live 2400 and odd years after.

Reason 9.
GOds own words in Exodus 20. 11. make Moses discourse in Genesis 2. 3. to be
understood of the then blessing and sanctifying the day: For God says not,
Exodus 20. 11. Wherefore I the Lord now at this present do bless and sanctify
the Sabbath day: but he spoke (as all reasonable apprehensions may easily
conceive) with relation to his acts past, as to his works on the first six
days, so to his rest on the seventh day, blessing and sanctifying the Sabbath.

Reason 10.
THe six days of Gods work, were presently exemplary, and all men in the
Church from the creation, have taken them for present use: What reason is there
in the Text, Genesis 2. 3. to conceit a Destination of the use of the seventh day,
not examplarie till 2400 years after?

Can it reasonably be imagined?

1 That God would inform Adam of his work of creation, and of the space he did
take to create all things in, to wit, in six days (for Adam could not know
that God had made the world in six days, except God had so informed him) and
not acquaint him with the use of the seventh day also?

2 Can we imagine, that God distinguishing the seventh from the other six, yet
would leave it for use in common with the six, for so long a time?

Can we think, that Gods work in six days, put men into the present
possession and use of the six days, and his rest on the seventh day, not
afforded unto them, the present use thereof?

4 Can we suppose in any reason, that the Sabbath day, was only needful to the
Israelits in the Wilderness, and of no use to Gods people and Church before
the Flood, nor after till those days?

There are other reasons which are brought out by some for this Destination,
but they are without any weight of reason.

Reason 1.
THere is no Historical narration of the observation of the day.

Exodus 16. 30.

Reason 2.
THere was no Commandment given to Adam, concerning his resting upon the day.

1

2 This reason concludes not a Destination of the day, till Moses his days,
nor any Destination at all, for:

3 It was needless to give to Adam any Commandment affirmative in his state
of innocence, because he was filled with great wisdom, with holiness,
righteousness, and uprightness; and it was enough for him to see Gods example
of rest, as a pattern before him, to make him to follow him: for he could not
but know, by his excellent wisdom and knowledge, that God was to be imitated,
and he bound to take his example for imitation: He also knew that God blessed
and sanctifled the day, not for himself to keep it holy, but for man.

Reason 3.
IT is repugnant to the opinion of the Doctors of the Church, that God imposed
upon Adam in his innocence, any more positive precepts but one, which was that
of the forbidden fruit.

1 Genesis 2. 3. there is a Destination, because Doctors hold only one positive
precept, given to Adam: for the plain narration has not its dependence upon
either one, or more precepts given of God to Adam.

2 This argument imployeth that the words in Genesis 2. 3. should be a
Commandment, or else needs must they afford a Destination; but though it should
be granted, that there is no Commandment, yet the simple narration of the truth
of Gods resting then, and his blessing and sanctifying the seventh day,
preventeth the Conceit of any future Destination.

Reason. 4.
THat the Law of the fourth Commandment was not agreeable to the state of
innocence.

Adams state of innocence; but the fourth Commandment to keep holy the Sabbath
day might be agreeable to Adam in innocence.

1. It would and did well agree with Adam to be an Imitator of God, but God
rested on that day, and was refreshed. Exo. 31. 17. Therefore it was no whit
disagreable to Adams innocence to rest after the example of the Lord his God,
and to keep a Sabbath.

2. Adam was to work six days (though his labor was delightsome, and not
toylesome) in imitation of God, and therefore to rest the seventh day, because
God did so: This is reason enough, if no more can be said for it: For albeit
Adam toyled not his body with pain and sweat, yet his mind was attent to his
weekly bussinesse while he labored, and six days were destinated to his
labor: but now on the seventh day his body was altogether freed from all
labor, and his mind also from attending to it, and the whole man set apart
for an holy rest unto the Lord, which befitted him well.

3. Though on the other days he served God, yet neither the days, nor he on
those days were immediately consecrated to God, as this day was, and held also
for holy duties, and to attend upon God immediately; who in that happy estate
did in a visible apparition manifest himself to him: And what know we what Adam
did, and should have heard, learned and seen from God on that day; I may think,
it should have been such matter, as might be agreeable enough to that his
estate of innocence.

4. Adams perfection of knowledge in holiness and righteousness, with
uprightness and innocence of life, did furnish him with matter of heavenly
Contemplation, and made him bold to present himself before God in a special
manner that day, and was fitted to spend the rest of that day in heavenly
meditations, who prepared himself, and strengthened his faith in the assurance
of eternal life in heaven, whither he should have been translated in Gods
appointed time; for eternal life was promised from the worlds beginning, Titus
1. 2. whereof the Tree of life was a Sacrament, as the Fathers and other
learned men do hold. So that in this regard, the seventh day a Sabbath to the
Lord, agreed right well to his estate in innocence.

5. If the day was blessed and sanctified of God (which must needs be granted,
if the Anticipation and Destinations be removed) then a blessed and sanctified
day, agreed well to his holy and blessed state of innocence, not any jarre or
unfittingnesse coming between.

6 The day of Gods resting was not only exemplary to Adam, but to all Adams
seed, had he and they abode in innocence. Now then all men laboring the six
days, had it been unagreeable to their holiness and innocence, to have
bestowed the seventh day in meditations, heavenly contemplations, praising God
in the beauty of his creatures, and the like? This surely would have stood
with the very highest degree of their excellencies in their state of perfection.

7 And lastly, Adam had on him, as all men should have, a double calling; one
for his body, his particular calling in the duties of righteousness, for which
he was allowed six days; and another for his soul, his general calling to be
performed in duties of holiness, for which the seventh day was ordained: So
that in this respect a seventh day Sabbath, was not disagreeable to the state
of innocence.

Reason. 5.
THe most ancient primitive Fathers, as Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Irenaeus,
affirm that none of the Patriarchs living before Moses, observed a Sabbath.
Therefore in Genesis 2. 3. is a Destination for future time.

1.

2. Affirmations are not to be rested on, but the proofs produced.

3. Those Fathers, are to be understood of a ceremonious observation, which
they deny to be kept before Moses time. They do not deny any Sabbath to have
been kept at all. They d^ny what the Jews did stand for (against whom they
wrote) to wit, for Circumcision, and a Sabbath ceremonially kept. Such a
Sabbath to be kept by the Patriarchs the Fathers deny.

SECTION. V. Of the true understanding of the words in Genesis 2. 3.
HAving cleared the text, Genesis 2. 3. of these two rubs, of a Prolepsis, and of
a future Destination, it follows that it must be understood plainly without
either of them, and the words to be conceived as they be written and delivered,
which is, that at that present time, that first seventh day on which God
rested, was it which he blessed and sanctified.

How can this be denied? Does not Moses proceed orderly in his historical
narration? First he relates Gods Work every of the six days; and having ended
that, he then immediately following speaks of the seventh day, and what God
did on that day, to wit, that God rested on that same seventh day, and
sanctified it. That this is clearly so to be understood without a figure, I
thus prove.

First, this third verse is connexed to the second by the copulative
conjunction and, tying (in the continued narration) with an and, Gods resting,
to Gods ending of his work on that seventh day, in verse 2. Then, to his
resting, with another and, he adjoyneth his blessing and sanctifying the same
seventh day. Now, as the ending his work of six days, and and his resting from
his work on the immediate seventh day following, are coupled together, and not,
in any indifferent man's understanding, separable from one the other, in the
n^^ration; so are his resting, and his blessing and sanctifying of the same
seventh day, knit together, and so conceiveably to every ones common
apprehension, tied one to the other, as the other be without any difference in
Moses relation. Therefore if the former verse be clear, so is the later, to
any not anticipated with a prejudicate opinion, destinated to error.

Secondly, God himself publishing the Law of the Sabbath in Exodus 20. 11. does
there as Moses does here in Genesis 2. 2, 3. couple together the same things,
his finishing of his work in six days (who made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is) with his resting on the seventh day, and then, that he
blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it: clearly thus verifying the truth of
Moses narration by his conjoyning of the things together, and then by speaking
also of all these his acts as then done in the time perfectly past, in the
words, made, rested, blessed, and sanctified: therefore may we see God himself
(if we will see) teaching us to understand Moses plainly, and that without any
Anticipation or Destination.

Thirdly, the seventh day in Genesis 2. 3. is that first seventh day in which God
rested, and not another seventh day, which should be 2450 years after, when
the Law should be given at Mount Sinai. For,

First, the conjunction and will not admit of such a distinction or division of
the day in the third verse, from the seventh day in the second, to make them to
be put asunder as far as the creation was from the promulgation of the Law,
2450 and odd years.

Secondly, the seventh day is three times mentioned: twice in the second verse,
which is not denied to be understood of one and the same seventh day; and why
not the seventh day in the third verse? For there is no difference in the
expression of the day, it is called alike in all the triple mentioning the
seventh day, and the later seventh day (as I said before) is by and conjoined
to the other.

Thirdly, the demonstrative ipsum it, refers us to the same seventh day
before spoken of: For the word cannot have reference to a seventh day to come
two thousand years after.

Fourthly, the reason that is annexed in Genesis 2. 3. tieth us to that first
seventh day on which God rested, and not to another seventh day to come after:
for if the seventh be understood of any other seventh day, than that on which
he rested immediately after the six days work, the reason should not be good.

Lastly, to this first seventh day God has reference in Exodus 20. 11. and to
no other seventh day: Therefore must the words be understood of the first
seventh day.

Fourthly, to take the words, he blessed and sanctified it, to be meant of that
seventh day on which God rested, has no absurdity in it, neither in respect of
the day, nor in respect of Adam in innocence, as I have proved; nor does it
contradict any other place, nor any other Scripture can be brought against it,
nor is there any untruth so to conceive it: Therefore are the words without
figure plain and easy, and so to be understood as they be historically
delivered.

Parenthesis, so says Gomarus, who desires to have it taken notice of in his
reply to Doctor Rivet.

Parenthesis is ever to the purpose and sense of the place, it alters not the
meaning thereof; it weakeneth not, but rather strengthens the litterall
sense, and tends greatly to the matter in hand: See instances in the New
Testament, Matthew. 1. 18. and 24. 24. and 27. 9. Mark. 5. 8. 13. and 7. 2. Luke
2. 2. 4. 35. Joh. 1. 14. Act. 1. 18. 19. and 5. 12. Likewise in the old
Testament, Genesis 24. 10. and 35. 18. and 38. 16. and 49. 31. Exodus 14. 9. Ier.
21. 2. and 29. 2. with infinite other places: but this conceited Parenthesis,
is clean contrary to all the other, and overthrows the natural and proper
sense of the place, contrary (I say) to the nature of any Parenthesis.

But I deny here a Parenthesis, for take away a Parenthesis, and yet the sense
remains, and the former following words are knit without any absurdity: but
take away these words, And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, Genesis
2. 3.

First, there is no meaning left to express what benefit man should have by
Gods resting on the Sabbath day, as Moses tells us, what benefit accrued to
man by Gods working upon every other of the six days: for as God wrought on
them, and distinguished them for man's use, even so must we conceive of his
distinguishing the seventh day, and resting on it for man's good, as well as the
other days. But if these words be a Parenthesis, and taken away, then had not
Moses told us of any use or benefit of this day.

Secondly, take these words away, then the second verse, with the later part of
the third verse, will absurdly be conjoined. In verse second, it is thus, And
he rested on the seventh day from all his works which he had made. And in
verse third, it then should follow immediately, because that in it he had
rested from all his work, which God made and created. So he rested, because he
rested.

But now if the whole third verse be in the Parenthesis, then as I said, the
benefit of the day in which God rested is taken from us, that is, the blessing
and sanctifying of it for our use. Therefore for these reasons we may not
admit of a Parenthesis, nor is there any such thing in the Hebrew Text, nor in
the Greek, nor in Pagine, nor in Vatablus translation, nor in the Caldee
Paraphrase, nor in Montanus, nor in Tremelius and Iunius, nor in the Vulgar
Edition, nor in our last learned English translation. This new Parenthesis, is
but an idle conception, brought forth to blunder the clear stream of the Text.

SECTION. VI. That in Genesis 2. 3. is the Institution of the Sabbath.
THe words in Genesis 2. 3. are the Institution of the first Sabbath.

1 The name Sabbath, does take its original from Gods resting on this seventh
day: for so the word signifies, cessavit, requievit. This also we learn from
the fourth Commandment in Exodus 20. 8. where God names the word Sabbath,
which in the tenth verse, is applied unto this seventh day, and in the eleventh
verse, the reason is rendered, why it is called Sabbath, because God rested on
the seventh day: So that Gods own resting on this day, made it a Sabbath.

2 It being by Gods resting made a Sabbath day, he did therefore bless it:
Now to bless a day, is no where spoken of God in the whole Bible, but here;
and in Exodus 20. 11. And therefore by that in Exodus 20. 11. we must seek out
the meaning of this in Gensis, which will appear to be this, that he blessed
it, that is, by sanctifying it; for the later word gives the sense of the
former, the conjunction and coming betwixt benedixit, and sanctificavit, is
exegeticall, put expositively, as is usual in the Hebrew speech, when two
verbes come together; and very learned men thus expound the place. So Calvin,
Vatablus, Paraeus, and others; but to come to Gods own exposition in Exodus 20.
which is this: By his rest he made the seventh day Sabbath; and it being a
Sabbath by his rest, he did bless it, that is, sanctified it, that is,
appointed it to be kept holy, as it is in the words of the fourth Commandment:
For the better confirmation of this exposition, we must understand that the
Commandment given, Exodus 20. 8. is deduced from his resting, blessing, and
sanctifying this seventh day, spoken of in Genesis 2. 2. 3. and repeated, Exodus
20. 11. for the Commandment of God is an inference from it thus: Because I
rested, blessed, and sanctified the Sabbath day; therefore I command thee to
keep it holy. Now albeit there be three words in Genes. Rest, blessed,
sanctified; yet in the Commandment, he mentions only the word Sabbath, and
the keeping of it holy. First the word Sabbath day, has relation to his rest;
then to keep it holy, has relation to sanctified, or hallowed it, in which is
included the word blessed: For Gods blessing of it, is the sanctifying and
consecration of the day to be kept holy to the Lord: And indeed, this was a
great blessing of the Lord, for man's heavenly and spiritual good many ways.

This exposition is strengthened by Exodus 16. 23. where it is said, too morrow
is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord. Here the word blessed, is not
spoken of, as to call it the blessed Sabbath, but the word holy is mentioned
only, having reference to Gods sanctifying of it, and including therein his
blessing of it.

Now the words thus clearly opened, they must needs argue the Institution of
the Sabbath. For first, here is a Sabbath made, which Christ tells us, was
for man, Mark. 2. 27. Secondly, here is Gods own example for man's imitation,
as is evident in Exodus 20. by Gods urging his own example for resting on the
Sabbath. Thirdly, here are his words of institution, in that it is said, He
blessed it, and sanctified it, that is, he ordained it to be an holy Sabbath
unto the Lord, to be dedicated to his own service, as Moses informs us,
before the Law was promulgated, Exodus 16. 23. Fourthly and lastly, he
confirms it with a reason in the end of the third verse of Genesis 2. Therefore
it is the Lords institution for to be his Sabbath day, and to be kept holy of
us, as the Commandment also teaches, and appoints us to do.

3 The Lord in the promulgation of the Law, does fetch from this place of
Genesis, the original of the Sabbath, laying the ground of his precept to keep
it holy, upon the institution (...) in Exodus 20. 11.

4. In Exodus 31. It is worth our observation, that there the keeping of the
Sabbath is not urged from the Commandment
lately given in the Decalogue, as reason would in man's judgment, but from the
first seventh days rest, and refreshment after his six days work, as we may
read in the 15. 16, 17. verses of that chapter.

5. Moses in Exodus 16. 26. makes mention of six days, and of the seventh day
Sabbath, and tells them, that God had given them the Sabbath: verse 29.
speaking of it as a time before: For as six days were before, so also was the
seventh day the Sabbath, for when some did break it, ver. 27. the Lord faith,
How long will ye refuse to keep my Commandments and Laws? He would not have
said, How long for the breach only of the first seventh day Sabbath, if they
had not done so long before. Therefore the seventh day was Sabbath long before
this time of gathering the Manna.

6. S. Paul speaking of a Rest or keeping a Sabbath to the people of God. Heb.
4. 9. fetches from the original, Gods own rest on the seventh day, even from
the Creation, verse 4.

7. Jewish Doctors have been of this opinion: Genebrad in his Chron. cites
four: Broughton in his consent of Scripture, notes two, Ramban on Genesis 26.
Aben-Ezar on Exodus 20: and Peter Martyr on Genesis alleges Rabbi Agnon,
Philo Iudaeus demundi opificio is of this judgment. For he says the seventh
day God vouchsafed to call it holy. And Tertullian cannot deny that the Jews
held the day to be sanctified from the worlds beginning, Lib. 4. advers.
Iudaeos.

8. Doctor Rivet out of Wallaeus on the fourth Commandment, does reckon up to
this purpose, the consent of thirty famous Protestant Divines. Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Zanchius, Vrsinus, and others, to
the number of thirty, I say; yet he mentions not learned Paraeus, Mercerus,
Perkins, Willet, Amesius, Selneccerus Aretius, and Piscator, and very many more
which might be named, holding the institution of the Sabbath in Genesis 2. 3.

9. Of this opinion are learned Papists, whom the same Doctor Rivet quoteth
also, as August. Steuchus, Eugubinus, Gilbertus Genebrad, Iacobus Salianus,
Cornelius a lapide, Catharinus, Ribera, hereunto add Thomas Aquinas on Genes.
2.

10. Ancient Fathers are alleged for this purpose, Ciprian, Epiphanius,
Origin, Chrysostom, Hierome, Athanisius, S. Augustine: Some Fathers produced,
as of a contrary opinion, are not to be understood of a bare natural Sabbath,
which we plead for, but as the Sabbath ceremonious, as the Jews held it, and so
these Fathers deny the observation of it.

Lastly, our learned Translators of our English Bible are of this judgment, or
they who have prefixed the Contents to the second chapter of Genesis, in which
are these words: The first Sabbath: And this is allowed to be read in our
Churches.

SECTION VII. The Institution was binding, and required the observation of the
Sabbath, from the beginning.
THis Institution was virtually binding, as a Law requiring abservation of man,
even of Adam in his innocence.

1. Though in Terminis the words be not To sanctify a day, is either to keep
it holy, or to make it holy; and seeing God keeps not any day more holy than
another, the meaning must be, that he made it holy, which is as much, as to
command the keeping of it holy. And this my Lord of Armach justifies.
preceptive, yet had they in them virtually a Commandment: For God in giving
his Law deduceth out of this his institution a Commandment, as before is
showed: For Gods Commandments do arise and are imposed upon man, not from his
absolute authority, as if he commanded, because he would so command this or
that, but he does it upon good reason, which reason carries the force of a
Commandment. As for instance; God brought Israel out of Egypt, and great
bondage; whereupon God frames to them his first Commandment in the Law, and
forbids them to have any other God besides him. Now what if God had not thus
in form of words imposed this precept upon them, had not his act of their so
great deliverance bound them, as a Law, to have him only to be their God? yes
without doubt, it carried with it the force and nature of that Commandment.
Even so here, God having rested from his work, made the seventh day a Sabbath,
blessing and sanctifying it for man, (for it was made for man: Mark 2. 27.)
though the Commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath had not been published; yet
Gods rest, Gods example in resting, and his blessing and sanctifying the day
for man, had been as a precept. Paraeus says, the words are preceptive, and
Marius a learned man, says they were a Commandment. For Gods own example
propounded to man for imitation, is as if he had said, Do as you see me do:
else it is to no purpose to propound himself to us for an example. And Gods
acts in this nature This way our Homily takes, teaching, that as obedient
children we should imitate our heavenly Father in this.
imitable, and for man's use, bind men to make that same use of his acts, for
which use and end he did so; as his blessing and sanctifying the Sabbath, for
to keep it holy to him, did bind them to keep it holy, as Gods Commandment in
the promulgation of the Law, Exo. 20. 8. grounded upon this his act,
sufficiently evidenceth.

2. The keeping holy the Sabbath day, is called Gods Law, before the Law at
Sinai. Exo. 16. 4. For the Law in this place is the keeping of the seventh day
holy, as a Law: for what Law in all the sixteenth chapter was there else, by
which God would try his people, concerning the keeping thereof, but the keeping
holy the Sabbath? as the maine of the chapter touching their Manna, in
gathering it the sixth day, in Gods preserving it from Worms and stinking, in
Gods not rayning it on the seventh day, in Moses commanding to have them keep
in on the seventh day, tended all to the keeping of the Sabbath to the Lord,
which is the Law mentioned in verse 4.

3. Some going out to gather Manna on that day, the Lord rebukes the people
for refusing of a long time to keep his Commandments and Laws, saying, how
long will ye refuse to keep my Commandments and Laws? Exodus 16. 28. In which
words we may observe these things: First, that the people had Commandments and
Laws before this time, and so before the giving of the Law at Sinai. Secondly,
that the Laws and Commandments were not men's, but Gods, for he acknowledges
them for his own, saying, my Commandments, and my Laws. Thirdly, in these
words is comprehended the rest of the holy Sabbath to the Lord, of which he
makes mention in the three and twenty, five and twenty, six and twenty verses,
before the reproof of the breach thereof in this twenty eighth verse: For some
going out to gather Mannah on this day, he taxes them for refusing to keep his
Commandments and Laws, which he would not have done, if the seventh day an
holy Sabbath had been none of them. Fourthly, that these his Commandments and
Laws they had known, and had refused to keep for a long time before; for he
says, How long refuse ye to keep them? Understanding among these, the
Commandment of the Sabbath, which being reckoned among the Commandments, it
must needs be of a binding power.

If any man ask me, where do we before this time find mention of any such
Commandments and Laws?

I answer, in Genesis 26. 5. which Abraham kept, and taught his to keep, Genesis 18.
19. and if you would know how they learned them, the Text there tells you, from
Gods voice, which voice Abraham obeyed: for God never suffered his people to
live by the unwritten Law in man's nature, without his positive Laws after the
fall; yea, he gave a positive Law to Adam before, in his estate of innocence.

SECTION VIII. The Sabbath was observed of Gods people, before the Law given at
Mount Sinai.
THe Sabbath being instituted of God, Genesis 2. 3. it was observed of Gods people
before the Law at Sinai.

1. It must needs be, that Adam observed it, else he did neglect the
institution, and Gods imitable example to stir him up to the same. Now if
Adam did neglect it, it must needs be: First, either of ignorance, which could
not be, for as he knew the Lords work of six days, so could he not be ignorant
of Gods rest the seventh day, this he saw, being created before, though he must
be taught the six days work, either by Gods secret inspiration, or by
instruction of his voice: Therefore Adam was not ignorant of this first
institution of the Sabbath. Secondly, if he neglected it wittingly, it was no
less than contempt, which to conceit of Adam could neither stand with his
state of innocence before his fall, nor with his state of grace after his fall.

Therefore seeing Adam did neither of ignorance nor knowledge neglect it, he
then observed it: and if he knew it, and observed it, without all question he
would teach others to observe it, he being after the fall one of the holy men
of God, a teacher and instructor of Gods people, as he is reckoned in Genesis 5.
amongst the teachers in those days.

Some perhaps will here say, it would easily be granted, that the words were
binding, if it could be proved, that Adam knew of this institution.

The works of God are wrought for man to know, and in knowing them, to
acknowledge God in them, and to observe them, and to make that use of them,
which he intends by them; This is an universal truth.

Again, his works wrought, are to be taken notice of, of the first to whom
they may become observeable, and to whom they do belong: This is undeniable.

All Gods works are documentary, and lead men to some use of them, as the
Scriptures do teach.

Adam, created in the excellency of perfection according to the image of God,
saw Gods workmanship of the world, and knew God in them, and well understood
how to make use of them.

But now that in six days God was creating all things, Adam could not know but
by information from God, nor could he know the seventh day, to be the seventh
day on which God rested, but by his knowledge of the six days before it.

Yet after God made him, he knowing that God wrought six days, and he
beholding Gods rest on the seventh day, by his excellent understanding, he
could conceive that God in both, to wit, in his six days working, and in his
seventh days resting, made himself a pattern for his imitation: for else
what needed God to take so many days for working, or the seventh day for
resting.

But concerning the seventh day, Gods exemplary rest is not only mentioned by
Moses, but Gods blessing and sanctifying of the day, not for himself, for so
to think were absurd, says learned B. Lakes, but for man, Mark. 2. 27. In his
These.


If so, then Adam must needs know thus much, else Gods blessing and sanctifying
of the day for Adam and his posterity had been of none effect.

Although there be a dispute about the time, yet on all hands the words are
acknowledged to be words of an institution. Now every institution of God is
made manifest without delay to them whom it concerns, no instance can be
given to the contrary; but I have proved the institution to have been upon
Gods rest, after the six days work, and therefore was it forthwith known unto
Adam to be an institution of the Sabbath; for which cause he knew himself
bound to observe it, as no doubt, but he and the Patriarchs did, as follows
to be proved in the next Section.

2. The holy men of God, before the Law, knew the space of times, they knew the
space of years, and reckoned by years, Genesis 5. and 7. 11. and 14. 4. They
knew the space of a month, Genesis 29. 24. and 38. 20. Exodus 2. 2. and could
reckon the months, knowing which was first, which the second, the third, and
fourth, etc. Genesis 8. 13, 14. Exodus 12. 2. and 19. 1. They moreover observed
weeks, Genesis 29. 2^, 28. and knew how many days made a week, else how could
Laban say fulfill her week, or Jacob understand what he meant by it? But it is
said, he fulfilled her week, which was seven days, which made the week, as
they had learned from God, in working six days, and resting the seventh day;
and as the Hebrew name shows it: for a week was called (...) Shabuah, coming
of (...) Septem, seven, which language the Church of God then spoke, and the
Septuagint translates the words (...), which the Latins call Septimana and
Hebdomada, which does constare septem diebus, as a man learned in the Hebrew
tongue delivers it. All do reckon seven days for a week, and so is it taken
in the Scriptures where a week or weeks be mentioned, Dan. 9. 27. and 10. 3.
Levit. 12. 15. Luke 18. 12. Now they knowing a week, and taking to themselves
six days of the week for work from Gods example, and as God allowed them, as
we see by his words in giving the Law, Exodus 20. 9. 11. may it be in reason
thought otherwise, but that they gave God the seventh day according to his own
institution?

3 The much observing of the number of seven and seventh, may somewhat move us
hereto; else, why did God himself so observe it? First, in his resting upon
the seventh day at the beginning, Genesis 2. 2. 3. Secondly, in his distinction of
beasts and fowls, commanding Noah to observe the number of seven, in taking in
to him the clean, Genesis 7. 2. 3. Thirdly, in ordering so the Arc, by the hand
of his providence, that it (as the Type of the Church) should rest in the
seventh Month, on the Mountains of Ararat, Genesis 8. 4. and that the earth
should be dried on the seventh day of the second Month, falling out upon no
other number but upon the number of seven; I say, by the guidance of Gods
providence, to teach the godly, that as he rested the seventh day Sabbath, so
the Arc the Typical Church, should rest on the seventh day; and as he ending
his work of Creation, and blessed the seventh day; so h^e ending his work of
his judgment, upon the sinful word, upon the seventh day, on which the earth
was dried: which seventh day might very likely be the seventh day Sabbath; what
may be said to the contrary I know not: For the Sabbath day, as now sometimes
it does, might fall upon the seventeenth day of one Month, and on the twenty
seventh day of another Month. Fourthly, in ordayning the Passover to be kept
upon a seventh day, Exodus 12. 3, 6. for the fourteenth day was the seventh day;
for if we reckon from the first day of the Month, to the tenth, and the
keeping up of the Lamb till the fourteenth day, it must be the second seventh
day of the Month, which the Jews began at the evening, and continued to the
evening. Fifthly, in the Lords appointing the feast of unleavened bread, to
consist of the number of seven days, and the seventh day to be an holy
Convocation, Exodus 12. 15, 16. and a feast unto the Lord, Exodus 13. 6. Sixthly,
in his not rayning of Mannah on the seventh day, because he would have no
gathering on that day. All these put together, do show that God did much
extol the seventh day before his people, and those holy Patriarchs, to stir
them up to observe the seventh day Sabbath. Seventhly, to add to all these the
Lords speaking to Noah, of the number of seven days to bring in the Flood, and
opening the windows of Heaven, and breaking up the fountains of the great
deep on the seventeenth day of the second Month, Genesis 7. 11. and in bringing
the Flood upon the old world, upon the seventh day, Genesis 7. 10. as the learned
Translatours have it in the Margin. So Tremelius and Innius give us it, from
the Hebrew Text: Fuit ipsorum dierum septimo: Vatablus has it, Cum illuxisset
dies septimus, that hereby, among other the wickednesses of the times, God
might show his wrath against those evil men, for profanation of the Sabbath,
and the contempt of that his holy institution.

Here I might annex the Patriarch Noah, his observation of the number of seven,
again and again, in sending out the Dove; Genesis 8. 10. 12. and likewise (being
come out of the Arc) in his sacrificing an acceptable offering to God, on the
seven and twentieth day of the Month, in which he came forth, Genesis 8. 14. 20.
25. like enough to be the observation of the first Sabbath in the new world;
so let me conceive it, till any can show me plainly the contrary. Howsoever
it was, we see the number of seven was observed herein by him, as being
mindful of the seventh day of Gods resting, and sanctifying it for a Sabbath:
For I would feign know, why the number of seven should be so observed of God,
and holy men, not only by Noah, but by Abraham in some cases, except it were to
mind them of Gods seventh day; the first time of the mention of seventh, which
God so blessed and sanctified* in making the seventh day his resting day? As
for the conceit of perfection in the number of seven, I conceive it to be
without ground of Scripture, except with relation to Gods seventh day, blessed
and sanctified.

4 Saint Paul in Heb. 4. speaks of Gods rest on the seventh day, when God
finished his work, and of the participation of that rest, as Bishop Lakes
says, two ways, Typically, and Spiritually: the first by Joshua, giving the
Israelites rest in Canaan; and the second by Christ, a rest from sin here,
and a spiritual blessedness hereafter. The Apostle tells us, that an
entrance was made into the seventh days rest, instituted by God, when he had
finished his work, and rested thereon, into which man entered and rested, as
also did the Israelites into the Typical rest by Joshua, and so do the
Israelites of God into the spiritual rest by Jesus Christ.

Now as we Christian believers do partake of our rest, and as the Israelite
believers enjoyed the Typical rest, so did the holy Patriarchs and Fathers
enjoy the seventh day Sabbaths rest, and kept that rest: for to what purpose
else is that first rest mentioned?

5 Genebrad in his Chron. says that the Hebrews held that Noah and the rest
of the Fathers did keep the Sabbath, once sanctified by God, and cites Rabbi
Iohai, Pater Rabbi Simeonis, Rabbi Moses, Hadarsan, and Rabbi Salomo; Aben Esra
on Exodus 20. is also of this judgment.

6 It is most clear, that God gave to the holy men of God, his Laws to live
by, his Charge, his Commandments, his Statutes, and his Laws, and they
observed them: so it is said of Abraham, the prime Patriarch, who also was
acquainted therewith, Genesis 26. 5. The godly were followers of good things,
walking with God, Genesis 5. 22. and 6. 9. They vexed at the sinful courses of
men, 2 Pet. 2. 8. 9. They preached against their impieties, Jude 14. 15. 1 Pet.
3. 20. and God threatened destruction to the world therefore, Genesis 6. 3, 7. and
accordingly did destroy them, Genesis 7. 19. Now if God gave his Laws, and
reproved sin, and punished sin; would he amongst these his Laws (the
particulars whereof are not mentioned) suffer his first institution, his
blessed and sanctified seventh day Sabbath, to be unthought of, and to be
neglected? May we reasonably think that the godly having received other Laws,
and observed and kept them (as the Text says they did) that they would
carelessely omit to observe this institution of the Sabbath, amongst those his
Laws, Statutes, and Commandments?

7 Before any feast mentioned by Gods appointment, Moses, and Aaron, and the
Elders of the people, Exodus 3. 18. could speak of a feast to be kept unto the
Lord, before Pharaoh, Exodus 5 1. on which they were to offer sacrifices unto
the Lord, verse 3. Now what Festival day could this be, but the seventh day
Sabbath; for as yet, no other Festivalls were instituted. Therefore how ever it
was, that in Egypt perhaps in time of their cruel bondage, and only toward
the end of it, they could not observe the Sabbath; this hinders not to apply it
to the Sabbath, because Moses spoke to Pharaoh in the term of a Feast and
Sacrifice, because it was better understood of Pharaoh, than if peradventure
he had mentioned the name Sabbath, which they might keep in Egypt, in the
days of those Kings which knew Joseph, before the extremity of their bondage.

8 The fourth Commandment, and all words thereto added, tells us that the
Sabbath day was kept holy, before the time that it was written in the Tables of
Stone.

First, the prefixed Memento, tells us so much, that it was before observed,
and God would still have it carefully kept: for the Memento, has respect unto
the time past.

Secondly, the manner of this delivery of this Commandment, may persuade us to
this; for the other Commandments are uttered imperatively, so as they enforce
the duty, as in the fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and Mother; the duty
charged, is Honor: and in the other Commandments, the sin is forbidden, as,
Thou shall not take my name in vain, Thou shall do no murder; and so of the
rest. But now in the fourth Commandment, the Lord falls not upon the maine
of the precept, as to say, keep holy the Sabbath day; but the imperative speech
is laid upon the word Remember: saying, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy; clean otherwise than in any other of the rest of the precepts; and the
reason hereof is, for that he had before instituted it, and it had been before
observed of the Israelites, as in the next reason is clearly proved: Therefore
he says not, keep holy the Sabbath as now instituted, but thus, Remember to
keep holy the Sabbath, as if he had said, as it has been before observed of
you, and still to be kept holy.

Thirdly, all the principal words annexed to the Commandment, tell us of no
new thing then imposed, but what was well enough known and made use of before:
as, first six days for labor, they were allowed before Exodus 16. 4. 5.
Secondly, the seventh day to be the Sabbath; this also in plain words Moses had
taught them, Exodus 16 23. 26. Thirdly, of the Lord their God, which they knew,
from Abraham's days, Genesis 17. 7. and by Moses in Egypt, Exodus 6. 7. Fourthly,
That in it they should not do any manner of work; this they were forewarned
of, Exodus 16. 29. and some were reproved for offending, verse. 28. Fifthly, that
in six days God made heaven and earth, etc. This was evident of old time unto
the Fathers, Genesis 24. 3. 7. And lastly, that he rested the seventh day,
blessed and hallowed the Sabbath; Gods own words of the institution, Genesis 2.
2. 3. So that we see it clear from the fourth Commandment, and the words
thereto annexed, that this Law was known and practiced before it was given in
Horeb.

9 And lastly, to make up all sure; Moses tells us in plain words, that the
seventh day Sabbath was kept, Exodus 16. 30. and that the people rested on the
seventh day, which he says was a Sabbath to the Lord, verse 25. the rest of
the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, verse. 23.

Now this Text being so clear, that it cannot be denied, except one dare say
Moses lied. Some have endeavored to darken the truth, and to becloud the
antiquity of the Sabbath, in the former institution, and use thereof, by being
pleased to vent their erroneous conception, and to say (but without any ground
of reason) that this Chapter Exodus 16. speaks of the first institution of the
Sabbath.

But for answer hereto, I do deny that any such institution can here be
proved; and to make this clear, look into the Text, and observe two things;
first, what God spoke; secondly, what God did to find an institution: first
God himself spoke of giving of Manna, also of gathering a certain rate every
day, and on the sixth day twice as much, verse 4. 5. 23. but in all this
chapter, God speaks not so much as one word of the seventh day Sabbath, nor
does he say, that he blessed or sanctified it, nor does Moses write* any such
thing of God in this chapter as he speaks of Gods resting, blessing, and
sanctifying it in Genesis 2. 3. as he should have done, if any anticipation were
there, with relation to this place: secondly, what God spoke in verse 28. is
implicitly of the Sabbath; first wrapping it up among his Commandments and
Laws given before this time, to them and their Fathers; so far is he from
instituting a Sabbath in this place.

Secondly, he reproves them for the breach of it, as already commanded before
with other his Commandments and precepts there mentioned. Now if God spoke no
words of the Sabbath, but what the people were to do in six days, and
especially on the sixth, God passing by the very naming of the seventh day, and
where he speaks of it implicitly, it is only by way of reproof, to the
people for transgressing and breaking of it: How can here be the institution of
the Sabbath? seeing God does not so much as name it, but reproves the breach of
it, which implies it to have been before this time, else should he have
reproved them for a transgression and a sin, whereof there was no Law.

Next let us see what Gods acts were, whether they will afford an institution.
First, he gave them the Manna verse. 15. but this blessing was only on the six
working days; what is this to the institution of the Sabbath? truly no more
than his six days work in the Creation for the institution of the seventh day
for a Sabbath. Secondly, he preserved the Manna, gathered on the sixth day in
the morning, from breeding of worms, and from stinking, being kept over night
to be eaten on the seventh day: what is this to the institution of the day?
The blessing, was not the blessing of the day, but of the eating of the Manna
on the Sabbath day, for which cause God did preserve it, that they might keep
the Sabbath before this time blessed and sanctified, Genesis 2. 3.

Thus we see, that neither by any words of God, nor by his deeds, can here be
proved the seventh days institution for the Sabbath.

Secondly, let us see what may be gathered from Moses, for institution of the
Sabbath here in this time.

True it is, that he names the seventh day, three or or four times in this
Chapter; which he says was the Sabbath, but not as an institution; neither
could Moses institute the Sabbath: for what God here did not, he could not do:
but he mentions here the Sabbath;

1 As a reason why he approved the peoples act, in gathering on the sixth day
two Omers; because the next day the morrow after, was the rest of the holy
Sabbath unto the Lord, Exodus 16. 23. Here is no institution, nor reason
alleged for it, as in Genesis 2. 3. but it is brought as a reason for a thing of
another nature, to approve of the collection of a double rate of Manna, on the
sixth day.

2 He names it again in verse, 25. but occasioned by the Manna, which was,
that they should eat the reserved Manna, for that none was to be found that day
in the fields; because it was the Sabbath day, on which they were to rest: So
here is a reason, why they should not go and seek Manna, but to eat what was
gathered before, but no institution of the day, but an appointment of the
means used for to rest on the day formerly instituted.

3 He mentions it again in verse 26. to the same purpose, to keep them
within on the seventh day Sabbath, because six days the Lord would give it
them to gather, but on the seventh day Sabbath, there should none be found;
which words make no institution, but are an information for the preventing of
the breach of the Sabbath.

4 He names it in verse 29. upon the Lords reproving them for the breach of
the Sabbath, by some going forth to seek Manna contrary to so much fore-warning
given by Moses; whereupon Moses deals a little more roundly with them, as a
man having authority: saying, See, for the Lord has given you the Sabbath,
therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye
every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the Sabbath day. In
these words Moses first commands every man to abide within, and that none
should go out to seek it on the seventh day. These be the only words of any
Command about the Sabbath in this chapter, which do not institute the day, but
serve only to prevent the peoples sinning any more in going out to seek it, as
they had done. Secondly, Moses gives two reasons for his so strict a charge
laid upon them, which he would have them to see and consider of, for the better
restraining of themselves from the breach of the Sabbath. The first is from
Gods grace and favor, that he had given them the Sabbath: And the other is,
that he allowed them on the sixth day the bread of two days. Where out of
these words let us observe two things. The first is, that the mentioning of the
Sabbath comes only in still occasionally concerning the Manna, and not of
purpose to institute a Sabbath; but wholly in all the four places, it is
spoken of, either of gathering the double rate of Manna, or of the eating the
Manna reserved, or of gathering Manna on every of the six days, or of tarrying
within, and not to go out to seek it when it was not to be found; and all this
to this end, that the Sabbath might be kept more carefully of the people, as
the event plainly shows: For upon these considerations about the Manna, the
people harkened to Moses, and did rest on the seventh day, verse 30.

The second thing, wherewith I will and may conclude my answer, is, (that which
may satisfy any, not wilfully averse from the truth) the change of the tense,
in the two reasons: Moses speaking of Gods giving of Manna (because it was at
this time given whilst the people were in the wilderness of Zin, Exodus 16. 1.)
says in the present tense, Dat vobis, he gives you in the sixth day the bread
of two days: but speaking of the Sabbath, he utters the words in the
preterperfect tense, Jehovah dedit vobis ipsum Sabbatum: The Lord has given to
you the Sabbath, as that same which was of old, which evidently declares the
Sabbath to have been before this time, and not now at this present in this
place instituted: For if it had been now at this time given, as the Manna was,
Moses would have said, he gives you the Sabbath, and not, he has given it.

Having thus answered this place of Exodus 16. yet one thing remains to be
removed as a great block in the way; which is the silent passing over the
observation of the Sabbath from the Creation till the rayning of Manna: and
therefore they are bold to conclude from a mere Negative, that there was no
observation of the Sabbath.

Genesis 2. 3. which is enough to prove, that they ought to have observed, which
if they did not, was sin in them: but the reverence we owe to those holy men of
God, binds us to think better of them than so.

2. I have showed my reasons why we are to be persuaded that the Sabbath was
kept of them, of more force to confirm this assertion, than such a weak
argument from the bare silent passing it over historically, can be of any
validity to refell it.

For as the historical narration of Moses speaks nothing of the observation
of the day, after the institution of it; so we may find after it was commanded
on Mount Sinai, that no mention is made of any observation of the day in all
the book of Joshua, nor in the book of the Judges, nor in Ruth, nor in the
first or second of Samuel, nor in the first book of the Kings: shall we
therefore conclude, that in all this time, valiant Joshua, the Princes of the
people, the worthy Judges, holy Samuel, zealous David, and others, did not
observe the Sabbath? In all the History of Hester no mention is made of God;
will we therefore say he was not then known or worshipped of Mordecai,
Hester, and the religious Jews?

God by his spirit directed the holy Penmen to write so, in such manner, and of
such things, as he in his heavenly wisdom thought fittest to make rehearsal
of to posterities, and not to embolden men to deny such and such things not to
have been, because the Lord was not pleased to mention them. If we should thus
reason, what an ill face of a Church would we imagine to have been in the
world till Moses his days.

For the better clearing of this point, and to manifest the absurd and impious
reasoning from the silence of Scripture in this sort, I will divide the times
from the Creation till Moses, and then let men see the silent passing over of
many things, and whether men dare to deny the observation of the Sabbath upon
that only very self same ground.

1. From the Creation to the fall, how long, is uncertain, the Story is only in
two chapters and no more: In this space is not one word of Adams worshipping of
God, not a word of any holy duties practiced: May we think therefore he
performed no such thing to God? If we be ashamed so to conclude from the
silence of the Scripture herein, why dare any deny Adams observation of the
Sabbath, upon no other ground? seeing he knew it to be instituted, and had Gods
example of resting before him for his imitation?

But ye will perhaps say, that Adam could not keep it, because he fell before
the Sabbath day.

Zanchius is confident to affirm, that Christ took an humane shape, and
conferred with Adam, and taught him how to keep the Sabbath to the Lord. And it
seems to me somewhat unlikely that God would suffer Adam to fall the very day
of his creation.

First, Adam was made the sixth day, what time is not noted; let it be in the
morning, it cannot be then; first because of the things to be done before he
fell: 1. All sorts of beasts and fowls were brought to him to name them, every
several sort according to their natures, which took up some time. 2. He was
cast into a deep sleep. 3. A rib was taken out of his side, and thereof the
woman was made. 4. The Lord brought her to Adam, and married them, who spoke of
her, and of the conjunction of man and wife. 5. God put them into Paradise to
dress the Garden, and gave them a Commandment: all which took up some space
of time.

Secondly, in respect of the time of the temptation, the Serpents coming into
the Garden, then the conference between him and Eve, and after between Eve
and Adam: the temptation was not so suddenly begun and ended, as the shortness
of the Story may seem to intimate.

Thirdly, the things done after the fall: 1. A confused shame of face to see
themselves naked: 2. Their sowing leaves to cover their nakedness: 3. Their
hiding themselves, which was in the cool of the day. 4. Their examination, and
answer, and then the sentence after upon all.

Fourthly and lastly, the casting of them forth of Paradise. All which may give
us to think, that these things could not well happen upon his day of creation.

2. It is not likely, that Eve would so suddenly straggle from her husbands
company, and so immediately to be set upon by the Serpent, as soon as they
were in the Garden.

3. They could not conceive of the excellency of their state of perfection, nor
of the efficacy of Gods blessed image and likeness in them, if they had
enjoyed no time for the expression thereof: For what time could they have had
together to discern of each others excellency, to contemplate upon Gods
creatures, to behold their glorious habitation, and to praise God for his
goodness, if they had fallen the same day.

4. The words of Gods approbation of all his works: he saw every thing that he
had made, and behold, it was very good, Genesis 1. 31. which approbation he gave
of them at the end of the sixth day: For upon the words written by Moses of
Gods seeing all things very good, he adds, and the Evening and the Morning
was the sixth day, that is, the day natural was finished, for so the words are
to be understood of every of the other five days, verse 5. 8. 13. 19. 23.

Now God speaking in the end of the sixth day so well of all his works, if Adam
had fallen on that day, and God had cursed the earth for man's sin, how could it
be said, that he saw every thing good, when through the sin of man, all things
on a sudden came to be out of frame.

5. It cannot stand with the beginning of the second chapter of Genesis, that
Adam should fall the first sixth day: because, when Moses had mentioned in the
other chapter the sixth day consisting of the evening and morning; he begineth
with a summary repetition of all Gods works. Gene. 2. 1. as yet without crack
or flaw in them: secondly with mentioning of Gods ending his work which he had
made, and not marred again by cursing of it, as yet, Gene. 2. 2. Thirdly Moses
tells us, how God rested on the seventh day (to wit) from all his work which
he had made. Now what is resting, but the Lords ceasing to create further any
other things, than what he had created, and his pleasureable delight in the
full accomplishment of his works done in those six days? And his resting was
from his work made; so it was from his creating only, and not from punishing,
as his resting should have been, had man fallen before his rest here spoken
of, Genesis 2. 2. Therefore from all these reasons it is very likely, that Adam
and Eve fell not on the day of their creation. But now to return again to the
point.

2 From Adams casting out of Paradise unto the restoring of religion by Seth,
Genesis 4. 26. which was the space of 235 years, which Story is contained in one
only chapter, Genesis 4.

In this space of 235 years, there is no mention of Adams personal
repentance, of his faith, and love to God; not a word of his praying to God, of
his worshipping of him, or of any duty performed by him, unto God, or man; can
any or will any conclude hence, that Adam failed in all these? No; why then,
upon the same reason, dare any conclude no keeping of the Sabbath by Adam,
because it is not recorded, that he observed it: especially, seeing we read of
Gods resting, and of the institution and making it the Sabbath for man?

3. From the restoring of religion by Seth, unto the Flood, was 1422 years,
all which long space of time is historied within two chapters and a half in
Genesis 5. and 6. to verse 17. of the seventh chapter.

Now in all this time, for so many hundreds of years wherein lived many holy
men, the sons of God mentioned in Genesis 5. yet not one word by Moses set down
of any public worship, in offering sacrifices, as before; not a word of any
holy meeting any where, not a word of any good they did one to another, not a
word of any thing worthy note of any of them, or of their children, save of
Enoch and Noah: will we hence conclude them defective in all things? no, then
why judge we them defective in keeping of the Sabbath?

IV. From the day of the flood, and Noah's entering into the Ark, unto the
calling of Abraham out of Vr, which is the space of 352. years, some say 427.
years comprehended in part of the seventh Chapter from the seventeenth Verse to
the end, and in the 8, 9, 10, 11, four Chapters, and no more.

In this space nothing is spoken of any Divine praises, of any solemn meetings
of them together; can we conclude, that so many holy men mentioned in Chapter
11. of blessed Shems race, did fail therein? if not, why dare we say, they kept
not the Sabbath?

V. From Abraham's calling out of Vr to Jacobs going down into Egypt, is about
215. years, this space is storied in many Chapters from Genesis 12. to 46.

In which space, though Moral duties were performed, and that its said in the
general terms, Genesis 26. 5. that Abraham kept the Lords charge, his
Commandments, his Statutes, and his Laws, yet the particulars of these are not
expressed; And therefore here may we include the observation of the Sabbath,
and can no more seclude it, then we can other duties observed, which yet are
not related to be kept by him in particular: especially if we consider how God
includes the fourth Commandment among them, Exodus 16. 28. as before is
declared. If any yet deny it to be kept of Abraham, because it is not
nominated, why deny they not as well other things to have been performed by
him, seeing they are not by name mentioned?

VI. From Jacobs going into Egypt, to the bringing of them out under Moses into
the Wilderness of Sin, spoken of in Exodus 16. 1. The space was also 215 years,
for they came to this Wilderness upon the fifteenth day, of the second month,
after their departure from Egypt, which was at the full end of the 430. years,
as God foretold Abraham, Genesis 15.

The story of all this time is comprised in the five last Chapters of Genesis,
and in the first sixteen Chapters of Exodus. In which space after Jacobs
departure from Canaan not one word of their worshipping of God, of no Altar, no
Sacrifice, no holy duties in public; yet I hope we will not say, that all
these things were neglected of them, because not mentioned; if not, then no
more may we deny to them the observation of the Sabbath; for now at this time
they being in the Wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. it is plainly said, they rested
upon the seventh day, as an holy rest and Sabbath to the Lord.

Thus have I c^early showed, that their negative Argument from the Scripture is
no good reason to deny the observation of the Sabbath in all this space of
time, except they will deny upon the same ground, so many holy men to have
sinfully neglected other necessary duties, also, as is before rehearsed.

But before I conclude, I think a Question fit to be propounded and answered.

Exodus 16. the keeping of the Sabbath so plainly spoken off, and not before?

Exodus 16. 3. and the Lord determining that he would reign Mannab, which they
should gather every day by a certrain rate, and on the sixth day twice as much,
the reason was, because the seventh day was the Lords Sabbath, on which day the
Lord reigned no Mannab, nor would he have any to go forth to seek it, for that
it was an holy rest unto the Lord: This was the reason of the mentioning of it,
as appears by all that which is before delivered out of the Text.

II. Because now they were a people openly separated to God from all other
Nations, and an holy people, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Exodus 19. 6. Therefore as soon as he
had delivered them, (within six weeks space or thereabouts) after they came
from Egypt, he took order for their keeping holy the Sabbath day, as a special
evidence of their holiness before God; the breach whereof he reproved as the
breach of all his Commandments and Laws, both then, Exodus 16. 28. and
afterward; in so high esteem had God his institution of his Sabbath: and no
marvel, because by the breach of it God is much dishonored, and in the
observation of it. The three first Commandments of the first Table are kept in
public view before men; for in observing the Sabbath day, we profess the God
of Israel as the first Commandment teaches, Then in assembling together, and
worshipping God, we do what the second Commandment binds us to do: and when
on that day we contemplate upon the creatures, take occasion thereby to praise
him, and show an outward holy behavior to advance his glory, we do what the
third Commandment commands us to do: so that the holy observation of the day
to the Lord, keeps up a public practice of all our duties to every
Commandment of the first Table: therefore no marvel it was that God took order
so soon for the keeping of the Sabbath day.

III. Because God intended not until this time, to set out any glorious face
of his Church historically unto us; but rather other things, happening in the
course of times, from the fall, as in the Story does appear unto this time.

1. From the Fall to the Flood, the ill fruits of Adams fall, and the increase
of sin to man's destruction is recorded.

2. From the Flood to Abraham, the planting of the world by people, with their
presumptuous sinning, causing them to be scattered over the face of the earth,
according to their distinct languages.

3. From Abraham to Isreal's going into Egypt, God moved Moses to record the
carriage of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as private families (upon which the
Church consisted) living among idolaters, as pilgrims and strangers, while they
were in Canaan, till God brought them into Egypt.

4. From the entrance into Egypt to their mighty deliverance, God was pleased
to instruct Moses to set down how Joseph came into Egypt, his troubles and
honor; how by him Israel came into Egypt by Joseph's means; the peaceable rest,
there till another King arose, and then of their heavy bondage, till God sent
Moses to free them.

But now God intending to make glorious his people, and his worship more
publicly to be observed of all Israel at one set time weekly, Moses relates
the Lords pleasure concerning the Sabbath, not to have it neglected, but
solemnly to be kept as an holy rest unto the Lord, according to Gods first
institution thereof, Genesis 2. 3.

And thus much for the Patriarchall-Sabbath, before the Law published upon
mount Sinai.

FJNJS.
A TREATISE OF THE MOSAICALL-SABBATH.

By Richard Bernard, Rector of Batcomb.

EXODUS 31. 15. Six days may work be done, but in the Seventh is the Sabbath of
rest, holy to the Lord, whosoever does any work in the Sabbath day, he shall
surely be put to death.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold, at the sign of the
Angel in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

The Contents.
1. WHy it is called so. 2. Of the Law of the ten Commandments. 3. Of the
Naturalitie of the Law. 4. Of the Externallitie or Positivenesse of the Law. 5.
Of the Spirituallitie of the Law. 6. Of the Morality of the Law. 7. That there
are ten Commandments. 8. Of the fourth Commandment, in what words contained. 9.
Of the meaning of the words of the Commandment. 10. Of the rest upon the
Sabbath. 11. Of the day for the rest. 12. Of the words annexed to the
Commandment. 13. Of the scope of the words. 14. Of the directorie in the words.
15. That one day in seven must be the Sabbath day. 16. Of the seventh day
Sabbath. 17. Of the six days work. 18. Of the restriction from work on the
seventh day Sabbath. 19. Of works which might be done on the Sabbath. 20. Of
the rigorous strictness supposed to be put upon the Israelites that day. 21.
Of the reason added unto the directorie, with the conclusion. 22. The arguments
to prove it ceremonial, answered. 23. That the fourth Commandment is no part
ceremonial. 24. The fourth Commandment is a perpetual Precept. 25. How much
of the Mosaicall Sabbath is in the Commandment to be kept holy. 26. How the day
was kept. 27. Of Judaizing and true understanding thereof.
OF THE MOSAICALL SABBATH.
SECTION. I. Why it is called so.
I Call the Sabbath here Mosaicall, not as any new Sabbath from the former,
being the same with the Patriarchall Sabbath, farther now ratified and
established.

Nor do I so name it, as if Moses were the institutor of it, or no publisher of
it. But because God, the Lord of the Sabbath did give this Commandment of the
Sabbath, with the rest of his divine precepts, when he had ordained Moses the
Ruler over his people Israel under him: and for that he delivered to Moses the
two Tables in which the Commandments were written, to deliver them unto the
people.

SECTION. II. Of the Law of the ten Commandments.
THe Law of which the precept of the Sabbath is part, is said by the Apostle to
be holy and spiritual, Romans 7. 12, 14. and if that Commandment Thou shall not
lust, be boly, just, and good, so is the whole Law, and every Commandment
thereof. His encomiis legem integram or^at Apostolus, says Paroeus.

This whole Law has in it Naturalitie, Positivenesse, Spiritualitie and
Morality.

SECTION. III. Of the Naturalitie of the Law.
1. THe Naturalitie of the Law is so much thereof, as by the principles of
Divinity in Nature, written in all men's hearts, Romans 2. 14, 15. and furthered
by the common light of Christ, Joh. 1. 9. may be known and assented unto. And
this knowledge is more or less, as Natural men partake of that natural
light: for from hence arises the difference in natural men, and not from the
common principles, which be one and the same in all men.

From this Naturalitie in the Law, it may be called the Law of Nature, not so
as if it were the work of Nature, but for that its in every man's nature, God
writing it in every man's heart, Romans 2. 15. since the fall, at the time of the
souls infusion into the body, as God did to Adam before his fall.

This Naturalitie of the Law consists in generals, and cannot reach to true
Specialities, without some further help and better direction, yet by deductions
it may go far toward the Specialities.

This serves to make all men inexcusable, Romans 1. 20.

SECTION. IV. Of the Externalitie or Positivenesse of the Law.
THe Externalitie or Positivenesse of this Law is the openly making known of
Gods Will in the Commandments given by word of mouth, and after written in the
two Tables of Stone.

This Externalitie of precepts, the Lord added for his Church, unto those
general rules, and principles in nature, and to that common light in all men.

For the Lord never suffered his Church to be only directed by that light in
nature, never since Adams fall, who having it in perfection, could not guide
himself to it.

And therefore we read, before Moses days, of Gods Word, of his speaking to
Adam, Noah, and to Abraham, viva Voce, giving his charge, Commandments,
Statutes, and Laws, of which the Lord makes mention to Isaac telling him, that
in keeping these Abraham obeyed his voice, Genesis 26. 5.

This Positivenesse or Externalitie is to guide those Generalities, unto more
Specialities, which natural men could never rightly discover without this help
of Gods external precepts.

This consists in the Letter, and written words of the Law in the
Commandments, and the farther meaning thereof is to be learned from other
Scriptures, to know what is contained in the short precepts.

This Externalitie properly belongs to the outward man, for the ordering of
it.

And this Externalltie may be dispensed with* in some precepts, though the
naturalitie cannot: for this is written in every man's heart, but so is not this
Externalitie.

We see Gods dispensation in some Specialities, as Gods allowing Cain to marry
with his Sister: also Polygamie in the Patriarchs: In Gods commanding Abraham
to kill his son: In the Magistrate commanded to kill the offender: Deuteronomy. 13.
9. so in war to kill, Numb. 31. 17. In his allowing of the Israelits to rob
and spoil the Egyptians, Exodus 3. 22. And what is it but a dispensation, when
God raises up some to spoil other? And that children may leave their parents
in case of Marriage, Genesis 2. 24. and Matthew. 19. 5. and that variance may be
between them for the Gospel sake? Matthew. 10. 35. Luke 14. 26.

The Commandments of this Law in respect of the mere Externalitie, manifested
in Specialities may be called Positive laws, as superadditaments for
Specialities of those generals: as for example, Naturalitie teaches me a God:
but the Positivenesse tells me that I must have only the God of Israel for my
god: Nature teaches to worship God, but the Positive precept forbids to make
any graven image or likeness thereby, to worship him, but to worship in spirit
and in truth: Nature teaches to honor God, the Positive Commandment forbids
the taking of Gods name in vain: Nature It teaches also that for the
proportion of this time, the creature must depend and wait upon his Creator:
who alone can make the work of six days serve to keep us seven.

By light of nature it is no way fit the servant should prescribe unto his
Master, but rather the Master unto his servant; especially considering the
ground of that distinction of servi a libere natura.


teaches to have a time to serve God solemnly, the Positive precept commands
a Sabbath day, and directs us to the keeping of a seventh day Sabbath.

SECTION. V. Of the Spirituality of the Law.
THe Spirituality of the Law is the spiritual extension of every precept of
the Law beyond all that which the naturality reaches unto, and above the
speciality of the Letter of the Commandments in the externalitie thereof.

I call it the Spiritualitie of the Law, for that this knowledge is only
attained by the spirits special illumination, and grace. And consists not in
the only bare knowledge of the mind touching the extension, but also in the
hearts affection, drawn on along with the utmost extent of the understanding,
to love what is commanded, to hate what is forbidden, to joy in obedience, to
sorrow for failings, and falls, fearing ever to offend.

This Spirituality is that which is promised of God in his Covenant of Grace,
made with his People, to be written in the mind and heart, Jer. 31. 33. Heb.
8. 10.

This is the reparation of that blessed image of God, consisting in wisdom,
holiness, righteousness, and uprightness, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. Eccles. 7.
29.

The Naturality is common to all, in and out of the Church.

The Externality belongs to those in the Church, and in this respect may the
Law be said to be given only to the Israelits.

This all the outward children of the Church may attain unto, and others out of
the Church by conversing with and coming among them, or these going unto them,
or getting some of the wri^^ngs of the Church; For its not possible, that the
learned Heathen got all their knowledge by the Naturality in them, and their
common light, but by the accession of the helps from the Church.

Therefore to gather, that whatsoever we find in their writing concerning God,
and the things appertaining to him, to be all from their mere light in nature,
will not hold for a sound conclusion.

This Spirituality is proper only to the Elect; The first is by inscription,
but bettred by diligent improvement of those principles and helps from the
Church: The second is by information, and bettered by good education, and
instruction publicly and privately in the Church. The third is by the special
inspiration of Gods holy Spirit in a constant use of the means, and in the
grace of Self-denial which every one must come with that will be a true
obedient observer of the Law.

SECTION. VI. Of the Morality of the Law.
THe Morality of the Law properly speaking, and distinctly to common
understanding is not the Naturalitie, nor perpetuity of the Law, as if these
three indistinctly were all one. But the Morality of the Law is the Laws,
power, binding the whole man outwardly to the good behavior in all good
manners concerning holiness toward God, and righteousness toward man,
according to the Naturalitie, Externality, and Spiritualitie of the Law.

And from this consideration truly, properly, distinctly, and clearly it is,
and may be called the Moral Law; the brief Epitome of Christian Ethick,
Oeconomick, Politics, and Ecclesiastics, and of whatsoever du^^ we owe to God
or man.

SECTION. VII. That there are ten Commandments.
HAving thus prefaced these necessaria praecognita, I come to the fourth
Commandment for the right understanding whereof many things are to be made
clear.

First that there are ten Commandments of the Law: I would not speak of this,
but that one has pleased to call this number vulgar Idols.

I. Its the number which Moses records, Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and
holds Deuteronomy. 10. 4. and says, God added no more, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. more then ten
there was not, nor fewer may we make them, least we be guilty of the curse, and
break the Commandment, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. of adding to, and taking from Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

II. Its commonly called the Decalogue by the most learned Divines.

III. Our Church in the Catechi^me would have children to be taught that there
are ten Commandments.

IV. Saint Augustine in Epist. 118. cap. 12. speaks of ten Commandments.

V. The Papists though they rob God of one sacriledgiously, yet do not diminish
his number of ten.

VI. The number has thus been reckoned for three thousand and two hundred of
years and more, and never either denied, or lightly disregarded, till the
spirit of too much boldness in some has dared without shame to speak
contemptuously of the number.

SECTION. VIII. Of the fourth Commandment in what words contained.
THis fourth Commandment is and has been hitherto accounted one of them, and
is a Commandment in form of speech so delivered unto us.

But here we are carefully to consider which is the Commandment, and in what
words its comprehended.

The mistake herein has occasioned all the contention concerning the
perpetuity of the Commandment.

The Commandment is contained only in these words: Remember thou the Sabbath
day to keep it holy.

I. Moses in the repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 5. 12. shows us this plainly,
who upon the words of the Commandment, Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it,
adds immediately these words, as the Lord thy God has commanded thee,
between the precept and the next words following, Six days shall thou labor,
etc. And so evidently tells us which be the words of the Commandment, and
thereto holds our thoughts: so we may not take any of the following words to
be any part of the substance of the Commandment.

II. The learned have set the Commandment apart by it self in a distinct
Verse: Exo. 20. 8. from the words following.

III. The Lord himself in the promulgation of the Law, in every other of the
Commandments, where reasons be added, makes a difference between the
Commandment, and the reasons annexed, as we may see in the second, third, and
fifth, and therefore so here.

IV. Every reasonable man's understanding gives him to know a difference
between a Commandment, and that which, for some cause, is annexed thereto, as
here we may clearly see it.

SECTION. IX. Of the meaning of the words of the Commandment.
THus knowing the Commandment it is fit to understand the meaning.

Remember (that is) be mindful of it, so, that thou forget it not, call it to
mind, think upon it, and consider the Sabbath as a day to be observed, and
kept, and therefore Moses puts keep for Remember. Deuteronomy. 5. 12.


The Sabbath day (that is) the rest day: for Sabbath signifies cessation and
rest, taken from Gods rest, Genesis 2. 2. Moses calls it the Sabbath of rest,
Exodus 31. 15. Sabbatum cessationis: and this rest is Requies sancta, Exodus 31.
15. an holy Sabbath, Exodus 16. 23. Nebe. 9. 14. and the day is an holy day,
Exodus 35. 2. But not so the rest, nor day, in themselves; but a rest unto Lord,
Exodus 16. 23. 25. and 35. 2. holy to the Lord, Exodus 31. 15. Sanctificata, as
some translation has it, set apart and separated to the service of God, as a
sanctified rest and day, which the Lord calls his holy day, Isai. 58. 31.

To keep it holy: This is the end of remembering the Sabbath day, to sanctify
it (that is) as God did set it apart, and ordained it for holy uses, and his
wo^ship, so we are to count it the Lords, seperating it from other days, and
bestowing the rest, and the day of rest, upon the Lord, for that end and use,
for which he has made the rest and the day holy: This is to keep it holy.

From the Commandment thus understood, we may observe.

1. That a Sabbath, a rest, is imposed upon us, Exodus 23. 12. 2. That God has
appointed a day for this rest. 3. That both the rest and day, are holy,
sanctified for holy uses to the Lord. 4. That we are to keep holy the rest day,
or the day of rest, both the rest, and the day.
SECTION. X. Of the rest upon the Sabbath.
THE Commandment charge us with rest, with this must we begin and keep the
day, without this no Sabbath day: It has it denomination from rest: The day
for the holy use of the rest, is said to be blessed: Exodus 20. 11. And from
Gods resting he is said to bless and sanctify it, Genesis 2. 3. This rest is
principally mentioned; the day is called the rest of the holy Sabbath, The rest
of the holy rest, Exodus 16. 23. the Sabbath of rest, Exodus 31. 15. Therefore
this is the first thing, in the first place to be observed, in the keeping of
the day holy unto the Lord, which is, by making our rest holy to him, by
employing our rest holily: For the day is kept for the rest sake, by Gods own
example, and because of the holy use of the rest upon that day, wherein we do
rest, and not for the days sake, for without the rest we could not keep the
day; nor would God have commanded the day, but for that he rested and made the
rest holy for holy uses on that day. The Consideration of this would cut off
much profaneness and make us better observers of the day unto the Lord.

SECTION. XI. Of the day for the rest.
THe Lord having imposed rest upon us, in the next place he enjoyneth us a day
for the rest: Time is necessary for all things, and without time we cannot
rest: Nature and experience teaches this.

This time allotted by God is a day, but in the Commandment the day is not
determinately set down, it pitcheth upon no certain set day; But the
Commandment is, Remember the Sabbath day (to wit) what day soever, to keep it
holy, So the holy observation of the day is the substance of the comet. This
generality is agreeable to the Naturalitie of the Law.

And thus the Lord delivered the Commandment.

1. To lay down in it the naturality of the Law, as well as in the rest of the
Commandments.

2. And so to hold up the perpetuity of it, with all the other precepts.

3. To teach that no one certain set day is of the very substance of the
Commandment: Therefore is it propounded indifinitly without limitation.

4. To inform us that the seventh day from the Creation, (as Bishop Andrews
does hold in his Catechiticall doctrine) is not of the substance of the
Commandment.

5. This was for an admittance of the Changeableness of the day; For this
Commandment being affirmative, and propounded in general terms makes it
applicative to this, or that day, To this, while it remains, and to that
which may come in the room of it, when this is changed, and taken away: as
thus.

Honor the King (to wit) whosoever is King. If Saul be See this Simile in the
next Treatise more at large.
King, honor him, when he is dead, and David be King honor him: So is it in
this Commandment, Keep holy the Sabbath day, while the seventh day from the
Creation is the Sabbath, keep it holy: if it be changed, and the first day of
the week be the Sabbath, then keep it holy: God foreseeing it necessary that
the seventh day from the Creation was to be changed, he propounded the Law so,
as to make the day alterable, as being for the time, by way of application
belonging unto the Commandment, but not of the substance, no more then S^ul
was of the substance of this Commandment, Honor the King.

If this had been, or were well pondered, the Controversy of the Sabbath had
been prevented, and should cease ^ow to trouble the Church.

SECTION XII. Of the words annexed to the Commandment.
WHen God gave this his Commandment, he himself annexed words unto the
Commandment, purposely to guide his people in the right understanding of this
Precept, and to bind them by reasons to the obedience thereof, unto the worlds
end.

To all the Commandments God made a Preface, to enforce obedience to all of
them, even from his Covenant of Grace, made with Abraham to be his God, and the
God of his seed after him, Genesis 17. 7. calling himself, The Lord their God, in
giving his Law, and remembering them of that their great deliverance, which he
had promised also unto Abraham, Genesis 15. 13, 14.

To the second, third, and fifth Commandments, he added reasons, all which the
learned take to be for the ratification of the Commandments, and to urge us to
keep them, and so do interpret the words accordingly.

The words of God knit to this Commandment, have, no doubt, been added for the
like purpose, even to be a Confirmation, and an establishment of the Precept,
and the perpetuity thereof, and to move us to keep it.

Yet nevertheless of late, diverse have endeavored to fish out of the words,
matter to change the nature of the Commandment, from Moral (as they speak) to
Ceremonial, and to take away so the perpetuity of the Commandment, and there
withal men's hearts, and consciences from affecting and obeying it, as being no
Commandment now obliging any Christian, and so do they rob God of one of his
Commandments sacrilegiously.

But the words are so to be interpreted (according to Gods intention) as may
uphold the nature and perpetuity of the Precept, as the words annexed to the
other Commandments do very forcibly, as also to bind us unto a careful
keeping of the Precept, as they do very effectually, and do meet with all that
which our corrupt nature may perversely object against our obedience thereunto.

In the words we are to note, 1. The Scope of all the words, 2. The Matter;
which is,

1. A Directory guiding to the observation of the Commandment in Gods allowing
of us six days, and the reserving of the Seventh to himself.

2. A reason of his thus approportionating time between him and us for labor
and rest.

3. A Conclusion in the last words, upon which this fourth Commandment is
raised: As if God had said, I have from the beginning blessed and hallowed the
Sabbath day, therefore I do command them to remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy: Thus enforcing the Commandment from the prime institution: Note it well;
So as the Commandment is a binding Law from the first institution, for the
Sabbaths more solemn observation for ever.

SECTION XIII. Of the scope of the words.
THe scope and use of the words, is to take man from his own bottom: For after
the Lords Memento, before the Commandment, to forget oblivion and
forgetfulness of it, through worldly distractions; He closely answers, and
meets with man's corruption, which might hinder him, in submitting to this
Commandment.

If any man should be unwilling to give God a day, he shows his bounty in
giving us fix, for fear of repining.

If any man shall think six days not enough for his worldly affairs, the Lord
prescribes a means, which is labor, by which he may finish all that he has
to do, if he loyter not, nor busy himself in other men's matters.

If any man should undervalue the seventh day, as of man's devising, God, to
prevent this contempt, here challenges it to himself, and presents himself
in his Sovereign authority over us, saying, it is the This is remarkably of
great force to direct us aright in our Christian Sabbath. For the day of the
Lords rest, must be the day of our rest. Now the day of the Lords rest may be
either the day of the Lord our Creators rest, or the day of the Lord, our
Redeemers rest.
Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

If any man should suppose that he might defer off to the Sabbath day some of
his week days works, the Lord does inhibite him from doing any such manner of
work, for fear of incroaching upon his Sabbath.

If any man should claim any exemption for himself, or any under him, God
comes with his charge upon parents, and masters, upon children, and upon
strangers, for fear of any misapplying it only to some* or a conceit of any
dispensation for other some.

If any man should ask an example of imitation, and perhaps presume to neglect
it, because great men little regard it: God has given us his own example, both
for labor on Six days, and rest on the Seventh day.

If any man should doubt of any good hereby, and enquire and ask what good and
benefit, he might reap by the observation of this day, more than of any other?
The Lord tells him that he has blessed the day for him.

And lastly, if any man should leave his worldly business, and might now
follow his vain pleasures: The Lord tells him that he has sanctified it to
holy uses. Thus God fortifieth his Commandment, and wisely meets with man's
corruptions, to keep us in a careful observation of this Commandment.

SECTION XIV. Of the Directory in the words.
THe words are to be a perpetual direction, in what space of time, and what day
in that space we are to take for the Sabbath day: For the words of the
Commandment being general, and not appropriated to any particular day, or
speciality of time; God would not have his people, either the Israelites then,
or the Israel of God in any age, to be ignorant of the time or day, but to be
able certainly to determine, and to be resolved of the day, without any
doubtful disputation concerning the same; as all might, and may, if we will
use this Directory for our guide herein: I say, its a Directory, for its not
brought as a reason of the Commandment, because here is no such connection of
the words to the Commandment, with a For, as the reasons are in the two other
Commandments; but here the Lord, without any such connexive word, presently
says, Six days shall thou labor, etc. as if he had said, I will direct thee,
lest thou mistake the generality of the Precept in application, how thou must
know in what space of time, and on what day in that space, thou may keep my
Sabbath.

SECTION XV. That one day in Seven must be the Sabbath day.
FOr this number God exceeds not here, first mentioning Six, and then a
Seventh day, and no more: So as within this time limited, is the Sabbath day.

In the beginning of time God made the mensuration of all time to be only
Seven days, Genesis 1. 31, and 2. 2, which was afterward called a week, Genesis 29.
28.

The Week then consisting of seven days must be the compass in which to find
the Sabbath.

The first Sabbath was within a week, to which the words of God here has
reference.

Whether nature does teach to consecrate one day of seven to God as Z^nch*
in^^tum praeceptum holds is not here to be disputed: Its enough that we have
Gods example from the beginning, and here his Word, for a seventh day.

The practice of Gods Church is grounded hereon, which from time to time, from
age to age, thousand of years have observed one day in a week for the Sabbath.

One Master Dowe says in his discourse of the Sabbath, that many grave and
judicious Divines, both ancient and modern judge the institution of one day in
seven to be perpetual: For this, he, instead of all, cites Chrysostom on
Genesis 2. 3. and Master Hooker in his Eccl. Pol. page 379. Who says Gods
immutable Law exacteth this of us as a duty for ever.

Reason may lead to think that God would not here mention only so many days,
and no more, upon the giving of the Commandment, if it were not for this end.

Gods will and Commandment says our Homily of prayer, was to have a standing
day in the week, for people to come together.

Its very reasonable to give God one day of seven.

1. Because God in his wisdom chose his day within that compass.

2. That this his choice is most fit to be imitated: He knew that a day in this
space was most necessary for us to observe.

3. For that a week is the first and principal space of time, and all times of
months and years, are but the revolution of a week, from the worlds beginning.
For this see Doctor Rivet in his dissertation, De origin Sabbati: which being
so, what reasonable man will deny to give God his day within this space, the
first, the chief, and the shortest space of all other times, and that which is
the fittest: For that the space of a week between Sabbath and Sabbath is not
too far a sunder to make us forget our duty, nor yet the return too quick to
hinder man in his labor, for the necessaries of his life and state, says
Master Dow.

SECTION. XVI. Of the seventh day Sabbath.
AS we see it must be one day in the week so we by the Lord are directed to the
seventh day in the week.

1. By God his free donation of six days to us, for to labor in, and to do
all that we have to do: our common and ordinary businesses must be all done,
and ended in this space: which space he presently after the Commandment
allotteth unto us. He first tells us, what and how many days in the week are
ours, before he tells us which is the day that is his: 1. That so we might learn
where to begin to find out the Sabbath. 2. By appropriating unto himself the
seventh day for Sabbath: The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

This seventh day here spoken of is not that one individual singular seventh
day of the Creation on which God rested, but a seventh day after the six days
given to us: For.

2. As the six days allowed us, are not the very six days in which God
created the world, which were gone and past, but only six days in likeness
and revolution, no more is this the self same seventh day, but another in
likeness by revolution. So it is as if he had said I allow the six days
together for your labor in the week, be those six days, what days soever
begone and reckoned together; But the seventh day following those six days is
mine, It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.

2. That first seventh day, and the first six days mentioned in the first and
second chapters of Genesis, are understood by God in the words following as a
reason added to this direction of God, why he gives us for ever six days, and
reserveth the seventh day always for himself; because he wrought those six
days, and rested that seventh day, which words of God are not the reason of
the Commandment, but of his giving us six days, and his reserving to himself
the seventh day.

3. Gods conclusion concerning the fourth Commandment helps us in this: For
in the end he turns his speech unto the very words of the Commandment:
saying, Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it, He says
not, that seventh day, but the Sabbath day, (that is) the rest of that first
Seventh, as a Sabbath for ever, fall it upon another seventh day, whatsoever it
be.

The seventh day therefore is ever the Sabbath day.

1. By Gods irrevocable donation of six days unto us.

2. By our acceptance of so many days in the week to our selves, from all
times unto this day: If from Gods words in this direction here we dare without
doubt or scruple take our six days, are we not then tied to give him the
seventh day by the like authority, who reserved to himself at the same time,
when he gave us our six that we should afford him the seventh?

3. By Gods proposing his own example, as a perpetual pattern to be followed
of us, in his six days labor, and in his seventh days rest; For says (that
ever honored Bishop Lakes) what time God himself took for his work, and for
his rest, the same did he assign to men, and made his pattern a perpetual Law:
In his Thesis the 8.

4. For that the seventh part of time God did choose to himself before before
fall: and so Gods ordinance is everlasting as the world, a portion of time
eternal, as the same reverend Father affirms in his 25 Thesis and 32. See
also for this very fully Master Hooker, in his fifth Book of Eccles. Pol. Sect.
70.

5. Because if a man had stood in his full perfection, not only our first
parents, but all his posterity, had observed the first seventh day: But sin
(not any Ceremony) made that day alterable says the same Father, as it now is
altered upon the recreation of all things by Christ; But yet is still the same
portion of time kept, a seventh day in the week.

This alterablenesse of that seventh day, through sin, is a reason why God, in
giving the fourth Commandment delivered as (I have said) the same in such a
general manner.

SECTION. XVII. Of the fix days work:
THese six days are called working days, Ezekiel 46. 1. in them men are to
labor, which labor is to be employed in doing work; and it must be all, and
it must be thy work, so laboring to do all that thou have to do, that is,
which by thy profession, Art, trade, and calling belongs unto thee to labor
in and to do.

The words are a permission put only by a concession: in six days may work be
done, Exodus 31. 15. and not preceptive, but as they have respect to the Sabbath
day; for the better observing of it, when we neglect not our business on the
six days, nor defer any thing thereof unto the seventh day.

For the Lord in the first Table commands man's duty to himself, and how to
express his love to him; which is the sum of the first Table, Matthew. 22, 37.
and not what man should do for his corporal and outward estate, for that
belongs to the second Table.

Therefore in these words is a preparation for the Sabbath, and a prevention
for hindering our spiritual rest, and also our bodily toil for our selves, in
and about our ordinary calling, when the day of rest is come.

Yet here we are not so tied to labor in these days, but that God must have
herein religious duties performed to him of every one privately, Psalm. 55. 17.
Dan. 6. 10. 13. and some part of the day to his service publikly, if he appoint
it, as under Moses he did a daily worship and offering of Sacrifices morning
and evening, yea he may take a whole day, as once in a month, once in a year,
as he ordained Festivalls in Israel: and when he calls for public Fasting by
his judgments, Joel 2. 15. or for public thanksgiving by some singular
mercies, we are to set some time apart for the same, as the Jews did. Ester 9.
19, 22.

SECTION. XVIII. Of the Restriction from work on the Seventh day Sabbath.
IN the six days we are to do all that we have to do, but on the Sabbath day,
neither we our selves, nor any under our power to restrain them, nor our
Cattle, are to do any manner of work.

These words being here to be taken as a rule of direction for ever touching
the Sabbath: They must so be understood as may stand with the perpetuity of the
Commandment for holy rest, and sanctification of the day in holy duties.

The words (we must know) are no Commandment, no more then the former words,
Six days shall thou labor: The Lord uses not to add It was fit, if nor
necessary, not only to prescribe the portion of time to be set apart for Gods
service, but also the particularity of the day, or not to leav^ that to the
(...) of man.
precepts to his precepts, for observation of them; If they were a precept, it
should be negative and so bind from all works for ever: But we find that
albeit some works were forbidden, yet God allowed diverse works to be done on
the Sabbath day.

The words therefore are only a restriction from some works, but not a negative
forbidding of every work without exception.

The works from which we are here restrained this day, are such works, as upon
other days we may do (and not the work of sin, which never ought to be done)
such are servile mechanic works of our ordinary profession, trade, occupation,
and calling, lawfully to be done in the other six days, which thus I prove.

1. This restriction is from the liberty of our labor, and the doing of all we
have to do in the allowed six days, Six days shall thou labor, and do all
thy work, then presently follows the restraint, But the Seventh day is the
Sabbath, in it no manner of work (to wit) of the nature of the former Six days
work.

2. Because here is mention of men and maidservants, and cattle, which
commonly are set about such works.

3. For that God propounds his pattern for resting on his Seventh day from his
work of his Creation in the several Six days.

4. Other Scriptures do strengthen this Exposition, as a restriction from such
kind of weeks work on those working days.

In Exodus 34. 21. there Earing time, and Harvest is mentioned, in which time,
about such things, men are not to labor on the Sabbath day.

As the work about Husbandry is restrained, so buying and selling of Corn,
yea, thoughts and speeches about the same, were forbidden, Amos 8. 5. buying
and selling of wares, and of Victuals, Neh. 10. 31. and 13. 16, 17, 18.
Carrying of burdens, and doing any such work on the Sabbath, Jer. 17. 21, 22,
24, 27.

All which Husbandry, buying and selling, carrying of burdens, Nebemiah
sharply reproved, and called it the profaning of the Sabbath, Neb. 13. 15, 16,
18, 19. These be the works from which they were restrained on the Sabbath day.

But the Prophet Esaias concerning the Spirituality of the Commandment goes
further, and tells them that they were to call the Sabbath a delight, the
holy of the Lord, honorable, and to turn away their feet from the Sabbath: this
he expounds to be, the not doing of our own pleasure on the Lords holy day;
which he sets forth in three things. 1. In not doing our own ways, 2. In not
finding our own pleasures: 3. In not speaking our own words: Then the Prophet
tells us, that this is to honor God, and that herein we show, that we
delight our selves in the Lord, Esaias 58. 13, 14.

Lastly, they were restrained to hold themselves from all that which is,

1. Against the Naturality of the Law, as not to keep the day to the Lord, but
to travel the whole day, work the whole day, or play the whole day.

2. Against the Externality, which is in outward holy rest, and sanctity, as to
lie lazily at home sleeping, to go to Church unprepared, Eccl. 5. 1. as men go
to any other place.

3. Against the Spirituality, delighting in vanity, and not in the Lord that
day.

4. Against Morality, when men carry not themselves in a decent, seemly
behavior, becoming holiness, but rudely either in, or out of the Assemblies.

SECTION XIX. Of the works which might be done on the Sabbath.
NOw lest any should gather from all before delivered, that not only servile
works are restrained, as in Lev. 23. 7, 8, 21, 35, 36. Numb. 28. 25. and 29. 1.
but also all other works from Exodus 20. 10. and that upon pain of death, Exodus
31. 14, 15. and 35. 2. Lev. 23. 3. we are to know what works for all this were
allowed to be done on the Sabbath day.

1. Works of Piety, commanded to be done on the Sabbath: which be not our
works, but Divine, not humane, as reading and preaching the Word, Act. 15. 21.
and 13. the killing of Beasts for Sacrifice, and what work soever was in and
about Gods worship and service, Numb. 28. 9, 10. 1 Chr. 23. 31. 2 Chronicles. 8. 13.
the ordering the Lamps, Lev. 24. 3. and putting new bread before the Lord, Lev.
24. 8. 1 Chronicles. 9. 32. 2 Chronicles. 2. 4. for as the Jews themselves spoke, in the
Temple there was no Sabbath: for that the rest on that day gave place to the
labor in and about Gods service there: see Fran. Lucas, on Matthew. 12. 5. So to
Circumcise an Infant, Joh. 7. 23. when the eighth day fell on the Sabbath.

2. Work or labor, tending to piety and Gods worship: as to blow a Trumpet,
Number. 10. 2, 10. for the assembly, as we do ring a Bell. To travel to the
Prophet, 1 Kin. 4. 23. Psa. 84. 6, 7. thence was a Sabbath days journey, Act.
1. 12. about two miles, fifteen Furlongs, compare these three texts together,
this in Act. 1. 12. with Luke 24. 50. and Job. 11. 18. To go in and out on the
Sabbath about the service of the Temple, 2 King. 11. 5, 7, 9. To stand watchmen
in time of need by command of authority, to prevent in others the profaning of
the Sabbath, Neb. 13. 22.

III. Works of preservation from Gods own example, Exodus 16.
who albeit he rested the seventh day from his works of creation, yet not from
his work of preservation of all that which he had made. So although he would
not rain Mannah, on the Sabbath day, yet would he preserve it from worms, and
from stinking on the Sabbath.

Likewise may we do the works of preservation, which are called the works of
Necessity, on this day. But this necessity must have warrant from the
affirmative part of some Commandment of the second Table, requiring this of
us, and not what we think, or make a matter of necessity: as for instance;

The fifth Commandment binds us to obey authority: Now if we be commanded
by supreme power, to stand watchman on this day, we are to do it, Neb. 13. 22.
So may we stand armed for the Kings safety, 2 Kin. 11. 5, 6, 7. 2 Chro. 23. 4,
5, 8. and for our Country: 1 Kin. 20. 29. Yea, upon command we may beseidge
and assault the City of an enemy, John 6. 8, 16, 20. Also an offender may be
attached, be brought before authority, and the Magistrate on this day may send
him to the Goal, Number. 15. 34. Its thought that Pharaoh sent the Israelites out
of Egypt on the Sabbath day: see Ainsw. on Deuteronomy. 5. 14.

The sixth Commandment charge me with the keeping of mine own life, and the
life of mine neighbor: By a necessity of this Commandment its lawful;

1. To dress food for us, as our Savior warranted his Disciples in rubbing
ears of Corn to eat them, Matthew. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7. And this is not only in
necessity of mere hunger, but for necessity of state, and dependence of many
to be fed, Neh. 5. 18. Here is spoken of daily provision, Vnoquoque die, per
singulos dies.

2. To seek the Physician for help, and for the Physician to prepare his
Physic, Luke 13. 14, 15. Joh. 9. 6, 11, 14. Mat. 12. 10. and to cure diseases,
Joh. 5. 3, 5, 9. Luke 13. 12, 13. and 14. 3, 4. and 6. 10.

3. To fly for safety of life, 1 K. 19. 3. 8.

4. To fight for our lives if need require, 1 Macha. 2. 41.

5. To save the life of another, Luke 6. 9. These works and the like may we do
by warrant of the Sixth Commandment on this day.

The Seventh Commandment requires Chastity, and comely Decency. Therefore
upon necessity of this Commandment, it is needful to put on raiment for
common honesty, to hide our nakedness, and decently to clothe our selves, as
all ever have done, on this day, so to wash and be clean, to comb the head,
brush thy garments, and the like.

The Eighth Commandment is in the affirmative part, that we preserve our own
and our neighbors estate: Its hence lawful; to fodder and water Cattle, Luke
13. 15. To pull a Beast out of the pit, Luke 14. 5. To take up that which is
our own, if it be without and abroad, to carry it home, Joh. 5. 8, 9, 11. To
quench an house on fire, and other things of the like nature: for in all these
cases and such like, the Sabbath was made for man, so it gives place, and
admits of such works warr^nted by the Commandments of the second Table.

IV. We may do works of Charity and Mercy, and that which is good on the
Sabbath day, Luke 6. 9. Such were all the Cures which Christ wrought on the
Sabbath day: which albeit they might have been done upon another day, yet some
coming to him to be healed, other occasionally be held of him with the eye of
pity, he healed and cured them.

V. And lastly, besides all these works of Piety, and tending to Piety, of
necessity and charity, there be deeds of indifferency lawful, as these;

To walk in the fields, as Christ with his Apostles, and others did, Mat. 12. 1.

To make a Feast, and ye invite Guests to go unto it, Luke 14. 1.

Thus may we see from authority of holy Scripture, and warrant from Christ, the
Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 8. what was lawful to be done on the Jewish
Sabbath day; So that they had as much liberty, as we have, if the Jews of later
times had not mistaken it, and from former profanation of the Sabbath, both
before the Captivity, Eze. 20. 12. 16. and 22. 8. 26. and. 23. 38. and after,
Neh. 13. 13. had not fallen to their Jewish and foolish superstition condemned
by Christ.

SECTION. XX. Of the rigorous strictness supposed to be put upon the
Israelites that day.
THat here we may not be deceived,

1. We are not to regard the writings of the Jewish Rabbis of later times,
infected with their own superstition, upon mistakes of Scripture.

2. We must have recourse to the Original Sabbath, which the fourth
Commandment propounds and maintains, as we may observe in the reason of
the direction.

Now in that was no restraint unto Adam, but to rest from his week days work,
dressing the Garden: So now only servile work in this directory added to the
Commandment, is forbidden, as before I have proved, in Sect. 17.

3. The instances of labor in the Old Testament, were not breaches of the
Sabbath, nor so were judged, nor can be proved to be so.

4. Our Savior Christ, the wisest Expositor of his Fathers Precepts, and the
exactest observer of his Fathers Will, always in all things, both by word and
deed, tells us that the Law of the Commandments laid no such yoke upon them,
in any such rigorous strictness.

5. We must make a difference between the Commandment it self, with the words
annexed, uttered by God immediately upon Mount Sinai to Israel, and some other
precepts given concerning the Sabbath by him afterward, but mediately by Moses
to the people: for the one is permanent, and admits of works, as I have showed,
but the other are transient, and for some use only for a space occasionally
delivered, binding to more strictness for the time.

They that go about to lay upon Israel a rigorous strict rest on the Sabbath,
from every least work which might be done without travel or distraction, do it,

1. To difference them from us by our more supposed freedom and liberty, as if
the Israelits had been tied by virtue of the fourth Commandment it self to a
more precise strictness, then we now are, so as they might do almost nothing,
no not to go out of their doors on the Sabbath Day.

2. Hereupon to make the Commandment Ceremonial in this imagined strictness.

3. And so to overthrow the Naturality of the fourth Commandment, and
perpetuity of it as nothing belonging now unto us. And for this purpose one of
late in his Treatise of the Sabbath, and Lords day, in Cbap. 2. of the fourth
part goes about to prove this so great strictness: for he says,

I. That none were to go out of their doors on the Sabbath day, not only not
to make a journey, but not to go out to walk although softly: And this he
collecteth because that they might not go out to gather Mannah on this day.

Mannah: for they had not sinned in walking out, but they did sin in going to
seek Mannah, which the Lord did not rain on that day, and had forbidden them to
go out to seek for it.

2. If it were not lawful to go out on the Sabbath day, how was it that some
found, in the Wilderness, a man gathering sticks, and yet they blameless:
They went out, else had they not found him, Number. 15. 32, 33. Yea, if it so fell
out, upon the Sabbath day, there were causes of going out of their houses,
Deuteronomy. 23. 10, 12, 13.

3. Though this gathering of Mannah, seem to this man to be done without
pains: its not so, for it was not at their doors, as he says, but on the
outside, about the host, on the face of the Wilderness, Exodus 16. 13, 14. so
as they must go abroad for it; neither was it without pains, to gather an Omer
for every one, of such a small thing as it was, like to Coriander seed, Verse.
31.

4. But grant it had been so, yet know, that to labor for food, was in the
nature of a weekly servile work; so that here is prohibited the six days
labor for bodily necessaries, which they had then no need to do.

II. He says, that the Israelites were to prepare their Mannah, to bake and
sees, what they would on the sixth day, that so they might prevent that labor
on the Sabbath day, Exodus 16. 23. So they might not belike, dress, and make
ready any food on the rest day.

Verse. 23. do not undeniably imply that: that which remained over and above
their baking and seething, was baken, and sodden with the rest: but rather the
contrary, as thus, bake what you will bake, and sees what you will, to day,
and that which remains over, to wit, not baken, nor sodden, lay it up for you
to be kept, until the morrow; for Moses said nor, sees, and bake all, and so
reserve some for to morrow, but bake and sees what you will of it, which
implies, that some was not baked and sod^en.

2. Albeit, he seems necessarily to infer, because Moses said. next day,
eat that to day, to wit, which was reserved, and had no worms in it, nor
stanke: Verse 24, 25. that it was baken or sodden over night.

But if it had been so, the miracle had not been so great: for that which the
people did reserve without warrant and had worms, and stank, was as they
gathered it, and not either baken, or sodden for any thing that can be gathered
out of the text.

Again, the only bare mentioning of eating, does not infer their not baking
or seething, more then the bare naming of the peoples baking and seething will
infer their not before grinding of it, of which not a word there in the text:
Its most like that which remained over, was ground with the rest, either in
Mills, or beaten in Mortars, as they used to do, Number. 11. 8. and so the Meal
thereof was reserved to be baken or sodden the next day; which if so, they
abstained from no other work, then servile, as we do, from carrying our Corn to
the Mill to be ground of the Millerd, which is his weeks days labor.

3. But grant all this to be so, yet this was but for the time of the Mannab,
let him prove that it was so in Canaan, my instances before do show the
contrary. Nor was this preparation, but about the Mannab, because it required
such labor, in the Mill and Mortar, to make it ready, a servile work, not fit
for the Sabbath, being so much for so many Thousands.

III. He alleges, Exodus 35. 3. That they were prohibited to kindle a fire
throughout all their habitations on their Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3.



2. This inhibition must be understood of kindling a fire, for work forbidden
to be done on the Sabbath day: for else there is no Coherence of this Verse
with the former: in which Moses does tell them, that God would have no six
days work done, on the Sabbath, to wit, servile; Therefore for this end not to
kindle a fire.

3. Some hold this Commandment to concern only making of fire for the
furtherance of the Work of the Tabernacle; For therefore is here the Sabbath
mentioned to show, that the Work of the Tabernacle, should give place to the
S^bbath.

4. Learned men both Protestants and Papists hold, that to kindle a fire was
not simply forbidden: for being a negative precept, it should not have admitted
at any time the making of a fire in any of their habitations. Is it like that
in Winter they never made fire on their Sabbath? The season was sometime cold
in that Country, as we may read, John 18. 18. And what a Feast was that, to
which Christ went on the Sabbath day, Luke 14. 1. may it be supposed there was
no fire?

Lastly note, that had this been a durable precept, these words had been added
to it, a Statute for ever throughout your generations: as we may see of
forbidding work, in Levit. 23. 31 and it was usual in a durable Law to add
the word Exodus 12. 14. 17. 24.
for ever: for which many other texts may be produced, which is wanting here,
as but temporary.

IV. He brings forth the punishment of him that gathered sticks on the
Sabbath day, Number. 15. 32, 36.



But that it hence is to be collected, that therefore it was an exact
strictness imposed upon Israel by the fourth Commandment, not so much as to
g^ther sticks upon the Sabbath day, rest to be proved: For,

1. The fourth Commandment it self is affirmative, and not negative, and
therefore necessarily infers not the forbidding of such an act for ever to
the Israelites.

2. The words in the directory, Thou shall do no work, are with a restriction,
as I have proved.

3. It is manifest that the most zealous for the Sabbath, have had meat
dressed then, flesh-meate, and whither that Nehe. 5. 58.
could be without fire, and fire without wood sticks or bones, or some other
fuel, let any judge.

4. There was no prohibition for such a work before set down expressly, and
therefore they knew not what to do, till they asked Council of the Lord
concerning him.

5. This man's sin was great before God: it appears by the greatest punishment
inflicted upon him, as was stoneing to death in Israel; but how came it to be
so, not simply in breach of the fourth Commandment, but it was as learned men
hold a presumptuous sin, a great sin, for such a one despises the Word, and
reproacheth God, Number. 15. 30, 31.

Now that he sinned presumptuously, it is so to be judged.

1. By the Connection of the Story: for Moses having set down a Law from God,
against presumptuous transgressions, Number. 15. 30, 31. He brings this for an
instance thereof immediately, Verse 32.

2. Because he sinned against two accessory precepts concerning the Sabbath.
The one that none should go out on that day, about worldly business, as to
labor for food; Exodus 16. 29. The other that none should kindle a fire then,
Exodus 35. 3. Now Contrary to these, this man went out, into the Wilderness to
gather sticks, no doubt, to kindle a fire.

Therefore he sinned against the first in going forth about such a business,
and in his intention, to kindle and make a fire against the second: therefore
his sin was great, while these two accessory precepts stood in force: But these
being not perpetual, this punishment on him proves not the point of such a
precise strictness of the fourth Commandment, to be ever observed of the
Israelites.

V. And lastly, He brings in the holy women, followers of Christ, who would
not anoint Christ's body on the Sabbath day: but rested from that work, as the
Text says, according to the Commandment, as thinking themselves bound to so
precise an observation by the Commandment.

according to the Commandment, may be thus expounded, that is, as they
understood it by the Jews interpretation, superstitiously: For these godly
women, being trained up by the then Doctors of the Church, observed the Sabbath
as they had learned it from them: And albeit, the work was to the honor of
Christ, yet for that it was not of necessity to be done on that day, nor at
all, in respect of Christ's body, but only a Custom for an honorable burial,
therefore they did rest from doing that work on that day.

II. Take the rest according to the true meaning of the Commandment, which
imposed rest, this their rest was according to the Commandment; and in that
they did not this work, it was according to the Commandment, forbidding
servile work, as the words in the Directory are to be understood.

For they could not anoint him, but they must first buy their spices and
ointments, which they might not do, buying and selling on the Sabbath being
forbidden: That they could not buy them on the Friday, as we speak, is evident:
For it was late ere Christ's body was taken from the Cross, at even, Matthew. 27.
57. then they did awaite, to see his burial, Luke 23. 55. in which space the
Sabbath was come on: (for they reckoned, from the Evening, to the Evening) and
therefore stayed they till after the Sabbath, to buy them, Mark. 16. 1.

Thus we see his proofs, no proofs to argue any precise strictness in the
words, (Thou shall do no work) more to them then to us, by the Law.

SECTION XXI. Of the reason added unto the Directory with the Conclusion.
THe Lord himself adds a reason unto his former words, why he gives us Six
days, and reserveth the Seventh to himself; for that in six days he made all
things, and rested the Seventh day.

In which words he lays down, as an unalterable ground of apportionating time
between God and us, which is his own example of working six days, and resting
the Seventh, in the beginning of the world, which, as they be past and
irrevocable, so is this portioning of time between him and us, to be
perpetual, else were his example thus propounded in his Donation, and
reservation, to no purpose.

He in this dividing of the days of the week, thus between him and us,
reflected upon himself, looked only to what himself had done, and so gave so
many days to us, and reserved only one to himself.

Now what can be more permanent, than Gods own self, in his own irrevocable
Acts, from the worlds beginning, to be laid for the foundation of this his thus
apportioning the week to us.

The Lord our God having thus laid down before them his unchangeable
reservation of the Seventh day for himself after his irrevocable gift of six
days to us, he concludes with these words; Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Seventh day, and sanctified it.

Its agreed on all hands, that here are the words of the Institution of the
Sabbath: not one of the late Writers gainsayeth this, that I have read or heard
of.

The main of the Controversy is, that here is (say they) the first
Institution, the ground of the Prolepsis, in Genesis 2. 2. and we say, they be a
repetition of the Institution, laid down before in that place of Genesis, where
no Prolepsis is.

For as the Lord here in the former words repeateth what he did in six days,
and that he rested the seventh day; so he repeateth his Institution of the
Sabbath then, what he did with the day on which he rested, that is, because he
had finished all his work in six days, and rested the seventh day, he blessed
and sanctified it, to show them here by this,

1. The Antiquity of the Sabbath day, from the beginning.

2. The Stability thereof, also grounded so upon Gods rest, not alterable.

3. Why he charged the Commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath day upon them
among the other Precepts, and that also with a Memento, above any of the rest.

For in the repetition here of the Institution, the Lord keeps the word,
Sabbath, in the Commandment, saying, He blessed the Sabbath day, and not as
commonly we read it, he blessed the Seventh day, lest any should make that
individual Seventh day, on which God rested, to be of the substance of the
Commandment, which God in his wisdom (let it be well observed) left out in the
Precept, and here again in the repetition of the Institution, and only names
the Sabbath, what Seventh day soever it be, either that for the time, or
another in the room of it: which Sabbath is the blessed and hallowed day of the
Lord, and so to be accounted of for ever, as appears by all that has been
said, if men be not disposed to wrangle against the truth.

From all which is before delivered, its very apparent, that this fourth
Commandment is no way Ceremonial, True, taking it in an indefinite notion,
commanding the sanctifying of one day in seven.
but a permanent Law to the worlds end, and not Ceremonial, as in the
following Sections I shall make it manifest.

SECTION. XXII. The Arguments to prove it Ceremonial, answered.
MEn disposed to wipe out this Commandment out of the Decalogue, fain would
make it Ceremonial; but their arguments, brought for this purpose, are of no
validity: They say it was Ceremonial,

I. For the exact strictness of it, which they have imagined, but I have
proved it to be only an imagination: For that strict observation which was
kept, was but for a time, and from accessory Commandments, not from the fourth
Commandment it self.

II. In their keeping of that seventh day: But the Seventh day is not of the
substance of the Commandment; and a seventh day is proved to be perpetual.
Nor was the seventh in the first Institution Ceremonial: And the Church
observes still a Seventh day.

III. For that the Seventh day is abrogated, but this is not so, its changed,
but not abrogated, as mere Ceremonies be.

IV. It was a sign (say they) between God and the Israelites: Exodus 31. 13,
17. Ezekiel. 20. 12. God, in giving his Law, says no such thing: and still we
must make a difference between the Law it self, and what after were added for
instruction, as the then state of the people required.

Again, every sign is not a Ceremony; for the Rainbow was a sign, Genesis 9.
yet no Ceremony.

Moreover, the reason added why it was a sign, belongs to us, For in six
days the Lord made beaven and earth, and on the Seventh day he rested, Exodus
31. 17.

The end why he made it, a sign does a like appertain to us, to wit, That they
might know him to be the Lord that Sanctified them, Exodus 31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12.
And are not we to learn and know as much in keeping our rest-day in holy
duties? yea, blessed are they that do learn this lesson, to know the Lord, that
he does sanctify them in the use of his Ordinances, upon the day of our rest.

V. It was a memorial, say, they, of their deliverance out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.
15. This reason was Moses addition to move the people to pity their servants
and cattle: Must Moses his charitable use made of the Sabbath, and his
argument to persuade them to mercy, from Gods mercy to them, alter the nature
of the Precept, and disannull it? The words in the beginning of the verse, may
be conceived in a Parenthesis, and are brought in only as a memorial of that
great deliverance, as God remembered it in the preface to all the Commandments,
to move them to observe the whole Law; and the word, Therefore, is to be
annexed to the end of the 14 verse, as indeed it ought in sense and reason:
which being so, the words prove not the Sabbath to be instituted for a
memorial of their deliverance from Egypt, though they had good cause to
remember it on this day, and in keeping the fourth Commandment, imposing rest,
as also in observing the first and all the other: for, as I said, its in the
Preface to the whole Law, as never to be forgotten of them, but to be remembered
as a strong motive, to stir them up to obedience.

VI. Say they, its ranked by the Apostle, Col. 2. 16, 17. among shadows.

But the place is not meant of the weekly Sabbaths.

I. The weekly Sabbath is the substance of the fourth Commandment: and
therefore durable, not abolished, as the Apostle speaks of these Sabbaths.

II. The Apostle speaks here of such things as cannot agree with the weekly
Sabbaths.

1. The Term, Ordinances, verse. 14. show where the Sabbath of the week is
called an Ordinance?

2. The word, Ordinances, are expounded to be the Commandments contained in
Ordinances: and these were the middle partition wall between the Jew and
Gentile, taken away on the Cross, Ephesians. 2. 15. But the Sabbath day was no part
of the partition wall between the Jews and the Gentiles, for we keep still a
Sabbath unto the Lord.

3. They are the hand writings against us, and contrary to us, blotted out, and
abolished, Col. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2. 15. but not so the weekly Sabbath.

4. These were a shadow of things to come, whereof, the body was Christ, verse.
17. but the Generally the Fathers take it to prefigure Christ's rest, that day
only, full and wholly in his praise: as D. Andr: in his Star Chamber speech,
acknowledges.
Sabbath of the week was no such thing: if we consider it in it original, and
not of the declaratory, clothed with it accessories, as BP. Lake speaks:
for, says he, before the fall, the Sabbath was a kind of rest, shadowing out
our eternal rest, but not of that whereof Christ is the Body. To us the Lords
day is a foretaste of that eternal rest, and I hold the shadow to be as
lasting as the world. Thus this lea^ned Father and Doctor in our Church, who
says further, that they who allege the Col. 2. 16. are out of the argument,
because le speaks of shadows, whereof Christ is the body, which he denies of
the weekly Sabbath, considering it in the original institution, and not after
the fall made a shadow by accessories.

III. Here the Sabbaths are equalized, with meat, drink, holy day, new Moon,
which were the shadow of things to come.

Therefore hereby must be understood other Sabbaths.

Such were these Sabbaths, the first day of the seventh month, Lev. 23. 24,
32. the seventh year, Lev. 25. 4. the year of Jubilee, Lev. 25. 8, 11.

So the holy Convocation of the Festival times, the first day, Lev. 23. 7. the
seventh day, verse. 8. the eighth and the tenth, verse. 27, 32. all which were
called Sabbaths, 39. the same mentioned with the new Moons, Esa. 1. 13. called
appointed Feasts, verse 14.

Those kind of Sabbaths must be here meant,

1. These were called Ordinances, as the Apostle calls them here. 2. These
were of the partition wall, and abolished, and taken out of the way. 3. A
shadow of things to come. 4. Thus the word, Sabbaths, taken, agree well with
meat, drink, new Moon, and holy day. 5. The Apostle varying the number from new
Moon and holy day singularly, to Sabbaths plurally, would have us to understand
the annexed Convocations, called Sabbaths, Lev. 23. 39. before mentioned.
Thus we see their arguments, what little strength they have to prove the
fourth Commandment Ceremonial.

SECTION. XXIII. That the fourth Commandment, is in no part Ceremonial.
IT is clear enough that the fourth Commandment is not Ceremonial not in
part, as some do grant it, much less the whole, as some of late boldly affirm
it to be.

1. The institution of the Sabbath, on which the Commandment is grounded,
commanding no more, then at the first institution, was before the fall, when
there was no need of any Ceremony.

2. God never made himself an example of any Ceremonial precept, as he does in
this.

3 A Ceremonial precept consists wholly, or in part of some Ceremonial
service prescribed by it; but no such service, neither in whole, nor in part,
in this, neither in the day, nor in the strict observation of it, as before is
proved.

4. All, and every Ceremonial precepts, and political, were given mediately,
only by Moses, Levit. 27. 34. Deuteronomy. 4. 14. But this was given immediately by
God himself.

5. That which was Ceremonial was properly and directly the Schoolmaster to
Christ: For the Ceremonial Law was that proper, and direct Schoolmaster, Gal.
4. 24. But this precept is not any part of that Schoolmaster to Christ,
properly and directly.

6. Whatsoever was Ceremonial, was Carnal, Heb. 7. 16. and a beggarly
rudiment, Gal. 4. But Saint Paul speaking of the Moral Law, calls it holy,
just, good, and spiritual, Romans 7. 12, 14. of which Moral Law, this is an
undelible precept, and not a Carnal and beggarly rudiment.

7. All Ceremonial precepts are abrogated by Christ, as all confess: But this
precept is not abrogated by Christ, but rather established, Matthew. 5. 17, 18.
who has ordained us another rest day, in stead of the former seventh day; to
uphold the Commandment.

SECTION XXIV. The fourth Commandment is a perpetual Precept.
THis Commandment to be one of Gods precepts, is undeniable, but some hold it
not durable.

To leave the ambiguity of the term, Moral, nor yet wholly to tie my self to
the word, Natural, I will hold my self to the word, Durable, or Perpetual.

That this precept is a perpetual precept, I thus prove;

I. The Laws only for a time in Israel, were either the Ceremonial till
Christ, or the Political, till the dissolution of the Commonweal of Israel;
But this precept and Law, is neither of these: And therefore a perpetual Law.

II. Ten is the perpetual number of Gods Commandments, so delivered by God,
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 10. 4. So preserved by Moses, so reckoned in all the Church of
God to this day, and by our Church, as before I showed; But this is one of the
Ten; Therefore a perpetual precept to uphold the number, else should there not
be Ten, except with the Papists we could find some other precept, to cleave it
in two to make up the number: And the Ten Commandments being Gods Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. we may not add thereto, nor take from it. For man's Covenant being
once confirmed, no man disannulleth, or adds thereto, Gal. 3. 15. may any
then take from Gods Covenant? if not, then as this Covenant is perpetual
consisting of the number of Ten Commandments, no fewer in the first Tables,
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. nor in the second Tables, Exodus 34. 1. 28. nor more added, Deuteronomy.
5. 22. Therefore this fourth Commandment one of them, is perpetual as is the
Covenant it self.

III. That which God did make of equal dignity to all the other perpetual
precepts, is perpetual.

But God did every way make this Commandment equal in dignity with the rest:
for as the other were, so was this.

1. Commanded immediately at the same time, with the same Majesty, with the
same terror. Exodus 20. 18, 19.

2. With the same preface, uttered under this title, The Lord their God, and
with the same motive, of their deliverance, from Egypt, Exodus 20. 1, 2.

3 Written with the same finger of God, at the same time, in the same Tables of
Stone, twice over, Exodus 31. 18. and 32. 16. and 34. 1. Deuteronomy. 10. 1. and 5. 22.

4. Its matter of one and the same Covenant of God, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. and 9. 15.

5. It was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19.

6. It was put into the same Ark, and preserved ever there with the rest, Deuteronomy.
10. 5. 1 Kin. 8. 9.

IV. That which Jesus Christ, as God man, or man God, as Mediator, is Lord of,
is perpetual, for what authority he so has from his Father, he never lays
it down unto the end of all things, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28. But thus is Christ Lord
of the Sabbath, Matthew. 12. 8.

Therefore is it durable to the worlds end.

V. Its Gods Commandment made upon his own institution, from the worlds
beginning as I before have proved: which institution of blessing and
sanctifying the Sabbath day, is upon Gods own work in six days, and his
resting on the seventh day: giving to us the six, and reserving unto himself
the seventh unchangeably, as appears by our taking possession of the six
days for thousands of years. Therefore the Commandment made upon the
institution, and the institution settled upon unchangeable grounds, the
Commandment must needs be perpetual.

VI. That Commandment is perpetual, the breach whereof makes us guilty of
all the other perpetual precepts, and of the whole Law: for this it could not
do, if it, and they were not in an untyable link together.

But the breaking of this fourth Commandment, in not keeping the Sabbath,
makes men guilty of the breach of the whole Law, and of all the rest of the
Commandments.

1. Before the Law given at Mount Sinai, Exodus 16. 27, 28. where God does
charge them with the breach of his Commandments and Laws, becaue they had
broken the Sabbath.

2. After the Law given; for all the breach of the Lords Satutes, and despising
of his judgments, are concluded with this, They polluted my Sabbaths: This
does the Prophet Ezechiel very often, Ezech. 20. 12, 13, 21, 24. and 22. 8. 26.
As if the careful observing of the Sabbath might have prevented all.

And no marvel, for the hallowing of the Sabbath, was a sign, that they knew
the Lord to be their Sanctifier, Exodus 20. 12. 10. that they delighted in the
Lord, and honored him, Isai. 58. 13, 14. and that they took hold of the
Covenant, Isai. 56. 6.

3. Under the Gospel, Jam. 2. 10. where the Apostle makes him that offends
in one point, guilty of all the whole Law. Now if we not only break, but take
away this fourth Commandment, we are guilty of the whole Law, unless we can
show that God has blotted out, and repealed this Commandment out of his Law,
since he put it in, if he have, show where, if not, then the Commandment
remains, and so in breaking it, we offend against the whole Law.

VII. This Commandment is perpetual, for that the observation of the things
therein commanded, are, by Gods appointment, in their use, the public practice
and profession of the most necessary duties, of the three former precepts, and
the public upholding of the same: For the and holy rest sanctification of the
day, being rightly employed, is in the public profession of the true God, the
God of Israel, as the first Commandment teaches. In our worshipping of this
God, as the second Commandment teaches. In the glorifying of his holy Name,
in the use of all his ordinances in Psalms of praises, in meditation of all his
works, to take occasion of thanksgiving, as the third Commandment does teach.

So that in truth, the keeping of this fourth Commandment, is the public
upholding weekly of those Commandments, the practice and profession of the
principal duties thereof, which be perpetual as the Commandments themselves
be.

If any say, the Churches observation of this day, from her own ordinance, and
other days by her appointment, may supply the want of this Commandment though
it be taken away.

But here being an immediate Commandment of God for this purpose once given,
with so great authority, what reason is there to let this go, and to rest upon
an ordinance of less force to bind?

VIII. That which the light of nature can find out of it self for substance,
and easily will assent unto for the circumstance, when its helped by due and
right means, that precept is natural, and then, say I, perpetual: I read not
of any which deny this: see Thomas Aquinas 1oe. 2oe. q. 110. Artic. 1. in the
Conclusion, whose words are summed in Master Dow his Discourse, page 8. who
does approve of the proposition.

But this precept may be found out by the light of Nature it self, for the
substance, and will readily assent unto it for the Circumstance, when natures
light is helped by due and right means, and so being natural, is also
perpetual.

I. Natural light will find out the substance, which is to keep holy a
Sabbath day: For as it acknowledges God, and that he is to be worshipped
publicly: So it will enforce a time for this his worship, and reason by
natural light from Common principles in all men to know, and to worship God,
will thus proceed.

1. Worship is an action, and every a^tion must be allowed it time: and a
public act, a public time.

2. This time of solemn worship cannot be all the time, and the whole time of
men's lives: for that there must be a time for other things.

3. That therefore if not all, then some time for such public service is to be
set apart, from the rest of the time of life.

4. That this parting of time, must needs be a set time, that the certainty of
a public service time may be publicly known, else how shall they meet
together?

Thus far natural light will go, with an unanimous consent in all of any
common Capacity in discourse; and this is the knowledge of the fourth
Commandment grounded in man by his light in Nature, touching the substance of
the Commandment.

II. By the help of instruction it will readily assent unto the Circumstance,
both in regard of what space, as also how much within that space, is to be
allotted unto God, for his public service: For let this thing be propounded to
a discoursive natural understanding, and see, if it do not easily yield.

That the set and lymitted space and quantity of time, must be prescribed
either by God or man.

But not by man, for if left to man then,

1. Either to every man severally, and so tot capita, tot sensus, and never an
agreement. 2. Or to all mankind conjoyntly: who can never meet together. 3. Or
to some one over all the world, which Monarchical power never any had yet, for
I count not Adam and Noah Monarchs in this sense. 4. Or to some special
persons of equal authority over all: nor did God yet erect such an
Aristocratie. 5. Or to several Princes in their several Dominions, and here
we see a discrepancy.
Therefore seeing men cannot agree, the discoursive natural understanding will
not leave this time to man.

Then will it allow it unto God, as most equal to him to prescribe the same:
Now if it be Gods authority to set the time, then will reason persuade further,
and think,

1. That certainly God has set down the time. 2. That I am to seek and make
inquiry after the time, when, and how much he has appointed. 3. That this
inquiry must be by the best means, the most sure, and certain, to come to the
knowledge of the time determined. 4. That means is, and can be no other, but
Gods own revealed will. 5. That this revealed will is known by his Word, on
which, even natural understanding makes a man to rest, as the Heathen did
upon the Oracles of their gods. Now then, if man's natural light be informed,
that God has commanded a Sabbath in a week, allowing us first six days, and
the seventh reserved only for the Sabbath, man in his understanding will
acknowledge it great reason to yield it him. Thus we see how nature informed,
can reach unto the Circumstance of the fourth Commandment, and therefore its
perpetual.
IX. That a perpetual Law and precept, which we are daily to pray unto God to
write in our hearts, and to incline our hearts to keep, and to be merciful
therein unto us.

But thus are we to pray unto God concerning this Commandment, and that by the
Direction of our Church, every Lords Day publikly: Therefore is it perpetual,
else we mock God in so praying. The holy and learned Bishop Lakes, understands
it of our Lords day grounded upon the fourth Commandment.

And who can think them to be of any other mind that added this prayer to
this, and every one of the Commandments.

The Authors of the Homilies understood it so, it is more then probable, for
that they call the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath, and affirm it to be the
Commandment of God.

It has been understood of all so heretofore till of late, whose perverse
answers to it are but unconscionable perversion of it, and without soliditie;
yea, some answers ridiculous and absurd.

X. That Law, is perpetual, the breach whereof God has punished heretofore,
and yet does, and lately within these few years, with very remarkable
judgments: For Gods punishments he sends for breach of his own Laws; if the
Law were not in force, then were there no sin, and there should be no
punishment; this our Homily takes notice of. And albe it such judgments might
fall upon other days, yet let any sober spirit tell me, why such happen on
these days so frequently, what may be the cause, but sin and breach of this
Commandment?

XI. That Commandment which the Church of God has from the beginning of it
unto this day observed, as one of Gods Commandments that is perpetual: But so
has this been observed: For let any show that any Church since Christ ever
rejected this as none of Gods Commandments: Who are they that ever durst deny
it, or ever attempted to expunge it out of the Decalogue? The Papists make it a
Commandment of God, so does our Homily, our Book of Common Prayer, the Book set
out by King Henry the eighth, approved by one and twenty Prelates, and many
Doctors, and by the Parliament, allows this for a Commandment, affirming that
the breach thereof does much offend God, and provokes his wrath and
indignation against us. Therefore it being so held to be one of Gods
Commandments in all ages hitherto, it remains in all sober men's account the
Commandment of God. It cannot be perpetual say some, because it is a positive
precept. But I have showed:

1. That it is in nature acknowledged both for substance and circumstance.

2. Albeit it were positive, it would not follow, that therefore it should not
be perpetual. For a precept may be Positivum natural, and so durable, for the
positivenesse takes not away the naturality of it, but it remains
perpetual, although the precept have further revelation, then the naturality
thereof can extend unto: For the positivenesse, only accommodateth the
naturalitie to some special certainty. Again, albeit the precept be merely
positive, yet might it be perpetual, as the Law to Adam of not eating the
forbidden fruit: it was perpetual to Adam, and all mankind, as we may see in
the bringing of death upon us, as well as upon Adam. Also, is not the
institution of Baptism, and the Lords Supper positive, and not natural; yet
as durable as the world, to the second coming of Christ: For here we must know
two things, whether the Law be natural, or positive, in which they do agree.

1. The authority of both is Divine, of both God is the Author, and both bind
the Conscience to obedience.

2. The independancy of both: for neither have any dependancy of man's will,
either to establish or alter them and both are in dispensable, and unalterable,
by man's authority: The Continuance of both, are to be judged by Gods only will
and intention, albeit they be not both alike in their Natures, in some things.

SECTION XXV. How much of the Mosaicall Sabbath, is in the Commandment to be
kept holy.
THe Sabbath instituted by God, and commanded to Israel in this fourth
Commandment, is to be understood not of some part, but of the whole day.

1. The time in the precept, is a day, not a part of a day, nor the greater
part, much less some few hours in the day, can be counted a day, neither was
it so with the Jews.

2. Gods gift of six days, we understand for full six days, and so no doubt
is the day of rest, the Sabbath day to be taken in the Commandment.

3. What God blessed and sanctified, he sanctified wholly, as holy things,
vessels, Numb. 31. 6. holy ointment, Exodus 30. 25. Garments and the like. So
holy places, as the Tabernacle, Exodus 29. 44. This, nor those were holy only in
part, but wholly. So is Gods holy time, holy, for the whole time.

4. The people of God kept the whole day from the beginning to the end, Exodus
16. 30. and this appears so in Nehe. 13. 19. and by the holy women followers
of Christ, Mark. 16. 1. Luke 23. 55, 56. and 24. 1.

5. The reproof of those that went out to seek Mannah, in the morning before
the Sun rose, Exodus 16. 27. and the punishment of him that did gather sticks,
Number. 15. does show it, that the whole day is to be set apart for the Lord. And
though some works might be done: yet the day was the Lords, the wholeday.

6. If the whole day was not the Lords, then it was partly holy, and partly
unholy, sacred, and common too; but in holy writ we read not of any such
partaking stakes with God.

Therefore we are to understand the whole day for Sabbath.

SECTION XXVI. How the Day was kept.
THe people of God, having ceased from their labors, as the Law commanded,
Exodus 20. 8. and 31. 14. Luke 23. 56. and betaking themselves to the holy rest,
and to make an holy use thereof unto the Lord, it being an holy day, and the
rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, Exodus 16. 23, and 35. 2. They thus
observed the day, and kept it holy.

I. Before the public meeting.
1. They began with private preparation, as they were commanded.

1. To look unto their feet before they entered into the house of the Lord,
Eccles. 5. 1. 2. To reconcile themselves one to another, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. 3.
To be of a clean Conversation, Ps. 26. 6. else God regarded not their coming,
Isai. 1. 12. 16, 17. and 66. 3. Psalm. 50. 16, 17. 4. To have an high esteem of
their Assemblies: as holy Convocations, Lev. 23. 3. and the house, as the house
of God, 1 Chr. 9. 27. Ps^. 27. 4. such were blessed, as did abide there, Psalm.
84. 4.
II. In going. It was
1. With singular affection, of love to the place, Psalm. 26. 8. and desire to
dwell there, Ps^. 27. 4. and vehement longing for it, Ps^. 42. 1, 2. and 84. 1,
2. 2. With care for others exciting them to go: the Pastors, the people, Jer.
31. 6. and they one another, Jer. 50. 4, 5, Mich. 4. 2. and the parties excited
to be glad thereof, Psa. 122. 1. 3. It was with the voice of joy and praises,
Psa. 42. 4. 4. Their end in going was to be taught, and understand, and that
they might walk in Gods ways, Isai. 2. 2. Nehe. 8. 13.
III. At the entering, and in the Congregation.
1. They worshipped at the Gate and entrance, Ezekiel. 46. 3.

2. They kneeled down before God, Ps. 95. 6. 2 Chr. 6* 13. 1 K. 8. 54. and made
their prayers, Isa. 56. 7. Esr. 6. 10. Act. 16. 13. Luke 1. 10. 1 Chr 16. 4:
and 23. 30. 1 Cor. 14. 16. Some appointed for it. 1 Chr. 6. 31. 32. and 16. 4.
and 3. 1. Number. 6. 23.

3. They gave thanks, Psalm. 26. 12. unto God, Psa. 35. 18. and 111. 1.
standing, 1 King. 8. 55. to which the people answered, Amen, Amen, and bowed
their heads, and worshipped, Neh. 8. 6.

4. They sung Psalms, 2 Chr. 29. 30. Psa. 95. 2. and 92. see the Title, a Psalm
for the Sabbath, and it was joy, to some, to be there, Psa. 84. 10.

5. The Scriptures were read, Act. 15. 21. Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13. Luke 4. 16,
17. Act. 13. 15.

6. With the reading, they had also afterward the Word preached, for the
Priests office was to teach, Mal. 2. 7. Deuteronomy. 33. 10. 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. and 35.
2. And it was a misery, I. to want a teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. and II.
for them to be ignorant of the Law in handling it, Jer. 2. 8 or III. to have
such as preached the word, and yet not to live thereafter, Mat. 23. 1. And this
preaching was either an exposition of the words, as they read them, Neh. 8. 3.
8. or to make an exhortation, or, as we call it, a Sermon upon the words, as
Christ did, Luke 4. 16. 31. and 13, 10. Mar. 6. 2. as Saint Paul did, Act. 13.
15, 16. and as it was usual every Sabbath day, Act. 15. 21.

The peoples behavior was, they stood up, Neh. 8. 5. They had their eyes upon
the Teacher, Luke 4. 20. and their ears were attentive, Neh. 8. 3.

7. There were Offerings, and casting into the Treasury, Mar. 12. 41. Luke 21.
1.

8. In the Conclusion there was a blessing pronounced upon the people, 2 Chronicles.
30. 27. Lev. 9. 22, 23. as God commanded, Number. 6. 23, 27. and then did break up
the Congregation, Act. 13. Deuteronomy. 21. 5. and 10 8. 1 Chr. 23. 13.
43, and the people departed, verse. 42.

IV. After the dismission of the Congregation.
It was the duty of all, and no doubt some did,

1. Meditate upon that they had heard: for if this was daily, Psalm. 1. 2. then
much more on this day: Aben Ezra, on Exodus 20, says, behold the Sabbath Datum
est ad Consideranda ^pe^a dei and meditandum in Lege ejus.

2. They searched the Scriptures afterward, touching the things taught, Act.
17. 11.

3. They taught their children, for this was a charge upon them daily, then
much more, no doubt, now, when they rested in their houses, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. and
11. 19.

4. They were to be mindful this day,

1. Of their deliverance out of Egyp^, and how to show mercy to their men and
maidservants, to the strangers, and to their very cattle, Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.

2. Of the Lord their God, and how he did sanctify them, Ezech. 20. 20. Exodus
31. 13, 14.

3. Of another rest, spiritual, here, and heavenly hereafter, Heb. 4. 9, 11.

5. They this day were to show their delight in the Lord, count the day
honorable to the Lord, and learn to express self denial of their own
thoughts, delights, and work, Is. 58. 13, 14.

6. On this day they did not fast, Judith 8. 6. but made merry, for it was
called the day of their gladness, Number. 10. 10. wherein they might cheerfully
refresh themselves, and send relief unto the poor, after such former duties
done toward the Evening; but this mirth was for their understanding of the
Word, Neh. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. It is true, that this holy day to the Lord was the
feast of Tabernacles, but why they might not now do so on the Sabbath day, I
see nothing to the contrary. For the strict precepts in the Wilderness were
out of date; and the Primitive Church, who observed our Christian Sabbath in
the room of the Jewish did make a feast after the end of Divine service.

See for the observation of that Sabbath, Philo Judaeus de vita Mosis, de vita
Contempla: De legatione sua ad Cajum C^sarem cited by Wall^us de Sab. page 127.
134. 135. 136. See also Dav. Kimch^on Psa. 92. cited by Goniarus in his Book de
Sab. page 81.

SECTION XXVII. Of Judaizing, and true understanding thereof.
IT pleased some to tax others of Judaisme concerning the Sabbath day. And why
of Judaisme? know they why? Judaisme was from the Jews, but the Sabbath was
long before this name became peculiar to a single tribe in Israel, Judah so
called. Seeing they fasten, as they must, Judaisme upon the Jews, let us see
(after this Tribe, was separated from the ten tribes of Israel) how they did
Sabbatize; for so we shall behold their Judaisme, that we may judge with
righteous judgment. For the better understanding hereof, let us consider the
Jews as before Christ's coming, when he was come, and afterward in the times
following. Of these we must have a twofold consideration, as faultlesse, or
faulty.

1. As Faultlesse, this is no Judaizing, for in our discourse its taken in ill
part. They ever held, and do hold the fourth Commandment, perpetual: and so
ought we as is before proved. They held the seventh day Sabbath from the
Creat^on, which they had a warrant from God to do till the Resurrection of
Christ: so far faultlesse without Judaizing in an ill sense.

As faulty and thus,

I. Before the coming of Christ we shall read, that they were,
1. Observers of the Sabbath in a bare rest, from servile work, but then doing
their own ways, finding their own pleasures, not delighting themselves in the
Lord, nor laboring for Self-denial on that day: Of this their Sabbatizing,
the Prophet Isaiah speaks, who herein labored to reform them, Isai. 58. 13,
14.

2. Great prophaners of the Sabbath, as appears by the Prophets complaints,
Jer. 17. 27. Ezech. 20. 13, 16, 21, 24, and 22. 8. By Gods punishing of them,
driving them out of their Land as Captives, for tbe breach of the Sabbath, 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. as God had threatened, Levit. 26. 34, 35. By the Story in Nebe.
13. 15, 18. where Nehemiah tells them, that the profaning of the Sabbath was
the sin of their Fathers, and the evil of their captivity befell them for it.
Now who with us do so Judaize, and Sabbatize both these ways, let the world
judge.

II. At Christ's coming, we may read
That the Jews ceasing from such former profaneness, now were become grossly
superstitious, not allowing such things to be done, as might be lawfully done,
without the breach of the fourth Commandment, as in former instances are
cleared: This foolish superstition our Savior confuted by word, and by his
works. And therefore none of sound judgment with us do so Sabbatize; our only
care is to observe the Commandment, as the godly Jews did, showed in the
former 26 Section, and as the holy rest requires in keeping the day holy, as
set apart for holy ends, without putting any holiness in the day it self.

III. After Christ's Ascension: and his Kingdom erected, the Jews did faulty in
their Sabbatizing:
1. In observing the Seventh day from the Creation, which was at that time out
of date; and now not to be observed of any Christian, if any do, these be
Sabbatarians, and do properly Judaize, and not others.

Its a foul sin, to belie and slander men, and to brand them with names of
reproach falsely.

2. In carnally keeping the Sabbath, as the Imperial Edict of Charles the
Great does speak, for these kept it in idleness, in dancing and revelling: See
Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Magn. St. Augustine de consensu Evangelist.
lib. 2. cap. 77.

This Jewish Sabbatizing, let those be blamed for, who are guilty, and the
fault be where it is. Thus much for the Mosaicall Sabbath.

FINIS.
A Large TREATISE OF THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH, THE LORDS DAY;

also now commonly called SUNDAY.

By Richard Bernard Rectour of Batcombe.

We ought to do all things for the truth, but nothing against it; for he
that striveth against the truth, striveth against God: for God is truth.

Let every friend of Christ observe the Lords day, Ignatius in Ep. ad Magnes.
In the honor of Christ his Resurrection Clem. Romans Constable. lib. 7. cap. 24.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop for Edward Blackmore at the sign of the Angel in
Paul's Churchyard.

The Contents of this Treatise.
Chapter 1. THe Preface, showing wherein we generally consent and agree in
one. Chap. 2. Of the title of Lords day, and of the name Sunday. Chap. 3. Of
the name Sabbath given to this our Lords day or Sunday. Chap. 4. Of the Reasons
why it may be so called, without offense. Chap. 5. In what circuit of time this
day has been kept, to wit, weekly, with the Reason thereof. Chap. 6. Of the
first day of the week, that it is the Lords day, and also the seventh day.
Chap. 7. Of the time when this first day began to be the Lords day, and upon
what ground. Chap. 8. Of the diverse opinions concerning the beginning and
ending of the Lords day: and wherein Conscience may rest it self. Chap. 9. The
authority is divine by which it was established. Chap. 10. It is of divine
authority from Christ himself. Chap. 11. Of some Objections which may be made
against it, answered. Chap. 12. That this day cannot be changed. Chap. 13. Of
the honorable esteem of this our Lords day, and that it is to be preferred
before all other festival days. Chap. 14. This day is to be kept holy, and
the whole day too. Chap. 15. How this day is to be kept holy, morally, as the
ancient Sabbath was kept. Chap. 16. How our Lords day was kept in the Apostles
days and the Primitive times. Chap. 17. How our Church would have our Sunday
kept holy. Chap. 18. How Christian Emperors would have it kept by their
Imperial Constitutions. Chap. 19. How it was to be kept by the Edicts of
Christian Kings in this our Kingdom. Chap. 20. How our late Sovereign King
James, and now our King Charles would have it observed. Chap. 21. What
Counsels and Synods have decreed touching the observation of this day. Chap.
22. What Popes, the Canon Law, Archibishops, Bishops, and other learned men
have said concerning the hallowing of this day. Chap. 23. God would have our
Lords day religiously observed, and not to be profaned. Chap. 24. Of exemplary
judgments immediate from God, against the prophaners of the Lords day. Chap.
25. Of exemplary judgments mediate from God, against the prophaners of the
Lords day. Chap. 26. Of examples of casual judgments, against the prophaners
of the Lords day. Chap. 27. Of objections which may be, or are made against the
producing of judgments in this case, with answers thereto. Chap. 28. Of the
serious ponderation of these things. Chap. 29. Concerning sports unlawful at
all times, much more on the Lords day; and why sports lawful at other times,
are on this day to be forborne; with some objections made, and answers to the
same.
It is the saying of S. Augustine. Bonum est homini, ut eum veritas vineat
volentem, Epist. 174.

To this agrees a learned man's sentence. Satius foret, a veritate vinci nos,
quam contra veritatem vincere posse alium. Bucerus.

Author igitur hujus Tractatus, quodcunque in co scripsit ut veritatis sincere
studiosus pro veritate, non ut contentiosus quicquam contra veritatem scripsit.

A TREATISE OF THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH.
CHAP. I. The Preface, showing wherein we generally consent and agree in one.
IT will not be amiss (ere I enter upon the Treatise, which for the honor of
Jesus, God blessed for ever, I here undertake) briefly to lay before the
judicious, a few things, for fear of mistake, while we maintain the
observation of a set solemn day weekly, for the worship of Christ, and a
Christianlike strickt keeping of it holy.

1 We hereby reject the loose opinions of the Familists, Anabaptists, and
wicked Libertines; who would be free from any time of set solemn days, for
Gods public service and worship, contrary to the command of God under the Law;
and the constant custom of the Church under the Gospel, among all Orthodox
Christians, in all places, throughout the whole Christian world, in all ages,
for these 1600 years; so that, says Chemnitius, it is barbarica petulantia, In
exam. Trident Council.
most rude impudency, barbarous folly, as one translateth it, not to observe
that day with all due solemnity, which has so long time been kept by the
Church of God: This witnesses, Ignatius, John the Apostles Disciple, Iustine
Martyr, S. Augustine, Tertullian, Athanasius, Maximus Tauronensis, Dionysius
Bishop of Corinth, in an Epistle of his to Soter Bishop of Rome: Against these
Familists, Anabaptists, and Libertines, has written Vrsin in his Chatechisme,
Zanchie in his Oper. sex dierum, and Master Rogers in his Display of the Family
of Love.

2 We renounce all Traskits and Brabornian errors, in their points of
Judaisme: Against the Author of the first sort, learned Bishop Andrews has
fully showed himself, by his speech in the Star Chamber: Against the later,
the late learned Bishop of Ely, Doctor White, has written at large, purposely
to confute Brabornes Judaizing, in standing for the Jewish Sabbath: Against
which tenent, Musculus, Vrsin, and Bellarmine, has also written: yea,
Heretics, as Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 26. and Ephan. de Haeres. cap. 30.
the Ebionits and Cerinthians holding this, have been condemned, as the Fathers
witness. The seventh day Sabbath from the Creation, now called Saturday, is
changed, and not under the Gospel to be observed of us, as an holy day to the
Lord.

3 Albeit we do hold the fourth Commandment to be perpetual, yet we conceive
it to be so, without any of those See the former Treatise.
accessorie percepts delivered by Moses, whereby though it was in it self
originally not ceremonial, yet was it by the keeping of those precepts
ceremoniously observed.

4 As that Law required rest, and the holy use of that rest, to be employed on
that Sabbath day, for the keeping of it holy; so does it now, by analogy and
proportion, for the holy observation of our weekly Sabbath. Rest we do hold
necessary for the day, yet not like the foolish superstitious rest of the later
Jews, grounded on vain Traditions, confuted by Christ. Nor do we require it
otherwise than a necessary means to further us to holy duties, not as a
worship of God in it self; nor do we deny works to be done, works of piety,
and for piety, works of charity, and those that be works of necessity; for
all were allowed under the Law, as in the other Treatise is proved. Moreover,
we account the day holy, yet not for any inherent holiness therein, but for
that it is set apart for holy uses: And the difference between this and other
solemn holy days, dedicated to the honor of Christ, we take to be; that this
is grounded on authority divine, and unchangeable, and so not the other; yet
to be observed with rest to religious duties, as is ordained by the authority
of the Church, which is not at any time to be despised.

These things premised, I suppose, we that desire for the honor of Jesus
Christ, that his day be solemnly kept, none of ripe judgment will condemn us
of Judaisme, if they well understand either us, or themselves, hereafter. A
charitable interpretation would amend all, which were to be wished, to quench
the heat of contention, by either ignorantly or wilfully misconceiving of us:
For we hold nothing, but what has been held by Orthodox Divines, the best,
and most in all ages, as in the ensuing chapters of this Treatise, framed to
the capacity of the common sort, will clearly be made manifest.

CHAP. II. Of the title of Lords day, and of the name Sunday.
THis term of Lords day, though none can deny it to belong to the day, yet
some few, and but very few (to show perhaps more wit, as they think, to be able
to say something to any thing, than worth of matter) do make it, as it were,
doubtful to understand what day should be meant by the Lords day in Revel. 1.
10.

But this place of John has generally been expounded, and taken for the day
which we now call Sunday, the first day of the week, by Aretas, Andreas
Caesariensis, by Beda, by out later Divines, and by the suffrage of the De rat.
tempo. cap. 6.
Church, the best Expositor of the word: which day has constantly since the
time of the Apostle S. John, been honored with this name, above all others;
under this it has passed along in the writings of all the ancient Fathers, in
Councels, in Histories Ecclesiastical, in Imperial Constitutions, and Edicts
of Emperors, and Kings. Beda on S. Luke says, It is a Christian custom to
call it the Lords day; which custom has continued hitherto in all reformed
Churches. And this name our King and State, gives it in Statute Laws, and
Acts of Parliament, and our Church in her Ecclesiastical Constitutions. This
therefore may be used without offense; nor is it fit that any scoff at such,
who constantly call it so, as being the most ancient name, and the most common
and usual religious appellation at the first, in the Primitive time.

This day has also had another name given it, and has been called Sunday:
this appellation is very ancient, for Justine Martyr in his second Apology,
calls it diem Sol^s. Lib. 4. cap. 22. Lib. 5. cap. 21.
So does Tertullian in his Apology, cap. 16. This name we may also find in
Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History, and in Socrates; in the Edicts of
Emperors, Constantine, Valentinian, Valens, Gratian, Honorius, Arcadius, and
Theodosius. S. Augustine tells us, how it may be used in a tolerable Contra
Faust. 18. 5. on Ps. 93.
sense: This name has been kept in the ancient Laws of our Land, in King
Edgar and Canutus his reign. Thus it is called commonly in our Statute Laws,
Ecclesiastical Laws, in our Homilies, and in our Common Prayer Book, and in
the most usual and common vulgar speech. And though it has had a note of
dislike, even by S. Augustine, and of later time by Beza, Doctor Fulke, and
Doctor Anot. 1 Cor. 16. 1 In Rhem. Test. Apoc. 1. Synops. controvers. 9. quest.
8.
Willet; nevertheless scruple is not to be made of it, no more than to call a
place Areopagus, Mars-Hill, Act. 17. or the sign of the Ship, Castor and
Pollux, Act. 28. 11. Nor more than our week days, to call them Monday,
Tuesday; nor our Months, January, February, March, etc. which are names from
the Heathen: So be it, that none so call the day purposely with contempt and
derision of those who use the first title, nameing it the Lords day, as some
have done, not many years ago, how ever now it passes for current without
check.

CHAP. III. Of the name Sabbath given to this our Lords day, or Sunday.
GReat offense is taken of late by some at this title Sabbath; first as a new
upstart name of Knox and Whitingham, as also for that it is not a bare name,
but supposed to have in it a mystery of iniquity: both which a learned man has
been pleased to utter in a D. Pocklington in his Sunday no Sabbath.
Sermon preached at a visitation; Master Christopher Dow, moderately handling
this controversy, in his discourse of the Sabbath, and Lords day,
acknowledges to have, in his reading, found it to be sometime called the
Sabbath or Sabbath of Christians. A very reverend Learned and judicious Divine,
in his Antidote against Sabbatarian errors, says, That to call Sunday by the
name of Sabbath day (rebus sic stantibus) may for some respects be allowed in
the Christian Church, without any great inconvenience. And that therefore men
(otherwise sober and moderate) ought not to be censured, with too much
severity, nor charged with Iudaisme, if sometimes they so use it. Before the
days of Kings Henry the eighth In Pupilla oc^li. psa. 10. ca. 11. Diem
Sabbati, ab ^psa di^ Saturni hora pomeridiana tertia ^sque in lunaris di^i
diluculum ^es^um agitari. In Emenda. temp. lib. 7. Synops. sol. 5^^
John de Burgo Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, held, that the Lords
day might be entitled the Sabbath day. King Edgar in his edict for keeping the
Lords day, does there call it the Sabbath and this was in Anno. 959. almost
seven hundred years ago, before Knox was born hundreds of years, Scaliger, that
man of Learning, tells us, that the Habassines, or Ethiopian Christians, call
both Saturday and the Lords day, by the name of Sabbaths, the one Christ's
Sabbath, and the other the Jews Sabbath. Doctor Willet cites Damascene,
saying, Sacratum est Deo Sabbatum, speaking of the Lords day: Saint Augustine
calls it the Christian Sabbath, in 152 Tract de temp. and Ps. 32. The
Albigenses and Waldenses, in a Catechism of theirs, give it this name: In the
fourteenth Session of the Synod at Dort, consisting of many Learned Divines, it
is called the Sabbath day. Doctor Heylin in his Historical Search, tells us,
that the first he cap. 5. part 2. page 258.
found was one Petrus Alfonsus, who called the Lords day our Christian Sabbath:
who lived about the time of Rupertus, many years before Knox and Whitingham
took breath.

But come we nearer home, it is called the Sabbath day in King James his
proclamation 1603. In all our Letters patente till very lately, in our Churches
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Canon 70, in our Homilies very often. Doctor
Rainolds, in the Conference at Hampton Court, made a motion for the
preservation of the Lords day from profaneness, under the name of the Sabbath
day, without offense then, or any exception taken against it. The learned
Doctor and reverend Bishop, Bishop Andrews, in his speech against Trask^,
calls it our new Sabbath; some Bishops heretofore, in their Articles of
Visitation have called it the Sabbath day: Learned men in our Church of all
degrees and sorts, have in their writings, allowed by authority, expressed the
Lords day by this name, without any dislike, ever since the reformation in the
days of Queen Elizabeth's reign, in all the time of Learned King James, and
also of this our now gracious Sovereign. Learned Doctor Featley, in his
Handmaid to devotion, oftentimes calls it the Sabbath, and in capital
letters, the Christian Sabbath; Master Primrose, in his very lately published
book, concerning the Lords day, calls it often the Sabbath.

And therefore without error we may with the Ancients, with our Kings, with
our reverend Bishops, and learned Divines, call it the Sabbath day. And as no
man of judgment and charitably minded will condemn them, that among us call
the Lords day Sunday, for heathenish Solarians, so should no moderate spirit
brand others for Jewish Sabbatarians, who call the day a Sabbath, nor think a
mystery of iniquity to be in it: For will any say that our Kings, reverend
Prelates, the Clergy composing the Canons, the Compilers of the Homilies, and
learned Divines, as aforesaid, had in their thoughts any mystery of iniquity?
No, God forbid; of which we may well be persuaded, for God prophetically
speaks of the Sabbath under the Gospel, in Esai. 66. 23.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Reasons why it may be so called, without offense.
AS it is and has been so called, so it is not without reason to give it this
name: For,

1. It has no evil in it, nor any such mystery to bring any, as is supposed
by some, into Judaisme, Mosaicall bo dage, or to cast a legal burden upon men's
Consciences (from which heavy yoke we are freed by the Lord Jesus Christ) as it
would appear, if moderate and sober spirits might have leave to make known the
truth which they hold, yea, they would easily, to indifferent men, clear
themselves from Judaizing, which unjustly is charged upon them; What though
some ignorant and rash, have uttered their monstrous Paradoxes, as some say
they have, and so passed the bounds and limits of truth out of inconsiderate
zeal, are all others to be censured to be men of the same mould? Brotherly love
and Charity cannot but be better Judges.

2 We see it carries antiquity with it, and has had allowance for a long time
in the Churches of Christ.

3 It is our rest day, and so, indeed, a Sabbath; for the word Sabbath is
nothing else but rest, so the name well agrees with the nature of the thing.

4 This name best leads us to the duty of the day, which is to cease from
weekly works, which are not works of piety, works of charity, nor works of
necessity, and to employ our holy rest on this holy day in the public worship
and service of Christ, and in other Christian duties, as is very excellently
set forth in our thirteenth Canon.

5 Learned and holy Bishop Lakes says in his Thesis, that eternali rest was
shadowed out in the first Sabbath, which our Lords day continues, and is a
fore-taste of our eternal rest, and a shadow thereof as lasting as the world.
This being so, it may well be called the Sabbath day.

6 If the fourth Commandment has any perpetuity in it, for a weekly day to be
kept, and ours being a weekly resting day; then it may be called a Sabbath, the
Commandment propounding such a day under the name of Sabbath.

7 All holy days, appointed by God, besides the weekly Sabbath, were called
Sabbaths, and that upon these reasons; because on them they rested to perform
holy duties, and had a holy Convocation: Now why may not our Lords day, because
of our rest to holy duties, and for the public assemblies on that day, be so
called? Our Linwood out of Aquinas says, Dies Dominicus dici potest dies
Sabbati, quia est requies and vacatio ad Deum.

8 The very Gentiles gave the name of Sabbath to their Festivalls, as the
Learned have observed.

9 Christ lesus is the Lord of the Sabbath, not only as God, but as he is
God-man, or Mediator, for so himself says, the son of man is Lord also of
the Sabbath. Mark 2. 28. Now this Lordship, as he is Mediator, he never lays
down 1. Cor. 15. 24. 23
whilst the world does last; and therefore he claims and holds the Sabbath
for his honor, that all may with a Sabbath honor the son, as they have
honored the John 5. 27.
Father.

10 If our rest, into which Christ has brought us, which is a ceasing from
sin, be called the keeping of a Sabbath, as it is. Heb. 4. 9, 10, 11. Then
may a certain set day be so called, for that therein we do not only hear and
learn how to attain to the spiritual rest, but do especially on this day
labor, through Gods grace, to express the performance of it in holy and
spiritual exercises.

CHAP. V. In what circuit of time this day has been kept, to weet, weekly,
with the Reason thereof.
THere is a time for all things, says Solomon, and nothing (...)
can be done but in time; therefore must we needs have a time for the service
of Christ: which time is to be within the circuit of a week. Saint Chrysostom
tells us, from Genesis 2. 3. that God has instructed us to set apart one day
within the compass of every week for spiritual exercises: whereto agrees our
Reverend Hooker, saying, In his Eccl. Pol. page ^79.
that we are bound to account the sanctification of one day in seven a duty,
which Gods immutable Law does exact for ever. Of this judgment, says Bishop
White, are diverse Divines; Cyted by Mr. sprim on the Sab. page 17. and 34.
many of good note in the Church of God, as Junius on Genesis 2. with others:
whereto may be added Learned Zanchius on the fourth Commandment, who says,
that one day of seven; all men are to consecrate to the external worship of
God. Pope Alexander said, that both the old and new Testament Cyted by D.
He^^inca. 5. p. 2
depute the seventh day to rest. Our Church in the Homily of Prayer teaches
us, that Gods will and Commandment was to have a solemn and standing day in the
week, wherein the people should come together. But what need I seek herein for
consent, when the whole Christian Church has this 1600 years kept within this
proportion of time: which Custom is a Law; for says Saint Augustine, Mos
populi Dei and instituta S. Aug ep. c. 86.
Majorum pro legetenenda sunt.

Now this observation of a day within a week, is from Gods institution before
the Law, from the Creation, who Genesis 2.
having set down the days of a week, took one within the Exo. 20.
circuit of the week for his public worship, which he also commanded his
people to observe under the Law; both which has been proved in the two former
Treatises. Now for the finding of proportion of time, who can better proportion
it for himself than God himself? That is the fittest that can be imagined,
Nature cannot but acknowledge his wisdom and goodness in his choice, says
Master Dow. Hence is it, no doub^, that Peter Martyr said, that one day of a
week be consecrated page 24. 25. In loc. Com. ca 7
to Gods worship, is an ordinance of perpetual force: and Reverend Bishop
Lakes confidently averreth, that the seventh In his Th^sis.
part of time is Gods ordinance, as everlasting as the world: for says the
same Father of our Church, the Lords day only changes, but alters not the
portion of time prescribed Luther. Dieterius on Dom. post Trin. Among the
Scholemen Iacebus de Valen. and others. St^ll^ on Luke 14. Against Brab. page
151.
by the fourth Commandment, by which we are guided to it: Yea some have held,
that one day in seven is the moral part of the Commandment. Sure I am, there
is acknowledged an equity in that Law durable for ever, both for a time, as
also for the convenience and sufficiency of time; to which equity it is
consonant, says Learned Bishop White, that one day in seven be an holy day,
wherein Christian people ought to rest, and give themselves to religious
exercises: who says further, that the common and natural equity of that
Commandment is moral (to wit) that Gods people are page 90:
obliged to observe a convenient and sufficient time for public and solemn
divine worship, and for religious and Ecclesiastical duties: And abstinence
from secular labor and negotiation, and keeping holy one day of every week,
both for man's temporal and natural refreshing, and for the spiritual good of
his soul, is very agreeable both to natural and religious equity, and it is
grounded upon the ancient custom and practice of gods people in time of the
Law. And we Christians having obtained a larger measure of divine grace, and
our obligation to serve God and Christ, upon his heavenly promises, being
greater than in the time of the Jews: If in those former times of greater
darkness the Lords people observed a weekly Sabbath day; then surely we
should be ungrateful, and negligent of our own salvation, if we yield not to
God a weekly day, or a sufficient time for his service as well as the Jews did?
Thus you see how we agree in the proportion of time, one day in the week,
according to Gods designation of time, and the equity of the Law.

CHAP. VI. Of the first day of the week; that it is the Lords day, and also the
seventh day.
AS we must have a day within the week, so is it needful to know which day in
the week it is, which we are to observe for the Lords day, else should we be
uncertain; for one would keep one day, and others another day.

In Scripture the first day in the week mentioned in Mat. 28. 1. Mark. 16. 2.
9. Luke 24. 1. Joh. 20. 1. 19. Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2.) is that which is
called in Rev. 1. 10. the Lords day: So says S. August. the first day of the
week is that day, Epig. 86.
qui postea Dies Dominicus appellatus est: S. Cyrill affirms In John lib. 8.
cap. 58. Apost. 2.
the very same. Our Sunday, says Justine Martyr, is the first day of the week:
Our Homily says the first day after the Jewish Sabbath is our Sunday: It is
our Lords day, said the Divines in Ireland. The former Scriptures are
interpreted See the many Exposit. cited by Master Spr. page 61.
by all Expositors, the Fathers Greek and Latin, the later writers,
Protestants and Papists, to be the Lords day: It cannot well be d^nyed, says
B. White, that the first day of every week was the Christian weekly holy day;
It is manifest, says Doctor Pocklington, that the first day of the week is the
Lords day: and to strengthen more this truth, learned Beza says, that he has
read in a Manuscript, (...), added to the Text in 1 Cor. 16. 2. so Crispine in
his Greek Lexicon.

This first day of the week has been observed for our Lords day ever, and no
true Christian Church can be named that ever brake off the custom of this day.
This universal unity of so Catholic a custom is sufficient to settle any
Christian in his faith of this truth, that the first day of the week is the
Lords day: For what better Expositor than the Churches continual practice and
observation, which must needs be from a settled judgment of the truth of the
time observed. Our Church tells us in the Homily, that this custom has
been kept in all ages, without any gaine-saying.

And although this day, after the Jewish account, be the first day of the
week, yet nevertheless it keeps the proportion of time, in the Commandment,
the seventh part of a week, so as it may be called the seventh day, though not
that seventh day, I say the seventh day. Let none here make a stir about the
seventh and a seventh, for the seventh day, and not a seventh day, is the
Sabbath of the Lord our God: for the particle the and not a is to be prefixed
to seventh, and not only because of the six days in which the world was made,
the days of the Creation (as is commonly and only so supposed to be taken)
but for the donation of six days to us by God, and that in the promulgation of
this Law, and Commandment, as is in the former Treatise showed. Always in
counting of numbers, we our selves, in any ordinary number of seven, when six
is taken out, do not say, there remains a seventh, but the seventh; for a
should note an uncetainty, but the does not.

God, of seventh days (for there are no more in a week, nor ever was) has
given us for ever irrevocably six of them for to labor in, and to do all that
we have to do, Exodus 20. 9. These days we take to our selves as Gods gift,
from his words in the Law: Now if we have six of the seven certainly known
unto us, can we reasonably say a seventh is the Lords, or the seventh is his? A
seventh may be spoken of whole numbers, where a certainty is not determined,
nor pitched upon, nor taken out, but where the number is no more but seven in a
week (as none heretofore, nor any now count more) there six being taken out for
us, the seventh is left, as a certain day not to be doubted of, for the Lord.
So as yet the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord our God, both by Gods
donation of six to us, and our counting our days to come to the seventh,
having taken to us the six.

For our first day of the week is Monday, and so we account forward to the
Lords day, as the seventh day, and our Sabbath and resting day.

And most fit it is, that we should still hold the seventh day for our Sabbath
Dies dominica representat m^moriam Creation is mundi, non minus quam Sabbagim;
nam die dominica incepit mundus fieri, unde Justinius Apo. 2. Et Leo Epist. ad
Dioscorum, dicunt diem dominicam colitam ob memoriam mundi Creationis, quam ob
resurrectionem Christi: Bellarm. de ^^l^u sanct. lib. 3. cap. 110.
, that we might, whilst we honor the Son in finishing the work of our
redemption, not forget the honor of his Father for his perfecting of the work
of the worlds Creation, and his resting from the same, which cannot be by
observing any other day, but the seventh day.

CHAP. VII. Of the time when this first day began to be the Lords day, and upon
what ground.
THis first day observed, was the very first day immediately Mat. 28. 1. Mar.
16. 2. 9. Luke 24. 1. Job. 20. 1. 19. Ad Magnes.
after the Jewish Sabbath: so the Scriptures confirm it to us. whereto agrees
the exhortation of Ignatius, After the Sabbath, let every friend of Christ make
the Lords day a solemn Festival.

And the reason of this was, because of the Lords resurrection, S. Aug. ad Ian.
epi. 119. and 130. De verbo Apo. ser. 15. Epi. 93.
by which the Lords day was declared to Christians, and from that time began to
be celebrated: and in another place it is said, that the Lords Resurrection
promised us an eternal day, and it did consecrate unto us the Lords day: And
Leo says the same, Dominicum diem nobis Salvatoris resurrectio Lib. 8. c. 33.
consecravit. In the constitutions of the Apostles it is Ca. 50.
ordained to be kept holy in the memorial of the resurrection; so a Council
held at Paris in Anno 829 ordained the like. Bishop White alleging reasons
why the Lords day was Against Brab. page 269. 270.
preferred before other weekly days, says, that the Primitive Church could
have made choice of no other day of the week more proper and convenient for the
solemn and religious worship and service of Christ: Great was this work, says
Athanasius, (...).
for we do celebrate it, as a memorial of the beginning of a new Creation:
Yea, ob excellentiam tanti miraculi proprie In Ps. 23.
dies Dominica appellatur, says another. And indeed the work of the day is the
ground, says Bishop Lakes, of the hallowing In T^esis 46. 43. 45.
of the day, whether it be weekly, monthly, or yearly; as particulars evince in
Scriptures and Stories; now when God does any rare, great, and remarkable
works, he will be honored with a Commemoration day, for that work; if the
work concern the whole, by the whole Church, and by a part, if it concern a
part: by which practice or work, Gods will is understood, which guides the
Church, where the
precept is wanting. This is a sacred rule observeable in the institution of
all sacred Feasts, both divine and humane, says that Father.

Now God raising Christ from the dead, upon the first day of the week, this
remarkable work, was to have that day, a day of Commemoration, above and before
all other.

1 Because it was the first notable work of God, immediately following the
Jewish Sabbath; which being to cease, the next glorious work of God following,
must needs be the ground of another Festival; and in stead of the other, for
it is a rule in mortality (says the reverend Father Bishop Lakes, that none in
reason can deny due respect unto the work, and therefore cannot deny the
hallowing of the day, to wit, on which it was wrought.

2 The raising up of Christ from the dead, declared him mightily to be the
son of God, Romans 1. 4. God fulfilling hereby to the children, the promise
made to their Fathers, he being manifest thus to be the Son of God, his
begotten Son in the day of his resurrection, as the Conqueror of hell,
death, the power of the grave, and of Satan's Dominion, Act. 13. 31. 32. 13. and
preferred above men and Angels, Heb. 1. 5.

3 This is the work above all others, which the Scripture so often mentions
for the Fathers glory in his Son, in that he raised him up from the dead, Romans
1. 4. Gal. 1. 5. Act. 2. 24. 32. and 3. 26 and 4. 10. and 10. 40. and in many
other Scriptures.

4 This is it by which Jesus is made both Lord and Christ, to sit upon the
throne of David, Act. 20. 30, 31, 36.

5 It is the work of our perfect redemption, and full justification, Romans 4. 25.

6 This was the act which to bear witness of, he principally chose his
Apostles, Act. 10. 41. and 1. 22. which work the Apostles first taught to the
Jews, Act. 2. and to the Gentiles, Act. 10. and for which they first chiefly
suffered.

7 This is the act on which depends all our comfort, and without assurance
whereof S. Paul tells us, his preaching was in vain, and our faith in vain,
1 Cor. 15. 14. and so our Christianity nothing worth.

8 This his resurection was to his Apostles and Disciples full of comfort: and
that which is most joyful to all Christians, for our justification, Romans 4.
25. as also for the hope of our eternal salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 3. and 3. 21. for
if Christ had not risen, we had been all in our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 17. his
birth, his life, his suffering had done us no good.

Therefore from the beginning has the Church held this ever for the most
remarkable work of Christ, and to keep this day Festival, on which he arose
from the dead.

For that it being the most remarkable work of God, next and immediately after
the Jewish Sabbath, as I said, it required a Festival, and that within the
space of a week, within which space God from the creation reserved a day to
himself; and its not fit, that under the Gospel, so glorious a work of our
redemption by Christ's resurrection, for the restoration of the world, should
be more seldom remembered upon a set day, then was the work of creation of the
world before and under the Law.

CHAP. VIII. Of the diverse opinions concerning the beginning and ending of the
Lords day: and wherein conscience may rest it self.
THere are diverse opinions about the beginning and ending of this our Christian
Sabbath.

Some hold it from midnight, to midnight; this is the judgment of very learned
Divines: some say it begins in the Morning, and so holds on till the next
Morning; not many of this opinion, as being weakest, and farthest from the
truth. Some hold it to begin at the Evening, and to end at the Evening: and of
this judgment are many ancient Fathers, and sundry Councels. And the ancient
observation of the Saturday in the afternoon, as a preparative thereto, may
seem to confirm as much.

But I am persuaded, if we keep the day from the Morning to the Evening, the
consciences of men need not trouble them about any other curious search: So
that there be a religious preparation to it, and a religious care in ending of
it, not rushing into it with unsanctified hearts, nor concluding it with
profanesse: For the nights are given for bodily rest, and the day for labor
(as the Psalmist speaks) When the Sun arises, man goes forth to his
labors and work, until the Evening, Psalm. 104. 22. 23. When the night comes
no man can work, says our Savior, Joh. 9. 4. Now a day for labor amongst the
Jews was twelve hours, Joh. 11. 9. from six to six, Matt. 20. 1. 2. 8. but
otherwise it was from the beginning of the Morning light, Genesis 1. 5. to the
dark of the Evening, Judge. 10. 9. 14. 16. Joh. 8. 29. Prove. 7. 9. And we see
in the fourth Commandment that albeit, as it is held, a natural day does
comprehend the night and day, yet is that time only mentioned in which men are
to labor, and to do all that they have to do, in the six days, which is on
the day time, and not in the night. And so, as they do well who labor
painfully and honestly in the day light, and take the night for their quiet
repose and rest in the six days: In like manner do they well, who religiously
serve the Lord Christ in the light of the day, though the night before, and the
night after, they thankfully take benefit of the same for corporal rest.
Neither do we read, that any were complained of, or punished, as breakers of
the Sabbath; but for their transgression and sin committed in the day time.
Our Savior Christ honored this our Lords day, with his visible presence among
his Disciples and followers on the day time: At the Sun rising early in the
morning, Mark. 16. 2. 9. then after in the afternoon, continuing till the day
was far spent toward the Evening, Luke 24. 29. John 20. 19. upon the same
day at supper time; yea, I confess it is probable to be somewhat late within
the Evening, and that space properly called the beginning of the night, but not
far within. And we read how the Jews on the day time kept their Sabbath,
and God appointed his service in the Tabernacle and the Temple from Morning to
the Evening sacrifice, and had no sacrifices in the night time. And thus was
the Lords day kept, except upon some extraordinary occasions, as in Acts 20.
27. and as afterward in the time of bloody persecution, but not in settled
days of peace.

Here some may ask, Are we then to be careless and regardlesse of the night
before, and the Evening after?

Saturday half holy day, our Evening Prayer, as a preparative to the Sabbath,
teach us to enter upon the Sabbath holily, and to take the nights rest, not
only for repairing strength of body for labor, as on working days, but to
be more fit to do service and worship unto God, without drowzinesse of
spirit: And in the end of the day, to behave our selves so, as it may appear
we have received a spiritual blessing that day, and have increased in
knowledge and other holy graces, in the use of Gods holy ordinance.

CHAP. IX. The authority is divine by which it was established.
THis our Lords day can have no less than divine authority for it.

1 Whether it be conceived to be founded upon the perpetual equity of the
fourth Commandment, as is made manifest in the former Treatise, and by that
which is said in the first chapter of this. Nor is this any new conception in
these our now present days: For of this some began to think 600 years ago,
as Doctor Heylin acknowledges: but no doubt it was before, for else how could
the whole Church In his Hist. o^ the Sabbath page 132.
of Christ retain the fourth Commandment in the Decalogue, without
application to a weekly solemn day, seeing the substance of the Commamdenent
is concerning the observation of a rest day for his worship and service every
week? whereto else could; they properly and directly apply it, and hold the
intention of the will of God in giving his said Law? And if it have no ground
from the Commandment, how is it, that in our Homily it is said, we have Gods
express Commandment to keep it? and lest the Makers of these Homilies might
be thought to mistake, they often mention the Commandment: now what other this
is than the fourth I desire to know: And let any tell me, in a mind affected
with the love of the truth, and not in a contradicting spirit, how it truly can
be said, that the Church of Christ has kept, or rather not broken the said
Commandment, now these 1600 years, if it has not been observed in our weekly
Lords day?

2 Or whether we take the observation of this day, to have its ground from
Scripture, as well we may: for this position, that Dies dominicus nititur verbo
Dei, was publicly maintained by a Doctor at the Commencement in Cambridge, in
Anno 1603. and by the Vice Chancellor so determined, nor was then opposed by
any other Doctors, nor in the Universitie of Oxford any Antithesis put up
against it: Neither was there just cause why, for is it not called the Lords
day, Rev. 1. 10. and are not also the Christian meetings mentioned on this day
in Act. 20. 7. and in 1 Cor. 11. 20 where it is said, When ye therefore are
gathered together (in die Domini nostri) on our Lords day, as the ancient
Syriack Translation has it? Sure it is that long since Clotaire Leg. Aleman
tit. 39. ap. Brisson.
King of France grounded his Edict, about the keeping of this day, upon the Law
and holy Scripture. So Charles the great, King of France, in Anno 789 had the
same ground in his regal Edict, saying, Statuimus secundum quod in lege
Dominus praecepit: And likewise Leo the Emperor of Constantinople, Constit. 54.
called Phylosophus, in Anno 886 seeking to reform abuses upon the Lords day,
in his Constitution declared, that what he had in that behalf determined, was,
secundum quod Spiritui Sancto, ab ipsoque institutis Apostolis plaucit,
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, and of the Apostles instructed by him.

Now may it reasonably be thought, that such great Princes should without the
advice of the Learned Clergy in those days, lay down such grounds for their
proceedings, considering how Charles the Great caused five several Synods at
one time to be assembled about the same? Scripture there is for it, and so
then held: And therefore the keeping of this day is of divine authority.

3 Or whether we understand Divine, according to that judicious man, the
Author of the Antidote against Sabbath errors, That which may be by humane
discourse upon reasons of congruitie, probably deduced from the word of God, as
a thing most conveniently to be observed, by all such as desire unfeinedly to
order their ways according to Gods holy will: As also it may be proved from
equity, either in the Law of nature, or by virtue of divine institution, or by
some Analogy and proportion which the Laws given to the Jews, so far as reason
and equity hold alike, or by some probable insinuations thereof in the new
Testament, whereto add the continual practice of the Church; for as he says,
Lex currit cum praxi: then may it be said to be de jure divino. Now all these
do, as he grants (and may fully be proved, and easily discerned, from that
which has been said in the two former Treatises, and what in this is already,
and shall be delivered) in some measure concur for the observation of the
weekly Sabbath; and therefore is established upon divine authority.

4 Or whether we maintain it to be an institution Apostolical, as many do, it
is divine: We believe, says that Father of our Church, Bishop White, that the
holy Apostles ordained Against Brab. page 189.
the Sunday to be a weekly holy day, and he adds his reason, because the
primitive Fathers, who lived some of them in the Apostles days, and others of
them immediately after, and who succeeded them in the Apostolical Churches, did
universally De bap. contr. Donat. l. 4. c. 23
maintain the religious observation of this day: For says Saint Augustine,
Quod universalitertenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum, rectissime creditur. Saint
Chrysostom affirms On 1. Cor. Hom. 43.
it, that the Lords day was made a weekly holy day by the Apostles: Who, says
Bishop White, at sometimes observed this day themselves, Act. 20. 7. Saint
Basil and Isichius numbers Against Brab. page 213.
the observation of the Lords day among Apostolical traditions, and Saint
Augustine proves it by his former general In his Ser. p. 24 see also more
rule, says the same Father, Bishop White. Doctor Pocklington says, that
Saint Paul had ordered in Galatia and Corinth, that his Disciples were to have
their meetings on the first day of the week, whereunto they submitted
themselves, and so did, says In page 5.
he, the whole Church of God by their example for ever after; He tells us
also, that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ thought it fit to appoint, and
command the day to be kept holy: And, indeed, in the place of 1. Cor. 16. 2. is
a plain Apostolical ordinance, which carries the force of a Commandment, In
Genesis 2. 3. on f^urth Com.
as Piscator notes; and Bishop Hooper, which albeit it be about a Collection,
yet he appoints it upon the first day of the week. And hear for this what
the Learned Bishop White says of this place: Although this text of Saint
Against Brab. 211.
Paul make no express mention of Church Assemblies this day, yet because it
was the Custom of Christians, and likewise a thing convenient to give alms
upon the Church-dayes, it cannot well be gainsaid, but that, if in Corinth and
Galatia, the first day of every week was appointed to be the day for alms and
charitable contributions; the same was also the Christians weekly holy day for
their religious assemblies.

This opinion for the Apostolical tradition, as it has the fuffrage of the
ancient, so of later writers, men very Learned: Beza says it is Apostolicae
and verae divine traditionis. Apostoli, In Rev. 1. 10. In Genesis Rhem. on Rev. 1.
10. Hos. confess. Romans Catech. on 3. Com. Ielisins fol. 292. Cat. Romans on 3.
precept. Bell. Tom 1. de cult. sancto li. 3. ca. 10. 11. with others cited by
Sprint. page 13.
says Mercer, in Dominicum diem converterunt, to wit, the Sabbath: Hereto
agree many Papists, who hold that the Lords day was established by the
Apostles, and that Jussu Dominico, as some say, by Christ's Commandment: And
that these places Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 1. Rev. 1. 10. do manifestly confirm
the same; Doctor Heylin acknowledges without doubting, that the religious
observation of this day had the approbation and authority of the Apostles, and
may very well be accounted amongst Apostolical traditions.

Now their authority is no less than divine. 1. Because they were instructed
by Jesus Christ himself in all things which he heard from his Father, John 15.
15. who gave them Commandments concerning the Kingdom of God, by the infusion
of his spirit, to make them receive the same, Act. 1. 2. Secondly, For that
they had this holy spirit to guide them into all truth, John 16. 13. in
teaching, both for matter, Act. 2. 4. 14. and 4. 8. and manner, 1. Cor. 2. 13.
Act. 2. 4. In answering Adversaries Matthew. 10. 20. Mar. 13. 11. Luke 12. 12. In
resolving doubts, Act. 10. 19. and 11. 12. In decreeing Canons, and judging of
Controversies, for settling of men's minds in the Church, Act. 15. 28. In
rebukeing sharply the wicked Act. 13. 9. In ordering matters in the
Congregation, 1. Cor. 14. 37. with cap. 7. 13. In ordination of Ministers, whom
they ordained in every Church, Act. 14. 23. and these so ordained by them, are
said to be set over the people by the Holy Ghost, Act. 20. 28. no doubt,
because the holy Apostles were guided by the Holy Ghost in such ordinations:
yea, in their advice about things indifferent they had assistance of Gods
spirit, 1. Cor. 7. 40. Now then put all these things together, can it be
imagined, that the Apostles observing this day, Act. 20. 7. and setting a
glorious title upon it, Rev. 1. 10. that it can be other than divine, they
guided herein by the Holy Ghost? who ordained also upon this day, the first day
of the week, to prepare for the poor: and why on this day? because; as Bishop
White says, it was the Christians weekly holy day: which being, as is before
witnessed, Apostolical, and the Apostles so in all things guided by the holy
Ghost, this day must needs be of Divine authority.

This the Church of Auspurg, Act. 7. confesses, that the day was changed by
Apostolical authority, directed by the spirit.

Lastly, as it is in these respects of Divine authority, so farther also,
because it has Jesus Christ the Institutor of it: Of which in the next Chapter.

CHAP. X. It is of divine authority from Christ himself.
THis sacred day is of so divine authority, as that by many reasons it may be
proved to be appointed by Christ himself: To hold this is neither a Novelty,
nor a tenent of singularity. Apol. 2. (...). In frontes. Hom. de Semente.
Wallaeus cites other Test. in his dis. de. Sab. See Wil^et his Synop. Pap.
fol. 500.


1. It is no novelty, for Justine Martyr says, that the Apostles received it
from Christ: Athanasius tells us, that the solemnity of the Sabbath was
translated unto the Lords day, by the Lord himself, who shows at large, that
it is of Christ's institution, from the words of Matthew. 28. 18. All power is
given unto me in heaven and in earth: It is said in the constitution of the
Emperor Leo, that the Lord himself did choose it for his honor.

2. It is no singular opinion, for it has the assent of many learned men;
Junius on Genesis 2. says, it is not by humane tradition, sed ipsius Christi
observatione and instituto: Tilenus in Synt. Loc. 44. page 276. holds it to be
ab ipso Christo institutus. Bishop Andrews, in his Sermon on the resurrection,
page 529. says, how can it be the Lords day, but that the Lord made it? Bishop
Lakes in his Sermon on the Eucha. says, that Christ did substitute the Lords
day in the place of the Jewish Sabbath: Doctor Fulk. on Rev. 1. 10. affirms,
that it is a necessary prescription of Christ himself: Of this judgment is
Doctor Lindsey Bishop of Brechen, in his preface to the assembly at Perth in
Scotland, and many other Divines: And the Arguments to prove it are these
following.

Argument 1.
THe day which the Lord made, he is the Author and (...) signifies to
advance, 1 Samuel 12. 6. so to observe and celebrate, Schindelerus in his Dict.
De Sa^. and circumcis. so does the B. of Ely. D. Andr. so Procopius on Genesis 1.
Epi. 119. ca 13. ad Ian.
Institutor of: But this day which is the day of his resurrection Psalm. 118.
24. is the day which the Lord has made, it is honored and preferred before
other days to be observed and celebrated, therefore he is the Institutor of
it. This day Athanasius understands of the Lords day, the day of his
resurrection, as does S. Peter, who alleges this Psalm for Christ after his
resurrection, Act. 4. 10, 11. and indeed, as the Psalmist says, it is the day
in which we should rejoice and be glad above all other days, because of his
resurrection, by which says S. Augustine, Dies Dominicus Christianis
declaratus est, and ex illo habere caepit festivitatem suam.

Argument 2.
WHatsoever in holy writ is said to be the Lords denominatively, The altering
of the name of the day, argues the Sabbath was altered, D. Prideaux page 29.
that is he the Author and Institutor of: As for instance, the Lords Supper,
and the Lords Table, because he ordained it, 1 Cor. 11. 20. and 10. 21. The
Sabbath of the Lord, because he commanded it: the Tem^le of the Lord, because
he appointed it: the people of the Lord, because he chose them: the Lords
messengers, because he sends them: Apostles of Christ, because he put them into
that office. No instance can be given to show the contrary: But this day is
denominatively called the Lords, Rev. 1. 10. and so in the first of Cor. 16. 2.
as Beza notes on the same place, affirming as I have before delivered it, that
to explain the first day he had read in uno vetusto codice (...), which title
is very frequent in the Fathers, calling it usually Diem Dominicum, the Lords
day; not by Creation, for so every day is his from the beginning, nor is it so
called by Destination, as is the last day, 1 These. 5. 2. as then and yet now a
day to come hereafter; when our Lords day was then so called by an excellency,
as also famously at that time known in the Church for the Lords day, as the
day of their solemn assemblies.

Therefore it is so called by divine institution, for divine worship, and as it
has Jesus Christ for the Author and Institutor of it.

Argument 3.
IF God, by resting from his work of Creation, and his blessing of that seventh
day, made it an holy day for his solemn set worship and service: Then Jesus
Christ his resting from the work of redemption, and his blessing of this day,
made it an holy day for his solemn set worship and service: For there is the
like excellency in the resting of God the Son, and the blessing of his day, as
there was in the resting of God the Father, and his blessing of that seventh
day: Christ his work of the worlds redemption and the renovation thereof, the
making of all things new, a new heaven, and a new 2 Cor. 5. 13.
earth, as was foretold, Esa. 65. 17. is equal with the Fathers work of
Creation: and in the rest of the one, and of the other, can there be no
inequallity nor disproportion. The Sons blessing likewise of this day is of
no less excellency, than the Fathers blessing of that day, which blessing of
his is not in the particulars expressed, but the Sons blessing of this day
is, and that at large in many particulars.

First, by his glorious resurrection, by which the Lords day So S. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 30. Lt Scr. 15. de verb. Apost.
became sacred and consecrated to us.

Secondly, by his several apparitions for confirmation thereof.

Thirdly, by his heavenly instructions, Luke 24. 25.

Fourthly, by the illumination of their minds, opening their understandings,
Luke 24. 45.

Fifthly, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, John 20. 22.

Sixthly, by the installation of the Apostles, giving them power to bind and
loose in heaven and in earth: John 20. 28.

Seventhly, by his mission in great dignity, sending them, even as his Father
had sent him, John 20. 21.

All which blessings Christ bestowed on them this day before his ascension; and
afterward on this day he sent down Act. 2.
his holy spirit extraordinarily after a visible manner upon his Apostles, made
them speak miraculously with new tongues, to the amazement of the hearers: and
on this self same day he blessedly converted 3000 souls, Act. 2. 41. and so
began on this day his Church to be a separated visible Congregation from among
both lews and Gentiles: Lastly, on this day he gave his heavenly Revelation to
his beloved Apostle, who was in the spirit upon this day to receive the vision,
Reve. 1. 10. Thus we see how Christ did bless this day.

But God the Father by his resting from the work of creation, and his blessing
of that seventh day, made it an holy day for his solemn set worship and
service, as the Scripture teaches, Genesis 2. 2. and very learned Divines do
maintain for truth: Doctor Rivet cyteth 36 by name, and their own words In
disser. de orig. Sab.
for it, to this purpose.

Therefore Jesus Christ his resting from the work of redemption, and his so
blessing of this our day, has made it an holy day for his solemn set time of
worship and service.

Argument. 4.
THat which Christ, through the holy Ghost, spoke by way of Command to be
observed, that he is the Institutor of: this I hope will not be denied: But
Jesus Christ by the holy Ghost spoke by way of Command, that this day should be
observed: For the things appertayning to the kingdom of God, he gave
Commandments to his Apostles to be taught and observed, Act. 1. 2, 3. But the
day of Christ's resurrection, and the worship therein performed, as it was in
the Apostles days, and after (as may be collected out of the Scripture, and
out of the writings of Justine Martyr, and Tertullian) is of those things which
do appertain to the kingdom of God. Therefore he commanded it to be observed,
and so was the Institutor of it.



Act. 1. 2. he is said to give, nor any particulars of the things he spoke,
which appertained to the kingdom of God. And therefore we cannot seclude this
day out of the Commandments given by Christ, because not expressed, no more
than we can deny other things appertaining to the kingdom of God to be
commanded, because they are not expressly mentioned, till it can be proved,
that the keeping of this day to the honor of Christ in his public worship,
is none of the things which pertain to the kingdom of God.

I answer again, that albeit it is not expressed, yet must it be comprehended
within these Commandments: For these Commandments here given, Act. 1. 2. are
of those which Christ would have his Disciples to teach his people, that enter
into the Church by Baptism, to observe, Matt. 28. 18. 20. Now we find the
Church to observe this day Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. The Apostle also to be an
observer of it with them, Act. 20. 7. prescribing duties to them on this day,
1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. when they did meet together, 1. Cor. 5. 4. and 11. 20. which
was on the Lords day, as the Syriack has it, as is before noted. And the
Apostle tells the Corinthians, that the things he wrote unto them were the
Commandments of God, 1. Cor. 14. 37. And it is acknowledged of all, that the
whole Catholic Church from that time, till this day has duly observed the
same. Therefore is it one of those things commanded by Christ to be observed
and taught by his Apostles, which the whole world has so religiously kept
hitherto: And it will not be denied, that such an universal religious
observation can have any less ground for it, than the authority of God
himself, being so unanimously kept in all ages for these 1600 years without
gaine-saying, as our Homily avoucheth very plainly.

Argument 5.
EIther himself instituted this day for his public worship, or left it to
others to appoint it, for that end: But he left it not to others: Therefore he
instituted it himself for his public worship.

That he left it not to others to institute, we may thus reason.

1 God his Father, when he had ordained his worship, did not leave to Moses,
nor to Israel his Church, to appoint a solemn day for it, but he himself
instituted it, Exodus 20. 8.

When the Idolaters in Israel, Exodus 32. did invent a worship, they that
invented it, instituted a day for it, verse 5.

Jeroboam devised a worship, which when he had done, he ordained a day for it,
1 King. 12. 32. 33. So did Nebuchadnezzar devise an Idol, and a worship for
it, and appointed the dedication, and day of the solemn worship, Dan. 3. 2.

The miscreant Prophet Mahomet, as he gave a Law, and prescribed a worship, so
he himself instituted his day for the same, and did not leave it to the
arbitrary will and pleasure of his Worshippers to ordain and appoint.

Therefore from all this I conclude, unless Christ should do as his Father
did, and be less careful of a day for the solemnity of his set worship, than
the very Idolaters, he must be the Institutor of this day, which we observe
to him: For it cannot be proved that at any time, in any age of the world, that
any public worship was ever invented to be observed, but the very Author and
Inventor thereof was also himself the Institutor of the day for that worship,
not leaving it to any others will to appoint the same for him.

2 If Christ left it to others, as to his Apostles, then either before his
ascension during his abode with them, which is absurd to conceit, or after his
ascension; if any do think so, then it will follow, that from his resurrection
to his ascension, the space of six weeks, the Church had no set day under
Christ publicly to do him solemn service. For the other seventh day he took
away by his lying that whole day in the grave: so that, if he appointed no
other day for it himself, the Church had then for that space no such day: But
as I have proved, Christ blessed the day of his resurrection, and in this space
from his resurrection to his ascension, the Apostles and Church observed it.
And therefore he ordained it, and left it not to them.

3 We are to understand, that there are some circumstances about Gods worship,
which he has ever reserved to his own authority, and never left them
determinable to any, but to himself: such be these which do concur about
the observation of the Lords day.

The first circumstance of this kind is, that which concerns the very
substance, for time of performing of public worship, whether one day in a
year, in a month, in a week, or whether a part, or some few hours of the
day, be to be set apart for his service, or the whole day be his. The
determination of this time, is substantial, and God always appointed the
same: as the ordaining of the Sabbath day, and other holy days set apart by
God, do manifest.

The second circumstance, is that whereof there is no reason to sway or guide
the judgment this way, or that way, but the will of God must be needful to
the determining of it. Such a circumstance is the proportioning of time, and
rest on the Lords day for Gods service: For if reason could regulate it, then
should it be the Law of nature, but by his written Law, and revealed will,
has God ordered it.

The third circumstance, is that which is of universal observation by all,
which none but God can impose by his supreme authority, to which all are alike
equally subject. And such an universal circumstance is this for observation of
this day, by all Christian people, and by the general consent of the whole
Church of Christ, in all ages. Therefore this day was not left to the Apostles
to be determined, but appointed by Christ himself.

Undoubtedly Christ would imitate his Father, and set a day for his public
worship, as he did: And can we suppose our Lord Jesus Christ, to be less
careful than the Turkish Mahomet, or other Idol Worshippers, in ordaining a
solemn day for his public service?

But if this day which we observe be not of his appointment, then have we
none; for all other days are the ordinances of the Church, and observed only
by humane authority.

4 That which the Apostles did observe, not only by inspiration, but by way of
injunction and command from Christ here on earth, through the Holy Ghost, that
he ordained, and left it not to them to ordain: But the Apostles did observe
the Lords day not only by inspiration, but by way of injunction and
commandment from Christ here on earth, through the Holy Ghost: And therefore
he left it not to his Apostles.

The Minor is thus proved from Act. 1. 2. where it is said, that Christ Jesus,
through the Holy Ghost, gave Commandments to his Apostles, in which
Commandments is included the Lords day, as before is proved: which
Commandment with the rest, he gave them through the Holy Ghost (that is) he in
giving them, did convey his holy Spirit into them, to make them to understand
them, to retain them in memory, to make conscience to observe them, and to
teach others to observe them as commanded from him: for so much these words,
through the Holy Ghost, import, when he gave them Commandments, and spoke of
the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God: So that through the Holy Ghost
here is not meant, as afterward the divine inspiration of the Spirit directing
them, as occasion served, to ordain things expedient and profitable for the
Churches of Christ, which he himself immediately commanded not; but left them
to them, as by the wisdom of his spirit, they should be informed.

But here is to be understood, the then operation of his Spirit upon them to
receive the Commandemets, which at that present in his own person he gave them,
which they should observe, and teach others to observe, as his own
Commandments, and as he himself had charged them to do in Matt. 28. 20. when
(as here in Acts 1.) he was to depart from them, and to ascend up to his
Father. Of other things after Christ's ascension, the Apostles spoke from the
Holy Ghost by way of inspiration, but of all these things before his ascension,
from the Holy Ghost by way of injunction, and Commandment of Christ. Note this
well.

Argument 6.
IF Christ himself did institute a day for his solemn worship under the Law,
then he did institute such a day under the Gospel: But he did so under the Law:
Ergo, now under the Gospel. The sequel is apparent, because he is as faithful,
and as careful for his people now, as then; Now that under the Law he
instituted a day for his public worship, we must know that he was among the
Israelites in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 9. for he was the Angel on
Mount-Sinai, who spoke with Moses, Acts 7. 38. even the Lord Jehovah, Exodus 19.
3. 21. for the whole Trinity gave the Law then. The Father by voice uttered
it, the Holy Ghost wrore it, Exodus 31. 18. for he is the finger of God, Luke
11. 20. compared with, Matthew. 12. 28. and Jesus Christ the Mediator gave by
Angels to Moses, the two Tables to Gal. 3.
be delivered to Israel; in which a Commandment was written for a solemn set
day for divine worship: Thus did Christ then, and so may we believe his care
had for his Church now, till the eternal Sabbath does come in the highest
heavens.

Argument 7.
WHatsoever was prefigured in the old Testament to be of use in the new, that
was instituted by Christ when he came: for the Text, Col. 2. 17. tells us
plainly that the body of those shadows is of Christ, (that is) he finished
them, he fulfilled them, he did ordain other things for them. The truth of
this might be showed in particular instances of those shadows, but that it is
fully laid open by others. But this day the first day of the week called the
Lords day was prefigured.

First, by the eighth day of circumcision, S. Augustine Epi. ad Ian. 119. cap.
13. Ad ^idum. lib. 3. Epist. 10. and 59 Edit. sec.
proves that by it out Lords day was shaddowed; S. Cyprian says that
circumcision was commanded on the eighth day, as a Sacrament of the eighth day,
that Christ should rise from the dead.

Secondly, Ignatius says, it was foreseen in certain Ignat. ad. Magnes.
titles of the Psalms superscribed pro octava the eighth: So hereto agrees
Saint Augustine in his fifteenth Sermon de verbis Apost.

Thirdly, by memorable things done on the first day of Welph. Cron. de tempore
li. 2, c. 2.
the week, as Wolphius notes out of an Hebrew Writer of a book called Sedar
olam Rabba, chap. 7. as that the cloud of Gods Majesty on this day first sat
on Gods people: Aaron and his children first executed their Priesthood; God
first solemnly blessed his people: The Princes of his people first offered
publicly to God. The first day wherein fire descended from heaven: The first
day of the world, of the year, of the week, etc. All shaddowing that it should
be the first and chief day of the New Testament.

Therefore this day, thus prefigured, to be of use in the New Testament, was
instituted by Christ, when he came in the flesh: which first day of the week,
as it was the first day of time, mentioned in the beginning of the first book
of the Bible, so is it mentioned with a glorious Genesis 1 5.
Title of the Lords day, in the beginning of the last book of the Bible, to the
praise of our Alpha and Omega Jesus Christ.

Argument 8.
IF the seventh day was by Gods immediate institution, then was the change of
it into our Sunday by Jesus Christ his immediate institution: But the
antecedent is true, Genesis 2. 2. Exodus 20. Ergo the consequent. For no religious
change has ever been made of any ordinance of God immediately prescribed by
him, but by God himself, and by his own immediate authority: for if the
institution be immediate by him, the change into another must be by the like
immediate authority also: for he that ordains, has only power to alter.

1. Man cannot change such an odinance; for, first it is complained of as a
sin, for the people to change Gods ordinance, Esa. 24. 5. The Jewish Church,
in the time of Christ, and after, held it blasphemy to teach, that it was
lawful for Christ to change the customs of Moses, because they took (but
mistook) him to be but a mere man. Secondly, if any but God have authority to
change his own ordinance immediately appointed by himself, then that
authority is equal with Gods. But there is no such authority, nor ever was
(Jesus Christ excepted) upon the earth: The whole Church, if gathered into one
place, is of no such authority: And if unstable man could alter such an
immediate ordinance of God, what stability could there then be in them? or what
tie of our consciences?

2. All religious changes of every ordinance of Gods own immediate institution
has ever been immediate by God himself, and no instance can be showed to the
contrary in holy writ.

The Tabernacle was of Gods own immediate appointment, Exodus 25. 40. when it
was changed, and the Temple erected in stead of it; this Temple was of Gods
own immediate appointment. David minding to build it, and Nathan 2 Samuel 7. 2,
3.
approving his intention (but without command from God) was after prohibited, 2 Samuel 7. 5. Neither left he it to the wisdom of Solomon, but the Lord gave the
pattern, 1 Chro. 28. 11, 12, 19.

The first borne the Lord did choose for himself; when the Levites were taken
for them, it was of God himself, Numb. 3. 12.

The time of celebrating the Passover, was the fourteenth day of the first
month by God himself, Exodus 12. 6. which time durst not Moses dispense with,
nor allow any other day for some to keep it, without Gods immediate warrant,
Numb. 9. 8. 11. Times and seasons are in Gods hand, Act. 1. 10. Dan. 2. 21.
therefore for the month Tishri he appointed Nisan for the first month of the
year, Exodus 12. 2. And Antiochus Epiphanes (a type of Antichrist) is condemned
for changing times, Dan. 7. 25. Thus we see Gods ordinances, for places, for
persons, and for time, being immediately appointed by God, cannot be changed
but by God. Therefore the seventh day, being the immediate institution of God,
could not be changed into another day, as now it is, but immediately by God
himself even by Jesus Christ, who is God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. who when
he was come in the flesh, changed the place, Joh. 4. 20, 21. the Law, and
Priesthood, Heb. 7. into the ministry of the Gospel: Priests and Levites, Esa.
66. 21. into Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and others, Ephesians. 4. The carnal
worship into spiritual, Joh. 4. 23. Circumcision and the Passover, into
Baptism and the Lords Supper; and that seventh day into this our Sunday, the
Lords day.

Argument 9.
THe Lord of the Sabbath is the only Institutor of the Sabbath: But Jesus
Christ is the Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 8. Ergo the only Institutor of it.
Now for the better understanding of Christ his being Lord of the Sabbath, we
must know three things.

1 How he is Lord of the Sabbath, and that is, as he is God-Man, and Man-God;
for it is said in the Text, The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.

2 Whence he has this Lordship; even from God his Father, who has given him
the Kingdom, all power in heaven, and in earth, Mat. 28. 18. delivering all
things into his hands, John 13. 3. and 3. 35. Luke 10. 22. having committed all
judgment to his son, and made him both Lord and Christ, John 5. 22. Act. 2.
36.

3 How long he holds this his Lordship, Rule and Dominion, even till the
consummation of all things, till God be all in all, never laying it down until
all things be fulfilled, 1 Cor. 15. 24. 28.

Therefore is he yet the Lord of the Sabbath, the Sabbath is his till the
worlds end, and he retains his right still therein; his right in the fourth
Commandment, which right must be showed, either in retaining of the seventh
day, on which God rested, and to which the Commandment was accommodated till
his second coming by the change of it, or in his substituting another day in
steed thereof.

But we see that seventh day altered, and therefore he shows himself Lord
of the Sabbath, by appointing this his day; for else should the other have
remained under the Gospel, or if not, then no other being ordained in its steed
by him, he had lost his Lorship over the Sabbath, which here he challenged a
right in, and still keeps until his second coming.

Argument. 10.
TEnthly and lastly, to these reasons, may be added the judgment of the
Parliament, the representative body of all this Kingdom, with his Majesty's
royal assent in the first year of his happy reign (which is this) That the
keeping of the Lords day holy, is a principal part of the true service of God;
which words are an acknowledgment that the Lord was the Institutor of the
Sabbath: for it is no service to God, much less a principal part of his
service, for that may be man's will worship, but cannot be service unto God,
unless he himself be the Institutor and Author of it.

CHAP. XI. Of some Objections which may be made against it, answered.
Object. 1.
IT is not commanded in the New Testament, Ergo, he instituted it not.



2. I have showed, that Christ gave Commandments of the things pertaining to
the kingdom of God, whereof the observation of this day is one. And therefore
he gave Commandment concerning this day.

Object. 2. It is not expressly commanded.


2. I answer further, that our book of Homilies tells In Homily of Prayer.
us again and again, that there is express Commandment for it: The Authors
of this book say there is; The Objectors say there is not: set one against the
other. To the book all the Ministers in the Church of England have subscribed,
but not to this Objection against it.

3. I answer, there is in the New Testament no formal expression of any of the
other Commandments of the first Table, neither of the first, nor second, nor
third, because they stood in force, and therefore no need formally to express
them: no more need was there for any such expression of this.

First, because the fourth Commandment stood still in force, as well as the
rest: for first, Christ did challenge Lordship over this fourth Commandment,
in his assumed humane nature, Matthew. 12. 8. to show that in his state of
humiliation, he lost not his authority over it: Secondly, because the
changing of the seventh day into another day, was not the taking away of the
fourth Commandment, but only the accommodation of the same Commandment to our
Lords day, for the continuation of it still. For if the fourth Commandment be
not observed in keeping of this our Lords day, then will it follow,

1 That either there is no fourth Commandment, and so not ten Commandments,
which number has bin observed without addition, or diminution, to this day,
the space of 3221 years in Gods Church, both of the Jews, and of the
Gentiles: or else if it be one of the Ten, as God gave it, Exo. 20. for one
of them, then have we lived in sinful neglect of this Commandment now this
1600 years.

2 It will follow that Christ has lost his Lordship of it, or suffered one of
his Fathers Commandments to be carelessly neglected; neither of which may be
granted without indignity offered to Christ, and his truth.

3 That Christ had not come to fulfill, but to destroy the Law, contrary to
Matthew. 5. 17. for if he neither kept the former day, but took it away, nor
ordained certainly in the room of it another day, he had destroyed this Law.

4 It also will follow, that the Son should not be honored of all men as
they have honored the Father with the fourth Commandment, and with a set day
by his appointment for his public worship and solemn service: But all men
should honor the Son, as they honor the Father, Ioh. 5. 23. And therefore
with this fourth Commandment, and with a set day by his appointment for his
public and solemn worship and service should he be honored.

Object. 3. The taking away of the seventh day appointed by God, disanulleth
the Commandment it self.
See the other Treatise,
The Commandment is, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: This only is
the Commandment, so by Moses it is clear (note it well) in Deuteronomy. 5. 12.

The application and accommodation of the Commandment was unto the seventh
day, which day may be taken away, as not of the substance, but a circumstance
of the Commandment of the Sabbath and rest day, applied unto that seventh day,
and yet the Commandment be still of force: As for example in the accommodation
of another precept thus;

Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. This is a Commandment, whosoever is King: The
accommodation of that may be thus: Saul is King, this is not of the substance
of the Commandment, yet while Saul is King, we are commanded to honor King
Saul, but in time Saul is taken away, nevertheless the Commandment, Honor
the King, is of force to another person in his stead, as David succeeding, the
Commandment is, honor King David. The same Commandment which binds me to
honor the King, binds me to honor Saul while he is King: And when Saul is
taken away, and David appointed in his stead, I am bound by the self same Law
to honor David.

Even so is the accommodation of this fourth Commandment, Remember the Sabbath
day to keep it holy: this is the Commandment what day soever it be applied
unto. The accommodation is, the seventh day is the Sabbath day to keep it holy:
this the Commandment does bind us unto, as long as the day is unchanged and
not taken away: But the day being altered, yet the Commandment abides, and is
of forc^, when another day is appointed in its room, as is now our Lords day.
And therefore the Commandment is, Remember the Lords day to keep it holy.

From whence here note, that as the taking away of Saul took not away the
Commandment of honoring the King, and David's coming in Saul's stead held up
the practice of the same Commandment: Even so the taking away of the seventh
day took not away the authority of the fourth Commandment, and the bringing
in of the Lords day in stead thereof, holds up the practice of it, and by it
we are bound to observe this day, as the Jews their day: And therefore may we
pray as our Church teaches us:

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law: And that
without any Judaizing at all. CHAP. XII. That this day cannot be changed.
We have heard how that the day is of a divine institution, and therefore is
not subject to alteration by man: The Church, says our learned Doctor On Rev:
1. 10. In Cases of Consc. ca. 16. In his Thesis.
Fulk, has no authority to change it; so holds Master Perkins: Bishop Lakes
speaking of Christ's resurrection gives this reason, saying, as no man can
change the work to another day, so no man can therefore change the day: This is
an undoubted rule in Theology, says that learned man.

2. What honor and dignity the Holy Ghost gives unto a day, cannot by the
authority of man be taken from it, to put it upon any other day: but the first
day of the week has by the holy spirit this superscription set upon it, The
Lords day; therefore it is not alterable by any, to any other day, to call that
the Lords day.

3. If the Church can change it, then has the Church authority to weaken the
grounds on which the observation of the day was first settled, but that she has
not; or else can bring better reasons for the alteration, else it were folly to
alter it: but there never was hitherto, nor now is, nor ever shall be, any such
reason to alter the day, as there was for settling of the day (to wit) the
blessed resurrection of the Lord Jesus; of the excellent glory of which work
ye have heard before: Therefore the Church cannot change it into another day.

4. Whosoever changes one thing for another, in matters of an high nature,
must have equal power with the first Institutors, or receive authority so to
do from them: But the Church has not such authority in her self, or by
delegation from either Christ, or from his Apostles: And therefore cannot
change the day.

5. It has been ratified by many Synods, by ancient Counsels, by Imperial
Constitutions, and Edicts of Kings, established by the Laws of Kingdoms and
Countries, as it cannot be altered.

6. The long continued custom of observing it, from the first day in the
Apostles time by the whole Primitive Church, and by all Christian Churches
since in all ages, for these 1600 years without any gainsaying, makes it
unalterable, it being observed upon such grounds, as is before mentioned.

To conclude, to what purpose is it for any now to hold the change thereof,
when never from the beginning, there was ever any one particular Church, any
Synod, or Council, or any Orthodox writer in ancient times, attempted it; Nor
ever durst any power on earth go about it. But all the holy Fathers, and
piously learned have with free consent endeavored the settling and honoring of
this day, as may appear in their writings and praises of the same, as shall be
manifest in the next chapter.

It is not therefore changeable, either absolutely or practically; nor have
Christians at any time, says Bishop White, judged it reasonable or convenient
to alter such an ancient and well grounded custom, which is commonly reputed
to be an Apostolical tradition. To this let me add in the last place, the
judgment of that reverend Author of the Antidote; That seeing the observation
of the Lords day has been confirmed by so many Constitutions Ecclesiastical
and Imperial, and has withal continued with such uniforme consent through
the whole Christian world for so many ages, ever since the Apostles times, the
Church (not to dispute what she may or may not do ex plenitudine potestatis)
ought not to attempt the altering of it to any other day of the week.

CHAP. XIII. Of the honorable esteem of this our Lords day, and that it is to
be preferred before all other festival days.
THere be many reasons to manifest the honourablenesse of this day, and to
prefer it before all other Festivalls.

1. The blessed Apostle has exalted it with the glorious title of the Lords
day, Rev. 1. 10. The Lord Christ his day, as Bishop White speaks, a title
proper and peculiar Page of his book 208.
to it; Now things and persons named the Lords, are sacred and venerable, says
he, in the highest degree: which day was generally and religiously observed of
all Christians. And albeit the Apostles took advantage to go and teach in the
Jewish Synagogues upon their Sabbath, yet (says Doctor Pocklington) for which
he cites Eusebius and Page 11. of his Sermon.
Ignatius; the blessed Martyrs in the Primitive Church, by the doctrine and
example of S. Paul and the Apostles, so unfeignedly abhorred the observation of
the Jewish Sabbath, that they esteemed the observers thereof, and the
contemners of the Lords day, the very sons of perdition, and enemies of our
Savior, and sellers of Christ: So dis-regarded they the one, and honored the
other.

2. The ancient Fathers and others have given it terms of honor. Justine
Martyr called it Sunday, as many others In Orat. ad Anton.
after him, no doubt, as the chief of days, as the Sun is the most glorious
to our eyes above all other planets. In Cod. Just. lib. 3. tit. 12. it is
called venerabilis dies Solis, the venerable and much honored Sunday, as
Bishop White expresses Against Brab. page 197. Ad Magnes.
it. Ignatius the Martyr, who lived at least thirty years in the days of S.
John, and was his hearer, calls the day, the Queen and Paramount of days:
Eusebius See the quotation of these in B. ^hite page 209.
calls it, the principal and the first: S. Chrysostom, a royal day: Greg.
Nazian. says it is higher than the highest, and with admiration wonderful
above all other days: S. Basil, the first fruits of days: Chrysologus, the
primate of days: A day above all other days to be esteemed, says Bellarmine
and Tom. 1. de cult. san^t. cap. 10. 11. lib. 3. On Luke 14. fol. 11. cap. 6.
Stella. The Council at Matiscon held it the day of our new Birth: Durand
says, Dominica dies primatum obtinet, and major est inter alios dies,
Rational. lib. 7. de festivit. Thus we see it honorably graced with very high
titles, which no other Festival reached unto.

3. The observation of this day is not only of Protestants, but also of
Papists, held to be de jure divino, and give reason for it, as is before
manifested: But no other holy day so held, by any learned Protestant, in any
reformed Church.

4. Easter day, that so esteemed high day, about the observation whereof in
former times there was such contention (when the consent for the Lords day was
universally agreed upon unanimously ever) yet for the more honor to it, it was
ordained to be celebrated on the Lords day only, as we find it to be observed
to this day.

5. Though the often return of this our Lords day weekly, makes vain people
less to esteem it than other days which fall more seldom; yet the truth is,
in the judgment of the wise, thi^ day receives the more glory and honor: For
by being our weekly holy day, it comes in stead of the Jewish Sabbath, by the
equity of the fourth Commandment, and it is for the great honor of our Lord
Jesus, by the upholding of his Lordship still over the Sabbath; between which
and our weekly Sunday, there is an analogy and proportion, as Doctor Heylin
acknowledges at large: Page. 11.
which is not so in any other Festival among Christians.

6 It has had the start before all other holy days, to be first honored with
Christian public meetings, holy Convocations and Assemblies, Act. 20. 7. 1.
Cor. 16. 2. and 11. 20.

7 It was the first, for the better observation whereof, that had Imperial
Edicts to grace it, and in those Edicts, for restraint of work upon other holy
days, yet the chiefest care was for the Honor of this day, as does appear by
this In Sermon. de tempore 251. Page 98. 102.
Clause, Maxim in dominicis diebus, on the Lords days most specially: For,
says Doctor Heylin, the Emperors and Prelates had the same affections, both
sorts earnest, to advance this day above all others. The Emperor Leo, says
he, also by two several Edicts made it singular above other Festifalls.

Lastly, our Church in Canon 45 prefers it above all other holy days in
this, that licensed Preachers are enjoined to Preach either in their own, or in
some other Church every Sunday, which order is not taken for other holy days.

Thus we see this day to have the pre-eminence above any other, and indeed, it
has before others antiquity, the authority establishing it is divine, the
certainty of the day is without alteration, and the unity of judgment, with so
full a Consent of all sorts, in all ages, as may well persuade us, to give it
the glory before any of the rest of the Festivalls; which to equal with it, is
void both of reason, and religion; as all that which has been said,
sufficiently proves.

CHAP. XIV. This day is to be kept holy, and the whole day too.
AN holy day is to be kept holy, none will deny it. Our Lords day is an holy
day and an high holy day too, before all other, as in the former chapter is
proved: and therefore to be kept holy; which very term of holy, challenges a
separation of the day unto holy uses; as Gods holy days all of them in the old
Testament were observed, and employed in holy duties, as the Scriptures tell
us: the end of the weekly Sabbath, was to keep it holy, as the very Commandment
shows, from the mouth of God himself, Exo. 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day
to keep it holy: and Moses the Interpreter of the Law, in Deuteronomy. 5. 12. says
the same: And our Lords day being our Christian Sabbath in stead thereof,
should be kept holy: We keep holy the Lords day, says, Dionysius, who lived in
Anno. 175. Our King, and whole In an Epist. to Soter, Bishop of Rome.
State, in a Statute, has delivered this, as is before noted; That it is a
principal part of true service unto God, to keep holy the Lords day: Our
Church in the Homily teaches us, That Gods obedient people should use the
Sunday holily, and carefully keep the day in holy rest and quietness, both
men, women, children, servants, and strangers, as they have ever done from the
Apostles days. That the Primitive Churches, Fathers, and Christian Princes did
in their several times always observe, and cause to be observed the Lords day
with all holy solemnity and godly reverence: read the many learned Authors
avouching the same, quoted for this by Master Sprint in his book of the
Christian Sabbath, page 18. To this effect speaks Bishop White, cited before
in chapter 9. affirming, that the Primitive Fathers and their Successors did
universally maintain the religious observation of the day: That it is to be
kept holy, there be none of sound judgment will deny it.

But the question is, how much of the day is to be set apart unto God? The
wisdom of God, which in man's best reason is most worthy to be our direction,
appointed a day for Exodus ^0.
the celebration of the Sabbath: we ought to rest the whole day, say the
Fathers in a Council at Nice. S. Chrysostom in 3. Hom. on John, exhorts to
destinate the day wholly to divine employments. The Divines in Ireland have
held the Lords day to be wholly dedicated to the service of God. And was there
ever any thing counted holy, as set apart for holy uses, which was not wholly
sacred? The Temple was holy, was it so in part, or in the whole? Set-Festivalls
were holy the whole day. King Edgar and Canutus enacted by Fox Acts and Mon.
fol. 644. Edit. 1610. fol. 715. ^echel de Dec^et. Ecclesiae Gal.
their Laws, that the Sunday should be kept holy from Saturday at noon, till
Monday morning. Charles the great, ordained to have it kept from evening to
evening; so zealous were those Princes in those times, for the observation of
this day to the honor of Jesus; they held not the whole day too much. S.
Augustine in his Sermon de tempore 251. and one Leo the Bishop of Rome, who was
made Bishop there in Anno 440. almost full 1200 years since, See Doctor Heylin
Hist. 119.
reckon the Saturday Eye a part of the Lords day. And Doctor Heylin cites also
a Synod held at Friuli, in An. 791. In 2 part ca. 5.
that all Christians should with all reverence and devotion honor the Lords
day, beginning on the Evening of the day before, at the first ringing of the
bell. He tells us also how S. Jerome relates, that the Monks in Egypt
designed the Lords day wholly unto prayers and reading of holy Scriptures.
Master Brerwood confesses, That it is meet, that Christians dedicate the day
wholly to the honor of God; that we should not be less devout in celebrating
the Lords day, than the Jews in celebrating their Sabbath: Because, says he,
the obligation of our thankfulness is more than theirs: Therefore he wishes
that it were most religiously performed with attendance to holy devotion.

This day (faith Calvin) is wholly to be dedicated to him, Calv. on Deuteronomy. cap.
5. verse. 12. 13. 14.
and it is necessary, that so we may intend wholly to the minding of Gods
works, and bestow the day in praising and magnifying Gods name: we have no
cause (says he) to grudge the giving of one day to him, seeing he leaves us
six for one.

Let any man give a reason, if they give any part of the day to Christ, why
they should not think him worthy of all the day? Is it too much for him, and
whole six little enough for our selves? If we will take a part from him (for
the whole none will, except they be worse than Jews and Pagans in observing
their days) which part is it? not the morning, for when shall we begin then to
serve him? Not the ending of the day; for why, are we weary of well doing? Gal.
6. Gal. 3. 3.
shall we begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh? A liberal friend that
has seven pounds in his hands, and gives me six of them freely, owing me
nothing, to employ the seventh for him; If I should grudge to bestow it wholly,
and take without leave any part of it to my self, were I not most ungrateful?
Again, every holy thing is holy unto the Lord, and is it not sacrilege to
rob God either of the whole, or of part? Lastly, let us consider this, that
he which willingly gives not God all, would give him none at all, if it were
not for by-respects, more than conscience of duty. For conscience will bind to
give the whole, where all is due, as well as a part of the due. Therefore God
commanding a day, and an whole day, as he gives us six whole days, so let us
afford him his own day, and that wholly.

CHAP. XV. How this day is to be kept holy, morally, as the an^ient Sabbath was
kept.
FOr the better satisfaction of moderate minds, and to clear this point, let
us consider how the ancient Sabbath was kept morally, how our Lords day was
kept in the time of the holy Apostles, how to be kept by the stablished
authority of our Church, and how Emperors, Kings, Councels, Synods, Fathers,
and others would have it kept, yea God himself from profane pollutions.

Concerning the first, the ancient Sabbath was kept in rest and in the
employing of that rest unto religious duties; which what they were, see at
large in the other Treatise, Section 25.

For the Ceremonial and Leviticall Services on that seventh day, they are
abrogated; so all the Jewish superstitition, brought in by men's vain
Traditions, are condemned, likewise those accessorie precepts for the more
strict rest on that day, belonging only to the Israelites for a time, are taken
away and do nothing concern us, and are not to be imitated of us. But the
ancient people of God are to be followed of us, as far as the fourth
Commandment binds us in the naturalitie thereof, in the spiritualitie, and
in its morallitie, as the holy people of God then kept it, in such common
duties, as we are, as well as they were bound to perform for Gods service,
and for the benefiting of their own souls, in the use and exercises of his
heavenly ordinances on his holy day. This is far from any Judaizing at all,
so much laid in the dish, and reproachfully cast upon many in these times, but
without cause at all: if the matter be well weighed, and they rightly
understood, as it were to be wished.

Their Service was both in the forenoone, and in the afternoon every day, Number.
28. 3. Exodus 29. 38. then much more on the Sabbath day: For in the morning of
their Sabbath, they had the Service in the Tabernacle and Temple, and their
Sacrifices doubled. Number. 28. 9. and also burning of incense in the morning,
Exodus 30. 7. So in the afternoon both Sacrifices and burning of incense, and
thus every day continually, Exodus 29. 38. and 30. 7. 8. To this David alluded
in Psalm. 141. 2. This afternoon Service was about three aclock, and called the
ninth hour of Prayer, Acts 3. 1. what time the godly used to pray, Dan. 9. 21.
and which Eliah observed in the offering of Sacrifice, 1 King. 18. 29. and we
read while the incense was offered, the people were devout in their prayers,
Luke 1. 10. Preaching was also in the Temple, for there Christ preached, Matthew.
26. 55. Mark 12. 25. Luke 19. 47. John 7. 28. of which, as of any strange
thing, the chief Priests and the Elders did not ask him, but of his
authority so to do, Matthew. 21. 23. Luke 20. 1. 2. And into the Temple early
in the morning, came he to teach, John 8. 2. and the people to hear, Luke 21.
38. whither the Jews always resorted, John 18. 20. Here also the Apostles
preached, Acts 3. 1. 12. and 5. 21. 23. 42. And in this place, no doubt was it,
in which the Scribes and Pharisees sat to teach the people, Matthew. 23. 2. It is
most certain that on the Sabbath day in the Synagogues, there was constant
reading and preaching, Acts 15. 21. and 13. 27. In the morning, Christ went in
to preach, Mark. 6. 2. in other places it is not so evident what time it was,
whether in the forenoone, or afternoon, when he came into their Synagogues,
Mark. 1. 21. Luke 4. 16. and 13. 10. nor what time of the day the Apostles went
into the Synagogues, Acts 13. 14. and 14. 1. and 17. 2. 10. and 18. 4. 19. nor
is it certain, whether they did depart home a while, and came again; It may be
they held out from the beginning to the ending, and to the breaking up of the
Congregation, as it seems probable in Acts 13. 43. so Nehe. 8. but it is
certain that upon their days of fasting, they did hold out and continued
together, from the beginning to the end, Nehem. 9. 3.

Whatsoever they did for the time, they holily begun their Divine exercises
with a blessing, Nehe. 8. 6. and ended with a blessing, Number. 6. 23. 26. Lev. 9.
22. 2^.

CHAP. XVI. How our Lords day was kept in the Apostles days and the Primitive
times.
THe Lords day being know^ to be an holy day, and to be kept holy, the Church
rested on this Histo. page 95. part. 2.
day, for performance of religious and Christian duties, as Doctor Heylin
acknowledges.

There was an assembly of Christians, they came together, says the Text, Acts
20. 7. who came together? the whole Church, 1 Cor. 14. 23. whither? into some
one place, 1 Cor. 11. 20. and 14. 23. for then they had no Temples, but met
together where they conveniently might: when, and on what day did they assemble
together? On the first day of the week, as Luke tells us, Acts 20. 7. and
the Syriack translation of the 1 Cor. 11. 20. has it in die Dominico: In Apol.
2.
Of this Just. Martyr bears witness; upon the Sunday all of us assemble in
the Congregation, all that abide in the Cities or about in the fields, do meet
together in some place: Coimus in Caetum and Congregationem, says Tertul. In
Apol. cap. 39. with cap. 14. and. 16.
on the Lords day he means: Cyprian tells us, that the Sunday was the day,
wherein they met together. So Saint Augustine also enformeth us; we Christians
assemble with Lib. 2. Epist 5. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. cap 8.
much diligence on the Lords day, says Clemens, Romans constit Apost. li. 2. ca.
36. Into this Congregation would some Gentiles come sometime, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
and none professing Christ might forsake it, Heb. 10. 25. Thus we see clearly
without doubting from Seriptures, and Fathers, when and where Christians met to
worship Christ.

Being met together, let us see what was done in the Congregation.

1. For Prayer.
THey prayed together, thus we read of them in the first Congregation after
Christ's Ascension, Acts 1. 14. 24. so (...), Acts 4. 23. 24. and 16. 13. For
prayer was one pa^^ of their Divine Service mentioned in Act. 2. 42. The
Apostles were much addicted to prayer, as well as preaching, Acts 6. 4. and
they and the Christian believers were frequent in it, as occasions were offered
Act. 16. 16. and 8. 15. and 1^. 3. and 20. 36. and 12. 5. 12. To the
performance of this duty with thanksgiving they were exhorted, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.

2. For Reading.
THere was reading of the Scriptures, of the Apostles writings, by the Apostles
command, Col. 4. 16. a charge by the Lord, 1 These. 5. 27. and the Apostles
decrees, Act. 15. Tertul. Apol. cap. 39. In Apol. 2.
30. 31. They met together, says a Father, To hear the holy Scriptures
rehearsed: In the Congreation, says Just Martyr, the Records of the Apostles
and the Writings of the Prophets In Ios. Ho^. 15. In Civit. l. ^2. c. 8.
are read, and other Scriptures says Origin, by the Apostles appointment, at
the reading whereof all were silent and attentive as S. Augustine, tells us.

3. For Preaching.
THere was also preaching in the Congregation: S. Paul on the first day of the
week, when the Disciples came together preached unto them, Acts 20. 7. The
Apostles in this spent their strength, Acts 5. 42. and S. Paul exhorts to
this in vehemence of spirit, and with a thundering charge, 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. Of
this speaks this same Apostle in 1 Cor. 14. and gives order for the use of
men's gifts in the Congregation; The preaching then was with reprehension, with
exhortation, 2 Timothy 4. 2. admonition, Act. 20. 31. with convincing of errors,
Tit. 1. 9. with consolation, 1 Cor. 14. 3. The matter was the word Acts 13. 5.
and 14. 25. and 17. 13. Romans 10. 8. 2. Tim. 4. 2. The manner was, not with
entising words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit, and
power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4. 5. The end for conversion, Act. 26. 18. 20. and to
save men, Act. 11. 14. Of preaching, and making a Sermon on this day, speaks
Just. Martyr, and Saint Augustine in the fore cited places. When the Sermon was
done, they sent up their prayers unto the Lord, says, Justine Martyr.

4. For receiving of the Sacraments.
ON the first day of the week, or Lords day, they received the Lords supper,
Act. 20. 7. They came together to break bread, says the Text: So did the
Corinthians Apol. 2. Epist. 118.
come together to receive the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 20. This Just. Martyr, also
certifieth us of, and S. Augustine, in the Primitive times, it was administered
every Sunday.

5. For Psalms.
THey in the Congregation sang Psalms, so the Apostle intimates to us, 1 Cor.
14. which as they might learn from the ancient people of God, as is observed
in the former Treatise: so from our Savior and his Apostles, who sang a Psalm
when the Passover was received, and the Sacrament instituted and administered,
Mark. 14. 26. Pliny secundus in an Epistle to Traian, makes mention of
Christians singing of Hymns, when they met together to worship Christ before
day: How comfortable singing of Psalms be when men sing with understanding,
and with the spirit, as they ought, 1 Cor. 14. 15. we may see by Paul and Sylas
singing Psalms in prison, Act. 16. 25.

6. For care of the poor.
THe true Church of Christ had ever care for the poor; from the very first
Plantation, as we may see, Acts 2. 45. and 4. 34. And for this purpose were
Deacons appointed, Act. 6. The Apostles gave a charge for to remember the
poor, Gal. 2. 10. and Saint Paul took order for the collection every Lords
day, 1. Cor. 16. 2. which Saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. Hom. 43. on 1 Cor.
speaks much of: And this continued in the Christian primitive Congregations:
They made collections for the widows (of whom care should ever be had, Act.
6. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 3.) for the fatherless (as religion teaches James 1. 27) for
the sick, poor people, captives, exiles, and strangers, Iusti^. Martyr. Apo. 2.
which came from far, as Just. Martyr, witnesses.

7 For Excommunication and Ordination.
UPon just cause on this day, when they did meet, the Leo. Mag. ad Dioscorum
Episc. Alex. Epi. 41. cap. 3. See Tertul. Apolog. Origin and others cited by
Bish. ^hit^, page 214. See Dr. Heylin Histor. part. 2. p. 118.
sentence of Excommunication was pronounced against some, which were v^ry
notorious offenders, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. On this day it was thought most proper for
investing men with holy Orders, for that the holy Ghost descended upon the
Apostles this day, and there gave us, as it were, this celestial rule, that on
this day alone we should confer spiritual Orders, in quo collata sunt omnia
dona gratiarum, All spituall graces are conferred. And it was appointed, that
such men, as were to receive Ordination should continue fasting from the Even
before, that spending all that time in prayer, humbling themselves before the
Lord, they might be the
better fitted to receive his graces.

8 Of their Love Feasts.
DIvine Service being ended, Christians observed a Love-Feast, or feast of
charity, where all the rich and poor sat down promiscuously together,
recreating themselves with godly conference, and singing of Psalms, which as
Tertullian says, did admit of Nihil vilitatis, nihil immodestiae, Apolog.
and at what time he says, non prius discumbitur, quam oration ad Deum
praegustetur. Of this speaks also S. Chrysostom, Omnes, commune inibant
convivium pauperibus, and qui nihil habebant vocatis and omnibus communiter
vescentibus, S. Paul touches upon these Feasts, 1 Cor. 11. and S. Jude verse
12. and this came, as there we find; to be abused even in the Apostles days.
We may Learn of S. Paul (who was a pattern to them, no doubt, in the end and
breaking up of the Congregation) that they departed with prayer, as he did,
Acts 20. 36.

9. Of what was done when the Congregation was broken up.
WHen the public service was ended, S. Paul went into an house where he was
invited, and there prayed, Acts 16. 16. Such no doubt, as were well minded, as
the Bereans, searched the Scriptures concerning the things taught them, Act.
17. 11. But for this the Fathers tell us what people ought to do. Saint Ambrose
exhorted the people Ser. 33. tom. 3. page 259.
to be conversant all the day in prayer, or reading, or if any could not read
that he should labor to be fed with conference. Saint Chrysostom, on Joh. 3.
Hom. was offended with the people that then did not meditate on the word heard,
who was earnest with them, that presently upon their coming home, they would
take the Bible into their hands, and make rehearsal with their wives and
children of that which had been taught them out of the Word of God. But let us
come to that which Iustine Martyr says, and Tertullian, when they were
departed out of the Congregation they ever remembered one another of those
things which they had heard. They went not, says Tertullian, Apol. ca 30. 39.
page 692.
in Catervas Caesionum neque in classes discursationum, nec in eruptiones
lasciviarum, sed ad eandem curam modesti^, and pudicitiae, ut qui non caenam
caenassent, quam disciplinam: from this Fathers speech we may observe. First,
That the Love-feast was a supper, they abode then in the assembly late in the
afternoon: Secondly, That at that Feast, in the afternoon, as may be gathered
from Saint Augustine, and Saint Basiles words they had care of Modesty and
Chastity. Thirdly, That they received instruction for their souls, as well as
food for their bodies. Fourthly, Being departed from the Congregation they took
heed, not to go into the route of Swash-bucklers, nor into the Company of
Ramblers, such as did run up and down, hither and thither, not into the
breaking out of the wanton and Lascivious sort. But Fifthly, they had care of
the like modesty and chaste behavior out of the Church, which they showed,
when they were in the Congregation. Thus the primitive Christians kept the
Lords day: And if credit may be given to that, which Theodoret writes, as
Doctor Heylin cyteth him, of the Festivalls in those times above 1200 years
ago, how they were Modestae, Castae, Temperantia plenae, performed with
modesty, and great sobriety, (not as the Festivalls of the Gentiles in excess
and riot) and also were solemnized with spiritual Hymns, and religious
Sermons, and that the people used to empty out their souls to God in fervent
and affectionate prayers, not without sighs and tears; what may we think then
of such godly Christians, but that they devoutly and with high reverence
observed the Lords day, so much to be preferred before Festivalls, as has been
before declared, in Chapter thirteenth? Hear what Durand says, in Rational.
lib. 5. de vesperis, who tells us of the Evening meetings, wherein they did
confer of the holy Scriptures: His words are these, Postremo notandum est,
quod religiosi ante Completorium permittunt collationem, quae a sanctis
patribus originem traxit, qui dictis vesperis convenire, and de Scripturis
sacris confer solebant ad instar Operariorum ad recreationem, ad invicem
confabulantium, ideoque tunc vitas, vel collationem Patrum, quae potius sunt ad
recreationem and delectationem legunt, and Eruditiores, si dubium occurrerit,
interrogant.

CHAP. XVII. How our Church would have our Sunday kept holy.
OUr Church has taken order for the keeping holy of the Lords day: For the
better understanding whereof, let us look into her certain judgment evidenced
by the undeniable Records established by the supreamest Authority, and
subscribed unto by all the Clergy of England.

The first is the book of Common Prayer, confirmed by Act of Parliament.

1. It makes our Sunday to be observed for an holy day. 2. It appoints our
Assembling, and therein to perform holy duties: as First Prayer: Secondly,
Reading the Scriptures, Thirdly, singing of psalms. Fourthly, Sermons,
Fifthly, Collections for the poor. Sixthly, The administration of the
Sacraments. Seventhly, Prayers at the departure. 3. And that the day may be
well observed, it orders this meeting both for the forenoone and afternoon:
calling the one Morning prayer, for that it must begin in reason betime and the
other Evening prayer, because it must bring the evening with it: So the times
of Service should hold us (but for the intermission between) from the morning,
until the evening. 4. It orders the Ministers distinctly to rehearse all the
ten Commandments and the people kneeling, after every Commandment to ask God
mercy for their transgressing of the same, and grace to have their hearts
inclined to keep every one of them, and to write them in their hearts. Now the
Fourth Commandment by this rehearsal of ten, and by the peoples prayer (except
the Minister mock the people and the people mock God, and that by imposed
duty from authority, which God forbid we should think) is acknowledged: First,
To be a Law and Commandment of God, not only heretofore, but now at this day.
Secondly, To be one of the ten, which God himself spoke. Thirdly, That it is a
Law and Commandment upon us, that make this prayer: Fourthly, That we are bound
to keep it: Fifthly That of our selves we cannot be inclined in our hearts to
keep it, till God incline our hearts unto it. Sixthly, That we should have a
joint care together, to observe it from our hearts. Seventhly, That we are to
acknowledge our selves transgressors of it, and stand in need to ask mercy of
the Lord for the same. Eighthly, That it is a mercy of God to incline our hearts
to keep it, and to write it in our hearts.

Now the Fourth Commandment requires a day to be kept holy, as a Sabbath or
rest day: and therefore by this prayer are we to acknowledge it a Law to us,
and all bound in heart to affect it, and to keep it, as the Lord has
commanded us.

The second is the Book of Canons or Ecclesiastical Constitutions.

For the religious observation of this day by our Ecclesiastical
Constitutions. First, All people are tied to resort to the Church. Secondly,
Not to depart out of the Church during the time of service or Sermon without
urgent cause: Thirdly, That before Evening prayer, Fathers, Mothers, Canon. 59.
Masters, Mistresses, should send their children, servants, and apprentices to
be Catechized, to be instructed, and taught by the Minister for half an hour
and more. Fourthly, All Canon. 13.
manner of persons within the Church of England shall celebrate and keep the
Lords day commonly called Sunday, and other holidays, as follows.

1 It must be kept according to Gods holy will and pleasure: Here the Church
tells us where to begin, the principal guide must be Gods holy will and
pleasure, which is to be searched after in his Word, from which if we swarve,
and have not it for our rule and warrant in doing any thing on this day, we
break this Canon.

2 According to the prescribed orders of the Church of England, which is there
very piously set down in eight Particulars.

1 In hearing the word of God read and taught: so it is kept as a day of
instruction.

2 In private and public prayer: so it is an especial day of audience, and
putting up our petitions to God: first with our Families before we enter into
the holy assembly, to prepare us the better for a blessing, and then with the
whole Congregation.

3 In acknowledging their offenses to God: so it is a day of Humiliation before
the Lord, and suing out a pardon for the same.

4 In an amendment of their offenses: so it is a day of Reformation of our
evil lives, and sinful courses.

5 In reconciling themselves charitably to their neighbors where displeasure
has been: So it is a day of Reconciliation, laying aside displeasure, and of
charitable seeking peace one with another.

6 In receiving the Communion of the body and blood of Christ: So it is a day
of Confirmation of our faith in Gods blessed Covenant made with us in Christ,
and a day of great consolation to behold visibly with the eye the greatest work
that ever God wrought, and the greatest mercy that ever he did show to poor
sinners.

7 In visiting the poor and sick: so it is a day of merciful visitation, and
beholding of Christ in his poor and sick servants.

8 And lastly in using all godly and sober Conversation: So it is a day, for
the expression of a good behavior toward God and man, in all godly
Conversation against profaneness in all sober Conversation, against
Intemperance, Riot, and Revelling, Gluttony, and Drunkenness, Lightness, and
loose Carriage.

Thus we see how the Canon directs us in an excellent manner to keep this
day. Can there be either required, or better means used, than is here
prescribed to keep from sinful courses on the Lords day?

The third is the Book of Homilies.

In the Homily of prayer we are taught: First, To assemble together solemnly
having our hearts sifted and cleansed from wordly and carnal affections and
desires, shaking off all vain thoughts which may hinder from Gods true
service. Secondly, To be careful to keep the day holily, and to rest from our
labors at home, riding and journeying abroad. Thirdly, To give our selves
wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and service. Fourthly, To
have in remembrance Gods wonderful benefits, and to render him thanks for
them. Fifthly, To celebrate and magnify Gods holy name in quiet holiness and
godly reverence. Sixthly And lastly, besides laying aside the works of our
callings the Homily exhorts to shun ungodliness, and filthiness, pride
praunceing prancking, pricking, pointing, painting or to be gorgeous and gay:
Likewise, to beware of gluttony, drunkenesse, and other fruits thereof
mentioned; to avoid also wantonness toyish talking, and filthy fleshlines. Thus
we see, what a strict observation of the Lords day our Homily prescribes unto
us. It has been the honor of our Church hitherto to outstrip all Christian
Churches in the world in the sanctifing of the Lords day. Our Common prayer
book, Canon, and Homily would hold us to it, if they had any authority over us.

CHAP. XVIII. How Christian Emperors would have it kept, by their Imperial
Constitutions.
We have heard how the godly among the ancient people of God, kept their
rest-day morally: How our day was kept in the Primitive Church: How our now
present Church of England would have it kept holy. Now we come to the highest
powers of Authority, abroad and at home, to learn how by them it should be
kept.

1 Imperial Constitutions.
COnstantine the first Christian Emperor, who thought the chiefest and most
proper day for the devotion of his subjects, was the Lords day, declared his
pleasure, that every Eusch. de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 13.
one who lived in the Roman Empire, should rest in that day weekly, which is
instituted to our Savior, and to lay aside all businesses, and attend the
Lord: who therefore forbade keeping of Courts, sitting in judgment, and
Artificers to use their trades: In Die Dominico, etc. say Imperial
Constitutions, L. ^mnes ^a. de feriis.
the whole minds of Christians and Believers should be busied in the worship
of God.

The Emperor Leo ordained, that the Lords day should be kept holy by all
sorts, and to be a day of rest.

It is our will, says he, according to the meaning of the Holy Ghost, and of
the Apostles by him directed, that on the sacred day whereon we were restored
unto our integrity, all men shall rest This Constitution reverend Ho^ker much
approves of, Eccl. Pol. Sect. 71. page 385.
themselves and surcease from labor, neither the husbandmen, nor others
putting their hands that day to prohibited work: for if the Jews did so much
reverence their Sabbath, which only was a shadow of ours; are not we which
inhabit light, and the truth of grace obliged to honor that day which the
Lord has honored, and has therein delivered us both from dishonor, and from
death; are not we bound to keep it singularly, and inviolably, sufficiently
contented with a liberail grant of all the rest, and not incroaching on that
one, which God has chosen for his Service: Nay were it not wretchlesse
slighting, and contempt of all Religion to make that day common, and think that
we may do thereon as we do on others?

This worthy Emperor would not have the days dedicated Cod. l. 3. tit. 12. de
feriis and Justin. li. 3. tit. 12.
to the supreme Majesty, to be taken up with filthy pleasures, then much less
the Lords day: for he highly advanced this day, and so honored it, that if his
birth day, or his inauguration fell upon this day, the solemnities thereof
should be deferred to another day, upon danger of loss of dignity, and
confiscation of estate to them which should offend his will herein: He exempted
this day from executions, citations, entering into bonds, apparances, pleadings
and the like.

The Emperor Theodosius enacted that (faithful Christian Cod. Theod.
peoples minds might wholly be bent to the Service of God) the Cirques and
Theators should be shut up on the Lords day, etc. and all public shows
prohibited by Gratian, and Valentinian; Nullus die solis spectaculum praebeat,
nec divinam venerationem confecta solemnitate confundat. They Anno 384.
forbad arbitrating of causes, and taking recognizance of any pecuniary
business on the Sunday, and that none should be brought before the Officers of
the Exchequer.

For further honor to the Emperor Leo and Anthemius, Insti^ian Cod. l. 3.
tit. 12. lex. de ferr^^s.
who called the Lords day, the religious day, and held it to be so honorable
and venerable; that they forbad all arrests, Law-sutes, and commanded all
Advocates, and C^yers to be silent, also Apparitours of every Judge were
inhibited, nor had allowed them any pretext, private or public, for doing
their office on this day.

The Esterne Emperor Emanuel Comnenus decreed, that Anno 1174.
all access to the Tribunal should be shut up, and that no Judge should sit on
any cause this day.

Charles the Great, in Anno 789. published his royal Edict, saying, we do
ordain, according as it is commanded in the Law of God, that no man do
servile work on the Lords day, in works of Husbandry, in dressing of their
Vines, Plowing, making Hay, fencing Grounds, grubbing and felling Trees,
working in Mines, Building, planting Gardens, Pleading, Hunting, Weaving,
dressing Cloth, making Garments, needle work, carding Wool, beating Hemp,
washing Clothes, shearing Sheep, but that they come to the Church, to Divine
Service, and magnify the Lord their God for those good things, which on that
day he has done for them.

This Great Charles forbad also Markers, and Law days on this day which was
confirmed by five Councels, which he caused to be gathered.

Thus we see the care of Emperors.

CHAP. XIX. How it was to be kept by the Edicts of Christian Kings in this our
Kingdom.
THe Kings in this Island of Great Britain, have from time to time showed a
religious care, concerning the observation of our Sunday.

In King Ina's reign, Anno 688, 900 years since, a Master might not force his
bond servant to work, if he did, the servant was freed, and the Master was
punished, and was to pay thirty shillings; but if the servant wrought without
his Masters commandment, he should be whipped, or redeem his whipping with a
price; and if a Freeman, to loose his freedom, or pay three pounds.

King Alured and Edward his son, in a league, between Cited by Bishop White,
page 222.
him and Gunthran King of the Danes, in this land did prohibit all Markets,
and other kinds of works whatsoever on the Sunday: The thing bought was
forfeited, and to pay money too, and the servant working, being a Freeman, was
to be made a slave, or to redeem himself: if a slave, then to be beaten, and
his Master to answer, for causing him to work: None guilty was to die on this
day for his offense, but to be imprisoned till the day was past.

King Athelstan forbad buying and selling on this day, under a penalty.

King Edgar, commanded every Sunday to be celebrated of every one from Saturday
at three aclock in the afternoon, till Monday morning at break of the day.

King Canutus, ordained the observation of the Lords day, as King Edgar had
done, from three a clock in the afternoon on Saturday till Monday: He also
inhibited Markets, Courts, and public meetings for civil business, hunting,
and that every one should rest from worldly works.

King Edward the Confessor, would have none molested either going to the Church
to serve God, or coming from it.

King Edward the Third, in his time the showing of Woolls should not be made at
the Staple on Sundays, and on the solemn Feasts.

King Henry the Sixth, in his days, Fayres, and Markets, were forbidden, as an
abominable injury and offense to Almighty God. Yea, it was held then by John
de Burge, Chancelour of the Universitie of Cambridge, that the Sunday might be
called the Sabbath as before I noted, for that we were then to rest from all
servile work, arts mechanic, husbandry, law-dayes, markets, and to be busied
at our prayers, public service of the Church, in Hymns and spiritual Songs,
and hearing of Sermons.

King Edward the Fourth, in his reign were forbidden, as unlawful games,
Dice, quoits, tennis, bowling; as also the felling of shoes, boots, nor was
it lawful for Shoomakers to put upon the feet, or pull on the legs any
shoes or boots on Sundays: In whose time it was judged, That sale made on a
Sunday of any thing, was not good, nor altered the property of it.

King Edward the Sixth, it was in his days manifested by Act of Parliament,
that the Sundays were holy days, and other days there expressed, wherein
Christians should cease from all kind of labor, and apply themselves only and
wholly unto holy works properly belonging to true religion, which holy works
were to be called Gods Service, whereunto such times and days were sanctified
and hallowed (that is to say) separated (mark it well) from all profane uses.

In Queen Elizabeth her reign, this Statute of King Edward the Sixth was in
use and practice: and the observation of the holy day was enjoined by the
twentieth of her Majesty's Injunctions, in the same words, with our now
thirteenth Canon, which was taken out, of that Injunction.

Thus far for this Kingdom before the happy uniting of the two Kingdoms in
one.

CHAP. XX. How our late Sovereign King James, and now our King Charles would
have it observed.
KIng James, the learned King that ever this Nation Anno 1603. May 7.
had, at his entrance of his reign, sent out his royal pleasure by
Proclamation, in which we may observe; First, that he calls the day, again
and again the Sabbath day: Secondly, the drift of the Proclamation was both
for the better observing of the day, and for the avoiding of all impious
profanation of it: Thirdly, that he forbad Beare-baitings, Bull-baitings,
Enterludes, Common Plays, and other like disordered or unlawful exercises or
pastimes.

After this in the Conference at Hampton Court, when that great Scholar Doctor
Rainold desired a straighter course for the Reformation of the abuse of the
Sabbath; there was found a general unanimous consent thereto of the King, of
the Prelates, and of that honorable Assembly met then in that place.

Furthermore when the Parliament was held, and a Convocation of the reverend
Clergy the same year, the pious Canon before mentioned, agreeing almost
verbatim with the Queens Injunction, was then framed, for the keeping holy the
Lords day with other holy days: Also in the self same year at the
Commencement in Cambridge, as before has been noted, a Doctor held this
Thesis, Dies Dominicus nititur verbo Dei, and so determined by the
Vice-Chancelour.

Lastly, as before in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, so in King James his
time, large Treatises of Celebrating the Lords day, were published under
Authority licensing the same; among which was the Practice of Piety by a
Bishop, and Bishop Downhams exposition upon the Command^ments; to mention no
other of lower rank, though some of them learned and reverend Divines.

King Charles, our now gracious Sovereign, has with the flower of this whole
Land, by Act of Parliament declared himself with them concerning the holy
observation of this day; First, In giving it the title of the Lords day,
Secondly, In affirming that in the keeping of the day holy, it is a principal
part of the true Service of God: Then undoubtedly, he highly pleases God, who
keeps holy the whole day: For by the judgment of the King, and the whole
State, such a one as keeps it is performing a principal part of the true
Service of God: Thirdly, In prohibiting on this day all meetings, assemblies,
or concourse of people, out of their own Parishes, for any sportes or pastimes
whatsoever; All Beare-baitings, Bull-baitings, Common Plays, Enterludes, or
any other unlawful exercises or pastimes. Also that no Carryer, Waggoner,
Waine-man, Car-man, or Drover, travel on the Lords day: Or any Butcher by
himself, or by any other, with his privitie and consent, kill or sell any
victual on this day.

Hereto may I add our Common Law, by which as the Sages in the Law have
resolved it, That the day is exempted from Law-dayes, publik Sessions in Courts
of Justice, and that no plea is to be holden, no writ of a Scire facias, must
bear date on a Sunday, for if it do, it is an error: so a Fine levied with
Proclamations, if the Proclamations be made on this day, all of them are held
erroneous acts: And all this was for the solemnity of the day, as also the
intent that the people might apply themselves to prayer, and Gods public
Worship and Service. Thus we see the honourablenesse of this day, and the high
esteem thereof, as it has been, and still ought to be in our Kingdom
amongst all faithful Christians.

CHAP. XXI. What Councels and Synods have decreed touching the observation of
this day.
IT cannot be, but where Emperors and Kings have taken care for keeping holy
the Lords day, they had the judg^ment of the godly Divines in their times: But
to clear more this point, let us see what has by the learned been decreed
concerning this.

The Council of Carthage decreed to petition the Emperor then, that there
might be no Shows, nor other See Dr. Heylin page 101. 111. page 112.
Plays on the Lords day, etc. The Council held at Aragon, would have no
sentence pronounced in any cause on the Lords day. The third Council at
Orleance informs us, that husbandry, reaping, hedging, and such servile works
were prohibited. The Council at Mascon decreed, that the day should be kept
holy, calling it the Lords day, the day of our new birth, the everlasting day
of rest, insinuated unto us, under the shadow of the seventh day or Sabbath in
the Law and the Prophets. On this day none were to meddle in Litigious
Controversies, in actions or Law Suits, nor prepare his Oxen for daily labor;
but to go to the Church, and there power out his soul in tears and prayers,
celebrate the day with one accord, offer unto God their free and voluntary
service, exercise themselves in Hymns and singing praises unto God, being
intent thereon in mind and body, etc. The Council at Dingulosinum in Bavaria
determined, that upon Sunday, every one being intent upon Divine rest, should
abstain from profane or common businesses. In the Council of Angiers
tradesmen were appointed to lay by their labors, and among those the Miller,
and the Barber. The Council at Coleine decreed, that the people should be
diligently admonished, why other holy days (but especially the Lords day,
which has been always famous in the Church from the Apostles time) were
instituted (to wit) that all might equally come together, to hear the Word of
the Lord, to receive the Sacraments, to apply their minds to God alone, to be
spent only in Prayers, Hymns, Psalms, and spiritual Songs. And here were
prohibited Plays, Dances, wicked Discourses, filthy Songs, all Luxury, and
Victualling Houses were commanded to be shut up. Concilium Bituriense,
exhorts saying, Let them practice nothing but that which savours of piety,
and there are prohibited profane Assemblies, ryotous Feasts, Dances, Morices,
disguises Stage Plays, and going to Alehouses. Concilium Basiliense, forbad
Dice and Tables, and would that such as did walk with chaste eyes, modesty,
and gravitie, should not go to Dancing.

In a Synod held at Friuli, it was decreed, That all Christian men, should with
all reverence and devotion, honor the Lords day, and abstain from all carnal
acts, Etiam So S. Augu. in 244. Sermon. de tempore,
a propriis conjugibus, and all earthly labors, and go to the Church
devoutly. A Synod held in Aken or Aqui^granum 800. years ago held, that in
reverence to the Lords day, it should no more be lawful to marry, or be
married. In a Roman Synod under Leo the fourth, it was decreed, that no Market,
no not for meat should be kept, and no person should receive judgment on that
day. And under Alexander the third, in a Council of Compeigne it was ordained;
that none should be doomed to death, or condemned to bodily punishment. In a
Synod at Coy, it was decreed, that men should do no servile work, nor take any
journey. A Synod at Petricow in Poloniae, forbad Taverne-meetings, Dice, Cards,
and such like pastimes, as also isntrumental music and Dancing.

CHAP. XXII. What Popes, the Canon Law, Archbishops, Bishops, and other learned
men, have said concerning the hallowing of this day.
1 Popes.
POpe Alexander the third says that both the old and new Testament depute the
seventh day unto rest. Pope Gregory the ninth commanded a restraint from labor
both of man and beast. In Pope Eugenius his time the Princes and Prelates (as
Doctor Heylin confesses) did agree together to raise the Lords day to as high
a pitch as they fairly might, and a Canon was made by that Pope in a Synod at
Rome 800 years ago to forbid businesses and works of labor, criminal causes
and vain sports on the Lords day, and other Festivalls. Pope Gregory in Epist.
3. lib. 11. held it not lawful for any to See Ios. Bentham his society of
Sects, page 154. citing Leo the first, and Leo the third, their decrees for
careful observation of the Lords day.
bath themselves out of luxury and pleasure on the Lords day, but that we
should rest from our earthly labors, and by all means abide in prayers, etc.

By the Canon Law grinding has been inhibited, and by the same Laws
traveling has been forbidden, and counted a mortal sin: See at large
Doctor Heylin out of Tostatus, the strictness of the observation of the Lords
day and holy days; let me add one thing out of Summa Angel. tit.
interrogationes in confessione: The Priests did ask the confitents as a sin,
whether they had used pastimes and dancings on the Lords day. Our Linwood the
Canonist de Consecr. Did. 3. ca. Jemina says, Die Dominico nihil aliud
agendum, nisi Deo vacandum, nulla operatio in illa die sancta agatur, nisi
tantum Hymnis, and Psalmis, and Canticis spiritualibus dies illa transigatur.

2 Archbishops and Bishops.
ARchbishop Islips with the assent and counsel of the Prelates assembled in a
Synod 1349, decreed that there should be a general restraint from all manner
of servile work, and that the Sunday should begin at the Saturday at Evening.
Cuthbert Archbishop Daroberniae in a Synod Anno 747 with the rest, decreed that
the Lords day should be celebrated with the reverence most meet, and to be
dedicated only to the service of God. Our last Archbishop Doctor Abbot so
honored the Lords day, as he by his Chaplains licensed diverse Treatises for
observation of the Lords day; and when a Minister presented him with a book to
be licensed, which was made for liberty on that day, he took it of him, and
before his face burnt it in the fire.

For Bishops, S. Ambrose tells us, it is well known, says he, how carefully
the Bishops do restrain all toying, light, and filthy Dances, if at other
times, then on the Lords day. Bishop Babington on Exodus 16. says, that
Drinkings, Dances, Wakes, Wantonness, Beare-baiting, and Bull-baiting were
wicked profanation of the Lords day. Bishop Downham on the Commandments
says, They that keep the day for idle rest, make it Sabbatum Boum or Asinorum:
They that defile it with drunkenness and the like, make it Sabbatum Diaboli:
and they that profane it with sports, make it Sabbatum aurei vituli: Bishop
Hooper, that Godly Martyr On the ten Commandments.
says, The Lord sanctified the Sabbath day, not that we should give our
selves to illness, or to such Ethnicall pastimes, as is now used amongst
Ethnicall people, etc. Bishop Bailey in his Practice of Piety says, We are this
day to abstain from the works of our callings, carrying burdens, Faires, and
Markets, studying any Book but Scripture and Divinity, all recreations and
sports, gross feeding, liberal drinking, and talking about worldly things:
Bishop White has uttered an Against Brab.
holy speech, who says, that all kind of recreations which are of evil
quality in respect of their object, or, are attended with evil and vicious
circumstances, are unlawful, and if used on the Lords day, are sacrilegious;
for they rob God of his honor, to whose worship and service the holy day is
devoted, and they defile the souls of men, for the clensing and edifying
whereof the holy day is appointed

3. Learned Divines.
NIcho. de Clemangiis de novis celebritatibus, non instituendis, tells us, that
especially the Lords day and solemn Festivalls should be wholly and only
consecrated to more special worship and spent in duties of Devotion, in
lauding and blessing him for his more special favors: Doctor Pocklington In
his Sermon: page 13.
has a right speech (howsoever it be that a little after he varieth) saying,
If the first day of the week be the Lords day, (as he in another place yields
it) we must look to do the Lords work on it, and not trench upon him by doing
our own work thereon: yea, he cyteth Saint Augustine for this, Page 5.
that men should leave all worldly businesses on Saints days, Et maxim Diebus
Dominicis, especially on the Lords days that they betake themselves wholly to
the Lords service. Reverend Hooker says, that the voluntary scandalous
contempt In Eccl. Pol. ca. 5. page 385.
of the rest from labor wherewith God is publicly served, we cannot too
severely correct and bridle: Master Dow teaches a cessation from ordinary
labors, and holds them In his d^scourse of the Sab. page 28.
unlawful on this day, as they hinder a man from applying himself to divine
duties, and therein are contrary to the divine precept and the morality
thereof. He requires first, A morning preparation in private. Secondly,
Warns men that they do not by improvidence, or negligence, or forgetfulness
draw upon themselves a necessity to omit or hinder the duties to which this day
is consecrated. Thirdly, that the hindrances and our defects be supplied by
private Devotions and Meditations. Fourthly, that it is good and commendable to
spend the rest of the day in holy meditations, private prayer, reading, and
calling to mind what we have read or heard. Vincentius Bellovecensis and
Bellarmine have condemned Specul. morale lib. 3. Concio 6. de Dominic. 3.
advent.
Stage Plays, Enterludes, Masks, mixt-Dancing, which they call lascivious,
to be especially on the Lords day most execrable. Alex. Fabricius in his
destructorium vitiorum pars 4 says, That the Sabbath by dancing is profaned.
So did the godly Albigenses and Waldenses, who also in a short In the History
of the Walden. part. 3. b. 2.
Catechism upon the Commandments would have the Christians keep the Sabbath in
ceasing from worldly labors, from sin, and idleness, and to do things as
might be for the good and benefit of their souls.

It were tedious to recite the learned in the later times, teaching the holy
observation of this our Lords day: I will Sect. 16. cap. 24.
end only with the harmony of Confessions, where it is said, that the Lords
day ever since the Apostles time was consecrated to religious exercises and
unto holy rest.

CHAP. XXIII. God would have our Lords day religiously observed, and not to be
profaned.
GOd does inform us by his word, by which we find his institution of one day
in a week from the creation (as in the first Treatife have been proved) to be
sanctified to holy uses: we find also the same established by his Law given
on Mount Sinai, as is manifested in the former Treatise: And from the word in
the New Testament, we find one day, the first day of the week, to have been
observed, and the observation continued now this 1600 years: So that one day
in a week has been given to God as sacred and holy for holy rest in his
worship, and for holy duties to be performed publicly and privately, now above
five thousand five hundred and fourscore years, some count 6000, a time long
enough to settle this truth, to observe such a day: and as the holy people in
the former times before Christ kept their day holily, morally, so should we
our day too.

But as God inctrusteth by his word, so does he also by his works; he is said
to speak by the work of his providence: Geness. 24. 50. 51. And when his
judgments are in the Esai. 26. 10.
earth, the inhabitants of the world are to learn righteousness thereby: and
even in this for not observing his holy day; for as before he punished his
people for the profanation of their Sabbath, as the Scripture witnesses in
many places: So has the Lord punished the profanation of our Christian
Sabbath dedicated to his honor, and service, and has pleaded by his
punishments for the sanctification thereof, and to deter men from the
profaning of it.

This we must know that there is no evil in a City but the Lord does it, (to
wit) the evil of punishment; and the same comes for sin, of what nature or
kind soever the judgments be: which are three fold.

1 Immediate judgments wherein Gods hand is clearly seen, which all will
easily acknowledge with fear; Such a judgment was the drowning of the old
world, the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with fire from heaven: So that of
Nadab and Abihu, with the 250 Princes also with fire from heaven; such a
judgment was that of Lots wife turned into a pillar of salt, Miriam and Gehezi
made leprous: such were also the ten plagues of Egypt on Pharaoh, and many
judgments on the Israelites in the wilderness; and on other in Israel, and
Judah afterward.

Secondly, Mediate judgments, which fall out upon men by some instruments, as
by the hand of one man against another, where one is the death of another: but
these are not so deeply laid to heart, as to behold Gods anger therein, as men
are bound to do, yet the Scriptures tells us of such, as Gods very hand in
punishing men for sin, as we may read of the falling out of great friends at
first the Sichemits and Abimelech, Judge. 9. 23. 56, 57.
who at length flew one another, God sending an evil spirit between them to
render upon their heads their wickedness and evil they jointly committed
against the house of Gideon. So happened it with the three Armies of Moab Edom 2
Chr. 20. 22. 23
and Ammon and their gathering together like friends, yet fell out one with
another, to the ruin of themselves, and this is attributed to be Gods hand
upon them.

Thirdly, Judgments commonly called Casual, which happen not seldom, too many
slight, and say, some, tush it was but an accident, as if Gods hand were not in
it. When we read of one killing another at unawares in Number. 35. 22, 23. Deuteronomy.
19. 5. that such a one so killed is delivered by God into the man's hand that
killed him: Exo. 21. 13. By this kind of way came wicked Ahab to his death, 1
Kings 22. 34. even by a man shooting an arrow at an adventure: So Ahaziah his
idolatrous son by falling down through a Lattesse came to his end. 2 Kings
1. 2. and 27000 by the fall a of wall in Aphekr. 1 Kings 20. 30. which no doubt
the Lord overthrew and caused to fall upon them to slay them. And we must know
that casual harms, and death come for sin, so our Savior tells us, Luke 13.
4. that they were sinners on whom the Tower of Siloe fell, though others were
not to judge them the greatest sinners above all: yea, casual losses in
outward things come for sin. 2. Chron. 20. 37.

Therefore be the judgments of God of any kind, they are to be taken notice
of, and we are to make use thereof, to beware of sin, and to repent least we
likewise perish, and not to slight the least casual harm as most do: For
Moses remembers the people of Miriam, and our Savior willed Deuteronomy. 24. 9. Luke
17 32. 1. Cor. 10.
his hearers to remember Lots wife: and Saint Paul sets the examples of the
punishment of the Israelites before the Corinthians, and tells them that these
things happened to them for ensamples, and were written for our admonition.
Wherefore what punishments have heretofore fallen out, or now happen amongst
us, we are to observe them, and lay them to heart; For says the Psalmist, All
men shall fear and declare the work of God, for they shall wisely consider his
doing, Psalm. 64. 9.

That the abuse of this our sacred Lords day, has proked Hem. in Mart. 162. in
Mark. 28. so in Luke Ioh. and Acts Concio. 6. 9. etc.
God to wrath is aknowledged; Gualter says, it is not to be doubted, but that
the profanation of the Lords day is not the least cause of the evils and
calamities of our age. And Bellarmine confesses also that the Disorders,
Dances, Revells, and the like, on the Lords days and other Feastivals, were
the occasion of all public calamities, and judgments, which they suffered; and
reckons up, famine poverty, pestilence, sedition, and concludes thus in
general, all plagues and scourges. Of this sin speaks our late learned King
James, and our now Sovereign King Charles, in the exhortation added to the
books of the two former Fasts, and to this now also, and do with the reverend
Prelates acknowledge that among other sins, the not-keeping holy of the Lords
day, but polluting it, is the cause of the plague breaking out upon us: yea,
our Homily tells us, that God has declared himself much grieved for the
profanation of this day. This is further acknowledged by many learned men, who
have been special observers of the judgments happening as well in times
heretofore, as in our days: which may be reduced to the three heads before
mentioned.

CHAP. XXIV. Of exemplary judgments immediate from God, against the prophaners
of the Lords day.
IN a Council held at Paris, in Anno 829, 800 years ago, the reverend Bishops
there assembled, some by relation, others of their own knowledge, affirm, that
some men following their husbandry, were slain with Lightning and Thunder,
other some punished with a strange convulsion of their joints, and sinews, and
miserably perished for their dishonouring of so great a day.

Gregorius Turonensis, who lived a 1000 years since, in the end of the fifth
Century, or in the very beginning of the sixth, as Bellarmines Chronicle has
it; said, that for the dishonor done to the Lords day in working, fire from
heaven, burned both men and houses in the City of Lomages.

Doctor Beard of Huntington, tells us in his Theater of Discipul. de tempo.
Ser. 117.
Gods jugdements how fire from heaven burned up a worldlings Barn, and all the
grain in it, for conveying his corn on a Sunday in Sermon time out of the
field.

To these may be added many other of the like nature: One would needs, though
diswaded by others, ring an Hog on the Lords day in the morning, but in the
ringing, staggered, fell down, and never spoke more, though he lived eight
days after.

A great man using every Lords day to hunt in Sermon Thea^r. histor.
time, had a child by his wife, with an head like a dog with ears, and chaps,
and cried like an hound.

A Grasiers Servant, would needs drive his Cattle on the Lords day in the
morning, from the Inn where he lay Saturday night, when he might have stayed
in the Inn, but he was not gone a stones cast from the Town but fell down
dead suddenly, though before in good health.

A man on the Lords day though entreated to the contrary by his wife, would
take his Hatchet and Shovell to make an end of his work left before undone: but
he was suddenly struck dead in the ditch and so ended his work and life
together.

One serving a Writ of Sub paena on another, coming from Gods Service on this
day: he after somewords of reproof for so doing, and his light answer thereto,
dyed in the place without speaking more words.

Certain disorderly youths would in despite of the Churchwardens ring on this
day, but the principal Companion, who had gathered them together, was stricken
with giddiness, as if he had been drunk, whilst he was ringing, whereof he
sickned, and dyed of that sickness shortly after.

A scoffer rejoicing at others evils, and the licentious liberty which many
took upon the Lords day, was stricken with a dead palsy, all over one side,
and with blindness, and dumbness, so as he could neither go, see, nor speak:
and lying thus in miserable pain, died within a short time after the stroke of
God upon him.

These few instances may serve for the immediate hand of God upon prophaners of
the Lords day. I pass by, how filthy drunkards have felt the Lords hand
against them on this day.

CHAP. XXV. Of exemplary judgments mediate from God, against the prophaners of
the Lords day.
CHristians in name should be Christians indeed, and one further another unto
goodness, especially on the Lords day, which should be provocative to good
duties, and to the stirring of us up to show the virtue of Christ his
resurrection in us, and our Christian love one to another, as at all times, so
chiefly on this day: but where lusts rule and persons are profane, the Lord
leaves them to themselves, to become his instruments to punish their
profanation of this day; as appears by these examples.

Some on the Lords day would go to Bowls (a forbidden game to the common
sort) at which play two falling out, the one threw a bowl at the other, and
struck him so on the head, as the blood issued out, of which blow he dyed
shortly after.

Certain youths (contrary to the order in the declaration) would go out of
their own Parish on the Lords day, into another to play at Fives, the Mother
of one of these earnestly diswaded him, but go he would, and returning
homewards at night, with his companions, they fell first to justling, after to
boxing, so as their blood being moved one of his fellows stabbed him in the
left side, and so wounded him, as he dyed the next day at night.

At a Wake on the Lords day, among others, two sitting and drinking, till late
at night fell out, but at first they were parted a while, after comes one of
them in again, and seeing the other sitting by the fire, with his back toward
him, comes behind him, and with an hatchet chineth him down the back, so as
his bowels fell out: the cruel murderer flying, and being hotly pursued,
leaped into a river and drowned himself.

A wanton Maid hired on the Lords day, a fellow to go to the next Parish to
fetch thence a Ministrell (not warranted by the Declaration) that she, and
others might Dance: but that night was she gotten with child, which at the
time of its birth, she murdered, and was put to death for the same, confessing
the occasion of her ill hap, to be her profanation of the Lords day.

Upon a Whitsunday in the afternoon two fellows meeting at the Ball (again
not allowed by the Declaration) the one killed the other: Also upon a Lords day
in the afternoon, one with much contempt against his Minister, as appeared by
his words, would take up Cudgells to play with another (a sport not allowed
them) but at the second or third bout, one of his eyes was struck out of his
head.

A fellow drunk at the Church-house where he dwelt, on the the Lords day (a
foul sin both for the time and place) was the next day, so given over of God,
as he became his own executioner, and hanged himself.

One d^^posed to revell-rout, without due bounds of prescribed order, would in
the Church-house keep an Ale on the ^ords-day and other days both night and
day without control: But see the Lords hand, on the Sunday night, his
youngest son was taken for stealing of a purse out of another pocket, while
he lay drunk in the Church-house on the board and that week his eldest son was
by one stabd to death.

A poor man after he had heard a good Sermon (as he said) when he came from
the bar unto a Minister, would go to a Revell (an ill name for Christians
meeting together) into another Parish, where occasionally falling out with one
he killed him; running out of the Churchyard to do the bloody fact, for which
at the next Assisses, he was excuted, lamenting his ill hap, that he could not
tarry at home.

More instances of quarrelling, fighting, and killing of one another, might be
given to terrify men from such sinful ways, and from such profaneness of the
Lords day; especially consecrated to the laud and honor of Jesus Christ our
blessed Lord and Savior.

CHAP. XXVI. Of examples of casual judgments against the Prophaners of the
Lords day.
OF such like judgments as happen as it were at unawares, unexpectedly, I have
given instances in holy writ: And therefore by the recording of them, God would
have us not only to take notice of such, but also to make good use of them, as
the Lord shall direct us in wisdom, in charity, and well-mindednesse so to
do.

For it must indeed be acknowledged that in this sort of judgments the
particular application to particular persons for this and that act is not
easy, but requires prudency of circumspection, and careful observation of
all circumstances concurring to make a true use of them in the application to
others, though not the like difficult in all, nor yet so hard for the parties
upon whom such casual judgments do fall, to apply them home to themselves
for instruction. And therefore have they been observed and recorded: Among
very many, take these few examples.

Famous and memorable is the fall of the Scaffold in Paris garden, where many
were gathered together on the Stowes Chron.
Lords day to see the rude sport of Bear-baiting, the fall whereof flew eight
persons, and many others were hurt and sore bruised.

A great number gathered on this day to see a Play acted Doctor Beard in his
Theater.
in a chamber; the floor fell down, by means whereof many were hurt, and
some killed.

Stratford upon Avon was twice on fire, and both times on the Lords day,
whereby it was almost consumed, chiefly for profaning the Lords day, and for
contemning the word of God out of the mouth of his faithful Ministers. These
two instances are cited by Bishop Bailey.


Teverton, (whose remembrance, says mine Author, made his heart to bleed) was
twice also almost utterly consumed with fire, 400 houses at once in a flame;
and in the first fire were about fifty persons consumed; which was for the
horrible profanation of the Lords day, occasioned chiefly by their
Munday-market. Of the first judgment they were forewarned by their Preacher,
telling them that some heavy judgment God would bring upon the Town, as it
happened, not long after his death.

Two brethren on the Lords day in the forenoone came from a Market-towne to an
Uncle they had, there to dine; after dinner they took horse again, but had not
gone far, but one of the horses fell down dead: who going back again to
their Uncles house, the other horse being put up into the Stable, within an
hour or two after died in the place.

One would ride after dinner on the Lords day, about a worldly business, which
he needed not then to have done; and therefore was diswaded from it, but go
he would, his way was over a bridge, on which when he came, a puff of wind
blew his hat into the river, which he seeking to recover by going into the
river, both he and his horse were drowned, nor could he be found till fishes
had foulely devoured his flesh.

The Magdeburgenses report, that a husbandman grinding his corn on the Lords
day, the meal was set on fire: And it is known to many, that a Millers wife
setting her Mill on going, and she busy in her Mill on the Lords day, in the
morning the Mill-house fell upon her, and killed her; of which by the fall of a
Stone there, but a few days, or but a week before, she had a fair warning
given, yet not making good use of it, she there ended her days.

Fourteen youths adventuring to play at football upon the river of Trent on
the Sabbath day, when it was, as they thought, hard frozen, meeting together in
a shove, the Ice brake, and they were all drowned.

I might here rehearse many more casual judgments of many sorts, which have
happened upon such as have profaned this day. Fires have been kindled, it not
being known how, in time of peoples ryoting on this day, which burnt down many
houses: Some in one place, some in another, on this day some going out to
swim have been drowned: Some riding to merriments (which commonly neglect
divine service) have fallen from their horses and broken their necks: More of
this kind might be rehearsed, but let me conclude with the words of the
Author of the Practice of Piety: If these be not sufficient to terrify thy
heart from the wilful profanation of the Lords day, proceed on in thy
profanation, it may be the Lord will make thee the next example to teach
others to keep his Sabbaths better.

CHAP. XXVII. Of objections which may be, or are made against the produceing of
Judgments in this case; with answers thereto.
AS men's understanding leads them, so are their hearts affected more or
less, seem the thing never so dreadful, or terrifying to our common
apprehensions; as I find in this particular case. Some reject these and other
like relations as fabulous, and so give no credit to them, holding them perhaps
for Piae frauds, as formerly were the Popish legends to move fear in peoples
hearts with telling of tales.

These forementioned examples are none such; it is a foul sin to belly God,
nor need his cause any lies to strengthen it: we live now in a clearer light,
than to be led away altogether with fabulous relations.

Others, because some of the judgments seem casual, and so commonly held in
this very respect, make a tush at the allegation of them: But however some be
apprehended as casual, many being immediate from God, none but the Heathen
Philistimes Priests will judge them mere chances: And for such as be casual,
let us consider, that a Sparrow cannot light on the ground without the will,
and providence of our heavenly Father. And are the hairs of our head numbered?
Certainly then, things which seem most contingent, and such acts as these
judged so casual, must needs fall out by the will of God, and the guidance of
his special providence, and his divine hand. And therefore not to be lightly
passed over with a tush, and slighted as a mere accident without due
observation, and use.

Some think, that there is not much heed to be taken of these judgments
concerning this day, for that the self same may be found to fall out at other
times, and other holidays: And therefore nothing can be concluded more
peculiarly for this day, than for any other, from these judgments.

No doubt, but it may so happen and fall out, that a Drunkard may fall from his
horse and break his neck as well on any other holy day, as on the Lords day: A
Cudgel-player may on another day be hurt, and have his eye struck out as well
as on this day: One may kill another, houses may be on fire, and men by
swimming may be drowned as well at other times, as on the Lords day: The like
accidents may fall alike at all times; for God though he punish the
profanation of his own day with his judgments, yet he reserves not any
special judgments to be inflicted upon Sabbath Breakers, as peculiar to them
for that sin: For if so, men would not thus dispute the case, and slight the
argument; for the judgment would clearly decide the controversy, and put men
to silence. But as I have said, the same punishments may light upon all sorts
of offenders alike at any time: Nevertheless, we may not neglect to take good
notice of Gods hand, not only in general to conceive where such hurts, and
harms happen, that there is sin which has procured it, upon such persons as
vain, and ill disposed (for we are to judge otherwise of afflictions on the
Godly, which happen upon a Job for trial) but also to endeavor to find out
the sin in particular in a sober search and godly humility. And thus much
must we do for the work of Conscience, which stirs not upon an only
generality; but upon knowledge of this or that particular sin applied home to
our selves, upon the breach of some precept: Thus shall we instruct our selves
by observing judgments, to take heed of particular sins.

Now to find out the sin, and the sinner in his sin, which God points
out by his hand upon him.

1 Enquire into the transgression of the Law, for by it comes the knowledge
of sin, which is the transgression of the Law: upon this ground we cannot
miss of the sin.

2 In the next place, ponder seriously all the concurring circumstances
concerning the punishment happening: And here note

1 The notorious qualities of the person upon whom the judgment lights;
whether he be a common swearer, drunkard, fornicator, a despiser of holy
duties, or grossly careless of them. 2 What evil he was saying or doing when
the punishment befell him. 3 Where he was, in what place prohibited. 4 His
intention discovered to be naught, ungodly, or unjust. 5 How he did, or speak
in an evil manner. Lastly, the time is very considerable when any such thing
was done, at what time the judgment happened.

By all these concurring circumstances duly weighed with mature deliberation,
the divine hand may be observed very usefully, even in common, and such as be
called casual accidents: As for instance,

A May Pole set up on the Lords day, falls and kills one; one is set up
upon a holy day in time of divine service, which kills another, as instances
may be given: The first happens for the profanation of the day, because they
brake the divine ordinance of God, who has appointed the observation and
keeping holy of the day: The other, for the profane contempt of Gods divine
service on that other day. To play at football on the Sunday, the example is
fearful of fourteen drowned together playing on the ice, for that they
profaned the day: At Chidlington in the edge of Hertford-shire, not far from
Hitchin, upon an holy day a company of fellows intended a match at football,
some of them were come into the Church, and to call the rest together, one
tolled the Bell; presently it began to thunder, and on a sudden was seen a
black ball to come tumbling down a hill near by, and came directly to the
Church, and there flew into the Bell-Free, and first slew him that tolled the
bell, then flustred about the Church, and hurt diverse; and at last did buise in
sunder, leaving behind it a filthy stinch like to brimstone. Now albeit this
was not on the Lords day, yet were they thus fearfully punished. First, In
plotting an unlawful sport, on that day against the authority of the
Magistrate. Secondly, By making the Church, a consecrated place, their
randevouze. Thirdly, by profanely toling a Bell, the principal use whereof,
was to give notice to the people to come and serve God, and not to draw youths
to vain and unlawful sports. Fourthly and lastly, in purposing to spend the
time, dedicated to sacred uses, in their boisterous, rude, and harmeful
spo^ting.

Thus we see how we may take notice of the judgments for breach of the Sabbath,
though punishments of the like nature, (yea sometimes worse) happen upon other
days. To Conclude this, it is not good to take off our awefull thoughts from
Gods hand, upon breakers of the Sabbath, least we grow presumptuous and fall
into sin, and so procure to our selves the deserved judgments which have
light upon others: And let us consider, how God threats to destory such Psa.
28. 5.
as regard not his works, and the operation of his hand.

Lastly, some are so far from having any regard at all to this argument
drawn from the judgments of God, as they hold the allegation of them, in this
cause, to be impious rashness, impious, and rash presumption, vain
observations, next allied to superstition, yea, a profane kind of
observation: a strangly presumptuous and dareing manner to perke up into Gods
throne, and a taking upon men to read the dark and divine Characters of the
causes of his inscrutable judgments, and an unsufferable arrogance in such as
produce them, making God to bear false witness, foolishly triumphing before
the victory, with saying, Lo the judgments of God, Lo the judgments of the
Lord, out of Heaven, making them speak Gods indignation against the
profanation of the Lords day.

What should move any thus to condemn, and censure such as bring Gods
judgments against the prophaners of the Lords day; They may perhaps better
know with in themselves, than they yet have expressed unto others. If any have
failed in truth of Story, or related examples not to purpose (or what if but
common, and ordinary, yet true yet may examples be memorable, though common and
ordinary; for God makes them so common, because he would not have them
forgotten) or that have put Causam, pro non Causa, they are left to answer for
themselves. For my part, I suppose, without fear of men's forementioned heavy
doom, that we may with lowly reverence, and with an holy awefullnesse of
divine Majesty soberly observe his judgments: and for those Reasons.

First, the Scriptures are full of examples of Gods judgments, to teach us to
observe them now, as then they were: For whatsoever is written, is written for
our learning, according to the nature of the things left us to read, and
understand.

Secondly, Our Savior Christ minded his Hearers of the destruction of the old
world, of Sodom, and of Lots wife to make use thereof for their instruction.

Thirdly, Saint Paul mentions fore-past judgments, not 1. Cor. 10.
to the Jews among whom they happened, but to converted Gentiles, the
Corinthians: He names the sins, and then the punishments, and tells them,
that they were written for ensamples, and for our admonition, that we should
not do as they did. If judgments past, serve for this use, are we not to make
the same use of judgments present, which daily happen among us? I doubt not
but we may, and ought so to do.

Fourthly, The holy Psalmist lays it down as a sin, and threatens
destruction as a punishment, because they regarded not, they did not consider,
nor understood, as the word Psalm. 2^. 5.
signifies, the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands; The like
does the Prophet Esai in his time complain Esaias. 5. 12.
of, they were given to fcastings and wine, and to the Pipe, and other musical
instruments, but they regarded not the work of the Lord, neither Considered the
operation of his hands, as many in our times, and especially on the solemn We
are taught to magnify his work, which men behold. Job 36. 24. Pro. 21. 11.
days, set apart for Gods worship: At which times, if evils befall any of
them, are we slightly to pass them by? Should we not learn by other men's
harms to take out a lesson for our selves? when the Scorner is punished, the
Simple is made wise, says Solomon.

Fifthly, It is a duty, yea, a grace commended in the Godly, Esa. 26. 9. 10.
that they will learn righteousness, when they see the judgments of God in the
earth: but it is clean contrary to the wicked, they will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord, when he (...) them, and when they behold others punished,
yet they ^ill not learn righteousness. Mark, how the Prophet here ^^dgeth
them for wicked, who from judgment; on others, and from his favor toward
themselves, will not learn righteousness.

Sixthly, I have showed that 800 years ago, how the Reverend Prelates at the
Synod in Paris, laid to heart the fearful judgments which befell some, for
the profanation of the Lords day: Gualter, as you have heard, durst aver
boldly, confidently saying, that it was not to be doubted, that the
profanation of the Lords day, was not the least cause of the evils, and
calamities in those times: Bellarmine durst say as much. In the exhortation
added to our Fast-Booke, is it not acknowledged, that the plague happened (among
other sins) for the polluting, and not keeping holy the Lords day? Learned
men from time to time have made Catalogues of such judgments as have happened
upon this day. The Author of the Practice of Piety (a book thirty five times
reprinted, allowed by authority, and dedicated to our Now Dread Sovereign,
when he was Duke of York, and after when he was Prince of Wales) rehearses
many judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, as he calls them, and is bold in the
Conclusion to affirm, that those judgments which he mentions may be
sufficient unto them (whose hearts are not seared) how wrathfully God is
displeased with them, who are wilful prophaners of the Lords day.

What shall we say of all these Reverend Fathers aforetime, of our Reverend
Prelates in their exhortation, of Learned Divines, as well Papists, as
Protestants in their observation of judgments, and applying them for the breach
of the Lords day, that herein they were strangely presumptuous, that their
observation was rash, vain, and impious, and they in so doing deserved to be
censured for insufferable arrogance? now God forbid. I presume, the spirit of
wisdom will not suffer any moderate mind to think it: nor ever did let any
such a condemning censure and deadly doom, pass the pen of any upon them for
so doing. Nor indeed, was there cause, nor yet is, if the judgments be wisely
applied.

For is it not acknowledged by a learned Opposite, that in some cases, it is
lawful to apply particular judgments to particular sins of particular
persons? Then why not in this case, if the case be put right, to wit, for the
profanation of the day, and not hailed and drawn to other by-ends, and
by-respects, not intended in the production of these judgments? For another
learned Opposite says thus, without all question, (whether the observation of
the Lords day stands by virtue of Gods immediate precept in the fourth
Commandment, or otherwise: or only by Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical
Constitution) the profanation of the day (mark the words) must needs be a
grievous sin, and powerfully-attractive of Divine vengeance, seeing it is
acknowledged by all, that in the profanation of that day, both Gods precept
(as far as it is moral in the fourth Commandment) is violated, and the
authority (which God has commanded all Christians to obey) is contemned. If
then the profanation of the day be a grievous sin, and powerfully-attractive
of Divine vengeance, when God lays his hand upon the prophaners of the day,
what lets any sober spirit to apply the judgment?

Gods ways, are not our ways, Esa. 55. 8. says one; true, not in his
mercies, of which the Prophet there speaks; and yet we fear not to apply his
mercies to our comfort, and to the comfort of others.

But the judgments of God are unsearchable, Romans 11. 33. what judgments? such
judgments as we speak of? The Apostle speaks not of the works of his
justice for sin, immediate, mediate, or casual, which happen in the sight of
men, and are so made manifest, and are not unsearchable. But the Apostle by
judgments understands the hidden determinations of Gods means to bring
about the manifestation of his justice, and mercy to this and that people, as
to the Jews, and to the Gentiles; which made the Apostle to cry out, Oh the
depth of the riches of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, etc.

If the sin be manifest, and the punishment visible, here is not an
unsearchable judgment, nor such, his way past finding out. These two places
alleged, that of Esaias for judgments of mercies, and this of the Romans
mis-understood, and mis-applyed to our matter in hand, do not hinder the
applying soberly Gods judgments when they fall out upon men, in their sinful
courses.

Our Savior sufficiently (will some say) takes us off from this rash attempt:
1. In the blind man's case, John 9. 2. In the fall of the tower of Siloam, and
massacre committed on the Galileans: And 3. the whole book of Job serves to
show the folly of vain men.

First, For the place of John 9. concerning the blind man, there is no
application of any judgment by the disciples, they do only ask him a
question, saying, Master, who did sin, this man or his parents? They knew not
the cause, they only supposed, there might be some sin, in the one, or in the
other, why the man was borne blind: Our Savior answers them, and directs
their thoughts to an higher consideration upon the occasion of his healing: but
he condemns them not of any rashness as in some other cases he did, when
sometimes they asked him a question. This text taxes not the sober minded for
observing sins, and applying of judgments, when they happen.

Secondly, Concerning, Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. it is to as little purpose: for
here some tell Christ of that which befell the Galileans, and our Savior
himself brings in the fall of the tower: but here is no mention of the
peoples apprehending of any sin, for which they might apply to them the
judgments: nor does our Savior find fault with them for any such conceit:
but he only makes a supposition, if any thought them to be the greatest
sinners above all others that dwelt in those places, they erred in so thinking,
and taught them the right use thereof, to wit, to repent, least they themselves
should perish: This Text is against such as rashly judge such to be the
greatest sinners, who perish by either mediate, or casual judgments; but who
do so judge of those whom God has punished for profaning his day? for my
part I know none of so presumptuous a spirit: we speak of the sin, we apply
the judgment, and desire men to make the use thereof, which Christ does here,
to repent, that they may not likewise perish; and this we have warrant to do.

Thirdly, for the whole book of Job, which is said to serve for this purpose,
to show the folly of vain men, presuming to particularize the footsteps of
the Lord, as if he proceeded in justice according to our fancies. I answer,
all might well have been spared in this matter, for it makes nothing against
the observation, and application of Gods judgments, against the profanation
of the Lords day. Job was a very holy man, his friends could not convince him
of any open crime: and yet for the strange manner of Gods afflicting him, they
rashly condemned him. They reasoned from Gods hand upon him, to make him
guilty of foul offenses, which they could not justly tax him of, for which
Elihu reproves them: But we reason from the sin, the profanation of the
day, (which is acknowledged a grievous sin) to the punishment, that God is
offended, and therefore the sin to be a avoided. In this, is neither folly, nor
we vain men, nor led by fancy, nor do we darken counsel by words without
knowledge, for Job 33. 2.
which God reproved Job, not Elihu for finding fault with Job; for Elihu his
reprehension of Job was sound, and good, Job 42. 3.
against which Job made no reply.

Oh, but yet some may say, if it be denied, that either the evil inflicted is
a judgment, or that it was for this (to wit, the profaning of the Lords day)
inflicted, we are forthwith put to shame, and silence.

Sooner said than proved: Can any deny the evil befallen to be a judgment?
For the better understanding hereof we must know the word judgment to be
taken, two ways; First, for the extraordinary vindicative Justice, the
dreadful revenging hand of God, in his wrathful vengeance, plaguing some
notorions wicked ones, as the Sodomites, Egyptians, Jehoram the son of
Jehoshaphat with a rotting disease incurable, so that he stank above ground,
and the like; Secondly, for ordinary punishments, which may happen to any, so
as the word judgment taken in 1 Cor. 11. 29. where the word translated
damnation is (...), judicium, judgment: so also in 1 Pet. 4. 17. it is used
for any kind of punishment which God infflicts upon men for sin: In this later
sense the evil befalling the Sabbath Breakers, is a judgment, and a due
deserved punishment, as the word is expounded by the learned in Gal. 5. 10.
Shall not fire from heaven, thundering and lightning, by which some have been
killed, be held a judgment? was not the fall of Paris-gardens Scaffold, which
hurt and killed so many, a judgment? These and other evils happening, such as be
before mentioned, have been held to be judgments; and why any should deny them
to be so now, they give no reason, nor indeed, can they, if they take the word
judgment aright, as in this case some Opposites do; who affirm that
irreligious contempt of Gods ordinances, appointed on this day, by the Church,
and law of the Land, may pull down Gods judgments: yea, that if this day were
changed into another, there would be as exemplarie judgments of God from heaven
against this kind of ungodliness of men, as ever were in any ages upon the
Lords day. It is no shame we see to call them judgments.

And we may without shame say that these evils befell them for profaning the
Lords day, and not keeping it holy. Our Church in the Homily, and in the
forementioned exhortation, the Fathers in that Synod, and learned men have
averred as much, whose affirmation may be opposed to any private man's negation,
if we had no reason to strengthen the assertion. But is it not granted that the
profanation of the day is a grievous sin? And does not the fourth Commandment
impose a moral duty, which is to keep holy the day of rest? The
sanctification of the day is imposed upon us, and this are we pressed to
remember. Let the day be what it will, appointed by divine authority, as our
Lords day is acknowledged to be, we are to keep it holy. To keep the day set
apart by a divine institution, holy, is the maine substance of the fourth
Commandment, and a moral duty: And therefore the not keeping holy the Lords
day, but polluting it, is a sin, against the fourth Commandment, and the
breach of a moral duty, and therefore for this did the evils befall those,
that profaned the day.

But some will peradventure say, that it was the profanation, and irreligious
contempt of Gods ordinances appointed upon this day by our Church, and the
laws of ^he land (sins highly provoking Gods wrath) (...) brought such evils
upon them.

It may be so, for vain and profane enough are (...) persons, with whom the
Lord is displeased, who may add one sin to another, to the profaning of the
day, an irreligious dis-regard of holy duties, with dis^bedience to Authority:
but this sin makes not the other to ^^ no cause of the evils happening to
them, but serves rather the more to aggravate the other sin, and so more
speedi^y to hasten their judgment.

And to this, some, it may be, will add an other cause, to wit, the
licentiousness of such, as have bin punished, swarving from those dirrections
and limitation prescribed to them.

I will not deny this neither, for certain it is, that almost all the
instances which lately have been given, are of those which have run out
beyond their bounds in the Declaration: and no marvel for such as care not for
Gods Commandments, will easily transgress the limits prescribed by man* But
yet here is no discord in the assignment of the cause of their punishment, the
profanation of the day: for in one and the same action, where God is
dis-obeyed, the Church dis-regared, and authority neglected; and for all this
together the parties punished, yet the principal cause is the sin against
God: as in this cause it is clear enough.

Nevertheless, some cannot peradventure be satisfied with all this, that it is
lawful to apply these judgments to particular persons, except certain rules
be observed herein, such as themselves lay down for guidance in the same.
These rules I will write down, and then give answer to them as I may. The
rules which I find laid down for this purpose are these following.

1 Rule.
We must have either extraordinary revelation of the punishments for the sin,
of which now there is no expectation in the wise: or immediately by the word
we must find those particular sins threatened with those particular judgments,
which we see to be executed upon them.

Sometime we find in Scripture particular judgments threatened for some
particular sins, which some have committed, and been punished for. But there
be above a thousand sins mentioned in Scripture, and five hundred of them
without any particular threatening added. This rule is not always observable.
We see several kinds of punishments inflicted for some particular sins,
which were not threatened before, to light upon the offenders. Uzziah for
attempting to offer incense, was smitten with an incuble Leprosy: Nadab and
Abihu were burnt with fire from heaven for their sin: Ananias and Saphira for
their lying to the Holy Ghost killed immediately in the place: Jeroboams arm
withered for stretching it out against the Prophet: Amaziah for silencing a
Prophet, given over to seck his own overthrow: Judas for betraying Christ left
to be his own executioner: Herod eaten with worms for his finne, yet none of
these particular judgments were threatened for these particular sins.

What therefore though we have no threatening that God would punish profaneness
on this day with such particular judgments as have befallen them; must we not
think those evils to have happened to them for that sin? A sin deserves
punishment, but what way and how God will punish, that he reserves to
himself, and seldom has revealed it, though sometimes as we see by Nathan to
David, 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12. and by Moses to the Israelites, against Korah and his
company, Numb. 16. 30.

2 Rule.
That which we suppose to be punished, must be truly, and indeed a sin, and
not a point disputable, but recreations on the Lords day, whether lawful, or
unlawful, are disputable: and therefore without unsufferable arrogance we
cannot apply the evils happening as judgments for sin.

No truth is so clear, but by agitation, siding, and exercise of wit, may
become disputable. This might be showed in many things evident enough, till
they come into question. The morality of the fourth Commandment was heretofore
very manifest, and the keeping holy the Sabbath day was of the morality, and
the not-keeping holy the Sabbath day, but polluting it, was a sin. The Lord
in the old Testament threatened to punish, and did severely punish the breach of
that Law; and the same sin he yet punishes in some, though not in all that
profane the Lords day, observed of us Christians, as our Christian Sabbath, as
has been proved.

If these judgments come not for the profanation of the day, (as before I
showed it has been acknowledged) wherefore has God so long, and so often laid
his hand on many? If God be not provoked to anger, he will do us no hurt.
Ier. 25. 6. He does not willingly afflict nor greive us. Lam. 3. 33. Therefore
when he does hurt, and afflict these vain, loose, and licentious sort of
persons on this day, what sin (for they do sin) evidenced by Gods hand
against them, what sin, I say, may we suppose it to be, but their
profaneness? and if the case be so doubtful as some would make it, yet
whether is it not better to make this use of these judgments, to sanctify the
day with due reverence, rather than in doubtful case to take our pleasurable
liberty? for the rule is good, Quod dubitas, ne feceris, for so we are sure not
to sin.

3 Rule.
That we find it by observation to have ever been, and continually, or for the
most part so.

What sin is there that may agree with this rule, that has ever, and
continually, or for the most part some judgment to set it out by, and by which
it may be discovered? For as an Opposite in this our case, says, are there not
thousands (more is the pity) that profane the Lords day in greater measure,
than any of those in whom instances have been made, which never felt any
exemplary evil? So may I say of many other sins, and sinful men wallowing
in their filthiness; where find we that ever and continually, or for the most
part, that vengeance suffers not a murderer to live? Have not many lived, and
do not many live guilty of blood? has ever, and continually, and for the most
part, the drunkard, the glutton, the adulterer, the cruel extortioner, and the
like wicked ones, been made exemplary by judgments upon them, that any should
expect ever, continually, or for the most part, judgments upon Sabbath
breakers?

But it is a pretty cunning for men to devise rules out of their own brains,
and lay them down as Maxims to try their Adversaries tenants by, and to
reject them as not sound, because they agree not to their crooked rule.

Yet concerning the matter in hand let me say thus much, the so frequent
accidents as some call them in so great variety, and happening so thick
together in many places, may work amazement, and do answer better to the
rule, than what other sin with following judgments upon the offenders may be
produced: It is said, (and but said,) that such accidents fall out as
frequently upon other days: Let them that so say be pleased to take the pains
to observe, and gather a Catalogue, and present them to the view of the world
to give satisfaction.

4. Rule.
When the sinner is taken in the very manner, the Lords hand may be observed
therein, the sin cooperating with the judgment, either naturally, or
morally.

When the sin, and the judgment meet together, it is very certain, that the
judgment then points out the sin, which is at that time committed, to be the
cause of that punishment. Whilst Vzzah was laying his hand upon the Arc, he
was struck dead, therefore the touching of the Arc, was the cause of the
judgment: Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, and whilst they were
offering, fire from heaven Number. 10. 1. 2.
light upon them, therefore the offering strange fire was the cause why this
fire from above was sent down upon them. Plagues fell upon the Philistimes
whilst they detained 1. Sam. 5.
the Ark therefore the withholding the Ark was the sin which made God so to
plague them, and was not a Chance. Jehoshaphat joined himself with Ahaziah to
make ships to go to Ophir for gold, but were broken at Ezion-Geber, which 1.
Kin. 22. 48. 49
casual cross befell him for that sin as appears by the use Jehoshaphat
made of it afterward, for he made not a tush of it but refused to join any
more with Ahaziahs servants: the Prophet also applied that casual punishment
to that sin. The Holy Prophet did not lightly reckon of such a hand of God, but
was taught by the Lord to observe it, and to apply 2. Chr. 20. 37.
it to the particular sin. Many other instances might be brought to confirm
this truth if need were out of the Scriptures. Therefore this being a rule
certain, then the hand of God may be observed against our Sabbath Breakers;
for their prophanations did cooperate to the hurt of many, and to the death of
some: They were punished in their acts and deeds doing. It is not the
questioning to make the matter doubtful, that can overthrow the rule laid, nor
sickness, nor death happening when any are about a good thing; for the good
thing, co-operateth not with the sickness, nor with the death following:
preaching and praying procure not hurts, nor evils, and therefore cannot be
produced fitly for this case, to take the sober mind off from observing Gods
punishments upon such as we speak of in this discourse.

It is a truth undeniable, that the true estimation of things dependes not upon
the events or accidents following it: for where the acts be apparently good,
the ill events and accidents concurring, cannot make the good to become evil,
nor to be so judged in any wise man's understanding, nor the party afflicted to
be judged ill of, in his good act, by men charitably-minded. But on the
contrary, if evil events, and ill accidents meet with ill deeds, there the
offenders may without the breach of Charity, be judged to be justly punished.
And I suppose that evil events and ill accidents, happening very often where
acts be done which be ill, in great probability, may probably witness Gods
displeasure against such as so do evil without profanely making the Lord to
bear false witnsse with us in such a case.

5.
For the rule of retaliation, it is not applyable to our purpose, and therefore
I pass it by, as neither furthering, nor hindering the cause in hand. Though
upon the Lords day God may proceed against profane men by retaliation, as for
instance known to my self to be a truth: A lewd fellow tall and strong, in a
Market Town upon a Lords day drinking in an Alehouse with his fellow, they
fell out about sprink^ing of the Cup with an Orenge-pill, and were so in^aged,
as this big fellow wounded the other deadly, whereupon he fled into the
Low Countries; a year after the self same day twelvemonth on the Lords day,
in the same Town returned he home; as soon as he was come, one skillful in
fencing (but a little fellow) would go and drink with him, and in drinking,
they two quarrelled about the sprinkling of the Cup with an Orenge-pill, who
could do it best; but when the little fellow stood upon his skill, the other
said, that if he durst say he could sprinkle it either better, or as well as
he, he he would fight with him, the other apt enough thereto they agreed,
fourthwith into the field they went taking their swords; the little fellow
after a few bouts, ran the other quit thorough, who being tall, closed with
him, and stuck his sword in the little fellows back, and broke it, whilst the
sword was in his own body, and then fell down and dyed in the place, the other
went back into the Town, but dyed also that day.

6 Rule.
The conscience of the sinner is many times a good directer to point out to us
that cursed thing: If so, then what shall we say in this case? for diverse
Prophaners of the Lords day, have upon their hurts felt withal the accusation
of conscience, and acknowledged, that those harms befell them for doing such
things as they did on the Lords day. Some dying bewailed their sins, others
living made good use thereof, and herein reformed themselves, of which examples
may be brought to make this good.

From all this which has been delivered, it may appear I hope that it is not
rash presumption, nor any vain, and profane observation, to take notice with
reverence of the immediate, the mediate, and casual judgments which happen
upon the Lords day, for the better stirring of us up to the sanctification of
the whole day, with readiness of will, to the honor of our Lord Jesus, so it
be without superstition, and hypocrisy; which such as understandingly know to
observe the day aright, are far from both in their intention and practice.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the serious ponderation of these things.
CHristian Reader, that love thine own soul, lay aside all prejudice in the
cause, labor for selfedeniall, and be in love with the truth: Behold the
Primitive times, weigh the records of our Church, the care of Emperors, and
Kings, take notice of the Decrees of Counsels, and Synods, the judgment of
the learned in the Church, both the Ancient and Modern, the many to the few of
a contrary mind, and lay to heart these several kinds of Gods judgments, by
all which we may see, what God, and all good men, would have us to do, and
what to avoid on this day without any Judaizing at all; For we do not put, as
the Jews did, holiness in the day, as holy in it self, but as a day set
apart by divine authority, for holy duties: Nor do we make our rest holy, but
in the use of it requisite to holy performances of the sacred duties of the
day: for without cessation from our own profits and pleasures, we cannot apply
our selves to Divine Services; and therefore it being both as a means to take
us off, from the hindrances of holy duties, as also a furtherance to the
exercises of holiness, which on this day are publicly and privately to be
performed, we press the keeping of a Rest: If we be well understood, I suppose
none would say, we did Judaize, nor call us by the new reproachful name of
Sabbatarians: we hold no more for restraint, than holy men have done in former
ages. Doctor Heylin does tell us that the fifth and sixth Centurie were fully
bent to give the Lords day all fit honor, not only in prohibiting all
unlawful pleasures, but in commanding a forbearance of some lawful
businesses, such as they found to be most hinderance to religious duties. S.
Augustine long before, allowed on the Lords day no wandering about woods, and In
Sermon. de tempo. 251.
fields, with noise and clamours, no telling of tales, no playing at dice, nor
dancing on this day: yea, he finds fault, that whilst they rested from a good
work, the work of their calling, they rested not from vain and trifling works,
as if (says he) one time of the day were set apart to the Service of God, and
the rest of the day and the night, to their own pleasures. Tertullian, before
him tells us, how holily the Sabbath was kept after the breaking up of the
Congregation, as before has been delivered. And it is worthy to be marked out
of Doctor Heylin, though he make mention of recreations, cap. 3. page 84. and
cap. 4. page 123. in his History of the Sabbath; yet has he not produced any
one testimony of any one Father for the now conceit of Christian liberty
concerning recreations, of which he says, after dinner until Evening Prayer,
and after Evening Prayer until the time of Supper, there is no question to be
made, but all were practiced, which were not prohibited: But had there been
proofs, he surely would have produced one Father or other for them. But come
we now to our Opposites, See before Mr. Brerewood.
and see what they say for us without Judaizing, and instead of all the rest, I
take only here the learned, Bishop White, who says thus, so farreforth as
secular labor, and Page 226. 227. 261.
pastime, or recreation, are impediments to sacred and religious duties public
or private to be performed upon holy days, they are to be avoided, and
abstinence from them must be used according to the equity of divine law, and
the precept of the Church, otherwise they are sacrilegious (citing Cyrill for
his purpose) because they are means to rob God of his honor, and to hinder
the spiritual edification of Christian people; and because abstinence from
labor, and from recreation upon the holy day is subservient to the exercise of
religious duties; and on the contrary, secular labor, and pastime, are
impediments thereunto, and if they be acted at such times, as the precept of
God, and the Church prohibit, they are prophanations of Gods holy day: The same
learned Father in another place in his book against Braborn, says, that
because the Lords day, and other holy days are devoted to the Service of God,
and appointed to the exercise of religious and spiritual duties; Christian
people are to perferre their religious offices of those days before their
wordly pleasures, and profit, and the more observant they are hereof, the more
they please God, if other actions of their life, be suitable to their devotions:
yea, he says further (and so much as we may say, and no more) that devout
Christians, who are so piously affected, as that upon the Lords day, and other
holy days, they do resolve to sequester, and retire themselves from secular
businesses, and ordinary pleasures and delights, to the end they may more
freely attend the service of Christ, and apply their minds to spiritual and
heavenly meditations, are to be commended, and encourged: For the doing
thereof, is a work of grace, and godliness, pleasing and acceptable to God:
for which he quoteth, Col. 3. 2. Joh. 6. 27. Cor. 15. 50. Secondly, we must
strive to do by grace, what we cannot do by nature, else we shall never do
at any time true service to God, according to any of his Commandments.
Thirdly, God must not loose his right of service from us, because we have
procured to our selves wretched natures, soon weary of all spiritual duties.
Fourthly, lazy servants can hardly undergo any labor, much less to hold out
a day, yet the awe they bear to their earthly Masters makes them to do it:
so should Gods fear move us to this. Fifthly, Imperfections through corruption
of nature are one thing, for they be in the best: but to nourish them, and
willingly to yield unto them, is another: I cannot do what I ought by nature,
will I therefore not endeavor to do what I should do by grace? God forbid.
Sixthly and lastly, let me ask any pious heart, any conscionable Christian, why
should men be more indulgent to weak nature, yielding to flesh and blood, in
and about the fourth Commandment, for keeping of a day wholly to him, than in
and about our whole service and obedience to any of the other nine? Seeing God
has made his displeasure so remarkable in many judgments against
Sabbath Breakers, both aforetime under the Law, and now since under the Gospel.

Let me again ask, is there any true Christian and lover of Jesus, but will
out of conscionable and mature deliberation approve of such a pious and
heavenly observation of the day, as the before mentioned reverend father
speaks of, yea and count them most happy that could delight themselves in so
heavenly a manner, for the only honor and glory of Christ?

If so, then let me once more be bold here to ask: First, why are any derided,
mocked, and abused with the opprobrious name of Sabbatarians, who seek thus to
extol and magnify the Lord of life without Jewish superstition? Secondly, why
should any be offended with the endeavor in any to keep strictly the day,
though they cannot attain to the perfection of it? seeing it is not
reprehensible; no Scripture against it, no Fathers reproving it, no Council
condemning it, nor any holy men censuring it, as Judaizing in any age, since
the glorious Ascension of Jesus Christ? Thirdly, why may not men be taught
thus to do? why may they not be exhorted to put to their best endeavoures to
attain unto it in the best manner they can, so it be without superstition and
putting any holiness in the day it self? Fourthly, why should we not on this
day, one day in the week, give Christ all the glor^ we can possibly, in our
love to him, and most solemnly show it forth to the further gracing and
magnifying of his name? If any be desirous to answer these questions, let them
first turn their thoughts to Christ, and hearken then what conscience will
say, and thereafter make their answer.

CHAP. XXIX. Concerning sports unlawful at all times, much more on the Lords
day; and why sports lawful at other times, are on this day to be forborne;
with some objections made, and answers to the same.
COncerning sports, games, and pastimes, it is agreed See Master Benham his
Society of Saints page 160. 176. his religious and l^rge d^scourse about sports
and recreations.
upon, that they are not all of one sort: Therefore let us consider what those
be which are to be forborne on the Lords day.

1 All sinful vanities, which be unlawful by Gods word, as foolish talking,
and jeasting, Ephesians. 5. 4. Idle words, Mat. 12. 36. corrupt communication, Ephesians.
4. 29. toying wantonness, Romans 13. 13. Compotations, excess of wine, or
strong drink, lasciviousness, either in words, songs, gesture, or action,
banquettings, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Revellings reckoned among the sins of the flesh,
which seclude from heaven, Gal. 5. 29. and practiced amongst the Heathen, and
condemned by S. Peter, as Heathenish, with other sins accompanying 1 Pet. 4. 3.
it, 1 Pet. 4. 3. Ryoting, Romans 13. 13. These so condemned by God himself,
none may use at any time, and much less on the Lords day, or any holy day: And
yet if our pastime-followers be withheld from all these, their rude sporting
would be no delight to them: For the common Rusticks do horribly defile
themselves with these things, as the fruits declare in their drunkenness,
fighting, quarrelling, bastard-breeding, and the like, besides murders
committed sometimes.

2 All sports, games, pastimes, and pleasures, which be made unlawful by the
Laws of our Land, and Canons of our Church, are not to be used at other times,
then not on the Lords day, by the rude vulgars and common multitude, who are
prohibited, first all Beare-baiting, Bull-baiting, Interludes, common Plays,
Bowling, Diceing, Carding, Tables, Coits, Cailes, Luggets, Shove-groat,
Football, Fencing, and all meetings out of their own parishes on the Lords
day, for any sports or pastimes whatsoever. Secondly, All such sports and
pleasures as cannot be done, but by such persons as are prohibited to wander
abroad, and by the Law judged to be vagabonds, and wandering rogues: such be
Jugglers, Fortune Tellers, Fencers, Gypsies, Players, Pipers, Harpers, and
wandering Minstrels, Players upon Tabors, and Timbrels, Soldiers tossing the
pike, going as wanderers to get money on this day. Thirdly, all pleasures in
prohibited places, as Gaming-houses, Bowling-alleys, and Tipling-houses.
Fourthly, all sports whatsoever in the Church or Churchyard forbidden by the
Canons of our Church in those places; and here, methinks, the reason is good,
if sports and plays pollute an holy place, then sports and pastimes pollute an
holy time.


3 All sports, games, plays, pastimes, and pleasures, as have been condemned
by the consent of ancient Fathers, Imperial Constitutions, edicts of pious
Kings, by the learned Fathers, and Divines in Counsels and Synods, and many
grave and worthy Clerks, Protestants, and Papists, have spoken against it, in
honor and due reverence to their persons, and learned judgments, we should
forbear on the Lords day: For that in other things they are much regarded,
their judgments are approved, and their authorities alleged. And may it not
seem reasonable unto us in this thing, which men acknowledge to be only matter
of recreation, to condescend unto them? especially considering that no ancient
Father, no Council, no Synod, can be produced for allowance of sports, games,
plays, and pastimes to be used upon the Lords day: nor can be exercised on
this our Lords day within the bounds of the Apostolical rules, made by the
holy direction of Gods spirit, for the use, and practice of indifferent things
which may not be done to greive another uncharitably, Romans 14. 15. nor whereby
another may stumble, be offended, or made weak, verse 21. 1 Cor. 8. 13. For we
must give no offense, 1 Cor. 10. 32. nor must we look what simply in it self
is lawful, but what is convenient, or expedient, or profitable, 1 Cor. 6. 12.
and 10. 23. and that the same be to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31. These
rules are holy and heavenly, and bind the Conscience though upon conceit of
Christian liberty, few make conscience of observing them, when yet
notwithstanding, the Christian liberty which some talk of, if it be not rather
licentious looseness, is either restrained within the limits of these rules;
Of which the Apostle Saint Paul made great Conscience; 1 Cor. 8. 13.
but many in these days make a very jest and mock of, as too precise, a
nicitie, and a loss of Liberty. What the sports, games, pastimes and pleasures
be, which the Fathers have declaimed against, what the edicts of Kings and
Emperors have disanulled, what Counsels and Synods have decreed against, and
what Learned and Godly men have both written and spoken against, have been
before set down, to which I add here Concilium Antisiodorense in Anno 614. a
thousand years since, at which were 45 Bishops and others of the Clergy,
learned men, who did forbid, and expel public dancing of women: Synodus
Turonensis in Anno 158^. prohibited on the Lords day, rioting, public Feasts,
Galliards, Dancing, Clamours, Morices, Hunting, Hawking, to serve wine or
victuals in Innes, or victualling houses, to any but strangers, the playing of
Prize, Comedies, Tragedies, and other spectacles. In France, in the reign of
Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, all dancing was prohibited under pain
of imprisonment: For what does dancing produce in the rude vulgars, but
lascivious wantonness, and the fruit, the begeting of bastards, and sometime
thereupon has ensued unnatural murders by Mothers, thereby thinking to hide
the former sin: Of which there be too many examples, and of which one instance
before of one gotten with child on the Lords day at night, after dancing.

4 All sports may well be judged to be forborne on the Lords day, which God
has by his hand showed his displeasure against, upon the actors on this day:
for the reverence we owe to God, in beholding his handy work by which he
lessons us, and gives us instruction; if it be not to observe the day better,
to what then? if we shall make this use of it, I am sure we do not offend.
Thus we see what sports are on this day to be laid aside; And if so, I hope
well, the day will be better employed of many.

Let it not be offensive to any that I propound these Reasons to their pious
considerations, to leave their pastimes this day.

1 The Scripture forbidding the doing of our own ways, finding our own
pleasures, and speaking of our own words Esaias. 58. 13. By our own he does
mean what we do please to do, or speak without warrant from him, of our own
heads, from our own worldly or carnal desires, for all this is properly our
own: But if we do what God commandes, Heb: 4. 10. Judge. 2. 19.
and what he warrants us, that is not properly our own, but Gods: For in the
former we do serve our selves, and are our own: in this we serve God, and are
his. This scripture is the only place in holy writ which teaches us how to
keep a Sabbath spiritual unto God, by teaching first what to avoid, and then
what we should be taken up with, on this day (to wit) with an honorable
esteem of the day, in considering whose day it is, Gods holy day; then what
delight we take in it, as a Sabbath day, and count it honorable, and so do
him honor, showing that we delight our selves in the Lord, verse 14. This text
speaks first, of nothing
proper to the Jews, but what is common to us, in keeping our Christian
Sabbath with them. And therefore the Prophet does mention only the Sabbath
day, and not their seventh day. Now Christ is still Lord of the Sabbath, Matt.
12. 2. Here is nothing spoken but what is durable for ever, in keeping an holy
day to the Lord: which is, First, That the day be held an holy day. Secondly,
That it be of the Lord. Thirdly, That it be a rest day. Fourthly, That we
delight in it and esteem it honorable. Fifthly, That on this day we honor
him, not doing what we please, but forsaking our selves, do what he would have
us to do, and so to manifest our delight to be, that day in the Lord: In all
which I would feign know what is there that does not belong to us in keeping
our Christian Sabbath? Thirdly, the scope of the Prophet tends as well to us,
as to them: for as in the former part of the Chapter, he had labored to
reform the abuse in their Fasts, so here the abuse in their Jewish keeping of
the Sabbath externally in an outward service, and rest, mixing withal their
own ways, pleasures, and speeches, but did not keep it as holy to the Lord, in
a spiritual manner, with delight to honor God, as they ought to have done.
Does not this tend to the reformation of keeping our Sabbath, as most do, as
the Jews did theirs, externally, mixed with our own ways, pleasures, and
speeches, but not internally with a spiritually delight in the Lord? Therefore
this Text is fitly urged by our Learned Divines for the religious observation
of our Sabbath day.

2 The force of the fourth Commandment, is yet of continuance, and binds us,
as in the former Treatise has been proved, on our Lords day; and first to a
rest, then to the employment of that rest to an holy use, and so to keep the
day holy. But sports and pastimes are not (to speak properly) any rest, nor are
they any holy duties for which we rest, thereby to keep the day holy to God:
Therefore to be forborne this day.

3 It is reasonable in all equity, to give God one day wholly to him for
spiritual worship and service, and for the spiritual good of our own souls
for ever, who has given us six whole days for our own service, and for our
outward and worldly estate concerning our bodies, which be here but for a time:
why should we then grudge to forbear sports for one day, denying God his own
right, and our poor souls their spiritual good, for to satisfy the corrupt
mind with corporal delights on this day?

4 The liberty of sports, pleasures, and pastimes, on this day, steal away
the heart from God in time of Divine Worship: The thoughts of these pleasures
choke the seed of the Luke 8. 14. On the fourth Commandment.
word, for pleasures as well as worldly cares choke them, says Saint Luke, and
more too, says Learned Bishop Downham, for nature, says he, presses youth
more to pleasure, than others to their wordly profits. So that the thoughts of
them do not only hinder in time of hearing, but does quite take away the
heart, from after-meditation, private prayer, and conference, without which
hearing for the most part becomes fruitless. Now if this liberty were
restrained, and they set to singing of Psalms, and other Christian, and
heavenly recreations (as Durand before calls them) they knowing whereto they
should hold, they would be more attent in the Church, and better exercised out
of it: especially, if they were made to know, that not to serve the Lord God
with joyfulnesse, and with gladness of heart, does not a little anger, and
provoke God to wrath, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

5 If sports, and pastimes have any allowance from God, it is either Legally or
Evangelically. But not Legally, for the letter of the Law binds strictly: Not
Evangelically, for albeit the rigor of the Law, be mitigated by the Covenant
of grace, and we by Christ freed from the curse thereof, yet nevertheless we
are tied in love, and in thankfulness to the uttermost of our power, withal
our hearts, minds, souls, and strength, to serve him, and to take the benefit
of such times, as be set apart for his glroy, and worship, and to be taken up
therein with spiritual delight in such service to the Lord our God. For grace
is more binding by the Gospel upon the regenerate, than the Law can be
forceable upon natural men: If therefore the Law does not admit of idle sports
on the Sabbath, then much less the Gospel, which does more enlarge our hearts
with the love of Christ, and more forceably takes us off from making any
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, if in truth it be
powerfully in us.

6 All sports, and pastimes on the Lords day are to be forborne, whilst the
lawfulness and unlawfulness is in question by the most judicious and greatest
Divines at home and abroad, and the same not decided for lawful, by any of the
Fathers, Counsels, or Synods, but rather held unlaw^ull: for in such a case to
forbear is safe without sin, but if any one shall sport, play, or use
pastimes, on this day, must either side with the one sort, or with the other,
and yet unresolved, because the controversy stands undetermined by some
indifferent Umpire, or he does presume of his own knowledge, to be able to
judge in such a doubtful case, to lead his conscience to do such things,
which is both too high a conceit, and very dangerous, or else is daringly
overbold in love to sports and pastimes to follow his pleasure and will, whilst
his conscience must needs remain in suspense and doubting, which is no little
sin, Romans 14. 23. and is no small sign, that such a one is a lover of
pleasure more than a lover of God, in that he dares to attempt the wounding of
conscience, and the breaking off of his sweet peace between God and him, by so
short a time of carnal delights: For acts in doubtful cases cannot be without
sin, and to sport with sin is folly, which without pardon is the souls
deadly wound, and destruction of the whole man.

7 Nothing is more warrantable to be done on this day, and on this our day
under the Gospel, than was on their day under the Law; understanding the Law in
its original, and set apart from the accessory precepts added thereto, and
durable only for a time. But under the Law, no sports or pastimes for corporal
pleasure were allowed on their Sabbath day; and therefore to be forborne on
this day: For, concerning sports on their Sabbath, we read not in any place of
the old Testament, either for allowance or practice thereof. Indeed, we read in
Exodus 32. 6. 18, 19. of eating, drinking, and rising up to play, singing, and
dancing; but it was upon a day made for the service of the golden Calfe, and
honor thereof, but condemned by S. Paul 1 Cor. 10. 7. and greivously punished
by the command of Moses, Exodus 32. 28. we also read (but when there was no King
in Israel, Judge. 17. 1. and 18. 1. and 19. 1. and 21. 25.
and when every one did that which seemed good in his own eyes) that the
daughters of Shilo, on a Festival day of the Lord, came out in dances, Quod
erat, says Peter Martyr on this place, Die Festo abuti: Neither do we read,
that it was a mixed dancing of men and women together, as our dances pleaded for
commonly be, contrary to all the instances in holy writ. We may also hear what
that learned Bishop White tells us, how the Rabbis out of the Page 138.
Talmud affirm, that it was permitted young people to recreate and sport
themselves upon some part of the Sabbath, with running, leaping, or dancing,
provided that it be in honor of the Sabbath: Note this well, then not for
mere
corporal recreation, as our youths use their sports. But what credit can be
given to these late Rabbis? For it is well known, that the Jews in the time
of the Fathers, became prophaners of their Sabbaths, by revelling, and the
like, as learned Doctor Prideaux witnesses; and therefore their example not to
be imitated or regarded.

8 Needlessely to do on the Lords day, what may (if out propably) hazard
sinning, and so the provoking of God to anger, is a great presumption that the
hearts of such are not possessed with that holy fear, which makes men ever
jealous of their doings, lest peradventure they should at any time offend God.
But for such to sport on the Lords day, as have vigor, strength, and health,
to express the bodies activity in their pleasurable delights (for of such the
controversy only is) it is needless, whether you respect their bodies, or
their minds, and spirits. And therefore of such are sports to be forborne
this day.

1 They are not needful for the body: If the body has lost any strength by
weekly labor, stirring sports, and pastimes which are commonly performed with
violent motion, cannot repair the lost strength. First, they are not the
ordinary means appointed by God for recovery thereof, but wholesome food, quiet
rest, moderate sleep, good physic, and the like, as the cause shall require.
Secondly, sports, and pastimes are commonly so violently pursued, as men's
bodies grow thereby the more weary, and so in stead of repayring, decay their
strength. Thirdly, for ordinary and common refreshment, for the reviving of the
body to return with more lightsomenesse and alacrity to work, God has given
the painful labourer rest and sleep in the night, for every days labor a
nights rest, for six days, six nights, as in his wisdom he thought fit; and
sufficient, according to that in the Psalm. 104. 22. 23. Man works on the day,
and rests at Evening. But now for bodily strength, if weakened by labor in the
week before, to refresh it for the week following, a man has first the
Saturday night, then the whole Sunday from servile labor, and lastly Sunday
night, two nights and a day for corporal rest, so that to an healthy body apt
for labor recreations, sports, and pastimes this day are needless, for if
every nights rest in the week day can by Gods blessing preserve strength,
recover the decay of it, and make it apt for new labor, then much more two
nights and a day, if we pray for a blessing thereon. Fourthly, The persons
addicted to sporting may be reduced to three sorts, either to
industriously-painfull, or to slack-handed, idle and lazy in work, or to the
holy day persons, such as either have little or nothing to do, living idly
like Droanes in an Hive upon the sweat of other men's brows, inordinate livers
not worthy to eat: These last need no recreations but rather a whip for
correction. The second sort are either rich men's children, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
(not wearied with work whose labor is rather a loytering than painful
diligence) or slothful servants; sports, and pastimes to these two rather
increase in them idleness than a will to work, for these commonly are they
which follow most after sports: And experience tells us, that such as most
love pleasure, are the least takers of pains, the greatest Loyterers, and the
laziest workmen, and laborers. The third sort which get hardly their living
with the sweat of their brows, poor men, and their poor children crave quiet
rest, and not painful pastime. For sports are often performed with greater
labor of the body than the work of a man's vocation. Rest is best for these;
and sporting, and pastime needless in respect of their bodies.

2 They are not needful for the mind and spirit: For what good can sports,
gameing, and pastime, afford man in this respect on this day, after he has
been in Gods house? Can they sharpen his desire to return more chearefully to
delight in holy duties? It is impossible, and the clean contrary is found by
experience in such as turn the Sabbaths holy rest, and their time, which
should be for meditation, into pleasureable recreations.

They cannot this day set an edge on, nor sharpen the spirit to make the body
more vivacious, cheerful, and lively to go about a man's calling, trade, art
or profession, in the week following.

1 Sports and pastimes on one day have no such vigor and force to hold up the
spirits for an after days work.

It is the nights rest, and not the sporting on the Lords day, that does it.

2 They are not seasonable recreations on this day, to quicken the spirits by
them: For seasonable recreations is in laboring time, and is to be intermixed
between labor, and labor, for to refresh the weariness of the spirits, to
return speedily again to labor. Recreation is, or should be, as a bait to a
Traveller, a bit, and away, as a whetting to a Mowers sith to cut afresh, or
as an hours sleep in the day time, short and sweet, to a wearied man, that
must hold to his work: But the Lords day is not the time of Labor, but of
rest: There is a rest a night before, there is a rest on the day, and the
nights rest following: What needs then recreation in the time of so much rest,
when recreation has ever relation to labor, and not to ease.

3 There is no cause of the dulling and blunting of the spirits on this day,
that there should need sports, and pastimes for recreation: For if the spirits
be wearyed this day, it is one of these ways following.

1 Either with bodily labor about worldly business, which ought not to be
done, which rather men should with tears bewail, than leaving labor to run
to sports for recreation.

2 Or with the rest of the body in doing nothing, but either standing idly,
sit chatting, or lying asleep like beasts, and so become drowzie, or lazy.

Because most persons ignorant of the heavenly use of an holy rest, know not
how to bestow the time, but either about the world, or about pleasures, when
they are out of the Church. But the well instructed know how to spend it
better, and if slothful drowsinesse should take hold on them, they know how
to stir their bodies by walking, and in walking to meditate on Christ and his
benefits alone, or to have some to confer with, or to go else alone to
prayer, or having a family to instruct them, and so shake of their sloth, and
not by gaming, sporting, and playing.

3 Or else the spirits are dull by going to the Church, and there continuing
for the time: If this be alleged;

1 I ask, how long are such persons in the whole days space at the Church? In
some Parishes (and too many of them) one hour in the forenoone, and less in
the afternoon, or an hour and half in the forenoone, and as much in the
afternoon, and grant to the utmost in the whole day, three hours and a half,
or four hours, and that also at divided times, with a long pause between,
perhaps of three or four hours. Can four hours in and about Christ's Service
and Worship, in twenty four, dull and weaken the spirits of any, which carry
the name of Christians, and have any life of saving grace in them?

2 I ask again of these lovers of pleasures, first, whether they come soon
to Church, and are at the beginning, and so abide to the end? Secondly, while
they stay there, do they not sleep? or do they not sit idly gazing about?
or are they not carried away with many bythoughts? If so, as too true, can they
then plead the dulling of their spirits by so staying sinfully in the
Congregation, drawing near with their bodies, but in soul and heart be far
from God?

3 I ask them, are they indeed devout Worshippers, and attentive hearers? and
do they so understand themselves, that they know what they have been doing,
what they have reaped thereby? then surely they cannot depart away dull in
spirit, but be glad of that they have heard, Act. 13. 48. Neh. 8. 12.
glorifying the word of the Lord, and so depart away with joy, because they
have understood the words declared to them. Neither is it possible, that they
should be so possessed with such profane dotage and folly, that they should
think (if they found any dullness in hearing) that sporting and playing,
gaming, and pastime, to be the means to remove such spiritual dullness, and
to recover their spirits to a more cheerful and quicker attendance to Gods
word, with joyfulnesse of mind and heart in the use of Gods ordinance? So to
think is both without religion, and also void of very reason it self.

Therefore from hence, and from the substance of all that has been said, I
conclude, that on this day, sports, games, and pastimes, are needless, and to
be forborne.

And here I end, praying thus for my self and others.

Oh Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep thy Law; And this
our sacred day, to the honor of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ: And from
Judaizing and Paganizing; And from all profaneness good Lord deliver us.
JOHN 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine
whether it be of God, or no.
Finis hujus Operis.

