A SHORT VIEW OF THE Prelatical Church OF ENGLAND.

Laid open in Ten Sections, by way of Quere and Petition to the High and
Honorable Court of Parliament, the several Heads whereof are set down in the
next two pages.

Written a little before the fall of that Hierarchy, about the year 1641. by
John Barnard, sometimes Minister of Batcomb in Somerset shire.

Whereunto is added, THE ANATOMY OF THE COMMON PRAYER.

Printed in the year, 1661.

TO THE HONORABLE AND High Court of Parliament.
HIgh and Mighty Power (under Sovereign Authority) Assembled for God, for your
King and Country, We distressed throughout the Land do earnestly beg
commiseration and pity at your helpful hands: behold, see, and consider, how
it is with us, and receive graciously our humble Petitions.

The wisdom of our God guide you make you also valiant for Truth and Right, and
give you Magnanimity of Heart, Unanimity of spirit to finish the Lords Work,
for Gods glory, for the Churches peace, the Kings safety, the welfare of our
Kingdom and Country.

SECTION. I. OF the title of the Church, and why it is called Prelatical.
SECTION. II. Of the Principal persons in this Prelatical Church and their
Dependents. SECTION. III. Of the means to support their Prelatical greatness.
SECTION. IV. Of the Prelatical rule and Government, and the ends they ai^e at.
SECTION. V. Of the Prelatical visitations. SECTION. VI. Of the Prelatical
Churches, and the dependents on them. SECTION. VII. Of the Prelatical Service.
SECTION. VIII. Of the Prelatical Ministry. SECTION. IX. Of the Prelatical
Convocation. SECTION. X. Of the great and manifold evils of these Prelatical
governments.
A SHORT VIEW Of the Prelatical Church OF ENGLAND.
SECTION. I. Of the title Church, and why it is called Prelatical.
THe Church of England now so called, is the Church of our Prelates, and may be
rightly termed the Prelatical, or Hierarchical Church of England, received from
Rome the seat of Antichrist, and set up here, after the Protestants fell off
from that Papal Church, for it is framed of Prelates, and also of a Prelatical
Clergy, and only ruled by them.

Quaere.

Whether any such Church was in the Apostles days, or any time shortly within
2 or 300. years after?

Whether any such Church be among any of the reformed Churches? or any where
else, but under the Pope, the Beast which has two Horns like a Lamb, but
speaks like the Dragon, Rev. 12.

Whether therefore it be guided by the Spirit of Christ, or by the Spirit of
Antichrist?

Whether God ever permitted any mortal men to frame a Church after their wisdom?

For when he gave

1. The Pattern for his Tabernacle, to Moses, Exodus 25.9. and 26.30. Heb. 8.5.

2. The Pattern of his Temple unto David, 1 Chronicles. 28.19. and verse. 11, 12, 13.
1 King 6.38.

3. The Pattern of the rebuilding of it to the Prophet Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.

He did not suffer Moses, nor David, nor Solomon, nor the Prophet, nor any
after them to attempt such a thing. Was he so careful for the Type and shadow,
and not for the Antitype and substance?

Whether therefore a frame of a Church after an humane device, may not be
altered, upon good reasons by lawful power?

The humble Petition.

That it may be considered of,

HOw according to the Romish fashion by the name of Church.

1 The Prelates understand only themselves, and (as they call them) their
Clergy.

2. That they seclude the Nobles and Gentry, the whole house of Parliament, the
Upper and Lower, from being of their Church, and so debar them from having any
right to meddle in Church matters.

When the title of Church (monopolized now to themselves) is taken in Scripture
of the new Testament, either for the Ministers and people together, Math.
16.18. Act 12.1. and 13.1. and 9.31. and 15 22. and 14.27. and so usually.

Or for the people distinct from Ministers, Act. 14 23. where the people are
called the Church before they had Pastors set over them, when Pa^ors and people
are distinguished, there the people are called the Church, and not the
Ministers, the Ministers are said to be of the Church, Rev. 18.2.1.8. The
Churches d^nomination is from the people, who also are the Lords cl^rgy, Pet.
5.3. the word in English is heritage, in Latin cleri, and in the Greek. cleros.

There is much complaint touching Monopolies in another nature, and justly, but
this is taken no notice of, and yet this Monopoly is a mystery of mischiefs;
for by this name of the Church assumed to themselves.

They d^gnifie very greatly their Prelatical power, as may appear by the ^o.
Article of Religion, which they have corrupted from that it was at first, set
out in Anno 1561. and 1571.

2 They decree what they please without control, as is evident by their former
and late Canons.

3. They strike an awefulnesse in all sorts under the sacred name of Church.

When the Church representative ought to be gathered of both sorts (as they be
now distinguished) of the learned and godly Laity, as well as of he clergy.

Why should therefore the noble Lords, and the christian Spirits of the Gentry
lose the right, into which the Holy Ghost (by calling them and the rest of his
Church) has invested you? In former times Parliaments have confirmed
Injunctions Ecclesiastical, and our Service Book, containing Gods worship,
matters of an high nature, and w^y not will so? And if the Nobles and Commons
can claim so much, as to ratisie the matters Ecclesiastical being concluded
upon, I hope it is by pernsal thereof before, else how can they in judgment
confirm them? And if they have wisdom from God to confirm them made, why may
not some chosen men be appointed to consult with the convocation house, about
the framing of those things which are to be s^^ ^orth, seeing they very much
^oncern all?

The Brethren, in the great council at Jerusalem, were not shut out, while the
Apostles and Elders came together to consider of a great controversy in
Divinity, and in making their decrees; but when they were sent forth, they
passed under their own name and the name of the brethren also, Act. 15.6.22,
23. David consulted with the Laity, as well as with the Priests and Levites, to
bring up the Ark of God, 1 Chronicles. 1^.1, 2, ^. Hezekiah concerning the keeping
of the Passover, took counsel thereabout, not with the Priests only, but
with his Princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 30.1, 2.

This Monopoly was not then learned among Gods people, nor among the holy
Apostles in their days.

SECT. II. Of the principal persons in this Prelatical Church, and of their
Dependents upon them.
I. Their two Provincials Archbishops.
THe one of the Province of York, Metropolitan of England, the other of
Canterbury Metropolitan of all England.

Dependents of Canterbury.
1. His Prince-like retinue. 2. His Domestic Chaplains, and the rest. 3.
Household Servants. 4. All his Officers for temporalities, and the Revenues
thereof, which are very great. 5. All his Spiritual Officers under him, which
are these 1. His Vicar General. 2. His Guardians of Spiritualities. 3. The Dean
of the Arches, with all the number depending upon them. 4. His many Courts. The
Court of Faculties. The Court of Audience. The Prerogative Court. The
Delegates. The Consistory in Paul's. The High Commission Court.


With the swarms of attendance on these Courts.
Advocates, Registers, ^octors, Proctors, Pursivants, Messengers, and
Apparitors, With all other belonging to them all, which come to many hundreds.
Quaere.

Whether all or any of these be of d vine institution?

Whether the words of Christ forbidding to be called gracious Lords, extend not
to these, Mat. 20.2, 26. ^uke. 2.25.26. Mark 10.42, 43, 44, 45.

Whether any Spiritual function ordained by Jesus Christ, stands in need of
so great a Prelate, and so great a dependence to discharge the Spiritual duties
thereof?

Whether this greatness has been any time the support of goodness, and of
good men in their places? or rather has not from this greatness risen great
troubles, at at this day, and much persecution, almost ever since the beginning
of Reformation?

The humble Petition.

That the immeasurable greatness of these gracious Lords might be taken away,
and the number of those their Dependants lessened.

That they might be made to show themselves Arch-preachers of Christ's Gospel,
and to attend upon some particular Flock to feed them.

That they might not be of Princes counsel, for commonly God leaves such to
become ill Statesmen, because they do contrary to Christ's bidding.

It shall not be so with you, Mat 20.26. Luke 21.25. Mark 10.42 and for that
they neglect the sacred calling of the Ministry, which is to be of Christ's
heavenly counsel, to give attendance unto temporal affairs, and to be of
earthly Kings counsel.

II. There be twenty four Bishops Diocesan Lord Bishops.
They are seated in several places throughout the Kingdom.

Of these three are under York Carleile, Durham, and Chester.


All the rest are under Canterbury.

Dependants on these.
Their train of Domestic Servants. Their Chaplains. Their Officers
concerning their temporalities. Their 24. Courts.
And hereto belong,
26 Chancellours, with waiters on them, 24 Registers with their men, 24
Gentlemen Apparatouss. 48 Proctours, if but two to a Court. 120 Apparitours at
least, more then a good many.
QVAERE.

Whether these Diocesan Bishops be jure divino, Read Tim. and Titus unbishoped.
and have warrant from Scripture?

Whether St. Peter's speech reaches not to them, that they should not Lord it
over Gods heritage by overruling it, 1 Pet. 5.3?

Whether we cannot be as well without them, as all other reformed Churches; or
whether we will condemn those Churches for casting them out, or not receiving
them in?

Whether this be not a mockery to say, no Bishop no King, seeing they also say,
no Ceremony no Bishop, therefore no Ceremony no King, what a weak standing
bring they a King unto? But a King is Gods ordinance; nor so they? And in
Denmark has been a King and no Bishops this hundred years?

Whether Bishops wanting in Diocesses, upon vacancy some ten, some twenty years
(as some have been) may not be so for more years, and so forever? And if they
may be wanting in a Diocese, why not in a Province, and so why not every where?

Whether may not our King, as lawfully cast them out of his Dominion, as did
the King of Denmark his Grandfather out of his Kingdom?

Whether by their authority have they advanced true Religion, or upheld mere
forms of it, as shows, habits, gestures, and Ceremonial observances, rather
then the power of godliness?

What wickedness and vanity is suppressed by him; nay, what error, what vice,
Idolatry, and profaneness grows not under them?

What one made better by them in the ways of God?

What one brought to a pious reformation by their Citations, Excommunications,
and imposed Penancies?

The humble Petition,

That they may be seated in Pastoral charges, every one over a Particular
flock, as all the first Bishops were, there to preach, and teach the people,
and so their many dependants might be taken away.

That their Chancellours be removed from them, and their overswa^ing
wasterfulnesse in their Courts be taken down, and cut off.

That they, their Officers, and their Courts be brought under some such
authority, as may rule over them, question them, and duly censure them, when
there is just cause, and not suffer them to be like Kings, free without
command, or any power of censure at all over them, is it fit they should judge
all, and be free from the judgment of any?

III. There be threescore Archdeacons under these Bishops.
Dependents on these.

They have threescore Courts to which do belong Commissaries, Officials,
Surrogates.

60. Registers with their Servants.

120 Proctors, if but two to every Court.

200. Apparitors at least.

The whole number appartaining to Archbishops, Bishops Archdeacons, with the
many Peculiars, are judged to be no fewer then ten thousand persons, which need
yearly 200000 pounds to maintain them all, the greater and inferior ones,
reckoning but 20. pound a man, when many have an hundred a year, some 200. l.
others more.

Quaere.

Whether these swarms of wasps, be of necessary use in the Spiritual Kingdom
of Christ?

Whether their Courts be reformative or deformative?

Whether there is any likelihood, that their gross abuses of Gods ordinances
in sending out Excommunications, and their commuting of Penances, etc. can be
blessed of God to bring an holy reformation?

Whether it can be probably imagined, that those Courts can reform others,
which in themselves are so corrupt, and mercenarie, and do employ such base and
lewd companions in a spiritual businesses, as be the Apparitours whom either
they cannot, or will not reform.

Whether their Courts being taken away as in all other reformed Churches, their
want should be bewailed, and their setting up again be desired?

Whether the mass of money which is spent by these, so many thousands might
not well be spared, and far better employed?

The humble Petition.

That these Courts be not longer permitted to take in so many thousand
Presentiments every half year, only to make such gain of the people, as they
do; for they reform no men's persons, but plague their purses.

That some other way might be considered of, agreeable to Gods word and the
godly practice of other Churches for suppression of vice, and the maintenance
of virtue in every Parish.

That their lewd Apparitours, so many and so base be not longer suffered.

That in their Courts their proceedings may be open to the hearing of all, and
that they lap not up businesses in secret, as their manner is to shut their
Consistory door, where they do as they please with Delinquents.

That they delay not men in their Courts, forcing and vexing poor men to come
very often, some have come eight, some 10. some 16. times before they can be
dismissed, a grievous vexation to needy laboring men.

SECT. III. Of the means to support their Prelatical greatness.
THese have their Lordly Palaces and great houses.

They have their Ecclesiastical dignities, and spiritual offices, and what do
thereto belong.

They have their Baronries, and the ample Revenues thereof.

Viis et modis, such is their Income, as it cannot but amount to four hundred
and fifty thousand pounds per annum, if not more, so much their greatness comes
unto, as the state of a King may be supported not a little therewith.

Quaere.

Whether the true officers of the Church of Christ, need so much to bear up
their train?

Whether Christ be hereby better served by them, or followed of them?

Whether their studies are more bent to advance the Churches spiritual good?

Whether are they more sequestered to the ways of God, to attend Gods service,
the reformation of ill men's lives, the setting forward those that are good in
the paths of grace?

Whether do they take the more time to apply themselves to Fasting, to praying,
to preaching, to do works of piety, and works of charity?

Whether do they not rather intrude into secular affairs, and into State
businesses, to the disgrace of the Nobles, and Gentry of the Land, and the
peace thereof?

Whether are they more bold against sin, to suppress it in all sorts? Or are
they not hereby the more Lordly minded to bear up themselves and to crush all
that justly find fault with what is amiss in them?

Whether are they not hereby higher from control and less subject to any
censure, both they and such as depend upon them?

Whether may not the King pair them as well as did blessed Queen Elizabeth
some of them in her days; Or as King Henry did the Lord Abbots, and Lord
Priors, with all their superfluous means; For those were of men, and so are
these, and not of God?

The humble Petition.

That they be made to change their Palaces for country Parsonage houses, there
to keep hospitality, and feed the people with the word of life.

That their Baronries be taken from them, and so the Lordly title, and not be
suffered to sit any more in Parliament, as Lords there.

That their thousands be reduced to some hundreds, and so their Officers and
retinue made fewer.

What need a true Pastor be so pompous and Lordly great to do his heavenly
office for Christ in preaching; and in all other Spiritual duties?

SECT. IV. Of the Prelatical rule and Government.
THeir rule is partly after the Canon Law yet in force, and partly after their
own framed Canons and Articles, and not according to Gods word.

The manner of their ruling is Lordly, and alone in their inferior Courts, and
in the high Commission Court, their power is unlimited, citing, examining,
swearing, judging, sining, and imprisoning as they please, one of the most
insufferable evils in this Kingdom.

The ends which they do aim at in governing are these.

I. To keep their own greatness, even by exacting oaths for it, as the oath of
Canonical obedience, and the late oath in the new Canons.

II. To hold others in subjection under them, as they like best, by citing to
their Courts, by hasty suspensions, by rash and very abusive excommunications,
etc.

III. To enrich themselves, gathering very much wealth. The means are these,

I. By ordaining Deacons, and Ministers for money four times a year, by which
they put up yearly hundreds of pounds.

II. By instituting and inducting Parsons and Vicars, Some have paid 7. pounds.
when Benefices do fall, and so scrape together much out of 9285. livings, 3l.
for every one, one way or other, which in time comes to many thousands.

III. By making Rural Deans yearly (where they be) in every Deanery, And for the
oath taken, some pay 8s. 6d. or a Noble, but no benefit to the Deanery at all,
but to execute Bishops mandates.

IV. By granting Licenses, which ought to be free.

I. To Beneficed men to preach in their own Cures, though at their ordination
they give them authority to preach, yet may not they afterward without 10s.
for every license, look then how many licensed Preachers there be (whether they
preach or no) so many 10s. is paid, suppose there be in 9285. Parishes, but
6000. of them, the sum comes to 3000. pounds. Thus they pay money to have
leave to discharge their highest duty of their office.

II. To Curates, who must pay for a license to read prayers in some place.

For a license to preach.

For a license to teach School, undoing poor beginners before they get any
thing.

III. To Clerks of the Parish to be Clerks.

IV. To Physicians to practice Physic.

V. To Midwives to do their office, for they have still in all trades and
professions to gain money.

VI To parties which are to be married without Banes asking, and in times
prohibited, and both for money allowed, yet against Law.

By absolving after a rash suspension, after a profane excommunication, and
both for money.

By aggravations for money.

VII. By putting men to clear themselves by oath, with their Compurgators, for
money.

VIII. By imposing Penance, which the richer may commute for money. But the
miserable poor (doing their penance) cannot be freed from their Courts without
money, though they beg for it, must stand excommunicated, and so be shut out of
the Church and given over to the Devil, for non-payment of money.

IX. By willingly receiving any secret information (true or false) to call any
before them, putting them to the oath ex officio, to catch them and make them
pay money.

X. By interdicting of Churches, and whole Congregations.

XI. By framing very many Articles, forcing Churchwardens to present upon oath
that they may get money.

XII. By Probates of Wills, and by granting letters of Administrations.

XIII. By suits about Tithes, and long delaying thereof, much money is spent of
others, but gotten by them; and thus a mass of money is gathered together of
them, to the great vexation of his Majesty's Subjects, especially of the meaner
sort.

Yea so ravenous they are for gain, that on fasting days appointed, they send
out every time a book, which yet is one and the same, with small variation, and
for it do exact 8d. which in the several Parishes amounts to above 300l. Thus
of solemn fasts shamelesly they make gain, and charge without cause the people.

At this last Fast a farthing paper prayer they sent forth, and took 2d. for
every one, which comes to threescore and ten pounds; They can do nothing except
they or their Officers lick their fingers.

Quaere.

Whether such a rule and authority, by such Canons, in such a manner, and for
such ends, can be approved of God, or any longer suffered of men?

Whether this be not to make money of Gods holy ordinances, and to gain by sin,
what hope of a blessing can there be by such a base kind of Ecclesiastical
government?

Whether it be not fit and just to squeeze such Spunges, and ravenous Harpyes,
by finding out their illegal courses, and punishing them.

The humble Petition.

That they may not rule by the Canon Law (which yet is in force so far, as it
touches not the Kings Supremacy) nor by their own devised Canons, but by Gods
word, and by such Canons as agree with the word, and are made with the full
consent of the Convocation, and confirmed by Act of Parliament.

That in ruling they Lord it not alone, but that they sit with learned, godly,
and grave assistants, keeping within the bounds of the Laws, doing neither
contrary to, nor besides them, nor yet dispense with any, as they do for
marrying without banes asking, and in times prohibited.

That they keep not their Courts, nor send out Process, Summons, Citations nor
proceed to censure in their own names, or style, nor use only their own seal
of office, and arms, as they do, thereby denying their power to be derived
from the King, this is an unsufferable usurpation.

That they be made to acknowledge their authority, not to be divine, but
humane, from the King, as has heretofore been fully acknowledged.

That the power of the high Commission, in ministering the Oath ex officio be
taken away, as also in all other inferior Courts, and that it may be a limited
power under Law, in all the proceedings, in citing, examining, judging, fining,
and imprisoning, that so the complaints of Gods Ministers might not still cry
aloud in the Lords ears to bring down wrath. Who can but pity with tears of
blood, the unsufferable misery of M. Peter Smart of Durham, for preaching
against setting up of Images and Altars, the severe handling of Mr. George
Huntly Minister, and very many others heretofore and of late years, now
famously known.

That by their high authority they may not be suffered, to hinder such as be
troubled from taking the benefit of legal courses to help themselves, and
neither Judges and Lawyers made so to fear, as the one sort dare not freely
plead for them, nor the other judge but with fear of them, as they ought not.

That seeing they are otherwise sufficiently provided for, they make not such
wicked gain in making and instituting Ministers, in giving licenses, in
imposing penance, in absolving, and in all the rest before named, to the great
grievances of his Majesty's subjects, robbing them of a treasury of money, and
making sale of Gods holy Ordinances.

Is there Simony in buying a Benefice, and none in giving money for the use of
spiritual gifts?

That they make no encroachment upon the subjects liberties, as they do prove
fully by the Author of the Breviate.

SEC. V. Of their Praelatical Visitations and in these, These are pecuniary
merely for money.
I. Are Bishops Visitations.
1. Churchwardens of every Parish and Chapel are called, who receive a book
of Articles, to present by, if any are wanting, they are warned to appear at
their Court with cost.

These Churchwardens pay for their book of Articles every year (though the
very same) and for other things, as also for writing their presentment by a
Clark (which they themselves could do) 2s. 4d. which in 9285. Parishes, comes
to 1058l. and odd moneys, besides Chapels, which be here and there many.

II. Ministers Beneficed.
These pay for Licenses to preach, if they have none.

Then they pay xxd. or thereabouts for showing their letters of Orders, and
their License to preach unto the Register, at every Bps. Visitation, though
seen and allowed of before.

After for Procurations to the Bishop, 4s. a piece.

To the Gentleman Apparitour 8d. but the abler sort pay xijd.

Lastly, sometimes the Bishops crave benevolence, as the occasion is, but the
sum they will set down, and threaten those that refuse their rate.

Besides all these they pay Paschal rents or Synodals to the Archd. in the
Bishops visiting.

III. Curates.
If they want Licenses to read, preach or teach a School, then they pay for
them.

Also for showing their letters of orders, so that in 9285. Parishes, the sum
will arise to some thousands of pounds.

Thus they do at Archbs. visitations, but when an Archb. comes newly to York,
the Parsons and Vicars, though never so poor under him, give him the tenth of
their living for a benevolen^e to help the poor Archbishop to settle himself to
5. or 6. thousand pound a year, which extorted benevolence if not paid him of
the poorest Vicar, the Reverend Father out of his mercifulness, will pitifully
afflict him in his Court?

II. Ar^hds. Visitations.
These be twice a year, here the Churchwardens do as before.

The Ministers pay.

At Easter Visitation their paschal rents, or Synodals, which sums are not a
like to all, some pay 5s. some less.

At Michaelmas they pay Procurations, some 7 s. some 10 s. some less; but its
judged that Ministers pay yearly at Visitations, throughout the Land 4 or 5
thousand pounds, some reckon more.

And what is all this for?

1. To call every Minister by name, and to pay as is aforesaid.

To call Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, or Posts (as some name them) to take
their oaths, to make presentiments, that men may be brought into their Courts,
to get money.

Quaere.

Whether these visitations be after God or man?

Whether any can hereby be bettered by them, either for Life or Doctrine?

Whether any reformed Churches keep such kind of Visitations, and such a manner
of Visiting?

Whether these be worthy of so many thousands of pounds, for calling such
Visitations?

Whether such meetings be worthy the assembling together of so great a number
of the Clergy and Laity?

The number out of 9285. Parishes, to wit, one Minister besides Curates, and
four men, Churchwardens and Sidemen, or Posts, besides two in every
Chappelry, are above 45. thousand at one visitation, and at both the number
double, is 90000. where if they expend alike, twelve pence a man, for dinner
and horse-meat, as usually they do, the sum does arise in both the
Visitations throughout the Land, to 4000. and 500. pounds yearly.

Why should men cast away so much money yearly, year by year, for upholding
them in such vain Visitations, injurious to others, and only gainful to
themselves?

The humble Petition.

THat some way may be taken, to make more useful these Visitations, in calling
together so many thousands, than thus only to fill their purses.

That neither the Bishops, nor Archds, be permitted to frame Articles, so
unlawfully out of the Canons, with sundry of their own additions, as may appear
by comparing of some of their Articles with the Canons, which every Parish are
bound to have, and so need none of their Articles.

That threescore and fourteen thousand men be not constrained to swear
threescore and fourteen thousand Oaths yearly, as they do to their souls
damnation without Repentance: For,

1. Not any do, nor can keep the Oath in presenting all offenses, faults,
defa^lts, and crimes (as they call them) mentioned in so numerous Articles, and
so do forswear themselves with breach of Oath, goes through the whole Land,
and with every oath goes a curse.

II. If men should present for offenses, faults and crimes, every thing
according to every Article, then they cursedly swear to present for offenses,
faults, and crimes, which before the Almighty GOD are none; as for instance,

1. A Minister to preach in his own charge, without a License or in a cloak.

2. A Father at Baptism to offer to the Minister his own child, and undertake
for the Infants education, and so prevent an high presumption of others, who
may be witnesses, but not undertakers, promising for the child that which they
neither can, nor ever intend to do.

3. Some going to another Parish to hear Sermons (which at baptism they are
exhorted unto) when they have none at home.

4. Some meeting together to read the Scriptures, and good Books allowed to be
printed, to sing Psames, and pray together.

5. A poor man, and in need to work upon an holy day for relief of his poor
family.

6. A Minister or a Deacon having unworthily taken those callings upon them to
leave the same upon trouble of Conscience, because they find themselves to be
utterly unfit, and to betake themselves to some more fit course of life.

7. One for having his Hat on.

8. An other for not standing up, at the Creed, others for not bowing, or not
putting the Hat off (which they may not have on) more at the name of Jesus,
than at Lord and Savior Christ.

These and other such like who dare to present for sins, offenses, crimes, and
faults before God?

And yet Churchwardens and Sidemen do so, to the grievous wronging of their
own souls.

Oh take pity, take pity of this their perjury and sinful swearing, bringing
a curse upon them.

That a Bishop in his visitations do go abroad to visit, and not force all
Ministers, and many old men to come to him many miles, when he is but one, and
they very many, for this is a making of them to visit him, and not he them; but
all this is to spare his own pains, and his own purse, that which he gets at
such Visitations, may be his without any expenses. Provident Prelates.

SECT. VI. Of the Praelatical Churches.
THe Praelatical Churches, besides their private Chapels, are the great and
vast Cathedrals, or other Collogiate Churches.

Dependents of these.

26. Great Deanes next unto Bishops with their Attendents and Servants.

544. Canon Residents and Prebendaries.

The rest also are many hundreds.

As Their Vicars. Peticanons. Singing men and boys, Choristers. Organists.
Gospellers and Epistlers. Virgers, and who else appertain to this idle and fat
fraternity.


A 300. or 400. Thousand pounds yearly in lands, Rents, Leases, and other
Revenues, and profits do thereto belong.

Quaere.

Whether such idle Droans are worthy of so much for their service, such as it
is?

Whether Jesus Christ cannot be better served with far less cost, and better
pleased?

Whether all these thousands might not be better employed to greater good, in
the training up of thousands in divine and humane Learning.

As thus,

1 That never a Dean have any Pastoral charge, but be continual resident at
the Cathedral Church, being a godly and learned Doctor, there to read twice or
thrice a week a Divinity Lecture, and interpret the Scriptures.

II. That all the Canon residents be also without Pastoral charges, and that
they be learned, grave, and godly Divines, or else others in their stead,
chosen out of the Universities, to assist the Doctor Deane in and about
spiritual and divine exercises, daily to study controversies, cases of
conscience, and some special Tracts of Divinity, etc. that other Ministers in
the Country may come thither for help, and for better information of
judgment, as need shall require.

III. That the greater part of the rest of the Prebendaries, be turned into
special selected Scholars, Graduates out of either University, such as for
natural gifts, their Learning in Tongues and Arts, and pious disposition by
grace, do give very good hopes to become good Divines, and here trained up
under the Deane, and the other Divines for the ministry.

IV. That seven of the best, Prebends be allotted to seven learned men, to
become Schoolemasters to teach Scholars.

Every Schoolmaster to be accurately skilful in one Art, and secondly to have
ability withal to teach the said Art to his Scholars, with some speed and
dexterity.

The 1 To teach to write very fair. 2 To teach Music. 3 To teach Grammar only.
4 To teach Rhetoric. 5 To teach Poetry. 6 To teach the Greek tongue. 7 To
teach the Hebrew.


That their Scholars may come thus furnished to the Universities, there to
learn Logic and other Arts, and to take the degrees of Schools. Every Master
must make known the aptness and untowardnesse of every Scholar, that the
Master may not be troubled with incapable boys.

V. That the Vicars, Peticanons, singing men and boys, with the rest be turned
into Scholars, ingenious Lads, picked out here and there from among mean men's
children, to be brought up under the aforenamed Schoolmasters, to be after sent
to the Universities, and maintained there by some Revenues belonging to the
Cathedrals, that so they may be taken thence, if they prove not unworthy, and
brought back again as places be void, to be trained up for the ministry.

By all these in the Cathedral Churches Gods public worship, Morning and
Evening might be performed.

And by this pious and profitable transformation of these Cathedrals.

1. When any Benefice falls void, hither may the Patrons come for a learned and
godly Minister, taking their choice.

2. If any Pastor happen to be sick, or have just occasion to be absent,
hither may he send for one to supply his place for preaching and prayer he till
be well, or return home.

Were this so happily done, who could but approve thereof, if godly and wise
hearted.

The humble Petition.

THat the goodly Revenues belonging to these Cathedrals, be employed to some
such good and godly use, as the wisdom of the state shall think fit, for
better advancement of Gods glory, Learning and Religion, then now they be.

That the so many needles Prebendaries might not be allowed, nor to take up so
great sums as some do, for preaching 2. or 3. Sermons a year, either by
themselves, or by some other, whom they can hire for a noble, or an angel a
time.

That the so many gifts of livings in the hands of Bishops, Deanes, Archd. and
the rest, be looked into, for better bestowing thereof, then they commonly be.

SECT. VII. Of the Praelatical Service.
THe Praelatical Service, is the Cathedral service, consisting in these things.

1. In a long wearisome Liturgy, read after a finding manner, syllable and
words drawn out unto a tedious length, wh ch Liturgy is framed out of 3 Romish
books, the Breviary, Purtuis, and the mass book, so as King James said of it,
that its an ill said Mass, from which it needs purging, and from some vain
repetitions, and from a corrupt translation of holy Scriptures, and other
abuses thereof.

2. In an unedifying singing, and piping on Organs.

3. In superstitious crynging to the name Jesus toward the Altar, toward the
East.

4. In a formal observation of Habits, Surplesses, Hoods, Copes, variety of
gestures, and ceremonious devotious devised by men.

Quaere.

Whether such a Service Book (as the Papists called it, an Apish imitation of
the Mass) be well pleasing unto God?

Why we should uphold such a service, which nourishes a bare reading Ministry,
nusles people in ignorance, and which no reformed Church have received to use?

Why is it not suffered to be reformed, in such things as have been witnessed
against, from the beginning of reformation, and for the reformation whereof
many thousands have pet^^ioned, many hundreds have been suspended, deprived,
and imprisoned?

Why is it that no end will be put to the misery of such who are men of tender
Conscience, and do desire God knows, to live in peace, seeing now a whole
Kingdom refuses it, and that with the danger of their utter undoing.

The humble Petition.

That such a Liturgy, might be framed, by godly and learned men thereto
appointed; as may be freed from corruption, and cast into such a form, as may
have no resemblance to the Romish Service; for by this Papists are but hardened,
and others offended fall away.

That nothing be allowed to be in Gods service, which cannot be proved by some
warrant out of Gods word; for the Scriptures are a perfect Rule for any thing
necessary, either in substance or circumstances, in and about the holy word of
God.

If any doubt of this, it shall be proved punctually to him.

That no Ceremony be ordained, but what may be found to agree with all the
Apostles Rules, made for the use of things indifferent.

That the use of them be free, and not rigorously imposed, nor the failing
otherwise of painful and peaceable men, to conform in some things be more
severely looked after, and punished more sharply, than the gross enormities of
their conformitant Priests.

SECT. VIII. Of the Prelatical Ministry.
THe conformitant Priests (so they now are called) which properly belong to
this Prelatical Church, and come from cursed Rome, are these,

1. All dumb Ministers, of which there be yet in the Land ^. or 3000. if not
many more.

2. All Pluralists, of which there be very many, in some Diocese 30. in some
40 why should some have two, other tot quotes, when worthy men have not one?

3. All Non-residents in Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches.

Prebendaries some.

Heads of some Colleges.

Domestic Chaplains.

4. All Curates, which are

Under Pluralists.

Under Non-residents.

Under some idle Doctors, and some other Parsons and Vicars.

Under Lay and impropriate Parsons, the number of which are 3800. and odd in
this Kingdom.

5. Most of them idle Drones, monthly and quarterly preachers, or which preach
perhaps once a year, or not at all at home, though it may be now and then
abroad.

6. All lewd and base Ministers, as also the mere worldlings, and Mammonists,
of which sort there be no fewer then some thousands.

7. All Popishly affected, and all Arminians may be added to these, to make up
these locusts, under their King Abaddon and Apollyon.

Quaere.

Whether these be sufferable in any Reformed Church of Christ?

What care has been taken hitherto, to reform this so great wickedness, and
mischief to Gods people?

How many thousands perish under these for lack of knowledge, are their blood
of no price with men, whom Christ has purchased with his own blood?

The humble Petition.

That there might be a speedy redress concerning these so much spoken against,
and written against from time to time, disallowed of God, and all Christian
Churches (separated from the Church of Rome) and not tolerable in Christ his
Church, where he is to reign by his own Word, in his own Ordinances, as he has
appointed.

SECT. IX. Of their Prelatical Convocation.
THis is a Provincial Assembly, for the Province of Canterbury, which consists
of the Archbishop, the President of all the other Bishops under him, Deans,
Archdeacons, with others, and of the two Ministers chosen out of every
Diocese, called the Clerks of the Convocation, to the number of forty and
odd.

These Clerks should be chosen freely, by the free public consent and voice
of all the Ministers, in every Diocese, but the Prelates propound whom they
list or like best for their purpose; and do ask voices, which are given to them
of many through fear, so as the choice is not free as it ought to be.

II. That which is intended to be done there is contrived and hammered in the
head of the Archbishop, and some few with him, to which the rest of the Bishops
do consent.

III. In the lower House, the Priests, Parsons, and Vicars, those Clerks sit
there to gaze one on another, and to tell the clock, waiting for their Lessons,
from their Lords the Prelates.

There is no freedom of voices, they dare not consult among themselves, to
promote the cause of Christ, and to reform abuses.

The better sort are the fewest, and are

Either overawed by the greatest,

Or born down by the worst.

So as they be made to consent unto the making of such Canons, as they would
not, and these are thrust upon us as the constitutions of the Church of
England, when its nothing so, but of a stong faction of Prelates, and their
Adherents, who set them forth, and obtrude them upon us unjustly.

IV. The canons they make, are many, not a few of them to uphold their
Praelatical authority, and unapproveable courses, many of them without warrant
from holy Scripture.

Some of them against Scripture.

Some of them superstitiously Oeremonious.

Some of them blind Canons, as these,

1. Against Popery and superstition, but they tell us not what Popery is, what
superstition is.

2. Against Socinianisme, but without declaring what that damnable heresy is,
almost every one of them needs examination and to be rectified for the peace
of Gods people, and the Churches Edification.

Note moreover that in setting forth their so many canons, there be none
charged against Arminianisme, that Semipelagian Heresy.

None against the Prelates themselves for their innovations, and exorbitancies,
as if they could not err, nor ever do amiss.

Lastly, before they break up, they look not to have their canons ratified by
Parliament, as they ought; but do make themselves as Clergy men, only to be the
Church, and not any else in the Land, with them to be Church, which should not
by godly wise men be digested.

V. After the dissolving of this their Convocation, they presume,

1. To make it a Synod, without a new call, and Summons. 2. To give great
sums out of all Parsons and Vicars purses, under the name of a benevolence,
and yet rate every one at a certain sum, as a subsidy, and that under the
penalty of deprivation and utter ruin of them that do not pay, setting forth a
book to this purpose, which (...) will that Lay men should not see.

VI. After some space of time.

1. They collect Articles every Bishop in his Diocese, and every Archdeacon in
his Archdeaconry out of those Canons, which Articles they impose upon all
Churchwardens and Sidemen, and by them to present upon oath.

Then if any thing happen to become questionable, touching the Canons or other
things, for and about their Church, their Service and Ceremonies, every Bishop
in his Diocese does take upon him to give a sense, and an interpretation as he
pleases, on which we must rest, though it be never so absurd, and not take the
words as they be in the letter, till there be another Convocation to decide the
question, and doubt arising, as they ought to do.

And if men be not satisfied, they labor to gain the help of Royal authority,
by some public declaration, to make good what they say and do; and so lap up
all under the authority of the Church.

Quaere.

Whether such a Convocation can justly be approved?

Whether such Canons coming forth are to be held the Canons of the Church of
England?

Whether they be of all to be submitted unto, before they be confirmed by Act
of Parliament?

Why more Canons are added, and not rather the other reformed?

Why they establish and countenance all their decrees, so as if they were of an
unchangeable nature, ordained without error, and necessarily useful ever and
every where?

The humble Petition.

That his Majesty, the noble Lords, the worthy Commons of the house of
Parliament, would carefully see, that the Convocation be gathered lawfully,
that voices be free therein, without an overawing power, that nothing be there
decreed, but with a serio^s examination, and full consent of the House, and not
be permitted to pass without an Act of Parliament; for if this kind of
Convocation, and their such proceeding as have been, be suffered to pass, they
will Lord it over us still, and so the people of God then will never be in
peace.

Oh consider, how in the Parliament they have been prevalent over their equals,
and betters; in the Convocation then they must needs domineer over all: heir
underlings, on whom they can avenge themselves afterward, if they find any
wisely and with courage to have affronted and cressed any of their intents and
purposes.

SECT. X. Of the great and manifold evils of these Prelatical Governors.
THey bear up themselves mightily by their Revenues and Baronries, strengthening
themselves in their pomp and in their pride to overtop whom they list.

They become as great Peers of the Land, and sit in Parliament with them cheek
by jole, to affront all the Nobles of the Kingdom, to bear down the House of
Commons, and perhaps to procure the dissolving of Parliaments, to the great
disturbance of the whole Kingdom and State.

They have raised up a bellum Episcopale to dash two Kingdoms one against
another, to the shedding of much blood, if God in mercy prevent it not.

They keep up a Romish Hierarchy among us, full of corruption, which they
suffer not to be reformed.

They uphold the forenamed sinful Prelatical and Priestly Clergy, so as those
their Priests be conformable to all their Rites and Ceremonies, they may in a
manner live as they list, and be supported against all those that shall attempt
their reformation.

They are pleased with the peoples ignorance, and their contentedness, resting
in a long read Service, without better instruction, holding reading to be
preaching, and preaching no part of divine Service, that so such silly people
might be misled in gross blindness, perishing for lack of knowledge.

They suppress Lectures and also Sermons in the afternoon, and allow no
questions in catechizing; but only such as be in the very common Catechism,
much hindering increase of knowledge.

They will permit no Minister to preach nor to expound in his own Parish
without paying for a License, for which when he has paid, they never care
whether he preach or no.

They will allow none of the people to seek for instruction, when they want it
at home, nor yet press the Minister to the discharge of his duty, but trouble
others.

They never trouble any Minister for neglect of his duty in preaching; But
diligent preachers they have a jealous eye over, and are ready to take an
occasion to vex them, as not for their turn.

They sinfully trouble thousands of Churchwardens and Side men, making them
swear to their Articles which cannot be observed.

They hinder prohibitions, stop the courses of Law, and terrify both Lawyers
and Judges.

They dare to fine and imprison without Law, going beyond as Spiritual power;
yea, and the Laws of our Land.

They have ever been plotting to ensnare Christ's painful Ministers, that they
might root them out.

I. They have pressed upon them Subscription, and Ceremonies, and so cast out
very many.

II. They have urged the oath ex officio, and by this they have undone not a
few.

III. They procured the reading of the declaration for profaning the Lords
day, and hereby many were suspended, excommunicated, and some deprived.

IV When they saw that all these things would not bring to pass their intended
mischief, they lately framed a wicked oath to be tendered to all Gods Ministers,
which whosoever would not take should be suspended first, and after deprived.

Lastly, to make up the measure of their evils, they have illegally given a
Subsidy to be extorted from under the name of a benevolence, which who so shall
refuse to pay, is utterly undone, according to their merciless decree in a
Book published, which now they are loath should see the light, and be read of
any judicious and religious Laymen.

They are the cause of the division and separation among us, by their Lordly
rule; by their rigorous exacting conformity, and by their cruel dealing with
such, as do not obey their Lordly wills.

They suffer Papists, and nourish Arminians in the bosom of their Church, to
the disturbance and danger of the true Church of Christ, and this whole State.

They allow to vain people Revels, heathenish vanities, unchristian meetings,
and that on the Lords day, to profane it, and have procured a Declaration for
the reading of this licencious liberty in every Church in time of Divine
service; and such Ministers as refused, they did suspend, excommunicate, and
some they deprived, the like never heard of in any Church of Christ.

They will have bowing to Altars, and yet permit notorious offenders, yea
Thieves and Murt herers condemned (if they have gotten pardons) to come to the
holy Sacrament, before satisfaction be given to the congregation, yea
drunkards, blasphemous Swearers, infamous Adulterers, and other vile persons
may receive, and not be debarred, if they can satisfy their Courts, and free
themselves from thence, though they do not manifest their repentance to the
Congregation, eating and drinking the holy Sacrament unworthily to their own
damnation, a profaneness much to be lamented.

They hunt after Greatness, and not for goodness, but for gain, and do
withstand all good means of reformation, and all the ways of redressing their
corrupt courses, much to the hindrance of the growth in Religion, and walking
with God.

Quaere.

Whether these evils are not such as may force all pious men to lay them to
heart, and to seek that they may be removed, as far as they are able to the
utmost, that we may be freed from their unjustifiable courses, and grievous
wrongs.

Whether we should not endeavor to introduce that which may better the
Ecclesiastical government, and bring this Prelatical power within bounds, and
our selves from the intolerable burden thereof.

The humble Petition.

That for these so many great and grievous evils they may be questioned, and
caused to reform, or else be censured and punished.

For they never had possession peaceably, but they have been

1 Prayed against for a long time.

2 Preached against by many.

3 Written against by diverse on this side, and beyond the Seas

4 Testified against by suffering Suspension, Excommunication' deprivation,
open punishment, to the cropping of Ears, slitting of the Nose, standing on
the pillorie, imprisonment, and some have suffered death.

5 Withstood by the Sword.

And what now remains, but for these their evils they should be condemned by
the Honorable and happy Assembly in Parliament.

That a better way of Government might be thought of, after the wisdom of God
in the State, tending not to the subversien of Ecclesiastical Government, but
to moderate the now Prelatical governors, ease the Land of excessive charges,
rid our selves of these insufferable evils, weaken the Kingdom of Satan,
advance the glory, and procure our own peace and happiness.

A short Letanie.
From this Prelatical pride and their Lordly dignities.

From all their superstitious vanities, and Popish Ceremonies.

From their late innovations and mischievous policies.

From the cursed oath Ex officio, and high Commission cruelties

From their Romish Clergy, and the peoples unsufferable maseries.

From their greedy gainful visitations, and the Churchwardens enforced
perjuries.

From their most corrupt Courts, and their vexing slaveries.

From all their fruitless shadows and hypocritical formalities.

From their hatred and malice against Christ's appointed Ordinances.

From their needlesley devised and troublesome conformities.

From all their Illegal proceedings, and oppressing Tyrannies.

From their sinful Synods, and all their Papal Hierarchy.

From Abaddon and Apollyon, with their Priests, Jesuits, their favorites, and
all their furious blasphemies.

Good Lord deliver us.

A short draught of Church Government to be erected.
I. In every Parish.

THat there be a meeting of choice men, for wisdom gravitie, and love of
Religion, to wit, Churchwardens, elsewhere called Elders, and Overseers of
the poor, in other Churches called Deacons, the number more or sewer, as the
place shall require.

These with their Pastor to come together, as often as shall be judged fit, at
a set time and place, once a month to look unto all within the Parish,
concerning their Religion, their honest behavior, and peaceable demeanure, and
to see all abuses reformed, according to the word of God, and according to the
godly and Ecclesiastical laws, which shall be prescribed unto them.

This will free us from all weekly corrupt Courts, and free the people from all
burdensome expenses, and not suffer sin to reign as it does in every
Congregation.

II. In every division or Circuit.

That there be a Presbytery of Ministers, such as they should be, learned,
grave, and godly men.

The meeting to be appointed at a certain time and place once a fortnight, and
in every meeting an Election to be freely made of a fit moderator in it.

These are to see how the government is to be observed in Parishes, and how
Ministers and Overseers do discharge their duties: at this meeting Minister^
gifts are to be showed and tried, that such as come thither may be edified and
instructed, and here are they to be ordained.

III. In every Province.

That there be a Provincial Synod gathered once a year of godly and learned
Pastors, and out of every County, certain learned and grave Divines selected,
and the number to be according to the Circuits in every County.

In this to look into the Presbyterian Assemblies, and to see that all things
be well ordered according as they ought to be.

IV In the whole Nation.

That a general Assembly National be gathered once in three year, of chosen
men, to consult for the general good of all, to make Canons, and to establish
Ecclesiastical Government.

Of the Excelleny of this Government.

I. It may stand with a Monarchy, for what is here that justly can be said to
hinder it?

II. It takes off all Prelatical Lordly tyranny, for every part is subordinate
to another, the Parochial meeting to the Superintendent and his Presbytery,
this Presbytery to the County Assembly, this Assembly to the Provincial Synod,
and this to the National Convocation.

III. It keeps Pastors to their spiritual function, and suffers them not to
intermeddle in Civil and worldly affairs.

IV. It sets up a learned and preaching Ministry, and casts out the before
mentioned Prelatical destroying Clergy.

V. It furthers the power of Religion, in Families, Villages, Towns, Cities,
in Universities, and in Princes Palaces.

VI. Its Christ's government, and easy yoke, freeing Gods people from great
payments, as has before been named, from all the corruptions of the Courts,
which all the Land does groan under, from that cruel oath ex officio, and that
unlimited high Commission grievous to be born.

Its a government that aymeth at godliness, and not at greatness and gain.

It makes none jealous of painful Pastors, none to be offended at Christian
meetings, as if they were Conventicles, none to envy other men's graces, but
stirs up to wrath one over another, and freely to admonish one another, to
further one another to Heaven.

It graceth very highly the godly and learned Laity.

Its grounded upon the word, proceeds by the word, rejecting the Popish Canon
Law, Popish Ceremonies, Popish Superstitions, and Idolatry, and all men's vain
inventions, in Doctrine, Sacrament, worship and government of CHRIST.

Lord Jesus advance thine own self in thine own Ordinance.
The second part of the Letanie.
That it may please thee to take into thine own hand thine own cause, to plead
against all thine Enemies, which would not have thee to reign over them.

That it may please thee to deliver us from cruel and unreasonable men, and let
them be snared in the work of their own hands, let their feet be taken in their
own net, and let them fall into the pit they dig for others.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

The Conclusion of all is this, and the sum of my desire, viz. that there may
be a full Conformity in Doctrine and Discipline, with the rest of the
Protestant Churches of Scotland, reformed Church of France, Geneva, etc.

1. For this will prevent future differences betwixt the two Nations.

2. Prevent the removal of many of the Kings good subjects into other
countries, with many other benefits.

This I humbly request to be taken into Consideration, which being done, will
bring a blessing upon this Kingdom and Church.

The manner of CONSECRATION Of the BISHOPS IN DUBLIN By the LORD PRIMATE, in
this present year 1660.
WHereas we have thought fit to appoint the 27th. of this instant January 1660.
for the Consecration of Bishops; To the end therefore that the same may be so
ordered, a^ decency and the dignity of so holy an Office shall require; We have
thought fit, by the advice of our Brethren the Bishops, who are to assist in
that sacred Administration, and with whom we have consulted in that behalf to
order,

That at seven of the clock in the morning of the said day, the Lords Bishops
Elect do attend us, at the Dean of Christ-Church his house, and that all the
Bishops Consecrators be there also in their cornered Caps, Rochets and Chimers.

That notice be given to the said Deans of the two Cathedral Churches of
D^blin, that they likewise are expected to attend at the same time and place in
their formalities.

That the said Deans respectively shall give orders to the Dignitaries
Prebendaries, Canons, Pettit-Canons, Vicars, Chorals, and Choristers, that they
do attend at the same hour, in their respective formalities in the body of
Christ-Church.

That the Vice Chancellor, or Pro-Vice Chancellor of the University, all
Doctors of Divinity, and of the Law, as also all the Ministers and Civilians in
this City, with the whole University, do likewise repair thither, so far as
they can conveniently furnish themselves, with gowns and formalities to their
respective Offices and Dignities appertaining.

That the order of proceeding be as follows.

The Pursivant of the Court of Prerogative, and the Apparatour general
bare-headed.

The Vergers of the said two Cathedrals also bare-headed.

The Choristers two and two, and the rest of the Procedents also in order, two
and two as follows.

Vicars-Chorals.

Pettit-canons.

Prebends.

Dignitaries.

The said two Deans.

The Bishops Elect in their Albs.

The Lord Primates Gent. Usher, and Secretary bareheaded.

The Lord Primate.

The other Bishops Consecrators two and two.

The Bedel of the University.

The Vice Chancellor, or Provice-Chancellor, and Provost.

Deans and Doctors two and two.

That the abovesaid orders may proceed with a silent, solemn, and slow-paced
gravity, until the time of entrance into the West-gate of St. Patricks Church,
where the Vicars and Choristers are to proceed singing into the Quire, and
there continue singing the te Deum, accompanied with the Organ, until the
Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of the principal precedents shall be placed
and seated in their respective stalls.

That the office of morning prayer be solemnly celebrated by the Dean of the
said Church. Which ended, Dr. Jer. Tailor Lord Bishop Elect of Down, designed
to preach the Concio ad Clerum, is to ascend the Pulpit during the singing of
per veni nobis.

That after the said Bishop has ended his Sermon, he be conveyed by the Verger
to his Stall.

That upon his Lordships descent from the Pulpit an Anthem be sung.

That from the end of the Anthem the voice of the Organ be heard, and continued
until the Lord Primate and the other Bishops who are to consecrate, ascend into
the enclosure within the rails, and somewhat longer; at least till the noise,
which may be occasioned by the usual motion of the People from their places
after Sermon, shall cease.

That after the Primate and Bishops Consecrators are seated in their chairs,
and the sound of the Organs continuing, the Vicar General (as sent by the said
Primate) is to go to the Lords Elect, sitting in their stalls, and so with the
Dean of St. Patrick to conduct their Lordships to the enclosure, and there to
range them in their order according as direction shall be given by the Primate.

That then the office of consecration be celebrated, which ended, the Anthem to
that purpose composed by the Dean of St. Patricks called Quam denuo exaltavit
Dominus coronam, be sung as it here follows.

Anthem after the Consecration.
Treble. Now that the Lord has re-advanct the Crown,
Which thirst of spoil and frantic zeal threw down.

Tenor. Now that the Lord the Miter has restored,
Which with the Crown lay in the dust abhorred.

Treble -- Praise him ye Kings Chorus all sing,

Tenor -- Praise him ye Priests Chorus all sing,
Glory to Christ our High Priest, Highe^^ King.

Treble. May Judahs Royal Scepter still shine clear,

Tenor. May Aarons holy Rod still blossoms bear.

Treble and Tenor. Scepter and Rod rule still, and guide our land,
And those whom God anoints f^el no rude hand;
May Love, Peace, Plenty, wait on Crown and Chair,
And may both share in blessings as in care.

Chorus. Angels look down, and joy to see,
Like that above, a Monarchy.
Angels look down, and joy to see
Like that above, an Hierarchy.

That while Veni Creator is in singing, the Bishops to be consecrated shall
have their Rochets and Chimers put on; which done, the consecration ended, and
the Anthem and Te Deum sung, the Communion is to follow, and after the
Communion the blessing to be pronounced by the Lord Primate.

That after the Consecration ended, the whole P^ocession do attend us to the
Primate his lodgings.

That the laetificetur cor Regis be sung before the Lord Primate, as he goes
from the quire to the outward part of the Church.

That in the return of his Grace from the Church, the procession be so altered,
that the now consecrated Archbishops and Bishops, be disposed with the other
Bishops Consecrators, according to the respective dignities of their Sees,
Quality, and Seniority of Consecration.

This is an exact Copy. Jo. Armacanus.

A Particular of the manifold Evils, Pressures and Grievances, caused,
practiced and occasioned by the Prelates and their Dependants.
I. FIrst, the subjecting and inclining all Ministers under them and their
Authority, and so by degrees exempting of them from the Temporal power, whence
follows.

II. The faint-heartedness of Ministers to preach the truth of GOD, least they
should displease the Prelates, as namely, the Doctrine of Predestination, of
Free Grace, of Perseverance, of Original sin remaining after Baptism, of the
Sab^ath, the Doctrine against Universal Grace, Election, for faith foreseen,
Free will, against Antichrist, Non residents, humane Inventions of GODS
worship: All which are generally with-field from the peoples knowledge, because
not relishing to the Bishops.

III. The encouragement of Ministers to despise the Temporal Magistracy, the
Nobles, and Gentry of the Land, to abuse the Subject^, and live contentiously
with their neighbors, knowing that they being the Bishops Creatures, they shall
be supported.

IV. The restraint of many godly and able men from the Ministry, and thrusting
out of many Congregations their faithful, dil^gent and powerful Ministers, who
lived peaceably with them, and did them good, only because they cannot in
conscience submit unto, and maintain the Bishops needless divices; nay
sometimes for no other cause but for their zeal in preaching, or great
Auditories.

V. The suppressing of that Godly design set on foot by certain Sects, and
sugared with many great gifts by sundry well-affected persons, for the buying of
Impropriations, and placing of able Ministers in them, maintaining of Lectures,
and founding of Free-schooles; which the Prelates could not endure, least it
should darken their glories, and draw the Ministers from their dependence upon
them.

VI. The great increase of Idle, lewd, and dissolute, ignorant and erroneous
men in the Ministry, which swarm like the Locusts of Egypt over the whole
Kingdom: and will they but wear a Cononical Coat, a Surplisse, a Hood, bow
at the Name of Jesus, and be zealous of Superstitious Ceremonies, they may live
as they list, confront whom they please, preach and vent what errors they
will, and neglect preaching at their pleasures, without control.

VII. The discouragement of many from bringing up their Children in Learning,
the many schisms, errors and strange opinions which are in the Church; great
corruptions which are in the Universities; the gross and lamentable ignorance
almost every where among the people; the want of preaching Ministers in very
many places both of England and Wales, the loathing of the Ministry, and the
general defection to all manner of profaneness.

VIII. The swarming of lascivious, idle, and unprofitable Books and Pamphlets,
Play-books, and Ballads, as namely, Ovids fits of Love, the Parliament of Women
came out at the dissolving of the last Parliament, Barnes Poems, Parkers
Ballads in disgrace of Religion, to the increase of all vice, and withdrawing
of people from reading, studying, and hearing the Word of God, and other good
Books.

IX. The hindering of godly Books to be printed, the blotting out or perverting
those which they suffer, all or most of that which strikes either at Popery, or
Arminianisme, the adding of what or where pleases them, and the restraints of
reprinting Books formerly licensed, without relicensing.

X The punishing and venting of Popish, Arminian, and other dangerous Books and
Tenets, as namely, that the Church of Rome is a true Church, and in the worst
times never erred in Fundamentals; that the Subjects have no propriety in their
Estates, but that the King may take from them what he pleases; that all is the
Kings, and that he is bound by no Law, and many other; from the former whereof
has sprung,

XI. The growth of Popery, and increase of Papists, Priests and Jesuits in
sundry places, but especially about London since the Reformation, the frequent
venting of Crucifixes and Popish pictures both engraven and painted, and the
placing of such in Bibles.

The multitude of Monopolies and Pattents, drawing with them innumerable
Perjuries, the large increase of Customs and Impositions upon Commodities, the
Ship-monys and many other great burdens upon the Common wealth, under which
all groan.

XIII. Moreover, the Offices and Jurisdictions of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, being the same way of Church Government which is in the
Romish Church, and which was in England in the time of Po^ery, little change
thereof being made (except only the head from whence it was derived) the same
Arguments supporting the Pope, which do uphold the Prelates and overthrowing
the Prelates, which do pull down the Pope, and other reformed Churches having
upon their rejection of the Pope, cast the Prelates out also as Members of the
Beast: Hence it is, that the Prelates here in England by themselves or their
Disciples plead and maintain that the Pope is not Antichrist, and that the
Church of Rome is a true Church, has not erred in Fundamental points, and that
Salvation is attainable in that Religion, and therefore have restrained to pray
for the Conversion of our Sovereign Lady the Queen. Hence also has come,

XIV. The great Conformity and likeness both continued and increased of our
Church to the Church of Rome, in vestures, Postures, Ceremonies and
Administrations; namely, as the Bishops Rotchets, and Lawn-sleeves, the four
cornered Cap, the Cope and Surplisse, the Tippit, the Hood, and the Canonical
Coat, the Pulpit clothed, especially now of late with the Jesuits badge upon
them every way.

XV. The standing up at Gloria Patri and at the reading the Gospel, praying
toward the East, bowing at the Name of JESUS, the bowing to the Altar toward
the East, Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Communion.

XVI. The turning of the Communion Tables Altar-wise, setting Images,
Crucifixes and conceits over them, and Tapers and Books upon them, and bowing,
and adoring to or before them, the reading of the second Service at the Altar,
and forcing people to come up thither to receive, or else denying the Sacrament
to them, terming the Altar to be the Mercy-seat, or the place of God Almighty
in the Church, which is a plain device to usher in the Mass.

XVII. The Christening and Consecrating of Churches and Chapels, the
Consecrating Fonts, Pulpits, Tables, Chalices, Church yards, and many other
things, and putting holiness in them; yea, reconsecrating upon pretended
pretended pollution, as though every thing were unclean without their
Consecrating, and for want of this, sundry Churches have been interdicted and
kept from use as polluted.

XVIII. The Liturgy for the most parts framed out of the Romish Breviarie
Retualium Masse-book, also the Book of Ordination, for Archbishops and
Ministers, framed out of the Roman Pontifical.

XIX. The Multitude of Canons formerly made, wherein, among other things,
Excommunication ipso facto, is denounced for speaking of a word against the
devices abovesaid, or subscription thereunto, though no Law enjoined a
restraint from the ministry without such subscription and Appeal is denied to
any that should refuse subscription or unlawful conformity, though be never so
much wronged by the inferior Judge, also the Canons made in the late Sacred
Synod, as they call it: wherein are many strange and dangerous devices to
undermine the Gospel, and the Subjects liberties, to propagate Popery to spoil
Gods people, ensnare Ministers and other Students, and so to draw all into an
absolute subjection and thraldom to them and their government, spoiling both
the King and the Parliamant of their power.

XX. The countenancing pluriality of Benefices, prohibiting of Marriages
without their license at certain times, almost half the year, and licensing of
Marriages without Banes asking.

XXI. Profanation of the Lords day pleading for it, and enjoining Ministers to
read a Declaration, set forth, as it is thought, by their procurement for
tolerating of sports upon that day, suspending and depriving many Godly
Ministers for not reading the same only out of Conscience, it was against the
Law of God so to do, and no Law of the land to enjoin it.

XXII. The pressing of the strict observation of Saints Days, whereby great
sums of Moneys are drawn out of Vens purses for working on them, a very high
burden on most people, who getting their living by their daily employments,
must either omit them and be idle, or part with their money, whereby many poor
families are undone, or brought behind hand, yea many Churchwardens are sued
or threatened to be sued by their troublesome Min^sters, perjured persons for
not presenting their Parishioners who failed in observing Holy days.

XXIII. The great increase and frequencie of whoredoms, and Ad^lterers,
occasioned by the Prelates Corrupt administration of justice, in such cases,
who taking upon them the punishment of it, do turn all into moneys for the
filling of their purses, and least their Officers should defraud them of their
gain, they have in their late Canon, in stead of remedying their vices, decreed
that the Commutation of Penance, shall not be without the Bishops privity.

XXIV. The general abuse of that great ordinance of Excommunication, which GOD
has left in his Church to be used as the last and greatest punishment the
Church can inflict upon obstinate and great offenders, and that the Prelates
and their officers, who of right, have nothing to do with it, do daily
excomunicate men either for doing that which is lawful, or for vain, idle and
trivial matters, as working or opening a shop on a Holi-day, for not appearing
at every beck upon their summons, not paying a fee or the like, yea they have
made it, as they do all other things, a hook or instrument wherewith to empty
men's purses, and to advance their own greatness, and so that sacred ordinance
of God, by their perverting of it, becomes contemptable to all men, and seldom
or never used against notorious offenders, who, for the most part, are their
favorites.

XXV. Yea further the pride and ambition of the Prelates being boundless,
unwilling to be subject to either man or Laws, they claim their Office and
Jurisdiction to be Jure divino, exercise Ecclesiastical authority in their own
names and Rights, and under their own Seals, and take upon them temporal
dignities, places, and offices in the Commonwealth that they may sway both
swords.

XXVI. Whence follows the taking Commissions in their own Courts and
Consistories, and where else they sit in matters determinable of Right at
Common Law, the putting of Ministers upon Parishes, without the Patrons and
peoples consent.

XXVII. The imposing of Oaths of various and trivial Articles yearly upon
Churchwardens, and Sidemen, which without perjury, unless they fall at jars
continually with their Ministers and neighbors, and wholly neglect their own
calling.

XXVIII The exercising of the Oath ex Off^^io, and other proceedings by the way
of Inquisition, reaching even to men's thoughts, the apprehending and detaining
of men by Pursivants, the frequent suspending and depriving of Ministers,
fining and imprisoning of all sorts of people, breaking up of men's houses and
studies, taking away men's Books, Letters, and other writings, seizing upon
their Estates, removing them from their callings, separating between them and
their wives against both their wills, the rejection of prohibitions with
threatenings, and the doing of many other outrages, to the utter infringing the
Laws of the Realm, and the Subjects liberties, and arraigning of them and
their families; and of later time the Judges of the Land are so awed with the
power and greatness of the Prelates, and other ways promoted, that neither
prohibition, Habeas Corpus, or any other lawful remedy can be had or take place
for the distressed Subjects in most cases, only Papists, Jesuits, Priests,
and such others as propagate Popery or Arminianism are countenanced, spared,
and have much liberty, and from hence followed among others these dangerous
consequences.

I. FIrst the general hope and expectation of the Romish part, that their
superstitious Religion will ere long be fully planted in this Kingdom again,
and so they are encouraged to persist therein, and to practice the same openly
in diverse places, to the high dishonor of God, and contrary to the laws of the
Realm.

II. Secondly, the discouragement and destruction of all good Subjects, of whom
all multitudes both Clothiers, Merchants, and others being deprived of their
Ministers, and over-burthened with these pressures, have departed the Kingdom,
to Holland and other parts, and have drawn with them a great part of
manufacture of Cloth and Trading out of the land into other places, where they
reside, whereby wool, the great staple of the Kingdom, is become of small
value and vends not, trading is decayed, many poor people want work, Seamen
lose employment, and the whole land much impoverished, to the great dishonor
of this Kingdom, and blemishment to the government thereof.

III. The present wars and commotions happened between his Majesty and his
Subjects of S^otland, wherein his Majesty and all his Kingdom are endangered,
and suffer greatly, and are like to become a prey to the common Enemy, in case
the wars go on, which we exceedingly fear will not only go on, but also
increase to an utter ruin of all, unless the Prelate^ with their dependancies
be removed out of England, and also they and their practices, who, as we, under
your Honors favor, do verily believe and conceive, have occasioned the
quarrel.

All which we humbly refer to the consideration of this honorable Assembly,
desiring the Lord of Heaven to direct you in the right way to redress all
these evils.

FINIS.
THE ANATOMY OF THE Common Prayer Book, Wherein is Remonstrated the
Unlawfulness of it: and that by Five several Arguments.

Namely, From the Name of it, The Rise, The Matter, The Manner, and The Evil
Effects of it.


John 9.31. Now we know that GOD hears not Sinners; but if any man be a
Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. (...). A pure Prayer is
Gods Temple. By DWALPHINTRAMIS.

Printed in the year, 1661.

TO The Well-affected READER.
Christian Reader,
OUt of a Respect to the Glory of the great God, who is a God that will he
worshipped by true Worshippers in Spirit and in Truth, as also with a Desire of
thy eternal good; here is presented this following Treatise, which was formerly
Penned by some Eminent Orthodox Divines, Late Non-Conformists, wherein are many
solid Arguments, and Reasons, declaring, and clearly proving, the Book of
Common Prayer, or Liturgy, to be wholly taken out of the Masse-book; As first,
The Common Prayers are taken out of the Breviary; Secondly, The Administration
of the Sacraments, Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, are taken out of
the Ritual, or Book of Rites; Thirdly, The Consecration of the Lords Supper,
Collects, Epistles and Gospels, are out of the Masse-book: Fourthly, The
Ordination of Archbishops, Bishops, and Ministers, is out of the Roman
Pontifical: So that the Service Book being thus unmasked, is plainly evinced,
to be a rank Impostor in Gods Worship; and, notwithstanding its long
Possession, it is even a violent intruder in the House of God.

Then a Word to you Readers, which are of Three sorts, either doubtful in
suspense, who by this Treatise may be fully resolved; or such as use it, and
Idolize it, by strength of Reason may be brought off, and that such as cannot
brook it, may be encouraged, not only (as a Learned Author observes) because
many of Gods People are of the same mind, but chiefly because God is of the
same mind: Lastly, How much does it concern all such, who have lifted up their
hands to the Most High God, in a Solemn League and Covenant, for the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Profaneness, and the
Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, according to the
Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches, to contend earnestly for the
Truth, and for purity in Gods Worship? This being the prime work of the day,
and of this Book, to inform thee of the Truth, and (as the Scripture says) if
the Truth make us free, we shall be free indeed.

THE ANATOMY OF THE COMMON PRAYER BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Preface.
AS Loyalty to King and Country, is the very fortress and wall of Polity, being
Commanded and commended, both by the Laws of God and nature; so Pure and
undefiled Religion, James 1.27.
is the Fountain and Rock of approved Loyalty; yea, equity, charity, sobriety
and loyalty are the Virgin daughters of unspotted Piety, as the foresaid place
witnesses: we could be large in this Theme, but we hasten to the Particular;
the subject whereof is one of the weightiest Pieces that yet has been
presented, namely, The Service Book, which notwithstanding the present surfeit
of Books, yet we hope it shall find a place in the most serious and judicious
thoughts; we may well call it with the Comic, Fundi nostri calamitas, The
overwhelming storm of the Purity of worship; for as it is true, No Ceremony, no
Bishop, because the Ceremonies are the pitchy wings whereon they fly; so it is
as true, that no Service Book, no Ceremony; for that is the Magazine of nimble
Ceremonies. Doctor Boys, in his Epistle Dedicatory to Richard Canterbury, upon
his Exposition of the Lyturgy, complains heavily, yet causelessly, that the
Lyturgy is crucified between two Malefactors, on the left hand Papists, on the
right hand Schismatics, meaning Puritans; both of these he calls Foxes: but
by a just retortion, we shall set the saddle on the right Horse, and shall
make it appear, that the Purity of Christ his worship in this Land, has long
been crucified between two Thieves, namley, that Superstitious and Popish
Liturgy and rank Atheism, varnished with Superstition, to whom we may well
apply that saying of Luther, Praefat. in Com. in Gal.
They are tied together by their tayls to do mischief, though by their heads
they seem to be contrary; and though we have no time to run over the Common
Places of Atheism and Superstition, and to show how like Pilate and the
Superstitious Jews, they concur to the crucifying of Christ in his Worship;
yet, thus much the Scripture witnesses, and experience proves, and we humbly
desire your Honors to mind it, That all Superstition, and the Purity of Gods
Worship, ever have been and shall be at continual wars, and can no more dwell
under one roof, than a chaste Spouse, and a Proud inveigling Strumpet; or no
more in one Temple, than Dagon and the Ark. Geneca.
Superstitio est res insana, Superstition (says one) is a mad thing, and so
indeed it is; for it is contrary to the wisdom of the Word, and of the Spirit,
which are the ground and life of the Worship of God. Superstitio est vitium
contrarium Religioni, Superstition is a sin opposite to Religion (says
Aquinas) which is very clear from the nature and rise of it; Sere. secund. q.
92. Art 19
for as Religion is a worshipping of God according to his will, Quisquis
praeceptis Coelestibus obtemperavit, is culior est, Whosoever follows the
Divine Precepts, he is a worshipper of God, says Lactant. but superstition
carrying the very nature in the name of it, Lib 6. c. 2
tells us, that it is Supra statutum, over and above the Statutes of God: the
word in the Greek is (...), as if it should signify the sear of the Devil, and
the signification suits very well with the nature of the thing; for when a Man
coyneth a Worship to himself, he recedeth so far from the fear of God, and
whereas the Devil is the Author of all Superstitious worship, whether it be of
another God, or of the true God, after a way of self-device, or will worship,
then it may be truly called, the fear of the Devil, as the true Worship of the
true God is notioned under the name of his fear: this Superstition shuts up
the way to the Jews conversion, and opens the mouths of Atheistical
Gentiles, against the Profession of all Religion, in derision whereof Averroes
speaks tauningly thus: In Metaphys. 12
Sit anima mea cum Philosophis, quia Christiani adorant quod edunt; Let my soul
be with the Philosophers because the Christians adore that which they eat: So
may the Jews take occasion to say: Let our souls be with the Old Ceremonies,
since the Christians New Ceremonies are so foppish and ridiculous; having no
footing from the Word of God. But to bring the charge to the Particular in
hand, if our Lyturgy be not a Mass of Superstition, and Superstitious
Ceremonies, we profess we know not what Superstition is: to instance it in one
Particular, namely, in the grand Ceremony of Adoration or kneeling at the
Sacrament; has it not been the staff and strentgh of that abominable Idol the
breaden God? and if the Masters of the Ceremonies disavow that opinion, yet the
Sermons and Writings of diverse of them do testify to their face, how they go
as far, yea, and farther than many Papists in that particular; Lib. 36.12. De
missa li. 2 c. 23.48. p. 242.
As it is true that the current of Popish Champions do maintain the bodily
Presence, as Innocentius the Father of that Monster, Bellarmine, and Haiga the
Expositor of the English Mass, by changing and choping that Fiat corpus; so
diverse of the Canterburian faction, as himself, Mountague, Pocklington,
Lawrence, agree with the Papists and Lutherans in this point, namely,
concerning the Matter, leaving the Manner as a Cabalistical Mystery: devocibus
dixi, ne de missa quidem, Antid. P. 10.
imo nec transubstantiationis certamen moverimus; for words (says Mountague)
as the Mass, yea, or Transubstantiation it self, Sermon. P. 17, 18.
we will not contend. I like not those (says Doctor Lawrence) that say his
body is not there: and to explain himself he adds Substantially, Essentially,
not by way of Commemoration or Representation: but should not this be their
opinion, since they act what they hold by a material Altar, Priest, and
Sacrifice, had not that Hydra of the Scottish Lyturgy made a greater Monster,
by the addition of some more heads, and that very cunningly, by the English
Authors, and sent out to take in the Church of Scotland (had not that we say,
lost all the heads and had the brains dashed against the stones) the aforesaid
Authors made no question, but that all the power of both Head and Tail should
have had room enough to domineer here in England, the Pope having such a large
Army both of Legionary and Auxiliary Forces to maintain it. But blessed be God,
who brake the head of that young Dragon in our Neighbor Nation, and we hope
will by you crush out all the blood of the old one here, who was the Mother of
that, and the Masse-book the Mother of both. There is a Proverb amongst the
Naturalists, (...), Except a Serpent eat a Serpent, it cannot become a Dragon:
so, except our Lyturgy had been full of Serpents, it could not have hatched the
Dragon that was sent unto Scotland. The Superstitions of this Bulk are such,
and so many, that if Paul were here and saw them, as he saw that of Athens,
he would undoudtedly cry out, Act. 17.
Men and Brethren, I see that in all things you are too Superstitious. We may
better apply that Speech of Tacitus concerning Superstition, 22 Annal lib. 14
not exitialis, hurtful or dangerous, but execrabilis, cursed and execrable;
and so it is indeed, both to whole Churches, and other People, whose eyes God
has opened to see the evil of it, which we are confident you do; Act. 25 27.
and I say as Paul said to King Agrippa, We know you believe it: But as it
seemed unreasonable to Festus to send Paul a Prisoner without the charge laid
against him; Act. 26.27.
so we neither will, nor dare charge any thing upon this Lyturgy, which we
shall not Prove, nor desire the outing of it without good and sound Reasons for
our desire; and therefore we humbly and heartily desire your Honors to take
into your consideration these five Reasons following.

The first is from the Name, wherein the Champions of the Service Book agree
with the Papists, calling it the Mass.

The second is from the Ground of it.

The third is from the Matter of it.

The fourth is from the Manner of it.

The fifth is from the Effects of it, to which we will add some Motives.

CHAP. II. Of the Name.
FOr the First, the Service-book-men, and the Papists do mutually interchange
the Name of Lyturgy and Mass; the latter call their Mass by the name of
Lyturgy: the Jesuit, Sanctes, Professes, That the most convenient Name that
can be given to the Mass, Liturg. p. 8.
is that of Lyturgy or Service, not but that the word Lyturgy is of good use,
for (...), signifies to officiate in sacred Worship, witness, Act. 13.1.
(...), as they were ministering unto the Lord. Where the Rhemists vaunt of a
coined liberty, To 15.16
to translate the word, saying Mass, which were to cross the truth; and all
the learned upon the place, as Oecumenius, Theophylact, and Chrysostom; yea,
and their own Expositors, as Casetan and others: the Apostle renders it by
another Word of the same value, (...) but howsoever they scrape kindness to a
word of use, till they abuse it; yet who knows not, that knows any thing,
that their Liturgy is the very Lethargy of Worship: And what difference
between our Liturgy and theirs? Truly nothing but a pair of sheers, and
putting ours in a Coat of another tongue, as shall afterward abundantly appear,
only ours has not all that theirs has: but ours has nothing to a word, but
out of theirs: And thence it is, that our Lyturgian Patrons do meet the Jesuit
midway, by owning the name of Mass to our Service Book, Sunday n^ sabbath.
Witness Pocklington, who calls the second Service, just the same with the
Mass: so Cozens, witness Master Smart's Sermon, and not only so, in relation
to the second Service, Antic. p. 10.
but even in regard of the whole Bulk, as Pocklington in the end of his Altar,
etc. and Mountague. In name you see then, there is an unanimous agreement, and
(...) names are the very images of things: and for their agreement in matter
and manner, in all things of importance, we shall make it as evident as the
former: in the mean time, what reason is there, that we should groan still
under the burden of a Lyturgie born in upon us, under the Name and Nature of a
Mass, which is nothing but a Mass of Idolatry, and an Idol of Abomination? The
name is a name of Blasphemy out of the Devils Cabula, as we take it: For what
language it is, or what it signifies, for any thing we know, was never yet
known; the Hebrews call their Tribute by the name of Missa, witness that place
in Exodus, laying out the oppression of the Israelites, by Pharaoh and his
Princes, or Officers, Exodus 1.11.
who are called Officers of the Tribute set over Gods people: the Word Tribute
in the first language is, Missa, of the word Messas, as the Learned observe,
which signifies to melt: both the name and Etimologie, suit very well with the
Popish Mass: for it has melted away true Religion and Spiritual devotion, and
as it inslaveth the souls of people, by leaving them naked (as Solomon says)
of the Preaching of the Word, Prove. 29.18.
for so the word signifies, so it is made an engine to screw out the bowels of
their estates, wasting and melting men's substance, as the snow against the Sun,
besides the universal experience of the extortion of the Mass, where ever it
bears sway; we may instance it too fully in this Island, where infinite
Masses of Money has been melted away within these few Years, without any
profit to the King or Subject, but to the great prejudice of both: for the
exhausting of the Subject is the emptiness of the King. Tiberius could say,
Adulterinum est aurum quod cum subditorum lachrymis exprimitur, it is a base
kind of Gold that is squeezed out with the tears of the subject; but who has
cast the State in this consumption of money? Who has made the hearts to ache,
and the Souls to groan of honest Householders, when they have been forced it may
be, to part with more than they had? Who in time of Peace, and under good Laws,
have caused men's Houses and Fields forcibly to be entered, their Goods to be
carried away? Who have caused the Kings liege People, and that for obeying the
Laws of God and man, to be carried to stifling Prisons, contrary to the Laws of
the Land, and privilege of the Subject? Who have caused some to be Tormented
and Tortured with unparalleled cruelty, both for kind and continuance? Lastly,
Who have been the Incendiaries or Firebrands to melt away (if they could) the
Kings love to his Subjects, and the Subjects true loyalty to the King; who (we
say) but these Lyturgian Lords, and their Jesuited confederates, together with
their Popish and hellishly profane Priests, Officers, and Appendices: to prove
these or any of them, were to show a Man the Sun: and many sheets could not
hold the Particulars. But to the purpose in hand, the Service or Masse-Book (as
they call it) is the main engine, it is the Saddle, and we (to speak a homely
Truth) are the Asses (for Englishmen are called by the Jesuits, the Popes
Asses) the Hierarchy and their Adherents are our riders: the Saddle has so
pinched and galled our Backs, that we know not how to take on the burden of
the Lord Jesus, though it be very light; our riders have with Spur and Rod of
their Rhadamanthean Courts and Temporal Usurpations so jaded us, (with leave be
it spoken) that they have almost rid the Spirit of zeal and courage out of us;
and had they but got the Saddle with some more new girts and trappings upon the
Scots, as they intended, they had gone near to have rid Religion and Policy to
death: Genesis 49.17.
but as the Scots have proved like Dan. Lions for Prowess, and Serpents for
Providence, in overturning both the Saddle and Rider; up in the Name of the
Lord, and do the like: What should we do with the Mass? Deuteronomy. 23.22.
some of whose Friends nor so well acquainted with the Nature of it, would
storm, if we should call a spade a spade, but they must believe their Book-mens
testimonies, published under the favor of their little great Landlord of the
Soil, (who knows best how it should be called ^one of whose Bandiliers tells
us in great heat, Pocklington. Sunday no Sabbath.
none but Schismatiques will deny the harmony of missification, away with it
then: To finish this point, I will enforce the conclusion with this Argument,
We are not to name an Idol but with detestation, much less are we to offer it
as a worship of God.

But the Service or Mass Book is an Idol, Ergo, we are not to mention it but
with detestation, much less to offer it to God as a Worship.

The Spirit is abundant in the proof of the former Proposition, Exodus 22.13.
Hos. 13.2. and 2.17. Psalm. 16.4. all remarkable Places, teaching us to be wary
with what Worship we join with; but in the first of these places there is a
Triplication of the charge in diverse terms, yet all beating upon the same
thing, to make us to look to it: In the latter Proposition there are two
things, one employed, namely, that the Service Book is the Mass Book; for proof
whereof, Habemus confitentes, we have their own avouchment; and if they should
deny it, we shall in the point following prove it, whereunto now we come.

CHAP. III. Of the Original.
THe second thing considerable for the matter in hand, is, whence the Lyturgie
has his rise or Original; Namely, from the Masse-book; that whose Original and
rise is naught must be naught in it self: Can there come clean water out of a
corrupt Fountain? Note that the Lyturgie is wholly from the Masse-book, and
other Popish pieces, as it shall be full cleared: First, by comparing of the
Books: Secondly, for that mutual liking that our Lyturgie-Masters, and the
Masse-Bookmen, have one of another peace. And thirdly, from the evidence given
from the King and Council of England.

Sect. Now, to the first, every piece and Parcel of the Lyturgie, word for
word, is out of these pieces; namely, the Breviary, out of which the
Common Prayers are taken; the Ritual or Book of Rites, out of which the
Administration of the Sacrament, Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the sick, are
taken; the Mass Book, out of which the Consecration of the Lords Supper,
Collects, Epistles and Gospels are taken: As for the Book of Ordination of
Archbishops, Bishops, and Ministers, that is out of the Roman Pontificial; we
might further prosecute the proof hereof, from the division of the Mass into
parts, essential and integral, with the enumeration of the said parts, Lib. 2.
de Missa c. 16.
as the ten or eleven parts of the preparation to the Introit, as Pater noster,
the first Collect, which Bellarmine calls the Mass, because they are the best
part of the Mass; p. 44.
The Introit, for which see Doctor Lauds pleading in his Star Chamber Speech,
the Kyrie Eleyson, or, Lord have mercy upon us, etc. The Gloria Patri, the
Misereatur, the Confession, the Absolution, the Angelick Hymn, Gloria in
Excelsis, word for word in the Scottish Lyturgie, Cap. 3. p. 107.
the Salutation, the Lord be with you; Lastly, the posterior collects, all
patches of Popes devising, which the brevity which we study, will not suffer us
to instance. Be pleased to see Morney de Missa. If any object that in our
Introit, the Ave Maria is wanting; we answer, (as has been said) that though
every thing in the Masse-book be not in our Lyturgie, yet all that is in our
Lyturgie, is word for word in the Masse-book.

Again, though Ave Maria be not actually in it, yet if purpose had holden, it
was in more than a fair possibility, to have been the head Cornerstone of the
Lyturgie, Witness Staffords invective defense thereof, Printed at London, not
disallowed nor retracted in any point, by Heylin or Dow, Canterburies surveyors
of the piece: further, that which has been said of the pieces of the Introit,
may also be said of our Creeds, Epistles and Gospels, Offertory, and other
things, whether more or less Principal, in regard of our calling them from the
Mass Book. love and liking, that the lovers of the Lyturgie bear to the Mass,
as also from that mutual contentment, or complacency that the Mass-mongers take
in the Service Book; we have showed already, p. ult.
how they agree in Name, and now we are to give evidence of their mutual liking
of the Matter; there be abundance of instances for the Papists approving of our
Liturgy, witness Mortons Appeal, Pope Pius, Explicat. Illust qua. 4. p 112. p.
46.
the fourth, and Gregory the thirteenth, offered to Queen Elizabeth to confirm
the English Liturgy, witnesses Doctor Abbot, then Prelat of Canterbury, and
Master Cambden in the life of Queen Elizabeth: to these I adjoyn Doctor Boys,
who was a bitter expositor of the English Liturgy, as Heiga by the Doctors of
Dowayes appointment was of the Mass, after he had whetted His Teeth upon the
Schismatiques, in his Epistle to Bancroft, he produces the letter of Pius, for
the approbation of the Service book; and notes also, the testimony of
approbation from Bristow in his motives. Motiv. 34.
Queen Elizabeth being interdicted by the Popes Bull, Secretary Walsingham
wrought so, that he procured two Intelligencers to be sent from the Pope, as it
were, in secret into England, to whom the Secretary appointed a State
Intelligencer to be their guide, who showed them London and Canterbury Service
in all the Pomp of it; which the Popish Intelligencers viewing and considering
well, with much admiration they wondered, that their Lord the Pope was so ill
advised, or at least ill informed, as to interdict a Prince, whose Service and
Ceremonies so symbolized with his own; and therefore returning to Rome, they
possessed the Pope that they saw no Service, Ceremonies or Orders in England,
Consid. p. 45 Sect. 9.
but they might very well serve in Rome, whereupon the Bull was recalled; to
this also Doctor Carrier a dangerous seducing Jesuit, gives ample evidence;
the Common Prayer Book (says he) and the Catechism contained in it, hold no
point of Doctrine expressly contrary to antiquity, that is, as he explaineth
himself, the Romish Service, etc. and thereupon he comfort himself with hope
of prevailing; and of the like mind were Harding and Bristow (as has been
said;) one more, and we have done: not long ago a Jesuit meeting a woman in
Paul's, in whose house he had lodged, she not knowing then that he was a
Jesuit, the workmen of Paul's being hot at service, he asked her how she liked
that work: she retorting the question, asked him how he liked it, he replied,
exceeding well, neither had he any exception to it; but that it was done by
their Priests. We have insisted the longer in this point; first, that men may
see, that this plain and evident approvement of our Liturgy by Papists, is not
from one singular or more indifferent Papist, but from an unanimous consent of
the greatest, zealousest and learned among them. Further, this symbolization
of Papists and Prelate-men in the name and nature of Mass and Liturgy,
discovers how they conspire against the Truth, and those who desire to worship
God in Spirit and Truth: it is a true maxim, Quae convenient in aliquo tertio,
convenient inter se, and dissentiunt a contrario; They who agree in a third,
agree between themselves, and dissent from the contrary; If the Papists then
sort with the Service-book-men, in the liking of the Liturgy, and the
Service-book-men with the Papists in the liking of the Mass, and so agree
betwixt themselves, they must both by consequent dissent from the true worship
of God, which is contrary to it. Lastly, the Papists liking of the
Service Book, makes it plainly appear, how little God likes it, for if it were
pleasing to God, it would never please the Papists: as the Israelites true and
sincere worshipping of God was an Abomination to the Egyptians, Exodus 8.26.
shall we sacrifice (says Moses) the abominations of the Egyptians before
their eyes, and will they not stone us? Even so, if this were the true worship
of God, the Papists and the Prelatical crew, would never endure it, but would
stone, tear in pieces, imprison, burn, banish, and kill with all manner of
cruelty, as they do, and have done, those that love and worship God according
to his Will; and as every shepherd was an Abomination to the Egyptians, so
there was no being for such Shepherds, as would not lead out, and lay down
their sheep by that muddy Nilus, or, Egyptian water; yea, and not only so, but
they must bear false witness in proclaiming it under their hand by
subscription, that this stinking puddle is the River of God; when indeed it is
the Euphrates of Babylon, by which the Soul of many grieved Ministers has sit
down with tears; being forced to hang his harp upon the Babylonish willowes;
but if his soul loathed the practice, much more the approbation, then all the
souls of the Mass-book-men would loath such an one, and with open mouth, would
dart out against him the Poison of Aspes, all manner of rotten Calumnies, of
Sedition, Tumults, Schism, Factions, and the like, not vouchsafing him, and
his, native air to breath in, much less a calling to maintain him and his:
neither is this al, but when these Ministers and others to fly the hatred of
Esau and his brood, had cast themselves upon the ends of the Earth, to enjoy
with much affliction the purity of the Ordinances; yet Esau his hatred slacked
not, like a boiling Furnace, till he cast the scum of his cruelty after them,
Rev. 12.15.
doing them all the mischief he could in word and deed: the Serpent cast not
only the flood of waters out of his mouth, that way after the woman; but also
pursued others in other parts, who endeavored to sacrifice that which God
called for; for proof whereof take Doctor Laud his own words, This hand (says
he) shall reach them, and threatening a Scotish-man for refusing to take the
oath against his Country, he laid his hand on his breast, and vowed and
protested, as he lived, he would make the hearts of all the Scots to ache; and
what had the Scots done to him? Nothing, but maintained that worship that was
an abomination to him and his. One instance more, very pat to the purpose, God
having appeared to Abraham (as often he did) Abraham in thankfulness builded an
Altar, but immediately after he is said to remove to a Mountain, Eastward of
Bethel; but what was the cause he staid not by it? Genesis 12.18.
The learned tell us, that it was dangerous so to do; for the erecting of the
Altar of God, was so offensive to the Idolatrous Inhabitants, that it was a
wonder, he was not stoned of them: where observe now by the way, that if the
Altars now erected, Calvin.
were of God, they would be an abomination to the Prelates and their Faction,
and dangerous for Gods people to stay by them: but as they are Altars of Baal,
erected and maintained by Baalites and Balaamites, so they and all their
Ceremonial accoutrements, and the Service Book it self, Exodus 8.26.
are an abomination, witness that place of Exodus already quoted; The
Abominations of the Egyptians shall we sacrifice to Jehovah our God, says
Moses to Pharaoh, it is not meet so to do.

The last ground or evidence of this particular; Edward the sixth, and the
Councels letter, to the Papists of Cornwall and Devonshire, making of Commotions
and Insurrections against the King and State, amongst many they give this
satisfaction for the Service Book, that it was the very same, word for word
with the Mass Book; the difference only was, that it was in the English tongue,
the extract of the Letter recorded in the Acts and Monuments, are these; as for
the Service in the English tongue, Vol. 2. p. 667.
it perchance seems to you a new Service, and yet indeed it is no other but the
old; the self-same words in English that were in Latin, a few things taken
out. If the Service of the Church, was good in Latin, it remains good in
English; for nothing is altered: but to speak with knowledge, that which was
spoken with ignorance, we have the whole letter in Print at large for your
Service, we thought fit for brevity, only to transcribe so much as made for the
clearing of the point; the sum of that which has been said by way of open
discourse, we draw up in this Argument.

That which is word for word out of the Popish Mass Book, is not to be offered
to God, as worship, but to be abolished as an abomination to him.

But the Liturgy in controversy, is word for word out of the Mass Book, as
has been proved abundantly.

Therefore it is not to be offered, as a worship to God, but to be abolished as
an abomination to him. Cap. 8.26
As the latter proposition of the Argument is proved to the full, so the former
is as clearly by the paralelling place of Exodus twice quoted, to which we will
add for abundance, these places following, Deuteronomy. 7.25. and 12.31. 2 King.
23.13. Ezra. 9.1. Esa. 44.19. In all which places, the Lord commands all Idols
and Idolatrous Service, to be utterly detested and abandoned, and still the
ground and reason is given, that they are abominations to the Lord, for so the
word is in the number of multitudes; to speak impartially, we see no color of
way to evade this Proposition, but by undertaking the defense of the Mass Book;
for as Mountague and others produced that their Service is the same in most
things with the Church of Rome, the differences are not great; nor should they
make any separation; then a necessity is laid upon the Prelates and the rest,
Recusancy, p. 1.
either to defend the Mass, so far to be the true worship of God, against the
truth, and all Orthodox Writers; or else, to give up the Service Book to fall
with the Original; and though the Treatise will not give us leave, to limne out
the Mass in every piece, patched up by diverse Popes, having given a
specification of some parts of it, most concerning our Liturgy, yet will it
not be amiss to lay down from the learned, the first entrance of it into
England, and then to take off briefly, the silly defense that the Papists seem
to make for it. To the former, Augustine the Monk sent from Gregory, called the
Great, for what we know not, except for his grand devises of Will Worship; his
man Austin finding not all things for his tooth in France, put over into
England, and there finding an ignorant King, and a superstitious Queen, there
like the envious man, he sows his corrupt seed of all Popish trumpery, as
Masses, Letanies, Processions, Copes, Vestments, Altars Candlesticks,
Holy-Waters, Consecrations, etc. Having like a Serpent deceived the People (and
as the Apostle says) corrupted their minds, 2 Cor. 11.3.
from that simplicity that is in Christ, sore against the minds of the godly,
Lib. 1
and learned Preachers of the times; yet, to make them (as Beda witnesses) add
this condition, which he never meant to keep, that no man should be forced, or
constrained thereunto; but having played the Wyly Fox in his entry, to finish
the work he had begun, he took on the Lions skin, and being opposed by one
Dinoth a great Divine, who withstood him to his face in a public Synod,
avouching, that he ought not to change the ancient form of Religion, neither
would he acknowledge him for Archbishop; but the bloody Prelate, to be
revenged on him, incensed Etheldred King of Northumberland against him, who
murdered the Servant and Minister of God, and twelve hundred Monks with him:
afterward about the Year 637. Pope John the fourth, sends over Malitus,
Honortus, Justus his Bandogs one after another, to hold out and confirm the
continuance of this dismal alteration, as they might easily do once having got
footing, for Pompous superstition suits too well with corrupt nature: then came
in keeping of Easter after the Romish manner, Lib. 18. cap. 14. de gest. Ang.
Ministers called Priests, chanting and playing upon Organs, with all which,
godly Beda his soul was grieved, who vented his grief in this sad complaint;
heretofore, instead of these things, the principal Service of God consisted in
Preaching, Morney of the Mass. Lib. 1.6.8.
and Hearing of Gods Word.

Here we may observe for matter of Humiliation, how easily Superstition finds
entrance into England, and how hardly it is rooted out; that former Maledict,
Monk Banedict (as they call him) found so little entertainment in France, that
he made little stay there, only stomacking that the Worship was not after the
Romish Order, he certified his Master by a grievous complaint, who being more
moderate than the Monk, bid him take that which was good in every Church: but
England found that that would not serve him, of whose Mass and Mischief it
could never yet be rid. It is also worthy your observing; how he laid the
Foundation of the Mass, and established it in blood; yea, that See of
Canterbury, in him and his Successors, has been a See of Blood; yea, it is too
well known, that that cursed Mass, whether Latin or English, has lived in
blood, and bathed in the blood of bodies, souls and states, as shall be more
particularly manifested hereafter.

Now for any thing that can be said in defense of this Idol, the Masse-book, it
is not worth the citing, and has been more than abundantly refuted; yet one
touch for a taste, and that upon Prayers, because it is the Subject of our
discourse, we will show you one place out of the Old Testament, and another out
of the New: such as they make choice of to defend their Mass or Liturgy (as
they call it:) the place of the Old Testament is in Genis. chap. 4. verse. 26.
the words are these, Then Men began to call upon the Name of the Lord; as there
be diversity of thoughts upon the meaning of the words, so Pertertus a Popish
Friar, will have this the meaning: that then they found out some set form or
order of Prayer, to gain footing forsooth to the Popish Liturgy; but say it
were so, what would it make for them? The Doctors of Doway are of the same
opinion, and fuller also in their words; It is meant (say they) of Public
Prayer, with observing some Rites, and set form, in a particular place,
dedicated to Divine Service. Grant that that were the meaning, as indeed it is
not, yet what would this make for them? Would the faithful Prayers of the godly
Patriarcks consirm, or would they not rather confute the abominable Prayers of
the Popish Mass? The word Invocat, in the first Language signifies also to
profane, though not so in this place; for it suiteth not with the sense; but
if this were the sense, then the Papists might well take a hint to parallel
their unhallowed Mass, which is nothing but an high profanation of the Name
of God.

The other place which I touch upon, and which they do egregiously abuse (as
they do many more) is from the New Testament, 1 Timothy 2. verse. 1. I exhort
therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
Thanks-givings, be made for all men: out of which words of the Apostle, the
Rhemists make this deduction, that the Prayers and Petitions of the Mass, are
deduced out of the Apostle his words, producing, or rather traducing; the
Fathers, making them speak that for the Mass which they never meant: the
transcription of all the passages would be too tedious: but let Master
Cartwrights answer suffice. First by way of Concession, grant the Mass Book to
have in it the same prayers that the Apostle commands, will it therefore follow
(says he) that their prayers is the true service of God? no more than the
using, or rather abusing of the words of Institution, This is my body, makes
for the Justifying of Transubstantiation. Inchanters and Charmers use many holy
words in their Charms, as they do with a piece of the first Chap. of S. John's
Gospel: but it agravateth their sin. This plea from good words, is, or has
been too frequent in the mouths of some Professors, whom we desire to satisfy
with this answer. Again, if their whole Liturgy or Service be here as they say,
where are their Mattens, Even-song, Complin, Procession, Dirgie, etc. As for
the name Mass used by the Fathers, we are to understand, as Morney and others
well observe; that as the Church finding ease, and growing in Wealth, under and
after Constantines time, fell to grow a little gaudy to please the Gentiles,
and also to allure both the Jews and Gentiles; the Christians were content to
hear and speak antiquated Names, as Altars, Sacrifices, Priests, First Book of
the Mass c. 4.
and so fell in the word Missa; but it is as clear on the other side, that
never one of the Fathers alleged, nor Orthodox Councels did use any of these
words in their Sense; and this may suffice for the Popish Mass. They also
abuse that place of the Acts 13.2. translating it as they were saying Mass;
but the foolery of it as has been said, answers it self. The Mass then
being such a piece, as it was Englands great unhappiness to lie so many years
under the burden of such an abomination: so when the light of the Gospel
sprung up, to fetch us out of Darkness, and from the shadow of Death, it was
great incogitancy (to speak the least) in our Reformers, in King Edwards days,
Josh. 7.
to take a Monk from among the Canaanites, and putting a coat of English cloth
upon it, to represent it, being an unclean Beast, as a service to the Lord: it
is no better truly than the excommunicate thing. What had we to do with the
River of Nilus? How could we look to pick Gold out of the Popes Dunghill,
Valor. max. lib. 1. tit. de. Relig.
where there is nothing but mire and dirt? It is true, that Heathenish Rome
sent the Suns of their Senators to the Etrurians, to have their instructions
for ordering of their Religion: but why should we, when God had brought us out
of Babel or Antichristian Rome, turn immediately in again to take a pattern out
of it, for the service of our God: this is an express thwarting of the Book of
God, whose Omniscience should only appoint in his own Worship, witness that
order and appointment given from him by Moses to the Israelites; first, Deuteronomy.
12 28.
he lays it down affirmatively, Observe and here all these words that I
command thee: and he enforces it with a strong reason, It shall go well with
thee and thine, when thou do what is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah
thy God: but now, lest they should patch up his Service with some Heathenish
tricks, he strictly inhibits them, so much as to inquire of their Gods, Verse.
30.31.
saying thus, How did these Nations serve their Gods, even so will I do
likewise; where the Hebrews observe, two things are observeable: First,
Idolatrous Service is not to be inquired after, because that occasioneth a
turning into it; and secondly, all imitation of such service is forbidden.
Cypryans complaint cited by the answers to the Humble remonstrance, suits well
to this purpose: Ad hoc malorum devoluta est Ecclesio Dei, and sponsa Christi,
etc. The Church of God and Spouse of Christ, falls unhappily into this evil
exigent, U^ lux de tenebris mutuetur, Ep. 7.4.
and id faciant Christiani quod Antichristi faciunt: That light should borrow
from darkness, and Christians should do that in Gods service, especially which
the vassels of Antichrist do. From this discovery also the Service Book is
unbottomed of that main Plea from antiquity, which Doctor Hall in his humble
Remonstrance makes his sheet Anchor; P. 13.
but Smectymnuus in his answer puts him to it, that for want of ground it is
come home; but to follow this a little further, and to wave the antiquity of a
set Liturgy, an instance whereof, for diverse hundred years, the Doctor, nor any
of their Book-men cannot produce: We desire to know what Antiquity they, or any
other can allege for this Liturgy, surely he can go no higher than the
Masse-book; and when it has gone as high, or higer than it can, sometime
abusing Scripture, and sometime butting upon the coined and counterfeit
Liturgies, First Book of the Mass c. 4 and 3.
fathered falsely upon the Apostles and Disciples of Christ; yea, and also upon
the Fathers, as Peter, James, Matthew, Andrew, Denis, Clement, Basil,
Chrysostom, and others; the falsehood whereof Morney discovers at large: yet
for all this, says the noble defender of the Truth: the Popish Mass is no
part, nor ever was of the Divine Service of God, and therefore the English
Liturgy out of it, and not able to ascend higher than it, can be no Divine
Service, as they call it (and that inclusively, by Catexochen, or excellency)
it can be no Divine Service, but is indeed a devised Service; but suppose it or
the unbloody Sacrfice of the Mass, should look as high as Cains unbloody
Sacrifice, yet if there want truth, they would prove no better than ancient
errors.

Last of all, to shut up the Point, of the Liturgy to have its rise, or to be
selected out of the Roman models: wherein we beseech your Honors, to cause him
to deal, Obsignatis tabulis, by comparing the Books together: and besides all
the evidences alleged, if it appear not, and that to the eye, to be what we
have said to be the truth we will de-relinquish our suit: but if it be so as we
aver, we desire no more of the Doctor, and all the admirers of the Liturgy,
that they would deal heartily with the truth, with your Honors, and with us, a
whole body of Petitioners; who in conscience do profess we desire to do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth; and as it becomes not those that defend
the Truth, Fictis contendere verbis, to Skirmish with devised, or velitory
palliations, as the Poet has it, even so, (...), there is nothing becomes
candid ingenuity, better than the Truth. To defend evil cunningly, is no good
commendation; it was no grace to the Orator, of whom it was said, Candida
denigris, and de candentibus atra: That he could with ill abused eloquence,
make black white, and white black: and yet, when such men have done all what
they can, they find that true of the Civilian; Mala causa pluribus eget
remed^ts: The malady of an evil cause stands ever in need of more medicines
than he that undertakes the cure can afford. For a closure of the point, in
love to the truth, we desire all men that have any wit, to take notice of these
two things; the former, a man had better be tongue-tyed than appear in an ill
cause; the latter, when they have done all they can, it will fall out with them
as it did with the Scribes and Pharisees, envying that the people should follow
Christ, Perceive you not (fay they) one to another, Ioh. 12.^^.
how ye prevail nothing; the world is gone after him. Just so in this case of
the worship of Christ, as it is partly begun, and shall be more fully
accomplished, when they have done all that they can, all is but lost labor,
they shall not prevail, the world shall go after Christ.

CHAP. IV. Of the Matter.
NOw we come to the third particular, namely, the Subject matter of the
Liturgy; the grain is like the ground it grows upon, the fruit must be like
the Tree; it is not possible that any wholesome sap of life should come out of a
noisome and poisonous root. To give a delineation of the matter in general,
Troubles of Frankford, p. 36
we can use no better expression than that of Calvin, in his pithy Letter to
the Church of Frankford, much troubled with this Service Book, where he calls
it the Relics or leavings of the Popish dregs; this may be made to appear
without contradiction, by scanning some particulars; for to go through them all
would fill up a great volumn: then to give a touch as briefly as we can, the
matter is partly false, partly rediculously frivolous; yea, and some part of it
is not without a tincture of Blasphemy. To this effect, a worthy and zealous
Pastor to that people of Frankford, regrating fore the troubles brought upon
them by that Service Book, after that he had told them that nothing must be
thrust upon any Congregation, without the Warrant of the Word: and forasmuch as
that in the English Book there were things both superstitious, impure, and
unperfect, P. 38. ib.
which he offered to prove before all men; he would not consent that of that
Church it should be received.

To come then to the first particular of the charge; Ministers were to
subscribe, it being the most corrupt piece of all the Latin Translation, none
of them being found; witness the current of the learned Fathers and others;
yea, the very pleaders for the Book, and that Bible: Ad Damas, i^ praesat. ad.
4. Evang.
Si in Latinis exemplaribus fides est adhibenda responderit quibus, etc. If we
must believe Latin translations you must first tell us which of them, says
Jerome? Which argues the Latin one, fathered upon him, not to be his, but of
all other Latin translations he damneth this most, which we are forced to
follow, as Erasmus testifies of him; Damnat superiorem translationem, quae nos
tamen maxim utimur, he condemns (says he) that translation, meaning the
vulgar translation; condemned also, by the grand Pillars of Popery, Burgensis,
Lyra, Jansenius, and others; yea, and by two Popes, Sixtus the fifth, and
Clement the eighth. Lastly, we have the dict of the defendants themselves,
Doctor Spark diebus illis, complaining of the corruptions of the Service Book,
instanced in these two particulars: First, for omitting much Canenical
Scripture, and putting Apocrypha in the place of it: Secondly, for appointing a
corrupt translation to be read. To some particular instances we come, and
amongst many places we must give but a touch; we will begin with that palpable
falsehood, Psalm 105.28. which the Book has thus, They were not obedient to his
Word; but the Scripture says, They were not disobedient to his Word; what
directer contradiction can there be than this? The Scripture given by
inspiration of the Spirit, admits no contradiction. Doctor Spark told the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that it was apparent by the History of their dealing
in Egypt; that to read, They were not obedient to his word, were to charge
Moses and Aaron with falsehood.

Another place abused, Luke 10.1. being their Gospel for that Evangelists day;
After these things ^he Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them, two
and two before them; but the common Book read seventy two: which, though it be
not in matters of Faith, as the defendants answer, yet it is a corrupting of
the Scripture. May we tear a man's skin from his flesh, because we cut not the
sinews, nor beak not the bones? In a word, this is the answer of the Papists
upon the place which our Writers take off.

But now we will evidence in a place as matter of Faith, Epistles the Sunday
after the Nativity. Ephesians. 2.3.
Gal. 4.5. the Service. book reads, that we through election might receive
the adoption that belongs to natural sons; where the Church-Bible, according
to the original, has it thus: That we might receive the adoption of the sons.
For, natural sons of God we cannot be said to be, Nam non nescimur, sed
renescimur Christiani; for we are not born Christians, but born again; yea, by
nature we are the children of wrath: is there not matter here of flat
contradiction, and that in a high point of Faith?

We will trouble you but with one other place, Luke 1.28. and 48. the Text has
it, Hayle freely beloved, or having found favor; but the Service Book will
none of that, but read it; Hayle full of grace, just with the Rhemists; and the
defenders of it go upon the same grounds that they do, crossing the true
signification of the words; all sound and learned Expositors, ancient and
modern, as Pagninus, Vatabalus, Chrysostom, Beza, Doctor Fulke, Doctor
Whitakers, and others, sorting full with Gregory Martin, Reynolds, and the
rest; and gives encouragement to Stafford in his Female Glory, to tell the
Puritains railingly, that till they be good Marians (in his sense) they shall
never be good Charistians. There are fifteen places more in the Service Book of
this cut, but these are enough, and too many to be so abused.

Now we come to a touch of Additions, Psalm, where a great difference is to be
thought on, between a Paraphraster and a Translator: The former may amplify,
but yet in different letter from the Text; but the Translator may not add, no
not from other Texts of Scripture. The grand Papists, the justifiers of this,
and other such stuff, dare not avouch these Verses to be in the Hebrew or Greek
Copies, no not in the Greek Bible set forth at the command of Sextus Quintus,
1587. for the justifiing of the Vulgar Latin, as appears by his own Copy,
written by Cardinal Carraffe, and another Cardinal, namely, Cajetan, Page 154.
avoucheth, that Paul in the third to the Romans had taken them from diverse
places of scripture, Sed ignorans nescio quis adjunxit haec Psalmo 14. But some
ignorant party, I know not who, has added them to Psalm. 14. So there is a
whole Verse added to Psalm. 13. and an addition added to Psa. 24. corrupting the
text, and applying that to Jacob, which is spoken of God; and diverse additions
more, which we will not reckon.

Now a taste of Omissions, or leavings out, Psalms, being, as other holy
scripture, given by Holy Inspiration, and very useful; yea, and Mr. In his
Preface to the Psalms.
Bucer learnedly and divinely affirms, are as so many keys to unlock and open
the door that lets into the understanding of the Psalms; Hallelujah is left
out of the 72 Psalm, the Book omitteth, Praise ye the Lord, seventeen times,
and puts in Gloria Patri.

Lastly, amongst diverse other Omissions, on which we cannot insist, the
comfortable Conclusion of the Lords Prayer is left out. They have drowned in
this Book 160 Chapters, according to their own account, of Canonical scripture;
amongst which are whole books, as the Chronicles, Canticles, and the most part
of the Apocalypse is left out, in place whereof the Apocrypha is placed, and
that (as they say) tending more to Edifying: yea, and some Chapters also,
wherein are palpable untruths, as Ecclesiasticus 49. Judith 9. Tobit 5. the
last two of these Books being Fabulous: A President of these foul Abuses of
scripture, are found no where in the world, but in the Popish Mass Book. To
this we may subjoyn that Profaning gross abuse of Epistles und Gospels, in
which there are three strange and remarkable Occurrences, for which there is no
Ground or Reason, but from the Masse-book, and Masse-mongers.

First, what reason is there, that in the Masse-Book, and in our Liturgy, the
Acts of the Apostles and Prophets, yea, any book of the old Testament, the
books of Genesis excepted by them, should be called Epistles, as Acts 7. on
Stephens day, Rev. 14. on Innocents day, Joel 1. Esaias 50.

Secondly, Mezentius dealt with his beds, he cut them, and lengthened them to
serve his own cruel humors, and not for the good of his guests. If Kings will
not have their Writs by confusion of names wronged, much less the King of
Kings, who is the God of Order.

Thirdly and lastly, Epistles there is silence, sitting, and what every one
will; but at the Gospels there is standing, scraping, Ruper l. 4. fol. 49,
bowing, and a response before and after; as every one of these were to serve
some piece of Superstition or other: so the reasons given by Papists are as
ridiculous as the things are Superstitious: it is enough to name them in
general, that the maintainers of the Liturgy may be ashamed to allege them,
and better of their own they have not. We therefore desire your Honors, to
cast a regardful eye upon the wronged and much abused Word, Ier. 1.12.
and not as passers by (as Jeremy speaks) in a case much like, but as supreme
judges here on earth, to vindicate Gods dishonor done to him in his
Ordinances. Chrysostom. 2 These. 2
Gods Word, as the Fathers speak, in his Epistle, not in that sense they call
Prophesies Epistle, wherein he commends many lovely favors to us; yea, his
Testament, wherein he leaves and bequeaths many rich legacies to us; If Kings
and Monarchs should deal so with us, would we suffer them to be abused,
corrupted, altered, cut in pieces? No, we would count them our deadly enemies
that should do so, and also traitors to the King. What an eye of indignation
then should your Honors cast upon such gross abusing of the Word, of the
Epistle and Will of the Omniscient and Omnipotent God; If clipping, corrupting,
or counterfeit coining be Treason by the Law, how much more and in a higher
degree is it to deal thus wiih the Word? Yea, and more than that, to maintain
this, and cause Ministers to subscribe to it, being no less than Treason
against the high and mighty God. Culpam deprehensam pertinaciter tueri, culpa
altera est; Pertinaciously to maintain a fault openly discovered, is a greater
fault than the former, on whom whether Nation or Person will the Lord rest upon
(says the Lord by the Prophet Esaias) but upon him that trembles at my word,
that is a humble soul, not only moved to obedience to it in it self, but
further, out of that reverence that it bears to the Word, it will not as much
as in it lies, suffer the word to be abused by others, as one speaks of the
Papists, that corrupting the Fathers, they rather make them their sons, to
speak what they will have them, then Fathers indeed: Just so does that book,
and the Champions for it, Discovery of corrupt translations.
make the word thus dealt with none of Gods, but their own; If a Minister add
or take away from the Service Book, it is made matter of indictment; but they,
it seems, may add, take away, alter, and corrupt what they will without
controlement: Fulk his Answer to Campian, discovering the evils of the
Apocripha. Gregory Martin recoils thus upon the learned worthy, that by those
words he condemned their own Service Book, which appointed those Books to be
read.

Having thus proceeded against the Servick-book, false translations, additions,
omissions, misnominations; we come now to some more particular untrurhs in the
Book, and that partly by false or misapplication of Scripture, partly by
coining things that have no show or ground for them, partly by establishing
some Popish expositions. Lastly, by confirming and pressing upon Ministers and
people, a heap of Popish and Idolatrous Ceremonies, a touch of every one will
suffice.

For the first, Rev. 12.7. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon,
etc. which words the Book appoints for the Collect for Michaels day; where they
make Christ by misapplying the place, a created Angel: for the place is meant
of Christ, neither can it agree to any other: for which we have a cloud of
witnesses, not only from the universal concourse of the learned and Orthodox
Writers, as Fathers and modern Authors, as Austin, Ambrose, Musculus, Calvin,
Beza, Doctor Fulk, Doctor Willet, and many others, but also from the very name
Michael, proper only to Christ, who, verse. 10. is called Christ: And further,
from the scope of the place, to set out Christ and his Angels, encountering
Satan and his Angels: And lastly, other places of Scripture parralleling the
truth of this sense, Dan. 10.13. and 12.1. 1 These. 4.16. Judge. 9. Angels here
under their General Christ, are said to be on Earth in the Church Militant, for
that is meant by Heaven, and here they are said to die, which suteth not with
Heavenly Spirits: the Rhemists indeed hold close to the sense of the
Service Book, because it is from their own Mass Book, and gives this as a
reason, why Michael is painted fighting with a Dragon, both Opinion and Reason
are of the like weight: Now from things without color of Ground; what color
or ground is there for that speech in the end of the Magnificat; O Ananias,
Azarias and Mizael; Praise the Lord? If this was the Prayer of these men when
they were alive, what sense or reason that we should speak to them being dead,
more than to others?

For Popish Tenants, That we with this our Brother, and all other our Brethren
departed in the true Faith of thy holy Name, may have our perfect Consummation
and Bliss, both in Body and Soul: First, here every one Buried is a faithful
Brother, which cannot be said of every one, no, not in the Judgment of
Charity: It is true indeed, That the Priest of Newgate bid the poor Condemned
Thieves provide Money for their Burial, and they needed not doubt of their
Salvation: Again, the words are an express Prayer, and tied to be said by the
Minister.

Now, for the Ceremonies having place in Gods Worship, and being man's device,
must needs be Idols, or Idolatrous Actions, Quicquid praeter mandatum, est
Idolum; Whatsoever is placed in Gods Worship, without the Commandment of God,
is an Idol; for none has power to Ordain or Place a Ceremony in Christ his
Church, but himself, who is King of it. For instance whereof, there is a
remarkable place amongst many, Numb. 15.39. And it shall be unto you for a
Fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the Commandments of the
Lord; and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart, and your own
eyes, after which you use to go a Whoring: where Observe both the Ceremony and
Signification to be from Gods own Appointment: And further, every device of man
in Gods Worship, is to be avoided; but against those there are diverse Treatises
never Answered, nor like to be; yet it shall not be amiss by one indissolvable
Argument to put all the Defenders of the Ceremonies to it; which is this:

That which is man's Device, and has been an Idol in Gods Worship, must of
necessity be an Idol still in the Worship of God: But the Ceremonies mentioned
in the Service Book have been Idols in Gods Worship, as Cross, Surplice, etc.
Ergo, they must be Idols still in the Worship of God.

The Proof of the former Proposition, is from instance of Abraham's Grove, Genesis
21.33. but being abused to Idolatry, as 2 King. 17.10. Jerem. 51.2. Isa. 57.5.
then God forbids his People the usage of it, because it was an Idol; yea,
commanded to destroy it, Deuteronomy. 12.13. The latter Proposition none can deny.
Here we may add the foul Abuses of the Sacraments, as Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, and that Jewish Popish Instrtution of Churching of Women, called
Purisication; and that bastardly piece of Confirmation, the particular
Eno^mities whereof we need not stand upon, they are so well known, especially
to your Honors, which is a part of our happiness: Again, the Treatise would be
too large; yet we would not have the Lent Fast forgotten, which the Patrons of
our Liturgy make a Religious Fast, 2 Part of Homil. of Fast.

Anno quinto Elizab. C. quint.


abusing places of Scripture by mis-application of Scriptures, as Joel 2.12.
Mat. 6.16. 2 Cor. 6.2. Mat. 4.10. clear contrary to the Law, and indisputable
Prerogative of God; the Homilies appointed by the Law of the Land, the most and
best Reformed Churches, and the harmony of Confessions, none siding with them
in it, but Papists and Popishly affected.

Now we come to Touch, foppish and foolish things in the Book, besides the
foolish and senseless Translations of some Psalms pressed by the Service Book,
as Psalm. 58.9. Psalm. 68.30. which would be too large to set down and canvafs.
What can be said for those Tautologies, and Battoligies, used in the
Service Book, as Lord have Mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us; the very
Popish Kyreileison, Christaleison condemned, Matthew. 6.7. the word Battology
here condemned, comes, as the learned observe, from one Bactus, a ridiculous
Poet, repeating the same words or verses often, and so Christ forbideth a vain
repetition of words or phrases, and the better the words are, the more grievous
is the sin, so the vain repetition in Prayer is most odious of all, both the
heathenish and Popish Battologies are struck dead at one blow (says Master
Cartwright) for mumbling up the same prayers again and again; and can these
repetitions of ours, being the very same in English, go scot-free? One foppery
more, for we cannot name them all, namely, that mutual salutation between
Priest and People; in these words, The Lord be with you, and with thy spirit:
which Doctor Boyce girding at the Novellists, takes upon him to defend from
Ruth 24. with many invictive strains, with other matter to little purpose: is
it a good Argument from salutation in civil conversment, to fall a saluting one
another in the worship of God? Luke 10.4. 2 King. 4.29.
if our Lord and Savior forbad his Disciples to salute any in the way, so far
as it might be any impediment to his service; like unto that of Elisha the
Prophet; how much less will Christ admit salutations in the midst of his
Service? It seems their devotion is very hot, that falls to toss a
salutation whilst they are upon Gods Worship. Hence is that apish trick in the
Northern parts, that all the Women, especially in coming into the Church, make
a courtesy to the Priest. Dr. Boyce, for further confirmation, cites the
Liturgy of James, Chrysostom and Basil, but all know (as has been said) that
they who are acquainted with this subject, know these Liturgies to be as
Apocryphal, as the subject; the Dr. Lib. 2. de Missa c. 16. Lib. de Scrip.
Eccles. fol. 51.
confesses upon the report of Bellarmine, that Tritenhemius writ a whole book
upon Dominus Vobiscum, in which are many fruitless questions, and so we are
sure the thing it self is fruitless.

CHAP. V. Of the Letany.
WE come now to the last piece, of the matter of the Lyturgie, but not the
least sinful, but rather the most offensive: Namely, the Letany, not a stump or
a limb of Dagon, but the head of the Masse-book, appointed to he said on
Sundays, Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, yea, and at other times, if the Ordinary
appoint it: of this it may truly be said, as one said of the Pharisees sin,
that it was either the sin of the Holy Ghost, Tossan in Mat. 12. Canon. 15
or a sin very nigh it; so the Letany is either blasphemy, or very nigh
blasphemy: upon these days, one of every house must be present; setting a note
of some preheminency, both upon these week days and the Service, yea, from the
Etymology of the word (...), or Letany, the defenders of it will have it to be
a more serious and cordial Prayer then others. It is observed by the Learned,
that the Ancients had the order and manner of the Letany from the Heathens,
Serarius in Litan Cassan. in Liturgy. P. 244. Exercit. p 237.
as Dionysius Halioarnassius witnesses, and Causabon observes in these words:
(...), the Letanies or Supplications about the Altars of their gods. Polybius
renders the words very handsomely and significantly by the word, (...), which
signifies to entice the gods by blandishing allurements: these words, and
others used by human writers to the same purpose, as by Homer and others, falls
in with the same fault that our Savior accuses the Pharisees of, namely, vain
repetition, and multitude of words, for which, says Christ, Mat. 6.7.
they think to be heard. Now this Letany is a very facinating fardel of
Tautologies and Battologies; besides its other faults, in this Latany there is,
Lord deliver us eight times, hear us we beseech thee, 20. times: to omit many
desires to be delivered from things from which there is not the least
appearance, no more than of the French pox, the danger of being drunk at a
Whitson-ale, or a purse cut at a stage play, and not so much. In that prayer to
be delivered from fornication, what means that addition, and from all other
deadly sin, as though some sin were not deadly. Again, after a tautolog call
suming up and repetition of the titles and Elogies of the Trinity tossed with
responses, they fall on in a Heathenish way to act the word Letany or Maggany,
as it is well rendered, namely, as it were to conjure; and as if the devil were
now to be dispossessed (which no Priest must dare to do by the Canon without
license from the Ordinary) they would use the very same pieces; namely, By the
mystery of the holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and circumcision; by thy
baptism, fasting, and temptation; by thine agony and bloody sweat; and by the
cross and passion; by thy precious death and burial; and by the coming of the
holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us. This piece of the Popish-Masse-book, whence
we have it, is no better than that conjuring or juggling of the Magicians,
whereby they seemed to imitate Moses his working of Miracles, Porph. in his
doub.
which they did not, as the learned in that Art testify, without magick-spels;
they use ridiculous invocations, says the same Author, and so be the
invocations in the Letany; and the better the words are, as we have said, the
more grievous the abuse: And that we may not come short of the Papists
idolizing of this Letany, we have not only our ordinary and weekly letanies,
but also our annual or yearly letanies, acted in Procession. It is true, we
have left out the Saints in our Lyturgy, that was too gross; but had the
Laudenses got their Colors fixed, ere this the letany had been flancked with
this stuff. But why did they expunge that suffrage in King Edward his Book
against the Pope, From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, Good Lord deliver us?
To shut up this cursory trial of the matter (for it is no more) how can the
Service-book-men justisie these words of the Collect on the twelfth Sunday
after Trinity, Giving unto us that which our Prayer dare not presume to ask? It
is true, we obtain more than we Pray for; but what we dare not Pray for, either
in act or desire, we shall never obtain.

The sum of that which has been said, we bring up into this Argument;

That Service, the matter or bulk whereof is partly false, partly foolish and
frivolous, should not be presented unto God: But the parts of the Service Book,
whether essential or integral, are such, as has been fully proved: Therefore
they should not be presented to God.

We humbly entreat your Honors to lay this Argument in the ballanoe of truth,
and if it weigh down the Service Book, let the said Book, we pray you, be cast
out of the Sanctuary as light.

CHAP. VI. Of the Manner.
NOw we come to the Fourth Particular, namely the Form or Manner, which is
large, as exorbitant and offensive as the matter: the Form is the essence of a
thing; say the matter were good, and the manner naught, God would never like
it; for the old proverb is true, God loves Adverbs better than Adjectives: Been
better than Bonum. It was a good work in David, 2 Samuel 6^
to bring up the Ark from the house of Aminadab; but one Philistine Ceremony
spoiled the whole Work. 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
David therefore acknowledged the breach to be made because they sought him not
in order; when our Savior taught his Followers to pray in that Platform of
Prayer, Cyprian.
which a Father calls the foundation of all our Prayers; he lays not down
only the Matter, but also the Form; when ye pray, pray (...), after this
manner; 2 Timothy 1.13.
hold fast (says the Apostle) the form of sound words, which thou have heard
of me, etc. Where he lays down, not only the matter of Preaching, but also
the form; even so should Prayer have a Form of sound words. Conformers to the
Service Book make Jonas his his Gourd, of one place of Scripture, 1 Cor. 14 40.
Let all things be done according to order and decency. But as the place is no
shelter for them, so we wonder that they cannot see the gross disorder of the
Service Book and Ceremouies; and still call for order. The Apostle rejoiced to
see the order of the Colossians, Col. 2.5.
but it would have grieved him exceedingly to have seen the disorder of the the
Service: as he grieved at the superstition of the Athenians; for it is
Will Worship which the Apostle condemns in the same place of the Colossians:
but to some particulars, Verse. 23:
and first to the Minister, whose change of voice, posture and place, is
strange and ridiculous; For the first, he must say some Prayers with a loud
voice, not all: what can be the reason of this? but that of the Mass Priests,
that there are some Mysteries: Tanquam sacra Cereris, that the profane Laics
should not hear. Secondly, for his Posture; besides the windings, turnings and
cringings, his face must be sometimes toward the People, and sometimes his
back. Thirdly, the Priest says somewhat in the Church, somewhat in the
Chancel, getting himself from the People as far as he can as if there were some
out-fall between him and the People: or, as if he were the High Priest gone
into the Holy of Holies. In the second place comes the unmannerly handling of
the matter: First, they have many short Collects, but a long and tedious
Service: the persecuted Christians indeed, made short Prayers upon the fear of
the Enemies Approaches, when they were forced to fly. A good Foundation we
acknowledge; Lib. 1. ^. 38. Lib. 3. p. 210.
but to turn this into a General and Continued Rule, will make but a scurvy
Building. Now, to the rest of the short Cuts and Shreds, rather Wishes than
Prayers (as Mr. Cartwright truly calls them) for which Doctor Boyce falls foul
upon him with an Invective Declaration, In his Comment on Dominus Vobiscum.
not with refutation; which course suits not with learning, much less with a
Minister, calling it a rude speech, savouring more of the Shop, than of the
School: but the abilities of the man is far above his calumny: and why does he
not fall a railing at him for answering the Rhemists, in charging the
Masse-book with the self same fault, Mat. 6.7.
where he calls them short shreds patched up to make a wearisom scrvice upon
the long last; what patched Petitions? how scatteringly and disorderly divided,
to the number of thirty or forty? what interrupting pauses and posting on
again, with, Let us pray? In this they are like unto little Girls, who setting
themselves as though they would sew, they cut abundance of Cloth into useless
shreds, doing no good, but hurt; And yet for further discovery of this
unmethodical and unmannerly dealing, let us put this Query to the maintainers
of this patched Service, Ibid,
that Mr. Cartwright puts to the Papists for the mammocks of their Masse-book.
If such a suit (says he) were offered to a mortal man, would he not rather
think himself mocked by the suppliant, than honored? After the same manner
speaks God to the Jews: Mal. 1.8.
Offer this now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy
person, says the Lord of Host? And if any object, that God speaks there of the
Blind and the Lame, the Answer is easily made; whatsoever is not of God, in his
Service, for matter or manner, it is blind and lame: for the closure of this
dismembring of Gods service, we annex the tossing or driving the Service
between the Priest and the People, for either the People pray with the Priest,
or they repeat his Prayer, or they add some Responces or Answers, all suitable
to Gods service. Sir Thomas Moore was so zealous in this way, that he did
officiate at the Mass in his Surplice. If the Minister be Gods mouth and the
Peoples and stand between them in things pertaining unto God, Heb. 2.17
is it not a gross absurdity? That when an Ambassador of State is delivering an
Embassage to the King, that the standers by or attendance, though much
concerned in the business, should set in with the Ambassadors speech, or repeat
what he says, or interrupt his speech, with a pause of a Responce. This
interrupting course in Gods worship is every way more gross, as much as the
high and dreadful God is greater than the greatest King; and we are to take
notice that God will not be mocked. Gal. 6.7
To shut up the Point, one thing we cannot but wonder at, why the Popish
Prelatical Priests do admit the common People a share in saying of Service, who
will not have the People in any case to try, Act. 17.1, 3.
much less to judge of the Doctrines of their Teachers, abusing the very
Scripture that makes against them: for they call themselves the Clergy,
alluding to the name (...), 1 Pe^. 5.
which signifies the lot or portion, arrogating to themselves the Lord to be
their portion, and they to be the Lords. But by the way of opposition they
account the People no better than unhallowed, Psalm. 26.15.
or carnal People; calling themselves abusively by the name of Spiritual, which
with the former name Portion, agrees to all Gods people; but we conceive the
reason to be this, 2 Cor. 2.15. Gal. 6.1.
that by filling their brains with the froth of that stuff, and their mouths
with that confused noise of words (which the most of them regard no more than
the Fool of Windsor, that could sing all the Service) and how should God regard
it: this they do (we say) to shut them out from the Soul-saving-Word, and the
Word from them, and then the Priests bear rule, or tyrannize over them at their
pleasure. Now we have done with the Arguments arising from the Essential Bulk,
or Integral Parts of the Book: whence we desire your Honors to consider, how
from four impregnable Arguments, namely, from the Name, the Rise, the Matter
and Form, or Manner, we have necessarily evinced the ejection of the
Service Book, all which we briefly sum up thus: That Worship of God, which for
Name, Original, Matter and Manner is naught all over, is not to be suffered,
head nor tail, but wholly to be cast out of Gods house: But the Liturgy or
Service Book is such a Worship, etc. Therefore it is to be cast out.

CHAP. VII. Of the Effects.
FRom Arguments taken from the Nature of the Thing, we come to some Arguments
Collateral, yet forcible enough to evince both the Equity and the Necessity of
our desire: And first from the ill Effects of the Book, and that not
accidentally, which might happily excuse the Cause, but properly and originally,
h^^ding always, in tali vel in tanto, an evil effect argues always ^n evil
cause; an evil Bird comes always of an evil Egg as bad fruit of a bad tree:
yea, the evil cause is always worse than the effect. Nam prepter quod aliquid
tale est, illud ipsum est magis tale, that which makes a thing evil, is worse
it self: for method sake, we will reduce the evils of the Service book into 4
Heads, distinguished from their several objects: as, 1 It shows its evil
effects upon the Ministers. 2 Upon the Ordinances. 3 Upon the People. 4 Against
God most of all.

Sect. 2 Timothy 3.3. Mat. 13.52. 1 Samuel 9.9. Isa 56 20 1 Cor. 4.15. Ephesians. 4.11
First, upon the Ministers, it works pernitiously, whether they be good or
bad workmen, or no workmen; to instance in the latter, where Ministers should
be apt to teach furnished with old and new, Seers, Watchmen, Begetters of Sons
unto God, and builders up of the body of Christ. But this Book settles such
blind fellows over People, who can neither feed, nor lead; What, we pray you,
is the procreant and conservant cause of dumb Dogs that cannot bark; idle
Shepherds, saying Sir- John's; mere Surplice and Service-bookmen, such as cannot
do so much as a Porter in his frock; for he does service, and the Priest only
says Service: is it not the Servicebook? A Priest in London, when he heard the
Service Book should down, made this his main Argument, or rather idlement, why
it should not: If they remove the Service Book (says he) What shall all the
Reading Ministers do? they must go beg, starve, or steal, 2 These. 3 10.
for work they cannot: (the words were to this effect) not remembering the
Apostles principle, He that will not labor, shall not eat. Some years ago, a
very godly man being convented before that High Commission, was asked by some
of them, what he thought of the Service Book? the man being afraid to deliver
his opinion of such a piece of ordnance mounted, fully charged upon him, the
great Canoneers sitting by, ready to give fire; yet with much ado, plucking up
his spirits, he told them freely, that it was a halter to lead a blind horse to
the water: such dumb Diegoes, or devouring Caterpillars, might rightly be
called, as the Prophet speaks, foolish Shepherds; and so the Service Book the
Instrument of a foolish shepherd, Zach 11.15.
they truck away their Souls, and the souls of others for a crust; are they not
then errant fools? And this foolish instrument the Service Book, is the Broker
in this unhappy bargain.

Sect. There are another sort of bad Ministers, Phil. 3.2. Verse. 18.
who will not be idle (as they say) but they are very ill exercised, such the
Apostle calls evil workers, dogs, enemies to the Cross of Christ. The Apostle
bids us beware of such; but indeed ours are worse than those false Apostles:
for they preached Christ, though of envy, Phil. 1.^5
but ours preach error, heresies, blasphemies, and calumnies out of envy, and
not Christ. Were there ever the like accusations heard of for number and
nature, as has bin laid against those unparalled Ministers, for vileness,
both in living and preaching? The Goliath his staff, wherewith they maintain
all this, and all their brags against the Host of Israel, is the Service Book,
which is the Helena of the Hierarchy, the strict and total observation whereof
Lincoln Articles do punctually appoint. To those we might adjoyn Nonresidents
and Pluralists, who knowing that Service will serve the turn, can have choice
of Readers to serve their Cure, at a cheap rate. In Kent a common Fiddler read
Service for 12. d. a week: In another place a Blacksmith did the like; yea,
the Prelates themselves trade in this comodity, when they have an old off-cast
servant, the ruins of a profane wretch, good for nothing, then make a Priest
on him, witness a Prelates Porter made Priest of Paddington. One that we all
know diebus illis, Chaplin to a great Officer of State, but now a proud
Prelate; in the time of his Chaplainry, possessed 3 Benefices to the value of
700. l. a year, or thereabout, allowing nothing out of all this for the feeding
of so many flocks, save 10. l. a piece, or thereabouts, to three poor Curats,
with a number of cast Service-books, which are no good meat, neither cold nor
hot; yea, had not this Service Book been, this man and others could never have
been so unconscionable.

Sect. Yet further, the Service Book has been the bane of many good Ministers,
and that of two sorts, Conformers and Nonconformers; the latter of whom were
deprived of their Ministry, dearer to them than their lives; cast out of their
Free-holds, against the Law of the Land, Excommunicated, Imprisoned, their
Families dissolved and cashired from all Callings; yea, their very Being,
through calumnies, and injuries thrust at; so that with Fambria against
Scaevola, they quarrelled with them, Quod totum ferrum in se non receperant,
Tul.
that they received not the whole deadly Weapon into their body; and what the
quarrel, but the Service Book? To which the Ministers must not only conform,
but also subscribe: As to four Books more, some of which (it may be) they had
never seen: that nothing in them was contrary to the Word of God; Monstrum
horrendum! O fearful sin, to father falsehood and lies upon God, for which the
Lord may justly quarrel with this Nation!

Now for the godly and painful Ministers, yet conforming and subscribing; the
Service Book was a heavy burden to them, and they groaned under the rigor of
the Service: It may be said of the Service Book, as it was said of Gath in
another kind, namely, It was Metheg Amath, the bridle of the hilly tract, or
strength of the Philistims: so the Book was the strength of the Philistim
Prelacy, and a bridle with a Curbing bit, to stop, to wind and turn them at
their pleasure; yea, sometimes to cut them in the Mouth, if they delivered any
such part of Gods Counsel, as touched their Copyhold; besides the scoffing
calumnies that the Prelates and their Janissaries would put upon them: How did
they grieve the souls of diverse worthy men, that diverse of them were forced to
break through that Egyptian bondage, with danger of their liberties and lives,
if they had been reached by the Prelates ill Angels; but flying with the Woman
into the Wilderness, the flood of the Service Book out of the mouth of the
Serpent was sent after them, but both fire and water conspired to the devouring
of it; witness its arrival at New England, two fellows being drunk, addressed
themselves by water, to disperse some bundles of them; one of them swearing,
that he would have a Pipe of Tobacco in despite of the Devil, striking fire,
the sparks fell into a barrel of gunpowder, which blew both men and Books all
into the Air; the men were saved by swimming in the water, and the Liturgy sunk
when it could not swim, and so we hope it shall. Some of us heard a painful
Minister complain, with abundance of tears, a little before his death, That so
long as he, and such as he carried the Prelates fardel after them, they would
never down. We will shut up this point with a very remarkable observation, Ier.
23.23. Joh. 4.23, 24.
Though God made conforming Ministers, being the dispensers of his Word, the
means to turn many from their evil ways, yet this proved for the most part,
but in the point of life and conversation, and not in point of Purity of
Worship, according to our Lord and Masters practice upon his Patient, that
Samaritan Woman, whom he reclaimeth not only from uncleanness of life, but
also from a polluted Worship; the Woman here is not only touched in Conscience
for her evil life, but also desires to be rectified in the case of Religion.
Christ heals her of both those Diseases, and having given check (as a Father
observed) both to the arrogance of the Samaritans, Ciril.
and of the Jews; for the latter was faulty as well as the former, though not
in the like degree, he lays down an undeceivable Rule for both, that they,
and all who will worship God acceptably, must worship him in spirit and in
truth; in spirit, that is opposed to bodily service, as washings, anointings,
garments, etc. In truth, that is opposed to shadows and figures, whereof Christ
is the substance and the body; such converts then as will reap Comfort out of
respect had unto all Gods Commandments, Tract. 15 in Ioh.
they must come down from the mountains of impure worship. Austin has a pretty
saying upon this, that he that will draw near to God, must come down from his
own mountain, or from the mountain of his own device in Gods worship; it is a
duty laid on Christ's Messengers, in preparing of his way, to lay those
mountains level, as well as others; but the good men durst not meddle with the
Gerezim of the Service Book, because they were captive to it, and partly
because the Philistims that kept it, would fall upon them.

We come in the second place to the Ordinances, Ministers, we must give but a
touch: as our Liturgian Mass-mongers, esteem more of the Service, than
Preaching, so they justle out, and keep out Preaching with it. For the former,
let Howson speak, not being ashamed to assert, That Preaching is no part of
divine worship, Sermon. on Psalm. 1.8. p. 78.
agreeable to that Canon of the Constitution, Anno. 1603. making a clear and
possitive distinction between Preaching and Worship, in these words, In time of
divine Worship, or Preaching. And for the latter, Can. 19.
we will cite but one testimony for brevities sake, namely, from the same
Canons: If any Minister having subscribed to the Articles, and to the Lyturgy,
and to the Rites and Ceremonies therein contained, do afterward omit any thing,
he is liable to the penalty of suspension for one month, and after that, if he
amend not, to excommunication: and lastly, if he continue so the third month,
to total deprivation; they have their pattern from Pope Pius the fifth, who
made the same impious sanction, for the Breviary, that at no time, nor in any
case, any thing thereof should be omitted; yea, the Congregations of London
have had too much experience of Service for Sermons, which exchonge is very
robbery, contrary to the proverb; for it is ordinary with the Journey-men
Levites, and Letany-Priests, to spin out all the time, in making up that course
thread of the Service, that is allotted for Sermons; and this they do of malice,
like the dog in the manger; but were it good, they would never be so eager
upon it; for the Country Priests will cast it through a riddle, and curtail it
to the waste, to gain a long afternoon for profane sports; but judge ye
Honorable Senators, if this be not a miserable case, that Hagar should not
only insult over Sarah, but also thrust her out of her own house: How
unreasonable, yea how dangerous a thing it is, that the wholesome and
soul-saving Word of the Lord Jesus, should give place to a fardel of men's
devices in the Worship of God!

We come now in the third place, to the People: There are three things of note
in every Commonwealth, (...), the People, Religion, and Law, the Service Book
intrencheth upon all these: as first upon the Law, in so many particulars,
though we cannot name them all, that it justly may be called Nomomastix, a
scourge to the Law, we will instance in one or two particulars: first by the
Law of England, No Clergyman to the very Pope himself, shall bear any Rule, or
exercise any jurisdiction, Nisi in rebus spiritualibus, except in spiritual
things: witness the second Lawyer that ever wrote of our Laws, namely, Lib. 1.
f. 5. n. 2.
Bracton, who lived in the time of King Henry the third, when Popery was in the
Ruff; for a little before, in King John his time, the Crown of England was at
the Popes disposing, which I allege the rather to show the Insolency and
Impudency of our Prelates managing of the Service Book against the Law; to
which Book, if Ministers will not conform and subscribe, they out them of their
Free-holds, contrary to Right and Law; the iniquity of which course has been
clearly manifested in Caudryes Case. Another witness yet more ancient appears
in this particular, namely, Lib. 4. f. 32. cap. 6
Glanvil, the first that ever writ of our Laws in the time of King Henry the
second, under whom the said Author was Lord Chief Justice; and speaking of the
Case of the trial of advowsons belonging (as he alleges) Ad Coronam and
dignitatem Regiam, to the pleas of the Crown; he produces a prohibition to the
spiritual Court, which he calls Curiam Christianitatis, that they meddle not
with the matter, though it might seem collateraly to belong unto their Courts;
and if they should persist after their Prohibition, then they are commanded by
appearance to answer it in the King's Bench. But how many of the Kings
prohibitions have been slighted by the High Commission, threatening those that
have brought them, the Case then depending, having its rise from that
Service Book;

Another instance we will cite of their incountering of the Laws, it is
decreed, that Ecclesiastical power, shall neither imprison nor fine, except in
case of mutation of Penance: but how many good Christians, both Ministers, and
others, have been not only Fined more than they were worth, but also closely
imprisoned in the nastiest dog-holes they could devise, never Parting with them
till their breath departed from them; And what was the ground of all these
illegell and cruel courses contrary to the Common and Statute Laws, Stat. Art.
cleai c. 1. Fitzher. de natu^. brev. fol. 51. Edw. 3. c. 6.
but Nonconformity to that Service Book and Ceremonies? We might be large in
this Point, but the Treatise will not bear it, only we Pray your Honors, who
are Judices and Vindices Legis, the Judges and Revengers of the Laws and
breaches thereof, to look upon this Lawdestroying-piece, and to manifest that
the Law of God is in your hearts, with which it cannot consist; cast it out of
Gods House, that he may delight to dwell amongst us.

In the second place, for the Service-bookes affronting of Religion, somewhat
has been said, and more we have to say in the fourth Evil effect, namely
against God: but now a little more of its malignity against the people, wherein
we will be brief: People are of two sorts good and bad: how the better sort
have suffered from this Iron Furnace, it is more then manifest, in spoiling of
their goods, loss of liberty, desolating of their Families, being forced to
wander from place to place, their nigh friends and acquaintance not daring
through fear to lodge them; at last, forced either to forsake their native
soil and dearest friends, with no small grief, genio pa^riae plangente, the
genius of the Country, to speak with Lipsius, lamenting after them; or if they
staid by it, and were catched in the Prelates clutches, they told them when
they petitioned, they should lie till their bones rotted, as Doctor Abbot, then
Prelate of Canterbnry, said of Mr. Baits, whom they stifled in the Gate House;
and all this, because they could not eat and swallow down, to the choking of
their conscience, the Arsnical Goblets of that poysonable Book, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
which is worse than the Iron Furnace (for so the Spirit terms it:) Gods People
came out of that, but the Furnace heated for the not adoring by their
Service Book, as Nebuchadnezzars, for not adoring of his Idol, did ordinarily
consume such as were cast into it; so that it became like the Lions Den,
whereof the Poet speaks,

Omnia te advorsum spectantia, nulla retrorsum: Many impressions of ingress,
but none of regress. But is this all? no, though it be too much; if any out of
their zeal to Gods Worship, stand up in opposition against that Goliath, willing
to redeem and buy the Truth, at whatsoever rate they shall buy it; Indeed, if
the adversaries may have their will, not only with hands spoiling of their
houses, exposing of their families to all manner of miseries, but also with
blows, and that not of an ordinary size, but with torments and tortures
unparalleled, as cutting, branding, slitting, whipping, besides shameful
pilloring, with censures of fines upon one, more than they were all worth:
After all this, they cannot satisfy their rage, in devising Golgotha's bad
enough, wherein to drain out their hearts bloods, being deprived of the company
of their wives, families and friends, and used worse than Dogs. Of such heavy
inflictions upon Ministers and Gods People, we profess, we never read nor
heard, neither under the Heathen Rome, nor Antichristian Romes Persecution; for
though they tortured the Martyrs of Christ, yet they rid them out of their
miseries with their lives; yea, the cruelest kind of American Savages, called
the Mohaukes, though they fatned their captive Christians to the slaughter, yet
they eat them up at once: but the Service Book savages eat the servants of God
by piecemeal, keeping them alive (if it may be called a life) Ut sentiant se
mori, Caligula.
that they may be the more sensible of their dying. One instance, and but one
occurs to our reading, that has some resemblance of this dealing. Catulus, to
revenge his brothers death, desired Sylla to let him have Marius his brother to
revenge himself upon, who is said thus to torment him:

Cum laceros artus, Lucan. l. 2. p 33.
aequataque vulnera membris
Vidimus, and toto quamvis in corpore caeso;
Nil animae, letale datum, etc.
Which a Poet Englisheth thus:

His mangled joints, May.
as many wounds as limbs
We see, yet no wound deadly given to him,
Through his spoiled body; an example rare
Of cruelty, a dying life to spare.
Yet this Catulus did so but with one; but our Catuli, Sic Canibus similes --
Like old Dogs, have filled their shambles with many. The aforesaid Poet gives a
good reason for it in these words: Lucau. l. 1. p. 14. May.
Nullus semel ore receptus, pollutus patitur sanguis mansuescere fauces.
Englished thus: Never again grow those jaws pure, that blood did once distain.
And why are these harmless men made worse than sheep to the slaughter, but that
they meddle with Diana, the Service Book, and the Master and Wardens of that
Company, who may truly say with Demetrius, (...), By this craft we get our
goods; Act. 19.25.
So we have better ground than Zipporah had, calling Moses a bloody husband, to
say and maintain it, That the Service Book is a bloody Book, Another sort of
Gods People there were, who were so terrified with the cruel usage of their
Brethren, that either they durst not search into the rottenness of this Piece,
and so like blind men that swallowed many flies; and some it may be, that did
see the evil of it, Joh. 12.41.
durst not avoid it for fear of a worse turn from the Scribes and Pharisees,
than casting out of the Synagogue.

Lastly, Some people professing the Lord Jesus, Separation, Anabaptism, and
other unsound Tenants, which has made a very great breach in Profession. For
which, see more in Zions Plea. And though the rise of Separatism, p. 84, 85, 86.
and other Sects, be there justly charged upon the Hierarchy, yet by shunning
of this sour pasture, they fall unadvisedly foul, on breaking of the hedge.

Now we come to the worser sort of people; Pharisees did, falsely of Christ, A
cursed people, not knowing the Law; all the provocations in the Land, have not
made havoc of so many souls, especially under color of good, as this has
done; if Ignorance be the mother of destruction, Pro. 29.18.
then much guilt lies upon the Service Book. Where there is no visions, the
people must perish, or, in the first Language, are left naked. So how many
Congregations are stripped stark naked of the Word in this Land? in some of
which it is well known, there has scarce been a Sermon in an age; and in most
places where they have Preaching, it is neither Seed to beget, nor Bread to
feed upon. And what makes this nakedness, but the Lyturgy? which is enmity,
both to good Ministers and Ministry: For as the Ivy, which winding it self
about the Vine, draws the sap and spirit out of it; so the advancement of this
Liturgy, leaves neither life nor spirit in the Ordinance of the Word; and being
like Priest like People, love to have it so: for the Liturgy will never bring
them out of the deadly Lethargy of sin; it will never awake the soul, Judge. 17.
nor pierce the conscience; and therefore they love it, is Micah did his Idol.
But let a man of God, by the light of the Word, discover their wretched
condition, he had as good stir in a Hornets nest, they will quickly hunt him
and pursue him to the Lions den, if they can: but (God be blessed for it) the
Beasts are in chase themselves. The love and liking of evil men unto this Book,
is an evidence of the badness of it, for if it were Gods Ordinance, they would
hate it, as they do the Ordinances of God; as Isaac took Abimelech his sending
of him away for a token of his hatred: Genesis 26.27.
so when a soul hating people set away the Word, and cleave to the Service, or
the Service joined, it may be, with some dead Ministry, then it is a token
that they hate the former, and love the latter. A worthy Minister went to visit
one of his flock upon his deathbed, a man of quality, for the world, but an
enemy to goodness, the Minister groping the pulse of his estate, he asked the
Minister what he thought of the Bishpop of Canterbury, which the Minister
waving (it being dangerous then to call a spade a spade) he asked the party if
he would pray with him, he replied, yea, if he would do it on the Book of
Common Prayer. To shut up this point, we will make but general mention of the
troubles, which this Book did bring upon the English exiles in foreign Nations
in the time of the Marian persecution, for the information in the particulars
whereof, we refer you to a Book called, The troubles of Frankeford, where from
their first erecting of a Church in Frankeford, Anno 1554. this Book and the
Patrons thereof, never left persecuting of those that could not brook it, till
after the death of Queen Mary they teturned home: In these troubles we commend
three things to consideration; First, in all these broils and unchristian
vexations, the maintainers of the Book dealt both maliciously and fraudulently
with the other party. The second thing, the Patrons of the Book, could not
allege any thing for it, and for others that they held, but such Popish stuff
as they did foot upon.

Lastly, some of those Patrons upon their retuin, became persecutors of such as
stood for the whole truth.

The last evil effect, but not the least, is against God, directly, or more
immediately, for indirectly all the other effects were against God; but as all
sin provokes God, so corrupt worship is that sin against which the jealousy of
God is inslamed, Exodus 20.5. D^ut 4.24. and 12.30.31. 2 Kin. 23 15. Exodus 8.27.
and he becomes a consuming fire; yea, the Lord calls such worship by way of
transcendency, abomination. If Moses would not sacrifice in Egypt, because it
was an abomination to the Lord, (as has been said) why should we provoke the
Lord by abominable service? All Systems of Theology are full of this in the
Thesi, therefore we shall not insist upon it, but come as briesly as we can, to
add something, to that which has been spoken of the Hypothesis, or
Service Book, which Mr. Calvin calls (as has been said in his Letter to
Frankeford) the leavings of the Popish dregs; so the Papistical Ceremonies
therein contained, are truly called by that Franckeford-book, burdens, yokes
and clogs to Gods People and his service; Besides those which have been named,
p. 89.
we will speak but a word or two more, namely, of Festival days, to Saints, at
least transitive, though not determinative, as Papists excuse their Idolatry.
The other is kneeling at the Communion; the former is an intrenching upon Gods
Prerogative: For, none can appoint an holy day, but he who has made the days,
and has all power in his own hand, which is clear: First, from the
Denomination of them in both Testaments, Levit. 231. Exodus 32.5.
in the Old they are called the Solemn Feasts of Jehovah, not only because
they were to be kept to Jehovah, but also because they were of his appointing;
and so in the New Testament, as we read but of one, for the self-same reasons,
it is called The Lords day: another instance for clearing it from that brand of
rebuke, Rev. 11 10.
that is put by God upon that Jeroboam that made Israel to sin: he, and he
only, that the Book of God speaks of, took upon him, besides all his Idols and
Idolatrous tricks, not to appoint another Numerical day, but the same day of
another Month, namely, the eighth month, where God has appointed the seventh
month, and that out of respects speciously politic, because in the eighth
month all the harvest would be in, and they might feast more freely. Secondly,
that the Lords feast being furnished in Jerusalem, they might come to Jeroboams
feast: but these fig leaves could not cover his scars; 2 King 6.11, 32, 33
but the Spirit charge directly upon him, that that was the month that he
had lied, or coined to himself. Gretzer the Jesuit commends the English,
(though it be nothing to our commendation) Quod Calvino-papistae Anglice, De
fest. lib. 8. c. 2
etc. That as the Popish-English Calvinists, are freer in other Rites and
Ceremonies, than the Puritans in France and Germany, and other where; so they
are in Holy Days. And to say the truth, we are too free indeed; Cartwrit Rep.
21.
for, as a learned man observes, we have more Holy Days than ever God gave to
the Jews: We will not insist on this subject, they who will know more of it,
let them read Altar Damascenum, P. 6.42, etc Gal. 4.10, 11, Col. 2.16
only we will point at these two places, which may fully show the unlawfulness
of them: Ye observe years and days, I am afraid of ye: Let no man judge you in
meat or in drink, or in any part of an holy day. Yet those holy days, though
then out of date, were better than ours, for they were of Gods appointment, and
so are not ours.

Follows in the next place Kneeling at the Sacrament, Sect.
the last particular that we are like to touch upon; for if we should reckon up
all, a great volumn would not hold them. This Popish modern posture, Colum.
of not above four hundred years standing, which (as has been said) and Peter
Martyr witnesses, Sect.
Propter transubstantiationem and realem praesentiam invecta est in Ecclesiam,
etc. That to maintain Transubstantiation, or real presence, it was brought into
the Church, and therefore to be abandoned with it. Though Innocent the third,
1215. enacted for Transubstantiation, and Honorius his successor decreed for a
reverent inclination of the body, to the Sacrament changed into a breaden God,
yet was it not used until the succeeding Popes, thinking this reverence not
enough for the countenance and maintenance of their upstart Deity, allotted
thereto the highest point of Adoration, for which there is neither Scripture
nor Antiquity; neither Precept nor President, but from the man of sin; neither
do any Churches use it, save the Synagogue of Rome, some Lutheran Churches, and
ours; and howsoever this misplaced worship has been cruelly manned out by the
Prelacy, and somented by that mis-begotten conceit of humility in Gods Worship,
because they knew no better, yet the truth is, it is mere will worship, and
has been a sharp rod to Gods People; yea, and proved a Scorpion to somes
Consciences: witness the former, the violent deaths of diverse for refusing this
gesture, as that worthy Gentleman, Mr. Dyton, stifled by his imprisonment in
the Gatehouse; Mr. Porter of Ware in the New-prison, and others: but because
many learned and unanswerable Treatises are out against this disapproved
gesture, it shall be needless, actum agere, to do a work so often done. It is
true, some have attempted to say so mething for it; but in the balance of
truth, hoc aliquid nihil est, that something is just nothing: For brevities
sake we will only shut up the Piece with one binding Argument:

To adore in, by, or before a Creature respectively, or with a relation to the
Creature, is Idolatry:

But to kneel at the Sacrament, is to adore in, by, or before a Creature
respectively, with relation to the Creature; Therefore it is Idolatry.

The explanation of the Terms, will make the Argument the better understood: as
first, Adoration is the highest point of external worship, which God will not
admit with an intervenient or relative respect to any Creature: for that makes
the Creature Objectum significative a quo, that is the motive of the worship;
the Terms thus explained: this is the very same Argument that our learned
Divines stop the Papist mouths with, in the point of adoring God mediatly by
the Creature: And as the Papists cannot deny the major; so sense and reason,
yea, the injunction of the Commanders, all verify the truth of the minor in
Kneelers; for they cannot deny the Elements to be the motive of their kneeling,
the Conclusion then must needs hold; that it is Idolatry disjunct, or improper
at least, as we argue against the Papists: But if the minds of thousands of
ignorant receivers in the Country were known, it is to be feared they fall foul
on conjunct or proper Idolatry, making the Bread Octjectum determinativum, in
plain, the Bread the Object of their Worship; with which sin the Papists charge
all the Protestant kneelers: for, if Christ were not there bodily (say the
Jesuits) we would rather be racked with horses than kneel. So said Spalato
after his revolt to Rome, and we confess ingenuously, if the Papists should
retort this argument upon us, it would put the learned Conformers to a
nonplus to evade it. Here were place to have a fling at the Cross, but we
refer the desirous Reader to Zions Plea, P. 95. to ^. 106.
wherein there is a succinct and learned Treatise against the Cross, proving it
by many strong Arguments, to be the mark of the Beast. All these, and much
more, are the household stuff of the Service Book, against which we will produce
one argument more in the closure of this point, namely, God will not hear the
prayers of the Service Book; Ergo, they are not to be offered.

The Antecedent shall be proved from that place of Saint John's Gospel; Ioh. 9.31
God hears not sinners, if any man be a worshipper of him, and doer of his
will, him he hears: out of the latter part, we reason thus negatively, a
contrario: those prayers which are not a doing of the will of God, God hears
not.

This Proposicion is confirmed from other places, the Intercessions of the
Saints (says the Apostle) must be according to the will of God; Romans 8.27.
Esa. 1.12.
and if they be not, the Lord will say, Who requires them?

Now, to the latter Proposition.

But the Prayers of the Service Book are not the doing of the will, nor
according to the will of God; witness all the former Reasons given against it;
therefore God will not hear them.

CHAP. VIII. Three Motives.
HAving thus clearly evinced by so many Reasons, as a cloud of witnesses, the
unlawfulness of the Lyturgie; for the expunging whereof we shall add some more
Motives in the closure: Let us now humbly crave your Honors favor, that
according to the justness of our desires, and the truth of the Reasons
alleged, you would be pleased for the love that you bear and owe to the Lord
Jesus, to the purity of his worship, to the thriving of our bodies, souls, and
estate, to the turning away of Gods judgments, mediate and immediate, to your
gaining of honor above all your Predecessors, to the chearing of the hearts of
Gods People, the daunting of the enemies, and the making our Jerusalem the
praise of the world; Matt. 15.13.
by all these, and many more, we again and again entreat you, to pluck up that
Plant of the Service Book, which God never set. O how the Prelatical Priests
grumble, when they hear of this place! and as the wicked Manichees abused this
place, in applying it against the Law of God; so we have had woeful experience,
how the Hierarchical Crew, endeavor with tooth and nail, and therein worse
than the Manichees, to supplant Gods Law; of whom we might justly say with the
Prophet, they have almost undone thy Law; the Worship of God is a prime and
precious piece, the ultimate end (as a Divine says) of all sacred
performances, Alsteed.
though the edification of man be the end subordinate; pure it is, and should
be like God himself; yea, it is called the fear of God, Psalm. 15.10.
in regard of that reverend awe that should be upon men, when they are in
divine duties; when Jacob awaked from the Vision, it is said, he was afraid,
and said, How dreadful is this place? Isa. 29.13
this is none other but the house of God, and the gate of Heaven, by which is
meant, Genesis 28.15.
the house of God where the Saints are assembled, whose fear should be as
Jacobs, not a slavish fear, nor an Idolatrous fear, but a filial fear, not
daring to present to their Father in worship, what he has not planted and
commanded. Bernard descants very sweetly upon this, terribilis plane locus,
dignus omni reverentia, etc. 6 Sermon. Psalm 57.
a terrible place indeed (says the Father) not meaning the stone walls, but the
presence of God in the Assembly, where the faithful inhabit, the Angels
frequent, and God himself dwells. How curious was Moses, the man of God, in
the matter and manner of Gods worship, Exodus 10 26.
that he would neither have horn nor hoof, over or under the Commandment that
was the ground of his punctuality, from which he would not go one hairs
breadth: and wherein we entreat your Honors to follow him to the full.

Caleb is said to follow God; We will go and sacrifice unto the Lord our God,
as he shall say unto us; Can it be so said of the Service Book? No sure, it is
no sacrifice of a sweet smell. Let any man that fears God, tell us
ingenuously, Rev 8.3, 4.
if he believes that Christ, the Golden Censer, standing at the golden Altar,
will receive the Lyturgie prayers, and persume them with the odours of his
merits, present them to the Father; surely we have no ground for it, Romans 7.2 7.
because (as aforesaid) they are not according to the will of his Father. Yea,
Christ seems to threaten out of his own mouth the contrary, in Psalm. 16. which
is meant Christ, he speaking of, and threatening their Idolatrous service, he
tells them plainly, he will not pour out their oblations, that is, he will not
be a Mediator to their services; and surely this is no acceptable service; it
is no beaten oil for the Lamp (though Mr. Wommock pleased to style it so) it is
not sure that pure oil, Zach. 4.3, 4.
out of the two olives, into the golden Lamp, that lightens the Sanctuary; but
it is rather Train Oil, and scarce so good that fouls the house, and darkneth
the light; and for its messages to heaven, which he mentions in his Epistle,
we have made a good Plea (as we conceive) for the contrary, let him disprove it
if he can; For the whole Book, though it concern them with whom he deals in
it; yet because it glisters as if there were metal in it, we may lay it a
little to the test. The Epistle has two heads; in the former he maintains
set Prayer in general; in the latter he endeavors to justify the set
Prayers of the Liturgy in particular: In both these the expressions be smooth,
and the Palliations stretched to the furthest; but it may be said without
offense of both, (...), too neat, but nothing useful. The head of set Prayer we
have not touched yet, till we come to answer some Objections; but we cannot but
wonder at Mr. Epist. p. 7
Wommocks incogitancy, to father a set Form of Prayer upon Timothy, terming it,
the first furniture that he provided for the House of God: a strange Position,
and as unsoundly grounded from St. Paul's direction. (Surely the Jesuits would
blush at it) or at least it might be one of John of Crage his observations,
from these words, I exhort not that you pray, as he glosseth, 1 Timothy 2.1.
but that Prayers be made for all men. Made (says he) i.e. set-prayers. This
is like John of Garlando's tricks, that did what he could to spoil the Text
with the Gloss: It is like a Sorbonists mis-exposition of that place, Exodus
29.39. Thou shall present one Lamb; the word Ghasah signifies to make, which
he and the Romanists apply to the words of Institution, Hoc facite, make this a
sacrifice; which as Galasius observes, is a very ridiculous piece. Does any
man think, that this was either Paul his intention, or Timothy his practice? No
sure, it is a gross mistake of the word (...), which does not signify a set
form of Prayer, exhibited, but as the learned in the tongue observe, Pasor.
it signifies preces fundere, to pour out prayers by the help and guidance of
the Spirit, proved by the comparing of other places, where the same word is
used: Again, the Spirit is said to make request for us; Luke 5.33. Phil. 1.4.
Romans 8.26.
dare any man gloss it by making a set Form of Prayer for us? No sure, but the
meaning is, He causes us to make request. To be brief, let us see how to unty
this knot; If Paul in these words prescribed a set Form, and Timothy made it
the furniture of Gods House, then such a Form should be found; and all the
Prayers enjoined by Paul, should be set Forms, because he enjoins no other
Prayer here, than he does otherwhere in other words, signifying to Pray, as
(...), and (...), both signifying to pray, Luke 22.33. 1 Cor. 14.15. and many
other places: but to assume, first, no pattern is to be found: secondly, to
affirm that all Paul's Prescriptions of Prayer were for set Forms, were a very
gross and absurd falsehood.

Ergo, so is the ground whence it arises.

He might as well have said, When Christ promised to Pray for Peter, that he
promised to make a set Form of Prayer for him: Luke 22.33.
for the words in both places are synonima: but enough of this, which is
besides our purpose.

Now let us view as briefly as we can, Epi. p. 15 Gospel for first Sunday in
Lent, p. 12.
what he says for the Liturgy in particular: He confesses it to be the
Daughter of a Roman Catholic, that is well, and so does Dr. Boyce: the
Novellists say (says he) that our Communion-book is nothing else but the Roman
Missal and Portuis thrust out of Latin into English, which the Doctor
contradicts not, for he could not. Why, says Doctor Hall, out of ancient
Models, not Roman? Yea, why should the Child be beaten for the Parent (says
Mr. Wommock?) For Answer, If the Child be as like the Parent in Nature and
Properties, as has been proved, as an Egg is like to an Egg: then there is
room for neither in Gods Worship, but both Mother and Child, like Hagar and
Ishmael, must out of doors: for the Parallels of Sabbath, Sun, and other
things, wherewith he would palliate, they are not Homogenial, or of like
nature; for nothing can make them clean in Gods Worship, being man's device and
worship still.

Again, The maintenance of these shreaddy and scrappy Prayers, from gadding of
the Soul, is but a gadding Argument. p. 28.29.
We have spoken of the ground of short and sappy E^aculations upon other
ground, Epi. 121.
and nothing like the foolish Patches of the Masse-book. Austin tells us of the
many Prayers that the Israelites made in the Egyptian furnace, and that they
were short Ejaculations; but they would have continued them, but for their
burdens: but men are forced to break off here, where there is no burden, but
the Service Book it self.

Again, p. 33.
he has a Plea from the Leprous house, wherein we are very willing to join
issues with him; he confesses that the old Roman Liturgy was like a Leprous
house, the Plague was spread in it; but now it is pitched, scraped, plaistered,
with well-tempered (or rather untempered) mortan, he should have said, that
upon the deepest search, no corruption can appear; and therefore to be judged
Clean by the Law; but there he goes too far, and farther (we conceive) than
most of the Prelates would do in a cold mood; yea, herein he is contradictory
to himself, for he acknowledges scars and defects in it: And in his last Page
of the Survey of the Parallels, p. 34.
he joins in evidence with the Author, in the discovery of Errors, and sueth
for Justice: but if the Leprosy break out again, p. 33.
then no affection of our Communion may lodge it.

Now, to apply, As the house infected was utterly to be demolished, and the
rubbish and ruins thereof to be carried forth into an unclean place: The
Leprosy of the Mass he grants to be this fretting Leprosy, the pieces we
have (though we have them not all) are the very same in another tongue. Levi.
14.43, 44, 45.
The Leprosy, of whose matter, manner, and contagious effects, we have fully
proved; and the butthen of Ceremonies therein contained, and pressed on men's
Consciences, to have been, and to be still, abominable Idols. Then it will
follow, that all the water and industry of the world cannot cleanse it, no more
then the skin of a Black-more, or the spots of a Leopard, which God can only
change, but will not do with matters or means of strange Worship; then, as
rubbish they are to be east out into an unclean place: Mark an unclean place,
not the meanest clean place allowed it, much less the Sanctuary of God. Ainsw.
Upon this place a learned Author observes, That we are taught by this severe
Judgment, to abandon all sin; but more particularly, to abolish all Idolatry,
and Instruments, and Implements of Idolatry.

Citing that place which might serve to clear this Point, if there were no
more; Ye shall also defile the Covering of the graven Images, and the Ornaments
of my molten Images, etc. Thou shall cast them away a^ a menstruous cloth; thou
shall say unto it, Get thee hence. Upon the passages of the Appendix we shall
touch when we answer the Objections: As for the Parallel which he vieweth, the
Author will make it good.

Sect. We proceed then, under your Honors favor, to outsuit against the
Liturgy; without Controversy, it is the garment spotted with the flesh,
condemned by the Apostle Jude; Verse 23. 1 These. 5 22.
which some expound by that of the Apostle, to be an abstaining from appearance
of evil; and so indeed, this were enough to abolish the Book. The best
Expositors apply the place against the Carnal Rites and Idolatrous Ceremonies,
devised by men in Gods worship; which, if the Papists were cleared (says one)
from the grossest of their Idolatry and Paganism, would condemn them; and will
not the retainment and maintenance exceedingly condemn us, that profess we are
come out of Babel? To these Rites and Ceremonies, says the same Author, as to
that spotted Profession of Popery, Dr. Willet
we should not conform our selves, neither in use nor opinion, but decline in
all things, the very shadow and show of them. What can be said more
emphatically to the purpose? As God is to be admired in the least of his
Creatures as well as in the greatest, (says a Father) Ita mente, Christo
dedita, etc. Hier. Ep. Nepotian.
So a mind devoted to Christ, does as well take heed of small faults as of
great, especially in Gods worship. The Hypocritical and Idolatrous Jews are
not only rebuked and threatened for eating of Swines flesh, contrary to the Law;
but also, that the Broth was found in their vessels. Austin comparing the ten
Plagues of Egypt, Isa. 65.4.
with the ten Commandments, tells us, that the turning of the water into
blood, corrupting of divine worship by humane and carnal Inventions of flesh
and blood. The Service Book and Ceremonies being such, we have grounds to
desire, and your Honors to grant (as we conceive) ejectionem firmam, against
them both. Sarah by Gods appointment, wills Abraham to cast out Hagar and
Ishmael, the Bondwoman and her Son; Gen 21, 10.
and why the Mother with the Son, for it seems she offended not? Yes, it
seems (as the Learned do observe) she was as Abetter of her Sons evil: so the
Service Book and the Prelates, the Cup and the Cover, the Mother and the Son,
should be cast out together: That Riddle of the Snow and the Water may well be
applied to them:

Matter me genuit, matter quoque gignitur ex me. My Mother brought forth me, and
is brought forth by me: That proud Hierarchical humor in Austin the first,
brought in the Lyturgy, and that Lyturgy has brought out, and has kept up to
this day the Hierarchy: If Christ be King of, and in his Church, in a more
glorious and eminential way (as who dare deny it in word) though too many do
deny it in deed; then consequently, without all controversy, he must appoint
his own Officers, Government, and Service. Now, there is nothing more
inculcated, and laid home in the Book of God, than Christ's Kingly Office, to
which all are subject, and it is subject to none: We will but cite some few
places of many, Psalm. 2.6.
I have set, or anointed (says God) my King upon Zion, the mountain of my
Holiness, by which he means his Church. Whence a learned godly Minister
delivered within these few days, that as Christ set up his Church, so it is
his to provide for it; To appoint, and no others, Offices, and Officers, and
all religious Service or Worship, to which we are only to submit, and to none
others. Another Testimony from the Prophet Esaias shall suffice, Esaias 9.6
Unto us a child is born, and a son is given, and the government shall be upon
his shoulders, and his Name shall be called Wonderful, etc. now, if God never
took off this government from Christ his shoulders, nor Christ never gave it
up, nor all the powers of heaven, earth, and hell, be able to shake it; then
first it must follow (as the Spirit speaks) that of the increase of his
government there must be no end. Verse. 7.
Secondly, it is every way as good by consequence, That he will have no Service
or Worship, but of his own Appointment. Porphyrius, who was a great
Necromancer, (as Eusebius witnesses) does tell us among other things, Lib. 5.
de Praep. Evang. c. 6.
That the Devils themselves (whom he calls Gods) signify unto their especial
servants, the Magitians, Quibus rebus, etc. with what things they are made to
appear, what is to be offered unto them; what days they should choose, and
what signs and Images they should make: Lib. 1. de Civit. Dei. c. 16
Which Assertion Austin confirms, Non potuit nisi ipsis primis docentibus
disci quid quisque illorum appetat, vel quid exhorreat; it could never be
learned but by their Teaching (meaning the Devils) what every one of them
desires, and what they abhor: Since the Devil then loves to be Gods Ape in
every thing, and his highest Menial servants account it nothing but reason,
that he should prescribe Orders in his own House, and appoint what Service and
Ceremonies therein as he pleases; shall not the King of kings, and Lord of
lords, and only he, appoint how, and by what means he will be served in his own
House; this is the reason why the Service of God is called (...), reasonable
service, for so we translate it, which might be more emphatically rendered,
sincere service, unmixed service, according to the Word; for so the Original
Word signifies, as the Apostle Peter calls the word, (...), 1 Epist. c. 2.2.
the sincere milk of the Word. Now, to draw to an end, we are forced in the
bulk, to exceed our intention; We crave leave further of your Honors, to bind
our Desires with Three strong Motives, for effecting of the Work, namely, from
Example or Pattern for doing of it, from danger, if it be not done, and from
the universal Covenant, binding every one in his place to the doing of it.

CHAP. IX.
I. Of the Pattern.
FOR the first, as the Apostle wills, to show our selves to others Patterns
of all good works and words; we should make others good Examples matter of our
Imitation: Tit. 2.7.
brevius iter per exempla, quam per praecepta, Pattern is a more compendious
way than Precept: Good Examples from Gods People, have the force of a general
Rule to apply: All the Reformed Churches, when God turned them from darkness to
light, they expelled the Prelates, as the Officers of the Kingdom of darkness:
and the Popish Liturgy, as a false Worship, and work of darkness. To pass
France, the Low Countries, Geneva, the Palatinate, and others, be pleased to
cast your eye upon our Neighbor Nation of Scotland who have neither left root
nor branch of Prelate or Popish Liturgy; and have not we the same Reasons to
reject both? It is an infallible Rule, both in Divinity and Polity, both in
Church and Commonwealth, Pareus in c. 11. ad Romans p. 1114.
Vbi sunt similes causa and circumstantiae, ibi locum habet exemplum; where
there are the like Causes and Circumstances, there Example takes place: the
Causes why they cast both out, were their offensiveness to Christ, his Church,
King and State; and has ever Nation been so prejudiced, in all these
particulars, as we have been? And have we not been, and are, partly yet
environed with a mantle wall of evil Circumstances: as the Prelates aggravation
of their Cruelty in pressing of that Book, and other like stuff, their
insolent domineering over Nobility and others; yea, their daring attempts, to
set a-foot their interdicted power, and their supercilious insultations, their
proud words, and affronting attempts, vented by themselves and their Priests,
even now, when the hand of the Lord is lift up against them, which they will
not see; but they shall see it: in this they are worse than the Egyptians or
Philistims, 1 Samuel 6.6.
who were content (the Lord his hand being upon them) not only to let the Ark
of the Lord go, but also sent it up in the handsomest way that they could,
taking Egypt for an example, in this their insolent striving against God and
his Truth, they may be compared to the Peasants of Lycia, Metam. Ovid l. 6.
lib. 1. de falls. Religione.
whom the Poet seigneth to be transformed into Frogs, for their cruel and
barbarous usuage of Latona, of whom Lanctantius also makes mention; but the
Poet tells us, that for all the Metamorphosis, they left not their old manners:

Litibus exercent linguas --
Et quanquam sub aqua, sub aquis maledicere tentant:
Englished thus:

Their brawling Tongues, but setting shame aside,
Though hid in water, under water chide.
Or: with Du-Bartus, in this posture, they may be compared to Lizards or
Snakes, cut in pieces:

Threat with more malice, though with lesser might,
And even in dying, show their living spite.
Or, as God said to Moses of Pharaoh, that he would not let his people go, no,
not with a strong hand; that is, he will stand out with God; Exodus 3.19.
so do they, they will not let the Ordinances go, the Liberty of the Ministry
go, they will not let the kingdom of Christ go, though Gods strong hand be out
against them; but as he fell at last, so shall they, and all their
houshould-stuff, and never rise again: the Scots have put them in the Pond;
Judge. 7.17.
let the love of the truth lead you, and their practice be to you as a speaking
emblem in the words of Gedeon Look on me, and do likewise. We will shut up the
Point with a Parallel of loyal entertainment of Kings, in their Inthronization:
the men of Judah, and the men of Israel contended zealously, who should be most
Officious in Crowning King David, though he was crowned before Judah anointed
him King over them, and Israel did the like over them; 2 Samuel, 24.5.
and to bring the parallel nearer home, what pious emulation was between us and
our brethren, the Scots, to set King James of blessed memory upon the Throne of
England? 2 Samuel 5 ^. Deuteronomy. 17.15.
they might both deservedly say (for they showed it in effect) that they were
his flesh and bone, as Israel said to David, he was no stranger, as the
Scripture has it, but a King from among his brethren; never King was received
with greater concourse, higher magnificence, and more applause; this made the
Kingdoms, as Jerusalem, Ps. 112.1.
as a City compacted in it self, which the Septuagint translateth, (...), a
partici ation, or communication together, often indeed attempted, but never
effected till then, but now blessed be the Name of God, in a more loving
league, and stricter bond than ever, contending who shall do God and his
Majesty that now is, most service: shall we not then join with them heart and
hand, in bringing the Lord Jesus, the King of glory, into his Kingdom? he has
showed himself no stranger amongst us, but done great things for us; but to the
woe of our hearts, we have used him too long like a stranger, in keeping him at
doors, and the door upon the hinges. Now, let us set open the gates, Rev. 3.20.
and bring him in with triumph; which will never be done so long as the Prelacy
and the Liturgy, or either of them keep the house; Non patitur regni socios,
Christ will have no consort in his Kingdom, much less an Antichrist; Christ
bare many calumnies and injuries from the Jews at his arraignment under Pilate,
and past by many things, not answering again; but when Pilate came to meddle
with his Kingdom, he would not let that pass, but freely avouched it; Art thou
a King (says Pi^ate) thou fayest I am, answered Christ, and to this end was I
born, Joh. 18.37. 1 Timothy 6.13.
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
Truth: of which words Paul gives this testimony, that Christ, before Pontius
Pilate, witnessed a good confession* which words of the Apostle have two
remarkable things in them. First, that Christ has a Kingdom, which he will
vindicate, in despite of all opposing power; wherein he will have his own
Officers, Government and Service, to take place. Secondly, that this course
must continue till the coming of he Lord Jesus, and every one that is of the
truth, especially Ministe^s and Magistrates, must maintain it, as they will
answer it at that day; for this work, God has brought you together; and if you
should divert this work, so exemplified, and expressed by Command, which God
forbid) then might Christ say unto you, 2 Samuel 19.12.
as David to his Kindred, ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh;
wherefore are ye the last to bring back the King? Wherein, if you will not be
faulty, but intend, as we verily hope you do to bring back the King; then let
it be your special honor, to make the paths of the Lord straight, by removing
of that rubbish, that the King of glory may enter in.

The second Motive is from the Danger of not removing of the Service Book.
Craesi filius.
Danger, as all knows, is the strongest motive to cause a people or Nation to
take heed. Histories report, that danger has made a dumb man speak. The danger
from this Service Book may be looked upon in a twofold respect, namely, a
priori, from that which is past, and a postoriori, from that which is like to
ensue; the former may also be looked upon in a way of prophecy, or in a way of
performance, the men and servants of God, to whom he was pleased to reveal
himself in more than an ordinary way, especially in time of persecution, or
some pressure lying upon them, have foretold, how the house of David should wax
weak, and the house of Saul should wax strong, that is, Popery should make
head, and the truth of Christ should suffer much, and many in trial should
forsake it; according to that of Simeon, a sword shall pierce through thine own
soul also, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed, Luke 2.35. where
by the swords piercing of the soul, according to all the ancient, is meant the
wounding sorrows of the Mother of Christ at his sufferings, and by the
revealing of the thoughts, is meant the discovery of some stumbling or taking
scandal at his death, Chrysostom, Austin, Origin, Ambrose, Theophylact: and
what is the ground of all this but these dregs of Popery now in controversy,
and the hurtful Hierarchy, one of these upholding another? a godly and famous
Minister preaching to the banished beyond Seas in Queen Mary's time, that Gods
anger was much provoked against England, for slackness to reform, when they had
time, place and power; and so it was indeed: for he cast back that partial
reformation into the flames of Antichristian tyranny, and gave many up unto
fearful Apostasy: Further the good man said, it stood them upon to look to it,
and to be circumspect for fear of after-claps, meaning that a partial
reformation would not serve. God will never endure (as has been said) the post
and threshold of Baal, and his to stand together, the like more fully was
delivered by Master Rogers, that honorable Proto-Martyr, in his days, when
the Gospel should be established in England, if the King ^ome of Antichrist
were not utterly cashi^red, and total reformation made in Gods worship, that
our persecution should be greater, and our trial hotter, than in the days when
he and others suffered; I^ we will not remove that which is an abomination to
God, as this Book is proved to be, it is just with God to cast us away. One
more of this kind from a Peer of this Land, who on his deathbed cried, Woe to
England, because they turned all their Religion into policy: dangerous
experience has taught us the truth of these predictions for from that halting
reformation after Queen Mary's death, wherein we pleased our selves with
Agrippa his almost, in the original (...), but a little, the Babylonian and
Edomites, Prelates and Jesuits, under the favor of their Canons, Act 26.28.
got at length such footing, and made such head for Popery, Arminianisme, and
that especially, by causing the Nilus of that Service Book to swell, and
heating the furnace of persecution, that Religion and Policy, the two twi^s of
Gods favor, were grown like to Archimedes his tomb, so overgrown with thorns,
Tul^y. Cap. 12.14
that it could not be found; yea, the woman in the Revelation was brought again
unto that straight, as to think on nothing but of flight to the wilderness: And
further, how nigh were our neighbors and brechren the Scots, to the pits brink
of ruin, both of Religion and State, and that by remitting of these Syno^ial
Prelates, and the Trojan-horse, the Service Book to enter, out of which, if God
had not beaten the brains, 1 Samuel 20.^.
we were like to have h^d a new Babylonish captivity; yea we may both truly say
with David, There was but a step betwixt us and death; had not God set in, as a
present help in our distress, Psalm. 12.3.
and ra^s^d you and others, the men of his right hand, in the very neck of
need, our enemies (as the Psalmist has it had swallow^d us up alive.

As we are gone thus far with the danger past, presentment with the ninth
Position of Sions ples, in these words, If the Hierarchy be not removed, and
the Scepter of Christ's Government (namely Discipline) advanced to its place,
there can be no healing of our sore, no taking up of our controversy with God,
yea our desolations, by his rarest judgments, are like to be the astonishment
of all Nations.

As the parts of the Position are soundly proved, so the same may be said of
the Service Book, and the very same Arguments concerning our danger will serve
the one as well as the other; wherefore we entreat your Honors to review the
Position, and its proofs; the Hierarchy and the Service Book are resembled
already, to Mother and Child, so may they be two twins, begotten and born of
Pride and Superstition, nursed and brought up in the lap of Covetousness;
these twins are born together, live together, and must dye together: a great
Judge returning from the Circuit of the Emperors service, and hearing his wife
to be alive, replied, si vivat i^l^i, morior ego, if she live, I am dead: so if
they live (we mean their callings) then our life may prove worse than death.
God will bear with many sins, in a people professing Christ, but with keeping
Christ out of his Throne, by intruding Officers and a superstitious worship, he
will not bear, especially of a long continuance; but will be avenged of such a
people, if they be as the Apple of his eye, witness Samuels speech to the
Israelites, who besides their desiring a King before the Lords time, were
faulty in many other things, as appears, verse the 20. yet he tells them,
If they, and their King, will follow the Lord, they should both continue (for
that is the best reading) where by following the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.14, 15 20, 25.
is meant, especially the serving of him according to his will: but if they
should turn aside from following the Lord in a corrupt way of his worship, then
the hand of the Lord should be against them, yea they should be consumed, both
they and their King; and as Samuel to terrify them, called for thunder and
rain; so we have felt both thunder and rain, Judgment yet mixed with Mercy,
both from the mediate, and immediate hand of God, and do feel it at this
present, and to the end we should clear his House of corrupt worship. The yoke
of the Philistims was never removed from the neck of the Israelites, till they
put away their strange Gods, and Ashtaroth their special Idol: 1 Samuel 7.3, 4 etc.
But when their humiliation was joined with Reformation, then the Lord gave,
not only deliverance, but also Victory over, and freedom from their enemies.

II. From the danger of not doing.
A word now of the particular Danger, Cap. 4.19.
so the work is great, as Nehemiah said, and the danger proportionable, if it
be neglected. When God puts his select Servants upon high employments,
whether they be Magistrates or Ministers, knowing best their weakness, and the
many impediments: he puts them on ever anon, to be courageous, Josh. 1.9. Jer.
1.17.
not to fear or be afraid, and the ground of all is, Have not I commanded you?
So the Lord gives the Prophet Jeremy a charge to s^eak all that the Lord
should command, and backeth it with a threatening, Be not dismayed at their
faces, lest I confound thee, both the Hebrew and the Septuagint has it, Lest I
make thee afraid. Saul his disobedience in sparing Agag, and the fat of the
cattle (notwithstanding all his fair pretexts) with the fearful punishment
inflicted by God upon him, may be a terror to all men in place, that they do
not the work of the Lord by halves, and quarters, Number. 14.24.
but that with Caleb they follow the Lord to the full. The Lord has said his
Command upon you, to put away the Excommunicate thing, and to cleanse his house
of Idols, and Idolothites, and blessed be that God whom you serve, ye have
begun, by your Edict, though men of disobedience hinder the work: but follow
home the work, we entreat you, and remember those Achans, but above all, put
away that Ashtaroth, the Service Book, for that we may well call Fundi nostri
calamitas, the very Caterpiller of Gods Husbandry. To shut up this Motive from
the point of danger, be pleased to take notice, how God bears in upon Moses,
that great Commission to Pharaoh, to let his people go, Exodus 4.
and that both by words and signs, namely, by turning his Rod into a Serpent,
his hand made leprous, and the waters turned into blood; which were not only
to confirm him in his message, against the fear of his adversaries, but more
particularly to teach him, that if he withdrew himself, in part, or in whole,
from the work, the Plague of Leprofie, of Blood, and Biting with Serpents,
should be upon him, yea, God put Moses upon a present trial of Obedience and
Faith, by causing him to take the Serpent by the tail, notwithstanding of the
danger to be bitten by it: we speak to the wise, who can apply it better than
we.

CHAP. X. Of the Covenant.
THe third Motive for removal of the Book may be taken from the Protestation
dated May 5. 1641. Confirmed, sent abroad, and solemnly sworn unto; yea, and
bound up with a public Covenant, on the public day of T^anksgiving, by
Ministers and People, so that it is an inviolable Covenant stricken between God
and us, like unto that in Nehemiah, which is there called a sur^ Coverant, Neh
9.38.
Coverant, a written Covenant, to which our Princes, Ministers and People seal
unto, from which we cannot depart, except we will incur that fearful Judgment
threatened against Covenant breakers, Emblemed out un ous in Scripture, Psalm
15.4.
by dividing of the Sacrifices, and causing the parties to go betwixt them,
Genesis 15.17.
admonishing, that God will so divide them in his wrath, if they forsake the
Covenant: The subject of the Covenant consists of three parts: In the first
we are sworn and tied to maintain all the Rights of Religion, Jer. 34 18
King and State: In the second to oppose all Persons and things, that do oppose
the three former mentioned, and more specifically, to oppose with all our life
and power, all Popery and Popish Inno^ations, which Expressions are thrice
mentioned; once in the Protestation, or Oath, and twice in the Explanation: The
third and last piece of the subject i^, the Peace of the three Kingdoms,
England Scot and, and Ireland, which we by Oath are also bound to maintain:
H^nce two Arguments will offer themseives; one more directly, and the other by
way of conse^uence.

For the former, Sect.
if all Popery, and Popish Innovations are to be opposed, then it will follow,
that the Service book and Ceremonies should be opposed, and by consequence, by
your Authority abolished, Verba Statuti sunt amplianda, non r^stringenda, the
words of Acts and Statutes for good, and against evil, are to be taken in the
largest extent: but the words themselves are universal enough. Now, that the
Service Book and Ceremonies therein contained, and pressed upon men's
Consciences, are Popery, we, and many others have cleared; yea, they are Popish
Innovations, Nam omnia quae a Chri^o non sunt, nova sunt, all things that are
not from our King Christ in his worship, are mere Innovations, Cant Prax.
as Tertullian was wont to call Praxeas, hesternum Praxeam, a yesterdaies
upstart: so one, and all of them, are Exotic and upstart things. It is true
indeed, by the malignity of the Masters of those Ceremonies, the bulk was
increased, and would have been like Crocodiles, who grow so long as they have a
being; if you had not come in place of the T^tyrites, a creature terrible to
the Crocodiles, which leapeth upon their backs, and brings them to the shore;
but otherwise for the kind, they are all, non ejusdem farinae, sed furfuris,
the same kind of Bran; and as the woman said of the Foxes, Plin. lib. 8. c 25.
If one be good, all are good. For the further confirmation, that they are
Popish, we have proof from that Treatise of Ceremonies annexed to the
Service Book: Bible in the Du^^ letter, Anno. 1561
in some ancient Copies we have read, that they thought good to retain some
Popish Ceremonies; but in another Copy they call them, the old Ceremonies
retained still, all one in effect.

The latter Argument, from the Protestation, Sect.
by way of sequel, is from our mu^ual Covenant and Oath, jointly and severally
to maintain the peace of the three Kingdoms, which is impossible to be done, in
the opinion of our Brethren the Scots, without Identity of Discipline and
Worship; witness the very words of the Arguments by the Scottish Commissioners
given to the Lords of the Treaty, persuading conformity in these, to be the
chief means of peace.

We will transcribe some passages, for all we cannot, leaving the thing it self
to your Honors review. It is (said they) t^ be wished, that there were one
Consession of Faith; one form of Catechism, one Directory for all the parts of
Gods public Worship: as Prayer, Preaching, Administration of Sacraments, etc.
Page 2.


The Arguments that they use, are first, from the Conjunction of spirit and
presence, both of great and small; of Assemblies in the Courts, and other
where; where there is oneness of worship: but by the contrary, there is
division, where the worship is diverse.

Secondly, Unity of worship will extinguish those Nicknames; as Puritanes and
Scismaticks, put upon Professors.

Thirdly, This will make the Ministers of both Nations, with face to face,
labor strenuously, and cheerfully to build up the body of Christ.

Fourthly and lastly, Pages 3, 4.
This will break the back of the Recusants hope of bringing Rome into England,
all which works strongly for peace, the sense whereof we cite; though not the
very words: But if this unity of Worship be not (say the Commissioners) there
is no unity in Policy, or Church, to be looked for: for as all the former
combustions, and stormy tempe^^s, formerly arose from that Popish Service Book,
born it upon them, whereby all the three States were much endangered: so they
profess in plain terms, that their Reformation so dearly bought, Page 8.
shall again be spoiled and defaced from England; and whatsoever peace shall be
agreed upon, they do not conceive, how without Reformation it shall ever be
firm and durable: for that Service, Government, and Officers, being none of
Christ's: but the main evil, and the cause of all evil in the three Nations:
That Maxim observed by the Commissioners, we may fear will prove too true; the
same causes will not fail to produce the same effects: witness Simeon and
Levi's digging through the wall, that is, the present conspired Plots of
Treason, like to blow up all, if they be not hindered, even when you and your
brethren are making up the breach: Now as we are tied by Oath to the
preservation of this Peace, according to our Power; We can look for no peace
with God, nor blessing from God, if we give way to that, or suffer that,
according to our power, that breaks this peace. They say in the Preface of
the Ceremonies, that without Ceremonies it is impossible to keep Order, or
quiet Discipline in the Church. So we reply, that Man's Ceremonies in Gods
Worship, will spoil the peace and quietness, both of Discipline and Worship,
witness the putting of the Ark upon the Philistims Cart, Apoph. 66
though it was a new one. Erasmus tells us, quod mala non sunt tantum
abolenda, sed etiam quae speciem mali in se habent things evil of themselves,
are not only to be abolished, but those that have in them appearance of evil.
In all this, Noble Senators, We take not upon us to put uncouth glosses upon
your Edicts, but under favor, we use the words without forcing, to overturn
that which crosses the Truth and peace of Religion and State: as means conduce
to the end, so impediments frustrate the end, if they be not removed. And now
since (under favor) We have presumed to enlarge our selves in this point o^
Peace, We beg leave of your Honors to speak a word or two of the
Improbabilities of Peace here among our selves, without removal of that
stumbling block, the Service Book, People can worse be without the Ordinance,
than without Liberties, Lives and Being. When Pompey the Great was about to
supply Rome with food, in a great Famine, the Master of the Ship told him, when
he went abroad (a great Storm appearing) that he could not sail and live.
Pompey replied (...). There is necessity of Sailing, but not of Living: and in
this case what shall they do? for with this Mock-ordinance, or Will Worship, of
the Service Book, they dare not join: There are such multitudes of people
(says Smectymnuus) that distaste this Book, that unless it be taken a course
withal, there is no hope of any mutual agreement, between Gods Ministers and
their people. We will say no more of this, but let the sudden tumult raised by
that Makebate Service Book in Scotland, be a seasonable Caveat to us and all
other Nations, to strike with Authority, lest that which should be done with
the Right hand, be done unhappily with the left hand.

Here might be place for another Motive, namely, from the reward, sed recte
fecisse praemium, to do nobly is reward enough, God employeth not man, propter
indigentiam, sed propter munificentiam, so much for any need of him, as for
honoring of him, by that employment: up then, as the Lord bids you, your
Honor shall be blazoned through the world, you shall be called the Saviors
upon Mount Zion in setting Christ on his Throne, and the Kingdom shall be the
Lords.

Answer of the Surplice.
WE had almost forgotten to say somewhat of one rag of the Ceremonies, namely,
the Surplice, of all the Idolatrous Rites not least, yea, worse (we dare
aver) than that Plague fore-clout which was sent, as should appear, to infect
Mr. Pym, and the rest of the House; for this rag is so infectious in Gods
worship, that many thousands of Gods people dare not join with it, and that
upon good grounds, as shall appear: for as it has been argued against all the
rabble of the Ceremonies, it is man's device, and has been an Idol in Gods
worship.

Therefore in the worship of God it must be an Idol still. The Antecedent no
man will deny; for it has been the Master Idol in worship amongst the Papists,
sanct fying all other Idols, and without which, it is unlawful to offici^te.

The consequent is as clear from induction of particulars, as has been
instanced from groves and things of that nature, yea, from the Brazen Serpent,
though of God his Institution: now according to the rule of Art, either let the
Defendant give an instance extra propositum, besides the thing in question; or
acknowledge the truth of the Consequent without contradiction.

This has been a grand Instrument of much mischief against the Ministers and
People of God, as we can show at large, depriving the people of their faithful
Ministers, and the Minister and theirs of all means of livelihood. The
unlawfulness of this Babylonish Garment will further appear, if we look to the
original whence we have it.

We must either have it from Heathen Rome, Gallestus.
which in her Idolatrous service did Apishly imitate Aaron his garments, as it
is instanced in the reign of Numa, 800. years after the Law; or we must have it
from the Dreides, the mad Heathen Priests amongst the Gauls and Britains, or
from the Antichristian Rome, as we have indeed, it being one of the Popish
Ceremonies retained: or lastly, from the P^iestly attire of Aaron, which
Heathen and Popish Rome has impiously followed, denying thereby the Lord Jesus
to be come in the flesh, who with his graces was typified out by those goodly
and beautiful garments, Col. 2.17.
which being shadows, are done away, and Christ the Body is come; for us then
to imitate them in this foolish Relic, or to devise a Priestly garment of our
own head in Gods worship, is to rob Christ of his honor exceedingly, and to
make our selves deeply guilty of will worship: Had not God himself clothed
those garments in the Law, with a particular and punctual command for matter
and manner, they had been foolish and ridiculous things: Exodus 39.1. Simler.
they made the holy garment (says Moses) as the Lord commanded, which later
words, as the Lord commanded, are repeated, as the learned observe, nine
several times in this Chapter, intimating that they did not swerve one jot from
Gods ^irection, teaching all Gods servants thereby, as the learned apply it,
Pelarg.
ut se contineant intra limits verbi Dei) that they contain themselves within
the limits of Gods Word, and bring nothing into the service of God of their own
invention: for the Apostle calls that, Simler.
(...), will worship: this being so, it appears what evil workers those
Ministers are, who with an high hand do display this Banner of the Man of Sin
against Gods own face in the time of his worship, interposing betwixt Gods
presence, Exodus 39.43.
and the worship, and diverting of the blessing upon the worship, for Moses is
said to bless the work of the worship, upon this ground, because he saw it
done, as Jehovah had commanded. The Hebrews add, and that truly, that
because of this, the presence of God was in it. Isa. 20.22.


Wherefore we humbly entreat your Honors, as ye would have God to be in his
worship, and his blessing upon it, and upon you and us in a perfect hatred of
that menstruous Cloth and Garment spotted with the flesh, to cast it out, and
all the rest, as Carcases of abominable things: but withal, we entreat you, to
set the Masters of the Wardrobe on packing with them.

It is observed as a custom among the Papists, that they bury their Prelates in
all their Pontifical robes, of which a learned Divine tells us, he could give
no reason, except they meant they should do service when they were dead, that
had never done any thing alive. If your Honors will lap up the Prelates in the
Sear-cloth of their own Surplices, and intomb them in the Tabernacle of the
Service Book, imbalmed with the strange ointment of their own Ceremonies, and
bury them under the Oak that is in oblivion, Genesis 35.2. Verse 5. Jos, 2.9.
as Jacob did the Idols of his family, and as our neighbors and brethren have
done with the l ke stuff, then the fear of you shall be upon all your enemies,
and the child that is to come shall bless God for you.

CHAP. XI. The Objections.
NOw, we come in the last place, to remove some Objections, which we shall show
to be of no great weight, and therefore we use the fewer words.

Service Book to which Doctor Hall Sm^ctymnuus; but say it had Antiquity
without truth, it were no better than a custom of error, Et nullum tempus
occurrit Deo, there is no prescription to the King of Kings.

Objection: Many good men have used it, and liked it well; for answer,
Testimonia humana non faciunt fidem, Logicians call it; the Patriarchs used,
and did many things that were not approveable; some good Kings of Judah, as
Amaziah, and Johosaphat, took not a way the High places: 1 King 14 41, 22 3. 2
King 18.4, to 9.
were they any whit the better for that? yea, the suffering of them is set up
as the Kings fault; it were better to follow Hezekiah that took them away.
Master Wommock alleges for the Service book, that Rome is not demolished in
the first day, and so we allege against it, that good men in mending times,
did either see as far as their Horizon, or at least as they durst. So we have
more light, and are set upon their shoulders, therefore it is both sin and
shame for us not to see more, and do more than they did: Hebeziah did more than
Jehosaphat, and Josiah more than they both.

Thirdly, that it has many good things in it; that is answered already,
Alcoran and Talmud have many good things in them: yea, the Apocrypha Books have
many excellent truths in them, are they therefore to be presented in Gods
worship.

The fourth objection is from a more convenient course of correctings For
answer, what King or Hos. 4 17.
and God speaks of Ep^raim let them alone.

Secondl^, this is not Gods course in reforming of his House* as the rubbish of
the Leprous house was to be cast out into an unclean place, as has been said:
so polluted pieces of Idolatrous Service, Rev. 14.13.
are not to be brought by any cleansing, into the House of God; God commands
his people to throw down the Altars of the Canaanite: where under Altars are
comprehended all other abominations; they were not to set a new trim upon any
of them, but because they obeyed not the Lord, they smatted for it. Blessed be
God, who has put it into your hearts, to strike at Altars, Railes, Pictures,
Crosses, and all the Popish Idols; Judge 2.2.
we are in good hope you will not leave a Popish Relic in the ^and, neither
in Church or Street, and then we may be sure there shall no Canaanite dwell in
our Land: this scraping and picking that Master Wommock speaks of, will be no
better than paring of the nails, and shaving of the hair, which as the Great
Turk said of his Army, will quickly grow again; yea, and grow again the faster
too: good medicines in natural things may be extracted out of rank poisons,
but so cannot pure worship out of things polluted, being man's inventions, Esa.
30 22
therefore the Prophet Esaias tells us, that nothing will serve, but the casting
away of the polluted thing, not cleansing of it.

Acts of Parliament, Service-book-men make their staff of their confidence; and
yet in truth, being well tried, it shall be found, that they abuse the state,
and consciences of men most grossly. Doctor Hall and others, strike much on that
string, as Parliamentary Acts, peremptory establishment; yet they make but very
harsh Music. A man would think that Doctor Hall, being a learned Divine,
would first have laid this worship of Liturgy in the ^allance of the Sactuary,
and tried the weight of it there and if it had proved too light, (as surely it
would) then to have counted it a piacle against God and man, to offer to make
up the weigh with humane Laws. I^ is not unworthy your remembrance, how one of
the latter brood of the Scottish Prelates, alleging, or rather mis-alledging
before our late Sovereign King James, some Act of Parliament for the
establishing and maintenance of the Prelacy, the King asked a Noble man being
by, being a great Legist, an Officer of State, what he thought of those Acts?
The Nobleman replied, That it went never well with them, since their
Churchmen labored to be more versed in the Acts of Parliament, than in the
Acts of the Apostles. But to the matter, for all this cry, we are more than
half consident they shall have but little wool for the Service-booke, from the
Acts of State, when they are well looked into. We know not any color of
confirmation for the Service Book, 1 Eliz. c 7.
except that Stature prefixed to it, which how little it makes for it, let the
words of the Statute testify, of which we shall set down those that are most
pertinent; for it is needless to write them all. In the fifth and sixth years
of King Edward the sixth, an Act was made for the establishing of a Book,
called, The Book of Common Prayer, the which was repealed^n the first year of
Queen Mary, which Statute of repeal was made void by this same Act the first
year of Queen Elizabeth; and that the aforesaid Book, with the alterations and
additions therein added, shall stand and be; and all Ministers shall use the
said Book, authorized by Act of Parliament in the said fifth and sixth year of
King Edward the sixth, and no other. This is the sum of the Statute, in
relation to the Subject, namely, What Service Book is it that the Statute
establishes; and for any thing we can see, there is not one passage or tittle
for confirmation, or establishing any other Service Book, but that of King
Edward the sixth; diverse Ministers in King James his time urged with
subscription, answered the Prelates, True it was, that if they refused, they
should make themselves transgressors of the Laws of the Kingdom, in
subscribing to another Book than that, established by Law: the Prelates in
pressing this subscription, 13 Eliz cap 12.
forced two Statutes, namely, the Statute alleged by the change of the Book;
and also another Statute requiring no subscription, but barely to the Articles
of Religion, which only concern the Confession of true Christian faith, and the
Doctrine of the Sacraments.

Now, to come to further answer; let us grant by way of Confession that there
were an Act, Sect.
or Acts for ratifying of the Book, which in terminis we cannot see, (as
Statutes use to be expressed) yet by the Law of charity and duty, we hold our
selves bound to believe, that a State professing the truth of Religion would
never inact so, for a Service Book of man's device, as that it might be a snare
to the People of God, having other ends; as a kind of uniformity, supply for
want of Ministry, and bringing Papists to the Church, but not to press it in
the bulk beyond the sphere of any man's Conscience, witness a Rubric in King
Edward the sixth his Book; but give it to speak as punctually for the Book as
they would have it, shall it be simply good? for that, it is only in the power
of a divine Statute simply to make a thing good; all Divines, Humanists and
Lawyers that have written on the Laws, concur in this Maxim, Omnium l^gum
inanis censura, nisi divinae legis imaginem gerant, August de Civit. Dei lib.
9. Cic. lib. 3. de Repub.
the power of all Laws is void, except they bear the impression of the ^aw of
God: the Orator gives a reason for it, Lex divina omnium legum censura, the
divine Law is the standard of all laws, yea, a thing evil in it self
established by a Law, becomes worse, as the learned tell us, it becomes
armata injustitia, an armed injustice, or with Lactantius to the same purpose,
Lib 4 Inst. Lucan lib. 2. May.
Legitime injurias infer, to do in jury in the form of Law, just with the
Poet, jusque datum sceleri -- well Englished, and licenced.

Which truth also is cleared from divine Authority: the Psalmist complains of
the injurious evil done upon Gods Church and People, aggravating it from this,
Psalm. ^4 2^.
(that is it was framed by a decree; which place, the Author of Zions Plea,
applies very pertinently to the Hierarchy, proving it to be the Master-sin,
wherewith the Church and State are pestered, and for which especially, God has
a controversy with us, because it is decreed by a Law; and as a Law for the
Hi^rarchy proved of no force to keep it up, no more than the late Laws of
Scotland could uphold their Prelates: so grant that there were a Law for the
Service Book, the thing being naught, what could it help it? Within these
hundred years there was a Law in England, for the Popes suprem^cy, say that
were not repealed, stood it either with Reason, Religion or Loyalty to submit
unto it? Yea, some fragments of Laws are yet unrepealed in this Land, that no
judicious man will obey: neither have we alleged those evidences upon this
suspicion to encounter with an Statutes; but to stop the mouths of those men,
who would make the Statute Law a blind guide, under which their unlawful
callings, and superstitious service, might march furiously against the word of
truth.

Now, Sect.
to come to an end (for we are sorry we could be no briefer) we will only
answer this Q^aer^, consisting of these two heads: First, whether we do approve
of any set prayer, in a more private way: And secondly, whether we do approve
of any set Litur^y in publi^ue? to both these we answer ingenuously as we
think; and for the former, we do think that parties in their infancy or
ignorance, may use forms of prayer, well and wholesomely set, for helps and
props of their imbecility, yea, riper Christians may do well to read such
profitable forms, the matter whereof may by setting of their affections on
edge, prepare and fit them as matter of Meditation the better to Prayer; but
for those parties so to continue without progress to conceived Prayer; were as
if children should still be poring upon spelling, and never learn to read; or,
as if children or weak should still go by hold, or upon cruches and never go
right out. We may say of set-prayer used for infirmity as Divines say of the
legal Ceremonies, in the interim, that they were tolerable, not necessary; and
so whatsoever is, or may be said in the behalf of it, is not so much (as we
conceive) for the commendation of it, as for the toleration of it for a time;
and for giving satisfaction to scrupulous consciences, for the warrantable use
of it in case of necessity.

To the second head; Sect.
for a set form of Liturgy in public, we answer, that with all the Reformed
Churches we do allow a sound form of set-liturgy, as an exampler, or president
of our preformance of holy ordinance, but so that none should tie himself, or
be tied to those Prayers, exhortations, and other things, in the Lyturgy, much
less should it be violently thrust upon any Minister or People; which proves in
very deed a limiting of the spirit, especially, in a Minister able to pray in
and by the Holy Ghost, yea, it a very transplantation of the Essence or Nature
of Prayer, wherein the words are to follow the affections, and not the
affections the words, as it does in the best set forms; but for our Liturgy,
what can be said for form, or has been said, that cannot be said for the
Popish Liturgy, Canon 38.
but the clothing it in another tongue? yet this is pressed under great
penalty, upon all the Ministers; who if they had the tougues of Angels, they
should not pray till every rag and remnant of that be said. To shut up the
business, if this Liturgy aque caput mali, being the head piece of our evil, be
put away, Act. 13.5.
we should have no more ado about such a Liturgy, than the Masters of the
Synagogue had, when after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, they desired
Paul to preach, where without question, Calvin.
as the learned observe, Prayer was not wanting.

FINIS.

