A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, IN Their MAJESTY'S Chapel at St.
James's, upon the Annunciation of our Blessed Lady, March 25. 1686.

By JO. BETHAM Doctor of Sorbon.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

Sold by Matthew Turner Bookseller, at the Lamb in High-Holborn*

A SERMON Preached before THEIR MAJESTY'S, Upon the Annunciation of our Blessed
Lady, March 25. 1686.
Ecce concipies in utero and paries filium. Luc. 1. 31. Behold thou shall
conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son.
THE most Solemn Embassy our World was ever honored with, appeared this Day in
Galilee, at the Town of Nazareth: The most surprising and astonishing News ever
sent from Heaven, was brought this Day by the Angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary.
She was to remain the most spotless and pure of Virgins, and yet become the
most Honorable of Mothers: She was Religiously to observe her Promise made to
the Almighty of Perpetual Chastity and Virginity; and yet on this Day become
Fruitful, and conceive a Son: Ecce concipies in utero.

Were the Prophets ever impatient upon any account, it was with the Expectation
of this Days News, this Miraculous Conception, which brought with it the
Messiah so long sighed after. Isaiah declares he would never rest, his
Importunities should never cease for Sion and Jerusalem, propter Esa. 62. 1.
Sion non tacebo, propter Jerusalem non quiescam; till that Just Man should
appear, that Savior, which should illuminate the World, and shine as a burning
Lamp; Donec -- Salvator ejus ut lampas accendatur: So to show their ardent
Desires, they address themselves in pathetical Apostrophes to the Earth and
Heavens, beseeching the one to send him down in a Cloud, or in a Heavenly Dew;
or the other to open its fruitful Womb, that he may grow forth to save us;
Rorate coeli desuper, and nubes pluant justum, Esa. 45: 8.
aperiatur terra and germinet salvatorem. At other times they call upon his
Omnipotent Hand to force his Passage, to break through the Heavens, and come
down to our Relief; Vtinam disrumperes coelos, and Esa. 64. 1.
descenderes.

Great Prophets, your Sighs and Tears at last have proved successful, your
earnest Petitions are granted; the Calamities of Mankind, and your mournful
Lamentations, have so far prevailed, that all things are now accomplished which
were to forego the happy arrival of this long-expected Messiah. The Royal
Scepter has past to a Stranger from the Sons of Judas, as Jacob foretold:
Daniel's Seventy Mysterious Weeks, or Septenaries of Years, are now expired:
The Virgin that Isaiah told King Achaz should be fruitful and bear a Son, is
prepared for so great a Mystery; and the Herald is arrived from Heaven that
proclaims the joyful News; Ecce concipies in utero; Behold, thou shall conceive
in thy womb.

Chaste Virgin, of the Royal Race of David, thou shall this Day conceive a Son;
not by the common way appointed by Nature, but by the Omnipotent Hand of the
Holy Ghost: No Man shall have the Honor to be his Father; but he shall be
called, what he truly is, The Son of the most High; Filius Altissimi vocabitur:
The Eternal Son of the Eternal Father; the Omnipotent Word by which all things
were Created; that Infinitely-significant Word, which expresses all that God
could conceive; this Incomprehensible Word, this only Son of the Almighty, will
this Day be united to Humane Nature in thy chaste Womb, will miraculously
become Man, and not disdain to be truly thy Child, and at the same time the
only Son of the most High, of God himself.

Here we have, Dear Christians, two stupendous Mysteries, which the Church
Honors upon this Day: A Virg^n made a Mother, without loss of her Virginal
Purity: God made Man, without prejudice to his Divinity. This obliges me to
divide my Discourse between the Adorable Son, and the miraculous Mother;
explicating in my first Part the chief Cause or Reason why this only Son of God
was this Day made Man, conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mary; and in my
second, I shall lay before you the Chief Honor due to the Mother. The Infinite
Blessing we received from the Son, and the best way of Honoring the Mother,
make the two Points of my Discourse, and the Subject of Your Majesty's Royal
Attention. It were rashness to discourse upon so sublime a Mystery, without
imploring the Assistance of that Holy Spirit by whose Divine Virtue it was
wrought: Let us therefore humbly crave it by Her Intercession, who, before all
Creatures, was chosen this Day as a miraculous Instrument of the Worlds
Redemption, when saluted by the Angel, Hail, full of Grace.

I. P.
There Is no Condition more deplorable, then to owe immense Sums, which must be
paid to the last Farthing, under pain of Eternal Prisons and Everlasting
Dungeons; and yet to be destitute of all means to pay one Mite: Nothing more
miserable, then to be scourged and chastis'd during thousands of years, for
Crimes committed, and yet no Satisfaction made for the least Offense. This was
the unhappy Condition of Unfortunate Man, ever since the Fall of our First
Parents; whose Sin, upon that account, St. Augustine calls great beyond
expression, ineffabiliter Enchir. c. 24.
grande peccatum, by reason of that Misery, ruina ineffabilis, that ineffable
ruin, as the same Father calls it, which it drew upon their whole Posterity.
All the Scourges of Heaven upon Sinful Man, ever since the Worlds Creation,
were just Chastisements of this first Rebellion; yet had they been infinitely
more, they could not have restored him to his Maker's Favor. For, as St.
Augustine observes, the General Deluge, the most severe Effect of the Divine
Justice ever felt by Mankind, was only able to destroy Man, but not sufficient
to wash away his Guilt: Diluvium hominem delevit, Sermon. 17.
crimen delere non potuit. Moses could drown Pharaoh and his Army, could open
the Ocean and swallow up at once great part of the Inhabitants of a whole
Nation; yet this dreadful Punishment could make no Atonement with Heaven; their
Sins still remained: Moses exterminavit Aegyptum, Ibidem.
non peccatum. In fine, All Chastisements ever undergone, all the Sacrifices
ever offered, all the Virtues the World ever admired, as the Faith of an
Abraham, the Patience of a Job, the Meekness of a Moses, the Penance of a
David, could not make Satisfaction for the least Crime: No Man could be perfect
to that degree, (says Lib. 6. i^ Luc.
St. Ambrose) as to make Satisfaction for this sinful World; Nullus hominum
tantus esse potuit ut totius mundi peccata deleret. Nay, had all the Angels of
Heaven, all the Men that ever had or will have a Being, been employed in
nothing but sighing forth Penitential Psalms; and with it whole Mankind been
condemned to feed on nothing but Dust and Ashes, to drink nothing but Brine and
Tears, to be clad in Hair and Sackcloth, to have passed whole Lives, though
prolonged to thousands of Years, in the most severe and contradicting
Mortifications that Humane Nature can support; all these, though multiplied
beyond the reach of Arithmetic, would fall infinitely short of making just
Satisfaction for the least Capital Crime.

The reason generally given by Fathers and Divines, why Man's Poverty and
Weakness could not cancel that Handwriting that was against us, Chirographum
decreti, nor satisfy for the sins committed Col. 2. 14.
against God, is the greatness of God and the vileness of Man: On the one side
there was an Infinite Majesty offended, on the other, a despicable Worm, the
Offender: The offended was Lord and Master, absolute and supreme Proprietor of
all that had a Being in Earth and Heaven; The Criminal had nothing he could
call his own, nothing but what did all really belong to his Offended Maker upon
several Titles; on the one side, all Power, all Greatness, all Independency,
all Majesty, all Divinity; on the other, nothing but Impotency, Servitude,
Dependency, Vileness and Baseness. This raises our Sin and Rebellion to such a
degree of Enormity, that St Thomas of Aquin sticks not to call it in some
measure Infinite, Peccatum Q. 1. de Incar. ar. 2. ad 2.
contra Deum commissum quandam infinitatem habet; because the Majesty offended
is infinitely Great, infinitely Good, infinitely Amiable, infinitely Adorable;
Man the offender infinitely beneath him in all these sublime Attributes; which
inhances his guilt beyond the reach of Humane Comprehension. Nay, the great St.
Bernard to give us a fuller notion of Sins malice carries it yet higher, by
impeaching Rebel and Sinful Man, of no less a crime than Deicide, that is, a
desire to destroy God himself, as much as lies within the power of his
malicious Will, Ipsum quantum in ipsa Sermon. 3. de Incar.
est Deum perimit voluntas propria, striking at the Divinity, and aiming to
Dethrone the Almighty; because, whoever offends God, does at the bottom of his
Heart, secretly desire, that God either did not see him, or could not punish
him, and so wishes him either ignorant, or impotent, which is in effect, to
desire he were not what he is; that is, that he were not God, which makes St.
Bernard's Zeal cry out, O crudelis and execranda malitia! O most cruel and
execrable malice! Quae Dei Potentiam, Justiam, Sapientiam perire desiderat,
which desires God might cease to be Omnipotent, Just and Wise.

Thus it stood with unfortunate Man, for about Four thousand Years, charged
with an immense Debt, guilty of an infinite Malice; and at the same time
destitute of all means to make the least payment or satisfaction, which in
justice was due and required. No Creature, that was only such, could repair our
Ruins; nothing less than a God could make just satisfaction for the Sins of
Men; because the boundless greatness, and dignity of the Majesty offended, as
you have heard, rendered our Crimes infinitely enormous, and the despicable
meanness of the Offender depressed all the satisfaction, we could offer,
infinitely beneath the least proportion to our Offenses, or the acceptance of
the Person offended. Tell me, dear Christians, Was there ever a condition more
deplorable? ever a Cause more desperate? Full satisfaction to be made, yet none
possible but what must come from the offended himself; no just Reconciliation,
unless the Adorable will stoop to Submission, and Humiliation, the Offended
turns Advocate, and the Innocent be dragged to the Bar, and condemned for the
Criminal, who stands indicted and convicted at his Suit. What hopes is there of
these Prodigies? Can Four thousand Years Sin and Rebellion move the Almighty to
so incomprehensible a Condescendency? Can our Insolence and Pride of so ancient
a date, and so long continuance prevail with our slighted Maker to undergo such
unbeseeming Indignities for our sakes? May we not here justly cry out as the
Prophet Isaiah did upon a less occasion? Who ever heard or saw any thing like
this! Quis audivit unquam tale, quis vidit Esa. 66. 8*
huic simile? How prodigious soever this may seem, it is the Case truly stated;
no Salvation for Man upon easier terms.

Therefore that Justice might at last triumph, after the unsuccessful
Endeavors of many Ages, consumed in millions of Sacrifices and Holocausts, not
regarded in the Court of Heaven, as St. Paul observes out of David,
Holocautomata pro peccato non Heb. 10. 6.
tibi placuerunt; his saving and just Providence appointed a new, more
agreeable Victim, by preparing a Humane Body for the Eternal Son of Heaven, as
St. Paul observes out of the same Royal Prophet, Corpus autem aptasti mihi:
Which Body Heb. 10. 15.
was this Day framed in the Womb of the Spotless Virgin, for our Redemption.
Against this Mediator no exception could be made, in his Satisfaction no flaw
could be found; his Mediation could not be refused; for as St. Paul assures us,
Non rapinam Phil. 2. 6.
arbitratus est esse se aequalem Deo, He did not think it any Usurpation or
Presumption to style himself equal with God; Omnipotent with his Eternal
Father, equally Great, equally Just, equally Independent, the same in Sanctity,
the same in Majesty, the same in all things that were Divine, without any
Incroachment upon his Fathers Prerogatives: Non rapinam, etc.

Neither could his Satisfaction be refused, because conformable to the most
rigorous Rules of Justice; infinitely charming, as the fault was infinitely
hateful, infinitely submissive, as the fault was infinitely insolent,
infinitely meritorious, as the fault was infinitely unworthy, infinitely
pacifying and appeasing, as the fault was infinitely provoking; fully equalling
our Debts, as the Council of Ephesus observes, Ad amussim debita nostra
coaequantem, which made St. Paul say, we were Redeemed at 1 Cor. 6. ult.
a high rate, Pretio magno, with an inestimable Ransom.

May we not here, Dear Christians, more justly cry out, then the Prophet Jeremy
did upon a less surprising Occasion, Obstupescite Jer. 2. 12.
coeli super hoc! Stand astonished at this, O you Heavens! Man has offended
God; the same provoked God comes to satisfy for the very Offenses committed
against his own Person: Man by Pride had soared above himself in affecting to
be like the most High; God, that he might not perish for this Insolence, stoops
to the greatest of Humiliations, and becomes the most Low. Man had abandoned
God, sold himself to be Captive and Slave to the Devil; God descended into the
narrow and dark Prison of a poor Virgin's Womb, to restore Man to his lost
Liberty, and rescue him out of the Hands and Tyrannical Possession of the
Powers of Darkness. In fine, Stupid and ungrateful Man had for thousands of
years debauched his Affections with fatal Friendships, criminal Loves,
pernicious Alliances and Unions with all the declared Enemies of Heaven; God,
to reclaim and save this perverse Creature, descended so low, as to unite
himself really and substantially to despicable Humane Nature, for an endless
Eternity. Had not St. Leo just reason here to say, Mirabilior nobis Dei
humilitas quam potestas; Sermon. 10. de Pass.
That the boundless Power he showed in raising this fair World out of Nothing,
Peopling the Heavens with Angels, the Earth with Men, and all variety of
Creatures, was not so surprising and astonishing, as the inconceivable
Humiliations he underwent in the Redemption of Man; Mirabilior nobis, etc.

Were we here permitted, O Eternal Maker, humbly to expostulate with thy
ineffable Bounty; Could thou not have left a Race of Rebels, Despisers of thy
Laws, Blasphemers of thy Majesty, Monsters of Ingratitude? Could thou not
have abandoned them to the utmost Rigor of thy provoked Justice? Had thy
Divine Majesty been ever the less Adorable? Had thy Eternity been shortened? Had
thy Immensity been confined? Had thy Omnipotency been weakened? Had thy Infinity
been limited? Had thy Glory been eclipsed? What prejudice had God suffered, if
the vilest Ingratitude had been chastis'd? if Man, the most unworthy of
Creatures, had perished for ever? Had thy Friends forsaken thee because thy
Enemies were punished? Had not the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost still enjoyed
one another in Boundless Knowledge, in Infinite Love, in Immense Glory? Would
not the Angels still have been ready at thy beck, the Cherubims rapt in
Contemplation of thy Greatness, the Seraphims melted in the Flames of thy Love?
Would not the Earth and Heavens, with all other Creatures, have still trembled
in thy Presence, and submissively owned thee as their Supreme Lord, although
ungrateful Man had been treated according to his Demerits?

It Is true, Dear Christians, God's absolute Independency and Supreme Dominion
places him infinitely above such Casualties upon the account of his Creatures
Disorders: And although that Power which created the Universe with a Word, could
with the same ease have saved or abandoned all Mankind; yet, all this
notwithstanding, it was not to be done upon other Terms. The Reason was,
Because God would not have the Greatness of his Mercy so manifested, that he
might seem in the least to neglect his Justice; he would join together those
seemingly opposite Attributes, after so admirable a manner, that his Mercy
should never appear more Indulgent, nor his Justice more Severe; fully making
good David's Prophecy, Justitia and Pax osculatae sunt. His Mercy could never
have pardoned more, his Justice could never exact more. It Is only here he was
infinitely Merciful, to satisfy himself in Person for the Offenses committed
against his own Laws; it is here he was infinitely Just and Severe, in admitting
of no less Satisfaction then what was offered by his own Coeternal and Coequal
Son, who could not atone for us, had he been of an inferior Rank, as St. Leo
observes, Nisi esset verus Deus non adferret remedium. Sermon. 1. de Not.
God, the Eternal Justice it self, will have full Satisfaction for the Sins
committed against his Person and Orders; this cannot be had but from a Person
equal to himself; therefore his only Son, who is God, and Equal with himself,
crowds (as I may say) his Immensity into the narrow Womb of a Virgin,
mercifully takes the Form of a Servant, and by it raises our Poverty to the
rich Condition of being able to pay a full and just Ransom for the Sins of all
Mankind.

Here stop a while, my Soul, and Contemplate the Eternal Word, the Omnipotent
Son of Heaven, for thy sake, become an Infant Child; Behold his boundless Love
for many, as the Prophet Sophonias foretold, has reduced him to a charming
silence, Silebat in dilectione sua, he was silent Sopho. 3. 17.
in the dearest expression of his Love. O Incomparable Invention of Divine
Mercy! Oh Silence more Eloquent than all the Tongues of Men and Angels! more
forceable in the sight of Heaven than all the Penitential Psalms of David, than
all the Lamentations of Jeremy, than all the earnest Petitions, and languishing
sighs of the Patriarchs and Prophets, which cries more loud, though in a sweeter
strain, than the Blood of an innocent Abel, pleads Man's Cause with a Heavenly
Eloquence, the happy Product of his infinite Love, silebat in dilectione sua.
Was ever Love carried to this height? was ever Charity to be compared to this?
The only Son of Heaven, the Immence Word of the Almighty, reduced to the state
of a newly conceived Infant: And why? St. Paul tells you in a few, but most
surprising words, Peccatores salvos 1 Timothy 1. 16.
facere, to save Sinners, his declared Enemies, Ungrateful Rebellious Sinners;
to save you that have contemned his Benefits, abused his Graces, vilified his
Glory, blasphemed his Majesty, for the Salvation of such who so little deserved
it. He is this Day miraculously made Man, substantially united to one of his
own Creatures, infinitely beneath him in all Perfections. Would any here
present willingly consent, that his Rational Soul, his Humane Nature should be
really and inseperably united for all Eternity, to the Nature of a Serpent, a
Toad, a Worm, or what is more Vile and Abject amongst Creatures; and this only
to redeem from Slavery, that Person of the World which most contemned him that
let slip no occasion of showing himself to be your most inveterate and
implacable Enemy? Alas! all this is infinitely outdone in our present Mystery.
The Creator of all things is substantially united to that created Nature, which
of all Beings had been most ungrateful; the supreme Lord and Master of Heaven
and Earth has assumed the contemptible Nature of his own Slave and Vassal, God
is become Man, and will remain so for all Eternity, to save his own Rebellious
Creatures, his Treacherous Servants, Monsters of Sin and Iniquity, Peccatores
salvos facere. It Is here clear, Brethren, the Powers of Heaven stand
astonished, and submissively adore the profound Abyss of the Divine Wisdom, the
Infinite severity of his Rigorous Justice, the Charming Goodness of that God of
Mercies; who although abandoned by his own Creatures, not owned as their Father or
Benefactor, but despised, vilify'd, and hated, as their inveterate Enemy; yet
appears this Day the most Gracious of Sovereigns, the most Bountiful of
Benefactors, the most Tender of Fathers, giving us all the Treasures of Heaven,
his only Son, as the most Generous and Indearing Instance of an Infinite Love,
Sic Deus dilexit mundum ut filium suum unigenitum daret.

May we not justly say with St. Aug. That although we have been insensible of all
other Benefits his Bounty has heaped upon us since the Worlds Creation; yet
certainly this strongest Proof of an Infinite Love must force some return from
the most Stony Heart, Si amare pigebat saltem redamare non pigeat.

That Nature upon which the First Adam had entailed Temporal Miseries and
Eternal Punishments, is this Day, by the Second Adam, renewing its Title and
Claim to Eternal Glory; the Pressures and Calamities we sighed under, as
Chastisements of our Sins, are this Day made the best and surest Earnest of
everlasting Bliss: All Creatures that ever had become our Masters, and had
debauched our Affections, are again falling at our Feet, by that Grace of our
Redeemer that makes us triumph over them, and despise them. The Way to Heaven,
hitherto unknown and untrodden by Mankind, is now clearly discovered, and easy
to be walked in. The Law of Figures, confined to Judea, is receiving an end,
and all Nations invited to a better Worship, to adore in Spirit and Truth. The
Distance kept with Man for thousands of Years, is this Day dispensed with; he
is Hypostatically united to Humane Nature: and that nothing might be wanting,
he graciously appears in our own Form. This must needs charm us, how insensible
soever we were to past Favors, si amare pigebat saltem redamare non pigeat.

If any thing appears on this Day that puts us in mind of his heretofore so
formidable Omnipotency, it is only the confounding the Powers of Darkness,
wresting their Prey out of their Mouths, the repairing the Ruins caused by Sin,
not to be made up by a lesser Power. No Effects here of his Justice, that
Attribute so dreadful to Mankind, unless it be the offering himself a rich
Victim of Peace, in full satisfaction to our offended God, reconciling this
sinful World to his Eternal Father, himself, and Heaven, mundum reconcilians
sibi. This was the Business he came for; for this Reason he assumed Humane
Nature, as you have heard proved at large: Which being performed, the Promise
made in the opening my Discourse calls upon me, after having spoken of the Son,
to say something of the miraculous Mother. You have heard how great the
Blessing was we received from the Son; I shall now lay before you the best way
of Honoring the Mother, which is my Second Part.

II. P.
THe Catholic Church was always careful to put just Bounds and Limits to that
Honor which her Children paid to the Virgin Mother; giving a check to those
who by an indiscreet Zeal carried it too high, and not supporting such who
durst in the least derogate from her. Of this we have a clear Proof in St.
Epiphanius, a Father living near the middle of the Fourth Age: In him we read
of the Collyridians, Epip. Haer. 79.
Persons who offered certain Cakes in Sacrifice to the Virgin Mother, who, for
so doing, are treated as Heretics, for raising her above the Nature of a
Creature, and so intrenching on the Divine Prerogatives. So likewise the same
Father stigmatizes others, called Antidicomarianites, with the same infamous
Haer. 78.
Character, for denying one of her Chief Prerogatives, the Honor of being a
Perpetual Virgin. So that as she forbids her Children to give her more Honor
then may be allowed to a Creature, she likewise permits them not to deprive her
of any Advantage granted by her and our Creator. The first is so absurd, that
it cannot be a Temptation to a Reasonable Creature; the second so unjust, that
none can refuse it that know her Merits. To adore her as a Goddess, were the
most enormous of Crimes, a Sacrilegious Idolatry; not to Honor her above all
Saints, were to diminish her Dignity, and a manifest Injustice. We are allowed
to pray to her, as the Mother of Pity, to pray for us; but must always expect
the Grace implored, not from her, but her Son's Bounty. Here you see the Spirit
of the Catholic Church is, that her Children in Honoring the Virgin Mother,
should never transgress by falling into Extremes, in giving her more then is
due to a Creature, or refusing what is her Right upon so many just Titles.
Maria in honor sit, Dominus Haer. 79.
adoretur; Let Mary be honored, but let God be adored as our Sovereign Lord
and Master.

But my time is too far spent to enter upon the particular Discussion of
several Ways that may be made use of in Honoring the Virgin Mother: Wherefore
I shall content my self at present to recommend only that unto you, which is
most desired by the Church and her, most advantageous to all that honor her,
and which alone makes all other Honors done her, to be truly so: I mean, the
Imitation of her Life and Virtues.

The Chief Honor St. Paul demanded from those converted by his Apostolical
Labors, was, That they would study to imitate his Life, as he did the Sacred
Life of Christ; Fratres imitatores mei estote, sicut 1 Cor. 11. ^^
ego Christi. This is the best way of Honoring the Saints, most acceptable to
them, and most beneficial to us: And therefore St. Augustine says, They alone
truly Sermon. 74. de Sanctis.
keep the Festivals of the Saints and Martyrs, and truly honor them as they
ought, qui ipsorum Marryrum exempla sequuntur, who make it their business to
imitate their Lives. And the Reason is evident: For when we would make our
Court to any Great Person here on Earth, and convince him we have a true Honor
for him, we cannot do it more efficaciously, then by saying always what he
says, approving what he approves, finding fault with all he dislikes; in a
word, imitating his Behavior and Conduct in all things. By this Proceeding we
convince him, that we take his Judgment for our Rule to act by, we esteem his
Choice to be the most wise, and himself to be the most excellent Pattern for
Prudence, Discretion, and Wisdom, of all others. Is not this the highest Honor
we can show? And in reality it is so, if we think he deserves it, and proceed
without Flattery. But the Saints in Heaven are not only above our Flattery, but
have moreover this Advantage, which we have not: Their Judgments, when on
Earth, were exactly conformable to the Wisdom of Heaven; their Choice squared
to the Rules of the Gospel; their Actions measured by the Will of the Almighty:
To which must be added, That now in Glory they see incomparably more clear;
that no way of Living here on Earth but theirs, when Pilgrims with us, was to
be esteemed Rational; and now being immovably fixed to the Will of the
Almighty, can love only what he loves, and necessarily hate what he hates; and
consequently, cannot esteem or admit of any Honor done to themselves, as truly
such, which is not at the same time a true Honor of the Lord of Glory, who
cannot possibly approve of any Action directed to himself, or his Saints, that
is not accompanied with a Desire at least of imitating his Son, or Disciples
that followed his Example. Therefore it is only then, the Saints esteem
themselves truly Honored, when their own exemplary Lives contribute in any
measure to carry on the true Honor and Glory due to our common Lord and
Master. When they see any one become Chaste by their Example, Penitent by their
Example, Self-deniers by their Example, true Servants and Adorers of the Lord
of Glory, being animated and stirred up by their Example; this they esteem a
great Honor indeed, that they should be any ways instrumental to effect that
which the Angels and whole Court of Heaven incessantly sigh after, the
Salvation of Men.

Upon this account St. Ambrose contemplating the Prerogatives of the Virgin
Mother, with the Advantages we may receive from them, and the best Honor she
can receive from us; recommends her Life to all the Faithful as a Pattern for
theirs, Hinc Lib. 1. de Virg.
sumat exempla vivendi, since as he adds, in her Life, as in the best Copy that
was ever drawn after that great Original of her Divine Son, we have expressed
the most lively Representations and Sovereign documents of all Virtues, Vbi
tanquam in exemplari magisteria expressa probitatis; pointing out to us what we
ought to embrace as conformable to God's Law, and what we ought to fly, as
opposite to that Sacred Rule. In fine, a Pattern so universal, that every Man
may find in it the Lesson proper to himself. Talis fuit vita Mariae ut ejus
unius vita omnium disciplina sit: To the Proud she offers Humility in a
Sovereign Degree; to the Luxurious Purity and Modesty without example, to the
Tepid and Slothful Christian the most eminent Charity that ever inflamed the
Breast of a Creature. What more humble than to own her self a poor Handmaid,
when assumed to the dignity of Mother to the Almighty? What more humble than to
go a long Pilgrimage to visit her Kinswoman that had conceived a Prophet, when
she carried in her own Womb, the Redeemer of Mankind, the Lord of Glory? What
more humble than to present her self in the Temple, as defiled in Childbed,
like the rest of her Sex, when she had conceived without loss of Virginity, and
brought forth with a miraculous Purity and Integrity? What more humble than to
Redeem her Firstborn, complying with the Law imposed on Sinners, when in her
Arms she carried him who came to wash away the Guilt of the World, and whose
Nature was incompatible with all that was sinful? Never was Purity and
Virginity carried to so eminent a pitch; never was Modesty so exemplar, a
Married Woman, unacquainted with all the lawful liberties of that state; the
Purest of Virgins, yet the most Honorable and Sublime of Mothers. What Charity
could be compared to hers? who knew she was chosen before all Creatures to the
dignity of Mother of God; who had conceived in a Spiritual manner, as St.
Augustine says, this Heavenly Son in her own Soul, by Contemplation and Love
before she concerv'd him in her Womb, Filium suum prius concepit mente, In
Psalm. 67.
quam carne. What melting joys must she daily experience, when she possessed the
God of Heaven made Man, and united to Humane Nature in her Chaste Body? It must
needs seem a Miracle, that her Life was not a continued Ecstasy of Love, since
she had the Creator and Redeemer of Mankind daily before her Eyes, constantly
in her Thoughts; the sustainer of all things supported by her Arms, the Father
and Author of all Being sucking at her Breasts, which made her cry out, Her
Soul was transported with her God and Savior, Exultavit spiritus meus in Deo
salutari meo. Luc.
Her Understanding contemplated nothing but his Greatness; her Will enamored
with nothing but his Bounty; her Memory charged with nothing but his Mercies,
as the Scripture relates of her, Conservabat omnia verba haec conferens in
cord suo, locking up in the Cabinet of her Heart every Passage of his Divine
Life, as a Sacred Fuel to feed the Flames of Divine Love. In a word, Her mouth
uttered nothing but his Praises; her Hands were employed wholly in his Service;
her Feet made no Step but for his Concerns; and her Eyes could be satisfied
with no other Object; witness her Grief and Tears when she thought him lost in
Jerusalem: So that her whole Soul was transported with so ravishing a Mystery,
always magnifying her Son and Savior; Magnificat anima mea Dominum: Joyfully
employing all her Senses, all her Being, all her Soul, (as Venerable Bede
observes upon these Words) in Thanksgiving and Gratitude; Quicquid vivo,
sentio, discerno gratulanter impendo.

These, Dear Christians, are the true Praises of the Virgin Mother; these
Virtues are what render her Honorable in Heaven; and the Imitation of these is
the best Honor she can receive, or expects from us upon Earth, not but that
other Inferior Honors may be good and laudable when used with a true desire
of acquiring the mentioned Virtues: Prayers for Example offered to her by the
Proud, with a true desire to become Humble; by the Dissolute, with a true
desire to become Chaste; by the Indevout, with a true desire to become Fervent;
by all Christians with a true desire and intention to serve her Glorious Son by
imitating the Virtues so eminent in the Mother. Devotions to our Lady with this
Disposition and intention, will engage her efficaciously in our Protection, and
invite her powerfully to use that Grace and Favor she has with her Divine Son,
in Praying with us, and for us, that we may obtain a happy and glorious share
in that Redemption, for which the Eternal Word was this Day Incarnate, and so
becoming the source of all Grace in this World, and everlasting Glory in the
next; Which God of his Mercy grant to Your Sacred Majesty's, and all Your
Subjects here assembled. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel, 1686.
REflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented etc. Directed to the
Answerer. Quarto.

Kalendarium Catholicum for the Year 1686. Octavo.

Papists Protesting against Protestant-Popery. In Answer to a Discourse
Entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Vindication of
the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, and the Reflections upon the
Answer. Quart.

Copies of Two Papers Written by the late King Charles II. Together with a
Paper Written by the late Duchess of York. Published by his Majesty's Command.
Folio.

The Spirit of Christianity. Published by his Majesty's Command. Twelves.

The first Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in English at Windsor, on the
first Sunday of October 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. P. E. Monk of the
Holy Order of S. Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by his
Majesty's Command. Quarto.

Second Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, and Queen Dowager, at Their
Majesty's Chapel at St James's, November 1, 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom.
Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of S. Benedict, and of the English
Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

Sixth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's Chapel at
St. James's, upon the first Wednesday in Lent, Febr. 24. 1685. By the Reverend
Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the
English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

The Third Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's
Chapel at St. James's, on the third Sunday in Advent, December. 13. 1685. By the
Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of
the English Congr. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Published by His
Majesty's Command. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters of
Controversy. By the Right Reverend James Benign Bossuet, Counselor to the
King, Bishop of Meaux, formerly of Condom, and Preceptor to the Dauphin: First
Almoner to the Dauphiness. Done into English with all the former Approbations,
and others newly published in the Ninth and Last Edition of the French.
Published by His Majesty's Command. Quarto.


