THE GENERAL INEFFICACY And INSINCERITY Of a LATE, Or Deathbed Repentance.
WITH Earnestest Disswasives from committing our Eternal Condition, to that
Infinite Hazard. AND A full Resolution of the Case, How far a Deathbed
Repentance is possible, to be sincere and effectual.

(...).

To DAY, whilst it is called, To DAY; lest any one be hardened through the
Deceiptfulness of Sin. Heb. 3. 7, 13,

LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne, for W. Grantham at the Sign of the Black Bear,
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1670.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
IT may seem unseasonable, and morose, to deny the value of any kind of
Repentance, in such an Age as this; wherein there is a Generation arisen, Oh
how lofty are their eyes? and their eyelids lifted up with scorn? and disdain
of all Religion? An Age so irreligious! that it seems necessary to gather up
all the Fragments, though but of a seeming Piety, and make the most of them;
rather than to call things to so strict a balance: A thinner, and more dilute
Repentance, then would formerly have admitted a man into a visible Church; may
at such a time, as this, hope for Heaven.

To all this I must answer, First, The looseness of an Age does not slacken, or
dissolve eternal Laws; Wisdom abates nothing of its price; of that timely, and
early search after it; whether men think good to give it, or whether they will
forbear. It has no meaner esteem of it self, because Folly, that is simple,
and knows nothing, sits upon the high places of the City, full of noise
and clamor, and intices to its entertainments the Multitude, and Grandeur of
the World.

All the severities of Scripture, that make the way to Heaven narrow, and the
Gate strait, stand like Rock, from generation to generation, alike in all
times. Nothing that is prodigally loosed on earth, in compliance with a
licentious Age, will be therefore loosed in Heaven.

The goodly price of a Deathbed Repentance, at which God is prized by men,
even then; when Religion is at the lowest, is rejected with indignation; and
the everlasting state purchased by it, may be sadly called an Aceldema, Mat.
15. 17.
Field of blood.

If this severity of Divine Truth offend any one, The resolution is that of our
Savior. a Every plant, whether person or thing, that our Heavenly Father has
not planted, shall be rooted up.

2. It is no improbable way of contesting against Atheism, and general
Irreligion, by the strict Doctrines of Christianity; as well, as by Arguments
of Reason: Nay Authoritative Applications of the Truth of God, often strike the
Conscience within the Reason, sooner and quicker than industrious attempts upon
the Reason: as lightning melts the steel, and neglects the scabbard. Pressings
of Faith, Repentance, Holiness, eternal Judgment make men (even unbelievers)
fall down upon their faces, when the secrets of their Hearts are discovered,
and confess; God is there.

For the Soul of man is more easily wrought upon by those domestic Rebukes,
God gives it by his Word, than by more solemn treaties.

Especially, corrupted reason takes upon it self to be a lawful Authority, when
an honorable War is commenced against it by the better reason on the other
side; It contemns laws of Discourse, as precarious; and makes account, it gives
Reason for Reason. But the rod of God shaken over it makes it tremble, and
confess it self a slave; Thus the slaves in the Story were more easily reduced
by the servile chastisements they were acquainted with, than by the force of
Armies. Atheism grows the prouder generally for being reasoned with; It does
but dissemble, while it pretends its disease to be in the Head, which it knows
indeed to be in the sensual Heart. And therefore is pleased to be struck in the
Head; but cannot endure to be wounded in the Heart, which the Word of God
especially aims at.

Not, but that it is indeed a most generous and honorable Achievement to show
Religion to be the highest Reason; and to detect those pretending sons of
Reason, of the greatest Irrationality. But it is still to be acknowledged; the
plain preaching of the Gospel, which the Apostle calls the Foolishness and
Weakness of God, is alone wiser and stronger than men; The reason of that,
couched under an Heavenly Authority of Truth, carries those (...), those mighty
weapons, whereby every high Imagination and reasoning is to be subdued, that
lifts up it self against God.

Upon this occasion, I cannot, but bewayl those unhappy divisions, that have
separated the Preachers of the Gospel one from another, and thereby opened a
lane for that black troop to advance in, and made the trumpet of the Gospel to
sound so incertainly, that it has rather scattered men, than prepared them to
the Battle.

Our Savior foreseeing the Consequences hereof, according to that great Maxim
of his, Mat. 1^. 25.
Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation, did so
earnestly command Unity and Love of one another to his Disciples in general;
and more particularly to the Ministers of his Word, as the most effectual
Demonstration, Joh. 17. 21.
He was sent from God, and his Doctrine from Heaven. From whence it follows,
where ever this Union is broken, Christianity is liable to the Imputations of
being a great cheat and fraud. Upon which advantage loathsome Irreligion
enters, and spreads it self in those empty spaces, begotten by our distances,
and removes from one another: All divisions in Christianity are scandals to it,
and weaken it. This we see verified in our Days, The differences in Religion,
and the profane scorn or stupid neglect of it, being alike visible, and
notorious throughout the Nation.

Yet upon just accounts: the Irreligion consequent upon Divisions in Religion,
turns to the advantage of Christianity; That thus it must be; else how should
the Scriptures be fulfilled? But this abates nothing of the sinfulness and
unhappiness, or necessity of Amendment.

To guide us then into that; It is very observable, the venom of this Distemper
falls not so much upon the several parties in Religion, as upon Religion it
self; while we wound one another, Religion is the martyr, lies a bleeding, and
even Dying. And while good men lament it, the enemies of it make merry and send
Rev. 11. 10.
gifts one to another, in token of triumph.

The method of cure therefore, is not, for every party to weigh up it self, and
press down others; but to buoy up Religion it self; and that is best done, by
preaching, and living the very Thing; without distinction of names. If we did
but yield it, its own Integrity and universal Goodness; it would soon rise into
that honor, it has lost, by being captivated to Opinions.

For as our humane Nature would be much more beautiful and happy, if cemented
by that philanthropy, or general love of mankind, so indearingly charged upon
us by our Savior; who demonstrated, that he embraced within his own Immensity,
the whole latitude of our nature; without contracting it into the narrowness of
a humane person, by the great care he took; That this nature should not be
dishonored, abused, and torn by it self through that bitter Censoriousness,
Revenge, and Contempt, men exercise upon one another, even there where Christ
is professed.

So would our Christianity, that is now evil spoken of, appear, as it is, in it
self, Acceptable to God, and approved of men, if we could unite in those
comprehensive Interests of Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost, that
substantial Christianity; Those healing wings of the Sun of Righteousness, In
the rays of which our little differences about Meat and Drink would play up
and down, as smallest Motes of Humane Frailty, easily obtaining a mutual
pardon: and that black and most abhorred Vapor of Irreligion, be forced to
dislodg, at so illustrious a Presence.

If there be any Interest to keep afoot these Divisions; It is an Interest of
Dishonor, that dares not name it self; It is not only, (...); but (...). It is
not barely to serve an opinion (much less the Lord Jesus) but the Belly.

3. But to return, from whence I have digressed, upon so great a Cause. Lastly,
we may find, in the very notion of a Deathbed Repentance, enough to defend the
seasonableness of this Discourse; notwithstanding spreading Irreligion. For it
imports a design to dye well: and we see very Few, and those Few deprived of
the common Modesty and Sobriety of mankind; and who thereupon become a horrid
Story; but dye at least in a fair and calm temper toward Religion; now if we
join to this, that of many millions for one, every one dies, as he lives, not
only, as the Tree falls, so it lies; but as it has inclined along its growth,
so it falls: How great is the necessity then of living well, that we may dye
well. For this Deathbed Repentance, that rises and sets at the same time,
generally proves but a falling Star. That Repentance only wheels orderly into a
higher Orb, that has given proof; It was a true Light, by shining here for
some considerable space.

A good Death receives Being from a holy Life, else there is not such a thing
in nature, no not in Grace, except by Miracle of Grace.

Thus far I have made Apology for the seasonableness of this Discourse. In the
Discourse it self, I am not conscious of having wandered from the universal
Doctrine of Divines in this point: except it should seem too high a strain to
place this Repentance, (when true) among Miracles. To justify that, I have the
warrant of Sacred Story, the Dying Convert; which being the only example of
such a one in Holy Writ, was in the days of the Messiah, that great period of
Miracles singled out, upon that greatest occasion; viz. To display the power of
the dying Mediator, to forgive sins, not only upon Earth, but in his lowest
Humiliation, His very descent into Hell: which argues it a very great Miracle.

Yet I have not trusted the weight of the Discourse to any thing that looks
like a private Opinion; but to most avowed Principles, and have therefore
reserved my particular sense as the Conclusion of the whole.

I have only to add; There is a National late Repentance, as appears by the
unsuccesfulness of that unparalelled 2 Kings 23. 26. and 24. 3, 4.
Reformation of Josiah; Sincere indeed in him, and of full effect: but not in
the Body of the Jewish Nation, as appeared by their Relapses under the
following Kings; and therefore, notwithstanding that seeming Return, the Lord
turned not from the fierceness of his wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled
against Judah, for its guilt in the sins of Manasseh; which the Lord would not
pardon, and therefore would not give a true Repentance of those evils, they had
so long continued in, against all the early Admonitions of the Prophets: This
is the just Parallel of a Deathbed Repentance.

The due application of all these Considerations, to every one, into whose
hands they may fall, is the earnest, and affectionate Prayer of,

T. B.

ERRATA.
In the Preface, p. 11. r. (...). p. 5. l. 1. for power, r. pour. p. 6. l. 13.
for there, r. their. p. 9. l. 20. r. (...). p. 24. l. 12. for these, r. the. p.
33. l. 10. r. destruction. p. 40. l. 17. r. continues. p. 65. l. 24. r. length.
p. 75. l. 20. blot; but they are, p. 79. l. 9. for saving, r. seeming.

The General INEFFICACY AND INSINCERITY Of a Deathbed Repentance.
Luke 23. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. And one of the Malefactors that were hanged with
him, rayled on him; saying, if thou be the Christ, save thy self and us. But
the other answering; said, do thou not fear God? Seeing that thou art in the
same condemnation. And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds, but this Man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord
remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him; verily
I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
THe generality of Men that have been at all acquainted with the name of
Repentance, and understood in any Measure the importance, and signification of
the thing, acknowledge it beyond all dispute necessary: Yet they allow
themselves a leisure for the performance of it, and such a leisure, as swallows
the whole time of life, and leaves only the last and lowest part of it, for the
discharge of so great a business; so that their repentance, if any at all,
falls out to be a Deathbed Repentance.

The inconveniences of which are unexpressibly great, because the lives of men
are left naked of that holiness and purity, that should adorn them, and all
over blotted with sin, and vanity. Their conversation wants that light of good
Works, that should shine before men, and glorify God in Heaven. Their life is
without form, and void, and darkness is upon the face of it. And in the end
they are cast upon the great Sea of Eternity, as in a Vessel of Paper, a thin,
and superficial Repentance.

It is therefore most necessary to use all means, to show the insufficiency of
this Refuge, which most of those, that live in common under the profession of
Christianity; design while they live, to fly too, when they dye. To demolish
this House upon the Sand; that men may not by hopes of shelter at it, conceived
long before hand, be kept off from laying their Foundation upon a Rock; which
possibly they would do, if these hopes were cut off.

And because this piece of sacred story has been generally taken, as an
instance of great Favor to a late conversion, not that it is indeed so, but
that it seems to be so, let it be the Ground of the present Discourse.

For I observe Divines, in their Doctrine concerning the danger of a Dying
Repentance, are careful to wrest out of the hand of presuming Imagination, this
example, and to allay the vain confidence built upon it.

Indeed the mistake of it is very fatal, seeing if it be duly considered,
there is nothing more forcible against what it is pretended for, than it. It is
true, it is a relation of a dying man returning from great sins to God, but so
circumstantiated, so defended on all hands against boldness upon it, that there
might have been more reason to hope well of last-breath-penitencies, if there
had not been a pattern of such a one in all points, as much above the imitation
of those of our days, as the Heaven is above the Earth. It is such a one, as
if God had said of it, if I accept a dying Repentance; behold this, consider it
every way, and take notice Ante mihi fidem latronis ostende and tunc tibi
latronis beatitudinem pollicere. August.
by it, what a one I will have it. God putting the Cast, and resolving it thus
has given a much more positive determination concerning it, that if the Cast
had never been put.

The end therefore I aim at is to make it evident upon general reasons, and
particularly from this instance.

That a Deathbed Repentance is a hazard so in^nitely great, that no man can
without folly extremely prodigious commit to so much adventure: An affair of so
great importance to an eternal condition.

Hereunto I will raise this Treaty by these degrees.

1. By observing the judgment of Divines concerning this case, and ballancing
the most favorable with the more severe.

2. By detecting the Follies that have given a reputation to a Deathbed
Repentance.

3. By examining the most hopeful appearances of this kind of Repentance, and
showing there are plain causes of them very much below the nature of true
Repentance, wherewith I will compare them.

4. By observing the extraordinaries, of which the Repentance of this dying
Malefactor was composed, because of which it can hardly be drawn into a
president.

To all these I will subjoyn pressing considerations on every side; that men
should not delay their return to God, to the latter times of life. Dr. Taylers
Invalidity of a late Repentance.


For the First, the judgment of Divines in the point, I begin with that
severer one; yet built upon great piety, and reason that asserts it a plainly
impossible thing, a man on his Deathbed should repent with that repentance,
the Scripture so often discourses of; and promises pardon to, and threatens the
neglect of with perishing, and therefore concludes, a dying man that has not
already repented must needs fall, not into the sin of despair. For who is bound
to hope, that has not the reasons of his hope given him by God? But into the
misery of despair: For how miserable is he whom God has left to the boiling
Sea of his own horrors, and thrown him out no Anchor of hope?

However this Sentence seem rigorous, yet when we consider the ponderous
Arguments it uses; it may rather amaze us, than provoke one Censure; For First,
it is very irre concileable with the Glory of God, that men who have had the
knowledge of God, and been called upon all their lives to give up themselves to
him, should be accepted; when they power out to him the lees, and dreggs of
life, instead of the generous spirits of it, That he that has had in his Flock
a male, should vow, and Sacrifice to the Lord a corrupt thing, and yet escape
the Curse of the deceiver. The expressions of Scripture are innumerable, in
which God disavows such prostitutions of his Grace, (as is hereafter to be
urged) but seals such, e're they are aware, under hardness of heart, and a
reprobate sense, to destruction.

2. It appears impossible, there should be a discharge of the duties of
Repentance, when Men are a dying; that they should draw within the hollow of
that little span, that is also otherwise encumbered, the vastness of that
action, that is necessary to take off the Brawn of a long impenitency.

That a man should live the life of holiness, that is just a dying; that the
Tree that has been always barren, should bring forth good fruit, now it is a
hewing down: These things are very contradictious, how can Repentance plant it
self in the Soul, and settle Gracious habits there in so short a space? Or in
an instant by mortification root out those lusts, and sinful affections, that
have been many years eating into the Heart; Repentance must have a time for
fruits, and those fruits for ripening and concoction, which a Deathbed will
not afford: So that it cannot be that Repentance of the Gospel, but at the
best, only some first strokes of it.

3. There must be a living to God, before a Man dies to God. It is the supreme
Law, every one must glorify him here on Earth, and finish the work he has
given them to do in the World. They must work the works of him that sent them
while it is day, before the night comes, in which no Man can work. After this
Men are received into the glory of God.

4. In Repentance, we must be in the same circumstances of Temptation we were
in, in the time of sinning. But it will be hard to find in what the state of a
dying Man differs from that of him, that is already dead, as to this business
of Repentance; but that he may as well be allowed to repent, that is entered
into Eternity, as he that stands on the very brink of it.

This censure cannot be injurious to Men living, and in there full opportunity;
suppose in speculation, it stretches principles of great weight and truth too
far, yet it recompenses for it self by the wholesomness of it to practice, for
who can suffer by being necessitated to an early Repentance, so much his duty,
so much his safety?

Further it is most prophetic, most undoubtedly true of most Men's late
Repentance; That it is too sudden, too Mushrome a birth to have any worthiness
in it. This Repentance almost universally withers, before it grows up, and
proves an abortion; whether it come to the trial of a longer life, wherein it
vanishes as a Cloud, and former impiety returns; or whether it pass immediately
into Eternity, where it sinks down into misery; for attempting the Regions of
life, and wanting the purity that rises thither: It is beaten back with all its
pretensions, as a foggy exhalation, that would climb to Heaven, but is forced
down, and made to rest below; so that for the universality of Deathbed
Repentances this judgment is truly calculated.

If it should seem too cruel to the dying condition, to smother Men alive with
the second death, (as Hazael spread upon the dying King a thick cloth dipped
in water) to stifle, and benumn at once all motions toward God, let us
consider what advice it offers against the stupidities of despair.

When we are fallen into so unhappy a condition, that the whole weight of
Aeternity depends upon a very little moment, It persuades, men would do all
they can in return to God, though that all must be trusted with the prerogative
of mercy, for that mercy which is stated in the promises of the Gospel, and is
in ordinary, cannot help them in the great point of salvation, however it may
alleviate their condemnation, and lessen their torment.

I may add, if that which appears a Messenger of Death should have a secret
reprieve in its instructions, and what seems a Deathbed, prove only a
discipline; It may be a happy beginning of a true repentance to him, who lives,
after his being near the Grave, to perfect it, according to that of Job, 33.
ver. 22. 23.

Thus this opinion does not cut off the Action of its desperate person, and if
by that Action, he pass the needles Eye, and get through the strait Gate of
Repentance, and Regeneration; it will be able to give him no resistance: For
those to whom the twoleav'd Gates of Faith and Repentance open, this Air of
discourse cannot bar, that they should not enter into life.

But on the other side, they that are confident, and make themselves sure of
Repentance, and Mercy; cannot when they meet the solid obstacles of things,
force their way by the breath of their Mouth; but they and their intended
Repentance are together locked up in the closeness, and compactedness of those
decrees: First, they cannot repent, then they cannot be saved.

To conclude, let such a decision of this case be never so austere; it is a
thousand times more just than the delay of our return to God in the
contemplation of doing it at the last can be; and the reasons upon which it is
planted, are such, that though they may not reach the height designed, yet do
they exclude thousands from eternal happiness; and although they may not make
good the complement of the censure, yet are they of so awful a regard, and so
worthy of all observation, that they are most vehemently to be pressed to the
main scope; that Men would by no means trust to this extreme Repentance, to
which purpose I shall hereaftet take further advantage of them.

But let us come to that tenderer apprehension of the generality of Divines,
with which I will concur, that all things of opination and dispute may be
taken away in so great a point. Let it then be allowed, that a Deathbed
Repentance is no impossibility.

First, in regard of infinite mercy, that cannot be limited; but by it self:
Now long impenitency though it be often doomed irrevocably by God in particular
generations of men, or persons; yet is not that sin, that shall never be
forgiven. Nor is it upon that account, that the Scripture says of some; It is
impossible to renew them to repentance. So that though there be many examples
of such impenitency, that has proved in the event unpardonable; yet not from
the precise nature of the thing it self: we may rather believe, that as the
unmeasurable Being of God has delighted it self in so many varieties, and
gradations of the Creatures down from Angels to the darkest footsteps of
himself in the World: so the unsearchable riches of his Grace is made known in
all kinds of pardons. As therefore it has chosen some of the worst of sinners
for the sorts of their sins, chiefest of sinners, and brought them home; so
some that have made the utmost adventure of continuance in sin, that in these
manifold Glasses it might be seen, Where sin has abounded, grace has abounded
much more.

2. Though the time of this repentance be short, and narrow, and the duties of
Repentance exceeding long and broad; yet where there are found the true
signatures of Repentance unfeigned; God beholds the fruit in the seed and root,
he knows the perfection of his own creation, though Infant, or we may conceive
such (...) in repentance, Repentance born out of due time, as Paul was in the
Apostleship, suddenly accomplished, though they had not the regular time of
forming, like a Nation brought forth in a day. D Cypri an de coend Domini.
Thus thou Lord annointest in a moment Herdsmen into Prophets, Shepherds into
Kings, Publicans thou ordainest Apostles, nor does their languor take leisure
to remove, whom thou recoverest, but in that very moment thou make them every
whit whole, wherein they have thee for their Physician.

3. Although there be according to the general Rule, a necessity of, living to
God here in the World; yet God may dispense with the continuation, or drawing
out of the Action of it in these late penitents, as we easily allow in the case
of Infants, or men dying within short space after a Repentance begun, upon sad
consideration and not in the exigency of a sickness.

In the mean time, it is not at all supposed, that God dispenses with the
sincere preparations and resolvedness of the mind to that Action; but that they
must be most true, sound and unfeigned, and the very Action it self according
to the time high, full and most significant; and as extraordinary as the
Repentance it self.

4. Although the condition of a man dying do in many regards nearly resemble
the state of him, that is already in eternity, as he is under a necessity of
leaving sin, and the world, and set at a distance from temptation; yet it
differs in that great circumstance, that he is not in Termino, he is not fixed
upon his unchangeable point, he has not undergone that sentence that
immediately passes upon the soul removed, and so may not neither have suffered
that more secret one, conceived by God upon long provocation. The whole time of
life may be a time of grace, and he that has not yet been concluded by the
incommutability of Eternity may hear the voice of Christ, and enter into his
rest. Quando isthinc excessum suerit, nullus jam poenitentiae locus. Libr. ad
Demetrianum.
St. Cyprian, who is positive, That whenever a man is launched into another
world, he finds no room for repentance; he is out of the climate of repentance,
who is beyond the line of Time. All kind of pennances which are a secondary
satisfaction under the sufferings of Christ are then desperate and fruitless.
Yet he allows the greatest liberty to repentance in this Life; For he says,
Inisto adhuc mundo manenti nulla poen^tntia sera est, etc
No repentance is late, that is earlier than the grave. He says, Here a man
takes hold of life, or loses it for ever. Yet he grants, Ad immortalitatem sub
ipta morte traensitur De coena Domini.
It is possible by repentance, though we are just a dying, to be safely landed
in a blessed immortality. And In eodem articulo temporis cum jam anima festinet
ad exitum, etc.
when the soul has left its inner residences, and is now sitting upon the
dying lips before its last farewell to the body, and when in haste to be gone,
yet even then infinite Clemency disdains not Repentance, nor accounts that late
that is true, nor deprives that of pardon, which has the free and full act of
the soul in return to him. Et quaecunque necessitas, etc. Yea though, as he
goes on, this repentance had its first rise from necessity, yet neither that,
nor the immenseness of guilt, nor straitness of time, nor the lateness of the
Season, nor the foulness of former actions foreprize from pardon when the
humiliation is sincere, and the soul exchanges impure delights for those of
Holiness, without counterfeit or dissimulation. It may seem in all those
discourses that he had forgot to enter a caution against presumption; but it is
to be considered while he thus franckly poures out himself, he was one while
inviting In Libr. ad Demetrianum. Credit and vivite and qui nos ad tempus
persequimini in aeternum gaudete nobiscum.
persecutors of Christianity into the confessions of it, whom he would not have
debarred with the sense of so great past offenses against it: another while
designing against the Novatian He esie, which took upon it to tie up the
freeness of grace as he says, Velit nolit Novatus Haereticus omni tempore Dei
gratia recipit paenitentes
In spite of the Heretic Novatus the throne of Grace is early and late
accessible to true repentance. This therefore is not to be pressed beyond the
design of the excellent and holy Writer, but will very well agree with all that
I am presently to add as a Balance to this favorable judgment for such a
Repentance.

For as that most prudent discourse of the right Daille.
use of the Fathers teaches us; we must always attend their scope, in the
pursuit of which they were often transported toward the other extreme.

But tha^ a Dying repentance in the nature of the thing is no incompossibility,
we have fullest assurance in the example of the Text, wherein we see one in a
moment conceived, brought forth, and even a grown man in repentance, one
passing through some short Instants of holy action and entering into Paradise
like Aaron's Rod budding, blossoming; and bringing forth ripe Almonds in a
night, and laid up in the Sanctuary for ever.

That it was most probably the first call he had to Repentance, agrees fully
with the intention of my Discourse, which granting so much as a possibility,
would yet take all advantage against the easy confidence of those, that living
daily under the offers of Grace, and yet despising them commit themselves first
to the ^ntentions, and at last to the faint motions of a la^e Repentance. To
whom that admonition of St. Austin is most seasonable concerning the instance
we have in hand. Ad consequ^ndam fidem non suit illi extremae hora sed prima.
Nec Religionem ante nec Christum scivit, non remedia status sui in momenia
ultima infoelici fraud posu^t. Sermon. 120 de Temp.
If we respect his opportunities for attaining faith, his repentance was not
late, but early and soon, he took the very first season, as soon as ever he
descried Christ and Religion he embraced them. He did not wretchedly cheat
himself of the remedies of his miserable condition by adjourning the use of
them to a late and uncertain futurity, which seldom or never succeeds well.

This consideration leads me therefore from the most favorable the light side
of this milder sentence, to the black and dark part of it.

That is to say, There is an infinite peradventure, whether God will give
repentance at the last or not, for this Grace being acknowledged extraordinary,
if it were common, it would cease to be extraordinary, Heb 3. 8, 9 etc.


It is most undoubted in Scripture, God is often provoked against men to swear,
they shall never enter into his rest, when they have long tempted him, and
erred from his ways.

The Heart is daily hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, till it grew to that
the Apostle calls (...) Romans 4. 2.
(...) a heart that is irrepentable, or that cannot be repented of; Customs in
sin long settled become Jerem 13, 23.
like the Aethiopians skin and the Leopards spots, that cannot be changed. And
though it is true the spirit of God is not hi^dered in its inspirations, but
that it blows where it lists, yet the course of it is so attemper'd to the
state, and motion of the soul it self, that it most usually takes the
opportunity so generally requisite to the settling a constitution and temper in
us, that is, the freest, and most unprejudic^d, and larger spaces of a man's
life: So that whenever it works upon Dying men, I mean those that have had the
free use of the means of Grace o^ old; It works by such a prerogative that a
man may as well expect a prerogative of providence to bear him walking upon the
Sea, because it did once so to Peter, as this.

Most even of the fair^st appearances of this kind of Repentance miscarry
having no true virtue in them, and though in regard of their vehemence they are
called early seekings of God, yet (which is horrible to be spoken) they are as
it were prepared for the triumphs of the Justice and indignation of Pro^ 1. 28.
God over those, who would have none of his Counsel in former times, but
despised all his reproof.

Lastly, Whoever seeing and knowing casts himself with design upon Repentance
at death, is like to fall headlong by temp^ing God, and expecting he should
stand ready for him with that Grace at last, he has so long resisted and
refused.

And now when this judgment of Divines with this Balance upon it is compared
with the former, the result will be only this, The kindest Divinity in the
point, and that seems to do the most favor, is very dreadful, and leaves such
men in a condition next to desperate, which is but an aggravation of the
danger, when what men would choose to appeal to, so far condemns them.

It is then agreed on all Hands, That for any man to live so as if he did
contrive and forecast a Dying Repentance (although it be yielded him, It is no
impossibility) as the safe expedient, first of an Irreligious life, free from
the troublesome thoughts of a present amendment, and then of a secure passage
into eternity, is first an exceeding Irreligion and immorality in it self; and
then to run so desperate a risque and adventure for an immortal soul; that he
is a pardonable madman, in comparison of such an one, that drinks a deadly
poison, because he has heard there is a certain Antidote in the world, that
will expel it, though he cannot tell whether he can have it at all, much less
whether time enough for his necessity; and lastly whether the endeavors he
uses for it will not be deluded with the counterfeits of it, it being supposed
they are thousands for one of the true kind; and he thereby perish, pleasing
himself with the hopes he has it, when he has indeed but a likeness of it.

I come now to the second Proposal, which is to 2. Head.
make inquiry, seeing the case is thus, as it every way appears to be, how the
name or notion of a Deathbed Repentance, as such an universal Refuge came up
in the world; for it is a new Repentanc^ ( much like Deuteronomy. 32* 17.
those new-come-up Gods Mosis speaks of) that Christianity and the Gospel know
not. The Scriptures that treat most professedly of Repentance, always insist
upon it as a reformed course of Life, to be undertaken even now, while the
proposals of Grace, and Reconciliation are made to us; and only by very silent
intimations, the track of which is hardly discerned, leave it possible, that
God should by miracle save some very few out of the Fire, and pull them as
Brands out of the Burning; by giving them Repentance at the last. Whereas this
is now become the only repentance in use, and has devoured the other, as if to
press men upon it were to torment them before their time, and to lessen the
validity of this were to take away the mercy of God, and deny the Grace that is
so free and universal. Let us search therefore how this sort of Repentance has
come into such Repute. And if we observe, we shall find it first rising from
the intimate sense the conscience has of the necessity of Repentance. For were
it not so clear and evident a Duty, a Deathbed Repentance had never been heard
of, most would choose to go out of the world as they have lived in it, not
suffering any degree of the trouble of conscience, or vexing themselves with
reflections upon an unholy and ill-spent life. As men have chosen to live
freely and uninterruptedly in forgetfulness of God, and an Ier. 2. 32.
eternal condition days without number, so would they choose to dye, were there
not a Law within, that however it has lain covered with the dust of
sensuality, yet is now restored to its authority, and urges the soul with the
terror of punishment for so long disobedience.

And secondly this necessity of repentance, though secretly understood, yet
was not sufficiently considered in the time of Health, for had it been equally
regarded, it had not been now to begin. He that had rightly measured it,
would not for a thousand Worlds so have adjourned it.

These two things then meeting so often together, viz. The necessity of
Repentance; and the neglect of it all along our life: the necessity it should
be performed some time, ere men go out of the world: and the neglect of it in
the freer opportunities of life. These, I say, bring forth hasty motions of it
at last: For it losing nothing of its necessity by its delay, it must be done,
as well as it may be at that time: even as the last moments, wherein
businesses of great consequence are to be dispatched, press for expedition the
more earnestly, because they must be done then or never, though it often falls
out, the time is so far past, they suffer not only much disadvantage, but even
defeat by the delay.

The Notion of a Deathbed Repentance then we may perceive rising from the
great indisposition to repent, while the pleasures of sin are in their season,
and flourish, and men in health and strength to enjoy them; and from the
necessities of Repentance falling upon them at the last, and wringing from
them sometimes very high acknovvledgments of God and an eternal condition,
passionate expressions of the folly, evil and vanity of former life, Desires of
mercy, professions of strong resolvedness to serve God, and if they had many
lives to give God, they would give them all. All which being so unusual to
hear formerly out of such mouths, and coming from Dying men, for whose sayings
we have a natural regard, Charity toward them, and vvillingness to hope
well of them gives these semblances, the reputation of Repentance. To which
may be added, That those who are Guides and Seers in Religion too often,
errante Clave, by too liberal an Absolution open the Kingdom of Heaven to such,
and taking the instruments of a foolish Shepherd to themselves, heal the hurt
of their souls slightly; so that their Repentance is saincted here, and though
it miscarry in the other World, yet the miscarriage is hid also in that other
World.

From all this has arisen a dovvn-right opinion of this kind of Repentance as
the only (...) the prudent expedient, that compounds two so different
Interests, first that of a worldly conversation, to which it gives no
hinderance; then that of eternal life in appearance, because it assumes the
promises of mercy to it self, especially those gracious assurances in Ezekiel. 18.
and Chap. 33. it reckons as made on purpose for it. All which argues a very
vile sense of both the justice and mercy of God; of his justice as if it had no
authority, of his mercy as if it had no sense of honor.

And lastly it is grown into a general expectation, that hovvever ill and
carelessly of God men have lived here, yet they should go out of the world
with good words of him and religious professions, as an Inbalm to their
memory and a Dirge to their souls into the happiness of an everlasting
condition.

Thus they call Repentance and Heaven after their Psalm, 49. 11 13, 14, etc.
own name. This their way is their folly; yet their posterity, men of like
inclinations, approve their sayings; because such men ( as they speak) go away
like Lambs, but as the Scripture says, like senseless Sheep are laid in the
grave, and Death feeding upon them; the error is not discovered till the
morning: when the upright have dominion over them; that is, infinitely excel
them, and their counterfeit Repentance, which cannot stand in judgment, nor
they in the congregation of sincere penitents.

Now this account I have given of a Deathbed Psalm, 19.
Repentance obtaining among us, is too comprehensive; yet I must acknowledge,
That there are many whose Judgments are more enlightened, and the sentiments of
their consciences quicker than to be satisfied at so easy a rate; who yet fall
into the common unhappiness of not having repented, till they come to die: I
will therefore inquire further, why many who are able to feel before hand the
necessities of a speedy Repentance, and also to draw their Death so near them,
as to die daily in the sense of death; and thereby further perceive those
necessities, do not yet repent daily, but betray themselves to an Evening or
Twilight Repentance.

The resolution of this lies not only in the immoderate love of sin and its
pleasures, and the too low apprehension of God and eternal things, (though
these are always present in the case) but chiefly it lies in the great
confidence such men have in the present time, not sensible of the continual
waste of it; Under the favor of which they put awa^ he evil day far from them,
and stretch themselves upon this moment, Amos 6.
that they may take their full ease and satisfaction: In the mean while
stifling the thoughts of Dying and Judgment. Were it not for this, no other
reason would encourage them to delay their Repentance, for when this fails, all
others generally fail also, and therefore none are so passionately moved as
such when they come to die.

This cloud that is but as big as a man's Hand ( our days are as an
Hand-breadth) yet looks like the whole Psalm, 39. 6.
Heaven; It stands as a firmament over their heads; It looks like an eternity
to man. In this time Repentance finds as little place with them, as it is like
to do with God in the Evening of Life.

In this occasion the wild Asses of the wilderness snuff up the wind at their
pleasure, and none can turn them. The Iere, 2. 24
lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life swallow all, and
can spare nothing; Yet in the midst of all this the soul promises it self, It
will ere long take a season of recollecting it self, and that it will do it
time enough, so timely as to leave space sufficient for a large exercise of
Repentance, for although it is but upon the edges and skirts of Time, yet it
seems to it self to be upon the Center, and in its imagination commands the
future, as if it were in its own hand; so that through the endless returns of
pleasure, and business, through indisposedness to holy and serious Action,
through intentions and purposes of being better hereafter, it slips down, or
ever it is aware, into the lowest of life, and has the business of Repentance
lying whole and undiminished upon its hand: Yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the ^ands to sleep, deceives men; till their las^
Prove. 24. 12.
end comes as an Armed man. The hopes that to morrow will be as to day, and
much more abundant, so as to Isa. 56. 12.
leave enough for sadder thoughts, befools men, till the very Course of Time
rows them before they think of it upon ^ernity.

Of great moment therefore it is to number our days rightly, that we may know
how frail we are, and apply Psalm. 39. 4. Psalm. 90. 12 James 3. 5 Iam. 4. 16
our Hearts to wisdom. For this time of life though it be but little yet it
boasts great things. This Vapor stretches out it self as far as it can; It
rejoices in its own boastings which are evil. In the mean while the moments of
it are winged, and fly from us; they glide away, and we cannot, except we bring
them to strict Account, take hold of them to graft any thing upon them: How
does to day like an Eagle, Wisd. ^. 9, etc.
or Post, or swift Ship, or Arrow get from us leaving no path. And if we offer
to take the account, How many things snatch it from us, as an impertinent
disturber from him that is catching slippery numbers. Here is wisdom, let him
that has it count the number of Rev. 1^. 18 Eccl. ^. 10
Life, for it is the number of a man. A short number. it is all but Dying man.
And yet it requires great ingenuity, The Ingenuity of a man, that is indeed a
Man, Ier. 17. 11 Pro, 26. 10
to find it. But he that misses it, is found at the end of his days a Fool, and
finds that dreadful Reward of a Fool, that the great God, that formed all
things, gives to that Fool as well as to the Transgressor: But those that Dan,
12. 3.
are wise shine as the Sun in the Firmament.

Thus far I have insisted upon the Accounts, How ^ Cor, 15. ^9.
this Baptism of Repentance for the Dead came in upon Christianity, that is,
How it comes to pass that men will not be baptized with this Baptism till they
are given over for dead men, like those Clinici of the first times, that
delayed their Baptism to their last Bed, of whom some expound that place, 1
Cor. 15 29. Vid. Estium in lecum.


But the mistake in this case (though that passed not without some note of
Disgrace) is in a point of much higher consequence, and so far more dangerous,
and has also less of reasonable pretense, for while they thought, Baptism
washed away all past sins, and was but once to be done; It seemed a necessary
providence to take the full Benefit of it at the last, upon which account
Tertullian even expostulates, Quorsum festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem
peccatorum, while he discourses of Infant-Baptisms.

Whereas the water of Repentance is ever forbidden, Acts 10. 47
but may be both evenly drawn through the whole course of life, and often
renewed to supply the defects of it self: which is one signification of that
(...) that repentance, which is always 2 Cor, 7. 10
promoted but never retracted. Nor do I indeed doubt, but the water of Baptism,
wherever it has effect, is a Spring, that from the first moment wherein it is
truly received, runs down with a free current upon the whole course of life,
and is therefore universally Operatur in Baptismo panitentia, tanquam in
fundamento. August. Expos, Ep. ad Roman
to be applied. And whenever converting Grace works, It leads back the soul,
though through many years past, to the virtue of that Sacramental Fountain.

But to return; Although these Accounts I have now given of a Deathbed
Repentance, obtaining among us infold the whole multitude of dying Penitents,
yet according to the former state given I do not deny, but that some very rare
Example there may be, giving a better sense to this sort of Repentance;
Examples of the Grace of God, acting in a way of Prerogative, as has been
said, and working effectually the truth of repentance in some; upon whom he
lays the hand of his Salvation and Rescue, while they stand upon the very
last-minutes of the season of Grace, and are just dropping down into Hell: and
guides them to take their latest steps in the ways of Life, wherein they had
hitherto been strangers; upon whom a great miracle is wrought; that they should
in their almost perfected motion to endless ruin be stopped, and when they had
just finished their course thither, they should yet be transplanted into the
way everlasting.

But I proceed to the third Head. To examine the most hopeful appearances of
this kind of Repentance, and to show there are plain causes of them, much below
the nature of true Repentance.

And first in the general: It is no wonderful thing to find men in a Paroxysme,
in a high passion of seeking after God, when they are a dying. It is indeed
more strange to find any so sotted, so seared, that their spirits seem only to
go downward: They are Beasts while they live, and as such they go do unto the
dead. There are no bands in their Death; They go down in a Eccle, 3. 18. etc.
Psalm, 73. 4 Job 21. 13
moment. There is not a moment between the first and second death of the soul,
not a moment of life between, not so much as of the life of natural conscience.
They are twice dead, dead in the common Jude 12
corruption of Nature wherein they are born. Dead Exo, 15. 5
in the loss of natural Principles: pulled up by the roots, there is nothing to
quicken or move in them. This 1 Samuel 2^. ^7
is the amazing Stupor: They die like a stone; they plung down with the whole
weight and force of impenitency.

This way of dying has certainly greater punishment, and heavier condemnat^on,
and though it seem more chooseable than a frui^less Repentance, yet doubtless
Eternity makes a difference, though not such an one, as should give any one
confidence to imbarque into it in a Coffin-Repentance.

But whether it be rather to be chosen or not, this is past question; It is
unavoidable to some, whether they will or no, they are surpised with thoughts,
what will become of them for ever, and few men but have thoughts this way at
such a time above ordinary.

But I intend to speak of the fairest and best spread Repentance that is found
upon a Deathbed. That which gives the liveliest Hopes of it self, that it is
true and sincere; not such an one that to a serious Observer betrays it self,
not either that forced composure, to the expectation of the world, which looks
for a solemn profession of God from every one that dies; nor an ignorant and
formal repentance, but a repentance that has much of vigor, and inward
affection, and is driven on by great knowledge and light; that is accompanied
with much sorrow, and very considerate apprehensions of eternal things: And if
such an one be so questionable, what can become of others?

There is no reason any Repentance should be the better esteemed because men
are dying, but much the less. Now while men are living a thousand of these
seeming changes for the better are evidently confuted without more ado, by
after returns to wickedness; and they that have to do with such shows of
reformation, have no regard of them, nor of the persons for them. Now God, who
is the exact Apud illum Cordis Interpretem Ars non admittitur ad salutem
August. Sermon. 120.
searcher of Hearts, can much less be imposed upon by the fairest appearances;
nor can men wise according to the rules of Scripture be easily well persuaded
of them, and when they are best persuaded, there must needs be a very trembling
consideration of so great a Hazard.

But to come more particularly to what I have proposed, viz. To show that
Repentance is a Height, to which these general motives of this late Repentance
can never mount the soul. In which I will begin with the descriptions of true
Repentance, in that, wherein it is most difficult (not to say impossible) to
rise to it upon a Dying bed.

Repentance in all the parts of it, is the fullest, clearest act of the Soul
and Judgment, wherein it is most perfectly it self. Remove a man never so far
from all kind of Fears, from the appearances of Death, if he were to live Ages,
he would be of the same sense. He that truly repents, does not snatch up
Repentance, as an expedient for a present extremity, but chooses it as an
entrance into the best state of Life, and lives always, and rests himself in
this (...). Hieroc. Carm. Pyth Pura voluptatum mutati^. Cypr.
choice. For however this may be introduced by very troublesome and tumultuous
motions, yet it is it self the easi^ sitting down of the Soul with abundant
pleasure, and satisfaction in the abhorrence of sin, and love of Holiness, in
the dislike of vanity and sensuality, in the approbation of Heavenly purity of
Heart and life. It is not a trance wherein sin lies dead, and a man is in a
rapture of goodness for a time, but a most settled state. Godly sorrow, that
works 2 Cor. 7. 11
Repentance, works carefulness, fear, reveng, desire, and by these
accomplisheth a Repentance to Salvation, that ver. 10.
has no after pain or trouble, no (...). These affections are preparations,
Repentance enters as a Soul into these, which is a still, solid, clear Act of
Reason renewed, and a mind that gives an uniform vote at all times. A change
that is never changed back again, no more than things can put of themselves, or
evil it self become good. It is therefore upon fullest deliberation to choose
with Joshuah, I and my house, those whom I can govern, ^ill serve Josh. 24. ^^
the Lord. It is engaging the Heart to approach to God, Ier. 30. 2^. and 50. 5
Acts 11, (...)
the joining our selves to him by an everlasting Covenant, never to be
forgotten. The cleaving to him with full purpose of Heart; when all forerunning
affections are laid, and quiet, or worn out, this judgment still remains, and
raises other affections like it self, that ever remain with it; into which
the spirits of the former are extracted, and wherein they exercise all the
true power they had. But now on a Death Bed there is often a great commotion
raised, a loud blustre of passion never arriving at this point, at this
settlement; But if a man should live after, it would go off, as Clouds and
Storms, that when they have spent themselves vanish and lie down: And when a
man dies, it is to be feared, that as they ^vere raised by approach to the
unappeasable tempests of darkness, so they are hurried along with their
violence.

and zeal it has for Holiness: whereas in Deathbed Repentances, it is
oftenest found, that there is either a terrifying presence only of former sins,
appearing to the affrighted conscience, without a more hopeful indication of
the soul truly composed to righteousness: or else some high flying resolutions
of better li^e afterward, offered, as a kind of Bribe to the patience and mercy
of God, in hopes of present deliverance, or at best, as a ransom from Hell and
eternal damnation; but without a deep sense of the guilt and evil of past sins,
or the just apprehension of that continually running issue of corruption, that
is still defiling anew. Either of these is a main Error, and pernicious; For
if on the one side the Heart in a rage be forced to cast out some sins for the
turbulency of them, if it be not immediately filled with better guests, Seven
other wicked spirits are ready to enter, and make the last state of that man
worse than the first. For Repentance is Mat. 12. 43
no void space, no silent, or unactive state, but when it has dislodged lusts,
furnishes and fills the soul with the best things, and carries the vigor of a
man's action to the best effect; when by repentance a man Isai. 1. 16, 17. Mat.
3. 8.
ceases to do evil, he learns to do well, and brings forth fruits meet for
repentance, and amendment of life.

On the other side, he that seems to make a hasty motion to Holiness without
due sense of sin, first thinks to overrule the method God has set, who
requires humiliation, godly sorrow, anger, revenge, fear, as preparing to
Repentance: and further, he conceits a freedom to himself, when he is fettered
and bound; without a power given him from God, he offers to cast out Devils
with ease that cannot be cast out Mat. 9. 29.
but by fasting and prayer; (that is) severe courses of self abasement, and
lowliest dependances together with earnestest application to the Grace of God.
These unclean spirits therefore, that dissemble a retreat, return immediately,
and make a prey of Acts 19. 14, etc.
the deluded soul.

Jesus Christ. Happiness and misery considered apart are not the object of the
gracious soul: But God and Christ considered apart are an infinitely sufficient
reason of Repentance. The clear love of God toward the soul, as a Father in
Christ without reflections upon happiness, is though not the single, yet the
paramount consideration in Repentance unfeigned. But men a dying are generally
so over possessed with the terrors of an eternal suffering, and mere desires of
Freedom from pa^n, and of well-being; and so in haste, that they generally miss
these higher considerations, which being further of not only from corrupt
nature, but even from natural conscience, are not commonly espied, but
therefore argue greater sincerity, and truth of Heart.

repentant tears. Here flows that Spirit of Grace, and ingenuous goodness,
which brings forth the clearest and holiest affection toward God.

But at the time we are now speaking of; It is very seldom, that either horror
or presumption do not swallow all: Presumption, where there is little sense or
judgment of the Case. Horror, where the judgment is clearer and the sense
quicker, for every thing Romans 8. 15
disposes now rather to Fear, and to the Spirit of Bondage; and a man naturally
does all he does under a servile dread of God, and his eternal Justice. And
though there may be much mention of Christ, and desire of mercy through him;
yet it is but as a malefactor convicted beseeches the mercy of the Judge, no
otherwise than as of a Judge: So such call out for the mercy of God to pardon
them, but still as a Judge, not with the Spirit of the Son sent into the Call.
4. 6.
Heart, the spirit of Adoption crying Abba, Father. Not with that Love that
casts out unworthy Fear. And indeed how can it be otherwise, there having
been no Job 22. 21
acquaintance with God in the way, but a long enmity; and the time now too
strait for a free and full consideration of the riches of Grace, such as may
still an awakened conscience: Fear presses in every way, and shuts out Faith.
What can now redeem the soul from this hellish Terror, but a light from Heaven
immediately darting into it, a Grace above that Grace, that ordinarily saves
men; for a well settled trust and confidence in mercy according to the general
Rule, is not, but after some sad debates, and experimental consultations, that
have passed betvveen the sense of sin, and the affiancing acts of the soul upon
Christ. This Repentance then is in great danger of missing the spirit of the
Gospel, and falling into the rank of those repentances of Cain, Esau, Judas.

Thus I have endeavored to show, that though we suppose a Dying man to spread
his soul and thoughts every way, and to all the parts of Repentance; yet it is
extremely to be suspected, there will want the true and right quality of them;
in regard of the very disadvantageous circumstances, wherein such an one is
found; and the great unfitness of the soul at that time, to begin to do any
thing worthy, to which it has not been before inured, or if it did begin, it
would be much more unlikely to bring forth fruit (as our Savior speaks) to
perfection. Luke 8. 14.


I add nothing of the exercises of a full and well grown Repentance, whereby it
is daily espying the risings of sin, and suppressing them, and filling up the
defects of Holiness and Obedience; because they are not to be thought possible
in the point I am now speaking of, and I have already given a resolution in
that case.

I shall now set my self to find out the low causes, that are always to be
suspected to have the great influence upon such a latter end penitency.

In general therefore, we must take notice, that there are several vapors of
misapprehension, rising upon the Soul, when we are a dying, that do so disguize
it to it self, and disfigure the true face of it, that from thence arise
dangerous mistakes concerning a man's condition toward God.

We see into how many shapes upon ordinary occurrences, we change, and how
easily we exchange them for quite different, without any good cause; what
continual Ebbs and Flows there are of the humors, and how do these cast the
balance of the superior soul? One man is every hour some several sorts of men.

How much more do great Accidents, and removes out of one condition into
another alter us? Which yet are but the sudden and just now state of our minds
upon such alterations, which not continuing we return to our former figure,
Unstable and weak as water, Genesis 49, 3,
we take the form of every vessel we are put into; who knows then whether his
Dying Repentance be any more than the mould, not of his mind, but of his dying
condition approaching him big with so great a change? We know many things befall
us in our lives, which put a greater sense of Religion upon us, than we find at
other times: and yet how variable we are, our goodness at such times is as the
morning Dew, Hose. 6. 4.
and as the early Dew it goes away. How often are we from the occasions of
mercies, afflictions, fears, hopes, good discourses carried into high
apprehensions of God? And we lose them again we know not how: Now out of doubt
a dying condition of any thing we meet with in the World is most apt to move
us upon God, and a sense of him. But can we think those fleeting shoots of the
Soul, that have no certainty, are accepted for Repentance?

How strangely does Melancholy, and oppressions of that transform men? which
when it falls upon the motions of conscience, gives us strong imaginaions of
eternal things; which yet being nothing but the cast of that Melancholy upon
the thoughts, when that is removed, they are quite of another hue.

It is evident the Mind sees much through the Body, and the representations are
colored by its temper; as the Eye sees through yellow or green Glass,
differently from the things themselves. So the Serenity or Cloudiness of the
humors makes a different reflection of things upon the mind, and the liveliness
or heaviness of the Spirits incline us to very varying apprehensions.

Now what time is more like to be so encumbered with these Clouds and
Vapors than a dying Hour? When every thing is ready to contribute them, and
nothing to scatter them. If then natural conscience, and implanted sense of God
together with the notions given us from Scripture pass through these, they
become very impressive, and affecting for the time, and yet he much mistakes
Repentance, who thinks it no more, than a fit of religious Melancholy.

But let us inquire after some more settled, and constant causes of these
penitential motions near Death, and we shall find many very likely to be so,
that are not yet worthy of true Repentance, and therefore what springs from
them, is not accepted before God.

1. When men find all their Being in the world at an end, and feel themselves
falling, they know not vvhither. It is no strange thing they should catch at
God, and that they may take hold of him, at Holiness also; Seeing ingraffed
Principles together with general discourse teach every one, how dear Holiness
is to God.

If God and Goodness were no more than imaginary things? It would be no
vvonder, if they who are tossed off the World, and thrown over board from it,
should snatch at them; if there were no more in the case than this, that every
one has heard so much speech, and talk of them among men. For to him that has
nothing in reality, even a shadow, a fancy are valueable. Men that are
dropping through the Air, or sinking under water without consultation offer at
everything they meet with.

In great extremities short of Death, they that are bereft of all worldly
assistance, fly to the Divine succors, though as Jonah's Mariners they pray
to an Idol instead of the true God, and their Devotion is no better than
Superstition, which is but a fancy in Religion What strange thing then is it,
for nature to cry out for God, and Christ, for pardon of sin, to be delivered
from Hell, and to have Heaven for an everlasting Rest, when all things else
evidently fail as they do in Death; and when not only fancy, and general
opinion, but most substantial reason in, lightened by the Scripture provoke up a
man to iteven for Self-preservation.

Yet this differs but little from howling upon our Beds ^os. 7. 14.
for Corn, and Wine, and Oil; for though the things differ much in their
nature, yet the esteem men have of them, and the desire they have after them is
much upon the same ground; for these spiritual things appear to that natural
sense of Self-preservation, as necessary in Death, as the other do in Life and
Healt.

But if the approaches of Death happen to be again drawn off, the value of
spiritual things removes with them, and the things of this world, with all the
sensual and sinful delights of it, return to their former price: which argues
the ineffectualness of this cause of Repentance, and the unacceptableness of
the Repentance it self to God, that flovves from it; God disclaims men, that
have never come to him before their extremity, and come then only because Ier.
2. 27. 28.
of it. In the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us: But
where are thy Gods that thou made? Let them arise if they can save thee, thus
to such Dying men crying out to him God says, Let your former lusts and
pleasures now be your Happiness. Fools and scorners, that would not be warned,
call upon God Pro. 1. 14.
in their calamity, and seek him early, when the whirlwind of their
distractions hurries them, but cannot make him hear, cannot find him.

2. Suppose the desires after God, and eternal Happiness, with all the retinue
of those desires rise not, so much, from the necessities of remove from this
Life, and sensible supports, but immediately from the sight of eternal things
themselves: yet will not this conclude the Repedntance sincere. For we may
easily pitch upon several so plain reasons of these quick apprehensions of
another world, that it is much more strange, if any man be not struck with
them; and they that are, are not in greater ecstasies of these considerations,
than that most die in some fair inclinable temper toward them, and others are
extraordinarily surprised with them, yet without true Repentance.

For First, If it were no more, but the leisure, and uninterestedness of the
mind in all worldly things, that Death brings: It is no wonder that the Action
of it should immediately, and necessarily flow upon God; for it being always in
action, and motion from its very nature, and God having made it for himself;
and the manner of its living here in the world being a slavery willingly
undertaken for the service of the Body, and the enjoyment of this present Life,
in its being fallen from God: It is nothing strange, that that drudgery being
now at an end, and the chains wherein it was held, just a breaking, it should
fall upon God, and spiritual objects, whither the stream of it was prepared to
run, and which are most truly its own business. For the distance being so wide,
and irreconcilable between man, and this earth in Death; the very having
nothing else to do must carry him upon the future state; seeing his foul is
such a being as cannot naturally lie still, and that state is all, that it has
to work upon, and further then that, it is so nearly allied to it.

Secondly, The very losening and uncementing the Soul from the Body, wherein it
dwelt, and wherein the motions of it were restrained, has been thought very
probably to give some men lesser degrees Multi euim quum remis^i and liberi
sunt sutura prospiciunt, ex quo intelligitur quales futuri sint quum se plane
corporis vinculis relaxaverint. Cice. de Senectu. Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 32. and cap 33.
of those advantages near their death, which naked and free spirits not
enclosed and pent up in bodies have, whereby they have been able to make
conjectures of future things, and to speak prophetically. The less the Soul is
bound to work by the Body, the higher are its operations. All extraordinary
motions of the Soul are a kind of ravishment from Sense. Those great prophetic
Blessings of Jacob and Moses were near their Dying. It is therefore very easy
to be thought, that when the Soul and Body are ready to cleave asunder, and the
Spirit to be unsodered from Fle^h, that it should make a higher flight toward
eternal things.

The nearer every thing is to its own residence, the more vehement is its
motion said to be thither. So there may very well be quick sallies of the Soul
toward eternity, before it enters into it, when it is so near that everlasting
Receptacle of it self.

Thirdly, We may observe in the experience of all times, every appearance of
the other world has strange effects of fear, and affrightment upon men's minds:
when any one is entering then into that whole World, it may well put him upon
purifying himself, more then they that fall upon Leviathan. Job 41. 25.
When men are just upon that Region of Spirits, what appalements of mind and
strong vvorking of thoughts must there needs be? Much more if the Soul have any
sense of its approach to the infinite Holiness of God, at whose rebuke the
pillars of Heaven tremble; whose presence astonishes the Heb. 1^. 22 Isai. 6.
5. Job 42. 6. Dan. 10. 8.
purer spirits of Angels, and beats down the sou^s of good men to the Dust,
as of Moses, Job, Isaiah, etc. in his intervievves with them. How much more
of those that have never thought of God, and now must come near his Seat.

Nothing so composes the soul to this amazing change of condition and converse,
as long continued Treaties with God through Christ: when though men change
their place, they do not change their company: Others, when this great light
strikes them, are in the very terrors of the shadow of Death, and Job 24. 17
Job* ^3 13
shaken out of their place, out of all the security, and quiet sensuality they
lived in.

Let us now take the estimate or avail of these things to true Repentance, and
we shall find, when the soul lies thus uncovered to the things of Eternity,
it has natural reasons for all, it may seem to do like return to God; and so
that all argue nothing of the true Grace of God; but if a man were again in
his former state he would be the very same he was; for first, as one thing
strikes upon another with a natur^l effect, Light upon the eye, Sound upon the
ear, so eternal things upon the immortal spirit, when there is nothing between
to intercept the ^ Ioh. 2. 16.
stroke. Further, when the lust of the Elesh, the lust of the Eye, and the
pride of Life are as a Scene removed, and a Play at an end; and instead of them
another World drawing near, just as men defeated in all their attempts for
riches, and honors, and beaten of from them to a private life, call all these
things cheats; not out of true reason, but because they cannot reach them: on
the other side they praise retirement and a Cloister, not that they like it,
but because they must live so, which bege^s some kind of contentedness so to
live. Thus and no otherwise do many Dying men call all this World vanity, and
profess an high est^em for all things pertaining to to that to come.

viz. The awakenings of Conscience usual at this time, because of the sense of
a Judgment: while common experience tells men, It is appointed to all men once
to die, and sinking nature gives Heb. 9. 27.
notice, This is the time: Conscience lifts up to the next things. After that
the judgment.

Now no man sees judgment, a judgment omniscient, omnipresent eternal without
great shakes of Soul, especially that has done nothing seriously to agree with
the adversary in the way. Coascience then Luke i2. 18.
rising up with the Awe of a Tribunal upon ^t stirs up all the powers to fly
from the wrath that is to come, by desires of pardon, and resolutions of
Amendment. The very hearing of Judgment made Act. 24. 25
such a one as Foelix tremble. When Judgment seems to us, at the other end of
Heaven, all is quiet; but when Death brings us to the very seat of it, How loud
may be the cries for mercy? The bewayling the former evils of Life? Now men
pour ont their complaints for the want of God, the misimprovement of former
time: Now they make large offers of a strict and fevere mortification, and
devotion to Religion. Now they would give the the thousand Rams, the Mic. 6. 6,
7*
ten thousand Rivers of Oil, their first born for their transgression, the
fruit of their Body for the sin of their Soul. And yet all but the eye opened
to see the flaming sword of Justice, that makes even a Balaam wish Number. 22. 32.
c. 23. 10.
to dye the death of the Righteous, and to have a Latter end, Sober, Just,
Religious.

The very suspicion of a Judgment inclines men thus far universally almost,
that hardly any choose to die in a Rant, in a madness; but had rather by
virtue, and Religion be consigned over to another World; and have their eyes
closed by Mercy, and Grace in Christ: They would see the Salvation of God, and
so depart in Peace.



Will, an indearment upon the Affections; to turn them to a full delight, and
satisfaction in God and holiness, and to a dislike and abhorrence of sin. For
else, the Devils, I am. 2. 19.
who believe and tremble, must be thought Converts. For who have clearer sight
of things than they? Balaam, whose eyes were opened, and spoke so great things
of God, and his people, must be concluded a Good Mat. 27. 4. Heb. 12. ^7 Dan.
4. ^7 and 6. 26. Luke 6. 20. Act 24. 25
man. Esau and Judas who had so sad apprehensions of Sin, and their loss by it,
must be affirmed to be Penitents. Nebucadne Zar's and Darius his
acknowledgments of God must be taken for true Grace. Herod his hearing John
Baptist gladly. Felix his trembling at Paul's Discourse, may be thought
evidences of true Repentance.



the service, every creature can do to him, is infinitely due, he may make use
of that which is his own, so far as he pleases. And because, the word God puts
in their Number 23. 5
mouths, is not their own, not arising out of the good Mat. 12. 35
treasure of their Hearts (as appears in Balaam) therefore their everlasting
condition is not determined by it, but by the constant course of their former
Life, the true image of their Hearts, as we see in the same Balaam, who after
died by the Israelites hand, whose Number. 31. ^.
greatness he had prophesied. Yet I will not deny, but they may have their
reward in mitigation of punishment for any service done to God.

If God did not interpose thus sometimes, he might seem vvanting in something
that concerned him, at least as a gracious Ruler of the World. He therefore
overrules some, who have lived so, as to make a constant Argument against
him, and a future state (so far as wickedness could do it) to retract the
whole course of their Life, and give their Vote, for what they had so long
withstood.

I will yet further add another cause of a Deathbed Repentance, that
sometimes falls out to have a most powerful influence, and yet the Repentance
that springs from it, is very unsafe to confide in.

Deathbed Repentance, and is often the occasion of great Error in the thing it
self.

For suppose a man followed with sound and affectionate persuasions, to do all
that may be done for his Soul in this exigent; how conceivable is it, that man
may be fo far wrought upon, as to entertain a present sense of Religion, and
yet have no true Life, no life that arises from a true intimate Principle. But
as those Bodies of Air taken, and moved by Angels seem to perform the
functions of living bodies, yet do but seem to do so for they have no principle
of life natural to them; but as soon, as they are forsaken by the Spirits that
made use of them, they fly abroad, and disperse themselves. Thus that general
sense of Conscience, that lies scattered through the Soul, and unable for
action, being gathered together and united by good and holy applications, and
acted thereby, may have force so long, as that union coatinues; but that
discourse that holds it together ceasing* it immediately falls asunder, and
loses its efficacy.

The stone that receives motion from the Hand, that throws it, goes on whilst
that motion lasts, when that is spent, it falls to the ground: so the force of
exhortation ceases too often, when he that gives it, leaves those to whom it
was given.

The instrument to which the Musicians hand gives tune and voice lies dead when
he deserts it: Man's soul is made by God capable of re^igious tune and mo^ion,
and while a skil^ful hand plays upon it, it may give that sound very
distinctly, and yet have no Life in it self.

The striking of Conscience makes the Sparks fly out, yea and sometime kindle
in a flame, and yet it presently dies* because not supplied with a continual
Oil to feed it.

The mind of oneman is very apt to receive impressions from another, we see
what passions and motions are raised by an eloquent Speaker; how the
understanding is carried captive, while the Orator works uponit: and yet all
the affection thus blown up falls flat again, when the breath that svvell'd it
lies still, and is apt to be carried the contrary way by cross persuasions
equally insinuated.

How much more may this be in religious things; Conscience being so easily
stirred by such applications, as we see in Felix, though it is as easily
becalmed, when sinful lusts through the efficacy of temptation are loud and
high.

And all this is certainly much easilier done near Death, when men are so
soft, that they are apt to take any stamp, so melting, as to be gathered into
any mould.

It is possible for one man's spirit to carry another for some considerable
space of time, as we see in Iehoiadas influence upon Ioash, who was not yet
all that 2 Kin. 12. ^
time possessed with the things themselves, whereunto he was directed.

But true Repentance is a frame set up by the spirit of God in the Heart,
subsisting by that spirit upon it self, and makes use only of all Helps
subordinated to it, by the wisdom of that Spirit; but does not live from that
Help, but from it self through that Spirit, its supreme Life.

To dravv these things therefore to a sum, It will appear, after all these
causes have done, what they can, these great Errors follovving are generally
found, and always to be suspected in a Deathbed Repentance.

1. In a Deathbed Repentance, There is only a Judgment made of the case of
Eternity, considered by it self* and without a counterpoise: The excellency of
God and eternal things are minded, as they stand out of the air of Temptation.
Now though this be a good opportunity for the first consideration, yet that
consideration must grow so strong, as to retain the same sense, in the midst of
all pretenses from the World and Satan. Else in the time of Temptation this
Repentance falls away. Dr. Iackson. Book 10. Chap. 23. Sect. 3.
For there may be many true apprehensions, which may make deep impression, not
only in the Brain and Fancy, but upon our Affections, whilst these are calm,
and unprovoked, and yet both the apprehension and impression quickly vanish
upon the starting, or provocation of contrary Fancies or Affections.

When the Blood cools in the Veins, and the spirits are ready to stand still,
when a man is no longer to live in the world, the season of the pleasures of
Sin is over, then to cast out his lusts, What excellent thing does he? does
not even nature, whether he will or no, the same? Mat. 5. 46.
True Repentance encounters temptation, and resists unto blood; when those
pleasures of Sin are at the height, and the tide of corruption from within
swells most. As Moses chose to suffer affliction with the people of God rather
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for Heb. 11. 25
a season, although they were in their growing, and ascending morning.
Repentance will not worship that Sun in the East. It is a very small thing to
despise it in the West, and just a setting, to choose Religion when there is
nothing to vye with it.

2. It is not a consideration of heavenly things in their true vvorth, but only
as recommended by the present necessity. For who would not die the Death of the
Righteous? And have his latter end like his? Every man at that time would be
glad to find, he has lived well: and he that has lived worst, except he be
outrageous in profaneness, will wish, he had lived better. Eternity at hand
gives value to all Holiness, and sense of God, in spite of the World; and
lessens all things else to a nothing, and less than nothing; imprints a
ghastliness and horror upon all Mat. 27. ^.
wickedness and sensuality. The thirty pieces are nothing worth, and the
innocent blood above all value, when men suffer in the agonies of Conscience,
and fears of the approaching Judge. A house full of Silver and Gold will not
buy a man to resist God, when indeed Nu. 22. 18
he appears to him, when the terrible Majesty opens Isai. 2. 10.
it self, what is so precious, that men will not fling to the Bats and Moles?
When the breath is going out of the nostrils, how precious is Repentance.
Faith, a pardon in Christ, a happy Eternity? To those, who have heretofore
slighted them, as the offscouring of all things.

But these things are always so rich, Wisdom is always so precious, that it
disdains to borrow esteem from a minute of extremity: and therefore it most
often falls out, that those who would none of its counsel, but despised all its
reproof, when they come to seek it early, cannot find it, but it laughs at
their calamity, as men laugh at the unhappiness of Fools, that would not be
corrected in their folly, till their misery confute their confidence.

3. From hence it follows, That this Repentance is a choice, when there is no
other choice; if a man loved his sins, or the world never so passionately, he
must leave them; if he disliked God, and his Holiness, and an everlasting abode
with him, to the utmost; yet he is even forced upon them, or dashed upon an
eternal misery, and unhappiness; which it is impossible to choose: and
therefore though he would not choose the holy ways of God, if he might still
enjoy former vanity, yet that being out of his reach and way, he must take what
is to ^e had. The sense therefore is no more than this, All these things are
good, when a man is just a Dying; but while he lives, and can have the world,
they are troublesome and unprofitable: Death makes them good, upon this account
only, because else there would be something worse, and there can no longer be
any thing better. A man is now willing to offer a Life he has not to give, but
Eternal life is not worth any part of that life he thinks in his power to do
any thing else with. Let us then observe at what rate it is set, for to use
Tertullian's words in another case, we may thus reason. Quale bonum hoc est,
quod melius est poena, quod non potest videri bonum, nisi peisimo compara^um;
ut ideo bonum sit res^picere, quia deterius est ardere. Caeterum si per mali
collationem cogitur bonum dici, non tam bonum est, quam genus mali inferioris,
quod altiori malo obscuratum ad nomen boni impellitur. Tertul. De Mono. gami^.
Chap. 3.
What a mean sort of good is this, that only excels punishment; which needs
the vvorst of states for a Foil to it self, that it may be thought Good? It is
good to repent, and be saved, because who can dvvell with everlasting
burnings? But if it must purchase the reputation of being Good from Evil, it is
not so much a Good, as a lovver degree of Evil; which while the greater evil
ecclipses it is compelled as it were to accept the name of a good, being
driven upon the confines of goodness by the violence of greater evil.

4. This Repentance is not the Free, but inslaved Judgment and Choice of the
Soul, as men cast out Goods in a Storm, and receive a power to rule over them,
that they cannot endure, but that it is too strong for them. Men are afraid
what God will do to them, therefore they submit. His enemies in heart are found
liars to him, they flatter him with their mouth, as Julian oppressed by the
Almightiness of Christ, is storied to have cried out. Vicisti Galilaee, Thou
have overcome me, Galilean. Thus they are overcome by Death, and the
apprehension of Judgment. In the sight and view of the danger men resolve to
part with their sins. Let but that remove, they call for their sins again, as
Mariners wish for their goods after the Storm. They throw up their lusts in
their sickness, but drink them in when their trouble is past, as the Dog
returns to his vomit. In all this there is nothing 2 Pet. 2. 12.
of the love of God.

5. In this Repentance, the Soul of it is generally a pitiful mean Self-love,
even the meanest kind imaginable, wherein a man considers himself as a Creature
in being, and likely, or at least possible to be for ever; without any
apprehension of himself, as a raaional creature made for God, and the enjoyment
of him, in conforming with whom his happiness consists, and in the resting for
ever in his love. Of this part he has no distinct apprehension, only he would
be happy though he knows not what it is, or rather he would not be miserable;
yet even that he truly understands not. But as the Jews said to Christ, when
he spoke to them of the Bread of Life, Lord evermore give us this bread; and
yet were scandalized at his explanation John 6. 14.
of himself to be that Bread, so far as to leave him. And the Pharisees hearing
of the Vineyard to be let out to other Husbandmen, and the Judgment upon
themselves Luke 20. 16.
to be executed, Cried out, God forbid, yet run on in the sin, that brought it
upon them.

This little point of Self-love into which all is crowded is ennobled with no
sight of the excellency of the things themselves, or a due estimation of them,
as the true pleasure, and joy of an immortal spirit.

This is not that allowable love of a man's self, which incircles it self within
the love of God, as the lesser Circle is comprehended by the greater, but this
either leaves out that love wholly, or debases it to basest self.

Let us now compare both sides together, and see how much true Repentance
differs from that, which is always to be feared, lest it should be the height
of the Deathbed: and of that which has been spoken, this is the sum,

True Repentance is the most free election of the Soul enabled by the Grace of
God, upon a clear, and just dictate of the Judgment, attended with sincerest
affection, to give up it self to God through Jesus Christ, and when it is most
it self, not under any irregular fear or constraint, and (at least would be the
same) in a time, when it has all the probability that can be to lay hold upon
things present.

The other Repentance arises from a Soul all troubled, and discomposed with the
throws of Death, the fears of Hell, the doubts what will become of it in
another World, the uproars of a guilty Conscience; when it supposes it self
necessarily at the full stop of its former courses, by being cut off from
longer Life, in the midst of all which arise vehement resolutions to turn from
sin to God, and possibly with many fait apparencies, but without opportunity to
give proof of themselves.

Let any one Judge between these two Repentances, and accordingly even counsel
himself concerning them.

Yet I must acknowledge this Discourse subject to these follovving limitations.

1. That the Arguments I have insisted upon prevail not only against a
Deathbed Repentance, but against all Repentances, that have no higher spirit
to move them, than what I have now represented; from hence therefore we may
take the trial of our Repentance in general, for though a Deathbed is most
subject to these mistakes, yet whatever Repentance falls under them, is by
reason of them invalid; and the later any Repentance is, or the more it is
occasioned by any extremity, which it does not outlive, the more subject it
is to them.

2. What I have said is not at all to be understood of the perfecting and
consummating Repentance, by higher and fuller acts toward God at Death,
though enforced by the present circumstances of the Case. For true Repentance
running through the whole life takes advantage of every thing, much more of so
considerable an opportunity to unite all our strength for God, as a Deathbed
brings with it. All that has been spoken is designed against trusting to the
Extreme unction of a Dying Repentance, just then begun.

3. H^ave before resolved upon that tenderest Doctrine, that it is possible
among all the unhappy circumstances of a Dying-Bed, there yet may be this true
Act of the Understanding, Will, and Affections turning to God; and if there be
this, it would be the same and alike, hovvever these circumstances alter, and
then it excels those temporary amendments undertaken in the freest times of
life. But because it is but possible and so almost impossible, so unhappy a
Case, (as not to have repented till just we dye) should fall out so happily,
the intention of this Discourse stands good notwithstanding.

4. I acknowledge, the choice of the Soul can never be so free, but it must be
subject to infinitely the most worthy and preponderating considerations: of the
love and goodness of God, the Redemption of Christ, the greatness of eternal
Happiness most indearing on one side; of the fear and terror of the Lord, the
loss of a Soul, everlasting perdition, most perswaswe on the other side, so
that if a man cannot be free in his choice of Religion, except he choose it
without the force of any such consideration, he can never be at all free, for
these are on all sides of him: And further, there is always the supreme motion
of the Grace of God, which does not lessen, but steer and exalt the freedom of
the Will toward God.

The difference then betvveen true and false Repentance in this particular is
the same, that is betvveen just and rational consideration of all the motives
of Hope and Fear: And the hurry of them moving us not intellectually, but as a
Tempest, or with the force of a mere Engine. 2. Betvveen the highest reasons
carrying the chiefest force, and leading along with them the lovver ones, and
the lovver doing all without the higher, for want of which they are Sensual
or Hellish. 3. Betvveen the government of mere Providence, and of the Spirit of
God. 4. Betvveen the Repentance of ^ain, Esau, Saul, Judas, and the Repentance
of Da^id Manasseh, Peter, and Paul.

5. I acknowledge the first preparations of the Soul by God for himself, may be
with a great deal of noise and confusion; Clouds and Darkness are the Dust of
his Feet, Storms go before him to prepare his ^ay, while these last; there
cannot be a serene calm Act of the Soul, and he that does not live till he hear
that still voice, in which God is, is in great danger of being lost in the
Storm. But if out of this darkness, and confusion, a holy and gracious
settlement proceed; it is not the worse for being so introduced, but is
agreeable with the usual method of God.

The fourth Head I proposed, is to weigh the Repentance of the crucified
Malefactor against our common Deathbed Repentances, which duly performed will
be of great force against presumption, rather than minister it any confidence.

For we shall find so much gathered together, and pressed down into it, that as
Jewels have their riches in a little room, so his short life of penitency had
an age of Repentance in it.

It is so composed of extraordinaries, that it can give very little
encouragment in ordinary Cases, except just thus much; that Repentance at Death
is no absolute impossibility.

1. Let us observe how his Repentance looked to the several parts of
repentance; for though it had but little time in this World to breath in, yet
with extraordinary diligence, it was busy in all the great, and most
concerning points. Yet I account this of the least remark in the History of his
Repentance, because it is easily imitable, That in which it excelled was the
Evidences of sincerity it carried.

1. Yet take notice of his sense and acknowledgment of Sin, which was not only
a confession of Magnum est poenitentiae sig* number in poena sua acqulescere.
Grot. in locum.
words, but of his very soul, for ce^iberating things in a moment, he
pronounced* himself worthy of the condemnation, and punishment he endured. I
confess this is not so infrequent in those, who have forfeited their lives to
Justice, but how often is it rather a formality, than the inward sense of the
mind condecently affected? and possibly if we look upon the outside of things,
we can find no great difference between him and others. Yet it is a necessary
part of Repentance, The sacrifice of God is a broken and contrite ^sa. 51. 17
heart.

2. In his Repentance lay a lively Faith in Christ, first resting upon the
principle, and truth of the thing; That Christ was a just person, that he had a
Kingdom, and then a particular application to him for mercy, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom.

3. A quick sense of Eternity supplied vigor to his Repentance, an evident
sight of something be yond this World. For what more excites the soul, and
shows it the necessity of a gracious change, than an everlasting condition
appearing to it? To this end has Jesus Christ brought life and immortality to
light, 2. Tim. 1 10
of which this Penitent made a very full confession; Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom. He saw a Kingdom beyond the Cross and Death.

4. An earnest desire to promote and propagate a sense of God into the Hearts
of others was the immediate fruit of this malefactors Repentance. He admonishes
the impenitent Thief on the other side, Do thou not fear God^? He had such a
reverence of God, that he expostulates the want of it in the other as monstrous
and horrid. His design was also exceeding compassionate, as well as pious: For
it was an endeavor full of charity, desirous his guilty fellow-sufferer should
be brought into the same condition with himself. We want much of the compassion
due to the Souls of others, because we are so insensible of the misery of our
own; and taste but little of the sweetness of Reconciliation and Grace: But
when we drink largely out of these Fountains, we derive the St^eams upon
others, that have flowed upon our selves.

All these things were evidently much to the purpose, if we look upon
themselves; Yet were there nothing more extraordinary in them, we might doubt
whether they were any more than the good Mood, into which principles of
Conscience excited by the unhappiness of his condition might put him: Let us
then consider the evidence, that all this was truly supernatural; for I
account it no injury to so memorable a Repentance to suppose, that as great and
fair an outside may have failed of Paradise, into which he entered. But,

2. The acknowledgment he made of Christ gives testimony to him in two things.

1. That it was made, when Christ was under all the infamy, and misery of a
shameful, and painful Death, and nothing to make such a greatness, as he
ascribed to him probable. Among us that in general Language speak honorably of
Christ, professions of him are cheap, and prove nothing: But if one bred in
Turcisme, or Judaisme, should confess him* it would argue much more; yet not so
much as in this malefactor, who saw him in so despicable a state: whereas now
so great a part of the World acknowledging him* has carried him up to Heaven,
Acts 1. 9.
as it were in that Cloud, wherein he ascended long ago, and hid the reproach
of ^is Cross in so high a Glory.

To confess him in his worst estate, and before any thing of the consequence
was known, was very Mat. 16. 17
great: Extrema sides, sed non minima. Aug. Sermon. 122. de Temp.
Christ was revealed to him, not by Flesh and Blood* but by God himself. Such
an Hero^ckness is indeed necessary to assure a Deathbed Repentance, which had
need be as great, as it is late, when men do not live to see the ordinary
fruits of it.

He that could see Christ, and his Glory, through so dark a vail* had his Eyes
anointed with that Eye Salve; Christ speaks of Adrem ^redendam a sensibus
remotissi mam excitatus est. Grot.
.

We find the Apostles, who had seen his miracles; heard his divine Discourses,
made long acknovvledgments of him, were fearfully shaken by this Rev. 3. 18.
assault of the power of darkness upon him; even to a despair, that he was the
Christ. But while they were Quando passus est omnes discipuli desperaverunt
quod ipseesset Christ^^. A latrone* victi sunt Apostoli qui tunc credidit
quando il li* defecerunt. Aug. in Psalm. 68
in a swoon of Faith, this Faith with Christ triumphed over Principalities and
Powers, even on the Cross.

We looking upon the things of Christianity in the common Profession of the
Nation, It is a hard thing for us to see them otherwise, than that casts them,
as it would be for those, that have known nothing but the Religion of
Mahomet, Paganism, or the Jevvish Synagogue, to take up upon the sudden the
Doctrine of Christianity against their own.

We believing not with our own Faith, but vulgar opinion, easily make a
confession of Christ; yet oftentimes the power and saving effect of it is far
from us, as from those that are strangers to him: sometimes they that come from
the East, and from the West, sit down in the Kingdom of God, when the Children
of the Kingdom are thrust out.

The acknowledgment of Christ in those times, was a much fairer evidence, than
it can be now; yet without inward Grace was nothing then, much less must it
needs be to us, who have it made ready to our hands by Education and common
consent in it, we must therefore the more narrowly observe, what Characters the
truth of Christ imprints upon our Hearts.

2. This acknowledgment was made without any Tanto namque pondere appensum*
est, tantumque valuit apud eum, qui novit haec appendere, quod confessus est
Dominum crucifixum, quantum si ^uisset pro Domino crucifixus. Augu. De Anima
and eju^ Origin.
manner of inducement, or temptation to it, from outward advantages, it could
possibly afford; but rather an increase of shame and scorn was to be expected
from it; and that if it were possible, he should suffer the second time for
such a confession, and become of a malefactor a Martyr. Nay further, there was
no Dictate of natural conscience*, that could incline him to it, for that runs
not into the confession of Christ, nor is any way quieted concerning former
sins* through such a confession; but eyes God only, and moral righteousness:
Lastly no general Tradition prompted him to it, the Jews at that time
condemning him. But in us, all applications to Christ are securing our selves
in the common Barque, and keeps us from being censured, as profane, and
irreligious persons. For to dye without any address to Christ, is accounted
very ungodly, and senseless of a future state; but to deny him, monstrous and
desperate. Further Christianity is incorporated with our natural Principles, so
that they never move, or heave themselves in us, but that also rises with them.

Now it is of great importance in the trial of Sincerity, upon what grounds and
motives we do, what we do; and the more we can clear it from inferior springs,
the more certainly it is Grace descending from above, and resting upon us. Iam.
1. 17.


Every one therefore that would justify a Deathbed Repentance, must exceed
all common sorts of Repentance, else he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Nay he must do something, that in the little space of time, he has to
do it in, must equal a course of amendment of Life, must be as great in him, as
this Repentance of the Thief.

And do but think, if our Faith were to cut those waves, his was to pass, to
row against such a stream, to remove such mountains, among how many thousands
there would be found a Faith to do it, we should immediately be stopped, and
sunk, and cast away, and lost. Yet such are they we are to pass through into
eternal life, though of different circumstances from his.

But after all I will allow it possible, there might be a secret flaw in this
whole penitent deportment, we now insist upon; and that it fared with him
as with some among us, who after a wicked and debaunched Life fly to the
Sanctuary of the Romish Religion ( as Joab to the horns of the Altar.) To
reconciliation ^ Ki. 2. 28.
vvherevvith Hopelesness of any good from that they have so long sinned
against, and natural superstition hurry them. So this person hearing a great
Fame of Christ, and observing his pretense high, might lay hold upon him in a
desperate Case, if peradventure any thing of good might follovv on it: It being
very incidental to the nature of man to cast himself upon Religion, when all
else fails, and upon one new to him, when he has offended against the old
one, beyond hope of pardon; whence men generally receive this recompense, that
Conscience is put into amaze, having nothing at present to say against it.

And had this been the top of his Case, that it had been thus, could it have
been saving? Nay that it might possibly have been thus, though indeed it had
been otherwise, yet this very liableness to such a mistake had unspeakably
abated the rational security, and safety of his condition; so that there had
remained good cause for Conscience to have mistrusted which way his condition
would have fallen to Eternity.

This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Now that Repentance which enters
into Heaven, that passes into Paradise, not hindered by those flaming Cherubs
of divine Truth, that which is within the Door, before the Master of the House
is risen Luke 13. 25,
up and has shut it to, that is true Repentance and prosperous, and
successful, how late soever. But to know that it is true, when it is so
late, needs a voice from Heaven, or something proportional to it, to verify
it, as is after to be urged.

The last thing I take notice of in this Repentance is the unparalellable
circumstance of time, wherein it was accepted.

1. It was in the time of a public Act of mercy to the World, God was in love
to mankind giving his only Ioh. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 25.
begotten Son. Christ was giving himself a^ this time. Therefore that there
should be an Instance and Monument of this mercy, seemed condecent to so great
and solemn a time.

2. This Penitent stood close to that Sacrifice, that was offering it self up
to God: He stood within the Savor, the Odor, the Incense of it. That
Sacrifice, that purchases men from a vain conversation, that draws ^ Pe 18
down all the Blessings of Salvation; that therefore the force of it should
reach so near it self, is not strange: I know no nearness of place signifies at
all. How many saw his Miracles, heard him Preach, looked upon him Dying,
without benefit; yet was his presence also, as he pleased, full of Divine
effects. That therefore there should be an experiment of so great a Balsom,
just as it was preparing, was most suitable.

3. It was in the time, that Christ was triumphing over Principalities, and
Powers, and making a show of them openly upon the very Cross. Vicem versam
reddidit Christus diabolo, quemadmodum diabolus depravando hominem abstulerat
de Paradiso, sic Christus latronem confitentem erueret de inferno: Ille de
interdicto ligno praesumentem decepit, Iste pendentem de paenali ligno redemit.
Augu, Sermon. 122. De Temp.
That he should bear off in the Field the prey taken out of the mouth of the
proud Foe, was very agreeable to the expectation so great a Conquer or raises.
Colos. 2. 15.

But whoever considers the Thief on the other side not converted, or saved,
will find cause to observe: The Salvation of Christ does not sweep the World,
but is rarelier vouchsafed, than we think; That a man may dye without going to
Heaven; That the mercy of the Gospel is most arbitrary and sovereign, choosing
and leaving; That it depends not on humane expectation, or any superstitious
phancies, that have been raised about the Cross of Christ; for so much appears
by one only taken here, the other left, though upon the Cross together with
Christ, and near him in the great and mediatory Act; who that considers will
not tremble to think of one left in his sins, falling down into Hell from such
a Heaven as Christ in his great Act of Redemption.

And although it may be truly said, It was the fault, and negligence, and
obstinacy of the unconverted malefactor, that he did not use aright the Grace
offered, or the Light vouchsafed him; yet it does not alleviate the danger, for
it still remains very uncertain to whom God will give a Heart to use
opportunities aright, though they have them from God with Nova and insolita
quaedam divinae virtutis efficacia, in exemplum omnibus saeculis memorabile,
etc. Grot. In locum. Vid. Grot. In locum.
an equal liberality, as those that do so improve them.

But indeed, the supremacy of Grace is here very much acknowledged by all, that
a ray of the Divinity of Christ with infinite kindness smote his Soul. I infer
nothing from that more improbable, and unnecessary increase Hier^m In locum.
some Interpreters give the Miracle, That he was converted after he had joined
with the other malefactor in reproaching Christ.

Upon the whole then of this example, let men that would be befriended by a
Dying Repentance, examine whether these things found in this Example are like
to meet upon them. I will not say, till there be a time, a fullness of time,
wherein Christ shall Beneficium multis modis insigne and non temere trahendi in
consequentias exempli. Grot. In locum.
again dye for sinners, such a Repentance is not to be expected; but I may
safely say, he that in the observation of this example trusts himself to a
Dying Repentance should strangle his presumption with this Interrogation, will
there ever be such a conjunction, as was here, again, while the World endures?

I come now to the last Head of down right Arguments against committing our
Eternal state to a Deathbed Repentance.

1. It is against all the prudence and providence of a man seeing no man knows
what kind of Death he shall dye; whether it will afford him the possibilities
of repenting, how many dye suddenly, and in so short a Breath, that they have
not time to desire mercy in general, how many of Apoplexies seizing upon the
very Top of sense at first; many by Phrensies have no rational motion of
themselves, innumerable Accidents (and oftimes made dreadful by the wickedness
wherewith they have been accompanied) have snatched away men in a moment. Such
are taken a way living and in his wrath before the Pots can feel the Pal. 58 9
thorns, before ever those hasty flames of motion toward God blown up for such
an extremity can be raised. Such are taken in the very manner without so much
time as to put off the Every-Day. Habit of Sin, like those that were carried
out dead in their Coats. Lev. 10. 5.


And though from the ordinary manner of Dying, we may hope for the warning
ordinarily given; yet we see others surprised, who have had the same reasons
of Hope with our selves; We cannot then without madness trust our selves to
accident, or boast our Pro. 27. 1.
selves of to morrow, of which we know not what is within it, seeing the
future is wholy concealed from us: They that make a Covenant with death, and
are at an agreement with Hell meet with nothing but perfidiousness, Isa. 28. 18
etc.
when the overflowing scourge approaches them, and the storm of Hail rends
their refuge of lies. If we were provided against all, but one single
accident, even that may fall upon us with the ruin, that all the rest could
bring*

Let a man examine, whether he can choose his Death, and design the
circumstances of it, and place every thing, just as he would have it, and
thereby afford himself the season he thinks necessary for such a purpose; But
who is so foolish as to undertake this, He that builds upon ground, that is
none of his own, is like to have all his Frame overturned at the pleasure of
another; God derides this Folly, who has all things in his own hand, and
disposes them without our knowledge. Go too ye that say, To day or to morrow
Iam. 4. 13.
we will go to such a place, and buy, and sell, and get gain: Psa. 104. 3.
But oh miserable is he that thinks, as God, to lay the beams of his Chambers,
that he builds for his eternal rest in the Waters, the flowing incertainty of
future time; vvherehe has nothing to do, and oversees the proper Rest
appointed him by God, seeing both his presumption, and his profane negligence
are likely to be punished together. For indeed he that is wickedly prodigal,
of what God affords him, as his, and is bold to entrench upon the future,
which is Gods, when he comes to it, finds it full and possessed already,
with what God has provided for it; so there is no room for his project, but
he perishes for ever in the disappointment.

2. It is against our Duty, and all the Obligations, that lie on us; For it is
as if a man should say to God, Odibile est apud Deum, quande homo sub fiducia
poenitentiae in senectutem reservatam liberius peccat. August, Sermon. 120.
I know it is my Duty, and the end of my Life, and the providence thou
exercisest toward me, that I should now serve thee, and give up my self to
thee; But I beg of thee, that while I live, I may live in my lusts and
sensualities, and when I am to dye and go out of the world, and shall have no
more time and leisure for any thing else, I shall then have nothing to do, but
to look toward thee, and beseech thy favor, and leave my sins; I desire thee
therefore to stay for my Repentance till then, and when I can no longer enjoy
the World, then to grant me a Kingdom with thy self, and the fruition of thy
own happiness: for though I shall dishonor thee in the tract of my Life, yet I
will retract it all in a breath. How horribly contemptuous of God does this
appear, how affronting and blasphemous? and yet this is the very sense of
deferring Repentance, till Death.

This is the greatest immorality and irreligion, for it destroys the reason of
our Being on earth, which A(...) ^. 36
is to serve our generation, or the course of our Life according to the will of
God, to glorify ^im here on Earth. It destroys the service, yet flies upon
the reward; as if John 17. 4.
God were bound to make men happy, because he had made them, and that he had
made them, first to take the delights he most abhorres, to dishonor him, by
deforming his workmanship, and violating his Laws, and the good order he has
set in the World, and yet after all because he had made them, to give them a
blessedness so insuperably great, that he could find no greater, and by no
means to hurt or punish them for sin, though all the Justice, that ever was
known to man, requires punishment of offenders, as much as the reward of
Desert: else all Government would be lost.

Thus therefore to imagine of God is to melt him down, with those great
Attributes of Justice and wisdom, into a foolish and unreasonable pity, and
only for this end, that there may be a licentiousness in wickedness and impiety.

And seeing upon the same account, all the men in the World may adjourn their
Love and Obedience to God to their going out of it; It might come to pass, that
this state should have been prepared only as a Stage for the vices and
exorbitancies of men to have acted themselves upon, and then they to have
removed to Heaven, when as though these have large scope indeed now, as things
are, yet their licentiousness is daily rebuked by the threats of the Gospel, by
the holy conversations of those, that have left their sins by Repentance, and
punished by an eternal Judgment hereafter.

But who that considers the infinite goodness and greatness of God, that in his
hand is our life, and breath, and allour ways, can think it equal, that God
should have only the faint and feeble services of a Deathbed, for all the
preservation and mercy vouchsafed through the course of our lives.

Or who can think it consistent with his honor to give men Laws, that point
upon the Government of themselves here, and that he should at so general a
rate, as the necessity of men's manner of living requires, accept of such a
commutation, or exchange for the obedience due to them, as a Deathbed
Repentance?

Or least of all, who can believe? that Jesus Christ should come a Redeemer
into the World, a Redeemer Ti^. 2. 14.
from all iniquity, a purchaser from a vain conversation, that ^e might have a
peculiar people zealous of good works; who shouldlook for the great day, and
his glorious appearance, Romans 2. 7.
by a patient expectation and continuance in well-doing^; to which he has also
tied them by the most strict obligations, that created nature is capable of,
and yet that this in a manner should be wh^ly frustrated, even in those
supposed to be redeemed by him.

How shall such a man then be able to look God or Jesus Christ the Savior in
the face, that has but just begun to acknowledge him by some weak devotions to
him, extorted even of necessity, and given the bulk of his time to sin, that
ha^h sacrificed the male ^ Mal. 1. 14.
of his flock to lust, and even with impious design kept the corrupt thing for
God,

3. If we truly understand the nature of Repentance, and that it is the gift
and Grace of God. It is,

1. A great presumption upon that Grace, to think we can call it down from
Heaven at our own need, who have offered so much injury to the motions of it,
vouchsafed in the time of our life; we do not consider, that this Grace
designs its own Glory, and teaches to live Godly, righteously, soberly, now in
this present world, and therein to wait for the manifestation Tit. 2. 13.
of everlasting glory, and thus we are to: seek for honor, Romans 2. 7.
glory, and immortality.

Now that they that have bidden defiance to this (...). Phil. in Allego.
Grace so long, should bring it down from the Clouds in their dying moments, to
convey them to Happiness, is to make so cheap of that infinitely precious
goodness, that whoever aright considers the Case, must needs infinitely abhor
the thoughts. Yet this is the necessity of such men's condition, that they must
either think themselves worthy thus to beckon the Grace of God, or they must
perish for ever. They enter then a contest of precedence and superiority with
this Grace, and decide against it: That it is fit for that to stoop and humble,
yea to prostitute it self, rather than they should be for ever miserable: yea
rather than they should have been obliged to a holy Life.

2. It is for a man to desire God, to mistime his grace, for the season of it
is the present offer in the Gospel. Now is the time accepted, now is the day of
Salvation. It 2 Cor. 2. 6.
is to desire God to give him a Spring in Autumn, or Winter, when the time of
the patience of God is over, to expect the Salvation of God, now God who has
with infinite wisdom and equality weighed out Eccl. 3. 11. and 9. 12. Luk 19.
42.
times and seasons, and made every thing beautiful in its time, does not
reverse his own appointments to serve the folly of man, who have not known
their times, and the things of their peace in their day.

For can it seem reasonable, that mountains should remove out of their places?
and rocks wander from Ier. 8. 7. Eccl. 9. 12
their situation? that man more unintelligent, than the Swallow and Crane that
observe their appointed times, might not be ensnared by the evil times that
fall suddenly upon them: He that trusts then to such a Repentance, does, as it
were, resolve to be saved by miracle, or else perish.

3. Men do not consider the Jealousy of God, nor Heb. 3. 9, 10, 11.
are afraid of his oath against them, that harden their hearts and do not hear
his voice to day; so that some, who have trifled with the Grace of God, seek
him early and do not find him. The Israelites that said, VVhither Deuteronomy. 1. 28. ^
shall we go up, when they were commanded to go up, and possess the land, when
they would have gone up afterward and fought for it, were rejected by God. So
in Zechary, God gives account of that great judgment of their Captivity,
concerning which though Moses, Samuel and Job had interceded, he would not have
heard. As ^hen I cried they would not hear, so it came to Zec. 7. 13.
pass that they cried, and I would not hear.

Many fail of the Grace of God that profanely sell their Heb 12. 16, 17.
Birthright for a transitory satisfaction, and find no place for their
Repentance, or of Gods Repentance in favor toward them, though they seek it
carefully, and with tears. While men are busy in fulfilling the corrupt
desires of their sinful flesh, and make slight of the mercy, that so freely
presents their souls, a silent decree passes against them; that though it makes
no noise in their ears, yet seals them in blindness, and hardness, so that
their souls are for ever closed therein: for who can open what is shut by so
powerful and awful a Hand?

4. It is impossible to a man to dye with good composure of mind, that trusts
to a dying Repentance; for let the Case be thus stated, That Repentance, which
will not enable a man to a Holy Life, is not saving; suppose a man then in a
dying sickness, making great acknowledgment of sin, full of resoutions of
leaving sin, and this man recovering and performing nothing, but sliding back
into the former vvretchedness of Life; this Repentance hovvever serious, and
earnest it seemed, would not have saved him, if he had died; he had perished
in his sins, and his false Repentance together: For that his Repentance was
truly inferior to his sins, appears, in that as soon as ever that is over,
which gave it a seeming advantage, his sins throvv off that Repentance: but
true Repentance always overcomes, that Repentance therefore Rev. 2. 7, etc.
could not be true.

And if Repentance be false and counterfeit, there is no amendment of it in
Eternity; when once the Luk 13. 25.
Master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, there is no
entrance: while the foolish Virgins too late Mar. 25. 3, etc.
understanding the error of oil in their lamps only, and not in their vessels
went to correct it, by buying oil, they were shut out and no knocking
powerful enough for their admission.

Yea though a man may seem to be well quicted, and comforted, and to have the
testimony of the Spirit of God, yet all this may be but a delusion, and Satan
in an Angel of light; for though they that have 2 Cor. 11 14.
truly this testimony, may be supposed to know it is that true spirit; yet
they that have it not, may have something, they so strongly imagine to be it,
that thereby they may be deceived. This testimony therefore must be
proportionable to the assurance, this dying man had from Christ; else even a
man that dies safe, must dye in such an unexpressible torment of mind, that it
had been much better he had enjoyed no such seasons of sin, than only endure
that. And who can presume so upon God, as to promise himself such a train of
miracles to carry him not only to Heaven, but without those Agonies of horror
that are like Hell, after so long impenitency.

Thus on all sides it is most necessary for every one to repent while he may
behold the truth of his Repentance in the ordinary fruits of a holy Life; and
see himself in all the circumstances of temptation, change of condition,
varieties, which Life and the course of it carry along with it: For that is
often by ^ength of time cast up, and appears upon the surface, that lay
concealed at the bottom, till such a concurrence of things gives it the
advantage to rise.

I understand nothing that can be objected to this last Argument I have used to
disable the confidence in such a Repentance, except this,

It may be supposed, the Repentance that is full of passionate and affectionate
motions toward God, though amidst the fears of Death may be good, till it be
blotted out by returns to sin, and therefore if it be taken in the just time,
while it is good; that is, if a man dies before it be reversed, it may serve
the great purpose of eternity.

This Supposition I must confess has a seeming countenance from that
particular place, Ezekiel. 33. 12. The righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgression; as for the wickedness of the
wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his
wickedness.

But if the scope of Scripture discourse in general, or the very sense of
morality be taken in the Case, no man may trust so great a weight here; For
Christ looks upon the stony ground with the same Eye, while it Mat. 1^. 20, 21.
Mat. 7. 26*
receives the word with joy, as when by and by it is offended; and it was
therefore truly no better at first than at last. The House that is not founded
upon the Rock, is as ill founded in the calm, as in the storm, only the storm
discovers what it was. Morality it self requires a better rooting of virtuous
Habits, than that they should be set only in loose ground, thrown up by
extremity of condition, and not in the soil it self.

That Repentance which will not bear the trial of time, will much less sustain
the test of Eternity, wherein every thing that stands, must be solid and
substantial, Things that suffer the loss of themselves, when they are tried by
man's day will suddenly be consumed by the hotter beams of Gods. ^ Cor. 4. 3:


That has need of good nealing, that must undergo an eternity, and have all
advantage of con^^ction, that must be laid up for ever; which the short moments
of a Deathbed without a miraculous assistance will not allow. The fruit of it
generally like that Hasty-ripe, perishes while it is in the Hand, This
Repentance Isai. 28. 4*
gives up the Ghost, as soon as it is born.

Now as for that place in Ezekiel, so much vexed with controversy, I do not
think it convenient for me, to entangle a Discourse intended wholly for
practice with the perplexities of it.

Only I am concerned to show, that it does not afford the favor supposed to
this kind of Repentance. For first, We must not mistake the day it speaks of,
as if it signified so strait a compass of time, as a day, but that season
wherein either the righteous man wastes and destroys his righteousness; or a
sinner overcomes his vicious customs and inclinations, neither of which are
usually done on the sudden. Secondly, the turning from wickedness intended is
certainly a sincere and impartial one, and not such as we have rendered this
dying Repentance suspicious to be. Thirdly, it must be justified by a walking
in the Statutes and Judgments of God, and doing that is right; that is, by a
continued Reformation, which will least agree to this Repentance, and therefore
this place of Scripture will not protect this supposition, but rather damns it.

Having now in the foregoing Discourse, in a practical and persuasive way,
endeavored to engage men to a timely Repentance, by setting out the hazard of
a late one: I have thought it yet necessary, to make the state of the whole
Doctrine, as exact as I can, by considering whatever might with fair appearance
of Scripture-reason call into question and scruple, what I have grounded my
persuasions upon.

I will therefore, as a supplement to all I have said, First recollect what I
have intended all along. And then cast all, I can possibly suppose against it,
into Objections and Answers, that by closer attention to the Case it self,
every one, that will be at the c^st to consider it, may be convinced to the
main end, viz. A present Religious Life.









All these I do with great confidence acknowledge, the substance of what I have
said against a Deathbed Repentance, will be comprised in these following
Assertions, which I restrain wholy to men, that have lived under the light,
and exhortations, and applications of the Word of God, with all usual Freedom;
and yet have not begun sincerely to repent, till they come to dye.

The First is, That a Deathbed Repentance how fair soever, it may appear,
has yet the greatest Doubt imaginable upon it, whether it be true.

The Second, There is greatest reason of Fear, God will not give his grace to
such a dying man, to repent*

The third, That a Repentance at Death is not that general Repentance, the
Scripture discourses of, makes promises of pardon upon, offers the assistances
of the Spirit to, enjoynes the Duty of, with so many pressing commands. For
that Repentance immediately to be begun is supposed to govern a following Life.
It must therefore be an extraordinary, and miraculous Repentance if true.

Lastly, That it is therefore against all rules of Piety and Prudence, by
mispending Life to cast our selves upon the necessity of Repentance at Death.

This, I say, is the substance of what I have designed all along, and which I
would now further clear, and vindicate from these following Objections.

Objection 1. Does not the Parable of calling some Mat. 20. v. 1. etc.
Laborers into the Vineyard at the eleventh Hour, imply; That God does in
ordinary convert some at the last Hour, as well as sooner?

Answer. The main scope of Parables is only argumenta^ive, and so far as the
scope of that Parable relates to this Case; It is no more, than what I
acknowledge, That God gives eternal Life to true Repentance, if true, at last,
even as to the first and earliest Repentance. The reward being to all of Grace
and not of Debt. It is also to be considered, there remained an Hour of
working, representing rather old Age, than a Deathbed, if the colors of a
Parable prove any thing, and so are rather against this Repentance, than for it.

Second Objection, I suppose men taking Sanctuary at infinite mercy and power
in this manner.

Although no thought of man can reach the mercy, that accepts or gives
Repentance at the last: yet mercy being as much above our thoughts, as the
Heaven above the Earth, what can we define concerning it? And though there are
so many circumstances of impossibility, according to our measure of things; Yet
the things that are impossible with men, with God are possible; for with God
all things are possible: how can we then determine in this Case? Can we by
searching find out the Almighty in his Mercy and Power? Can we find him out to
perfection? It is high as Heaven, what can we do? It is deeper than Hell, what
can we know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the
Sea.

Objection, the sinews of allhope and expectation from this late Repentance
meet; I will endeavor to give the most punctual Answer to it. And though I
know after all, that is, or can be said; men will not quit it. Yet I shall rest
upon this Answer, as my last resolution of this Case; and by it raise the
disswasions from a trust in such a Repentance to the height, the greatness of
the hazard appearing most fully from it.

In general therefore it has been noted, The question is not whether God
accepts a true Repentance, how late soever, but whether God will give a true
repentance so late, and herein the question is not of the limits, the absolute
limits, of infinite mercy and power; But what limits it has set to it self?
and what seasons it has limited to us? and whether according to these a
Deathbed Repentance be not almost, if not altogether an impossibility? I Will
therefore lay down several degrees of impossibility, notwithstanding infinite
mercy and power, that must necessarily abate the irregular confidence of such a
repentance, and under one of them I shall be bold to place it.

1. The highest degree of impossibility is, of those things, that are utterly
and absolutely impossible with God, because they are irreconcilable with his
Nature, and such wherein if they were; he must deny himself, which he cannot
do. For though there is nothing above God, not so much as any goodness, or
righteousness abstracted from himself, that should give him Law; Yet he being
himself that supreme goodness and righteousness, He is a Law to himself; His
nature is his supreme and inviolable Law; And his Will stands always even
with his Nature; For his Will is himself reciprocal with his Nature; And all
his Actions keep perfect correspondence with his Will. Upon this immutable
reason God cannot lie, he cannot do any thing weak, or that argues
imperfection: He cannot but be righteous in all his vvays, and holy in all his
works. Upon this reason also he cannot he will not acquit the guilty. He
cannot he will not save or make happy men in their sins. God himself speaks
this sense. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. and c. 33. 11. As I live says the Lord, I have
no pleasure in the Death of him that dies, why will ye dye? Turn your selves
and live ye. As if he should say, except ye turn, all my mercy can do you no
good. For such a mercy would not be a mercy, but either a foolish softness, or
loose indulgence to sin. Such a power were not a power, but an impotency, or
turning all things to confusion. These therefore are as inconsistent with God,
as Folly, Imperfection, Sin. The Gospel, the highest display of mercy rests
upon this principle, being not a Salvation of men in sin, but a most effectual
redemption of men from sin. Of all that God can be supposed to do for men,
there is nothing more impossible than this, more repugnant to all the true
sense of man, more overthrowing of the undertaking of Christ, more contrary to
the nature of true Happiness. An opinion of the damned in Hell being
annihilated, or recovered to Holiness and H^ppiness after some Ages of torment,
were a high probability compared with this. He that can tempt himself to
believe this, may believe any thing, and needs no confutation, but his own
unreasonableness. Against this I have been thus large, because it secretly
lurkes in men's Hearts, that God may save them without so much ado about Faith
and Repentance* though being afraid to speak a thing so monstrous, they
di^guize it under the pretense of a faint Repentance at last.

But from what I have said, It is plainly to be inferred, First, That some
things which God cannot, will not do, are not the reproach either of his Mercy
or Power, but the Glory and Greatness of both. And this; that He neither can,
or will save men without sincere Faith and Repentance (that is without a
recovery to Holiness) is one of these things. The Deathbed Repentance then,
that is unto Salvation, must without all dispute be a sincere change from sin
to Holiness.

2. There is an impossibility, that arises from the peremptory, and absolute,
and irrepealable determination of the Will and Counsel of God concerning any
thing, In this degree of things I account, I cannot acquiesce in the exposition
of the learned Dr. Hammond in his Annot. concerning these two Cases.
the unpardonableness of the sin against the divine Spirit. The unrene^ableness
of total Apostates from Christianity to repentance. The impossibility of
repentance after this Life: Now though those carry not their own evidence of
being inconsistent with the Divine nature, as the former; yet the declaration
of supreme pleasure against them is so effectual, that we must needs look upon
them, as impossible. And we may see a great consent, a high congruity between
the things themselves, and the determination of God concerning them, which
reasons are yet clearer with God. For in the sin against the Holy Ghost there
is so mature, so perfect, so concocted a wickedness, so high a contumely
against the Godhead it self, that it is very irreconcilable with either
Repentance, or pardon. The total Apostasy from Christianity, and the evidences
of it mentioned Heb. 6th. from the very nature of the Case appears
irrepairable, because there is no other or higher Grace, than that of the
Gospel, for the Apostates to remove to, no more sacrifice for sin, nor are
there any higher Evidences of that Gospel, than those he is supposed to revolt
from, and no more perfect Acts of contrariety to the Gospel, than the
crucifying the Son of God afresh and putting him to an open shame, the doing
despite to the Spirit of Grace, the treading under foot the Son of God, and
counting the Blood of the Covenant an unclean thing, in the parallel place. Heb.
10.

Besides all other reasons the unchangeable state of Eternity is so consolidate
with, so fixed into our very Being, that the perpetuity of it is very
accountable to our Reason.

From hence then, we derive thus much farther against a Deathbed Repentance;
First that some things, wherein we cannot find an express impossibility in their
nature, are yet made so by Gods absolute resolution concerning them; into the
reason of which he also is pleased to give us some light: And that many
expressions of Scripture (as, They shall seek me early but shall not find me,
the Parable of the foolish Virgins, with many others) make this Repentance very
dangerous, with which also the very reason of the Case concurres; Yet not
amounting to this kind of impossibility.

3. There are some things impossible according to the Rules, and general Laws
of the Creation, and Government of the World, which we call Nature, and which
Rules, infinite wisdom and power has so prescribed to it self, that he has
yet reserved to himself freedom to show himself above them, as Founder and Lord
of Nature.

Thus it is impossible for the Sun to stand still, to raise the Dead, that the
Fire should not burn: That is, It is impossible at all times, but when infinite
Power is pleased to be seen riding in the Heavens, far above all Nature, that
is, when he is pleased to work Miracles: suitable to these Laws of the first
Creation, there are also Laws of the new and second Creation, The Redemption of
Christ.

It is true, the new Creation, compared with the old, is so far as it is new,
All Miracle. Such is Righteousness Romans 4. 6
without works; Regeneration, such is the Incarnation; the Resurrection. Even
as the first Creation and daily Preservation are Miracles compared with that
nothing, out of which all things were drawn, and are still upheld.

Yet this very miraculous Frame of the Gospel is bounded with certain Laws
and Rules, and when these are transcended, it is a Miracle in this miraculous
state of things.

Now all Instances of miraculous power are rare and extraordinary, and the
reasons of them, when they have been, have always been great and solemn; and
when they have been more plentiful in any Age, the Reasons have been great for
that also. And in Miracle it self, there has been always regard to the
natural state of things. Miracle has for the most part lifted up Nature only,
wherein it was either decayed, or not planted so high, as the very effect to
be wrought, and just then designed; not minding the flourish of it self, but
the main Intention only: we read of no other circumstances but those of
ordinary mortality, into which they that were raised from the Dead in
Scripture were exalted; only that they were raised to Life.

In the new Crea^ion, so much of the old, as would serve in it, is generally
taken in; and the constitutions, that will agree with the design of Grace are
upheld for the most part; as were easy to manifest. Divine Inspiration did
not disanul the natural temper of the Prophets or Apostles; but they are easily
observable in their vvritings. Conversion does not destroy, but sanctify and
renew nature. For what does all this serve? but to show, God does as little,
as may be, decline from the first Model of things, His Wisdom so deeply
contrived.

Further, the new Creation in all things excelling the old; as the whole
state of it is never antiquated by a higher Revelation, so the Laws of it are
seldom exceeded by any thing extraordinary; yet I acknowledge, Instances there
are of extraordinaries, even here also.

The Apostleship was in a manner wholy miraculous, yet the calling of the
Apostle Paul was something higher than that; for whereas the Twelve were
trained, and educated in the discipline and conversation of Christ; and express
care in the surrogation of one into the place of Judas, was had of such a
preparation, Acts 1. 21, 22.
yet St. Paul was suddenly born into that high Function and Authority, into
which they were gradually admitted. But the reason also was very high, That
there might be so great a proof of the power of the Gospel, as a Persecutor and
Blasphemer preaching that Faith, he had so notoriously persecuted; and on Acts
9. 20 21, 22, 31. ^ Galat. 1. 23, 24. 1 Timothy 1. 1* (...).
the sudden, that it might be without the suspicion of a confederacy.

His very Conversion was a superabundance of Abundant Grace: He was not only in
a deep humility of expression, but in the thing it self, one of the chiefest of
sinners saved by Christ: His sin had been the un pardonable sin, had not
ignorance abated it. 1 Timothy 1. 15 v. 13. v. 16.


But upon that solemn account he obtained mercy; That in him Jesus Christ might
show forth a pattern of all long suffering.

This of the dying Malefactor, I esteem of the same kind, and the reason was
extraordinary, as I have before observed.

I have now thus fully discoursed this particular, because it brings me to the
ultimate Resolution I can make of this Case; that is,

A Deathbed Repentance whenever it is true, is a Grace and Favor vouchsafed
to the Soul, in which it is found, above the ordinary and general Grace that
gives Repentance. For it is above these four great Rules of the Gospel, wherein
also the fundamental nature of things much conspires.

1. That God is jealous of the Glory of his Grace, and gives it by the same
rule, he prescribes to us. To day, while it is called to day, hear his voice.

2. God attempers his Grace to the state of man's soul, so as not to to permit
to such a long hardening, and accustomedness in ^in, those whom he intends to
convert.

3. The Ingenuity and Freedom of the soul necessary to Repentance is not
ordinarily possible, amidst the fears and necessity of Death.

4. Fruits meet for Repentance, and amendment of Life, and the glorifying God
upon Earth, by a holy conversation are universally required. Such a Repentance
then must be proportionable to a Miracle, a miracle in Grace. Now Miracles are
seldom, and not but upon such reasons as exceed the value of those Rules (at
least) in that Case, wherein they are overrul'd; reasons of greater eminency
than what daily fall out, but it is a daily reason, that men must either repent
or perish. Such Repentances therefore are very rare, and doubtless when they
are, God gives a luster to the reasons why they are; In such a measure, that
men may say, Here is the finger of God, ingraving his wisdom upon his work. And
with such a freedom as our Savior expresses. Luke 4. 25, 26, 27.

The practical Conclusion then from hence is this, It is as presumptuous a
boast for a man to think, He Pro. 27. 1.
shall repent when he comes to die, because the mercy and power of God are
infinite; as for him upon the same accounts, to leap into Seas, or roll himself
in Flames, without fear of danger.

Nay, It is such a kind of profane Insolency, as Genesis ^. 23 Pa^^us in locum.
some Interpreters give that of Lamech to be, T^ough I should slay a man in my
anger, or a young man in my sense of an injury, Yet if Cain notwithstanding his
murder, was secured by a sevenfold vengeance from God upon him, that should
slay him, I shall be secured in mine, by a vengeance seventy sevenfold. Thus
men say, if ever any one for all an irreligious life, was preserved from Hell
by a Repentance at last, I need not fear, but I shall: Both agree in a bold
claim of the sovereign actings of God for their own safety in sin.

4. Below all these impossibilities, As in nature there are great difficulties,
that are not usually overcome, and yet in things possible without a Miracle; so
there are also in Grace. Our Savior tells us, It is easier for Mat. 19. 2^,
etc.
a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. His prejudices and prepossessions are so many, his
temptations and intanglements are so great. The Prophet says, Can a Blackamore
Ierem. 13: (...)
change his skin? or a Leopard his spots? then ye that are accustomed to do
evil, may learn to do well. All delaied Repentances are very uneasy; some
Divines observing few Conversions after the fortieth year of Life. But of
these, though all men ought to apprehend the danger: I should say, (that no man
might be ensnared) as our Savior speaks in these Cases, The things impossible
with men, with God are possible.

Objection 3. But according to this state of the Case, What should a Dying man
do, that has not yet repented? Should he expect a Miracle, or do nothing
through despair?

Answer. Have ye not read, what David did when he was an hungered and had need?
He adventured over Laws, and was blameless: If any man feel the necessities of
a Soul perishing, let him lay hold upon Mercy and Grace to help. There is a
Faith in this Case, like the Faith of Miracles, that removes mountains, and
divides Seas. He that can receive it, let him Mat. 19. 12
receive it: But let every man take heed, how he falls into these necessities;
For multitudes not having the Heb. 11. 29.
right Faith, like the Egyptians, assay this, and are drowned.

It is a very hard thing to distinguish between mirum, and miraculum, a wonder,
and a miracle; so is it between a saving Faith, and Repentance that may have
wonderful effects, through the conviction of a Deathbed, and this true saving
Faith, this Faith of Miracles; and for any thing I know, Eternity only can make
a man safe concerning it, and sure that he had it. Doubtless many like Joab
perish, catching hold of the horns of the Altar.

Objection 4. But what? If men having made a profession of Religion, have done
many things religiously and soberly, and yet through the prevalency of some
lusts, it appears they have not truly repented? may not the conversation they
have had with Religion, so prepare things, that their Repentance may be
dispatched in the instants of Death?

Answer 1. It is dreadful to consider, how the unhappy pleas of some upon such
kind of accounts recited by Christ, are also rejected by him. Many shall say
Luke 13. 2^, etc. Mat. 7. 2^.
in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets? In thy Name have we cast out Devils, and in thy
Name done many wonderful Works. Yet he shall profess unto them, I never knew
you, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity*

Besides all the Doubts already insisted upon, such men have made a custom of
deluding Religion, and have great cause to fear they should do so at last.

God also is so provoked by such, as have long tempted Heb. 3. 9, 10.
him, proved him, and seen his works, and yet err from him in their hearts,
and do not know his ways, that he comes to his oath against them.

Answer 2. But lest this should discourage and suffocate all motions after God,
either in Life or at Death; and they seem in as good condition, that never mind
Religion, as those that do: I add,

Any good thing found in men, either in their Life or Death, though it have not
the worthiness of Repentance to Salvation, yet shall certainly have its reward
in mitigations of punishment; which consideration fully explained at the Day of
Judgment will assoyl many of this sort of Doubts concerning the ways of God. I
believe those very early seekings of God, notwithstanding which, he is said to
laugh at the Destruction of those, from whom they come, when they have first
served the gloryings of Justice, obtain lessenings of Pain: as conquered
Enemies, after they have been led in Triumph to wait on the Conquerors glory,
may have even that service recompensed with a more compassionate captivity.

Answer 3, If there have been solidity and sincerity in any religious Exercises
in the time of Life, whereby the Heart by the Grace of God is prepared for
further Grace; as very often Conversion is by degrees: It is hopeful God may
use Death, as a season of completing his work; yet this is to be registered
among the seldomer disposes of God, and both those preparations, and the
complement of them is under the caution of our Savior: Strive to enter in at
the strait-gate, for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter* Luke 13. 24.
and shall not be able.

Objection 5. Is it not at all times a great Folly, to promise a to morrow to
Repentance? how long soever we may live after that to morrow: because we daily
harden through the deceitfulness of sin. Is it not also always a curious point,
and that requires a great jealousy over it? Whether our Hearts are at any time
sincere in returns to God? Is it not lastly, always to be feared, lest our to
day, the time of Grace slip from us? Why then are the dangers placed so
industriously upon this Repentance at Death?

Answer 1. First as concerning the time of Repentance, It is to be
acknowledged; Every man, that is come to the strength and fixedness of his
understanding, to the poize and inclination of his Will and Affections, to the
habit and custom of his Life and Actions, and has not determined for God;
has great reason to fear, lest as there is a deep print of the high hand of
Nature upon his unconverted state, so there should be a seal of Justice also,
and this Doubt increases every day.

Notwithstanding this; All doubts and scruples, that have an appearance of
insnaring and intangling the minds of men with fears, they begin too late, are
to be avoided; if it be not so late, that it is just now dark, and their feet
stumbling upon the dark mountains; ^er. 1^. 16.
And these things being written especially for the living, Isai. 38* 19*
who have in ordinary probability time to lose* the danger is best placed here,
where it takes them every way.

By the way of Encouragement; that the time is not yet past, while they have
the spaces of Life, and of the patience of God; which is not a slackness of
Justice, but a designed Salvation. By the way of Caution, because they know
not, how soon they may be cast upon a Deathbed, and this patience be at an
end: With Dying men the case is otherwise, who are already in the thickest of
the Danger, and must work themselves out in that moment, or perish for ever;
without any injury therefore to them, the Isa 38. 19.
living are thus to be warned.

Further, It is evident, all delays of Repentance roll down hither, however men
propose a stop; yet hither the generality come at last: so that in effect, It
is all one, whether men are dissuaded from trusting to a Dying Repentance, or
from delaying their Repentance. For if they are given to delay; It comes to
this, They repent and dye together. But if a man be afraid to venture Eternity
upon his last Breath, he will repent presently.

2. For the difficulty of being sincere in Repentance, I place it here,
because, though every man should by drawing the parallel lines of Delusion, and
mistake upon himself, try his Repentance when ever it is; yet these errors fall
in greatest numbers upon that point of extremity, and with least possibility of
rectifying them: But seeing there are at all times such deceipts in this Case,
there is nothing so necessary, as to repent in a clear light, and full leisure.

3. For the severity of God in denying his Grace, though I acknowledge his
indignation condemns many, who have dallied with him and their own Souls; to be
sucked in again by the whir-pool of their lusts, when they would have risen out
of them; yet this indignation is never so certainly at the height, as when men
have provoked it as long as they could: It is most miserable therefore to make
our last motions within the command of such a horrible pit, lest they prove
only the struggles of sinking men: yet this we must do, if we are not before
got out of it. There is much greater hope (how bad soever their condition may
be) to them, who Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9
are yet in the hand of patience lifting and leading them to Repentance; and do
not despise it, but account it Salvation.

Objection 6. This Doctrine does not favor enough of the Grace of the Gospel,
that would have all men come to Repentance.

Answer. To discourse the severities of the Gospel, to the ends of the Gospel,
is most Evangelical Discourse. For as the Gospel does with all clearness
declare its own rigors, that men might not mistake it, for a loose and careless
Doctrine, and so mi^s the Salvation of it; so have I discovered the great
hazard of a Dying Repentance, that Living men might be persuaded not to cast
themselves upon it, and Dying men excited to an action suitable to the
extremity of their Case.

And this is indeed preaching the Gospel: and to Heb. 11. 7
be moved upon it with fear, to prepare an Ark to the saving our Souls before
the flood come, is as true an effect of Faith, as to be constrained by love to
live to 2 Cor. 5. 14.
him, that has died for us. I say as true, and gives us a Title to the
inheritance of the Righteousness, which is by Faith, together with the other.
For the prudence of Faith makes us apprehensive of the reasons of danger, and
so to fear, even as the gratitude of it ties us with the obligations of love.
This is not that fear that love casts out, but that it self quickens, and 1
Ioh. 1. 18
is also both quickened and guarded by it: nor is it the bondage, but the wisdom
of Fear. Romans 8. 15. Job 28. 28.


Objection 7. But is the general judgment of Divines thus?

Answer. All judicious Divines are very tender of binding the Prerogative of
Grace, or clipping off the action of men toward God, even at this time: See
besides the concurring judgment of the Ancients, Bishop Andrews Sermons of
Repentance Dr. Hammond and D. Tailor in their Treatises of this point, Bolton,
Dyke, etc.
in observation whereof I have desired to be cautious herein also: But in their
cautions against presumption, their expressions amount to the utmost I have
spoken.

But setting aside the whole danger of a Deathbed Repentance, Let me now lastly
thus reason, and thus expostulate; Why should we desire to repent so late? it
is good to be betimes doing, that, which is most comporting with our truest
happiness; Reconciliation with God Return to Him, his Favor, to obey Him,
these are the truest freedom and peace of a man at all times: Great peace have
they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. He lives in Psalm 119.
60.
the least pain, that lives holiest; I made haste therefore and delayed not to
keep thy Commandment; I seized Psalm 119. 60.
upon so great an enjoyment as soon as I could, afraid to be kept off from it
too long.

To fear God and keep his Commandments is the whole of man, When a man
considers Life, and that he Eccl. 12. 13
has but a moment of it, and that therefore he would live that moment, as much
as may be, he shall find the highest of life, the top of life to be Godliness,
which has all the promises of this life, and of that which 1 Timothy 4. 8.
is to come.

To pursue this World, and the vanities of it is not only with greatest folly,
and impertinency to launch our selves in a great vessel, the greatness of our
affection, and with solemn preparations; our strongest Action into the low
water, the shallow of Life; which because it cannot carry so great a bulk,
increases the toil and vexation, as well as enhanses the vanity and folly: But
worse than this, It is the loading our selves with guilt under a delusion of
pleasure, that gives us secret disquiet and torment, while we are laying it on,
and cannot be laid down as we please; but with more sensible and industrious
anguish, then we heaped it upon us, I mean, the sense of our misdoings, and
contrition for them, so necessary to work Repentance.

To conclude, Seeing to dye is the end of all men, Eccl 7. 2.
Repentance is to be chosen while we live, that we may dye with the greatest
quiet, without those agonies of Conscience, those cold sweats, those sinking
eyes, and fainting spirits; for he dies with most ease, that most surveyes
Death, and looks into all the retirements of it beforehand; that knows it
perfectly, and all its strength: such an one governs himself in it, as in a
most important Action with Decency and Freedom. He is not haled by Death, but
received by Luke 23. 46.
it: Into thy hands I commend my spirit, he lays himself orderly into the shade
of Death: Whereas so long adherence to the pleasures of sin gives Death a
violence. It makes men both unwilling, and afraid to Luk 12. 20.
dye. This night thy soul shall be required. Life is exacted of a Sensualist,
and torn from him, that is resigned by a Spiritual and Mortified man; Good men
dye in an active sense, they know how to dye, others dye passively, they are
forced to dye.

This great difference prefers to us dying daily, before that forcible dying at
once.

The wisdom of dying was accounted by Heathens one of the worthy businesses and
employments of Life, and that required much study, Christianity gives us the
true Rules of it, and they lie in waiting 1 Cor. 7. 29.
till our change come; Time is short, they therefore that use this World,
should not use it down to the Bran, sensually; but only take the advantages of
it to a higher Life: Else being met on the sudden by Death, they are like those
that fall off from Life with violence, that is, Headlong; but they that live in
the sense of God, and an eternal Condition, alight with care and ease.

It is therefore not only greatest Safety, but truest Frugality and Improvement
of Life to Repent betimes, and when we come to dye, the easiest and sweetest
way of dying. Not indeed a dying, but a translation into Immortality, and
Blessedness.

FINIS.

