A LEARNED TREATISE OF THE PLAGUE: WHEREIN, The two Questions: Whether the
PLAGUE be Infectious, or no: And Whether, and how far it may be shunned of
Christians, by going aside? are resolved.

Written in Latin by the famous Theodore Beza Vezelian.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at
the Adam and Eve in Little Britain 1665

To the Honorable Sir JOHN ROBINSON, Lieutenant of his Majesty's Principal
Fortress, the Tower of London.
Honorable Sir,
THE confidence of a Stranger will (I hope) easily meet your pardon, when the
worth of the Author, and the occasional Subject of the Discourse (in these
contagious and calamitous times) have given me too sad an opportunity of
presenting it to your Honor, whose concerns for the Public Welfare, (even in
this Great City) are as eminently great as any others. The matter of the
Discourse is a Confutation, and reconciling the only two destructive Opinions,
that in all Ages (in Contagious and Infectious times) have ever proved fatal to
the World: the one too much presuming and relying upon this bold Opinion, That
the PLAGUE is not Infectious: and the other, Tum pavor sapientiam omnem mihi ex
animo expectorat: out of a weak and unspirited Precipitation, without
exception, fly away from it; both of which are so contrary to Humanity; that
as they are utter Enemies to each other, so (like the dis-agreeing Brothers)
they are both in opposition to Christian Community and Charity. To say more,
were too great a wrong to the Judicious Beza, and to anticipate Your Honors
Judgment; To whose Noble Approbation I commend the Author; and hope from Your
Noble Candor, You will easily censure this Presumption in,

Honorable Sir, Your Honors (though unknown) most devoted, and most humble
Servant, Edward Percivall.

A LEARNED TREATISE OF THE PLAGUE: Wherein the two Questions: Whether the
PLAGUE be Infectious or no? And Whether, and how far it may be shunned of
Christians, by going aside? are resolved.
I Confess my self to have been so unacquainted with this question, Whether the
Plague be to be reckoned amongst infectious Diseases? that until within these
few years, I am of belief, that it was never doubted; but that this Sickness
alone, amongst all others, was to be judged Contagious; for testimony whereof,
before any man that is not given to quarrel, I refer my self to the judgment
of The Plague is judged to be infectious by all that have written of the same.
Writers of all Countries, who have treated of these things. But now in our
times men have taken in hand to dispute this question upon this occasion, That
many do so greatly fear this disease, and death which commonly follows the
same* that forsaking all duties, not only of Christians, but also of Humanity,
they have greatly increased the very wrath of God, which is the chief cause of
this Sickness: and there has in a manner been no The unnatural discourtesie
of some toward their Neighbors visited with the Plague.
stay or let in them; but where this great misery has happened, the bonds of
Man's fellowships being once broken, it is much to be wondered at, that all
Mankind has not perished and been destroyed. And these men being demanded
what they can allege for so impious a crime, for that they commonly bring
nothing else for their excuse, but the fear of Infection, whereof it has come
to pa^s, that those in whom there is a greater boldness, do think that they can
no way more certainly find a remedy for this evil, than by teaching that this
Sickness is falsely supposed to be infectious.

But I, because I think that this Paradox or strange opinion can no more be
proved by good reason, then if a man with Anaxagoras should hold the Snow to be
black, or out of the Hypothesis of Copernicus, labor to prove, that the Earth
does really move, and the Sun stand still, as the Center of the World, do
judge, that this so great fear, which brings with it a forgetfulness of all
duty, both may, and also ought otherwise to be put away: neither will I believe
this Disease not to be infectious, until some man shall teach me, either out
of the Word of God, or by evident and good reasons to the contrary; for there
are in the very course of Nature certain and most sure grounds and proofs of
this verity, so long as the order of necessary Causes agree with themselves.

For I deny, although it be agreed upon, that the Plague, of all other
diseases, is most infectious; yea, and that unavoidable death for the most part
does presently follow: that therefore the Standing, in which God has placed
every man, is to be forsaken. I deny, I say, that therefore that thing is not
to be preferred before Life it self, which we owe unto God, to our Country, and
which we owe unto men, either for some public or private respect. And I had
much more rather they would bestow their endeavors in persuasive disputes, to
restrain men's flying away for fear of the Plague, than that they should labor
to prove their strange opinion of the Plague not to be contagious. Indeed, I
had rather have the Consequent (according to the School-phrase) in that same
Enthymeme to be denied, than the Antecedent; for by that means something might
be brought to pass, not only by probable, but also by necessary Arguments,
according to their own desire, namely, That those do very greatly offend, who,
for fear of any peril do offend against God, or against their Neighbor. For
what Christian man dares to call these things into controveisie? or if he dare
do it, shall not be reproved by the restimony of his own Conscience, though all
the world should be silent? For I do not think that there are any, which do
hold, that with a good conscience, the Plague by all means without exception is
to be fled from; which notwithstanding, I see by some in such sort disputed
against, as if it were by others maintained. Yet, if there be any of that
mind, I do no more favor their error, than I allow of those men, which of a
clean contrary opinion do think, that the Plague is not to be fled from. But
surely it is the part of a wise man to follow the Golden mean, so that he fly
not when he should tarry, neither when he should go aside (for the term of
flying away in this Argument seems to me to be very improper) by his rash
tarrying, offend against the self-same Charity, which seemed to counsel him to
stay. These things I thought good in manner of a Preface to set down, before I
come to the handling of the matter: To the end, that all men at the first
entrance may perceive, what I have undertaken to defend, and what to disprove.
Then for as much as there are some not wanting, which do think that this
discourse of the Plague to be fled from, or not to be fled from, does depend
upon the first question, Whether the Plague be infectious or no? let us examine
with what reasons and arguments they so boldly deny the Plague to be
infectious; a thing which hitherto of all men without controversy has been
believed.

For the better determining of this question, they would have it to be
considered what the Plague is, from whence it comes, what is the cause of it,
by what means it is sent unto us, what is the nature of it, and what the end?

I take their Proposals, for it is most lawful and reasonable: But how shall we
come to the knowledge of these things? By no means (say they) from any reasons
out of Physic, but only by the word of God. Then let all things disputed by
Physicians be blotted out; and instead of the Books of Hypocrates, Galen, and
others, Let Physicians read only the Bible; and let there be no difference
between them, and Divines; between the Physic of the body, and the mind. Nay,
God forbid, will they say; for we condemn no other reasons of Physic, than
such as are against the word of God. Let us enquire then (forasmuch as
Infection has its beginning from Natural causes, and therefore proceeds from
them,) whether concerning Natural causes of the Plague, there be any thing
taught in the word of God, contrary to the Rules and Judgment of Physicians.
They say that the Plague is caled by the Hebritians Dener, of the word Daner,
which also signifies to destroy, by Sentence given by God: and that the
Grecians do render it Thanaton, that is to say, Death. Be it so, it is not much
to the matter; ^or hereof it follows not, that the Plague proceeds not of
Natural ^auses coming between, because it is sent by God, unless that we will
^ave therefore all Natural causes of Diseases taken away, because no man di^th,
but God decreeing of what kind and manner of death soever it be that he die.
Nay, (say they) it is a folly to call the Sentence of God, whereby he
appoints unto every man, not only death it self, but also the kind of death,
and Second causes, infections. But who I pray ever doted so much as to call the
Sentence it self, of God, infectious? But that which we say is far otherwise,
namely, That the Infection it self is to be reckoned amongst Second causes; for
who can deny that many Diseases are gotten by Handling and Touching? of the
which some are deadly, and other some are less dangerous; unless they will also
contend that the Sun shines not at noon day? Sin indeed, wherewith we are
all born infected, and from which all this Dying comes, by a certain Spiritual
infection, not without the Decree of God, it is conveyed and spread into all
the posterity of Adam: therefore there is no substance at all in this Reason.
But they also demand, if Infection be reckoned amongst Second causes appointed
by God, how we can avoid that which is ordained by God? that hence they might
gather, that if the Plague be granted to be infectious, that in vain a Remedy
is sought against it, by flying away. But this is also a very dull reason; For
if this reason be good, shall it not be lawful to affirm the same of all Second
causes of death? If so, Let us neither eat, nor drink, nor seek any remedy
against any Diseases; let Soldiers go unarmed to Battle, because Death
ordained by God cannot be avoided. But thus the Case stands, doubtless
neither Death, nor the Time, or any kind of Death appointed by God, can be
avoided: Neither do we eat, or use Remedies against Diseases, or put on armor
against our Enemies, as if we meant to withstand God. But leaving those things,
which God would have kept secret from us, we must use those things which God
himself going before, Nature tells us to be ordained by him to prolong our
life so long as it shall please him; which if we do not, we shall worthily be
deemed to tempt and most grievously to offend God; so far off is it, that using
the means set down by him to avoid death, we should sin against him, although
that sometimes we use them in vain, that is to say, when as the end does
plainly show, that even then we must die, when as we thought our life should
yet for a time have been prolonged. So is Asa rebuked, not for that he sent for
Physicians, but for that he put his hope of life in the Physicians: So that
when experience has taught us, that Infection creeps rather into things
near, than afar off; he is not to be accused, who leaving no part of Christian
duty undone, withdraws himself and his Family: Nay, he shall be greatly
blamed, who rashly casts himself and his into the danger of Infection; when
as the Apostle bears witness, he is worse than an Infidel which has not so
great care over his, as with a pious safety and charity he ought to have.

Now let us see whether this following Reason be of any more force. By those
Names, say they, which in the holy Scripture are attributed to the Plague, is
sufficiently and thoroughly expressed, what the quality and manner of the same
is. Now the Plague is called The hand of God, 2 Samuel 24. The word of God, 1 Chronicles. 21. and is also signified by the name of Arrows, Ps. 31. and 90.
Therefore it comes not of Infection: when asneither Hand, nor Sword, nor
Arrow, wounds by Infection. But besides that, peradventure I might worthily
call into doubt, whether all these testimonies alleged deny this Argument
also; for in another place, as Psalm 17. David calls his Enemies the hand of
God, who by natural means assaulted him. And when as the hand of God is said to
have made us, Natural generation is not left out; and it is manifest, that in
the Scripture all evils, and punishments whatsoever God sends unto Mankind,
using either ordinary Laws of Nature only, or else using the service of Angels,
are called Arrows. I demand moreover, what they call the quality and manner of
the Disease? They will say, The nature thereof it self: But I say by those
metaphorical terms of hand, sword, arrow, is no more signified of what manner
or quality this Disease is in it self, than what is Hail or the Scabb, when God
is said with a stretched out hand to have smitten Egypt: And to be short, what
is the force and nature of every Disease, when as in the additions of the Law,
they are reckoned up amongst the Curses which God would send upon them? What
then? surely then it belongs unto the Physicians to search out the nature of
Diseases, so far as they depend upon the laws of Nature; which we often see by
them performed with such good success and certainty, that they can foreshew
both them, and what issue they are likely to come unto. But concerning
Supernatural and Divine causes of Sickness and other Miseries, those do Divines
declare, teaching, That we must mount far above Nature, and all things
appertaining unto Nature, when with our Prayers we deal about the avoiding and
removing of them far away from us; for the true and principal cause of them is
our Sins, wherewith God being provoked, does raise and stir up against us all
these inferior Causes, to be revenged on Mankind with just punishments. I
therefore say, that it is an absurd and fond thing, to confound these things,
so far severed asunder, and distinguished by their most diverse, yet not
contrary ends, but only such as are placed, the one under the other. And
because that in this Argument they contend, that the Plague therefore is not
infectious, for that it is often called the hand, and sword, and arrow of God,
I demand of them, whether the Leprosy were not the hand of God? and whether it
were not therefore infectious; and the rather, because it was infectious
whether therefore the Leprous were not commanded to depart aside from the rest
that were clean? I demand this also, If there be no evil in the City, which the
Lord does not, whether at this day, notwithstanding, the foul black sporty and
scurvy Leprosy called the Elephantiasis be not accounted infectious. And I
would gladly ask of them which find fault with our going aside in the Plague
time, whether they think that those which are infected with it, are to be
suffered in the Common company and society of men? And if they suppose that
they are to be suffered, why they declaim not, and cry out against them also by
whom they are shut out? if not, and think them to be avoided for fear of the
Infection, why without all exceptions do they blame those that shun the
infections of the Plague, as the most hurtful to all persons? But they will
peradventure deny that kind of Leprosy to be the hand of God: Let us speak of
the Pox, whether it be the French, or the Spanish, I would to God it were not
also the English, That it is a punishment sent of God for Whoredom, which in
these times is accounted as a sportive recreation; I think there is no man
which dares to deny that it is indeed the hand, sword, or arrow of God, which
strikes Whoremongers. But is it not therefore infectious? And does not a Whore
even infect many with this disease, who again bewray one another? So that this
most filthy Sickness is gotten, not only with lying together, but also by
breathing and handling, and is sucked out by infants from their Nurses Breasts;
and the Nurses get this Disease by giving suck unto the Infant, which is is
either conceived by an unclean Father, or born of an unclean Mother: Thsoe
Arguments also are therefore such, as do indeed need no confutation. Without
all question it is absurd and against all reason to think, that there are
immediately (as they say) rather sent unto every several man so many several
Plagues, than the kind it self of the Disease, by the which one corrupts
another by Infection: For whether God kill at one stroke, or whether, as it
fell out unto the Midianites, he strike them down by one wounding another,
whomsoever he has appointed to die, what difference is there? Neither
concerning what we have in hand is there any difference, whether any man be
slain with the Dart of God himself, or the Infection of another.

Let us now come unto that which they allege concerning Second causes, which
they deny to be any certain placing of the Stars, or corruption of the Air:
Neither will the Physicians have any Plague or Infection to grow of those
Causes. But if we grant this, and imagine that all Natural causes of the Plague
are by them rehearsed, they must tell me, Why they shut out all these at once,
insomuch that they will have them to have but small skill in Scriptures, who
impute the plague (next after God) to these Causes? Because, say they, that the
Holy Scriptures bear Record, that the Plague is sent by Angels, as Psalm 88. 1.
1 Chronicles 21. Ezech. 9. also in the History of Zennacherib, and in the
Revelation, where there is mention made of a most noysom Ulcer; for, say they,
that which God sends by Angels is not of Natural causes. I grant that, so far
as concerns the Angels themselves, who I yield are not reckoned among Natural
instruments: But what hinders, God so commanding, the Natural causes themselves
to be stirred up by the Angels? For surely it cannot be doubted that they, borh
the good and the bad, do stir up the mind of man after a certain sort, what
kind of moving soever it be, when as Satan is said to have entered into the
heart of Judas, (unless we shall peradventure say, that the Good Angels have
somewhat less power than the Bad) and that also is manifest by the Story of
Achab, and by the efficacy and power of the Spirits of Error. And who can deny
that the will of man is to be reckoned amongst the very Chiefest causes of Men's
actions? But if the will of Man be not debarred from the Ministry of Angels,
why shall we think that other Natural causes must needs by the same be taken
away? Moses stretching forth his Rod, raised up Lice, and innumerable sorts of
Flies, brought out upon the sudden fearful Hayl, and struck the Egyptians
with most noysom Boyles and Botches. And this Ministry of Moses was doubtless
altogether as extraordinary, as the Ministry of Angels. But did not therefore
the Lice and Flies come of Rottenness, the Hayl of Vapors growing together on
the sudden by restraint of the contrary, and the Boyles and Botches also of
corruptions of the Humors? Satan receiving a Grant from God, by a sudden
raising of the Wind, and by throwing abroad the Fire from Heaven overthrew,
and burnt the House of Job, together with all his Children. But does it
therefore follow that this came to pass without any Natural causes stepping in
between? Or shall we not rather say, that those Princes of the Air (as the
Apostle, not without cause, calls them) made in a moment, those indeed
natural impressions of the Air? The Devil sends the Godly to Prison, Revel.
2. 10. But by Tyrants and Persecutors of the Church. In the same Book, cap. 6.
verse. 8. The pale Horse on whom Death the Rider sits, receives power to
kill with the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, and sending of wild Beasts: Here,
if we shall by that Rider understand an Angel, why shall we not as well say,
that he used Natural matter to cause the Plague and Famine, as a Sword and
Wild beasts, when themselves are also natural instruments? and afterterwards,
cap. 9. v. 1. The Angels are commanded to stand in the four quarters of the
Earth, and to keep back the Winds, that they hurt not the Sea and the Land
with blowing. Whereof follows, that at the Commandment of God, the Winds are
in like manner sent forth by them; from the which doubtless it is manifest,
that many Infections of the Air, and chiefly infection, does proceed. So that
Natural causes, whether they be moved by little and little of their own force
planted in them by Nature, or otherwise beyond Order, God so commanding, they
be in a moment carried to their effects, they are natural, and so far forth are
their effects also worthily judged natural, which no man of reason can deny.
For if there come in no Natural causes in the Plague, those whom the Plague
has touched, doubtless they cannot be at all eased, much less be healed by
Natural remedies. And to prove this to be most false, experience and very sense
does demonstrate; yet I profess my self to be one of those which do so far
detest the superstitious judicious Astrology, of Casters of Nativities, and all
other such like predictions, that I could wish the old Statures of Princes
concerning those things were renewed, and straightly to be observed. But to
take from the diverse concourses of the Stars, the natural Constitutions of the
Air, and such effects as depend thereupon in our Bodies; as if the Stars were
only placed in their Spheres to be looked upon, or for difference of times, I
think to be no sign of Judgment, but rather of a perverse Stubbornness, when
as the Husbandmen have a daily knowledge of this, and the Tempests do speak the
same; and that the thing it self does prove, that the temperature and
distemperature, and even Infection it self in some measure may before told by
skillful Astrologers. But now should we grant, that those Plagues, the example
whereof are taken out of holy Scripture, were sent by Angels, and therefore to
have been without Infection; why should it be less absurd and against Reason to
conjecture and resolve, that no Plague is sent by Angels, than to hold that no
Hayl, no Showers, no Lightning is made by the course of Nature? because that in
many places of the Scriptures we read, that by the ministry of Angels it has
both hayled, and that most rough and blustering winds have blown, and that it
has horribly thundered. But, say they, those examples of the Plague by Angels
are set forth unto us for example, that thereby we may learn rightly to judge
of Middle causes, and of the Original of the Plague.

Verily who will deny, that what things soever are written, are therefore
written that by them we should be instructed, and that all things which are
mentioned in the holy Scriptures, of the ministry of Angels not only of the
Plague, but also of Famine and other Calamities, both to destroy the wicked,
and also to correct and exercise the good, does bring unto us great profit,
that we may learn both to fear and love God, who is not tied unto the laws of
Nature, as the Sto^ck Philosophers have thought and has certain instruments of
his Judgments more fearful even that those which are perceived by our senses.
But hereby is not concluded that which thou would have, namely, That thus we
are taught, that there are no Natural causes used by Angels in the performance
of the Commandments of God. The Scripture affords us examples of Plague sent
upon men, making no mention of Angels; and those against whom I dispute, do
grant, that it was the Plague of which Ezekias wa^ sick, yet is he not said to
have been stricken by Angels. God does often by Moses and other Prophets
threaten the Plague unto Sinners neither (...) there any doubt but that these
threatenings were not in vain; yet does he (...) where recite that he will
always send them by Angels. The Psalmist seems in certain Psalms to show
that he was taken with the Plague, whom notwithstanding we never read to have
smitten with any sore, or wound given by the Angels. All these things
therefore, unless I be very much deceived, make nothing at all to the taking
away of the contagious air, the Second cause of this Sickness.

But this also which they set down, upon what reason I know not how grounded:
They say, that the Plague is sent unto men by the singular and especial
providence of God; and what is here which may not be affirmed of every thing
which comes to pass in the world? for, as he says, not so much as a Sparrow
falls to the earth without the providence of God, and the hairs of our head
are numbered; which providence, if it be stretched unto singular things,
doubtless it is in such sort universal in the general, that it is also singular
in the singular. They say moreover, that so often as the Plague reigns in the
World, that all those are kept from this Infection whom God has appointed to
preserve alive; and that unto the others all places are infectious, though they
be never so far from those which are sick of the Plague. And they add further
and say, why then do we fear Infection? is it not a fond thing to sear that
which is not? I for my part cannot d^scern how these things can hang together;
for how can all places be infectious to any man, if there be no Infection?
unless peradventure they out it to be the Case. But it cannot by any means be
truly gathered by certainty of Gods providence that the Plague is not
infectious; therefore this Argument runs beyond the Question propounded.

Besides, shall we think that the number of those which shall dye, is more
certain as often as God sends the Plague, than when he casts other Darts?
Now if they offend not against the providence of God, (who leaving, as it is
meet, things unknown unto us, to the good will and pleasure of himself) who do
use remedies of Physic both preservative and sanative, to keep away Sickness,
and also to heal when it comes; why shall we do the like also in the heat of
the Plague? As therefore God has appointed some which shall not die of the
Plague, so also has he appointed Remedies, by which, so far as in them lies,
men may avoid the Plague. And it is one and the same providence of God in all
kind of diseases with which he has ordained by an unchangeable Decree what
shall come to pass, although the natures of the diseases differ never so much
in themselves. Now among the chief remedies and provisions in Physic against
Infection, tha going aside in due season is worthily reckoned, the very nature
and signification of the word Contagion does declare: although neither all be
save which fly, neither all die which tarry. God without all doubt when h(...)
sent a Famine into Egypt and the Regions thereabouts, had determine(...) who
should die in that scarcity; yet for all this Joseph cease not with (...)
best diligence and most wise counsel to provide for the Egyptians: The which
things the Churches in the time of Claudius the Emperor also did, when as they
understood by Agabus the Prophet that a Famine should shortly come. The Lord
also knew who should dye in that most cruel war of the Assyrians in the days
of Ezekias, and yet both Ezekias and the Prophet Esaias himself secure themselves
within the walls of the City: what should I say more? when as Paul knew
assuredly, that neither he himself, neither any of those which were with him
should perish in the shipwreck, yet said he to the Mariners who were preparing
to fly out of the ship, Ye cannot be saved unless these tarry. Christ also,
though he well knew that his hour was not yet come, yet did he more than once
withdraw himself when the Jews sought to kill him.

Finally, that which they take for most certain, namely, that happening or
chance is repugnant unto the sure and steadfast Decree of God; which
notwithstanding it makes not much to the matter, yet who will grant it them?
we call those happening or chancing Causes, which of their own nature may fall
out unto either part; if any man should take them out of the nature of things,
I know not whether he should have any man of a right Judgment to hold with him.
They say out of St. Augustine, That the will of God is the necessity of things;
I grant so far as pertains unto the end and effects of the Causes themselves:
But as St. Augustine says very well, It follows not, that though all things
which God has decreed shall come to pass, must needs come to pass, that
therefore they come to pass of necessary Causes; like as the Stoics did
falsely conclude, and the same may be proved by most certain and most plain
examples: For do we not believe that Christ had indeed Man's bones; and
therefore such as of their own nature might at any time have been broken; and
yet indeed they could not be broken, for that it was otherwise decreed by God:
Therefore by hap and chance, concerning their own nature they were not broken;
when as notwithstanding they were such as might have been broken, and yet by
God's Decree they remained of necessity unbroken. Again, that Christ from the
very time that he took upon him our Human nature was endued with a Mortal body,
all Christians do confess; therefore of his own nature he might have been
slain by Herod, with the other little Children; but by God's Decree he could
not: Therefore that he was not then slain, fell out by hap and chance, if you
consider the nature of his Body, when as it might have chanced otherwise: But,
by God's Decree, he could no more be slain by Herod, than the will of God could
be changed. Christ when he was carried to be crucified, was then undoubtedly of
such health, that he needed not at that time to have died; he died therefore by
chance, if you do consider the cause of his Natural death; and yet be died of
necessity, if you look to the unchangeable appointment of his Father, because
his hour was come: and withal he died willingly, because he laid down his Life
for us. Thus far therefore is neither chance nor will repugnant unto the most
certain Decree of God.

There remains one Argument taken from Experience, which in show seems very
strong, yet is it of no force to take away Infection, I mean to prove the
Plague not to be infectious. If, say they, the Plague come of Natural causes,
or of some certain Constellation, or of corrupt Air, then should all they
doubtless be infected which dwell under the same Constellation, or breath in
the same corrupt Air; which is found to be false; for even reason it self does
prove the falsehood of this Argument: For who is so unskilful that knows not,
that one and the same Cause does not always operate alike, much less equally;
nay, that the effects are diverse, according unto the diversity* of the matter
it works upon? one and the self-same North-winde does not equally annoy men
with Cold; every man therefore sees how weak this reason is. But let us grant,
that in some place every man of himself is apt to receive the corrupt air, yet
may many things happen why the same effect in all would not follow; as for
example, one man takes a Preservative medicine, another does not; one
forthwith uses a good medicine, another very late, or never. Lastly, that
which is the principal point is to be considered; That Almighty God does govern
Natural causes and their effects, as it pleases him; So that hence it comes
to pass, that Infection touches not every one which is in danger of it, as it
is written Psalm. 91. 6. Neither yet is it deadly unto every one that it has
infected; like as Poison also drunken is not, as it is written Mark 16. 18.
Therefore this Argument also is not of force to prove there is no infection in
the Plague, because that many which keep company with those that are sick of
the Plague are not taken; and contrariwise, they that are absent are infected:
As if the poison of a Viper were not deadly, because that Paul being bitten of
one felt no harm at all, Acts 28. 5. And thus far concerning Infection.

Now we must treat of going aside; for so I had rather call it, than flying;
though I think it the part of a Wiseman to fly peril with reason. There are
some therefore, which do without exception find fault with going aside for the
Plague, that they count it a very heinous offense, though they think that those
which tarry ought not to use rashness. There are on the other side which hold
that every man, so soon as the Plague comes, ought to provide for himself,
having no regard, or but very small of the fellowship and duties which
Christian Charity does command. Now I for my part do dissent from both these*
and especially from the latter, as having most lawful causes: But ere I set
down my own judgment in this Controversy, let us hear these disputing the one
against the other. Thus therefore they which think it not lawful to fly, do
first of all Philosophically dispute against those that hold it not lawful to
tarry at all, they allege out of Plato his Gorgias, That it is foolishness to
fear Death; and that he cannot seem to be a temperate person which flies
Death, because it proceeds of too much delight in life; nor yet to be a just
man, for that he which in the time of the Plague provideth for himself by
running away, does yield neither to God nor Man his due. To these Reasons they
set down others taken out of the holy Scriptures, as That they think not well
of the providence of God, by whose unchangeable Decree the course of man's life
is limited: That they distrust God, and believe not his promise, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy Seed: That they are void of all Charity, nay, and more,
of all Natural pity and affection: That they tempt God after the example of
the Israelites, Exodus 17. 3. and Psalm. 78. 18. appointing God by what manner,
time, and place, and by what means he may save them: That they love not God
from their hearts; for being enamoured and in love with Earthly goods, they
neglect and are careless of the heavenly: That they fear death too much, for
that they set themselves against the will of God, which is always good: That
they think themselves stronger than God, and that they can escape his hand:
That they do openly break the law of Christ, and of Nature; by which they are
commanded to do unto others as they would be done unto themselves: That they
do, and teach that which no Christian has done, but that which has often been
done by the Heathens. And thus much say the first: unto whom these later have
nothing to answer, who under pretense of saving their lives, persuade flying
away without exception. Wherefore if these things alleged against those which
do in such sort fly the Plague, so that they in any thing swerve from the Rules
and Laws of Godliness and Charity; I hold with their Adversaries, and count
them worthy of all blame, which fly from thence whither they should rather run,
if they had but the least spark of humanity. But if these Reasons be wrested
against those, who being moved with just causes go aside, and keep that mean by
which they let pass no part of their duty either toward God or their
Neighbors, (which we say may oftentimes be done,) we affirm, that all these
Arguments, in show never so plausible and strong, to be of no force or value,
if the matter it self be diligently weighed Answer to the former Reasons if
simply alleged against such who upon any manner of occasion go aside.
and considered. For answer to their first Reason, albeit the Decree of God be
unchangeable, and that his eternal providence has set the unremovable bounds
of our lives; Yet does not this take away the ordinary and lawful means to save
our Lives; no, not although a man have received an answer from God of
prolonging his life, as we have showed by the manifest example of Saint Paul,
Acts 27. 14. and 31. much less that we may not use these means, when it is yet
hid from us, what God from everlasting has decreed concerning the prolonging
and ending of our life. Moreover, why should he be said to distrust the
promises of God, who does follow the ways appointed by God, to avoid Evils,
that notwithstanding he depends wholly upon God; unless peradventure we can
any where find in the holy Scriptures this Commandment expressly written, When
the Plague rages, fly not away. And amongst them, preservative Remedies are
to be reckoned; and amongst these, going aside in due time; the like also, as
the very name of Contagion does manifest. And this also is plain, That he does
not only not offend against Christian Charity, neither yet tempt God, who in
such manner by going aside does avoid the Plague, so that in the mean time he
let pass no act of Piety toward God, or of Charity toward his Neighbor;
That on the contrary, unless he perform these Duties, he may be thought to
provoke the wrath of God against himself, and to be worse than an Infidel, as
being one that rashly puts himself in danger of deadly Infection, without any
care of himself, or his.

The fifth and sixth Allegation is not any whit truer, They love not God, say
they; and, gaping after earthly things, they care not for heavenly; Because
they which love God desire nothing more than to be with him, which falls out
unto us by death; but they on the contrary fear nothing more. Then truly he,
who in loving has only his last end before another, for his own profit-sake
to enjoy the thing he loves, by what means soever it be, shall worthily be
judged to love himself rather than his Friends. Therefore the self-same person
which desires to be loosed and to be with Christ, wishes also, for his
Brethrens sake, to be separated as a thing accursed, Acts 9. 3. Neither does he
deliver up his Life into the hands of them that lay in wait for him, appealing
unto Caesar, Acts 25. 11. and gives thanks for his health restored unto him, 2
Cor. 1. 11. That David also does not so much fly Saul and Absalon, as Death,
being notwithstanding a Worshipper of God; That he and Ezekias do expressly pray
against Death; therefore whosoever flies Death is not rashly to be judged or
censured not to love God: as contrariwise, whosoever desires Death is not to
be thought to love God; but he only, who lawfully and with a good Conscience,
obeying the will of God, prepares himself either to suffer or avoid death. The
like also is to be judged of the fear of Death, that is, if it be grounded upon
good reason and moderately, it is not only not to be condemned, but also to be
allowed as a Preserver of life grafted in us by God; Therefore that fear of
Evil is condemned by Philosophers, which is contrary to Fortitude, and calls
us from that which every one of us owes unto each other, and out of holy
Scripture, that Fear which is against Faith and Charity: For it is one thing to
take clean away Natural affections, (which no man could ever possibly do) and
another to moderate and rule them; the which the Philosophers very well teach
ought to be done, but how it may bedone, the Word of God, by the Holy Ghost,
does only declare. And concerning those things which they cite out of
Tertullian, they shoot partly beyond his Mark, when as he speaks of flying
only in Persecution, and partly with the great consent of the Church* are
reckoned amongst his blemishes, as one that in this Argument was carried beyond
the Butt. No man questionless that is godly, and of right understanding, ever
condemned the going aside of Jacob; no man ever condemned David flying the fury
of Saul, and conspiracy of Absolon; nor Elias avoiding by his flight the rage
of Jezabel; no man ever condemned the going aside of Athanasius more than once:
neither do we here fly either unto the Agony of Christ, or unto that of
Matthew 10. 23. If they persecute you in one City, fly unto another: which
places I confess are of some not fitly alleged; for as touching the fears of
Christ, they are grounded upon a peculiar consideration, and are not to be
drawn into example; when as there is handled of the mystery of our Salvation,
the parts whereof Christ alone both could and did take upon him, in the which
he did see that fearful wrath of his Father, and indeed felt it, bearing the
Punishment due unto our Sins: we contrariwise are not at our Deaths tried with
the same fears, because we have the Father appeased with us, and, through
Faith, behold Life in Death it self. And that saying of Christ is doubtless no
Command of flying away; but on the contrary, admonishes faithful Pastors, that
being feared with no threatenings, if they be driven out of one place, they
hasten unto another; the which afterward we see diligently to have been done
by the Apostles.

But let us hear something else of more weight peradventure; There can be
nothing sent of God (say they) but that which is good; nay; there is nothing
Good, but that which comes of God: But the Plague is sent of God, therefore it
is good; if not of its own nature, yet in respect of the good end; namely, to
punish our Sins, to try our Faith, to drive us to Repentance, and to bring
forth Hypocrites to light. Who therefore (say they) can deny, but that They fly
the thing that is good, which fly the Plague, by the which God brings all
these things to pass? Again, that which God sends upon all, that is to say,
upon any one Church or Kingdom; as for example, the Plague, the same he will
have born of all; how is it to be fled from? Therefore they set themselves
against the will of God, which fly the Plague; nay, they fly in vain, because
it is in vain to strive against the will of God; but what could have been more
vainly said than these things; For to let pass the falsehood that lies in
these words, Good and Evil, in this Argument, to what end I pray you should
they enter into this disputation concerning the nature of things? There is no
Evil (that is to say, no calamity or punishment) in the City, which the Lord
has not done, says the Prophet. Why therefore shall we call Famine,
Pestilence, War, and such like, Good? Because, say they, they fall out unto the
good of the Godly. I grant it, because the Lord fetches Light out of Darkness:
Yea, but the Godly are instructed by Sin it self. Are Sins I pray you
therefore good, and does he which resists them resist God? To be short, who
sees not, that to pray unto God against things which of their own nature are
hurtful unto us, and withal to use just and lawful remedies to avoid them, if
it may be; So that we commit the end to God, to be a far other thing than it
is, or that we should hope to withstand God, or by any means to escape his
Judgments? Abraham himself, Isaac and Jacob did fly Hunger, the which
notwithstanding was sent of God; who yet cannot be said to have fled the thing
that was good, or to have sinned: As for that which they so greatly stand upon,
namely, That those which fly the Plague do break that immovable Precept which
Humanity it self teaches, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do
ye the same unto them; as it is worthily turned upon them which do in such sort
fly the Plague, or any other danger, that then neglect the Duties of a
Christian: So does it in no case make against them who shun the Plague by going
aside, unless they may be judged to have neglected to perform those Duties
which they owe both unto their Country and to their Neighbor. And truly, I do
marvel that those who without exception do condemn going aside, as being of it
self repugnant unto Charity, do not consider, that Charity does less require
that we provide for the whole, than that we help those that are taken with that
Sickness.

Finally, They say that as many as fly the Plague, do that which no Christian
ever did, when as there is no example thereof in the holy Histories.

I answer, That this is too deceitful an Argument, when as it is apparent that
in the holy Scriptures is not fet down what every one has done; and that in
many the general Rules of Doctrine, there is sufficient to determine those
things whereof we have no Commandment, nor any particular Example; and that it
is without doubt that it is not set down how often the People has been visited
with the Plague, neither yet how every man behaved himself in the Plague. But
they say they have altogether contrary counsel in the holy Scriptures; for
that David does call us back unto the Tabernacle of the Most Highest, Psalm. 91.
as though he fled not unto God, which lawfully uses going aside: But yet, say
they, David did not fly that very sore Plague whereof mention is made, 2 Samuel
24. neither removed his Hcushold unto any other place. I grant this; but how
many peculiar circumstances do forbid us to make of that a general Conclusion?
for he himself was the cause of that Plague, and deservedly so far forth
troubled, that he is ready even with his own destruction to redeem the Public
calamity; further, when as this Plague continued not above three days at the
most, what place was there left him to take advice or to fly unto? whither
should he have fled, when the Plague was hot in all his Dominion, and yet is
said not at all, or very little, to have touched the Chief City it self?
Again, they say Esaias fled not from Ezekias being sick of the Plague: As if we
held, that the Shepherds with a good Conscience, might willingly, and of their
own accord, leave their Sheep; Yea, and what if I should take exception that
Esaias came not to Ezekias but by the special command of God? for so does the
History bear Record. But, say they, Jeremiah also and Baruch, with other godly
men, fled not out of the City being besiedged of the Chaldees, though a great
part of the People died as well of the Plague as of Famine; Neither do we say
that we may worthily shun the Plague by going aside, if we depart from that
which we owe unto God, our Country, and every of our Neighbors: But I cannot
but wonder, that those which allege this example of Jeremiah have forgotten
that he was taken at the Gate of the City, when he assayed to get out, Jer.
37. 12.

Last of all, they bring a notable example of the Church of Alexandria, out of
the seventh Book of Eusebius, Cap. 20. as though we did allow the going aside
either of all, or in all places, and times, or do not teach that such Constancy
and Charity ought both to be praised, and also followed, so that a General
Rule be not made thereof; for Eusebius does not say that every one, but that
very many of the Christians did it.

Therefore to conclude these things, there has been nothing yet alleged
whereby the Plague has been proved either not to be infectious, or that going
aside to avoid Infection is without exception to be condemned; for that going
aside is one of the Chief among Natural remedies and provisions in Infectious
diseases, Reason and Experience it self does teach; For doubtless the word
Contagion in it self does aloud speak this* That those things which are less
far off are more in danger of it; and it is daily to be seen, that by removing
in due time unto more healthful places, many have been preserved; which if any
man will except against, should have been saved if they had tarried still at
home, because God had so decreed: What then shall he say, who agrees not also
unto the other shunnings and remedies of all perils? Therefore we ought to
laugh at, as needless, not only Physic, but also all prudence and wisdom,
which is used in avoiding dangers of all sorts; neither should there be any
difference between Rashness and Discretion, between Fortitude and Boldness. But
the matter is far otherwise, because like as God by his everlasting and
unchangeable Decree has appointed the course of our Life, so has he also
ordained Middle causes, which we should use to preserve our Lives withal.

It now remains that I show you when it may be convenient to go aaside; for
as in other indifferent things, so also may a man use going aside both well and
ill: and so far am I from persuading the same to every man without exception,
that on the contrary I confess that they offend much less, who when they
might otherwise, with a good Conscience, withdraw themselves, had rather yet
tarry; and to venture and endanger their Lives, rather than that they might
seem to have forsaken their Neighbor, or Family. I confess, I say, that these
offend much less than those, who being carried away with too much distrust, or
with unmeasurable fear of death, forgetting and neglecting all duties of
Humanity, have this only before their eyes, Away quickly, a far off, long ere
you return again. Men surely most worthy to be thrust out of all company of
men, the bonds whereof they break all to pieces. Now what in this point may be
observed, I think may this way be determined.

First of all I think it is to be proivded, That every man do summon himself
unto the Judgement*seat of God, unto the Plague as the coming of news of the
wrath of God, condemning himself, that he may be acquitted by him, and that
withal he weigh with himself, that he is called to stand forth and plead his
own Cause, and that this Rod cannot be avoided by change of place, but of
manners; and that if he must die, that this is decreed for the good of them
which die, forasmuch as they are blessed which die in the Lord.

Another Point is, That no man either Go aside, or tarry with a doubtful
Conscience: But when as he shall have learned out of the Word of God what his
Duty is; that commending himself unto God, he continue constantly therein.

And although that in so great variety of Circumstances, Rules for every
singular thing cannot be set down; yet is it no hard matter to give certain
General Precepts agreeable unto the Word of God, by the which, as by a certain
Rule, singular Cases may afterward (as they say) be tried; Let them therefore
which think to tarry, know, that it is the Commandment of God, Thou shall not
Kill, and that therefore neither their own, nor the Lives of any belonging or
depending on them, are rashly to be put in danger of deadly Infection. Let them
on the other side, which think to Go away, know, that no man ought to have so
great regard either of himself, or of his Family, that he forget what one owes
unto his Country, and Fellow Citizens. To be brief, what he owes unto
another, whether they be bound by the common bond of Humanity and Society, of
by any other kind of Friendship; for Love seeks not the things which are her
own: Wherefore, I confess, that I cannot see by what reason at all any man is
forbid to depart, which either by reason of Age, or of Sickness, past hope of
Recovery, cannot help others; and if they tarry, they may therefore seem only
to be stayed, that they may die, to the great loss of the Commonwealth; for
as their Cruelty can never enough be blamed, which thrust them out of their
Cities, especially if they be of the poor^^ sort; so both the pious natures of
Parents in time providing for the preservation and life of theirs, without
prejudice or hurt to any man, seems unto me to be greatly commended; And also
the providence of the Magistrates is much to be praised, where their care shall
be extended (without damage to the Common-welfare) to see that those weak
ones, as seed-plots of Citizens, be well looked unto.

And here comes in the way that General bond, wherewith Man is especially
bound unto Man, and that without taking away of Humanity it self, cannot be
broken; There is also another Bond binding every Citizen unto his Country and
City But both these Bonds I affirm to be natural and universal, that every one
must have regard of his Estate, and Calling; for some serve in Public Offices,
either Civil, or the Ministry; the rest are Private persons; And the bonds of
Private persons between themselves are manifold, the which Nature it self
knitteth, and Christian Godliness binds; the which, unless they be discerned
asunder, that every man may know what his Duty is in all things, it must needs
follow that Confusion shall bear the sway in all things, under a show of Order;
Therefore let Man help Man; Citizen Citizen, that needs his help, according
to his power, and let him not think of Going aside, by which it may justly
appear likely unto him to come to pass, that by this means some body shall be
ill looked unto; much more that through contempt of any man, or of an
overthwart fear of Death, he depart not any whit from the duty of Humanity,
but when as without the neglect of his Duty and Public offense, he may be
careful both for himself, and his, by going aside. I see no cause why he may
not only not do it, but also why he is not bound to do it; yet, lest in this
case, any man by flattering of himself, might sin against his Neighbor, it
is the duty of a Christian Magistrate to provide, that those things which
either breed or nourish the Plague, so far as they may, be taken away, and that
regard may be had of those that be visited with this Sickness, that A^l benot
driven to be careful for All. But how they that serve in any Public Civil
Office may leave their Charge in the time of the Plague, I do not see; and for
faithful Pastors to forsake but one poor Sheep at that time when he most of all
needs Heavenly comfort, it were too shameful, nay too wicked a part. As
touching Private persons, their bonds of F^iendship and Amity are diverse and
manifold; among these, this is the Chiefest, unto which also Natural
conjunction of Blood (as God witnesses) must g^ve place, I mean the bond and
tie of Wedlock; so that in my judgment the Husband cannot with a good
Conscience go (...) or the Wife from the Husband, especially if one of them be
(...) the Plague: And how much Parents do owe unto their Children, and Children
to their Parents, Kinsmen to Kinsmen, the very Laws of Nature declares, the
which Christian Charity is so far off from letting loose, that contrariwise it
draws them more and harder together: Yea, and for Servants to forsake their
Masters, or Masters to look slenderly to their Servants being sick (which
comes too often to pass) who have made use of their Service when they were
well, is Cruelty. Yet is not the bond of all these friendships alike or equal,
and therefore that which is not so near must give place to the nearer,
forasmuch as many cannot be discharged at once.

Furthermore, as there is place also for forsaking amongst those which are
present, unless they which tarry do their duty; so heed is to be taken both of
those that are sick, that they abuse not the love of their Kindred and Friends,
whilst they are desirous to have themselves provided for: and also of those
which continue in doing their duties, that they cast not themselves rashly into
the danger of Infection, which is used to be done by some of desperate
boldness, rather than of true and Christian judgment, who being wont to
contemn those that are sick of other diseases, do visit those that are taken
with the Plague, that they may seem to despise Death. And this conrempt of
God's judgments, I should less bear withal, than with the too much weakness
of the fearful. But how others are affected and disposed in the craving of the
presence of their Friends I know not, when as my self being visited with the
Plague, and that diverse of my Friends offered unto me all kind of Courtesy, I
suffered none to come unto me, lest I might have been thought to have provided
for my self with the loss of my Friends. But if in such Calamities the
Magistrate do not in time provide, as much as may be, both by such lawful means
as are not repugnant unto Christian Charity, that the Infection may be
prevented, and also that the sick of the Plague want nothing; he shall
doubtless do very well both for the sick and the whole, and shall take away
many Questions which in this Argument are wont to be raised: but this
especially must be agreed upon, that as our Sins are the chief and true cause
of the Plague, so that this is the only proper remedy against the same; if
the Ministers dispute not of the Infection (which belongs to Physicians) but
by their Life and Doctrine stir up the People to earnest Repentance, and Love,
and Charity one toward another.

FINIS.

