CONFIDING ENGLAND UNDER CONFLICTS, TRIUMPHING IN THE MIDST OF HER TERRORS.

OR Assured comforts that her present miseries will end in unspeakable lasting
mercies to the whole Nation.

First preached in Bengeo, and Hitchin in Hartfordshire, and now published for
the common comfort of the Nation.

By JOHN BEVVICK, Minister of Bengeo, near Hartford.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1644.

TO HIS Excellency ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, Viscount Hereford, Baron Ferrars of
Chartley, Lord Bourchier and Lovain, one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and General of the Army raised by the Parliament, in defense of the
true Protestant Religion, his Majesty's person, the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament.
IT is a lovely thing (says the Philosopher) to (...). Arist.
benefit one, but to do good to a nation, it is a thing divine. Your
Excellencies love to England, in not counting your blood, your life dear to
preserve it; the eminencyes in your person of virtue and valor, of courage and
courtesy, of greatness and goodness, of mercy and meekness, of admirable
prudence, and unwearied patience, the worthy deeds already done unto this
Nation, by your providence; all these obliges all true English hearts, to
bear a part in the National acknowledgment of your worth, and in accepting
what is done by your Excellency with all thankfulness. Your noble candor may
be pleased then, to pardon this presumption of dedication, in a stranger to
your knowledge, but an honourer of your virtues; the rather, because the
obscurest clot upon the fallow, reflects something of the sun beams, as well
as the mountains, as the whole globe. These ensuing meditations are now
mustered, to attend the Camp: and if the banner of your protection overspread
them, he shall be comforted, who by them desires principally to comfort the
Natio, yea the world. For if it be true as Saint Augustine writes, that if one
drop of the joys of heaven should fall into hell, it would swallow up all the
bitterness of it: Tanta est dulcedo caeleslis gaudij, ut si una guttula
difflueret in infernum totam amaritudinem inferni absorberet, August Rom 5. 3.
Romans 8 37. Heb 10 35. Deuteronomy. 33. 26. 27.
it may be hoped then, that a few drops of heavenly joys, here presented
[under your Excellencyes countenance] to my Countrymen, ingulphed in an hell of
outward miseries, may avail to allay their bitterness, and clear their eye
sight (as Ionathans was after his tasting honey) to see thorough an hell of
horror, their heavenly recovery. It is Englands present duty, to rejoice in
tribulations, to triumph under terrors, to confide under conflicts, to expect
salvations, to veiw God by the eye of faith, as a refuge, as interwining us in
his everlasting arms of preservation, as healing our breaches, as stanching
our wounds, as preparing all ranks among us, to enjoy a perpetual unity,
peace, amity, joy and jubilee, in despite of hell and Rome. All this God will
do for us in righteousness, but by terrible things. And during his pouring
vialls of wrath upon the Antichristians, the English Church (with the other
reformed) must stand on a sea of glass mingled with fire. She shall apparently
see (as in a glass) Antichristian Rev. 15. 2. 3.
tumults, rising like wave after wave, yet Christ calming them, and causing all
attempts ebb into emptiness, come to nothing. She shall stand on a sea
mingled with fire: enduring hot service from inward contentions, and outward
afflictions: these a while shall heat her, but not fire her; scorch her, but
not roast her; bruise her heel perhaps, in some losses, but they shall not
break her, nor crumble her, into a total desolation: for the ten Kingdoms
must stand by an unalterable decree, to undo Antichrist, Rev. 17. from the 12,
to the end.
though they a while may seem to favor and fight for him. And she shall stand
with the harpes of God, singing the songs of Moses songs of judgment, praises;
for every new judgment upon her troublers, and destroyers: and singing too,
the song of the lamb, songs of mercy, praises, for every new deliverance,
vouchsafed her from on high. All blessings from the omnipotent Lamb (who
warreth against Antichrist, and will conquer) are craved for your Excellency,
by all the real lovers of this Nation, among Minimorum minimus Tertul. ad
Trallian.
whom I rest the meanest of Christ's ministers, and to

July. 20 1644. Your Excellencye most humbly devoted in all Christian service,
JOHN BEVVICK,

CONFIDING ENGLAND UNDER CONFLICTS; TRIVMPHING IN THE MIDST OF HER TERRORS.
PSALM. 65. 5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, oh God
of our salvation: who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of
them that are a far off upon the sea.
THis Psalm is Eucharisticall. It is a form of thankesgiving penned by David
for those mercies, which God bestows on mankind. The first verse calls on the
Church of God to Verse. 1.
praise him, for the things afterward recited. Others will take no notice of
them; or if they do, yet they will not so freely acknowledge Gods kindness in
them: and therefore the Saints, the children of Zion must do it. The rest of
the Psalm is spent in recounting the benefits, both spiritual and temporal
which are conferred. The spiritual blessings which properly belong to the
Church and faithful people of God are four. 1. Gods hearing of their prayers.
In the want of defense, counsel, relief: in the midst of afflictions and
troubles, when they are straightened, and upon the verge of any extremity, he
hears their prayers: Oh thou that hear prayers to thee shall all flesh
come. 2. Remission of sins Verse. 2.
is another blessing here recounted: though sin has raised the storm of
afflictions, trouble, and adversaries; yet God will purge away sin: and the
cause of these storms removed, there is a calm. As for our transgressions
thou shall purg them Verse. 3.
away. 3. The collection of a Church is another blessing here rehearsed. And 4.
The saving and preserving this Church in a Verse. 4.
wonderful and admirable manner, so as others shall be driven to join
themselves to the Church: this is another favor from God. And these are the
blessings spiritual which this Psalm does mention. The blessings temporal
are common to the Saints with others: yet they are such, that none but Saints
will take Verse. 5.
notice to praise God for them: and therefore for these also, Praise waits
for God in Zion. These blessings temporal are. 1. The erection of Kingdoms,
and Governments in the world. It is from the mighty power of God, that Common
wealths are set on their foundation. He by his strength set fast the
mountains. Verse. 6.
By mountains, Common wealths are here to be understood, as they are in the
latter part of the first verse of the second of Isaiah. It would be a terrible
sight to see mountains tumbling and rolling, ready to close and break one
another in pieces: and yet such are all the Common wealths in the world, they
would totter and tumble and destroy one another, but that God has fastened
them: their bounds are set; and that is one blessing. 2. The repression of
tumults, seditions, and conspiracies in Kingdoms, which would utterly ruin
them; is another blessing Verse 7.
which God grants, and for which he is to be praised. And this is amplified by
the terror seizing on the wicked and profane, when they shall see the power of
God, curbing and crushing seditious men: when these are crossed and crushed, then
shall all others in all places, believe, and fear and tremble. The uttermost
parts of the earth shall be afraid of thy tokens that is of thy judgments
executed upon the rebellious, and upon the destroyers Verse 8.
of people. 3. The restitution of peace and plenty to a people in a firmer and
more established manner then they had before, is another blessing. Thou make
the outgoings of the morning, and evening to rejoice. Men shall in the morning
go out to their labors with joy and in security; and at evening they shall
have songs of joy and rejoicing in the night: they shall have no more terror by
night, nor fear and trembling in the day, as in the time of former troubles,
by the tumults of such who sought to dissolve their Kingdoms and Common
wealths: God will fill them full of peace and comfort, and make the Outgoings
of the morning and evening to rejoice. And then he will abundantly bleste with
plenty, so as neither the Church, nor the world shall complain of searcitie;
when God has wrought these great things for his people: as the rest of the
Psalm sets out. This is the sum and From verse. 9. to the end.
scope of the whole Psalm: being a Psalm of Thankesgiving for mercies,
vouchsafed the Church both in spiritualls and in temporalls.

The fifth verse whereof conteines a description of the wonderful manner, how
God saves and preserves his Church. And here are three things remarkable.

1. The means of its preservation. It is by things terrible. 2. The manner of
its preservation. 1. In respect of God. It is in righteousness. 2. In respect
of the Church: By answering it.
3. The Author thereof, who is here described 1. By what he is and has done: he
is the God of salvation. 2. By what he is, and will be to his people in all
places; The confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of those that are a
far off upon the sea.

These three parts affords us these five observations.

1. Gods preserving his Church or people is by terrible things. 2. Gods
deliverance of his Church or people by terrible things is in righteousness. 3.
The deliverance of the Church by terrible things, is Gods answering his people.
4. God is the Author of his peoples salvation. 5. God is the confidence of all
his people in all places.
1. Gods preserving his Church or people is by terrible things.

In handling this point we will consider.

1. What these terrible things are by which God preserves his his people. 2.
Why he will by these preserve his people. 3. What practical conclusions may
hence be deduced.
First. The word here rendered [terrible] signifies also things wonderful and
things reverend; and its signification gives a (...).
good light to understand that the things whereby God delivers his people are
terrible. 1. In respect of the terror, which they work in the adversaries of
his people. 2. In respect of the wonder and amazement which they procure both
in the adversaries and in others. And 3. Terrible in respect of the reverence
and awful regard which they work or should work in all sorts toward God. Of
these in order.

First, God delivers by things which strikes terror and fear into adversaries:
and these things may be reduced to seven heads.

1. God sometimes preserves his people by terrible imaginations, wrought in
their adversaries: so he delivered Israel by filling all Egypt with fear and
terror. Egypt was glad when they departed for the fear of them fell on them.
And so Israel Psalm 105. 38.
was saved from the Midianites, the Lord put fear into the heart of their
Army, when Gideon and his Soldiers blew the trumpets. Judge. 7. 20, 21.


2. God sometimes causes the adversaries of his people to hear of some
terrible, yet true and real relation, what he has already done for his: and
that weakens them. Your terror (says Rahab to the Spics) has fallen on us,
and all the inhabitants Josh. 1. 9, 10, 11.
faint because of you; for we have heard how the Lord dried up the waters of
the red sea for you, when you came out of Egypt, etc. And as soon as we heard
these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage
in any because of you.

3. God sometimes strikes terror into the adversaries, by some terrible
machinations, which they hear is attempted against them: and by this means he
sometimes saves and preserves his people. Thus when Philistines are against
Philistines, it is terrible to them, because they cannot invade Israel. When
the Philistines invaded the land, it was terrible to Saul, to be thereby took
off from pursuing David. The Lord filled the heart of Julian 1 Samuel 23. 27 28.
(who was resolved to destroy all Christians in the Empire) with terror from
the Persians: and therefore out he goes against Nazian. orat. 4. in Julian.
them, and fell in battle: and so the Christians were delivered.

4. God often delivers and preserves his Church, and people, by striking terror
into their adversaries, through terrible frustrations, or disappointments in
all the adversaries agents and means, making them ineffectuall. Pharoh was hot
in the pursuit of Israel, but the chariots wheels were took off, and that was
terrible Exodus 24. 25.
to the Egyptians. When God shall drown a Navy, an Armado, coming with full
sail to destroy: when he weakens at any time the strength, and infatuates
Counselors, and makes adversaries to fall on ways, and counsels destructive
to themselves: these are things very terrible to them, and yet means of the
Churches deliverance.

5. God sometimes raises up terrible oppositions against the adversaries, and
that terrifies them, and stops their rage and fury from working bitterly
against the Church: and the Church thereby has deliverance. Thus God called for
an Angel, who destroyed Senacharibs Army. He called for a wind and split and 2
King. 19. 35. Psalm. 48. 7, 8.
sunk the ships of Tarshish. He called to lice, to frogs, to flies, to hail,
to locusts, to his sore and terrible judgments, and they devoured Egypt. The
least creature when God arms it against an adversary is very terrible: and by
such terrible things many times God strikes fear and terror into the
adversaries, and works safety for his people.

6. God sometimes preserves his Church and people by terrible revelations: when
he discovers the closest plots and conspiracies and counsels of their
adversaries, when they carry on things subtly, hoping that nothing shall be
known: but a bird Eccles. 10. 20.
of the air tells it; a letter reveals it: one thing or other brings all to
light; and all mouths are filled with talking of the horrible attempts. The
plot of Haman for destroying all the Jews. The plot of the Irish for
massacring all the English. The plot of the Jesuits for rooting out all
Protestants in all Kingdoms. These and many such being discovered, are
terrible to the adversaries: and yet by such terrible revelations God does
often preserve his people.

7. And so he does sometimes by terrible destructions: when either God
destroys the adversary; or shows his judgments on them, in some horrible
manner, so as they shall never be able to lift up the heel, and kick and
spurn his people. When the Zach. 1. 21.
Lord pleases to knock off all the horns that pushed, it will be very
terrible: and yet thus he often times saves his Church. Pharaoh is drowned;
Haman is hanged; and his people escape.

Thus the things by which God delivers his people are terrible, in respect of
the terror which thereby befalls the adversaries.

Secondly; The things by which God preserves his Church are terrible in respect
of the wonder and amazement, which they produce both in the adversaries, and in
Gods people: filling them both full of astonishment and amazement when they are
seriously considered. For;

1. It is wonderful that the Lord often saves his people by weak means, God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty. It was a thing wonderful, 1 Cor. 1. 7.
that Sisera should be sold into the hands of a woman: That deliverance should
come by Esther: That Sampson should slay a thousand with the jaw bone of an
Ass: That a few Protestants in Ireland should yet remain there,
notwithstanding the whole Kingdom be full of Popish Rebels. It is wonderful
that true Christianity, and the true reformed Religion, should get ground and
win upon the world, daily increasing and spreading, notwithstanding all
opposition which it has had from the beginning. Though Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Nobles, great ones, and men of all sorts have combined against the
purity of Religion; yet that it should prevail, and find multitudes of
Professors in all Kingdoms, this is wonderful. It is very marveilous in our
eyes, that the stone which the builders refused, should become the headstone in
the building: and so it is that Antichrist should be destroyed daily by the
breath of the Lords mouth: that by the preaching of the word the Man of Sin
should be at length fully revealed. That a few Rammes-hornes should break
down the walls of Ierico. These and a thousand such are wonderful things:
terrible in respect of the amazement, into which they may put all sorts.

2. It is terrible, that is, a thing wonderful, causing astonishment, that God
should save and deliver his Church under the unlikelihood of means: when all
means and instruments of its help seem to be insufficient. Moses a weak man
is sent to deliver Israel; and when he was sent their burdens were greatned:
and yet Israel was then upon the point of deliverance. God many times is
working deliverance for his people when the means of it is crossed, seems to
be frustrated, disappointed, to work backward, and altogether unlikely: and
this is to the amazement of the adversaries, and to the wonder of his own
people. It was a terrible, that is a thing wonderful; that when all the
European world was in a manner, filled in all places with agents for
Antichrist; Luther should arise, and carry on the cause of the Gospel against
Leo the Pope, Charles the Emperor, against Cajetan the Cardinal: against
Rome, Italy, Europe, the world, and Hell. This was a terrible astonishment to
the Pontificians, and a wonderful though comfortable amazement to Gods own
people, who had long groaned for a Reformation. And so when Germany Camiltons
discovery.
mourned under the pride and oppression of the Emperor, and house of Austria:
and when the Jesuits (the Popes factours) had devised and contrived its utter
ruin; yet then God raised up the Gustavus Adolphus.
King of Sweden, who landed in Germany, but with ten thousand men at most; and
God made him an instrument to curb the Imperialists; this was a terrible thing
the amasement of the world. The Papists bragged, let us beat the Sweede, and
then all Germany is ours, but God made the Sweede a rod to whip, and lash So
Til'y vido Swede Intelligeucer.
the Pontifician Nation in those parts unto this day: this is so terrible to
them that they gnaw their tongues for vexation of spirit. And so likewise who
would have thought, that the troubles in Revel. 16. 10
the North, should have procured a pacification between the two Nations of
England and Scotland, and give a light to the whole Island to look to its
security. And who would think, that. God is at this time bringing about the
peace and security of England, though all the Agents, and instruments of it,
should be slighted, contemned, and despised: but God is he who works wonders,
effecting by unlikely means the Salvation of his Church; and when this comes
to pass, it will be a terrible astonishment to all the enemies of the Land,
and a wonderful comfort to all Saints.

3. It is a thing terrible, that is wonderful, causing astonishment, when God
preserves his people without means, in a miraculous way and manner: this
strikes terror into the adversaries, and wonder into his people. When the sea
was made a passage for Isarell, and therein the Egyptians troubled, they were
afraid: when Jordane was dried up for the people to pass over, the hearts of
the Cananites melted in them. It was terrible when God rained down stones on
the Kings which Iosh^a 10.
fought against his people: terrible, when he suddenly cut off many of the
persecuting Emperors; and gave thereby his Church rest, and a breathing time
from trouble. And so when the Lord shall have effected miraculously (I believe
he is now working it, though most think otherwise) the peace and security of
England, though all the prime wits of Christendom (among the Antichristians)
have been employed to undo it: I say when it shall be seen that all their
labors are miraculously quasht: and Englands fears are suddenly hushed; and
that Englands Troublers shall but trouble, and undo themselves, in their
attempts against her, and that their now warring against her peace, does but
lay ground work for the utter ruining of the Papacy in all Europe: when the
Lord (I say) shall miraculously effect all this, then shall the enemies be
ashamed and confounded together: it will be their terrible astonishment, and
then shall all the righteous be wonderfully comforted. Thus the Church is
delivered by terrible things in respect of the terror wrought thereby in the
adversaries: and the wonder they work in his servants.

Thirdly the things by which God preserves his Church, are terrible things in
respect of the reverence, and awful regard which they work, or should work
in all sorts toward God. Therefore some translate the word here, reverend
things: understanding Tremellus.
thereby things which should cause us reverence, and dread that mighty God, who
has done them, and who is for them to be feared. Thus if God deliver by some
actual judgment, and vengeance she wed on the adversaries; this should make us
fear and dread him. I am afraid of thy Judgments (says David) Psalm 119. 120.
Isa 26 9 Psalm. 21. 11.
And when thy Judgments (as it is in the Prophet) are on the earth, the
inhabitants thereof will learn righteousness. Or if the Lord deliver his Church
by overthrowing only the plots and conspiracies of the wicked, disappointing
them in bringing to pass their mischeife: yet this also is a thing Reverend,
it should cause us to reverence him, because he is able to confound the wise,
and to be-foole the wicked with the works of their own hands: or lastly, if
the Lord relieve his Church by small means, or by unlikely means, or by no
means; yet all this should work reverence in us, to fear that God, who does
so great things in so great, and wonderful, and unexpressible manner; doing
for his Church above all that we can imagine and think of.

Thus every way God delivers and preserves his Church by terrible things: we
now see what these are.

Secondly that God will thus preserve his people by terrible things (that is)
by things striking terror into adversaries, and working wonder in his children;
and which works, or should work reverence toward him from all sorts, three
reasons evince.

1. God delights to meet with his Churches adversaries in their own way: he
will out shoot them in their own bow. They desire to appear terrible and
formidable to it: if they can but put men into fear, they think they shall
have the day: they Neh. ^ 10, 11 12, 13.
triumph if they can raise a terror and fear in people: and therefore God will
serve them, as they would serve others: he will meet with them in a way of
terrout, searing them, and making Prove 28. 1.
them sly when none pursues. Adoni-bezek confessed that seventy Judge. 1. 7.
Kings by him had their thumbes and great toes cut off: as I have done so God
requited me, says he. Haman prepares a gallows for Mordecai; and the same
gallows hangs him. God will be terrible to those who delight to be terrible.
The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast Psalm.
57. 14.
down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation:
their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.
Cruel terrible men shall be dealt with cruelly at one time or other.
Ebedmelech showed kindness to Jeremiah in prison, and therefore God preserved
him. But the Ier. 38. 7, 8, 9 10, 11, 12, 13. Ie 39. 16, 17 18.
other Princes (which had incensed the King against him) were given up into the
hand of their adversaries. God will be terrible to those, who seek to put his
people into horror and amazement. Pashur smote Jeremiah, and put him into the
stocks all night, he thought to have terrified the Prophet, but the Lord
threatens him to be terrified. The Lord (says Jeremiah from the Lord) has not
called thy name Pashur, but Magormissabib: Ier. 20. 2.
for thus says the Lord, behold I will make thee a terror to thy self, and to
all thy friends.

2. God will save his people by terrible things: because he will show to all
the world, how terrible a God he is, whom his people so dreadfully and
reverentially adore. All shall thereby understand, that he is a God working
wonderfully. Thou art great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone:
says the Psalm. 86. 10.
Psalmist. He himself challenges his creatures to do as he has done: Where
wast thou when I laid the foundation of the world Job 38. 4. Job 40 9.
etc. Have thou an arm like God, and can thou thunder with his voice. The
great ones of the earth, which cause others to trimble, and fear, are hurled
up and down as piles of dust, in a whirlewinde by the smoke of his nostrills.
God will have the world to know, that he is more terrible, then any thing which
the world accounts terrible. Wicked and sinful men are many times a great
terror; But who art thou (says the Prophet) Isa. 51. 12, 13
that are afraid of man who shall dye, and of the son of man who shall be
made as grass, and forgets the Lord thy maker. They may destroy the body, but
when they have done, they can do no more: but fear God, who can destroy both
body and Luke 12. 4. 5.
soul in hell fire. Again death is the terrible of terribles, says the
Philosopher; adversaries of the Church are so terrible, because they come as it
were armed with death, and are ready to destroy: but yet God is more terrible,
for he only can instict death. It is not the rage, fury, and malice of
adversaries which can cause any to die: as God gives life, so he takes it away;
he makes alive, and he kills. Now God will show himself to be more terrible
then they, though they come armed with death by turning their own terror
(death) upon themselves: He shall bring on them their own iniquity and shall
cut them off in their own wickedness: yea the Lord our God shall cut them
Psalm 94. 23.
off: And

3. God will save his people by terrible things, that all the earth may stand
in awe of him, and fear him, and know him only to be God: Who would not fear
thee oh thou King of nations Ier. 10. 7. and 10. verses.
there is none like thee etc. (says the Prophet) The Lord is the true God, he
is the living God, and an everlasting King: at his wrath the earth shall
tremble, and the nations shall not be Rom 9. 17.
able to abide his indignation. God would be terrible to Pharoh in his
judgments to get himself a name in all the world: and so he will be to the
enemies of his Church, that the world may know that he is a terrible God, and
that the adversaryes may be Heb. 12, 28, 29.
compelled to cry out, who is able to dwell with the everlasting burning: and
likewise that his own people may thereby learn to serve him acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear: because our God is a consuming fire. Wicked enemies
may kindle a fire to scare a Nation, and fill thereby a Landfull of terror and
trembling; but yet God can keep his own, so as there shall not Isa 43. 1.
pass the small of fire on them: for he will be with them when they pass
through fire and water. How ever; the adversaries fire shall not be a
destroying fire to Gods Church: for when he begins to show himself terrible
to them, he will be unto them a consuming fire: and will quench all the fires,
which they have kindled, and so free the Land from all their fear: but yet all
will be with a terrible destruction, to the most terrible ones, (continuing
unrepentant) among the adversaries. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass your selves about with Isa. 50. 11.
sparks, walk in the light of your fire and in the sparks that you have
kindled, this ye shall have of mine hands, you shall lie down in sorrow.

Thus the point is cleared: Because God will show himself to be a God of
terror, a God of vengeance, a God to befeared, respected, reverenced, and
dreaded: therefore he will execute terrible things on the wicked; and thereby
preserve his Church and people by terrible things.

Thirdly, We will now see what for practice may hence be learned; And briefly.

1. Seeing God will preserve his Church and people by terrible things; then
surely the world must expect no other, but terrible things, before the quiet of
it, and of the Kingdoms in it, can be established. If you should hear at any
time of terrible battles, of terrible Sea Fights, of terrible conspiracies, of
terrible treasons, of terrible persecutions, of terrible massacres; yet as our
blessed Savior said, so say I; Let not your hearts be troubled, Ioe I have
told you all these: these things must come, but the end is not yet: these
things must be expected, and so looked on, that we may see and perceive, how
that by these and the like things, the Lord is working the peace of the world,
and of all his Churches in it. We must therefore still look for terrible
things, and prepare for them; and a better preparation cannot be made, then to
make God our fear and dread. Fear him, and not any terrible thing need to
affright us; because he will not suffer those who fear him to miscarry
spiritually, thorough any trouble. If you would not then be afraid of evil
tidings, get your hearts fixed, trusting in the Psalm 112 7, 8
Lord.

2. If God will preserve the Church by terrible things: then the enemies of it
may know, that they can expect nothing, but what is terrible. Indeed the Church
her self must look to hear, and perhaps to feel in some measure things
terrible. A whale may swallow Jonah awhile, and afterward restore him.
Troubles may (for ought I know) swallow us deeper, though not for destruction,
but for a better restitution: the Church must expect to feel less or more
things terrible; but her enemies must expect to feel the utmost
destroying-smart of all things terrible. The cup of fury is begun to be drunk,
and it must go round about the nations: It began at Jerusalem, and thence
past on to I^r. 5. 15. etc.
the Churches of God, in the primitive ages of the Gospel, who did drink of it
under the Pagan and Arrian Persecutions: it past along to the faithful
servants of God, who did drink of it at sundry times under the tyranny of the
Roman Antichrist; and it is now passing the reformed Churches, going from
people to people, as we see at this day; It has gone about Germany, Bohemia,
Palatinate, the reformed parts of France; it is come into Ireland, and into
England too: and it must about to other Kingdoms. And in their due time
Spain, and Italy, and other Nations, must also drink thereof; and by that time
it has gone thorough the Kingdoms, the Kings and Rulers of these people
(whether the cup has gone) will be all awaked to consider, Isa. 51. 25.
how they and their people have been made to drink of the cup of trouble, and
to reele again with it: and out of indignation, they will cause the Seat of
the Beast, and the Papacy, in all their Kingdoms (which was the cause of their
bitter draughts) to drink up the dregs of it: for the King of Sheshach (a type
of Hieron in loc.
Antichrist, as some aver) must drink after them. The sufferings of Christ's
Church for the present, in their fears and unsettlements, and other
molestations, are as the purest wine: bitter (I confess) they are, because
there is something of Gods frown in them; and something of their sins to be
discerned in them, as the cause of such sufferings: but yet these sufferings
are nothing in comparison to the troubles, distresses, and perplexities, which
shall fall on the Nations which are Enemies to the Church: for such must drink
up dregs of wrath, which shall fill them with horror and astonishment, and make
them reele and stagger, and no more keep footing to annoy, and trouble the
Churches of the Saints, as they have done formerly. Enemies of God and his
Church must therefore look for no other, but terrible over-throwings of their
plots, terrible revelations of their treacheries, terrible consumptions of
their designs and persons: and they are to look for a fearful expectation
of judgment, and for some terrible destruction whenever they come once to be
high enough to be destroyed, and Gods people low enough to be delivered. And
all these temporal judgments, shall be but as a few drops, before the storm
of terror; for God has appointed a day, wherein the Church shall have a full
deliverance, and the world a full riddance of all destroyers. In which day he
will rain on such destroyers snares, fire, and brimstone, and Psalm. 11. 6.
an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.

3. If God will preserve his Church by terrible things: then let us all fear
this great and terrible God. Consider that he can avenge himself with terror
on those, who fear him not. The Ier. 5. 21. 22. etc.
Lord chides his people, for not considering what he has done, can do, and
daily does, that so they might be provoked to fear him. All of us are naturally
prone to fear men, when they are terrible. We usually fear a man of power,
who is able to do us a shrewd turn, to molest our estate, spoil our goods;
who can restrain us in our liberty, or imbitter any of our comforts: at the
approach of such, men quake and tremble; Let us be much more ready to fear,
and reverence the great God, who is able to do terrible things, above all that
the most terrible of men can do: for men can do no more then what he
permitts, but He does whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth. He can soon
Psalm. 115. 3.
blow on thine estate, bring thee to poverty, lay on thee sickness, exercise
thee with pain, and fasten thee to a prison; he can scare thee with visions,
and terrify thee with dreams; he can awaken conscience, and smite the soul,
and make a man a terror to himself. Fear therefore this dreadful God; and
considering how terrible he has already been to Enemies, be persuaded the
more to dread him. They have often molested, and he has as often rescued his
people; they have devised mischeife, but he has defeated it: they have rose in
tumults, and he has ever stilled the tumults, and the madness of the people;
though they have been mighty, yet the Lord is more mighty: who will cut off the
spirit of Princes, and who is terrible to the Kings of the earth. So Psalm. 76.
12.
terrible a God he is, that he ought to be reverenced, and therefore the
Psalmist having related what combinations there are against Christ and his
people, (though Christ will break them all in pieces like a Potters vessel)
concludes with an exhortation to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoice with
trembling. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in
him. Let therefore all that hear of the Lords terror answerably Psalm. 2. 12.
fear him.

4. Seeing God preserves his Church by terrible things; then let us all be
thankful, when at any time by terrible things he has preserved his Church.
Show your thankfulness by speaking of it, and by admiring his goodness in it;
and by resolving to live in his fear: and as men knowing thereby the terror of
the Lord, persuade your selves and others to be faithful; this is true
thankfulness. Bless then God, for not suffering wicked plots, wicked
stratagems, wicked designs to prosper and take effect. If God at any time
curbes wicked insolences, observe it. He sometimes breaks here, and
sometimes there an arm, weakening thereby his Churches adversaries: and this
is to them terrible, but to his servants comfortable; and so much the more
comfortable it will be, if it makes them trust and rely on him only for
help. True thankfulness will not trust on men, nor on the sons of men, for
they are vain. England perhaps may heareof so many thousand horse, and so many
thousand foot, of such and such a great fleet of ships, which intend to have
a-bout with her: but let us not be dismayed: for the Lord sure has yet some
terrible thing to show on the adversaries of England; and he will come riding
on the chariots of salvation to help and relieve it. There are who confidently
affirm, that by the Laodicean Church (spoke of in the Revelation) the
lukewarm Church, Brightman in Apocalypse.
the Lord means the English Church: though I will not peremptorily affirm it,
yet thereupon I dare boldly make this inference; That if the English Church be
the Laodicean Church, then if it will, but hear the voice of Christ, and open
the door to him, if it will become an obedient Church, and repent of its
sins; and if its children would once cordially and seriously reform their
lives, then Christ will come in and suppe with it. And we are told what the
supper is, which the great God has provided; It is in breife, what may be read
at large; the utter destruction in it of the beast and false Prophet, and of
such who combine with them to set up the tyranny of the Roman Papacy. So
terrible Revel. 19, 17. 18.
God will be to such, that the very fore-thoughts of it, should cheer up our
spirits, and fill us full of thankful expectations of help from on high,
that though all nations should compass us about, (and it may be they will
before all be done attempt it;) yet repentant England, shall in the name of the
Lord destroy them all. Christ will come and suppe in it, and it shall suppe
with him; He rejoicing at Englands amendment, and new obedience, and it
enjoying his comforts and deliverances. The God of our Salvation will thus save
and preserve by terrible things in righteousness, So much of the first
observation. The Second is this. Gods deliverance of his Church and people by
terrible things is in righteousness.

The meaning of the point is this. God in all the deliverances of his people by
terrible things, does therein manifest his righteousness. He does therein
nothing but what is righteous, according to righteousness and justice. To clear
this, consider that there is a double righteousness. The righteousness of his
word; which is the righteousness of his faithfulness: and the righteousness of
his works, or his just acts of righteousness. And God does manifest both these
in his deliverance of his people by terrible things.

First God in delivering his people by terrible things, does it according to
his righteous word. Now there is a double righteousness of God in his word.
There is his righteousness of fulfilling his word of promise. And there is his
righteousness of accomplishing his word of threatening. And both are manifest
in the Churches deliverance by terrible things.

1. Gods delivering his people by terrible things is in righteousness; that
is, it is according to the word of his promise. He is faithful to keep
covenant with his servants. Heaven and earth Math. 24. 35. Job. 5 19. Psalm 50.
15. Psalm. 92. 14 15. 16.
shall pass, but not a word of his promise shall fall in vain. And God has
in many places promised to his people deliverance. The last of the quotations
in the margent, is to be understood of Christ mystical: of Christ together
with all his faithful members. God delivered Israel out of Egypt, and it was
terrible, by over-throwing Pharoh and all his host; and yet in righteousness
too, according to his righteous word: as Moses shows. The word of promise is
fulfilled, when the deliverance is by terrible Deuteronomy. 7. 8 9.
things, it is therefore in righteousness. And

2. Gods delivering by terrible things is in righteousness, that is, according
to his word of threatening; that the word of his threatening might come on the
adversaries, and be fulfilled. God in many places has threatened them. He by
Jeremiah gives a gracious promise to his Church, but a terrible threatening to
the enemies of it. The words are these. All they that devour thee shall be
devoured; and all thine enemies every one of them shall go into Ier. 30. 16.
captivity, and they that spoil thee, shall be spoiled; and all that prey on
thee will I give for a prey: for I will restore health unto thee, and I will
heal thee of thy wound, says the Lord, because they called thee an outcast,
saying this is Zion, whom no man seeks after. And that the Lord will
accomplish all this in the last day^^ (it may be in our times or a very little
after us) the 23. and 24. verses shows. So that when God delivers his people
by terrible things, as by confounding and undoing their adversaries, and their
forces; all is but a fulfilling his word of righteousness, his righteous
threats. And thus Gods deliverance is said to be in righteousness, according
to his righteous word.

Secondly, God in delivering by terrible things, does it in righteousness;
that is, he therein declares his righteous facts, that they are very righteous.
There is a double act of Gods justice or righteousness manifest in it. 1. His
righteousness in righting a wronged world. And 2. His righteousness in
revenging it self upon a wronging world; or on those adversaries of his people
which wrong them.

1. God by delivering his people by terrible things does righteously right a
wronged world he thereby rights his oppressed wronged people, easing and
releiving them. So the Prophet: As for my people children are their oppressors,
and women rule over them: oh my people! they which lead thee, cause thee to
err, Esa. 3. 12. 13.
and destroy the way of thy paths: the Lord stands up to plead, and stands
to judge the people. etc. and so the Psalmist. For the oppression of the poor,
for the sighing of the needy, now I will arise says the Lord, and will set him
in safety from him Psalm. 12. 5.
that passes at him. An excellent description of a state wronged Church, which
is a tree shaken, the winds from all corners conspiring to blow it down, it
craks and shakes, and the enemies like wind puffes and blows, and makes a
bussell: but the Lord looks from Heaven, he hears the groans and sighs at
last of his afflicted people; and at length stills these winds and scatters
them, and so the Kingdom and Church stands, and is in safety. As when some
honest traveller in his journey, falls among thieves; they unstrip him and
riffle him and are searching him, when suddenly (while the poor man is in
perplexity) some noble man rides by, seeing his distress, pitties him, and
comes in with power, and sets him free from such violence, and beats and
smites those who molested him, giving them according to their deserts. So it
is; the poor Church is a traveller to Heaven, beset with enemies of all sorts,
who think to riffle her, and leave her poor, naked, destitute and wounded:
but then the Lord comes riding in his excellency to her help: and rescues his
Church. Thus Deuteronomy. 33. 26.
he rights a wronged world and thus he shows his righteousness.

2. God by delivering his people by terrible things does it in righteousness;
because he does thereby avenge himself on the wronging world. It is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. It is
indeed a very 2 These. ^. 6.
righteous thing for God to bring troubles on them. 1. It is a righteous thing
to bring vengance on them, for their wronging himself; for they fight against
him, who war against the Acts 9. 4. Isa. 37. ^9.
Church, they persecute him, who persecute it: they rage against him, who rage
against his people: and God will avenge the wrong done unto him by those, who
attempt to root out such, who keep up his honor in the world. It is a
righteous thing therefore to trouble such. And 2. so it is to take vengance on
them for the wrong, which they do unto his people. The wicked and him that
loves violence his soul hates. The Lord will be avenged on unmercifull men:
There shall be judgment Psalm. 11. 5.
without mercy on those that will show no mercy. And therefore it is just with
God, to render tribulation to those, who have James 2. 13.
injured and unmercifully used his Church and people. Thus it is evident that
the Churches deliverance is in righteousness: the righteousness both of his
word of promise, and of his word of threatening, and the righteousness of his
justice both in righting a wronged world, and in revenging himself on a
wronging world, is thereby made manifest.

This truth serves. 1. To vindicate Gods justice. 2. To terrify the Churches
adversaries. 3. To encourage all Gods faithful people.

First let it serve to vindicate the Lords justice from any aspersions. Men are
ready (when things fall out otherwise then they would have them) to charge God
foolishly, when they see terrible things falling out in the world [as terrible
attempts, terrible massacres, terrible impoverishing of a nation, terrible
executions of wrath] they are ready to say, that they see not how God should be
just in punishing them, by these things, more then others, who deserves (in
their apprehensions) as much yea more then they: but such murmurers should
consider that God does all in righteousness: he can and will do no other then
that which is righteous. It becomes every holy man seeing things falling out
otherwise then he would, to conclude with the Church: I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I Mica. 7 9.
have sinned against him. If God cull thee out to scare thee from thy sins by
terrible things; say thou (when these things happen) that God is righteous, and
will deliver his people by terrible things in righteousness: for he brings
terrible things upon the world, to keep the inhabitants thereof from sinning.
When thy judgments (says the Prophet) are on the earth, the inhabitants Isa
26 9. Psalm. 52. 5. 6. Isal. ^9 5. 6. 7. etc.
thereof will learn righteousness. And the Lord does so thereby to work also
the world, to an awful reverence of him and to stir up his own thereby, to a
greater fervency, and importunity in praying to him for deliverance: and
therefore never charge God with any kind of injustice in his saving and
defending his people, or in ruinating his adversaries by terrible things, and
by terrible means, but say as the Psalmist: I know Psalm. 119. 75.
oh Lord that thy judgments are right and that thou have in faithfulness
afflicted me.

Secondly. Gods delivering his Church and people by terrible things in
righteousness, shows unto us what the adversaries are to expect: namely no
more (and that is enough) but that God should deal with them in
righteousness, and recompense them according to their deeds. This Babylon of
Caldea found, she spoiled, peeled, robbed, and subjected the nations, and God
sent spoilers accordingly unto her, who dealt with her, as she had dealt with
others: the Prophet gives the reason: for the Lord God of recompenses shall
surely requite. The western Romish Iere. 51. 36.
Babylon must, and shall find the like: God will bring upon her slayers and
destroyers, and such who will undoubtedly reward her, Revel. 18. 5. 6. 7. 8.
as she has served the Saints. Yea all enemies shall be recompensed according
to their dealings, with the Church, for God will deliver it by terrible things
in righteousness. They may for a while plot, and project, and attempt, and
some times seem to thrive: but their plotting will in the end ruin
themselves. For the Lord will be known by the Judgment which he executes: and
that judgment is no more but this: the wicked is snared in the works of his
own hands. Adversaries of the Church must Psalm. 9. 16.
look for no other, then to eat the bread of their own baking, and to drink
of their own brewing. Their terriblenesse to the Church shall be measured out,
in a full cup to them, in that which is terrible unto them; for God is
righteous, and in his due time he will deliver his Church by terrible things in
righteousness.

Thirdly Gods delivering his Church or people by terrible things in
righteousness, should encourage all the followers after righteousness: such
who seek the Lord and delight to walk, and be found in a way of
righteousness and holiness. All things to the outward appearance may seem to
work ruin, and go cross; but they shall undoubtedly work in the end to the
ruin of adversaries; for God will deliver but in righteousness. The Lord
remembers the righteous cause of his servants; and though it may be a while
oppressed, yet it shall never be suppressed, and destroyed; for he will again
bring on the cause of religion: and will maintain in the world a people
serving him, in despite of hell, and of Rome which he will destroy in
righteousness. And though your own Persons may be took away, yet still be
encouraged to keep faith, and a good conscience; because the Lord will
preserve a seed of worshippers, and will repair the loss of his Church, by a
more plentiful increase of terror Psalm. 22. 30. 31.
to the adversary, and of comfort to all those, who are faithful in the land.
And therefore let us all from this point be encouraged.

1. To wait contentedly on God, till he work for his people in
righteousness: so the Church did. In the way of thy judgments have we waited
for thee. Look for him as coming to rescue and deliver, for he will do so,
when we are fully fitted for it. Isa 26. 8.


2. Be encouraged also to cry the more earnestly to God to come and save his
people in righteousness: so did the Church. Oh that thou would rend the
heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might flow down at
thy presence Isa. 64. 1. 2. 3.
etc. to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may
tremble at thy presence when thou did terrible things which we looked not
for, etc.

3. Be encouraged to take notice of every particular act of Gods helping any
ways in righteousness: it is an excellent means to gain comfort in
discomfortable times. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways. Isa. 64. 5.


4. Let us all be encouraged to put our selves into such a condition, that we
may be ready to be delivered in righteousness, when God will save and preserve
us: and that is in few words: study righteousness, seek righteousness,
thirst after righteousness, desire to be found in a way of righteousness. The
more we look after and apply our selves to the righteousness of
sanctification or holiness, the fitter shall we be to be saved and delivered
in righteousness. Let it be your prime and principal care not to be found in
your own righteousness, (for that is very odious) but in Christ's. Labor to
be found in him; and when God comes to deliver in righteousness he will espy
your consciences sprinkled by the blood of Christ, and thereby purged from dead
works: he will discern that your hearts are quickened by the spirit of Christ,
the spirit of righteousness, and that your life's are conformable to the life
of Christ who is the son of righteousness, and finding you thus, he will
deliver you among his faithful people in righteousness, though he smites
terribly the adversaries of his Saints: for by terrible things in
righteousness he answers us the God of our salvation. And so much for the
second observation.

The third is this. The deliverance of the Church by terrible things, is Gods
answering his people.

Gods answering implies some things done by the people of God, and some things
done by him.

1. It implies that his people prayed unto him for deliverance: and that he
gives a gracious audience, and full-fillance of their prayer. I will look (as
it is in the Prophet) to the Lord, I will Micah. 7. 7.
wait for the God of my salvation, my God shall hear me, the Church speaks
in prayer, and God hears her in granting her prayers.

2. It implies that his people expects mercies from him, and Gods answering
them is his affording help, his real contributing succor unto them. They
looked unto him (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 34. 5, 6
and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed, this poor man cried, and
the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles, his people expects
mercy: and his answer, is the fulfilling of their expectation. I will (says
Habbakuk) Hab. 2. 1.
stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he
will say unto me.

So then Gods deliverance of his people is an answering their prayers, and an
answering their expectations. They pray for deliverance and he gives it: they
expect it from him, and answerably it comes to pass. Gods delivering of Israel
out of Egypt was an answering of their prayers: I have heard (says God) Exodus
3. 7. 8.
their cry, by reason of their taskemasters for I know their sorrows, and I am
come down to deliver them. When he delivered them at the red sea, it was an
answer to the prayer of his servant Moses: The Lord said then unto him, why
cryest thou Exodus 14. 15.
to me. When he gave Israel victory over Amaleck, he then answered the prayer
of Moses on the mount while Joshua, and Israel fought in the valley. His
deliverance of his people from Jabin, from the Midianites, yea from all their
other enemies at any time, all was an answering of their prayers, and
expectations. They prayed in faith for deliverance, and they waited in faith,
until God had given a full deliverance; and so deliverance was but Gods
answering his people.

Because God usually gives not unto his Church and People deliverance, till
they have sought and sued to him earnestly for it. Thus says the Lord God, I
will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them;
though he knows that his Church does need deliverance, yet he will have his
Church to be Ezekiel. 36. 37
apprehensive and sensible of that her need: for he will have from it, the
honor of his mercy toward it: and of his providence and care over it, as
also of his wisdom, power, and justice in confounding all its adversaries by
terrible things.

This point teaches. 1. To pray for deliverance that God with it may answer us:
And 2. To observe Gods several answers unto his people, by giving unto them
the deliverances prayed for.

First. If deliverance be Gods answering his people: then surely it concerns
all the people of God to put up prayers for deliverance. Prayer must preceed
deliverance: and deliverance is the return of prayer in a gracious answer of
it. We must be praying men, and men expecting deliverance as an issue and
consequent of prayer; and that our prayers may be answered, we are to put up no
other then such, which God will answer: as namely,

1. Let our prayers be prayers of faith, coming from a believing heart. Ask
and doubt not; believe the promises of deliverance, Mark. 1^. ^3
and confidently rely on Gods word to be accomplished, and from assurance that
God will fulfill his word, put up prayers. Both the cloud of promises, and the
cloud of witnesses, persons, families, kingdoms, Churches, which from time to
time have been delivered, and the consideration that the Lords hand is not
shortened, should prevail with us not to doubt, but to pray for deliverance in
faith: not doubting, but that God will answer us.

2. Let our prayers be in humility. A broken, and a contrite heart God will not
despise. He hears the prayers of the humble Psalm. 51. 17.
destitute. Pray for deliverance in humility, and it shall be granted as an
answer to an humble prayer. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God
that he may exalt you in due time. 1 Pet. 5. 6.


3. Let our prayers be importunately earnest without fainting. I have says the
Psalmist waited long and sought the Lord: oh my Lord (says he) I cry in the
day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season I am not silent. The
Lord sometimes Psalm. 22. 2.
delays deliverance, to make us importunately wrestle with him in prayer for
it: and so it may be the answer of our earnest prayers.

4. Let our prayers be sanctifiedly performed: with hearts which are departed
from iniquity. If I (says the Psalmist) regard Psalm. 66. 18.
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Sin causes him hide his
face that he will not hear. If we pray Isa. 59. 1, 2.
for deliverance, let us pray lifting up pure hands from an holy heart: and
then God will give deliverance as an answer to our prayers, which are thus
prayers of faithful, humble, importunate, sanctified petitioners.

Secondly if the deliverance of the Church by terrible things be Gods answering
it: then let us observe Gods several answers unto his people in his giving
several deliverances from time to time. Indeed we must not look to see an
answer to some of our requests at all in our own time; we must not think to
live to see the accomplishing of the number of Gods elect: or the putting an
end to the days of sin or the making of the Church and people of God
completely glorious.

Again it may be, we may not live to see the answer, of many of our other
petitions, which are put up, and for which we are to expect daily tidings, of
some preparations, at least toward their accomplishment: as namely the calling
of the Jews: the spreading of the Gospel at once into all places: the joint
profession of Christ publicly and unanimously in all kingdoms, and among all
people: prayers for such things are put up by us (it may be) in our age, but
the ages to come will see the fruits of them: only this know, that when the
heart firmly believes the truth of these things, and that God will in his due
time accomplish these, then there is some answer of our prayers: because the
same spirit which inables a man to pray for these, works belief, and carries
the eye of the soul, to look beyond all difficulties, and all times, and by
faith to see them as certainly, as if they were already come to pass. Thus
Abraham by faith saw the day of Christ and rejoiced: and so we by faith see the
answer of all the petitions, we have put up: and we should rejoice John 8. 56.
therefore; knowing that when they shall be granted, the grant of them will be
every way answerable to that which we formerly believed and prayed for.

But moreover there are some things which it pleases God to bring to pass in
our times: as perhaps some particular mercies, for our selves, or others, or
for the whole Church: now after prayer, we must wait for an answer, thereby
showing our dependency on God: so the Psalmist: As the eyes of servants look
unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of
her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord Psalm 113. 2.
our God until that he have mercy upon us. It may be God will not grant that
very deliverance which has been prayed for, but some other; yet then the
prayer is answered, though not in the very particular which was desired.

A man perhaps prays that God would root out and destroy all enemies: God
pleases to cut off some, but he will not slay all, least his people forget it,
and therefore he scatters them by his power and brings them down. And though
perhaps Psalm. 19. 11.
God give not a speedy deliverance: yet he answers the prayer for the present,
when the heart is afterward more humble; and more careful to walk with God;
and is more dependant on him; and is still more earnest to seek and cry unto
him: and is thankful for any favor though never so little: for any
deliverance, for any safety vouchsafed from time to time, and still continued.
Likewise God hears our prayers, and for the present gives an answer unto
them, or rather assurance, that he will in due time answer them; when he
fills the heart with content to be denied, and to magnify him however. Thus
let us pray, but with an expectation of an answer to our prayers. When God
gives deliverance, it will be an answer to the prayers, desires, wishes,
longings, and expectations of his people: by terrible things thou will answer
oh God of our salvation. So much for the third observation.

The fourth is this. God is the Author of his peoples salvation or deliverance.

Salvation or the deliverance of Gods people is every where ascribed unto God in
scripture. God is styled the hope of Israel Ier. 14. 8.
the Savior thereof in the time of trouble: and the Church is styled a people
saved by the Lord: as if the maine care of God Deuteronomy 33. 29.
were to save and deliver his people. Salvation belongs to the Lord, and his
blessing is upon his people: and he only works Psalm. 3. 8.
salvation in the midst of the earth. I even I (says he) am the Lord, and
besides me there is no Savior. Psalm. 74. 12. Isa. 43. 1.


For the better understanding of this title know: that there is a double
salvation spoke of in scripture. 1. There is a spiritual salvation from sin
and Satan, and the power of both, and from Hell. And 2. There is a temporal
salvation, which is Gods deliverance of his people, from outward temporal
afflictions, calamities, and distresses under which they are. I take the
temporal is cheifely intended in this title of God, as it stands in the text;
yet the other must not be excluded. A word or two of both.

First if we refer this title here given to God, to the spiritual salvation,
then it may be very evident to us that he is the Author of it.

1. Because he calls us to salvation. He did ordeine us to it, and 1 Thessalonians. 5 9.
he has called us thereunto. Our souls were running headlong to Hell and
perdition but God called us back from the pit. We were as sheep straying, but
God has called us by his word, and such who listen to it and obey it, return
from the way of destruction, and are saved. Besides Gods call to salvation.

2. He puts men into it. The very entrance which any make into it is from
him, Man is naturally averse thereunto; he is unwilling to pass thorough so
many difficulties, to undergo so much mortification, self denial, crucifying
of the world: and to aspire to so much heavenly mindedness as is requisite. It
is the Lord only, who makes the heart, and soul overlooke all this and a great
deal more. It is he only who raises up the spirit, to a resolution to go
thorough all, to follow him in all. My soul (says David) follows hard after
thee. As a child Psalm 63. 8.
does what he can to keep company with his father: so he still applied
himself what he could to imitate his heavenly father. God only brings the
spirit to this, that though it has many discouragements, doubts, and troubles,
and has spent much of its time in by, and sinful thoughts, and ways; yet now
being put into the way of salvation, it goes on in a way of holiness and
righteousness, and is sure to meet with perfected salvation at the last. We
have a strong City, salvation will God Isa. ^6. 1. 2.
appoint for walls and bulwarks: open ye the gate that the rightous nation
which keeps the truth may enter.

3. The progress and perfecting in the way of salvation is from God. The God
of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus after
that ye have suffered a 1 Pet. 5. 10.
while, will make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you. God
perfects, and God guides us to salvation: he guides with his eye, and after he
will receive us up to glory. It is his Psalm. 32. 8.
work to make us persevere unto the end, and to bring his people to
establishment, strength, settlement, and perfection in piety and goodness,
salvation is of God.

4. The crowning of his people with everlasting salvation is from God. God will
give heavenly salvation to those who by Romans 1. 7.
patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor, and immortality,
eternal life.

Thus in respect of the spiritual salvation of his people, God may well be
styled the God of our salvation. But the text speaks most properly of such
things, whereby we may more properly here ascribe unto him this title, as it
has reference to the temporal salvation, or deliverance of Gods people:
though in the application we shall make use of it both ways.

Secondly then this title (oh God of our salvation) relates to his temporal
salvation, of his people whereof we will consider 1. The parts of it: 2. The
reasons of it.

1. Temporal salvation has several parts: or rather it is represented to us
several ways: and God is the Author of every one of them.

1. There is preventing salvation, when the Lord prevents his peoples meeting
with a danger, then he saves them. If a man upon the way in his journey were
told that thieves did lie in wait for him, and thereupon he turns aside a
little, and escapes them, this is a danger prevented. The Lord does many
thousand times thus save his people: thou preventest me (says David) with thy
Psalm. 21. 3.
goodness. God was then saving Jacob and his family, when he sent Joseph into
Egypt: he then prevented their perishing in Genesis 50 20. Math. 2. 13.
the famine. He prevented Herod's slaying Christ by sending an Angel to
forewarne the danger. Gods people are often ignorant that evil is devised,
contrived, prosecuted against them, but God prevents it, and saves them, and
afterward they come to understand so much. I will say of the Lord he is my
refuge, and my fortress: my God in him will I trust: he shall deliver from
Psalm 91. 2. 3.
the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence.

2. There is a preparing salvation which is from God. I call that preparing
salvation whereby the Lord sits his people to meet with adversaries, dangers
troubles and perplexites. The Lords preparing his people to it, is his saving
them from it. Thou have (says David) girded me with strength unto the battle.
Thus the Psalm. 18. 43.
Lords establishing the heart with grace to bear a trouble, and the Lords
giving unto the spirit comfort and consolation in the midst of the thoughts
within: and the Lords speaking peace to the soul, when all the world is in
tumults, and the Lords feasting the soul and spirit within with joys and
expectations of comfort in himself in heaven; when the hail rattles on the
tiles and there is no peace abroad: these and a thousand other ways are part
of the salvation which God works for his people. It is his preparing
salvation, or his preparing them for safety against the trouble which they
encounter.

3. There is an upholding salvation, when any is kept from perishing in a
danger or trouble: and this is also from the Lord. I was sore thrust at that I
might fall, the Lord sustained Psalm. 118. ^3.
me. And so the Lord saves, when he upholds from perishing. If we were let
alone the trouble would overmaster; the waters are perhaps so deep, they would
drown: the fire so raging, it would devour. But if God upholds, holds us by
the chinne that we sink not: if he carries us through the fire and water,
through all, and we be preserved; then he vouchsafes his up holding salvation,
whereby we perish not.

4. There is an establishing or confirming salvation: whereby one is so
strengthened, that no troubles, nor adversaries can out daunt them. My arm (as
it is in the Psalmist) shall hold him up, and my arm shall strengthen him.
When a man walks in slippery dangerous ways, and then is established that he
Psalm. 89. 21.
treades confidently and slips not: here is salvation, troubles, crosses,
afflictions, adversaries, are occasions of falling: but when the Lord
notwithstanding this, keeps up our feet that they slip not, it is his
salvation and a deliverance, Thou have delivered my feet (says the Psalmist)
from falling. The Church is described Psalm. 116. 8. Cant. 8. 5.
coming out from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved. Gods people may be in
many troubles and perplexities, in a wilderness, at a mase, not knowing what way
to turn, but the Lord upholds, and establishes them, and brings them out of
all, but leaning on their beloved. The Church partakes of establishing
salvation.

5. There is also another part or manifestation of salvation; which we may call
rescuing salvation: when the Lord suffers his people to come into danger, and
trouble, and to be as it were in the enemies hand, and yet then he snatches
them out and rescues them. As David did strike in, and take a lamb out of the
mouth of the lion and of the bear: so the Lord strikes in to rescue Psalm. 44 4
his servants, commanding deliverances for his peeple. He suffers them
sometimes to come to the mouth, but he gives them not up a prey to the teeth,
but then delivers them.

6. There is a crowning salvation, or a compassing about with songs of
deliverance: when God puts his people into a state and condition of
security, that no evil shall surprise them to their damage. And this is the
highest pitch of temporal salvation: and God is the author of it. God is my
King of old working salvation in the midst of the earth.

And thus from all these parts, or degrees rather of temporal Psalm. 74. 22.
salvation, it is plain: that God is the God of our salvation. Thus of the
parts of it.

2. The reason proving that God is the Author of his peoples deliverance is
this in stead of many others. In him are to be found all those things, which
are effectual, to work the salvation of his people out of troubles. For in
the salvation, which he grants to his people are to be seen these footesteps
of Gods glory.

1. His pity and compassion toward his people. There is in him toward them
the sounding of bowels; and he will surely Ier. 31. 20.
have mercy on them. Out of his compassion he stands (as it were) deliberating
what to do: How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee
Israel? how shall I make thee Hosea. 11. 8.
as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together etc. And we find that when the people
confessed there sin saying do to us what thou please, only deliver us this
once: then the soul Judge. 10. 16
of God was greived for Israel, his pity moves him to help.

2. God is omniscient: he only knows how to deliver his, The Lord knows how
to deliver the godly out of temptation: he is only infinitely wise, and knows
all purposes, policyes, 2 Pet. 2. 9.
engines, instruments, which attempt any thing against his people: he knows
what they can work to the utmost: and he knows how to defeat their working:
to ensnare them in their own net. He sitts in heaven, and sees, and laughs the
enemies Psalm. 2. 4.
of his Church to scorn. He suffers them a while to busy and weary themselves
in plotting and ruining his people; and then on the sudden he turns all upon
themselves: having them all in derision. As when a man overlookes a company of
boys busy in making clay walls and castles; and hears them talk that they
will destroy hereby any who meddles with them: he laughs at them, and suddenly
comes in, and breaks all their works in pieces, and sets them all on crying
and lamenting, even so the Lord is wise to understand fully all the adversaries
attempts: he laughs, at them, and suddenly breaks their power, and fills them
with wailing.

3. God is all sufficient to rescue and save his people, and deliver them out
of all their troubles. He only is able to save. So he is described by the
prophet: Who is this that comes from Isa. 63. 1.
Edom with died garments, from Bozra, this that is glorious in his apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength, I that speak in righteousness
mighty to save. Nothing can withstand his power, with a strong hand he brought
his people out of Psalm. 44. 4.
Egypt. Deliverances are at his command. Know thou not (said our blessed
Savior to Peter) that I can pray to my father, and he shall presently give me
more then twelve legions Math. 26. 53.
of Angels. All the Armies in heaven, and earth are commanded by him. He is
able to raise up, and fit instruments to be deliverers of his people from them,
that spoil and distress them. The Midianites thought to overbeare Israel
with multitude, Psalm. 47. 9.
and mighty Armies; but the Lord raised up Gideon, and made him successful,
that the Midianites helped to slay one another, and so he utterly discomfited
them.

4. God is very watchful to do his people good, and to give deliverance.
Behold he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep. He will let
no opportunity slip to relieve. The Psalm. 121. 4.
Lord stands up to plead, and stands to judge the people, the Lord will
enter into judgment with the Ancients of his people, Isa 3. 13. 14. 15.
and the Princes thereof; for ye have eaten up the vineyards: the spoil of the
poor is in your houses: what mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and
grind the faces of the poor says the Lord.

These footsteps of Gods glory: his pity, omnisciency, all sufficiency and
watchfulnes does evidence, that the salvation of Gods people comes from no
other but God. He is the God of their salvation.

From this double salvation of the Church, whereof God is the Author, and
therefore is styled here the God of our salvation: we learn. 1. To ascribe
both to him: 2. To seek for both from him: and 3. To labor to have an
interest in the salvation which he works for his people.

First let us ascribe all the salvation which is wrought, to God only.
According to the title here given unto him, say as the Psalmist. Not unto us oh
Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the glory. And this we should do both
in respect of the spiritual, and of the temporal salvation, whereof he makes
us Psalm. 115. 1.
partakers.

1. We are to ascribe our spiritual deliverance to God only. The four beasts
and twenty four elders, fell down before the lamb, saying: Thou art worthy,
for thou wast slain and Revel. 5. 8. 9.
have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people and Nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we
shall reign on earth. All the glory of man's salvation is only to be ascribed
to God. He contrived the means of salvation by Christ, and he gave him to
work salvation, and to brin^g his people to it: let him therefore have the
glory of it. By grace (says the Apostle) we are saved: and Ephe. 2. 5.
as if he had not said enough, he adds: by grace ye are saved thorough faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works lest any
should boast. It was prophesied that when the temple should be built by
Zorobabell, the people of God should with on joint cry say: Grace to it: and he
shall bring Zach 4 7.
forth the head stone thereof with shouting, crying Grace, Grace to it. It was
a type of Gods building his spiritual temples, by working grace in their
hearts, and fitting them to be come holy temples, an habitation of God through
the spirit. Indeed there Ephesians. 2. 21. 22.
shall be mighty oppositions, many difficulties, mountains to be removed. but
the head stone shall be fetched out: Christ the corner stone (which the builders
once refused) should be laid in the heart, and they should all shout Grace,
Grace to it. It is of free grace, that the work is begun, continued, and
finished: the Lord must therefore have the praise of our salvation. He brings
salvation into the heart, he causes it to persevere unto salvation: and he only
will complete our salvation: and therefore every gracious man must confess
that all of his salvation, is only from the God of his salvation. And so the
Lord will count when he writes up the people, that this man was borne there, He
will count that Christ was formed, and framed in the hearts of his Psalm. 87. 6.
people, living in this or that Kingdom: the Lord keeps as it were a record,
of all his glorious salvations, which he has wrought in any, and he will be
glorified by his people for it. The glory then of our spiritual salvation is
only to be ascribed to God.

2. And so we must ascribe only to him our temporal salvation. If he at any
time does deliver, or preserve: let us say of this his salvation, as we did of
the other: Not unto us oh Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the glory.
And with the Psalmist: They got not (this or that deliverance) by their own
sword: neither Psalm 44. 3.
did their right arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the
light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them. Say not it was
the valor, and strength, and wisdom of such and such which has done thus and
thus for us: but acknowledge that God only was the Author, and the other his
instruments of the mercies enjoyed. Many a time Psalm. 129. 1. 2
from my youth up have they afflicted me, may England now say yea many a time
have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed against me:
the plowers plowed on my back, and made long furrows: but it was the righteous
Lord that cut asunder the cords of the wicked. It would be a great work to
relate the bare heads of the mercies which from day to day God vouchsafes to
his people; every day brings out new mercies, new kindnesses, new helps, new
succors, new escapements, sundry sorts of deliverances in on kind or other.
England had long before this have bin as Sodom and as Gomorah, unless the Lord
had saved her: let us therefore ascribe her salvation unto God only: and when
at any time the Lord saves any part of it, or our selves temporally: let this
his kindness lead us on to repentance. Let us look to be partakers also of
spiritual salvation, when he saves us temporally: otherwise his temporal
salvation will prove, but a reserving of us unto eternal destruction. Thus we
ought to acknowledge that God indeed is the God of our salvation.

Secondly. Seeing God is the God of our salvation, then let all of us learn
whether we are to fly for any succor in a time of need: even unto this God,
entitled the God of our salvation. Thus did David in every strait, giving unto
God such Psalm. 18. 1. 2
titles and names, which intimate, that God was all kind of succor unto him.
And this we must do in our need of either of these salvations.

1. In our way spiritual to salvation. We desire to be freed from many of our
lusts, passions, and disordered affections: for though perhaps God has
destroyed in his the dominion of sin, that it reigns not: yet much
corruption remains, keeping them under, from thriving in godliness: and of
this they would be rid: now in this case, we must do as Saint Paul did beseech
God against the messenger of Satan: seek to him for salvation, yea for any
salvation spiritual. If Satan tempt: it is God who must tread down Satan
under your feet shortly, Romans 16, 20.
Satan is still a troubling, though a conquered enemy, seeking to espy all
advantages: and therefore we must to God, who only inables us to resist, that
he may fly from us. On perhaps complains of an unruly, unbeleeving, yea dead
heart: let him remember that it is God that quickens it, and therefore seek to
him resolving not to cease till he leave a blessing behind: the more
unbeleeving, dead, dull, unruly melancholy, and dejected you find the heart, be
the more importunate, doubling, trebling, yea multiplying suites: for God at
length will hear and free thee from an evil heart of unbeleife. He has the
hearts of Kings in his hand, and can turn them: he only can change the heart,
and for this he will be sought, that such a deliverance and salvation may be
only ascribed unto him. Another it may be is afraid, that he shall one day
miscarry, yielding to the temptations which daily assaults him: one day he
doubts he shall fall back, giving out from his Christian profession: let such a
man seek to God, for he only establishes, upholds, and strengthens in grace:
he only guides his servants, making them persevere to the end, and afterward he
receives such, so guided up to glory. Thus we ought to seek only to him for
any thing needful unto our spiritual salvation.

2. Let us only seek unto him for any temporal deliverance or salvation.
David, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, yea all saints have done so, and so ought we
to do, both for our selves, for others, and for the Churches of God. The Church
needs much salvation: it was David's prayer, and it should be ours; Redeem
Israel oh God out of all his troubles: not from one but from Psalm. 25. 22.
all: from its troubles from within, and from its troubles from without: yet
seek to God, call in his help, and his salvation unto her: Our help stands
in the name of the Lord who has made Heaven and Earth: let us depend on him
for it, in a praying way: so the Prophet. Oh Lord be gracious to us: we have
waited for thee, be thou their arm every morning, our salvation Isa. 33. 2.
also in the time of trouble. The Church has (blessed be God for it) many to
fight for her; but unless the Lord be their arm, every morning, strengthening
them to fight, all will for a certain miscarry: and though he do strengthen,
yet she may come into trouble for all that: and then her duty is to pray that
he may be her salvation in trouble. And thus God is to be sought unto, as to
the Captain of his peoples salvation both spiritual, and temporal.

Thirdly seeing God is the God of our salvation: let us his people labor to
get assurance, that we have an interest, in the salvation which he works. As
his people have interest in him; so they have in his salvation. To get this
assurance: let it be our care to have an interest in Jesus, the Author of
eternal salvation and the founder of all temporal deliverances: for all, and
all manner of salvation is ratified, and confirmed to Gods people in Christ. We
may be assured that we have interest in Christ, and in the salvation which he
has wrought.

1. If we be lost in our selves and sensible of our need of salvation. Christ
was sent to the lost sheep, to such who in their Math. ^8. 11.
own apprehensions, are lost, being not righteous in their own eyes. He came
to call sinners to repentance: burdened sinners, such who call to Christ for
help, least they perish: such he will save: come unto me all ye that are
weary, and heavy laden and I will refresh you. Math. 11. 29.


2. If we yield obedience to him, from whom we expect salvation, it is evident
that then we have interest in Christ and his salvation. For Christ is the
Author of salvation, to all them that obey him. A savior he is to such, to
whom he is also a sovereign: Heb. 5. 9.
for his saved people are saved to walk in holiness. I. Ephe. 1. 4.


3. If we willingly hear and practice his word, it is a sign that we shall be
saved: For God will have all to be saved, and 1 Tam. 2. 4.
come to the knowledge of the truth, and salvation (says the Psalmist) is far
from the wicked, because they seek not thy stat^^es, but I have longed for thy
salvation, and thy law is my delight. Let Psalm. 119 155.
us make Gods word our delight, and God will make good to us this his title,
that he is unto us, the God of our salvation. And so much for the fourth
observation,

The fifth is this. God is the confidence of all his people in all places.

The confidence of the earth: of the ends of the earth, yea of all the ends of
the earth: and as if that were not enough: he is the confidence of those who
are a far of upon the sea. The confidence of those on sea, who are surrounded
by sea, of Ilanders: and the confidence of those on land, in all lands, of the
whole continent. In handling this we will consider. 1. How God can be called
the confidence of all the world. 2. What this confidence is, which all his
people every where have. 3. Why God is their confidence: or what are their
grounds of confiding in him. And 4. What use may be made of this title, given
unto God: who is here called the confidence of all the world.

First how can God be called the confidence of all the world? This question may
well be asked, that the doubts, which it affords may be removed. For if by the
ends of the earth, be understood the inhabitants of the earth: or the nations
on it: people dwelling on the earth, and in the sea: it will then be said, that
it does not appear that all these trust and confide in God. There are many
nations which know him not. And therefore how is God said to be the confidence
of the ends of the earth.

To this we must answer, according to a double acception of these words, the
ends of the earth. They may be taken either collectively or else distributively.

1. If we take these words collectively: for all nations in all places: then
two things may be answered to the question.

1. Though many nations as yet know not God, yet in those nations there is
sufficient means given from God, to let them know that he only should be their
trust and confidence. In all nations there are such demonstrations of Gods
power, such declarations of his goodness, that he has not left himself without
witness, and that he only is to be depended on for all their good, and to be
trusted, and confided in. Two scriptures proves this. We (says Saint Paul)
preach to you, that you should turn to the living God, which made heaven and
earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein, who in times past suffered
all nations Acts 14 15. 16. 17.
to walk in their own ways, notwithstanding he left not himself without
witness; in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven. And fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. We see that God vouchsafed
to all nations common outward temporal mercies, that very heathens (if they
would but observe and take notice of it) might thence have sufficient proof,
and witness that he only is to be trusted in. And so likewise Gods severity,
and judgments in smiting nations (as yet not knowing him) these are proofs,
that such nations ought to know, that God only is to be confided in. The wrath
of God (says the Apostle) is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of men, who hold Romans 1. 18, 19, 20.
the truth in unrighteousness: because that which may be known of God is
manifest in them, for God has showed it to them: for the invisible things of
him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things which are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are
without excuse. So then, though many nations, do not actually make God their
confidence, yet God has witnessed to them, that he is or should be their only
trust and confidence.

2. Though many nations do not as yet make God their confidence: yet all
nations shall one day do so; and so for the present it is prophetically true,
that God is the confidence of all the ends of the earth. David in spirit
foresaw the great honor, and glory, which God should have in all nations: and
therefore he being a prophet, and knowing what God would do in these later
days, he seeing this before, spoke of the universal adoration of God in all
nations, and of their taking him, for their only God, in a confidentiall
reposing themselves on him. And because of the certainty of the fulfillance of
all this, in due time therefore David speaks of it, as if it were already come
to pass, and here he calls God the confidence of all the ends of the earth,
and of those who are a far off upon the sea. This is not only employed in this
title here ascribed to God; but David has so much in another place. Ask of
me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the Psalm. 22. 27.
earth for thy possession: And again. All the ends of the world Psalm. 2. 8.
shall remember themselves, and turn to the Lord, and all the kindred of the
nations shall worship before him. And again. He Psalm. 72. 8. 11.
shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to the end of the
earth, all Kings shall fall down before him all nations shall serve him.

Take then the words as prophetically spoken: of the time when God shall by
terrible things shake the nations, being the desire of his people: and then it
will appear, that he has bin the Savior of his: from all their troubles and
oppressions: and then all nations will come in, and choose him for their God
and Lord: one nation after another, till all have made him their confidence:
and so in time these words shall be fully accomplished, that God is the
confidence of all the world: of all the ends of the earth.

If the words were handled in this sense, according to this exposition: they
would afford much instruction, touching the expectations, which we are to have
of the conversion of the nations of the world: and concerning directions, to
pray for it: that the arm of the Lord may be revealed to all people: according
to that of David. God be merciful unto us and bless Psalm. 67. 1. 1.
us, and cause his face to shine on us, that thy way may be known on earth, thy
saving health among all nations. It is a blessing and mercy from God on his
Church, that for the present it knows him: but it will be a new glimps of the
light of his countenance on it, when the nations come thoroughly to understand
and praise him aright with it, as their only confidence. We should expect this,
and pray for it; and desire the Lord to remove all impediments of it: which for
the present are very great. For every valley must be filled, and every
mountain and Luke. 3. 5.
hill must be brought low, the crooked must be made straight, and the rough
ways made smooth. People of lower, and higher rank in all places, must be
filled with grace; after they are brought into a state of humiliation: and
whatsoever is crooked among them, must be made straight, brought to the rule,
be squared by the word: and the ways which are rough, or offensive shall be
smoothed: just offenses, truly scrupling offenses shall all be took away: and
then after this all flesh shall see the salvation of God: all nations shall
then come to know that Christ is the Savior, and salvation, which God has set
out to the world: There being no other name under heaven, by which Acts. 4. 12.
men can saved. These things might be prosecuted with much instruction, and
comfort to all Gods people, but I choose to leave the Prophetical handling
these words, to the ages to come, who shall experimentally find the things
(now spoken of) to be very true. Let it suffice us to know, that these words
are prophetically true. God is the confidence of all nations, because he will
be so, when all nations shall come, to acknowledge him for their God. And so
we may safely understand the words collectively: which so understood, they are
a full answer to the question.

2. If we take the words distributively: for the several countries of the
world in parts: and therein more particularly for the several inhabitants; for
the particular persons, dwelling in the earth, and on the sea: yet then, the
doubt remains still: How God can be said to be the confidence of every
particular man in the earth. It seems otherwise: experience teaches us, that
there are very few who trust God and confide in him: how then is this true,
that he is the confidence of the ends of the earth, and of those on the sea.

To this I answer. When it is said that God is the confidence of the ends of
the earth: we must not understand these words, of every particular individual
person, or nation: but of some in all places, of some in all nations: and so it
is very true, that his own people (where ever they be) make him their
confidence. They trust in him, rely on him, depend upon him. So that the
meaning of these words (The confidence of the ends of the earth etc.) is: Gods
people in all the earth, and on the sea: where ever they are, make God their
confidence, though others do not. And so it proposes to us this doctrine.

God is every where the confidence of his people.

I say of his people: of those to whom he is the God of salvation, of those
whom he answers: for whom he works terrible things in the earth. This
righteous holy people make God their confidence. And that God is the confidence
of his people in all places, not only this scripture, but also others prove.
Some says the Psalmist trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will
remember the name of the Lord our God. And from the text let Psalm. 20. 7.
us take notice of the description of this sanctified considing people. 1. They
are called the ends of the earth: the extremity of the earth, as if they were a
people, shut up in a corner, a people driven to the ends, or out skirts of the
earth to serve God there. And moreover: 2. They are a people far off on the
sea. A people exposed to as great hazards and dangers, as can be imagined, Toto
divisos ^rbe Britannos, Virgil.
as if they were a people cut off from others by the sea, and destinated to be
a people afflicted, and continually to be tossed with waves and tempests. Yet
this people in this condition as it were Isa. 54. 11.
an outcast driven to all inconveniences of earth and sea shall still trust in
God: making him their confidence.

I know (as I said before) that this description aims principally, at the
universality of the Church; which shall extend and spread it self, far and
near in all places on the earth, to the utmost bounds both of sea and land.
But yet withal it will imply this that I say, that though Gods people be a
people, as it were shut out from the nations of the earth; not reckoned among
them; though they were penned up in the utmost limits, not thought worthy to
tread, and to live on the earth, and therefore contemned of all people, and
exposed to a thousand miscarriages and hard usages: though they be tossed in
name, in estate, in their persons: yet shall this godly people, this seed
which serves the Lord: be accounted unto him for a generation. And they shall
make the Lord their stay, and staff, their hope, and confidence. So says the
text, He is the confidence of all the ends of the earth, Psalm. 22. 30.
and of all them that are a far off upon the sea: all his people every where,
in all places, in all business, in all hazards, in all straites, for all
comforts do still make the Lord their trust and confidence. And thus the first
thing, the question purposed is resolved, how God is said to be the confidence
of the ends of the earth etc.

Secondly consider what this confidence is which all his people every where
make him: what does it imply.

The word here signifying trust or confidence: is sometimes put for an hopeful
security. Ye shall do my statutes and keep my (...)
judgments and do them, and ye shall dwell in the land in safety: that is in
an hopeful confidentiall security. Now this confidence Levit. 25. 8.
is nothing else, but a secure resting on God, for all manner of succor, and
security in the good, and comfort which we would have. God is said to be the
confidence of his people in these respects.

1. In respect that they hope for all good from him. Confidence is not only an
expectation of the full fruition of himself, as our portion; but also of all
things else together with him, and of all things else which are good from him.
The Lord is my portion says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. The soul
looks on all its good, and comfort in heaven and earth, as from the Lord
Lamen. 3. 24.
who is its portion: and as to be supplied from him, as out of its portion. It
expects from him life; and health, and outward comforts, friends, good name,
food, raiment, yea every thing: if these fail; it looks to be supplied from
the Lord, its portion; yea and for all its good spiritual, temporal and
eternal. Not only the pardon of sin, and things spiritual and heavenly, but
likewise protection, provision, and things earthly, are hoped for from God.
Whom have I (says the Psalmist) in heaven but thee and in earth there is none
that I require besides thee. Psalm. 73. 25.


2. God is said to be the confidence of his people in respect of their secure
relying on him for security, and safety, and repulsing all evil from them.
David to show that he relied on him for all manner of safety, calls him, his
rock, his for tresso his buckler, the Psalm. 18. 1. 2
horn of his salvation, and his high tower. God was a rock to him, in the
seas and waves of his trouble, when afflictions like billows came thick and
threefold, he broke them, and secured him as on a rock. And God was a fortress
to him in a siege, a a shield against a storm of darts: a shelter against a
storm of inconveniences: an horn of salvation to push away adversaries, and
an high tower where he was safe. Making God our confidence is a secure relying
on him for safety, and security against all the evil, which is feared, or
which has seized on us.

3. God is said to be his peoples confidence, in respect of their recumbency
and dependency on him, in all businesses, and employments thorough which they
go in this life. A contented acquiescence resting on God: relying on him, for
the bringing to pass (according to his will) what we have to do, is a true
making God our confidence. So David, Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also
in him, and he shall bring it to pass. And so Psalm. 37. 5.
Solomon, Trust in the Lord, with all thine heart, and lean not to rhine own
understanding, in all thy ways acknowledge him, and Prove. 3. 5. 6.
he will direct thy paths. Now this confidentiall trusting to God, in all that
we have to do, is seen most eminently in one of these three particular acts.

1. When men make God their confidence, though they have most apparent means
of effecting, or working what they are about: yet they will not rely on those
means, but on God and his blessing upon it. So the Psalmist, I will not trust
in my bow, neither Psalm. 44. 6.
shall my sword save me, but thou have saved us from our enemies and have put
them to shame that hated us. And so men make God their confidence, when though
they have happy success in their undertakings, yet look through all on God,
as the donor and giver of it, and as the worker of all their works for them
and in them. A man who though he has bread, and sits down thereto; yet knowing
that he is not fed by bread alone, but by Gods blessing, by the word that
proceeds out of Gods mouth, therefore he trusts in God: and though he watches
and builds, yet still he looks to God, acknowledging that except the Lord
keep Psalm. 127. 1. 2
the city, the watchmen waketh but in vain: and except the Lord build the
house, he labors in vain who builds it: and if he plow and tills his ground,
yet confesses that it is God who gives him knowledge unto it, and that blesses
his labors: and therefore whilst he is about his ordinary employments, yet he
hopes and trusts in God, even in plowing there is hope: the man who does thus;
is one undoubtedly, who makes God his confidence, and so also this is seen.

2. When men make God their confidence, though they have no apparent means of
effecting what they are about or intend. Gideon saw no way whereby God would
give deliverance by him, from the Midianites, yet he trusted on God, and relied
on him. David going out against the Philistine, only with a staff and a
sling, yet trusted in God. The Lord that kept me out of the paw of the Lion,
and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistine. The Apostles and Disciples 1 Samuel 17. 37
which went on Christ's message without money, and change of raiment, yet
trusted on God for provision and lacked nothing. And so when men trust on God,
for a blessing on their callings and labor, though they see no likelihood of
their thriving therein: and so when a man (in the use of spiritual means)
still trusts God, he will make use of the ordinances, he is attentive to the
word, he reads, meditates, prays, comes to the Sacrament, and it may be he
finds little comfort in all, his soul is nothing more quickened, nor at all
settled by them: and yet out of conscience to Gods commandments he uses these,
depending not on them, but trusting to God, that at last he shall have comfort,
settlement and peace by them, though for the present he find none.

3. When a man has all means in appearance contrary to him: every thing
seems to work against him, yet he does put his trust in God, that God will
still make good his promise, showing himself gracious, and being still the
preserver of his people. This is trusting in God, and making him our
confidence, here beyond all hope, is a believing in hope, against hope, against
all that is seen. Thus when a man sees all the world band together against
the Church: when Kings, Rulers, Nobles, great mighty, powerful, Psalm. 2 1.
wise, and subtle ones, yea people of all sorts, combine and conspire to root
out Christian profession, and to bring a licentious Libertinisme, and Atheism,
into the world: when he shall see the Church in distresses, and perplexities,
as it were besieged on all sides; yet then to trust in God, and to be able to
see as Elisha, more for the Church, then against it, this is a making God our
confidence, it is a relying and trusting on him. So when in great penury, in
the want of food and sustenance, one yet relies on God, it is a great degree of
confidence. Thus Eliah trusted to God for his feeding by Ravens, and afterward
for his food from the meal in the barrel, and the oil in the widows cruse.
It was a great degree of confidence in the Prophet Habbakuk: that though the
fig tree should not blossom, nor fruit should be in the vine, Hab. 3. 17. 18.
the labor of the Olive should fail, and the field should yield no meat: the
flocks should be cut off from the fold, and there should be no herd in the
stalls, yet (he says) he would rejoice in the Lord, and would joy in the God
of his salvation. It is an high degree of confidence, still to rely on God in
the want of means and so it is to rely on him in the contrariety of means, so
David trusted in God, when he seemed to be abandoned of all: if he has a
favor to me (said he) I shall see both the Arc and this place. And 2 Samuel 15.
25.
so in spiritualls, when all seems contrary, yet then trust in God, the Law
perhaps thunders out death, against the soul of a poor sinner; the Gospel
yields no comfort: godly conference adds nothing, holy exercises leaves him
still, as it found him comfortless and troubled, yea perhaps more troubled,
because we have used them; yet it still does trust in God, looking beyond
sense, peeping within the veil, and perceiving that God will at last, speak
peace, and though he slay, yet (with Job) it will still trust in him: this is
a very great exaltation of God, and making him our confidence.

These and many like cases may be ours, when the means appointed to do us good
seem to work contrary, and yet in conclusion they will do us good: it is our
duty (how ever they work) to trust to God, making him our confidence. A man
having a faithful friend, whom he knows to be trusty, and real in any thing,
which he undertakes for him, though he perceives that things go untowardly
cross, in his friends managing some affairs for him, yet he relyes on him,
and is confident, that he will do all to his advantage at the last: or as when
a man has a faithful counselor to follow his cause, and plead it: he sees
perhaps his counselor much crossed, and thwarted: yet knowing him to be
cordial and wise, and sollicitous in his undertaking, and very careful to
take any occasion, and to make use of any thing offered to promote his good: he
will depend on him, for soliciting his cause to the utmost: such a thing is
our trusting in God, though in a far more eminent way: we trust him as a
friend, to manage all for us: and though we apprehend that things prove
otherwise, then we expected; yet we still depend on God; knowing that he will
at last cause all things to work for our best. We trust him also as our
counselor who will thoroughly plead the cause of his people: and though they
seem a while to suffer yet he will at last give peace to the land, and
disquiet the inhabitants Ier. 50. 34.
of Babylon.

In these respects God is said to be the confidence of his people in all places.

Thirdly the reasons or grounds why Gods people so confide in him: or why God
is thus their confidence, are these two, to name no more..

1. His people in all places, in all estates, in all conditions, desire to
glorify him above all: and this they do most by confiding and trusting in him.
For.

1. They glorify his providence: while they thus rely, depend, and stay
themselves on him. Their trusting in him shows, that they are a people at his
disposal, to do with them as he sees fit: either to bring them into straites,
or to enlarge them: to make them vessels of honor, and comfort: or to be made
broken vessels, a people for misery and destruction. This trusting in God
exceedingly gloryfies his providence, and sovereignty over them, Confidence in
him, is a gracious submission to be ordered, and desposed of, as he sees fit.
It is a yielding, that he may be gloryfied thorough us, whether he break us,
or build us, wound us, or heal us, save us, or destroy us, make us glorious or
miserable. Confidence in him ever implies in it an humble acknowledgment that
we are but as clay in the hands of the potter: to be disposed of, as will best
suit with his glory.

2. Confidence in God gives unto him the glory of his truth: or the glory of
his promises: it manifests our acknowledging of his faithfulness, and our
depending upon the word of his truth. It is a great glory to God, that we
account him faithful, a God keeping promise with his people, and this is done,
when we confide in him. David prayed Let thy mercy come also unto me, oh Lord
even thy salvation, according to thy word: and he professes Psalm. 119. 41.
that his soul faints for his salvation, but I hope (says he) in thy word.
And again: uphold me according to thy word, verse. 81.
that I may live, and let me not be ashamed of my hope. Thus God has the
glory of his truth: when we confide in him. verse 116.


3. Confidence in God gives him the glory of his goodness, it is a real
acknowledgement, that the Lord is good, and does good, and that we therefore
depend upon him, as children do on their Psalm. 119. 68.
parents for all our maintenance.

4. This our confidence in God, gives unto him the glory of his Godhead. We
then glorisie him, when we make him the master of our affections: as when we
love, and fear and joy in him and the like: but when we hope and confide in
God, we then gloryfie him above the glory, which we give unto him by our other
affections. For though in them all the principal stream runs to Godward; yet
there are rivelets and by currants of these affections, permitted to run to
other things. As for example: we love God, and gloryfie him by our love, when
he only and cheifely is loved by us: but yet our love also runs out to other
things: to his children for his sake: and to our neighbors: and to men: and to
other things subordinately. And so we gloryfie God, when he is primely and
principally our fear and dread: but yet he allows us to fear the
magistrates who bear the image of his majesty, and to fear our parents, and
to fear and reverence others. And so we gloryfie him when he is cheifely and
principally our delight, and joy, and when our souls cheer up themselves in
his word: but yet he allows us to joy in other things: we may joy and delight
in his saints, on the earth: and in outward mercies, blessings and
deliverances: we may take pleasure in the creatures moderately. I might speak
the like of all other affections. But now in confiding and hoping in God we
only gloryfie him. The whole stream of our hope is to run to Godward, and to
him only. When we make him our confidence, we trust not in any thing else, but
surrendering up to him all our hopes, we then make him fully, and wholly our God:
and we thereby give him the sole interest and command in our affections: and so
we hereby gloryfie him. Thus the people of God being every way desirous to do
so, they therefore make him their confidence: for confiding in him honoreth him
as God.

2. Gods people make him their confidence: because they see in God an all
sufficiency, to supply their defects, to comfort them Reas. 2.
in distresses, to relieve them in their wants, and to furnish them with all
things, which they can desire and would have. The sight of this alsufficiency
in God, to do all this, is wrought in them, from one, or from all these
considerations which are the ground of hope and confidence, as.

1. They know that God himself is very powerful, able to help and save, and
therefore they confide in him, they know that he is able to give all what they
need, both in spirituals and temporalls. He made and framed all, and all is at
his disposal; and he can dispose of all for their good. This the Prophet
acknowledges that he made heaven, and gives rain, and showers, and every
comfort. Ier. 14. 22.
Art not thou he oh Lord our God, therefore we will wait on thee, Lord thou
have made all these things. Gods people know that he has power to save, and
deliver them, out of trouble, and yet though he do not, they will trust in him,
because he can do it and none else. Shadrach Meseck and Abednego said so, Our
God whom we serve Dan. 3, 17. ^^
is able to deliver us from the fiery furnace, and he will free us, out of thy
hand oh King, that we will not serve thy, Gods, nor worship the image which
thou have set up. A man who has a strong and powerful convoy for his safety,
thorough the dangerous country he travells in, will be the more confident,
knowing that he who conducts him, is of power to raise the country, for his
defense: so a Christian in his travel to heaven, has cause to con^ide in God,
for his convoy thither, seeing he knows that God himself is powerful, and
likewise able to raise the country to call in all the creatures, both of
heaven, and earth, for his safe conduct, and to make all work together for his
best.

2. His people know that Gods only care provides for them and all the world,
seeing he has taken on him the care of all things. The eyes of all wait on
thee, and thou give them their meat in due season, thou openest thy hand,
and satisfies the desires of every living thing: and therefore they make him
their Psalm. ^^5. ^5.
confidence, knowing that they have no cause to distrust him. God takes care
for oxen, much more for his servants, he has (besides his general care, in
providing for all creatures) a special care over those of his own family. He
himself tells some men, that they are worse then infidells, because they
provide not for their own: he himself therefore will both think on, and
relieve 1. Tim. 5. 8.
his own, in due time, he provides both for their bodies, and for their
souls: and he who gives to the body now a few crummes, will never deny unto
the soul the crown prepared for it. When Gods people do seriously think on
this, they see that they have just ground to confide and trust in God.

3. Gods people know, that he is so powerful, that though for our good he
often imploys instruments, and creatures, or secondary causes, bestowing on
them strength, and ability, to work for their good; yet that these can work
nothing except he concur with them: they are without his concurrance like
broken cisternes, or as the brooks of Tema, affoording no comfort, but soon
dried up. The Lord can do with them, as he did with the Egyptian chariots, if
he take off the wheels they stand. The Apostle tells us, that in him we live,
and move, and have our being: the Saints considering this, make God their
confidence. Acts. 17. 18.
Not any creature can hurt or help, unless God concur. A sword may be
drawn and strike, but it wounds not, unless God does give it a commission,
and put strength into it. The Psalmist tells us, that God turns the edge of
the sword. It may smite but if God blunts its edge, there will be no harm.
Nothing likewise helps without him, clothes could not warm, Psalm. 89. 43.
friends could not help, or works could not prospet, unless the Lord give a
blessing. Consider your ways says the Lord, ye have sown much, and bring in
little, ye cate, but ye have not enough, ye drink, but ye are not filled
with drink, ye Hag. 1. 5. 6.
cloth ye, but their is no warm, and he that earneth wages, earneth wages,
to put it into a bag with holes: ye have looked for much, and lo it came to
little, and when ye brought it home Ver. 9. 10.
I did blow upon it. The heavens over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is
stayed from her fruits. Creatures are no further beneficial to us, then it
pleases God to concur. Paul plants, Apollos waters, but yet God gives the
increase. The Saints knowing this, do therefore see, that they have a
sufficient ground, to make God their confidence.

4. Gods people know, that he is able to do alone whatsoever any secondary
cause does. God can do that thing, either with it or without it. And this makes
them confide in God only. The streams depends on the fountain, but the
fountain it self can send out its waters, some other way, by some other
channells. The creatures depends on God, the great creator, and if he but
speak a word, it is done, what he wills, he can work without his creatures,
for his people, and will do so, if he see cause: and therefore his people see
reason, to confide in him.

5. Gods people know that he has engaged himself by promise, to those that
trust in him, he is their father, and cares for them: and though a parent
forsake their child, yet he will not his people. When my father and my mother
forsake me, then the Psalm. 37. 4.
Lord will take me up. Indeed God^ people may see there are many
improbabilityes of their safety, yet seeing God has promised, Psalm. 27. 10.
they see no cause to distrust. Abraham knew that he had a dead body, yet
believed, because his God was the living God. Sarah had a barren womb, yet God
was able to make it fruitful. He can turn a wilderness into a fruitful
field. Though your hearts should be naughty, unbelieving, misgiving: yet hope
in Gods promises: consider his infinite ability and his undoubted fidelity, in
keeping promise with his servants, and you cannot choose but trust in him, and
make him your confidence.

Upon these grounds, or for these reasons, Gods people make him their
confidence.

Fourthly: this title that God is the confidence of all his people, should make
us try our selves, whether we are such, to whom he is the only confidence. And
here we will show. 1. Such signs whereby every one good, and bad, may know it:
and 2. Such whereby they who are truly Gods people, may certainly find that
they do so, in some peculiar acts or other.

1. The trialls whereby every on may guess at their own condition, in this
respect are these.

1. He who truly makes God his confidence, will above all things desire Gods
favor: and will part with any thing for it. No man would be pulled from the
horns of the Altar, which while he holds, he is in safety: we cannot persuade
a company of naked men to forsake the fort, wherein they are safe, and to
commit themselves to the open field; they will desire to keep where they have
confidence: thus the man who makes God his confidence will do any thing for
him, and part with any thing for his favor. Moses forsakes all the treasures
in Egypt, and the glory in it for God. It is a sign that a man makes God his
confidence, when he renounces his sins and lusts; and is content to be
disgraced, nicknamed, and to suffer the loss of all things gladly for God. It
is sign that he sees more in God, then others, and more in God then he can
lose, he finds that Christ is all in all. But surely they as yet have not made
God their confidence, who sell God for the world, as Demas; Christ or the cause
of Christ for gain, as did Judas: who are content to let gospel, conscience,
goodness, and all go, so they can thereby please such, on whom they depend.
They never trusted God, who prizes their sins, lusts, and sinful pleasures
before him: neither will they make him their confidence, if troubles should
come.

2. He truly makes God his confidence, who makes him an universal
confidence, and trusts in him in all things, and for all things, He comitteth
his whole ways to him: his whole person, his whole business, his whole
managing, he trusts in him in all places, at all times, in health, and sickness,
for provision and protection, in times of trouble, and any danger, for
Children, and for a blessing in every thing. He trusts on him, for earth as
well as for heaven, for grace: as well as for glory. But that man has not made
God his confidence, who does not trust him in all things. Some will not trust
him with their temporalls: they dare not believe in him to provide for them,
and theirs after them: they depend not on him, for their outward estate, others
will trust him for temporalls, but not for spiritualls; they are loath to rest
on him only, for full salvation, and pardon. They would have something of their
own to justify them before God: And this is all the trouble of many: but God
will be the sole confidence of his people: trust in him, for with him there is
plentiful redemption. He who trusts in God will make him his universal
confidence.

3. He who makes God his confidence will be industrious in the use of the
means which brings a blessing on him, and which God has appointed. Thus he
who confides in God for salvation, will diligently search after the means of
salvation, harkening and listening after the word of salvation, he who confides
in him for wordly things, will be industrious in an honest calling. They trust
not God, who sit still, nor they, who set themselves into no good way. He
trusts not God for salvation, who says, if God has predestined me to life,
I shall be saved, though I betake my self into no such ways, as the Preacher
speaks of: he considers not, that God has predestined as well to the
means, as to the end, and to the end, by the means: and that he saves only
such, who betake them to his appointed means. It is a delusion to think to
come to heaven, without walking in the way to it: it is as if men expected to
reap an harvest, and yet never sowed a grain of seed. So likewise he never
trusts God, for outward who does not apply himself, to an industrious way of
obteining them, why look ye (said Jacob to his sons) one upon another: I
have heard that there is corn in Egypt, get ye down Genesis 42. 1. 2.
thither and buy for us from thence. A confidentiall man will be industrious in
the use of means.

4. He who makes God his confidence, will not put forth his hands unto
unlawful means, for his help. David relied on God for the Kingdom of Saul,
but would not use unlawful means 1. Sam. 26. 10.
to obtain it. Such never trusted God, who resolve to steal, oppress,
defraud, lie and flatter, and use wicked means to gain a penny. They trust not
God, who take a pension from Mammon. Nor they, who (when they miss a thing, or
when any thing is amiss with them) will consult with witches and wizards, as
once Saul did with the witch of Endor, and Abaziah sent to the God of Eknon.

5. He who makes God his confidence, will be undaunted in any condition.
Confidence in God makes the heart invincible. It is true: an holy confiding man
when evil comes, cannot but see it; and be thereof sensible, and troubled at
it: but though he be troubled on all sides (as the Apostle speaks) yet he is
not in despair: though he be sometimes afraid, yet with Psalm. 17. 3.
David he can say, in this will I be confident: in this he is confident, that
God is his refuge, his present help in trouble, his preserver from the hurt of
evil. Though I walk (says David) through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil for Psalm. 23. 4.
thou art with me. He may suspect his confidence; whose heart in troubles is
wholly spiritles, and comfortles, drooping and dwining away, as Naballs did: he
may fear, he is not yet resolved to commit freely his soul into the hands of
God, who is a faithful creator. The confiding man will not be heartlesse,
though an universal death and desolation befall the land; because he knows
that by death he shall be translated hence to see the goodness of the Lord. I
had fainted (says David) unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of Psalm. 27. 13.
the living.

Thus every one good and bad may try whether they have made the Lord their
confidence.

2. There are also some signs which may help all Gods truly faithful people,
to gain assurance, that they have undoubtedly made him their confidence. Many
of those (I know) complain of unbeleeving and despairing hearts, that they
cannot confide and trust in God as they should. To whom for comfort, I answer
that true believers may know that they have really made God their confidence,
if ever the Lord please to bring them to one of these temptations.

1. When the promises made by God, seem to be delayed, and there is no
appearance of their fulfillance: then all such who have not made God their
confidence will cease expecting and believing the word of promise, like that
profane man: this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any
longer. But 1 King. 6. 33.
if notwithstanding Gods delays: the heart keep still to the word of truth;
and is still confident that in time it will be fulfilled, it undoubtedly is
then an heart confiding in God. A waiting heart is a confiding heart. So the
Prophet: I will wait on Isa. 8. 17.
the Lord, and look upon him. A Merchant who rests on his factor, for the
return of some commodity, which he promised, finding that his factour
deferres, yet will account him faithful, knowing that he on weightier
considerations, for his Masters greater profit, uses not to return commodities
so soon as he expected. So the soul (which rests on God, for the
accomplishment of such and such promises) will yet wait on him as faithful,
though they be not presently, or so soon performed, as we desire: because it
is persuaded that God delays for some further advantage to the soul: to
humble it, or to exalt it more; or to make his blessings more acceptable when
they come. A soul confiding in the delay and unlikelines of the performance of
promises, that God can and will fulfill his word, when it shall be for the
best, is a soul which has made God its confidence.

2. If the Lord suffers you to be mocked by profane men: if at any time they
ask, where is the promise of his coming, and 2 Pet. 3. 3.
what advantage has piety in these times: can your God save you out of the
hands of murdering, destroying men, will you still retain your integrity: do
not the most religious suffer, as much, if not worse then others: Now at this
time, if notwithstanding all these scorns, and disheartnings, you are willing
still to keep close to God, and to pass through good report, and evil
report, and are content to be yet more vile, before these men, for Gods sake;
and in Gods cause: you have undoubtedly made God your confidence: Gods people
thus proved that they had done so, as it is in the Psalms: All this is come
upon us, yet have we not Psalm. 44. 17.
forgotten thee: neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant.

3. If ever the Lord bring you into a state, that he seems to be an enemy, by
visiting the soul, wounding the spirit, giving it as it were a sight of hell,
as if he would have no mercy: yet in this case, you shall know, that ye have
made God your confidence if you still will wait on God, boldly and trustingly
reasoning with him, as the Psalmist did: has God forgotten to be gracious will
he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure. A soul in the Psalm. 77. 9.
lack of mercy: being willing to stay it self on God, because he will show
mercy: being resolved however; to dye at the foot of majesty, to be crushed by
his scepter: this is a soul which confides in God. And the Lord who knows the
anguish, and distress of this confiding spirit, will heal, and restore it, to
strength, and comfort. It shall be established, when all the careless ones of
the world, shall be terribly shaken, and shattered, in all their hopes.
Consider what the Prophet writes. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak O
Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my
God etc. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he
increases strength: even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young
men shall utterly fall: but Isai. 40. 27, 29. 30. 31.
they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk
and not be faint.

Thus may every one try, and experimentally find, whither God is to them, as he
is to others, the only confidence. For he is says the Psalmist the confidence
of all the ends of the earth, and of those who are a far off upon the sea.
Let us therefore of these western ends of the earth, be still confident, though
we see nothing but things terrible: because by these the Lord works his
Churches deliverance; manifests his own righteousness: answers his peoples
desires, and expectations, and declares himself to be the God of all his
servants salvation; and therefore worthy to be made the confidence of them all
far and near, by land and sea, in all places.

FINIS.
July 25. 1644. Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.


