SERMON Of the True, Spiritual, Transubstantiation, Opposed to the GROSS,
CARNAL, IMAGINARY, Transubstantiation.

WHEREIN The true Meaning of the Lord's Supper is opened, in order to a
constant, habitual, and actual Preparation to it.

By T Beverley.

Printed for the Author, 1687.

TO THE Christian Readers, ESPECIALLY MY CONTINUAL AUDITORS.
I Offer this Sermon to the Public, as the most satisfactory Resolution
concerning the Lord's Supper and its true Transubstantiation, in opposition to
the false, so eagerly contended: I have done it with all the Modesty and
Inoffensiveness I could, without Injury to Truth, without Denying Christ before
Men.

I have put the best Value, and all the Value possible, upon
Transubstantiation; that is, To Interpret it into a True Scripture, Gospel
Notion, into a Spirituality: I confess the very Word, nor any one Word parallel
to it is found, that I know of, in the New Testament; but the Thing it self is
every where in the Gospel of Christ: Christ in us, and we in Christ, Baptized
into one Body, one Body, one Bread, a Drinking into one Spirit, are favorable
to it; Christ being All in All the Head, putting on Christ, but above all,
dwelling in Christ, and Christ dwelling in us, joined with Eating his Flesh,
and Drinking his Blood, are the very same thing with this Spiritual
Transubstantiation; to which the Bread and Wine are the most fit and sensible
Symbols, and Christ is as really present in them by his Word, sanctifying them
into Spirituality, as in his Word it self; And if we Abide in him, and his
Words abide in us, we are one with him in Both, as the Vine and the Branches
are one, John 15. 1. etc.

I consider nothing is so likely to satisfy so deeply an engraven Notion in
some men's minds, as this true and faithful Account of it, as nothing could
satisfy the confused Lineaments of Nebuchadnezzar's Dream in his own mind, but
Daniel's Prophetical Revelation of the Thing, and of the Truth it self to him.
I look upon this True Presence of Christ given from the Word of God, as the
most effectual means to recover those to the Truth who live in Error concerning
it, to settle the Wavering, resolve the Doubtful, to confirm and stablish in
the one Truth always present, the True Christian. This is far above all Reasons
of Philosophy, Vindication from Antiquity, and the Fathers concerning it. When
we find we have that which answers all the Notions of Scripture, and is worthy
to be its meaning, we may be at rest. Here the Romanists Zeal for a
Transubstantiation, the Lutherans for a Consubstantiation, other Protestants
for a real Presence, may find full Reception and just Entertainment, in a sense
worthy of them if they will accept it.

Besides this, I have aimed at possessing the Minds of Christians with so high
a spiritual Notion, to recommend the Gospel as Preached, as in the Lord's
Supper, in its highest Intendments and Efficacy, and to win men's Souls to the
outward Observation by their being impregnated with the inward Life and Power;
In which Pursuit many excellent Truths, and of great moment, have risen up, and
offered themselves. There remains nothing, but to beseech the God of all Grace
to give his Blessing to it, and to you particularly, My very Honored and truly
Loved Hearers, to whom it is my constant Endeavor, through the Grace of God,
to open to you together the Spirituality and the Reasonableness of Divine
Things; whom I commend to God and the Word of his Grace, to build you up,
strengthen, stablish, settle you, and shall thereunto labor while God allows
me opportunity, with most conscientious Meditations, most earnest Prayers, and
dearest Affections.

Your very faithful Servant in the Work of the Lord, Beverley.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SERMON.
AN Introduction upon the general view of the Institution of the Lord's Supper,
as given by three Evangelists, and by the Apostle Paul as a fourth, composed
into a Harmony; and our Lord's Discourse, John 6. lying as a Foundation, Page
1. to Page 5. General Observations upon the Harmony, giving Advantage to the
right understanding the Institution, p. 6. to p. 9. The method of the Sermon is
laid down in general, p. 9. The first general Head shows, How Christ gives his
Body or his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink, in four Points, p. 10. Point
1. The Humane Nature of Christ is in sacred Writ most expressively set out by
his Flesh, his Body, and his Blood, p. 11, 12, 13. Point 2. The Flesh, Body,
and Blood of Christ, and all his Actions therein, are as so many Preparations,
that he may be spiritually eaten and drunk, p. 14. Point 3. The Humane Nature
of Christ, and all his Sufferings and Actions in it, are so many Rests and
Repositories of the Divine Power, p. 14, 15, 16: Point 4. The Divine Power of
the Son of God extends the Body and Blood of Christ, his Action and suffering
therein in their saving virtue, without limitation to Time or Place. This is
branched into three Points, p. 17. Point 1. The Divine Nature of the Son of
God, acting in the Humane Nature united to him, can draw out such spiritual
Efficacies from his Actions and Sufferings therein, as shall be most conducive
to the Salvation of Souls that believe in him: and this is displayed briefly in
some Resemblances of Nature, though found insufficient to decipher so great a
Mystery, p. 17, 18. Therefore these Efficacies are drawn out into four
Causalities according to Scripture, 1. Of an eternal, propitiatory, expiatory
Cause, p. 19. 2. Of an exemplar Cause, p. 20. 3. Of an efficient, unitive
Cause, p. 22. 4. Of an argumentative Cause, filled also with divine Efficacy,
p. 23. to p. 26.
Point 2. and 3. The Divine Efficacy of Christ cannot be hindered by distance
either of Time or Place, p. 27, 28. General Head the second, propounds to show
how clear the Passage is to those Words, Take, Eat, etc. from the Point of
Christ giving his Flesh to eat; by showing, That as there is a rich
Communicativeness on the part of Christ, giving his Flesh to eat, and his Blood
to drink, so there are receiving Faculties and Powers of Man, fitted by Grace,
that may be truly said, in a spiritual sense, to eat and to drink, as Christ is
said to give, p. 29, 30. This Eating is therefore resembled with eating and
drinking, 1. As in pledge of Peace and Reconciliation with God, p. 31. 2. As a
solemn Act of Worship, p. 32. 3. As Eating and Drinking is made a Symbol of
Eternal Glory, p. 32. 4. Principally as Eating and Drinking are in order to
Life and Nourishment; where the Notion of Transubstantiation has its most
proper place, and is most fully discoursed in its spiritual sense. p. 32. to
the end of p. 38.
General Head the third, offers a fair Accommodation, so as that there may be
no Encounter betwixt the Mystery and the Letter, or betwixt the grand Sense and
the very Words, This is my Body, discoursed upon the Harmonical Context, from
p. 38. to p. 44. General Head the fourth, is taken up in an Enquiry, How there
came such a Notion into the Christian Church, as that fleshly
Transubstantiation, so earnestly contended for, and finds it arising from four
Causes, 1. From the great mystery of spiritual Transubstantiation, given in
that our so magnified Sixth of John, and in the Institution of the Lord's
Supper, p. 44. 2. From the Ancients and Fathers discoursing with high Eloquence
of this Point, not sufficiently guarded, p. 45. 3. From the Ignorance and
Barbarity which after them invaded the Christian Church, p. 46. 4. From the
rising of a Church Power at the same time over men's Consciences, and pressing
this as an Article of Faith, p. 47.
General Head the fifth, shows the danger of such a Doctrine as fleshly
Transubstantiation. 1. As it shakes the Credit of all our knowing and judging
Faculties, p. 48, 49. 2. As it makes void the Divineness of Scripture Language,
expressing spiritual things by sensible, and indeed perverts the Wisdom of all
Language so doing, p. 49. 3. As it amuses Men's Minds, and draws them off from
spiritual Action in Holy Mysteries, p. 49. 4. The great danger especially lies
in bringing down God into a contemptible, vile Appearance, and allowing divine
Honor to it; which is one sort of Idolatry Scripture most abhors, p. 50 to 52.
General Head the sixth draws all into six practical Applications, p. 52. to
the end, 1. By proposal to our choice the most worthy of these two, The
spiritual, or the carnal Transubstantiation. 2. By raising us to high Thoughts
of the Redemption of Jesus Christ, so uniting it self to us, as by eating and
drinking his Body and Blood. 3. By lifting up our Hearts to Christ eating the
Passover, and drinking the very same Fruit of the Vine with us by his
Intercession in Heaven, which he did here on Earth. 4. By obliging us to a high
value of this Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, in which we so unite to Christ.
5. By persuading us to an earnest care against violating so great a Mystery, as
Christ eaten and drunk in the Gospel, and the Lord's Supper. 6. By lifting up
our Heads in Prayers and Desires to the Table of Christ in his Kingdom.



A SERMON OF THE True, Spiritual Transubstantiation, opposed to the Gross,
Carnal, Imaginary Transubstantiation.
MATTHEW. 26. 26. Compared with Mark 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23. etc.
This is my Body.
I Take all these Scriptures, as the common Subject, that by the Grace and
Assistance of God, I intend to discourse at this time, and especially to Treat
the Sense of these Words, This is my Body: And This Cup is my Blood of the New
Testament. And as I have earnestly begged of God, that he would waken me
morning by morning, that he would waken my Ear to hear as the learned
concerning it; so that He would give me the Tongue of the Learned to speak of
it; and grant you also to hear with the Ear of the Learned; that so in this
whole Duty the Preparations of the Heart, the Answer of the Tongue, and the
Hearing of the Ear, may be from the Lord.

Now I shall endeavor so to treat of it, as if there were no other Point of
Controversy between us Protestants and the Roman Persuasion, but only the
Sense of these Words, This is my Body: And I shall consider that
Transubstantiation, as it is generally called, that is built upon it, as if
there were no other Fault nor Error in that Doctrine, but only a Zeal for the
Mystery of the Lord's Supper, and the Letter of Scripture in this Institution,
though it be not according to Knowledge: and therefore I will allow the utmost
both to the Words, and the Sense, that can be allowed, the very utmost that can
be made of This is my Body, This Cup is my Blood of the New Testament. And I
shall endeavor so to treat of it, that there may be nothing that may be
offensive, except the plain Evidence and Reason of Things, the Evidence of
Truth, without any umbrage, any shadow of a Railing Accusation. I will
discourse only upon the single Account of Scripture, and the Reasons drawn from
it.

And therefore I do allow, That these Words, This is my Body, and This Cup is
my Blood, they do carry a most high and important Sense; And I shall consider
the utmost Tendency they can have to such a thing as is called
Transubstantiation: though the Word it self be not indeed found in Scripture,
yet I will allow the thing in its due sense. And I shall endeavor so to do
this, that you may have the clearest understanding of the Intention and Meaning
of the Lord's Supper, and the Institution of it, and of these Words, This is my
Body, and so as may tend most to the real Sense, and Impression upon your
Hearts, of so great an Expression of our Savior both in the general Doctrine
of the Gospel, and in the particular Sense and Meaning of the Lord's Supper,
and that sacred Solemnity; and also may be most practical, and may most serve
to the good of every man's Soul who desires spiritually to understand this
great Doctrine, and the particular Ordinance of the Lord's Supper.

And because it is agreed among all men that profess any Reverence to the
Lord's Supper, that as it is not a humane Device, so not a natural Duty, made
known by natural Light, nor written in natural Conscience; it is not like the
Reverence of the Divine Being, or Prayer to God, or the desire to know his Mind
or Will, or any moral Duty: but it depends wholly upon Divine Institution and
Ordination: It Is wholly from Scripture, or else there could never have been
such a Worship of God known in the World, as the Solemnity of eating Bread, and
drinking Wine in the Lord's Supper, in Remembrance of him.

To introduce therefore this matter, I consider, There are Four inspired
Writers who have given us this Institution from our Lord; the Evangelist
Matthew, the Evangelist Mark, the Evangelist Luke, and the Apostle Paul: and
then the Evangelist John, although it was not committed to him (as every
Evangelist had throughout the whole Evangelick History, his Portion of every
Matter, and the proper Words of it committed to him) to write of this
Institution; yet he had a sublime and highly spiritual Discourse entrusted with
him all along the last part of his sixth Chapter concerning the eating the
Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood; which must needs be the Foundation of
eating the Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood in the Sacrament: for a
Sacrament must have a Doctrine to sustain it, that it may not be an
insignificant Ceremony: and what can have nearer Relation to the Sacrament of
eating the Body of Christ broken for us, and drinking his Blood of the New
Testament shed for many, than eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, which
he gave for the life of the World, which is Meat indeed and Drink indeed, which
the Evangelist John relates from Christ, of which whoever eats shall live by
him for ever, and he will raise him up at the last day, viz. at his Coming,
till which Coming there is a showing forth of his Death in this Supper, viz. a
declaring that efficacy of it which shall then appear. And it is certain,
though Christ had not yet instituted this sacred Rite, nor did till some
considerable space after this great Discourse, yet he knew his own Intention
concerning it, and he knew, this Doctrine should be in its just Time commanded
by himself, to be represented in that Rite; and his Death, as a Sacrifice, he
continually enlivens, and keeps, new, vigorous, and in full force by his
Intercession upon it, in which Intercession he appears with his own Blood in
the true Holy of Holies, as the High priest with the Blood of the Typical
Sacrifices in that Typical Holiest. All which becomes a most especial
Preparation of his Flesh to be eaten and drunk in the Lord's Supper: therefore
the Lord's Supper is so peculiar an Annunciation of his Death till he comes;
viz. in the eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, now become a
Peace Offering by his Intercession, and to be feasted upon.

Now in these four sacred Penmen of this Institution, it is observable, That
they are all uniform in these Words, This is my Body: there is not any
difference among them, from one to the other, not any variety found: they all
with one Mouth say to a very Tittle, This is my Body. But they are not so
uniform concerning the Cup: The Evangelist Matthew and the Evangelist Mark,
say, This Cup is my Blood of the New Testament: The Evangelist Luke, and the
Apostle Paul, say, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood: so here is thus
much of variety, Two say, This is my Blood of the New Testament; two others
say, This is the New Testament in my Blood. And this I do account will give us
great light into the sense of this Institution, as you shall perceive in the
progress of this Discourse.

That which is yet farther considerable, is, that the Apostle Paul says, That
which I received of the Lord I delivered unto 1 Cor. 11. 23.
you: by which Words, there is great Reason to believe, that the Apostle, as a
fourth Evangelist, received this Institution immediately from the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, and that it is part of that Gospel, which he tells us, Gal. 1.
11, 12. he received not from men, neither was taught it, but by the Revelation
of Jesus Christ: so that I think we may certainly and safely conclude, He was
not only inspired as a sacred Writer of that Epistle to the Corinths, but
Christ had before that, at the time of his Call to the Apostleship, made an
immediate Revelation of this Institution to him; which, as it shows the great
excellency of this holy Sacrament, so to this Apostle was committed, as his
peculiar part, to show the Obligatoriness of this Ordinance upon all Ages till
Christ's coming, which is not given in express terms, but by him only.

All this being premised, it is of concern in the next place, to give you an
exact Harmony of these four sacred Writers, and what they have written
concerning this Institution: that is, out of all the words of each of them
drawn out, and laid together, to make up one even Text of the whole, which, by
Interpreters, is called a Harmony. And thus it is, as I shall draw it out of
the Apostle Paul, as enfolding the whole Institution.

I received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus
the Night in which he was betrayed, while they were eating that Passover, of
which he had 1 Cor. 11. 23.
said, Luke 22. 15, 16. [With Desire have I desired to eat this Passover with
you before I suffer, For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof until
it be fulfilled in the Luc. 22. 19.
Kingdom of God,] he took the Bread, which we break, and blessed it with
Thanksgiving, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
Body, viz. the Communion of it, 1 Cor. 10. 16. which is broken for you, This do
in Remembrance of me. In the same manner, after Supper, when he had supped, He
took the Cup of Blessing, which we bless, and when he had given Thanks, he gave
it to them, saying to them, Divide it among your selves, and drink you all of
it; For this Cup is my Blood of the New Matt. 26. 28. Marc. 14. 24.
Testament, and this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, viz. in the
Communion of it, 1 Cor. 10. 16. which is shed for you and for many for the
Remission of sins. [And they drank all of it,] Mark 14. 23. This do as often as
ye drink it in Remembrance of me. As often therefore as ye eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, ye show forth the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

This is that, which laid together arises out of all these four Evangelists
(accounting the Apostle Paul for one,) and comprizing this Institution in what
immediately concerns the Institution it self, wholly and fully. And before it
we may place the sixth Chapter of the Evangelist John, beginning at v. 27. as
giving the Doctrine that supports this Institution. And out of this Harmony I
shall endeavor to discourse at this time.

Now it is certain, this harmonical Context must be true in every Iota of it;
and whatever is fuller in any part, must inlighten and clear the whole; and
whatever is obscure in any part, or curt, and short, must be enlarged from what
is more clear and full. For you know one Writer is as true as another in
whatever we place, as from them to this matter. The very Order in which they
give this Institution is much to be considered; and if in any particular there
seems any thing that does encounter, and run cross, one thing with another, it
must be so explained, as that the whole, and every part, may be most
conciliated with it self; so that the whole must be both cleared, and
illustrated, and reconciled by the concert of every part, and every part by it
self in compare with the other parts: of all which we are to make our
Advantages; as,

1. When we find the whole Concert of the Institution so one in these words,
This is my Body, we know, That in them is most plainly, positively, forcibly,
delivered the real Participation and Communion of the Body of Jesus in the
Lord's Supper; as we shall find all the words joined with them, viz. Blessing,
Breaking, Taking, Eating a Body broken for us, lead us unto and make this Bread
the Communion of Christ's Body; as the Apostle Paul calls it.

2. When we find the four Records of this Institution agree in the Cup, even as
in the Body, thus far, that the drinking of it is an equal part of the
Institution with the eating the Body: that it appears in every one, it had its
distinct particular Blessing, even as the Bread: that it has some peculiar
marks, as the particular Command, Divide it among your selves, Drink all of it;
do this very particular thing, as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me: that
the matter of Fact concerning it is peculiarly recited, viz. They All drank of
it: that the Apostle calls it the Cup of Blessing. All this speaks two things;
That the Cup is as essential a part of the Institution as the Bread, of as high
Necessity and Dignity; and the Precept of one as extensive as the other, and of
the Two the most particularly remarked in its Extensiveness.

3. That it is worthy to explain the sense of those words, This is my Body, and
the meaning of the Institution, upon what occasion or account soever it shall
be so urged; seeing as the Doctrine of the Blood shed of Christ has the
Equality and rather the Preference to the Body (if there could be any odds)
throughout the New Testament, as being the last and completory Act of Christ's
sacrificing himself, and is therefore so expressly named in that Tri-unity of
Testimonies on Earth, The Spirit, the Water, the BLOOD, 1 John 5. 8.

4. When therefore we find two sacred Penmen of this Institution write, This
Cup is my Blood of the New Testament, and two other, of which one by immediate
Revelation, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, we thus collect; It
cannot be indeed so probable Christ said both (if he did, what I urge will be
the stronger:) but I allow he said only one, and that it was, This is my Blood,
yet is this explanatory Alteration most Authentic and Divine: so that there
shall be as full a sense of the Blood offered to us in the Sacrament as of the
Body, by those Words, This Cup is my Blood, etc. and yet the Explication of
them shall limit that Presence to such a one as will bear those Words, It is
the New Testament in my Blood, (omitting the Figure of this Cup for the Wine in
the Cup, which yet shows, Christ did not abhor from Figure in this
Institution;) and so shows a mystical sense: and seeing the Wine in the Lord's
Supper is equal to the Bread, even as the Blood in the Doctrine of the New
Testament to the Body of Christ, it shall have power to limit the sense of
those Words, This is my Body, to such a Mysticalness, as agrees to the Wine,
being the New Testament in Christ's Blood. And when the Apostle explains both,
by the Communion of the Body and of the Blood of Christ; it limits the sense
so, that the Bread is not the Body, nor the Cup the Blood, in any other sense
than the Communion of each is so, as shall be farther argued: For these Words
explain, by divine Authority, This is my Body, this is my Blood, into such a
sense, that it may be true, This Bread is the Communion of the Body of Christ,
this Cup the Communion of his Blood.

5. When the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, all record the Saying of Christ,
I will no more drink of the Fruit of the Vine, the Evangelist Matthew
emphatically of [this] Fruit; and the Evangelist Luke prefixes of the Passover,
and anti-dates part of the Institution of the Cup, that he might join the like
important Saying of our Savior, concerning the Fruit of the Vine, That he will
not eat any more of the Passover, nor drink of the Fruit of the Vine, till the
Passover Which by the Evangelist Matthew must be This Fruit.
be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, and till he drink of the Fruit of the Vine
a new in the Kingdom of God his Father, when it shall come: and the Apostle
says, We show forth the Lord's Death till he come: From hence it may be argued,
That there was another manner of Presence of Christ to be expected than was
just then, at the eating and drinking with his Disciples, and that such a one
was to be expected in the Kingdom of God, his Father: so that he would no more
eat nor drink with them, either in the same manner of bodily Presence, nor in
the way of Anticipation, or of eating that Passover, and that Fruit of the
Vine, which at the time of this first Institution was not yet sacrificed, nor
the Blood yet offered; but in such a manner as would agree to the fulfilling of
all, the renewing of all in the Kingdom of God, and his Father, when that
should come, after that Passover sacrificed, and that Blood offered; of which
we shall after enquire: for this I esteem of great moment in this Discourse.

Lastly, When we find the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 17. making that Question [The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? and
subjoyning in the very same Contexture, in the same Air, and manner of
Expression, [We being many are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all
partakers of that one Bread,] must we not needs infer, the sense in both [This
is my Body] and [We are all one Bread and one Body] must be alike one mystical
Sense? for seeing common sense teaches us, All Christians cannot be one Bread
and one Body, but in a mystical sense; no more can the Bread be Christ's Body,
but in such a mystical sense: and the very Letter can no more oblige us in the
one than in the other.

All which is much enforced by the Consideration, The Notions of eating the
Flesh of Christ, and of drinking his Blood, were given before the Lord's Supper
instituted: and though I doubt not Christ designed it as a Foundation of that
Supper, as I said before, yet it had been a true Doctrine, if that Supper had
not been instituted, as a Representation of it; because Christ, as a Sacrifice,
gave himself for the Life of the World, and offered himself to the Faith and
Participation of his believing Servants, as it were to be Eaten and Drunk by
them, had not the Lord's Supper been appointed.

Thus far I have endeavored to prepare the way for this Discourse, by laying a
Foundation upon this Harmonical Context for it: and indeed I desire in
prosecuting it to use little more than Scripture Notions and Words: and if I
can be so happy, by the Assistance of God, to express the things as plain to
you as I apprehend it in my own Mind, I doubt not to give you a satisfactory
Account of these Words, This is my Body, and also of the sense of this great
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper.

In doing this, I propose this Method:

1. I shall endeavor to give a clear Resolution, How Christ may be said to
give us his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink: for that was the great
Stumble that those who heard Christ upon this Point, John 6. made.

2. I shall from thence endeavor to show you, That there is a clear Passage
and Transition from that giving his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink, into
those Words, Take, eat, this is my Body, or from the Doctrine into the
Sacrament.

3. I shall endeavor to find a fair Accommodation, and no Encounter betwixt
the Mystery and the Letter, or betwixt the grand sense and the very Words, This
is my Body, by a compare of this whole Harmonical Context with other Scripture,
and its way of speaking in such Cases.

4. I will enquire into this Thing, How there came such a Notion into the
Christian Church as that fleshly Transubstantiation, so earnestly contended for.

5. I will represent to you the danger of such a Doctrine as that Fleshly
Transubstantiation; not so much as it is a contemplative thing, a Notion, a
manner of Apprehension, or matter of Discourse; but as it carries the Practice
of Worship and Adoration.

6. I will close all with practical Applications, tending to a constant
habitual Preparation for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

Now to discharge the first part of this Undertaking, I must establish these
following Points:

That the Divine Person of our Lord Jesus Christ taking Humane Nature upon him,
that Humane Nature is most emphatically expressed in these Words, his Body, and
his Flesh, and his Blood: or, the Body, and Flesh, and Blood of Christ are the
most fit Expressions that could be chosen to set out the Humane Nature of
Christ, or to set out the Man Christ Jesus. Now this being rightly apprehended,
shows, There is the Flesh, and there is the Blood of Christ, that are to be
eaten and drunk by Believers in Jesus Christ.

That the Body, the Flesh, and the Blood of Christ, and the Body, in his Flesh,
and Blood, were as so many Preparations of his Body, Flesh, and Blood, to be
spiritually eaten by, or applied to the Souls of Believers, or communicated by
them.

That the Body, the Flesh, and the Blood of Christ, are so Divine Power,
Spirit, and Efficacy, filling them with infinite saving Virtue and Effect in
their Communication to the Souls of Believers in Jesus Christ.

That the divine Power, Spirit, and Efficacy, extends the Body, Flesh, and the
Blood of Christ in their saving Virtue and Effect, without limitation to Time
or Place; and to all Dimensions and degrees of Effect.

The first Point, viz. That the most expressive and significant Man Christ
Jesus, that the Spirit of God has chosen, throughout the Scripture, are the
Flesh of Christ, the Body of Christ, and the Blood of Christ. This is the first
Branch of the Mystery of Godliness; God manifest 1 Timothy 3. 16. 1 John 4. 2, 3.
in the flesh, Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is made the grand Principle of
the Gospel.

The whole Humane Nature of Christ, in which the Son of God was manifest, is
called Flesh: The Word was made Flesh, John 1. 14. So the Body of Christ, how
often is it mentioned? The offering of the Body of Christ once for all. Heb.
10. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Who bare our Sins in his Body on the tree. And in all the New Testament, there
is nothing so memorializ'd as the Blood of Jesus Christ.

And the Reason is this; Because these, The Body, the Flesh, and the Blood, are
the most visible Representations of Humane Nature; and so in Scripture, and all
Language, they are the readiest, easiest, and most familiar Expressions of
Humane Nature. The Apostle John therefore so often in his Epistle expresses the
whole Doctrine of the Messiah, by Christ come in the flesh; that is, God
manifested in flesh. So that, though it is true, Man is chiefly Soul and
Spirit, and so to be considered, yet he is most visible, most apparent, in
Body, Flesh, and Blood; and Humane Nature is so framed and constituted, that it
desires most to appear and display it self in a Body.

And though God and Christ have a peculiar Care and Account of the Spirits of
just men, yet they are not Perfect without Bodies; and till Christ does appear
again in a Body of Glory, He is not shown. Pray consider, Though He Is now in a
Body of Glory, yet till he appears in this Body, that every Eye may see him,
God does not till that time show him, whom he will show, who is the only
Potentate, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
that is, He will show Christ Jesus, in a Body of Glory, at his Appearance,
though Christ has been in a Body of Glory ever since his Ascension. So Just
Men are not made Perfect, Heb. 12. 23.
till they appear in a Body at the Resurrection.

Although therefore the Soul of Jesus Christ (understand I beseech you, what I
say) was the Principal Agent in all the Work of Redemption, yet it was, as in a
Body, in the Action and Passion of a Body.

It was not indeed a Body that acted, that suffered, that dyed, yet it was in a
Body. It was the Humane Soul and Spirit of Christ that came to do the Will of
God, and a Body was prepared him, Hebr. 10. 5. It was not a Body, but a Soul, a
Will in Christ that surrendered it self to the Will of God, that said, Not my
Will, but thine be done. It was a Spirit that surrendered it self to God, Into
thy hands I commit my Spirit: yet it was in a Body. So it was in the
Circumcision of Christ; it was the Circumcision of the Spirit, not of the
Letter. Soul and Spirit was the Life and Excellency of all: yet all this was
visible in a Body, it was visible in Flesh and Blood. So it was in Christ's
fulfilling All Righteousness in his Baptism, in all the Holiness of Life; There
was an Humane Soul, a Spirit, that acted in and throughout All, yet All was
still visible in a Body. His Soul sent out Strong Cries and Fears, with that he
offered Prayers and Supplications, but it was in the days of his Flesh, Hebr.
5. 7. He was Circumcised, Baptized, Died in a Body. He arose again in a Body,
and in such a Body as we carry about with us: but just at his Ascension, then
undoubtedly, in the very Time of his Ascending up to Heaven, his Body was
changed into a Glorious Body: so that That Body which was in a state of
Humiliation, which he carried with him in the World, after his Ascension
remained no longer in those Circumstances of humbled Flesh and Blood he
underwent while he was here in the World; for, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. and therefore the days of Christ's
Humiliation are called the Days of his Flesh. Therefore observe, 1 Timothy 3. ult.
The mystery of Godliness is absolved in that, Received, Taken up into Glory:
and there he is hidden to us, though swallowed up in the Perfection and
Excellency of Glory till God shows him, till he appears, and is revealed in
that Glory: From all which amounts, That the whole undertaking of Christ was in
Body, and his Intercession is now in Body, though a Body of Glory.

Now from hence you may perceive what I drive at; viz. That there was great
Reason that Christ should say, This is my Body, This is my Blood; because the
Body of Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ, was that which was visibly and
sensibly active, and was to be so throughout the whole Work of our Redemption;
for, Forasmuch as the Children Heb. 2. 14: 17.
were Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he himself took part of the same, that etc.
And it behooved him in all things to be made like unto his Brethren. The holy
Humane Soul, and Spirit of Christ, was the principal Agent; the Body, Flesh,
and Blood of Christ, was the Theater upon which All was made public, the Tube
and Channel through which All is conveyed: therefore the whole Humane Nature is
expressed by Flesh and Blood, the Representation of it and the Communication of
it is so given in the Doctrine, and therefore so in the Lord's Supper.

The Body, Flesh, and Blood of Christ, and all his Action eaten, applied to,
and communicated with, by the Souls of Believers; of which his Death is the
most comprehensive, and principal, as that, in which center not only his
Incarnation, Circumcision, Baptism, Holy Life, Prayers in the Days of his
Flesh, but even his Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession at the Right Hand of
God: and therefore as the Doctrine of the Communion of his Body styles his John
6. 51.
Death, the giving his Flesh for the Life of the World, so the Sacrament of it
in the Lord's Supper, calls it his Body given for us, and the Remembrance of
his Death: and the whole Application by Faith is called Eating in both.

And proportionably in sense, Christ was sent in the Likeness Romans 8. 3.
of sinful Flesh, that he might condemn Sin in the Flesh, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: We put off the Sins of the
Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ; we Col. 2. 11.
are buried in his Baptism, we rise in his Resurrection, and Romans 6. 4.
know the Power of it, Phil. 3. 10. We sit in Heavenly Places in him. He makes
Intercession for us, and so saves to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. And his Death
is in all Senses communicated to us. All which are in other Words the very same
thing with giving us his Flesh te eat, and his Blood to drink.

The humane Nature of Christ, called his Body, his Flesh, Blood, and all his
Actions and Sufferings in it, were so many Rests and Repositories of the Divine
Nature, Power, Efficacy, and Virtue of Jesus Christ; filling them with infinite
saving Virtue and Effect in their Communication to the Senses of Believers in
Jesus Christ.

For in all the Action, and Sufferings of Christ, the Son of God was
immediately Active, the Divine Power and Spirit was always present, and Active
in all, as a supreme Spirit and Soul.

The Incarnation of Christ was a sensible, fleshly, and bodily Thing; But there
was a Manifestation of Divinity in it. The Power of the most High over-shadowed
the Virgin, and Romans 8. 2.
Christ was Conceived, as we daily Profess, by the Holy Ghost: The Law of the
Spirit of Life, purified the Humane Nature of Christ to the highest Elevation
of Purity: The Circumcision of Christ was a Divine Circumcision made without
Col. 2. 11.
Hands, by the immediate Action of the Divine Spirit; for if ours were so, much
more His, the original of it. The Baptism of Christ was full of a Divine
Presence; The Spirit rested like a Dove upon Him; This is my beloved Son, etc.
Matt. 3. 18. Philip. 3. 9.
His Obedience and Righteousness was the Righteousness of God. In his Death he
offered Himself by the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14.
His Blood is called the Blood of God. He Rose by the Spirit Acts 20. 28.
of Holiness, which Justified Him. He is made higher than the Heavens in his
Intercession. And this is of supreme Consideration in all the Communications of
Christ, in all our Eating and Drinking his Flesh and his Blood, as may be seen
in that excellent Discourse, John 6. to which the Lord's Supper is a parallel
Representation.

As the Living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, v. 57.
even so he that eats me shall live by me. For his Flesh eaten is the Conduit
of divine Life. It is the Spirit, viz. the Divine Nature, that quickneth. The
Flesh, profits nothing. v. 63.
The Words that I speak unto you, are Spirit, and they are Life; that is, by
the Virtue and Presence of the Divinity, of which they were spoken; for by
Power he is declared to be Romans 1. 4.
the Son of God; viz. by the Power of the Divinity. He was 2 Cor. 13. 4.
put to death through weakness, but he lives by the Power of 1 Pet. 3. 18.
God. He was put to death in the Flesh, quickened by the Spirit.

If any Man therefore considers the Actions of Jesus Christ in the Flesh, and
does not consider the Divine Nature in them, he does not consider that which
our Savior says, Quickens. He only considers that which our Savior says,
Profits nothing.

From hence therefore, it is plainly first to be understood, that it is most
impossible, Material or Bodily should by it self do any thing, to that which is
Spiritual, Immaterial, Intellectual, as is the Soul of Man. The Sun, though so
glorious a Body, can do nothing to Man's Soul immediately; and suppose the Body
of Christ as much higher in Glory than any thing we know in Nature, as the Sun
excells a Turf of Earth; yet this very glorious Body can do nothing to our
Souls, to our Spirits: It can do nothing in these great Negotiations of Peace
with God, Purification of our Consciences, Sanctification.

This is so acknowledged a thing, that you know, as many as know any thing of
Transubstantiation, as it is held in the Roman Persuasion, That they themselves
confess, That if a Man Eat that very transubstantiated Body, and Drink that
very transubstantiated Blood of Christ, though it is, as they suppose, the Body
and Blood of Christ in the most fleshly sensible Presence we can imagine; yet
it does a wicked Man no good, a Man who has not Faith and Repentance: And it
is very true, it must needs be so, because it is a material thing, and cannot
act so as to act upon spiritual and immaterial Things; on the other side, it
can do no hurt to these immaterial Beings. But if it did operate after the
manner of material Things upon material, I cannot conceive how it should miss
the best Effect, seeing it is infinitely prepared to do good in that very Case
of presupposed Evil of Sin: but when it is spiritual, and requires spiritual
Preparation to receive it, or else it is not received, it then does not work
Good where that Preparation is not, because it is not received; but if it be
received, it has its certain Effect. On the other side, when it is not
received it does hurt by way of increasing Guilt; because a spiritual Offer, of
so excellent a Nature, is refused and contemned, and because the Soul, by such
pretense of receiving, and yet Refusal, grows much more confirmed in Evil.

But this is not all; for though the Holiness and Spirituality of a Holy,
Created, Finite Spirit, may by Instruction, Suggestion, or Example, offer much
Good to other Spirits, and be instrumental in affecting them aright; yet, this
is in all Regards in so finite and limited a way, that the Effect may be very
small, or none at all: and so it is not possible in any more than a very low
and abated sense, to eat or to drink of the Communications of any Angel or
Saint above or below. But now whatever is divine is communicative, even to what
degrees it pleases. All Finite is Poor and Scanty, and has not for it self,
but as received. But the Son of God in Humane Nature has all Fullness dwelling
in Col. 1. 19.
Him; and so can derive and convey to what degrees he thinks fit. Of which is
to be spoken in the next Particular. But this Assures in Christ there is Meat
and Drink abounding to the Life of the World.

The Divine Power of the Son of God, and its Efficacy

And under this Head I will undertake these three Particulars.

1. To show that the Divine Nature of the Son of God, acting in the Humane
Nature united to Him, can draw out such spiritual Powers and Efficacies from
those his Actings and Sufferings, as shall be most conducing to the Salvation
of Souls that believe in Him; now this I shall make good by showing what kind
of Causalities, and what answerable Effects are by the Word of God ascribed to
the Divine Power of Christ Acting in the Humane Nature.

2. I will show, that they cannot be prejudged nor hindered by any distances of
Time, because of the Eternity of Jesus Christ the Son of God.

3. That they cannot be intercepted by any distances of Place, because of the
Omnipresence of Jesus Christ the Son of God.

Now I shall not presume to speak of these Particulars, but as I am guided by
the Spirit of God in his Word; For, Who can describe the way of the Divine
Spirit in Nature? Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me, I cannot attain to
it; if not in Nature, how much more not in Grace and supernaturals? But yet it
is not unworthy to be taken notice of, That all Philosophy owns some kind of
Effluviums, some flowing Atoms, Ramenta, or little Globules of matter, that
fly every way, or if but some Sympathies in Nature, that pass up and down, and
fly unknown ways, and unmeasurable distances, without the Load, Cumber,
Presence of those Bodies from which they flow, which cannot move nor pass as
they do; if Spirits of much greater Efficacy are extracted, more agile, more
portable, and more easily conveyed than the Bodies themselves from which they
are extracted; if there are some Relations of unknown Communications of Minds
at great distance of Bodies; These may be taken notice of, as some Illustration
of this matter: But such things are too slippery and uncertain, and also too
gross to rest so great a Point upon, seeing what so infinite an Agent as the
Spirit of Holiness, can do, cannot be grasped or comprehended by any material
Likenesses; its Extractions, its Abstractions, are more subtle than our gross
Apprehensions can find out or receive, or natural Agents imitate.

There are yet in common Observation, some Instances, that may come nearer this
great Point: From the virtuous Actions of great Personages in Bodies, there is
an Honor, an Esteem, a Dignity, an excellent Example flowing out, that
continues Ages beyond the very Actions, and beyond the Persons continuance in
Bodies that performed them, and may be imputed to their Posterity; and are, as
it were, Abstracts from Persons in Bodies, and yet of a spiritual kind of
Diffusiveness, as to both Time and Place, and much exceed the Places whereupon
they were acted; that have a kind of Universality both as to Time and Place,
are nearer the matter we are upon, and yet they are but dark, and dull shades
of so great a Truth: Let us therefore come to the Holy Word of God it self, and
we shall find four kinds of Causality attributed to God manifested in Flesh,
and to all his Divine Action and suffering therein.

1. The Causality of an expiatory, propitiatory, or meritorious Cause. 2. Of an
exemplar Cause. 3. Of an efficient Cause, by way of Union to himself. 4. Of a
rational argumentative Cause, so effecting a Conformity of the Souls of his
People to himself.
There is nothing more evident, than that the Gospel ascribes Body, Flesh, and
Blood of Christ, the Efficacy of an eternal, propitiatory, expiatory Cause: By
one Offering Heb. 10. 14.
of the Body of Christ, and that once for all, He has for ever perfected, that
is, reconciled and consecrated, them, who are sanctified, because it was
offered by the Eternal Spirit. Heb. 9. 24.
His Body is an Offering, a Sacrifice of an eternal sweet smelling Ephesians. 5. 2.
savor, because he offered himself: now himself is God in our Nature; so the
Offering is in the hand of Divinity. Thus his Blood offered by the Eternal
Spirit purges the Conscience from dead Works to serve the living God. The Blood
of Christ, more precious than Silver or Gold, redeems from a vain Conversation.
All these are plain, and high Effects of a spiritual Nature, and they are
derived from the humane Nature of Christ, called his Flesh, his Body, his
Blood, acted by an intellectual, holy, humane Soul, which delighted to do the
Will of God, and the Law of God was within his heart. And Psalm. 40. 8.
all this, by being in the hand of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, is infinitely
communicative both as to Time and Place.

The Righteousness of Angels, or of Men, though they had continued Holy as the
standing Angels, could not have done this: but what Christ the Lamb did, he did
by the Eternal Spirit, which is infinite.

Now these expiatory Extracts, Abstracts drawn from the Body of Jesus Christ,
are so DIVINIZ'D, if I may so speak, by the Eternal Spirit, That they are every
where: Christ's Body, in this sense, may be every where (even as his Divinity
is,) with Pardon of Sin, Reconciliation to God, Peace with him, sprinkling the
Heart from an evil Conscience; and all other great Effects: For, where is it
that the Gospel is, and true Christians are, where this Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World is not? Where is it, that true Believers in Jesus
Christ have not Right to eat of this Altar? And is not this Altar, as in a
peculiar Institution presented in the Lord's Supper? These Spirits may be
extended any way, conveyed every way, not gross Flesh and Blood, but these
Divine, expiatory Extracts of the Body of Jesus Christ, extended and applied by
the Divinity; the savor of that Offering, of that Sacrifice fills Heaven and
Earth.

From the Humane Nature, called the Body and Flesh, and Blood of Jesus Christ
united to the Son of God, is drawn that common Image, Idea, and Exemplar, to
which his Saints are every where Conformed; They are Called, Justified, and
Glorified according to this Image, for whom God did foreknow, He predestined
to be so Conformed. Romans 8. 29.


This is in all Nature, there is a common Idea and Platform of every kind of
Being, and Life, and it is every where, as in the Mind, and under the Hand and
Power of God; so that all in whatever parts of the World agree in it, each to
their kind; And whatever is not formed and shapen according to it, is monstrous
and misshapen.

So in Christ Jesus, is deposited, that common universal Image, and Idea,
according to which the New Creature is framed, and this is God manifested in
the Flesh, that He might be the First Born among many Brethren: And this Image
by the Divine Spirit is every where, and there is neither Jew nor Gentile,
Scythian nor Barbarian, Bond nor Free; but Col. 3. 11.
all are one in Christ Jesus. Called, Justified, as Christ was; Glorified, as
He is, so shall they be; and particularly in the Lord's Supper, this Image is
so presented, that We are all one Bread, and one Body by being made partakers
of that one 1 Cor. 10. 17.
Bread by Faith.

And this Image is not either a liveless or mere Contemplative Image, but it
has a mighty Power and Operation from the Spirit of Jesus Christ to conform
and configurate all his Servants to himself; That as He was in All Things made
like unto his Brethren, so his Brethren are to Him. And this mutual
Assimilation is so close, that He dwells in them, and they in Him.

The Humane Nature of Christ has therefore the Power Divine Spirit of Christ,
by the Mediation of his Humanity, does unite himself to the Souls of his
Servants, and so to their Bodies, and so conveys his Righteousness in the value
of his Blood, his Spirit in the power of Holiness, that we become Members of
his Body, his Flesh, and his Bone; as Eve coming out of Adam and made one flesh
with him, was Flesh of his Flesh, Bone of Ephesians. 5. 30.
his Bone: And so we are Branches of this Vine, of this Good Romans 11. 24.
Olive, who as a common Root bears us All.

So that indeed it comes to this, That all the Servants of Christ are as one
Christ; for as the Body is one, and has many 1 Cor. 12. 12.
Members, and all the Members of that Body being many, are one Body; so also is
Christ: As there are many Members, and one Body, just so is Christ, not Christ
in his Person, but Christ in all his Members, All one Christ: So Galat. 3. 16.
he says not, Unto Seeds, as unto many, but as of one, To thy Seed; which is
Christ, viz. Christ in his whole Body of Members. And we all come in the unity
of the Faith of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ, Christ full in all his Members: And the
Apostle to the Colossians, calls Jews and Gentiles, One new man in Christ; and
the Church is the fullness of him that fills all in all: And thus we are one
Body and one Bread. Ephesians. 1. ult.


This is a great mystery of Christ and the Church; but if rightly understood,
it greatly explains Christ's Words, This is my Body: for as there are many
Incorporations, as of political Bodies, which are not lost by distance of
Place, as being Citizens of such a City, mystical as the Incorporation of
Husband and Wife, which is not made void by distance of Place, while the Bands
of Union hold; thus Christ in Heaven, by his Spirit, unites his Members to him
on Earth; and his Body, in this spiritual sense, is every where to be so
joined, and it does so draw to it self.

But this Union is yet more nearly expressed by a natural Union, viz. by eating
his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, even as the Branches are united to the Vine,
by being fed by the Vine, and sucking from it; and so the Members are supplied
with Spirits from the Head: and if they were not so, they would,
notwithstanding a local Union, be disunited, as a withered Branch or Member is;
even so by receiving the saving Effluxes and Communications of Jesus Christ,
which is an eating of him, we dwell in him, and he in us. And without this we
are not united by any outward Professional Duties.

And this Union shall be most evident in the separated state of Souls, made
like the Holy separated Soul of Christ, or the Spirit of Christ committed into
his Fathers Hand, and as it were all one Spirit, and are therefore, as Stephen
was, received by him, and yet most visible in the Resurrection, when the Bodies
of his Saints shall be made like his glorious Body, because they shall see him
as he is: for then indeed the 1 John 3. 2.
Body of Christ shall have a most natural Presence and Influence on the Bodies
of Saints, and shall act properly, as matter upon matter, or as the Sun upon
the Moon and Planets about it, whose Bodies it illustrates. He will present his
Church to himself then, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such Phil. 3. 21.
thing, by that Power that subdues all things to himself. That Col. 3. 3, 4.
Life that is now hid, as Christ is hid, shall then appear, and we shall appear
with him in Glory, as all one Christ.

He will then be as a Tree of Life, in the midst of the Paradise of God, and
his Blood in a spiritual sense, as a Water of Life.

And of this, the Lord's Supper is the great pledge, till He comes, and the
Sacrament of Eating him, so as to live by him, and to be raised up by him at
the last day when this Union shall fully appear.

The Humanity of Jesus Christ, that is, His Body, Flesh, Blood, as it is
arrayed in the Holiness, Heavenliness, purity of it, and in that
self-Resignation to the Will of God in suffering, and becoming Obedient to
Death, even to the Death of the Cross, in highest love to lost Sinners, is
present every where in the Gospel, every where set forth before our Eyes,
Evidently Crucified among us. Galat. 3. 1.

And this has in all due Reason the force of a strong and mighty Argument to
draw us to him by Faith, and Repentance, to apply his Blood, and to Trust in
his Redemption, to move Christians to the same Mind in every thing, that we
see, was in Christ, it has even a Constraining Power of love, to live to him
that dyed for us, to purify our selves, as he is Pure, to be in the World, as
he was in the World, to Walk Heb. 13. 12, 13.
as he Walked, to go out to him without the Camp of all False Religions, out of
the Camp of Sensuality, and Worldly-mindedness, bearing his Reproach, to
Crucify the Flesh with the Lusts, to be Crucified to the World, and the World
to us, to set our Affections on things Above, Whither His Humane Nature removed
in regard of Place; But by the Preaching and Manifestation of the Gospel, it is
every where, as thus Represented, as thus set forth; This is a sense of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, being every where, where his Gospel and Word
come, that cannot be denied; and as therein it is so received, as to become an
Argument, and powerful motive of uniting our selves to Him of being like Him,
It may be most significantly expressed by the Metaphor of Eating and Drinking,
like Ezekiel's Eating the Roll, and filling his Bowels with it. This is a
hearing Christ's Voice, which strongly Rev. 3. 20.
knocks or persuades to open the Door to him; that he may, as he will, come in
to Sup with us and we with Him.

This is a Sense so proper and natural, that it is chosen by that Learned
Interpreter, Grotius, to expound that great Discourse, John 6. of eating the
Flesh, and drinking the Blood, Grot. in Evangel. John.
viz. such a Receiving his Word and Sayings, as to be every way confirmed in a
way of Holy, Rational, Intellectual, Spiritual Obedience to Him.

And, as there is so particular a Representation of Jesus Christ in the Lord's
Supper, as a Sacrament summing up the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, or of Jesus
Christ Crucified; so a particular Approbation of our selves to it, and for it,
and the danger of an unworthy, an unbecoming Eating and Drinking, is so
earnestly and vehemently pressed upon us by the Apostle, as to infold us in the
Guilt of his Body and Blood, as if we had Crucified the Son of God afresh, and
put him to open Shame, and because in the Apostolical Times, the Lord's Supper,
and the (...), the only two such words in the New Testament.
Lord's Day, the only Institutions so inscribed, were undivided; It was a
Constant, Habitual, Uniform Preparation that was required.

Now that this is Eating and Drinking Christ in a mystical Sense agreeable to
the Mystery of the Doctrine and Supper of Jesus Christ, is very easy to be
Apprehended, seeing Christ Jesus is not to be loved, nor received in any
Fleshly Figure, He is no such kind of Object to our Souls; even a virtuous
Lawgiver, or Philosopher, is not to be loved in his Flesh and Blood, as Gross
and Carnal, but, as in his Laws, his Doctrine, his Virtue, how much more
Christ? If ye Love me, keep my Commandments: Pretend to no carnal Love, to no
Love to me by looking on, and kissing my Pictures, or Figures of fleshly
Representations; For he that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is
that loves me, and he that thus loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I
will John, 14. 15. 21. 23, 24.
come to him, and manifest my self to him: If a Man love me, he will keep my
Sayings, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
Abode with him; Words equal in Sense to these, He that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him: On the other side, He that
loves me not, keeps not my Sayings, and therefore, Whoever keeps not my
Sayings, loves me not, All others attempt to do that, which cannot be done, to
know and to love Christ after the Flesh; whereas now there is no loving Christ,
but in the New Creation, All old things are passed away, Behold (mark it well)
all Things are become new. All outward Representations, Images, Pictures,
Gestures, Geniculations, Adorations, if not commanded by him, are not the least
signs of Love, but rejected and refused by Christ, as a knowing him after the
Flesh; even the Ordinance 1 Cor. 5. 16.
of the Lord's Supper had been a false Love of Christ, if it had not been
received from him, and specially by himself commanded; and yet even as it is,
without that spiritual Approbation, or approving our selves (which we translate
by the Word Examine our selves,) It is so far from Acceptance, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
etc.
that it is eating and drinking Judgment to our selves.

And all this is most rational, if we consider, That we are our selves not
truly our selves, but as we are thus intellectually, spiritually, in a way of
virtuous Conformity moved to things, by the great efficacy of Christ, and his
Spirit in our Hearts, and move effectually by inward, rational Apprehension and
Affection, according to the Arguments and Motives in the Word of God, without
which, we can under any Pretensions, Professions, Confessions of Faith, Forms
of Worship, Prayers, outward Rites, Postures, and Observations, be no more
Christians, than the Statues and Images of the Apostles or Saints are
Christians, because they are inscribed with such Names, and vouched to be such
or such Representations.

But when there is a single Eye and Design to this Conformity to the Word, and
Sayings, and Commandments of Christ, there is then a far more real Presence of
Christ in his Word, than in any of the Writings or Lives of the most excellent
Men that ever were in the World; for the Sense and Reason they wrote are indeed
here, their Actions and Virtues are drawn into History, and may be preserved
from Copy to Copy, but the Soul, the Spirit that wrote them, is gone from them:
but now Christ, yesterday, to day, the same for ever, is present by that
Spirit, that Divinity, by which he preached of old, even in Noah's Time to the
disobedient Spirits now in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 20. While his Truth operates after
the manner of rational Truth, his Spirit works much higher, even divinely.

His Table therefore in the Gospel, and in his Supper, is a Psalm. 28. 5.
Table richly spread, a Cup running over with spiritual Efficacies, of which,
whoever is indeed Partaker, cannot be a Partaker of the Table of Devils,
whoever truly drinks his Cup cannot drink of the Cup of Devils, either in an
Idolatrous Religion, or an unholy Life: He cannot eat of the Sinners Dainties,
of Folly's Bread, or of the stolen Waters she has Prove. 9. 17.
provided.

For by one Offering he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified, of
which the Holy Ghost is witness, even of that Covenant of which he is the
Mediator, it being established upon the best Promises of writing the Laws of
God in their hearts, and putting them in their mind, together with the
Remission of their Sins. So that as there needs no other offering than that one
offering, so needs it not to be daily offered, for it was once for all offered,
and he is now at the Right Hand of God interceeding upon that one offering,
once offered; by the Blood of which he entered into the Holiest to appear before
God for us, and from whence he cannot be moved till the Time he expects, of his
Enemies being made his Footstool, Heb. 8. 6. compared with c. 9. 12. 24. c. 10.
13. etc.

2. And thus I have made good the first Point of this Head, viz. Of the
spiritual Efficacies that flow from the Humane Nature of Christ, expressed by
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, as in Union with the Son of God. I come now
to the second, to show that in regard of the Eternity of the Son of God, these
Efficacies cannot be hindered, nor prejudiced in Point of Time: The Divine
Person of Christ being unchangeable and eternal, there is no distance of Time
occurs to him, or can encounter his Divine Efficacy: Before Abraham was, says
Christ, I am. How could it be, that Christ, that was born so many hundred years
after Abraham, could be before Abraham? were it not in regard of the Eternity
of the Divine Person, communicated to the Humanity, and predating the Great
Powers and Efficacies of God manifested in Flesh before the Incarnation? Upon
this Account Christ is called the Lamb slain before the Foundation of the
World; because the Divine Person anticipated the Efficacy of the Death of the
Lamb, ordained before the Foundation of the World, much earlier than his
Manifestation, which was not till the last Times: Christ was not abridg'd, nor
forestalled in Time, because he did not actually dye till about four thousand
Years after the Fall of Man: for the Divine Person, Jesus Christ, never had a
Yesterday, nor can have a To morrow, but is always in a To day, the same for
ever.

In this very Point of Eating the Flesh, and Drinking the Blood of Christ, when
the Jews were so disgusted with the Doctrine, Christ, to ease their Thoughts,
proposes his Eternity to their Consideration, and shows the mighty
spiritualizing Power of the Divine Nature by it; What; says he, if you shall
see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before: though he was as Man, the Son
of not Fifty Years by many, as the Jews observed to him; yet he was in Heaven,
as the Son of God, calling his Humanity, that was not actually till his
Incarnation, as if it were.

And as it is thus in regard of Time past, so in regard of Time to come, he
says, Lo I am with you to the End of the World.

3. In respect to Place, we shall find very great Expressions of the Divine
Vbiquity, and Omnipresence of the Son of God, extending the Manhood to all
Spiritual Effects, without any Limitation, or Confinement within Place, though
yet it be, according to its natural Presence, determined to Place, even as the
Incarnation it self was to the Fullness of Time.

Our Savior discoursing with Nicodemus upon the Point of Regeneration, John 3.
13. tells him, No Man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from
Heaven, even the Son of Man, who is in Heaven: Observe it, Christ was in his
Body upon Earth, His being the Son of Man was that to which his Body was
proper, yet says he, The Son of Man, that now discourses thee upon Earth, This
Son of Man is now in Heaven. How could this be, but only, because no space does
hinder or straiten the spiritual Efficacy of the Divinity, or confine its
Presence, even as it is united to the Humanity?

By all this you may see, Christ was in Heaven while he was upon Earth, and he
was in Heaven before he was Incarnate, for, He came down from Heaven; and all
this by the Unchangeableness and the Omnipresence of the Action of the Divinity
united to the Humane Nature: and then as to his being now upon Earth, although
the Heavens contain him, Consider what the Apostle says, He ascended far above
all Heavens, that he might fill all things: so that Christ, by his Divine
Power, fills all things; and the Church, which is his Body in his Humane Nature
on Earth, is the Fullness of him who fills All in All; even he that was
Raised up from the Dead, is he that fills All in All. And the Church on Earth
is his Fullness, (though Christ is in Heaven) either receiving his Fullness,
or, as he is pleased to account himself, Full by his Union to it. Upon these
Accounts, The Humane Nature of Christ, as it is united to the Divinity, though
it self be Finite, yet in the Extensive Power of the Divinity, spiritually
applying it to the Salvation of his Church, has the Nature of Infinite: both
as to Time and Place, it is always, it is every where, filling All in All,
Yesterday, to day, the same for ever.

For if the Soul of Man can improve the Senses, and Faculties of the Body, in
representing to it self in a Map, Places at greatest Distances from the Body,
and the Mind can thereby in some sense convey it self thither while the Body
remains in the same place; If we can by Writing converse one with another at
greatest distance, How much more can the Divine Nature of the Son of God extend
the Humane in the Spirituality of all its Use and Effects, in an Infinite
manner, so that it can convey and dispose them unlimitedly as it pleases? and
this may well be called his Body and Blood in very real, though mystical sense.

It remains yet, as to the clearing this Point of Christ giving his Flesh to
eat, and his Blood to drink, to show, That as there is such a rich
Communicativeness on the part of Christ, giving his Flesh to eat, and his Blood
to drink; so there are Receiving Powers and Faculties of Man's Soul, prepared
and fitted by Grace, that may be properly and truly said, in a spiritual Sense,
to Eat, and to Drink, as Christ is said to Give.

Now unto this, the Understanding, Will, Conscience, Memory, Imagination, and
Affection, with the active and executive Powers of the whole Man, are prepared,
even to receive spiritually the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, however at a
bodily distance; viz. by Understanding, Faith, close inward Application, holy
Affection, obediential self-Resignation; all which, are this Intellectual
spiritual Eating and Drinking the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ.

And to all this, there is no Notion or Resemblance more significant or
expressive than spiritual Transubstantiation, as shall be more fully discoursed
under the two following Heads: And so having thus far discussed the first Head,
I go forward to the second, to show, That there is a clear Passage and
Transition from Christ giving his Flesh to eat, (as it stands thus in the whole
Doctrine of the Gospel) to those Words, Take, Eat, this is my Body, when he had
blessed the Bread with Thanksgiving, and broke it; and likewise after Supper,
Blessing the Cup, with Thanksgiving, and saying, Divide it among your selves,
and drink ye All of it, For, This is my Blood of the New Testament, or the New
Testament in my Blood.

For when our Lord had settled that great Doctrine of Eating his Flesh, John 6.
and Drinking his Blood, comprehensive of the whole of his Redemption, and the
saving Application of it by Faith and Love, and the entire new Creation; Galat.
5. 6. c. 6. 15.
it is not at all strange, he should establish so great a sacramental
Institution upon it; For when in so large and Sublime a Discourse, and in more
Words, than he expended upon any one Subject that we find upon Record, he had
comprised the whole Mystery of our Salvation, it cannot be surprising he should
adjust to it one of the two, and that the most solemn and continual of his
positive Laws, which we call Sacraments.

For though it is true, Eating and Drinking considered, as mere sensitive
Things, and much more, when it degenerates into Sensuality, a Life of, and for
Eating and Drinking, it is a sordid, low, and course thing, as the Apostle
says, Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy both
it and them; and there cannot be a more ignoble Character, than of those, whose
God is their Belly, and who serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies, a
beastly, a brutish Servitude.

But then taking it, as it is by the Wisdom of Providence made the means of the
support of the Humane, Animal Life, in Subordination to the Life of Reason and
Religion, and is symbolical and significant, and also serviceable to many
rational Communications, and much noble Humanity of Conversation, so it may
even (as the natural Purgation of Water in Baptism) be worthy to be
transplanted from common use to the highest Significations in Religion, and as
it had been so dignified in the Old Testament, so to be farther ennobled in the
New, and to bear a sense far above and beyond it self. And yet to show both the
Spirituality, great use to the highest Life, and also the Simplicity of the
Gospel Institution, it is taken from the most necessary, plainest Food in
Eating, Bread, and the most generous thing in Drinking, viz. Wine; Bread that
strengthens, and Wine that makes glad the Heart of Man. And the Resemblance
stands in these following Particulars between Eating Bread and Drinking Wine,
and Eating the Body, and Drinking the Blood of Jesus Christ.

But I shall begin with those Particulars that are, as least of Controversy,
so of least Interest in the main Merits of the Point we are upon, and will end
in that which is of the grand Concern in this whole matter.

1. It is an Eating and Drinking in Pledge of Reconciliation, Peace, and
Friendship with God by Jesus Christ; for so eating Bread and drinking Wine is
in Scripture, and by the general Impression of Providence upon Mankind
ordained; as Joseph's Brethren, in token of extraordinary Favor, were to eat
Bread with him: and it is said of the Nobles of Israel, Genesis 43. 25.
They saw God, and he laid not his hand of, viz. of Displeasure, upon them;
They saw him, and did eat and drink in Exodus 24. 11.
token of Peace; and especially this is a Feast upon a Sacrifice, a
Sin-offering become a Peace Offering, of which the Jews, that serve the Altar,
have no Right to eat, because their Heb. 13. 10.
Sin Offerings of greatest expiatory Account, yet as not able to purge off the
imputative Guilt laid upon them, were burnt without the Camp. But Christ,
though he suffered without the Camp, yet consuming the Guilt, and fully
expiating it, his Body, as sacrificed, becomes an Altar of Peace Offerings to
the true Christian, although to the Jews an Offering only to Justice, not
conquering the Guilt, but, as a Malefactor, dying in his own Blood: but the
true Believer feasts upon it, after he is sanctified, atton'd, reconciled, and
purified by the Blood of it.

It is a Feast upon the Paschal Lamb, in assurance against the destroying
Angel, the Blood being sprinkled by way of 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
Expiation, and the Flesh eaten in the way of a holy Festival, Rejoicing, and
Thanksgiving.

So that though eating the Flesh of Christ carries a broad Signification of the
great Evil, and Horror of Sin, and of the dreadful way of Reconciliation,
looking so unnatural as the eating of the Flesh and the drinking the Blood of
our Savior, does; yet by the great attoning virtue of this Sacrifice, it
becomes a Feast of Joy and Peace.

2. This Act is a solemn Act of Worship of God and Christ, We eat thus, and
worship: It is an Acknowledgment of Jesus Christ, as our Savior, Lord, and
Master, as all eating upon Sacrifices was an Acknowledgment of the God of the
Sacrifice: and seeing our Mediator is our Sacrifice, of whom it is testified,
He lives for ever, and we are to live to him, it is an Acknowledgment of him
our Savior; and so it requires Reverence and Godly Fear, it calls for
Self-probation even to Approbation, or Approvizing our selves, that so we may
eat, and not otherwise. To eat and drink in a way worthy or becoming the Holy
Body and Blood we seed upon; to discern that Body of the Lord, or to make a
difference and discrimination betwixt it and all other Bread by spiritual, holy
Action; and to carry from it such Obligations as by no means to partake of the
Table, or drink the Cup of Devils; This is the solemn Worship of Eating and
Drinking before God.

3. Eating and Drinking is made a Symbol of Eternal Glory; for so Christ
expresses Eternal Glory, by Eating and Luc. 22. 30. Matt. 8. 11.
Drinking at his Table in his Kingdom. By sitting down with Abraham, with
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. And this is the Reason Christ, in that
great Sixth of John, so often enterweaves with that Discourse of Eating,
Raising up at the last day; because then shall the full effect of the Union to
the Body of Christ be seen, when all his Members shall indeed be seen, as One
Christ in Glory; Their Bodies shall be fashioned like his Glorious Body; It
does not yet appear what we shall be, but when he shall appear we shall be like
him, for we shall see him as he is. He will then present us faultless before
the Presence of his Glory: And all this from the Power of Union to himself,
through the eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood. So that Life, Eternal
Life, Living for ever, Never dying, Raising up at the last Day, Having no Life
if we do not eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood, are in that
Discourse sixteen Times mentioned, to show how close the Relation is betwixt
eating the Flesh of Christ, and drinking his Blood, and Eternal Life: So that
the Apostle Peter sums up all the Discourse in the Words of Eternal Life; Thou
have the Words of Eternal Life.

4. I come now to the last and greatest of those Resemblances between the Flesh
or Body eaten, and Christ's Blood drunk in the Lord's Supper, and natural
Eating and Drinking, viz. Life and Nourishment; and this is that upon which the
weight and stress of the whole matter lies: and in order to the understanding
of this, it is most necessary well to weigh the Words, Take, Eat, This is my
Body, And drink ye All, for This Cup is my Blood.

For here the Notion of Transubstantiation has the most proper place, and here
it will be most properly to be decided: and here I will allow the utmost to it
that can be allowed.

I have then, as I hope, made evident, The real Communication of the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, in its spiritual, saving, and redemptory Effects,
without any change of Place, is no incompossible Notion, to the Divine Power of
the Son of God: And this being rightly apprehended, It will be as evident, He
can convey through such mediatory Channels and Conveyances (as he pleases)
those divine Influences. It is out of all Controversy, The Truth of his Word
and Gospel, together with Prayer and holy Meditation, begetting in the Soul,
Knowledge, spiritual Understanding, Faith, Repentance, Love, and the whole New
Creation, are the primary and fundamental Conveyances of such divine
Influences, by which the sacred Body and Blood of Jesus Christ touch the Soul,
and unite with it, unto all the salvifick Effects of Spiritual and Eternal Life.

And the very effects of Truth, and the Word of God, uniting the Soul to
Christ, through the Efficacy of his Divine Power and Spirit, are in the first
place, before the Lord's Supper Instituted, compared to Meat and Drink.

And as They, in the Course of that Providence, or Word of God, by which Man
lives, and not by Bread alone, are Transubstantiated into the Body, Flesh, and
Blood of those that Eat and Drink them; even so the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, in these saving Effects, are Transubstantiated into the Soul and Spirit
of every faithful Receiver of them, and enliven them to a spiritual and eternal
Life: and there can be no fitter Notion of these Divine Effects than this
Transubstantiation of natural Meat and Drink, and Incorporation thereof into
the Eater: for even as what is eaten according to the nature of Perishables
lives in the Eater, dwells in the Eater, and he in that, and they are one in
one another; even so they that Eat Christ, dwell in Christ, and Christ in them.
Christ lives in his Church and Saints, out of which he is pleased not to live,
as our Mediator and Head: But he lives in them as in his Fullness, and they in
him, as in their Fountain of Life; Christ in them, and They in him by this
spiritual Transubstantiation; or else they have no life in them, but pine away
as through want of Nourishment.

This then being the true measure of eating and drinking Christ, and the
spiritual Transubstantiation arising from it, as in the general Doctrine of the
Gospel, it must give Law and Rule to our eating and drinking of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, that we may rightly understand it, and so to
the Transubstantiation flowing from it: It must be all in our spiritual
Transformation into Christ living in us, and we in him, and no other in that
principal Notion.

But because in all Intellectual and Spiritual Communications of Truth to our
Minds, there are no sensible, no material Images or Representations, and that
by the Wisdom of Jesus Christ in the Lord's Supper, there are those sensible
Images of Bread eaten and Wine drunk, and these Cargoed and enriched with the
Representation of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and that these are to
awaken, collect, and sum all our intellectual, rational, and spiritual Notions
of Christ, the Virtue of his Sacrifice, and whole Transaction of the Humane
Nature, and our closest Application thereunto, as to our Redemption by him.

It must needs therefore be, that the Bread and Wine, as to our Understandings,
our Souls, and all intellectual and spiritual Appetite and Action, having done
their very first Service of leading us through the whole suitableness betwixt
Bread and Wine, and the natural Life of Man, and the same suitableness betwixt
the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Life of the Soul, according to the
Institution, they must immediately drop their bodily and sensible Nature, and
become to our Minds, Thoughts, and Affections the Body and Blood of Christ. And
it pertains to the Divine Power of Jesus Christ, and his Eternal Spirit, to
make, in a spiritual Reality, that Bread and Wine his very Body and Blood, in
all its Efficacies, to us, if we are duly prepared so to receive them: And the
inward, high, and saving Effects, to all Intents and Purposes, immediately
follow.

But yet if the true natural Realities of these Elements, or the subsequent
unitive Incorporating Virtues of those Elements were lost, not only the
Institution it self, founded on those sensible Qualities, would be lost, but
the very Body and Blood of Christ, by such a monstrous kind of Miracle, would
become outward Elements to themselves; for, by the very Confession of the gross
Transubstantialist, They, however Transubstantiated, do no good without Faith
and Repentance, and so do no more than the Vntransubstantiated Bread and Wine
may do, and so prodigious a Miracle serves to no purpose, which is most absurd;
For it makes the Body and Blood mere outward Elements to themselves.

The Bread and Wine then must, as to the bodily Senses, as to the natural
Effects upon the Body, be Themselves, or keep their own Natures; but as to the
spiritual Sentiments, and the spiritual Effects, they must be thus
Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Cbrist, in regard of Christ really
communicating them by his divine Power to the Soul, as the Soul by Faith must
receive them.

There must therefore be the Conduct of all the Instituted Actions, Blessing,
Breaking, Taking, Eating, the Bread; Blessing, Dividing among our selves,
Drinking, All, of the CUP, and that in a solemn manner, as in an Act of
spiritual Worship, with Reverence and godly Fear; else it is not to eat the
Lord's Supper: for, If a Priest, not rightly ordained, or not intending to
consecrate the Bread, shall in the very Judgment of the Transubstantialist
defeat the sacred Institution; how much more ought, in the very same men's
Judgments, the Neglect or Omission of any of the solemn Instituted Acts
evacuate the spiritual use and end of which the natural use of the Bread and
Wine, (necessarily to that end continuing in their Natures) was one great part;
and therefore, undoubtedly, if the Stomachs of Communicants were opened, as
Alexander opened the Stomach of his Soldier, to find whether the Milk charged
upon him to be taken away from the poor Woman by violence, were there, and
there he found it; so the Bread and Wine would be found in the Stomach of the
fresh Communicant, making the just natural Progresses, and moves to Union,
Incorporation, and Nourishment, that according to the Law of substantial Food
(not Accidents) or according to Nature, it should do.

And it is necessary it should be so, that the spiritual Transubstantiation may
answer the Resemblance Christ has chosen for it, and might guide us into the
understanding of it, and Application of our Souls to it, according to the steps
of the natural Conversion of Food into our Flesh, and Blood, and Life; yet not
so that Christ should be obliged to his own Ceremonies, as if he could not work
without them.

But this is the ordinary means, even besides and beyond the Word, that the
Goodness of Christ has chosen, that we might have the most sensible and
powerful Application of our Souls to him, and of him to our Souls in such a
Sacrament, which has, besides the very Time of Celebration, [even in cases of
Omission by necessary Impediment,] its constant use; for, the Ordination it
self is a Seal, always and inseparably fastened to God's Covenant, and does
assure the great Point of the real Exhibition of Christ to the Faith of his
Servants, as substantially, as the Meat and Drink we live by, assures it self
to our Bodies and Senses, and this always.

And this Offer, this Exhibition, is so real, that whoever professing the
Gospel, and having the Knowledge of this Sacramental Institution, and
especially coming to the Lord's Supper, and not approving himself in all the
spiritual Acts of receiving Christ, becomes guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord. Now as we know this Guilt is only of a spiritual Nature, committed
against the Body and Blood of Christ thus spiritualized in their effects, for
who can hurt Christ's natural Body in Heaven? so it assures us, the Presence of
the Body and Blood is only of a spiritual Nature, and so the Transubstantiation
is only spiritual; for as the Guilt is, so is the Presence: and if the Presence
were sensible, the Guilt might be by an Injury of a sensible, Nature: but we
know, It is not so; and so the Presence and Sin also must be of a spiritual
Nature.

And so also is the Sin of not discerning, of not discriminating the Lord's
Body. It must needs be the Sin of the Mind, because there is no Presence that
strikes the Sense; The Sense is in no Fault, for there is no Body of Christ
before it; but the Mind, that does not discern, is to be blamed: for that has
a high, spiritual Object, made known to it, evidently set before it by the Word
of Christ, in the Sacrament, but only to it, not to the bodily eye or sense:
therefore the Presence can be only spiritual.

But so certain as the Bread and Wine are present to the Sense, so certain are
the Body and Blood of Christ, in a spiritual Transubstantiation. For it must be
acknowledged, This is my Body, standing in a Sacramental, solemn Institution,
is of greater force than a mere metaphorical Saying, I am the Vine, and does
signify a Presence of Christ with the Bread, in such a manner, that the
General Doctrine of the Gospel concerning the real Communication of the Body
and Blood of Christ in general, is more particularly determined to the Bread,
Blessed, and Broken, Taken and Eaten, which is become a Memorial perpetually
annexed to the Gospel by Christ's Institution, and is a Superaddition of the
Certainty of a real, spiritual Presence, of all the saving Effects of the Body
and Blood of Christ, in the manner before discoursed: And the Guilt of unworthy
Receiving, or not discriminating this Body and Blood, is proportionally a Sin
committed against the spiritual Presence of the Body and Blood there
represented, in all its spiritual Effects, and really, and substantially,
though by Divine Abstraction and Infinite Diffusion of them, without any
material bodily Presence.

And though this Sin, according to the Laws of Discourse, is charged only upon
the unworthy Eating and Drinking, as at the Table of Christ, in a set Discourse
of the Sacrament; yet, as the Divine Institution offers at all Times the Body
and Blood of Christ, and testifies the Truth of a real Participation of Christ
by the True Believer; so the Obligation, and consequently the Guilt, is
chargeable upon every Pretender to Christ, whether he be a Receiver or not, as
is most evident by 1 Cor. 10. all along the Chapter. And such a Profanation of
the Lord's Supper as the Corinthians were guilty of, as even the turning it
into a Riot and Revel, so that it was not to Eat the Lord's Supper; yet the
weight of the Institution fell upon them, even as it does upon all, that
profanely forbear the Lord's Supper among us, [as it were in their own Defense,
against the Danger of it;] whose Guilt is the same as to the not Receiving
Christ exhibited to them in the Lord's Supper, that must be always Preached, as
a Memorial of Christ Instituting it, wherever this Gospel is preached, and is
pretended to be so Received by All, that is by all who pretend to be
Christians: So that they do not, by neglect, lessen the Guilt of an unworthy
Eating and Drinking, which the very Profession of Christianity entitles them
to, but also add that of a profane Omission and Neglect of so Holy an
Institution. Now as all this is most evident by a Collation of the Apostle's
Discourse, in the forementioned Chapters, so it is of 1 Cor. c. 10.
great Illustration to the Point we are upon, as also Conviction of careless
profane Christians, who must, whether they will or no, be under the Bond of
this Covenant, to whom Christ is so clearly set forth before their Eyes, and no
Shift can disoblige them.

I come therefore to the Third Head of this Discourse, viz To find a fair
Accommodation, and no Encounter betwixt the Mystery and the Letter, or betwixt
the grand Sense and the very Words, This is my Body, by a compare of this whole
Harmonical Context with other Scripture, and its way of speaking in such Cases.

And in this I have so far prevented my self, that there remains nothing, but
to gather up the whole Context, and then to apply to it the sense of this
Mystery I have pursued: Whereupon it will be evident, these Words, This is my
Body, This is my Blood, agree with the constant manner of Scriptures speaking
in such Matters, and that less than these Words could not import the great
Sense that was to be imported.

It is therefore first to be considered, That Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, even the very night he was betray*d to dye, that he might draw up the
whole Mystery of Redemption in short, and into a Sum; He does it first in that
most significant, typical, sacrifical Rite of the Passover, that had been of so
great use and signification in the Church of God among the Jews; of which, the
several Ordinances for the solemnity of it bound together, are called by not a
Literal, but Mystical Propriety, the Lord's Passover. Exodus 12. 11.

This Passover, with Desire, Christ desired to eat with his Disciples, before
he suffered, as a very lively Table of his Redemptional Suffering, so near: but
withal, He declares, He would no more Eat of it, till it was fulfilled in the
Kingdom of God.

Immediately upon this, whether out of an appendant Rite to the Passover, or
not, is not now material, He Institutes the Lord's Supper, as it were
proleptically, and by way of Prophecy, and yet Intuition, and looking upon his
Death just before him, and draws in this new Table the Intention of it: but
whether it was to be celebrated any more, there is no Explicit, but that
Implicit Preception. In the Evangelist Luke, Do it in Remembrance of me; which
carries an Intimation of a Continuation: but it is observable, It is applied
only to the Bread, importing the Body of Christ: and it abates much from the
rigor of a gross, carnal Sense, where it seems to press hardest. For as to the
Wine being materially the Blood of Christ, that Figure, This Cup, for this Wine
in the Cup; and that variation [is the New Testament in my Blood] does, beyond
all Contradiction, rebate the gross Literal Sense, even as Remembrance does
from [This is my Body;] for Remembrance is of Absent, and not Present; This
therefore was as beforehand to an after thing; So Christ said of the Body
[which is broken] although it was not yet actually broken, and of the Blood
[which is shed] although it was not then shed.

Immediately after the drinking of the Wine, Christ subjoined, I will no more
drink of This Fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new in the Kingdom of God my
Father, when it comes; which to show a thing of weight, and of the same Sense
with eating the Passover no more till, etc. The Evangelist Luke is beforehand
with the Institution of the Cup, to join to that Saying of the Passover, this,
of the Fruit of the Vine, as is very visible.

And both these Expressions speak these three Things:

1. That there was an eminent Kingdom of God the Father immediately to succeed,
at whose Right Hand Christ sits till the Time of his own peculiar Kingdom
comes, which is not till he puts down all Rule, and Power, and Authority, and
last of all abolishes Death and Hell out of God's Creation, into the Lake, its
own Place, which is the Second Death, or the Death of Death, and then he
resigns back the Kingdom. The Kingdom of God and Christ are thus kept distinct,
and the Kingdom of the Father is in an especial manner the state of the Gospel,
after the Resurrection, Ascension, Sitting of Christ at his Right Hand, and his
continual Intercession even until that Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

2. That the Death of Jesus Christ, imported in both the Passover and the
Lord's Supper, was to be renewed into a perpetual Life and Virtue immediately
after his Death, by those his Resurrection, Ascension, Session on God's
Right Hand, and Intercession, which are the Gospel-Kingdom of the Father.

3. That Christ, in a spiritual sense, continually eats the Passover, as
fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, drinks the Wine as new in the Kingdom of God,
and that with his Disciples of all Ages, viz. in that perpetual Renovation of
his Death in his Intercession, and Application of the Benefits thereof to
Believers, according to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, and particularly of the
Lord's Supper; and as in a Pro-gramma or aforehand Portraicture of all this,
those excellent Discourses of at least John 15. c. 16. and that great Prayer, a
Pattern of the Intercession of Christ, John 17. following show.

And of this Intercession of Christ upon his own Death, the Lord's Supper is in
highest sense the Memorial; for, the Remembrance of Christ is not of a dead
Christ, but who lives for ever, to make Intercession, and so saves to the
uttermost.

In consequence of all this, especially the A point most insisted upon by the
Apostles Paul and John, (I had almost said solely by them) Romans 8. Epist. to
the Heb. frequently and solemnly, c. 7. the Apostle John c. 15, c. 16. c. 17.
especially Epist. c. 2. 1, 2.
Intercession of Christ, The Apostle Paul, as a fourth Evangelist, concerning
this Institution, is immediately commissioned by Christ from Heaven, to
promulge it to all Ages of Christians. And therein he reveals it under a solemn
new Title, as it were new in the Kingdom of God. The Lord's Supper. He applies
to it its great Scope and End, both to the Bread and to the Wine; Do it in
solemn Memorial of Christ, and his Action now in Heaven upon his Death which
was here on Earth: and farther in those Words; You show forth his Death till he
comes, that is, the whole Contexture of his Death, as his Body is eaten and his
Blood drunk through the Efficacy and Application of his Intercession, through
which we offer the Sacrifice of Praise, giving Thanks to his Name, through him,
in this Eucharist or Feast of Thanksgiving, of whose Altar we continually Eat,
even that of the Great Shepherd of the Sheep brought again from the Dead by
the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, as the Apostle has most divinely woven
these Things into a Neighborhood, Heb. 10. v. 10. v. 15. v. 20.

And this Ordinance, with this whole State of Things, the Apostle has dated
till the Coming of Christ, when a new State shall receive this into it self,
till which this Ordinance cannot be superannuated, or out of Date; for which
his being received into Glory is postpond in the Mystery of Godliness, that it
may be a Pawn and Pledge of his Kingdom of Glory. 1 Timothy 3. 16. on which the
Apostasy follows, darkning all till then. c. 4.

Laying then all these Things together, how evident is it, This whole Matter is
of a divine, spiritual, heavenly Sense? and therefore the Words concerning it
are to be understood mystically, spiritually, heavenly, however expressed in a
Phrase and Language nearest, most easy, and familiar to Sense, by which
Sensibleness, the Substantialness, Reality, certain Presence of those
Spiritualities is to be understood; and yet nothing to be detracted, or
derogated from the Spirituality: and to interpret otherwise, is to go contrary
to the Rule of all Language, and of Scripture Language particularly, and is as
mischievous as the worst sort of Allegorizing, or Evacuating the sense of the
Letter of Scripture, where plain historical Things are intended. The one is
turning Scripture into a spiritual Romance, the other is to subvert the whole
World of Spirituals, to bring in horrible Anthropomorphitism, or imagining God
to have Eyes, Hands, Feet, etc. because Scripture representing the Reality of
his divine Action, Providence and Government does it in Words and Images we
best understand; and in a word, to bring in rank Hobbianism into the Scripture,
the Church of God, and into this Sacrament, as shall be more particularly
remarked under a following Head.

Add hereunto, This is most particularly the Language of Scripture in
Sacramental or Testamentary Discourses, Discourses concerning the Covenant,
according to that famous Instance, Heb. 9. 19. 20. When Moses had spoken every
Precept to the People, according to the Law, he took the Blood of Calves, of
Goats, with Scarlet-wool and Hysop, and sprinkled both the Book, and the
People, saying, upon the whole, This Thing, this whole Thing, is the Blood of
the Covenant, which God has enjoined you.

Thus the Bread, Blessed, Broken, Taken, Eaten, is the Body of Christ, (and
proportionably the Blood.) This whole Thing, the whole Doctrine and Law of the
Gospel, always (...).
considered and embraced first, and then the Bread, so Blessed, Broken, Taken,
Eaten, is the Body of Christ; and accordingly this Cup or Wine particularly
Blessed, Divided, Drunk.

And that not only in a figurative, cold sacramental, or commemorative Sense;
for that Divine Power, that Eternal Spirit of Christ, does infinitely propagate
the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, representing his whole Humanity, in all the
saving Efficacies and mighty Effects proper thereunto; as perpetually in the
Doctrine and Truth of the Gospel, in an intellectual way, so in this Supper, as
in a sensible material Representation; but yet only confirming, assuring,
making present a divine spiritual Efficacy, as has been all along declared:
And even as the Bread and Wine have an undoubted evident Appearance to Sense,
are Eaten, Tasted, Concocted in the Stomach, converted into Flesh, Blood, and
Spirits; so are the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ really present in the Bread,
in the Wine, viz. in their spiritual Effects, justly called his Body and Blood:
So that the Bread is in true spiritual Sense the Body of Christ, to be eaten
spiritually, to be tasted spiritually, to be turned into spiritual Life to the
Soul, in which Body and Blood go hand in hand with the Elements, in all their
natural Progress, by their Spirituality: and so that the want of due spiritual
Action in all that profess Christ Jesus, whether at, or not at the Sacrament,
(however particularly applied to that) is an Offense against the very Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ, and brings a Guilt proportionable to the Offense; All
which has the Full of a spiritual Transubstantiation, and is the Thing we have
pursued.

viz. To enquire into this Thing, How there came into the Christian Church such
a Notion as that Fleshly Transubstantiation, so earnestly contended for. And I
account it to these four Causes:

Sixth of John, and in the Institution of the Lord's Supper, give great
Warranty to observe a great and divine Mystery in the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and in his Supper: That there must be some real sense of the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, as preached in the Gospel, as presented in the Lord's Supper,
Transubstantiated so, as to be Meat and Drink indeed, and to give Life to our
Souls.

All this Mystery cannot be exhausted, and drawn out in no more than a plain
Assent to this, that Christ dyed as an Atonement for the World, (if so much be
allowed as Socinianism denies,) and gave a Body of Holy Precepts and Commands,
of an excellent Nature; and that whoever lives in Obedience to these, with
Sincerity, shall have that their Obedience imputed to them for Righteousness,
through the Covenant of Grace, and justify Men, as perfect and unsinning
Obedience should have been and done by the first Covenant with Adam.

Rationalists and Moralists draw down this Gospel-Mystery too low, while they
seem to acquit themselves to Reason and general Understanding, and to carry all
Things plausibly before that, They lose the high Spirituality of Christianity;
which they are too ready to esteem no better than Jargon Cant, and Nonsense.
There is a Gospel middle betwixt gross, portentous, carnal Transubstantiation,
and such an emaciating and shrinking up the great and unsearchable Treasures of
the Gospel, as if they did not much excel a Lecture out of Plato, Plutarch,
Epictetus, or some of the great Sages of Morality; joined to some Articles of
Faith and Forms of Worship.

The way and manner of the Gospel speaking of these things, and especially as
our Lord and Savior spoke, who spoke as never man spoke, might well raise the
Minds of Christians to look for something high, and surpassing in the Mysteries
of Christian Religion, and beyond common Sense, or common Reason.

2. Many of those we call the Ancients, or Fathers, coming out of the Heathen
Learning and Eloquence, into the Profession of Christianity, Men of great
Holiness, Innocence, and Sanctity of Conversation, Contempt of the World,
Readiness to dye for the Name of Christ, and generally Martyrs, of curious and
delicate Reason, of very sublime Notion and Sentiments, of a flowing Language,
softness and sweetness of Speech, and accomplished with all the Gracefulnesses
of Rhetoric, taking the Scripture-Expressions, and displaying upon them with
that Magnificency and Gallantry of Words, and all kind of Wit, but not pursuing
strongly and closely the Reason, Strength, and whole Analogy of Scripture, nor
guarding their Discourse by a Nervous Compare of Scripture with Scripture,
launched out into many free and liberal Expressions concerning these Things,
which not balanced, limited, defended against possible Mistake, at some Times,
and in some Veins of their Writings in this Matter, might give occasion to the
more grievous and dreadful Mistakes to such a course of Times, as we may easily
observe succeeded them.

And this they did at the higher rate, undoubtedly, out of a great Zeal for the
Honor of Christian Religion; for, the Jews and Pagans speaking high of their
Cabalaes, Great Mysteries, and Secrets of Religion, and their Mystae, who had
the guard of these Mysteries, their Priests, and Devotoes. The Fathers of the
Christian Church, knowing the true Excellency of Divine Mysteries, and pitching
upon this, as easily the most remarkable, viz. the Doctrine of eating the
Flesh, and drinking the Blood of Christ; and this Doctrine in an especial
manner consigned into the Mystery of the Lord's Supper, to which is adjoined
that severe Discourse of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. It was very obvious to them,
here especially, to exalt the Glory of Christianity, and of the holy Ministers
of it, as highly surmounting the Poor, if true, but therefore most poor,
because false Mysteries of outdated Judaism, and much more of Paganism.

It is most evident, at the very same Time, in the very same Places of their
Writings, they in the same kind of flowing Eloquence intermix other
Expressions, that sufficiently argue, How free they were from any
Misapprehensions in these Things: But their way of Writing being not by way of
severe Examination of Scripture Notions and Texts, not by the austere Beam of
Scripture, in its several Portions of Revealed Truth, and of the Sacred
Context, nor having any surmise of the after danger, there being so little
occasion, or appearance of Fear at the Time, left Things so, as that the
following Times depraved their Innocent Glory of Learning, and sublime Ingeny,
dyed deep with Love of Christ.

3. Through the many Devastations of the Christian Empire, by the Barbarous
Nations, by the Saracens, and Turks, in a long Tract of Time, through the daily
Decay of Christian Knowledge, Zeal, and Holiness, there ensued a great
Darkness, Ignorance, Barbarism, upon the Christian World; in which, Men of the
best Note seized upon such Expressions of Scripture, and the Fathers, whose
Sepulchers they built, and garnished their Tombs all manner of ways, (I add no
more) and it may be, as it seemed to them most to make for the Honor of
Christian Religion: But their Understanding being heavy, course, sinking into
the thick and impure matter, bearing also a deep Grain of Paganism, they
grievously erred, neither knowing the Scriptures, the true Sense of the
Fathers, nor of the Power of God; And hereunto they proportioned all their
Notions of the Christian Religion, their Worship of God and Christ, and most
miserably especially, They stuck in the mirey Clay, as to this great Mystery of
the Lord's Supper, and the Doctrine of Eating the Flesh and Drinking the Blood
of Christ, out of which it was drawn, and degraded the most losty Spirituality
of the Gospel, into the poorest and even vilest of carnal Apprehensions
concerning it, in the Doctrine of a Carnal fleshly Transubstantiation.

4. At the same Times, and by the same Degrees, grew up a Despotick, Arbitrary
Church power, that imposed what it pleased under Anathemaes, Curses,
Excommunications, Brands of Heresy, and all Cruelty, upon the Bodies, Names,
Estates, of those, who even to Syllables did not Say as they Said, and do as
they did: while at the same Time also there Invaded Persons of as honest and
sincere a Devotion as Ignorance could produce, a Veneration for the Name of the
Catholic Church and the Governors of it, and their Canons.

Now the Impress, the Stamp of this Authority, being set so particularly and
Imperially upon this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it is no wonder it
prevailed so far, and sunk so deep into the Minds of Men, through what every
Age from those Worthies before-nam'd, contributed both to the Grossness and
Authoritativeness of this false Article of Faith.

I forbear, because I would be as inoffensive as may be consistent with Truth
to remark upon that Apostasy, that Mystery of Iniquity, which the Apostles of
our Lord and Savior foretold, were, even then beginning, and to rise higher
and higher in the Latter Times, to which even many Things, innocent and
inoffensive in themselves at first, and indeed all Contingencies, fathally
concurred; and which, it is most certain, are not yet removed. Nor do I think
fit at this Time to Animadvert upon the Covetous Practices, Cruelties, and
Inhumanities, into which Transubstantiation has been Transubstantiated, not
only in the true, real sense of spiritual Wickedness, but in a sense as
corporeal as Corporeity it self.

I hasten therefore to the fifth Head; viz. To represent to you the Danger of
such a Doctrine, as that Fleshly Transubstantiation, not so much as it is a
contemplative Thing, a Notion, a manner of Apprehension, or matter of
Discourse, though that also, but as it carries the Practice of Worship and
Adoration.

Now in these Great Points we may very plainly and convincingly understand the
great Danger of that Transubstantiation.

1. The believing it must needs shake the Credit of all the knowing and judging
Faculties of our Natures and Beings, than which, nothing can be more
destructive to Religion, or put all Things into greater Disorder and Confusion,
that concern God, our Selves, or our Motions in relation to another World.

For if our Faculties are not true, we have nothing to guide our selves, or to
be guided by.

Now the Faculties of our Minds first judge, and act by Sense, then by Reason,
then by the Notices or Sentiments of Natural Conscience, then by Faith; and
these must be all sound, in due state; They have all their proper Objects, they
are all finite, and by these Rules they are limited; they must not go out of
their Limits. It is true, these are each as so many Stories one above another,
and the lower must not presume into the Region of the higher, for then they
will be mistaken, and in Error; yet the highest is supported and sustained by
the lower. And seeing they all are from God, whatever is true in the lowest
cannot be contradicted in the highest; and therefore whatever is pretended in
the highest, cannot be true there, if it be justly denied in the lowest.

Now it were easy to show, this Notion of Carnal Transubstantiation must be
false in all the judgment of our Faculties; but I shall only instance in Sense:
And, if the Bread be Bread in the Judgment of every one of our Senses, of the
Senses of all Men, in all Places, at all Times, and in all Ages under the most
advantageous Circumstances for sense to judge by, the contrary can never be
true in Reason, in natural Conscience, nor in Faith; for then, either there
must be no such Faculty as Sense, or that fundamental Faculty of the Souls
Judgment by Sense, must be false, and so all our Faculties will lose their
Credit; for they may be false too, seeing he that gave us one gave us all of
them, and this of Sense is that we most live and act by in this World.

If any attempt to parallel this with the Doctrine of the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit, being ONE, to which, Reason (say they) can never subscribe; the
Case is manifestly different, seeing it is certain, our Faculties are finite,
and cannot judge of Infinity but by Faith in divine Revelation: Infinite Being
is too High, too Deep, too Broad, too Long, for Job 11. 7, 8, 9.
a Finite Reason to judge of; It is not its proper Object.

But Color, Taste, Figure, Hard, Soft, Sound, may be all judged by Sense, and
properly are so to be judged.

Or if any should make the same Objection against that Spiritual
Transubstantiation we have made out by Scripture, it is certain, It is only
cognisable, and to be judged of by Faith and Revelation: Sense has no Title to
judge of it; If it be maintained by Faith, it is maintained in its proper
Court. But it is certain, The Judgment whether this Bread be Bread, or Wine be
Wine, is to be made by some one or more of the Senses, at least in the
Universality of all the Senses, of all Persons, Times, Places.

Let any one then lay that place 1 Epist. John c. 1. v. 1. That which we have
heard, that which our Eyes have seen, which we have looked upon, and our Hands
have handled, etc. to the being born down, That in these Senses, and all
others, we are mistaken in judging Bread to be Bread when it is no Bread, and
Wine, when it is no Wine; Must not all the Argument, the Evidence, the
Assurance the Apostle gives, stand for nothing? Nay, Must not all
Scripture-Miracles whatever fall by the same stroke the Senses do in this
matter? and Religion be suspected but only Juggle and Imposture? For here Sense
is upon its own Object, in its own Business: All Sense that is in the World,
agrees; and a pretended Faith only makes it void.

2. Hereby that great Excellency of Scripture in giving Divine and Spiritual
Things under sensible, prophetical Events under Emblems, mystical Things under
Types of a material Nature, great, concernful practical Truth under Parables,
is made void; for if it may not be allowed it to mean Spirituality under [This
is my Body,] it may be denied it in all Things else, seeing in nothing it can
be more necessary, than when all the Senses in the World bear witness to the
necessity, and the sublime Spirituality of the Thing, as we have set out,
requires it. This must needs turn even the minds of Men into gross and carnal.
Must not that great Heresy of the Anthropomorphites (as was intimated before)
be defended and made good, because Scripture speaks spiritual Things freely and
under Sensibles; nay, all Language does the same, and is made foolish by so
perverting it.

3. The Amuse and Wonderment of the minds of men, persuaded of such a
Transubstantiation, must needs be great, and their Thoughts gazing after a
Nothing, and taken off from the greatest Business of a spiritual Application to
Christ according to his Word, and the whole Truth of the Gospel concerning
Redemption by him.

4. But that which is yet the greatest danger of all, There is nothing the
Scripture so much abhors, as to bring God into a contemptible, vile, mean
Appearance, and that such an Appearance should claim Divine Honor, a share in
the Divine Glory. There never was a Divine Appearance, that God required any
Acknowledgment of himself in, but there was a Retinue of Divine Power and
Majesty with it, to assure the minds of men, and to direct them to the
Apprehensions of God alone.

When Christ was here in the World under the Form of a Servant, the Disguise of
a Carpenters Son, I do not find that there was any Act of Worship done to him;
but when the Shecinah, the Presence of Glory, descended upon him; when the Wise
men from the East worshipped him in his Infancy, a Star from Heaven, as an
Evidence of his Divinity, guided them. It is never recorded the Disciples
worshipped him, but after his Resurrection, and when they saw his Apotheosis,
his Ascension, his receiving up into Glory, or when a Ray of his Divinity shone
out, as in the Draught of Fishes.

And yet it is true, that throughout the Time of his public Luke 5. 8.
Appearance, though he was made Flesh, and dwelt among them, yet they beheld
his Glory as the Glory of the only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth, not bodily, but divine, spiritual was the Object of their Worship.

How does God caution and warn the Israelites, that They saw no Similitude, no
Likeness of any thing when he spoke out of the midst of the Fire: They heard a
Voice of Words, but they saw no Similitude, that they might not Copy God out
into any such. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. 15, 16.

If men say, They intend to worship only the True God in Jesus Christ, in the
changed Bread; Consider what miraculous Presence, what Evidences of Divinity
can you find to summon your Worship, that you may be secure from Idolatry?

Consider what the Glory, what the Majesty of the Divine Appearances are, when
he has summoned the Worship of his Servants; some Extraordinaries of Glory
have always been the Alarm of their Worship.

One great part of the Idolatry of the Heathens was their course Representation
of God; They changed the Glory of the Romans 1. 23. 25.
Incorruptible God into an Image made like to Corruptible Man, and to Birds,
etc. They changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and worshipped and served the
Creature more than the Creator, Blessed for ever, or besides, or missing the
Creator, and as against him, Blessed for ever.

Though I would not therefore say, It is Idolatry; yet I heartily pray, Men may
not be ensnared in so great a danger of it: I could wish it were not, as the
Apostle, Romans 9. 1. if it be lawful to do so. I am sure the Danger is exceeding
great of stooping God so low, and then Worshipping him as in a piece of Bread.

There remains nothing now but the last Head of this Discourse; viz. To draw up
all into short Inferences, applicatory to Practice.

Transubstantiation is most desirable, and worthy to be preferred; Whether that
Insipid one, at the supposed Expense of a Miracle, so unaccountable to Sense
and Reason as changing the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ
materially taken, which yet offers nothing to the Sense to excite and stir up
the Mind by, to attend upon the Divine Presence, nor contributes any thing to
the Soul; Or that spiritual Transubstantiation which is All Spirit and Life,
and certainly gives Life to the Soul that Receives it.

The one can be not so much as an outward Sign, because not visible; the other
is certainly the inward, invisible Grace, that yet demonstrates it self in all
real, visible Effects, with Demonstration of the Spirit and Power, and that
will raise us up at the last day: The one does nothing, For if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; The other is that very Spirit of
Christ that is Life and Righteousness: so that the true Believer, who has the
Spirit of Christ, has the whole Virtue from that within, and the Bread and
Wine are present to the Sense, by Christ himself sanctified, and appointed to
do good that way; which nothing unseen can do, in the very nature of the Thing,
any more than insensible can affect Sense.

That then which offers not it self to Sense nor Reason, and does no good
without the Spirit, and Life received by Faith, what can it do at all?

To a Man without Faith, it has not so much as the outward Visibility to stir
up to Faith by sense; it cannot of it self give the inward Grace neither; so
that it indeed is nothing, nor can do any thing. But the Spirit and Life of the
Body and Blood of Christ immediately has the saving Effect upon the true
Believer; It Invites the very Unbeliever by its Excellency, while it offers it
self under the sensible Signs of Bread and Wine made Intelligible and
Intellectual by the whole Doctrine of the Gospel.

It is easy therefore thus far to know, what is to be chosen: But on the other
side, There is the great Danger, if this Transubstantiation be a mistake, (as
there is so great assurance it is.) There is, for a mistakes sake, all the
danger imaginable of overthrowing the whole Credit of our Faculties and of
Religion by it, and the greatest danger of Idolatry, against the Precept of the
Apostle Paul, upon the very Discourse of the Lord's Supper, a Prophecy, I am
persuaded, of Future Danger, as well as an Admonition; Dearly Beloved, viz.
Christians, flee from Idolatry, the Idolatry which 1 Cor. 10. 14.
turns the Cup of the Lord, and the Table of the Lord, into a Cup and Table of,
what I am afraid to name; for the Devil is the Author of all Idolatry. It is
likewise against the prophetical Farewell of the Apostle John, after declaring
the True God and Eternal Life; Little Children, Keep your selves from Idols, 1
Ep. John c. ult. v. ult.

When therefore, There is so little Gain at the cost of such a miraculous Power
supposed on God's part, of so prodigious a Faith on ours, and so great a
danger; what, but a strange Servitude to a Church, calling it self Infallible,
can subject us to such an undesirable Opinion?

2. It should raise us to high Thoughts of the Redemption of Christ, thus
nearly uniting it self to, and incorporating it self within us: Although it is
matter of Faith, yet it is so abundantly assured to that Faculty of our Minds,
to Know, and to be assured to that Faculty of our Minds, to Know, and to be
assured by so high a Revelation; that if we pursue it by that Power, that
Faculty, sanctified actually to believe in Christ; and that we come to live by
that Faith of the Son of God, it will be even as certain, as sensible, as Life
it self.

3. We should lift up our Souls and Hearts to Christ in the Heavens, on the
Right Hand of God, Interceeding for us; for there he still eats the Passover,
and drinks of that very same Fruit of the Vine with us, as it is new and
fulfilled in his Fathers Kingdom, there he continually applies it to our
Hearts, as the great Testator, and Risen surviving Surety, Executor, or
Mediator of his own Testament.

4. It should oblige us to a continual Appretiation, and high value of the
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and joining the Lord's Supper, (if it could be)
to every Lord's Day, Lordly Supper. Lordly Day.
to which it is coupled in so peculiar, and unparalled only to themselves, a
New-Testament-Expression. For though it has a constant and undividable
Annexion to that New Testament, of which Christ has made it a visible Sum;
although it is always preached with the Gospel, and is as it were administered in
that Preaching; yet, because the whole Gospel is present, and sensibly preached
in that Sacrament also, we should embrace both within our most conscientious
Observation: And the very Ordinance it self is undoubtedly the most ordinary
means of a superadditional Assurance and Conveyance of the Gospel-Efficacy into
our Hearts, and therefore by no means to be neglected.

5. It persuades us to an earnest Care and Caution against violating the great
Ordinances of the Gospel preached in both the Word of God, and in the Lord's
Supper; for it is the Offer of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ to be Eaten
and Drunk; and if we neglect and refuse, or unworthily partake, we are guilty
of the Body and Blood of the Lord; we do not discern and take due notice of the
Lord's Body, so it becomes a savor of Death unto Death in the Word, and of
Judgment to Condemnation (if we persevere so to do) in the Lord's Supper,
because it is a degree of that great Sin of Apostasy, treading under foot the
Son of God, counting the Blood of the Covenant a common thing, doing Injury to
the Spirit of Grace, Crucifying him a-fresh, and putting him to an open Shame.

And when by the ordinary Profession of Jesus Christ, being Born, and Baptized
into the only Holy Religion in the World, Educated in it, we are caught in its
Net, and under the Bond of the Covenant, the Gospel is Preached to us whether
we will or no, and the Lord's Supper goes along with it, whether we Hear, or
whether we forbear, whether we Receive, or whether we forbear, we must know, we
shall know the Gospel in its Preaching, in the Lord's Supper inseparable from
it, has been among us. We are All Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea of the
Gospel Ministry, every way surrounding us: We All Eat the same spiritual Meat,
and 1 Cor. 10. 1.
Drink the same spiritual Drink, and that is Christ. The Bread broken among us,
the Cup of Blessing blessed among us, encloses us, though in regard of Unbelief
and Impenitency, we Eat and Drink Judgment to our selves, and with many of us
God is not well pleased, and our Carcasses will fall notwithstanding this
Manna, this Water of the Rock vouchsafed to us, if we Repent not.

There is therefore no way of avoiding the Gospel-Penalty, but by Receiving the
Lord Jesus aright, and walking in him: No Abatement of our Danger, as to the
Lord's Supper, but by giving no Sleep to our Eyes, nor Slumber to our Eyelids,
till we have brought our selves into an approved state for it. Refusal of the
Gospel, in its Preaching, in the Lord's Supper, will not be so Tolerable as
Sodom's Judgment: There is no Safety any way, but in Eating and Drinking
Christ, so that we may live for ever; else we can have no life in us.

6. Seeing all the Gospel and Lord's Supper has such relation to the Last Day,
to the Table of Christ in his Kingdom, in his Glory, and to Eating and Drinking
then in his Presence, let us lift up our Heads, our Thoughts, our Desires, our
Prayers, to it: Although these Ordinances ought to be all our Delights on
Earth, yet they are but the State below, a State of the Delay, and Patience of
Christ for his Kingdom; A showing forth the Lord's Death till he come.

Then (...)


