TIDINGS of PEACE, OR Acure for the many Evils that happen in the world about
Religion, in a discourse OF The New Jerusalem, Proveing That The New Jerusalem
is a Holy City to be built on Earth in each Kingdom, in which The Clergy are
to dwell; Whereby a New and most happy Ecclesiastical Administration will
arise.

Behold I will bring it Health and Cure and I will Cure Them, and I will Reveal
unto Them abundance of Peace and Truth. Jer. 33: v. 6.

And I John Saw The Holy City the New Jerusalem, comeing down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband. Rev. 21: v. 2.

And He that sat upon the Throne, said Behold I make all things New. v. 5.

To the Clergy.
Srs.
THe Dedication of the ensueing Model of the Holy City does most properly
belong to you, as being the Lords Heritage and Servants: In the old
Administration, The Sons of Aron had Thirteen Cittyes and the Levites eight
and Forty, but in the New and better Administration the Servants of Jesus have
not one City to dwell in amongst all the Kingdoms of the Earth. Methinks I
hear you Speaking as the Sons of the Prophets to Elisha vizt: Lo the Place
where we dwell is to strait for us, Let us go unto Jordan and take thence
every one a beam, and Let us make a Place there where we may dwell. It Is
certain your Place is to Strait, and though Some of you have room too much,
yet others (unhappy unequallity) have noe Place at all. I could Present you
with a Catalogue of all the Evils you have suffered for many years, and of
the many evils* the world has sufferd by you. But Prima abierunt, and Ecce
nova facio omnia, Old Things are passed away, and lo I make all things New,
Says Christ in the Revel: I shall omit mentioning the forma Evils and proceed
to the remedying of them. And do here present you with a model of a New
OEconomie, and it is this. I have appointed you a City in each Nation and
Kingdom to dwell in, where in you shall live peaceably and quietly, and shall
be sufficiently provided for of all things necessary for your holy Functions,
so that all Temptations shall be taken away from you of acting or moveing
irregularly; From this City placed in the midst' of each Nation, you are to
go or ride out, as it shall please you, every month by turns, and heal each
Nation, and on the Bells of your horses shall be wrote Holiness to the Lord.
The Kings and Princes of the world and all Temporal Governments will find
their accott. in building you such a City, for it is not to be expressed what
happiness will accrue to them and to all the world thereby: This City will
put an end to all the miseryes the World labors under on account of Religion
And we shall hear from you rideing on your Red, white, and Speckled Horses
that Joyful Report mentioned in the 1st. cap. of the Prophet Zacha. and 11.
verse. We have walked to and fro through the Earth, and behold all the Earth
sits still and is at Rest. If this be the glorious effects of your circular
Preaching as we have all the reason in the world to think it will. It Is no
wonder that the Kings of the Earth will bring their Glory and honor into this
City, not only as it is a City dedicated to the honor of God, but as it is
a City whose Inhabitans will establish Peace and Tranquillitty in their
Kingdoms. It was in the heart of King David, to build God a House, and though
God had not commanded it, yet he most graciously accepted his good intentions.
But it has not yet been in the heart of any King to build God a City they have
built themselves Cittyes for their own honor and glory. Is not this Great
Babylon that I have built for the House of the Kingdom, by the might of my
Power and for the honor of my Majtye* Thus speaks the proud Emperor
Nebuchadnezzar, and he spoake the truth, he had built Babell for the honor of
his Majty. And many are the Cittyes, whieh both the Heathen and Christian
Emperors have built for their own honor, and have put uppor them their own
Names, as Caesarea, Allexandria, Constantinople, etc. but we find not one by
the Name of Deople or Christople. When I consider how in a special manner Gods
has set Crowns on many Christian Princes heads, and has raised some from a
Private station to the highest dignity, and given them Several Kingdoms and
many Thousand Cittyes, I say when I consider this, it makes me wonder, to find
none returning back one single City by way of gratitude to the Donour. Pudet
haec opprobria nobis etc. It Is True They have built and ginen him Several
Houses, But what is a House or a few Houses A magnificent and Royal City
would be more Suitable to the Majtie of Heaven and Earth then a House? Besides
in this City he has said shall be noe Temple, plainly insinuateing that the
Temple Administration should be ended and be changed into that of a City. To
me it seems to be a most Just and reasonable Thing That in Every Nation and
Kingdom God the Giver and Governor of all should have one City built and
dedicated to his Honor, wherem his Servants who wait in his Courts and
Minister at the Altar should be honorably provided for, that their Lineings
and fortunes may noe more be precarions, and subject to the Will of men, as to
the Shame of Christianity they are at this day. I could mention what evil has
befaln the World on accont of Gods Ministers being-chosen by men and not by
Lot, and by haueing their allowance and dependence from Man, but I shall here
omit it haueing spoaken of it in another place. I could heartily wish that
Christian Kings and Princes and all Temporal Governments would Seriously
consider on this Point. Who can tell but that their building Such a City, in
which the Dispensers of Gods Graces and Blessings to each Nation, may dwell,
may be as Sweet incense in the Nostrills of God in and some measure atone him,
to stop the Rage of Fire and Sword which at present lays somany of their own
Cittyes wast? I will hope there fore, That (as David Thought of building Gods a
House) so that Some King or other, whom God shall deliner from many Troubles,
and bestow on him Crowns and victory over his Enimyes, and shall Establish him
on his Throne in Peace, will think of so holy a work, and with a most
grateful heart build a Royal City to the God of Heaven, as a Pattern and
Example to other Princes. And it is my oppinion that That Prince who first sets
his hand to so holy a work will as far exceed all others, as a City shall
exceed a house or Temple, T'or as Soloman exceed all other Kings of his Time.
To you Therefore the Preachers of the Gospel who are to be Inhabiters of this
City, To you, whose interests are so unhappily mixed in Temporalls, To you who
have been so much abused, and who have abused so much, To you who are, and
have been so unhappily and unequally provided for in this Late
Administration, I address my self; And make it my Request, that instead of
writeing, disputing and Preaching one against another, and instead of making
parties and Factions, and stirring up Kings and Princes and the Particular
States where you dwell to defend your Controversyes and interests; That you
rather apply your selves to dispose and move the Hearts of Prince and People to
the building you a City, wherein you may live peaccably, and out of wen. you
may with ease and Comfort dispense the pure word of God to Each Nation. This
will be more for the Honor of God, for your interest and happiness, and for
the interest peace and Happiness of each King and People. And who then is
willing to consecrate his Service this day unto the Lord? The 1 Cron. 29 cap.
and 5 verse. This to me seems to be a more pleasing Text then, Curse ye Meros,
or Some others that I could Name, I recommend you to the Demonstration of Truth
in the model of the City and followeing Pages, and will not further add,
only when your City is built, and you are in your Possessions, I hope you
will be very Thank full to God, ands not be altogether unmindfull of

Yor. Humble Servant T. B.

GOd says by the Prophet Isaiah, Behold! I create a New Heaven and a New Earth
etc. in the 56 Cap. and the 17 verse: And from thence in the 18: 19: and 20
verses. The Prophet proceeds to describe the happiness of the Jews in this
promised state; And in the 21: verse further Says, And They shall build
Houses, and inhabit them, and They shall plant Vineyards, and eat the fruit of
them etc. Now in Heaven there is neither building, nor planting, so that this
New Heaven and New Earth can mean nothing else but a New and happy state of
affairs here upon Earth. Further in Heaven our Savior says that there is
neither eating, nor drinking, marrying nor giveing in marriage, but that men
shall be there, as the Angels of God. So that I am sattisfied there will be no
Cities there. If we are to have Cities then, we must have them on Earth, Now
I find two Cities, one in the Proph: Ezekiel. The other in the Revelation of St.
John. I shall leave speaking of the first to the Jews, and only treat of
this latter, which indeed is very glorious. Without all doubt the meaning is
certain. For in the 22 cap. and 6 verse. it is said. These sayings are faith
full and true. And the Lord God of the Holy Prophets sent his Angel, to show
unto his servants the things which must shortly be done, But how and where
these things are to be done, and what the meaning of this Holy City should
be, is the subject of my present Enquiry. Some will have it to be Heaven, and
when ever this New Jerusalem is spoaken of, that is Heaven say They; Others
will have it a representation of the Church purely, and others of a new
Condition and happy state of the Church. But there is not one thinks in the
least of it is being a City to be built upon Earth. First then, as to those
that think it Heaven, I answer that without all doubt Heaven in a Spiritual
sense is the New Jerusalem, but it does not at all follow that the New
Jerusalem is Heaven, espetially this New Jerusalem, for it may be a City built
in the Place where the old Jerusalem was, or another City built in another
place like the old Jerusalem either in the Model, or Serving the Same Ends and
designs, and for any of these reasons may be called the New Jerusalem. Besides
this New Jerusalem is said to come from God out of Heaven, therefore cannot be
Heaven it self. This is a plain confutation of all those who think it
Heaven. Further it is said, that the Nations of them which. are Saved shall walk
in the light of it, And that the Kings of the Earth shall bring their Glory and
honor unto it, Now it is certain that the Kings of the Earth can bring noe
Glory or honor into Heaven, but rather receine glory from thence, from God Who
is the Fountain of all honor and Glory; It seems plain therefore that this
New Jerusalem is not Heaven it self, and at best can only be something that
is a Type of Heaven, What can it then be? it cannot be only a bare
representation of the Church, The comparison, and Circumstances will not in the
least quadrate, it has toomuch order and beauty in it, to represent any thing
we at present have, or hitherto have had, in the Church: The Church hitherto
is rather represented to us by a Woman in the Wilderness persecuted by the
Dragon Then by such a Glorious City as this is. Nor can We Suppose that Such
a Glorious City can be built upon Earth in a Literal Sense with such costly
Materials. What therefore can the meaning and import of This City be, only
to represent to us the beauty and glory of Heaven and of the Church Triumphant?
No, not this only. Yet I must acknowledge in part it does represent the Same
but not wholly. for It Is attended with too many particular Circumstances
relating to things here below, then wholly and entirely to signify that; it
must be something which at the first appearence in the World must seem to
Strike and make impression on the Senses of Men. For St. John says, And Isaw
the Holy City The New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared
as a Bride adorned for her Husband. That my Model is such I will not say. But
This is my Sense of the Whole matter. That The New Heaven and the New Earth
mentioned by St. John does represent a New and Glorious Condition of Church and
State, And That this New and glorious Condition will be procured by means and
influence of this New Jerusalem, And that This New Jerusalem is a City to be
built upon Earth, after the Same Model and Form as The Angel has described,
except the costlynesse, which as Isaid before cannot be fullfilled here on
Earth; And This City seems to me by the Angel to be represented so costly
and Magnificent in part to Typifie to us the Glory of Heaven and of the Church
Triumphant; and in part to instigate us to build it in the best manner we can;
And in part to insinuate to us, those Glorrious Effects which This New
Jerusalem will produce in the World, introduceing a New and most happy
OEconomie: Its Inhabitans are to be Angeli Evangelizantes Preachers of the
Gospel, and every Monrh, are to go out and Heal The Nation, for Proof hereof
peruse the following Texts of Scripture And He That sat upon the Throne said
Behold, I make all Things New. John's Revel the 21 cap. and 5 verse, This
relates to the New Administration, which I hereafter prove in those things that
are changeable, in this world. And it came to pass that he went throughout
Every City and Village, preaching and showing the Glad Tideings of the
Kingdom of God, and the Twelve were with him. Luc. 8. verse 1. And Jesus went
about all the Cittyes and Villages, teaching in their Synagogues, and Preaching
the Doctrine of the Kingdom etc. Mat. 9 cap. verse 35. Lo; this was the Method
Our Savior took when on Earth, And can the Disciples imitate a better Copy
then their Masters? And it is certain that Doctrine will be best nourished and
perserved by the way, and Method it was first planted. I Have Set Watchmen
upon Thy Walls which shall never hold their Peace day nor night. Isaiah 62.
and 6. Thy Watchmen shall Lift up the voice, with the voice together shall they
sing, for they shall See Eye to Eye when The Lord shall bring again Zion the
52 Cap. 8 verse. And I will set Shepherds over them that shall feed them, and
they shall fear no more nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking says
the Lord Jer. 23: 4: Then again God says by his Proph: Jer. 3 and 15 verse.
And I will gine you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with
Knowledge and understanding. The Pastors of this Administration which are to
go out of the City every month to heal the Nation, seem to me to be the
Pastors here mentioned. The Proph. Zac. the 14: and 8. says thus, And it
shall be in that day that Liveing waters shall go out from Jerusalem, half of
them toward the former Sea, and halve of them toward the hinder Sea in summer
and in winter shall it be. Can any thing more plainly chalk out the Method of
this new Administration then this Text? The liueing waters are Preachers, which
are to go out of this City in their courses, Some one way and some another
both in Summer and in Winter, that is for ever to the worlds end, for so long
will Summer and in Winter last. But as to these liueing waters these
Evangelicall Preachers hear what the Prophet Ezekiel. in the 47 cap. beginning at
the 6: verse. Then he brought me and caused me to return to the brink of the
River. Now when I had returned, Behold at the Bank of the River were very many
Trees on the one side, and on the other. Then said he unto me, These waters
issue out toward the East Country, and go down into the desert, and go into
the Sea, which being brought forth into the Sea, the Waters shall be healed.
And it shall come to pass, that every thing that Lives that moves, whither
soever the Rivers shall come, shall live, and there shall be a very great
multitude of Fish, because these Waters (These Preachers) shall come thither:
for they shall be healed, and every thing shall live where the River comes.
And it shall come to Pass, That the Fishers shall stand upon it from Engedi
even unto Eneglaim: There shall be a Place to spread forth Netts, Their fish
shall be according to their Kinds as the Fish of the Great Sea exceeding many.
But the myrie places thereof, and the marshes (That is Private standing
Churches that will not hear or admit of these Public Preachers) shall not be
healed but given to Salt. And by the River on the bank thereof, on this side,
and on that side, shall grow all Trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade
neither shall the Fruit thereof be consumed: (that is These Preachers shall not
fail to make their constant monthly circuits out of their City) it shell
bring forth new fruit according to his Months, because the waters issued out of
the Sanctuary, and the fruit thereof shall be for Meat, and the leaf thereof
for medicine. Here The Gospel very propely is Typefied by a River and by
waters which cleanse and purifies and heales all places, and makes every thing
fruit full wherever they go, Also the Preachers are Typefied by Fishers, and
by Trees, whose fruit serves both for food and Physic, in further confirmation
of which, Hear what St. John sairh, And he showed me a pure River of water of
life clear as Christ all proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb.
In the midst of the street of it; and of either side the River was there the
Tree of life, which bare Twelve manner of Fruits, and yielded her fruit every
Month, and the leaves of the Trees were for the healing of the Nations. This
seems to be plain in all the Circumstances thereof, And therefore I have
taken the Model and delineation of the City there from. But may be some may
doubt whether The Throne of God be Jerusalem. To which the Prophet Jerem: will
answer for me, in the 3 cap and 16 and 17 verses. And it shall come to pass
when ye be multiplied and increased in the Land; in those days says the Lord,
they shall say no more -- The Arc of the Covenant of the Lord: neither shall
it come to mind, neither shall they Remember it, neither shall they Visit it,
neither shall that be done any more. At that Time they shall call Jerusalen The
Throne of the Lord, and all the Nations shall by gathered unto it, to the Name
of the Lord to Jerusalem. As to the Fountain I have put in the middle to give
source to the Rivers. See what the Prophet Zach. says the 13 cap. verse 1. In
that Day shall there be a Fountain opened to the House of David for sin and
for uncleanesse. And and a Fountain shall come Forth of The House of the Lord,
and shall water the Valley of Shittim Ioell 3 and 18: and Our Savior says in
St: Ino. ye 4 Cap. and 14 verse, Whosoever shall drink of the Water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst. But the Water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a Well of water springing up into everlasting life. The Watet which
Christ will give, is the Water of the Gospel, out of this Holy Fountain, this
holy City, And see how by the Prophet Isaiah he inviteth all to these waters
in the 55 cap. and 1 verse. Ho, Every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters,
and he that has no money: come ye buy and eat, yea come by wine and milk
without money and without price. Many have paid very dear for a draught of
these Waters, But old things are passed away, and all things are become New.
These Evangelicall Preachers shall go from Town to Town and from City to
City, and are to offer these Waters of the Gospel Gratis, inviteing all to
come, and drink, and will not in the least be chargeable to any one, being
sufficiently provided for from their City, with all things, necessary for
their Function and voyage, If any man Thirst let him come unto me and drink
says our Savior John the 7. and 37. and in the Rev: the 21. and 6. I will
give him that is a thirst of the Fountain of the water of Life freely. And in
the 22 cap. and 17 verse. And let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever
will let him take the water of life freely. But then again as to the Preachers
goeing to and fro, the following Texts seems to be very favorable Genesis 28.
and 12. And hedreamed and be hold a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the Top of
it reached to Heaven. And behold the Angels of God ascending and descending:
These Angels of God seem to represent these Evangellicall Angels who from
Heaven this New Jerusalem are to go to and fro, to do Gods message and to
dispense his word and blessing among the sons of men in each Land. And in Dan.
the 12. and 4. And thou o Daniell shut up These words, and seal up this,
writeing to the Time of the End: What are These words and this writeing which
are to be sealed up to the Time of the End? To me it seems to be the ensueing
sentence which is a sentence entire and independent of it self, having noe
Relation either to the words goeing before or after vizt. Many shall go to and
fro and Knowledge shall be increased. That is from this New Jerusalem many
Preachers shall go to and fro, instructing and preaching to the People, where
by Knowledge shall be increased. But the Proph: Zacha seems yet to be plainer
both as to the manner of These Preachers goeing out, as also to the happy
Effect of Theit Doctrine in the 1 cap. and 7 verse, He says thus, And I saw by
night and behold a man rideing upon a red horse, and he stood among the Myrtle
Trees, that were in the Bottom, and by him were red Horses speckled and white
(for these Preachers to ride on) then said I o my Lord what are These? And the
Angel that talked with me, said unto me I will show thee what these be, And
the Man that stood among the Myrtle trees, answered and said these are they
whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro through the Earth (And now observe
the happy Effects of their preaching,) And they answered the Angel of the
Lord, that stood amongs the Myrtle Tees and said We Have walked to and fro
through the Earth; And behold all the Earth sits still and is at Rest. But
least it should be doubted the office of these Walkers is not to settle peace
and quietness in the world, but only to pass through and view the World, my
sense herein seems to be confirmed in the 6 cap. and 7 verse, where speakeing
of Four Charriots sent out From God, in the first of which were Red Horses, in
the second Black, in the third white, in the fourth grizzled and Bay Horses,
it is said, And the Bay went forth, and sought to go, that they might walk to
and fro through the Earth: And he said get yet hence, Walk to, and fro,
thorough the Earth. Then cried he upon me and spoke unto me, saying Behold
These that go toward the North Country have Quieted my spirit in the North
Country, so that it seems plain to me that the office both of those that
rode on the Horses, and in the Charrets, was to quiet the Earth. The Earth at
Present has much need of being quieted, Pray God of his merey send and
Establish These To and fro Walkers. When they come We shall say as it is in the
Proph. Isaiah cap. 52. and 7 vesse. How Beautiful upon the Mountains are the
Feet of thim that brings good Tideings that Publishes Peace, that brings
good Tideings of Good, that Publisherh Salvation, that says unto Sion thy God
Reigns. I hope These Arguments and Texts of Scripture carry such a Face of
probabillity upon them as to persuade any Person disengaged from prejudice, to
believe that a Holy City is to be build upon Earth, which is to Give birth to
a New Administration. And Why may we not believe that God may use the same
OEconomie in His Church as he does in the World, since what conduces to the
good of one will also conduce to the happiness of the other. The Earth is at
it were passive, acted on by the Heavenly influences, the Sun the Moon and
stars and all the Heavenly spheeres make Their continual and constant
circuits round it, administering their Light and heat, making day and night and
differing seasons, and impregnateing the dull matter so as it may bring forth
food both for man and beast in due season. And we find that Gods OEconomie in
the Little World man, is the same as it is in the Great one. He makes his Blood
and Spiritts to make their constant circuits, and thereby Keeps his Body in
due frame and temper. This Spiritual OEconomie would procure the like effect,
For this City would be as the Sun in the Firmament, or the Heart in Man's body,
for as the Heart by continual sending forth blood and Spirits into all the
Members of the Body procures a perfect health; So These Heavenly Preachers
acting on the Dull minds of men, dispersing their Heavenly influences as they
go, in a continual ltineration and circulation through all the Cittyes and
Villages of each Nation, would settle each Nation in perfect peace and
Tranquillity. I have said each Nation, because I believe that a Holy City will
be built in each Nation. For though I believe that the City which the recalled
Jews will build in the Holy Land will be the most Glorious City and more
honored by God then the Rest, yet I believe not that she is to be built and
no other, Nor that she is to have superiority or Command over the Rest, this
would be to run back into Aegipt and into the old Babylonish Captivity, and
we should not better our selves, by the change of Administrations haueing
only changed Rome for Jerusalem; Besides to confine all power and Dominon to
one City or Nation, would be a weakness that would fall much short of that
Perfection we say this New OEconomie is to have, for one City or Nation
cannot send out such speedy orders and commands as to serve the present
necessityes and exigencyes of the whole World, especially to the remotest
Nations: The fall of Romes both Temporal and spiritual power, will convince
such a Government of Weakness, so that Jerusalem I believe will only have
the honor of an Elder sister but noe more power then the Rest. The Rest Isay,
for I supose others, and that she is not to be built alone, for that she would
not be able send out preachers to serve the necessityes of the whole world: I
know very many promises are made to Jerusalem, and I acknowledge that many are
made to her in a particular manner, which she alone shall enjoy. Yet
notwithstanding this, it is certain, that most of the Promises made to her are
made as to a part for the whole, and that the whole Church is interressed
therein, there fore When the Proph: Zacha. says. And it shall be that who so
will not come up of all the Familyes of the Earth to Jerusalem to Worship the
King the Lord of Hofts even upon them shall he noe rain, I cannot understand
the meaneing of this to be, that all the World should go up to Jerusalem in
Palestine once a year, For some live so remote that they cannot go thither
and return back in a years Time, Nor do I think that God would oblige all
the world to so painful a voyage. Yet I believe that when the Jews are
settled in their Land and have built their City, zeal will draw up Persons of
all Nations to visit their Land, I say zeal, to see that Land and People whom
God has blessed and not obligation will draw them up. And as to the
obligation, When God says that All Nations shall go up to Jerusalem to
worship him there, I rather believe that Persons of every Nation shall go up
once a year to their own Jerusalem, I say some persons and not all. For all
must not be admitted to enter in it, only such as bring good Testimonialls of
their Christian Conversation and holy liueing. For David alludeing to this Holy
City says. Lord Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? and who shall dwell in thy
Holy Hill? He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness and speaks
the truth in his heart. An St. John says There shall in noe wise enter into
it any thing that defiles etc. Blessed are they that do his commandments ehat
they may have Right to thee Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates
into the City, For without are Dogs etc. so that when God says that all
Nations shall come up to worship him at Jerusalem, I understand by Jerusalem
all other Jerusalems, as a part for the Whole, And by All Nations I understand
Some of Every. Nation to represent all, And these Figures are very common in
holy writ. But some will say that What the Proph. David and St. John speak of,
is Heaven; in the ultimate degree and scope I allow it is heaven. But I contend
earnestly that we must first have the Types upon Earth. And what can Typifie
Heaven better then a Holy City whose Inhabitans are to be Gods servants and
Ministers, representing the Angels, and into which no impure thing, no unholy
man shall enter, but such as are of an unblemished life and Conversation. But
suppose it was Heaven absolutely, I see not, but that the imitation of Things
done in Heaven, here on Earth is very commendable.

For the better Strengthening of the Proposition of this my Holy City and New
OEconomie I would further suggest the ensueing Considerations, That the Jews
as yet have had no benifit of Our Saviors Death And are at Present a wretched
miserable People, under Gods displeasure, dispersed over the Face of the whole
Earth. That the Christians as yet have had noe Settled or lasting Peace amongst
them since their embraceing so peaceable and holy a Religion: so that I think
it will be easily granted me that the Religion of the Holy Jesus has not as yet
had it is proper and Natural Effects upon Earth. And that all those glorious
promises of Justice, peace, and Truth, made by God to the Jews in the old
Testament, and to the Christians in the New are not yet accomplished: And as I
take it for granted that they are not yet accomplished, so I more certainly
take it for granted that they will be; for all the promises of God are Yea and
Amen. It cannot enter into my Mind that the Son of God should come into the
world, and take upon him humane Nature and preach unto Mankind. And that the
World should remain in the Same unhappie circumstances of War and misery as it
was before. It Is true I know he says that he came not to send peace into the
world but a Sword. But this he speaks of the accidental effect of his
doctrine and not the natural. His doctrine has noe such innate propensity in
it self, but such Evil Effects come ab extra We may with great Justice
therefore Expect the natural Effects of Christ's doctrine upon Earth. God has
promised it, and very pathetically describes the state of its accidental
Effects, and its Natural in the 8 cap. of Zacha. and beginning at the 10
verse. says He. Before These days (speakeing of this New OEconomia) there was
no hire for man, nor any hire for beast, neither was there any Peace to him
that went out, or came in, because of affliction: for I set all men every one
against his Neighbor. But now I will not be unto the Residue of this People,
as in the former days says the Lord of Hofts. For the seed shall be
prosperous: The vine shall give her fruit, and the Ground shall give her
increase, And the Heavens shall give their dew, and I will cause the Remnant of
this Teople to posesse all these things. It has been the Expectation of many
devout and Pious Christians for this Last hundred years, to see the Prophesyes
and Promises of God fullfilled, to see the Jews converted, the Church in a
most Flourishing condition, and Peace Truth and Justice Established upon Earth:
But their Expectations have failed them; and we are still in the dark: so
that the Present Times seems to be that Dunkell Day Spoaken of by the Proph.
Zacha. Known only to the Lord, in which. it should be neither Day nor night but
says that in the Evening there should be Light: which is of great ^freshment
to al those good Souls who wait for this blessed evening. It must be
confessed, that it is neither Day nor night with us, We have waited and looked
up and calculated, and all our calculations have been Erroneous But
notwithstanding we have erred yet God cannot mistake, he is true* and will
certainly send forth his Light and his Truth in due Time; For the Writeings of
the Prophets are not as wast paper, or the Fables of Poets, but the real
dictates of the Spirit of God. Men There fore may with great reason Expect
Glorious and happy Times because God has promised them, their Expectation is
good and commendable but nothing else. For they neither rightly enquire into
the Nature of things, Nor are fitted to receive any such Mercyes. First Isay
they make not right Enquiry into things. It Is true they may depend wpon God to
fulfill his own promises, Yet they ought a little to inspect into the means,
For God works all his purposes, by just and propper Mediums; Glorious Times
are expected, But we ought to say How? by which ways? and methods, and from
what spring will they have their original? the natural Answer hereto will be
by changeing something, this ought next therefore be enquired into vizt. on
what Bottom and Ground the Natural and Pollitical Constitution of this World
stands: And since These Happy Times are to come by Changes, We ought
dilligently to find out Those things which will admit of a change, and those
things which will not, And this will facilitate the work and make us more
easily comply with those Mediums and Propositions which are amongst the
changeable predicaments. The Things the refore here below that are unchangeable
for brevitys sake I shall comprehend under Seven Heads as folls.

1. Life and Death. 2. Pleasure and pain. 3. Buisnesse under which may be
comprehended the inequallity of Persons and Differing Intrests of Men. 4. The
Faculty of Chooseing, under which may be comprehended the passions and
affections of Men. 5. Divine Worship and Love to our Neighbor. 6. Justice. 7.
Power. These are all Essential and perpetual, constituting the natural and
Political Administration of this World, And to take a way any of these is to
pull down the pillars of the Earth. It must therefore be granted me that what
ever things are changed in order to pocure the Expected Times These must
continue in statu qno. Then 2dly.
The things that are changeable are only Three vizt.

1. The Minds and opinions of Men. These are Accidentalia and mutable, And
whatsoever changes may be expected in order to the produceing of Happy Times
can only be in these Three.
2. The Outward Administration of Justice and Power. 3. The Outward
Administration of Divine Worship.
First I need not Prove that the opinions of Men are changeable, it being
sufficiently Known, And since the World in a manner is Governed by opinion,
and it has so great power and influence over men, It must of necessity follow
that the abolition of many corrupt and bad opinions which at present disturb
the peace of the World, and the admission of new ones, more conduceing to its
welfare and happiness; will make up a great part of that felicity which is
expected in the change of affairs. Secondly I need not prove that the outward
Administration of Justice and Power are changeable. The Names of Despoticke,
Monarchick, mixed, Aristocraticke, Democraticke, being the present Inscriptions
on these Sovereign Metalls will easily convince this. Nor will I mention which
of these Methods of Government is best, Several Nations haueing been happy
under all of them. And lastly I shall have as Little occasion to prove that the
outward Administration of Divine Worship is changeable, for nothing is more
apparent in holy Scripture then this; There has been a series of mutations,
from Noah to Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to Soloman, from
Solomon to Our Savior, and from Our Savior to this day: And These things
being well considered I hope the New way of Ecclesiastical Administration
proposed will be more easily admitted: The Present Administration in all
Countries is differing, and very unhappy, especially in England God he Knows!
But this most exquisite and uniforme Way I Have proposed will cure all Evils
the World Labors under on this accott. But more of this hereafter. I said
before that I found men Expecting to receive the Benifit of happy Times, but
noe way willing to comply with any Reasonable propositions that might introduce
them. The Greek, the Roman, the Lutheran, the Reformed, the English, and all
other private and particular Churches, would have their own opinions, and
particular Method of Administration be established Throughout the World. And
Iam sattisfied that when God shall begin to work his designs and fulfill his
promises made to the Sons of Men, that they will not be more content Then the
Jews was with Our Savior, they will think it should be something else, And
think all should be done after their own way. But alas! they are mightily
mistaken, For hear what God says by his Prophet Isaiah. For my Thoughts are
not your Thoughts, neither are your ways my ways says the Lord, For as ths
Heavens are higher then the Earth so are my Ways, higher then your ways, and
my Thoughts then your Thoughts. The Jews sent the Prophet Jerima. to enquire
of God for them what they should do, and made a Protestation to obey what ever
should be commanded them, yet when the command came they refused to be
obedient, and cleaved to their own ways and to the imagination of their own
heart. So it is with us We say in our Prayers thy Kingdom come thy will be
done in Earth as it is Heaven, And pray and Expect Glorious Times, yet for all
our hopes, and Prayers We would have our own Kingdoms, Our own will, and our
own ways be done upon Earth notwithstanding whatever we may seem to wish or
desire. Great was the hopes and Expectation of the Jews of a Savior, And when
they had him they crucified him. And Iam sattisfied should he come again in
the flesh to the Christians, in the same humble manner as he did to the Jews
and preach against Some of their evil Customs and Constitutions, The
Christians (Notwithstanding their present adoration of him in heaven) would as
certainly crucify him as did the Jews: for the Nature of mankind is in all
places and at all times much the Same, Whoever crosses their humor or intrest
or speak againsts any thing in which they have been educated shall certainly
find ill treatment. Our Savior pulled down the Jewish OEconomie but it cost
him his Life, And the Apostles and Martyrs extinguished the fire on the Heathen
Altars, but it was with their Blood, And whoever speaks against the bad
customs and constitutions of the Christians no doubt but will find his share
of misery. But Gods will be done. But then further since Every Denomination of
Christians, have a differing way of Administration, And since there are many
parties, and that every party would have their own way be preferred and to be
established in the world before all others; What Remedy is there for these
things? to set up any particular way before the other will not do well, for
that will inflame and provoke the opposition of all the Rest. The only remedy
therefoe is to set up a way differing from all, whereby all being pulled down
and none in particular set up or preferred before the other, None will have
reason to complain. And such is the way of Administration I propose, it is
different from all their ways, nay and it is Gods way to, as I plainly prove
by Scripture, and then no wonder it is differing from Men's ways. For as I said
before, God says my Ways are not like your ways. But in order to conclude I
shall speak a little of the advantages of this Administration.

Supposeing therefore in Each Kingdom and Nation a City built in the midst
thereof, Blessed God! What a Glorious change should we Sudenly See in the
World? What a Blessed Harmony would there be betwixt these Holy and chaste
Sisters? The Blessed Effects of this OEconomie is almost unspeakable, All
those Evils the World Labors under on Account of Religion, would speedily
vanish like the morning dew before the sun. Upon the building of these, all the
old ill built Fabrics would fall to the ground. First the Man of Sin would
tumble from his Throne like Dagon before the Ark, And how Happy and easy would
the Princes of Christendom find themselves, when rid of all his Ecclesiastical
pretensions. They and their Kingdoms have tomuch Suffered by his greevous yoke
and unjust usurpations (I need not Quote old stories We have a certain King
at present struggling in the Ecclesiastical Net) But this OEconomie would
absolutely free them for ever from all the Scourgeing of the Ecclesiastical
whip: And we should hear no more of Popes Kicking down of Emperors Crowns,
Thundering out Curses, forbidding the Subject to pay his Homage to his Lawful
Prince: All the Doleful noise of Persecution would be no more heard of in the
World. All sects and parties, would speedily vanish, And we should have no
more Flying for Religion, from one Country to another the Protestants from
France or Papists from England; No Kingdom or Country turned upside down by
Religious Men, contending to get or keep their parties in, and to turn others
out of the Government. For these preachers being Sufficiently provided for in
their respective Cittyes, all Temptation of acting irregularly would be taken
away. And by this means Temporalls would be absolutely Separated from
Spiritualls A thing much hitherto wished for but never yet effected, And we
should hear no more of Kings imprisoning Bishops, or of Bishops dethroneing
Kings, nor of this or that Party being upper or under in the Government, For
these Spiritual preachers should have nothing to do in any Government, Nor
should Princes or Temporal Power have anything to do in spiritualls, for this
has been the occasion of many Evils in the World, and has corrupted the
purity of the Christian doctrine, And a certain King has said, so long as it
was in his power so choose Bishops he could have what Gospel he pleased,
Therefore these spiritual Men, in respective their Cittyes, (as in another
place I have said) are to be chosen by Lot as was Matthias, And hereby God as
is most Just and fit will choose his own Ministers and Servants, and then no
doubt but we shall have the Stream to run pure. And these Streams comeing out
from this Holy City every Month, how will they cool and refresh each Nation,
there will be no dry or barren Corners therein But all things will live, and
all places be Green and flourishing where these liueing waters come. At present
by the unhappynesse of the presenr Administration, many are the Dark Corners
of the World, where the Light of the Gospel shines not, and no provision is
made for Preachers. But These Gospel Angels, these Rays of the Sun, will
illuminate all the Dark Corners of Each Land, so that The Earth will be full
of the Knowledge of the Lord as the Waters cover the Sea; No dry or barren
corners will want watering by these ever Flowing Fountains And no Dark corners
want the Rays of these glorious and evershinning Ligbts. But Iam not able to
describe all the advantages of this most Excellent OEconomie but must send you
to the Prophets who do it very largely and pathetically.

These things we Suppose will come to pass to make up the fullness of the
Gentiles which St. Paul speaks of, But then as to the Jews may I speak in
the Terms of the Angel, in the 12 verse of the 1: cap. of Zacha. who when the
men had brought in their Report That all the Gentiles were Still and at Rest,
said, O Lord of Hosts how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem etc.
Without all doubt God will Remember his promises made to the Jews by the mouth
of all his Prophets, and will bring them and Establish them in their Own Land,
Where they will build also a City holy to the Lord, out which will flow
Liueing Waters (vizt. Peachers) half of them toward the Former Sea and half
of them toward the hinder Sea, both in Summer and in Winter, as both the Proph:
Zacha: and Ezekiel: mention: And Palestine being placed in the midst of the Earth,
(as some Writers affirm) And Jerusalem built in the midst of Palestine, And a
Jerusalem or Holy City built in the midst of Each Kingdom, How will every
thing answer one another? Ye Admirers of order, Ye Sons of Uniformity, Where
can there be greater order and Uniformity then in such an OEconomie? What a
glorious Harmony will there be betwixt These Holy and chaste Sisters Jerusalem
in Palestine being the first borne? How Glorious will the Spouse of Christ be
in such Days? Let us be glad and Rejoice, and give honor to him: For the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready. I dare not
affirm with what particular presence and manner God will Honor these Cittyes,
But it is said that the Lamb will be the Light there of. And what if God should
Honor these Cittyes of the Gentiles, with the same honor with which he
honored the Tabernacle and Temple of the Jews? Who can tell? Great are his
mercyes to his unworthy creatures. In our Daily Prayers We beg of God that his
Kingdom may come and that his will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, But
I pray you tell me, was there ever a Kingdom without Cittyes? will a Few
Houses make a Kingdom? God has Houses in the Earth, it is true, but as yet has no
Cittyes Therefore if we would have his Kingdom come We must build him
Cittyes. And when in Each Kingdom he has a City built, they all together will
make him here on Earth a Kingdom, or at Leastwise by their influence make the
whole Earth his Kingdom.

And so our Prayers of thy Kingdom come, will be fullfilled, both in a Literal
and in a spiritual Sense. And as Other Kings of the Earth, amongst all their
Cities do choose one for the Royal seat of their Kingdom, so God will choose
Jerusalem, and put his Throne there, and make it as it were the Head of this
spiritual Kingdom. The Prophet Ierem. says at that Time they shall call
Jerusalem The Throne of the Lord, And all Nations shall be gathered unto it.
And the Proph. Mica. says in the 4 cap. and 8 verse. And thou O Tower of Flock
etc. unto Thee shall it come, even the First Dominion, The Kingdom shall come,
to the Daughter of Jerusalem. Here it is said that she shall have the First
Dominion, And that the Kingdom (which we have so often begged for) shall come
to her, We know it is the Custom on Earth, that the Eldest Son or daughter
shall Inherit the Crown, Now God has here a spiritual Kingdom, And these
Cittyes or Several Churches are his daughters, But Jerusalem is the Eldest:
Now to which of the Daughters should the Kingdom come? God here answers, To
Thee (as the Eldest) shall it come, even the First Dominion, the Kingdom shall
come to the Daughter of Jerusalem. But These Words the First Dominion, may
admit of a double construction, First they may imply that all these Cities,
sisters, or Daughters, are to have Dominion But that the Holy City built at
Jerusalem as the First and Eldest Daughter shall have The First or principal
Dominion, or they may signify that all these Sisters, as Gods Daughters may
have a right to the Dominion and the Kingdom, But that the City at Jerusalem
as eldest Daughter shall have the Dominion first, And the others afterward
Successively, Whether of these are the more genuine I leave to the more
Judicous to determine, But for the Reasons formerly mentioned I think not that
the Nature of this Dominion is Imperial, or that the Lady at Jerusalem, should
as a Queen Exercize an absolute command over the Rest, But I rather think that
the nature of it relates more to order than command, And that she shall have a
Priority of order and pre-eminence of Respect due to her on accott. of being
Eldest Sister, and as enjoying more particular honors and favors from God.

I must confess I have found this Little Book in the inditeing or eating of
it as Sweet as honey, I hope that no one hereafter will make it bitter in my
Belly, For I have wrote Nothing but for what I have alleged the Word of God
and Great probabillity. The Apostle says there are different Administrations,
but one Lord. The Lord is King of the Universe, And Christ is the Head
Administrator, and can Govern his Family after what method and manner he
pleases: What therefore if he first order an Altar, then a Tabernacle, then a
Temple, and then a City, And then at Last bring us to Heaven the New Jerusalem
it self. The Prophet David says, They shall pass from strength to strength
until they come to God in Sion: Heaven it self without a Type, To which Place
God of his infinite mercy bring us all through the merits of Jesus Christ Amen.

Postscript.
The Julian and Gregorian Account of Time are both vicious and puts the world
in no small confusion. I would therefore humbly propose that they both may be
regulated by an exact calculation. It will not only be the greatest honor,
but also the greatest Proffet and advantage to that King or Prince Who shall
undertake so Honorable a Task. Since therefore all things are to be come New,
And the Angel says that Time shall be no more (which I understand to be the
Time of the old Administation, as also of the Old Vicious calculation) I hope
that this Proposition will also be considered, that with the New
Administration, we may have a New account of Time That we may write Anno
domi, and Anno ab Urbe condita.


