AN EXPOSITION OF THE Divinely Prophetic SONG OF SONGS WHICH IS SOLOMON'S.
Beginning with the Reign of David and Solomon* Ending in the Glorious Kingdom
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Adjusted to the Expositor's Line of Time, and
Illustrating it. And Composed into VERSE. By T Beverley.

London, Printed for the Author. 1687.

THE PREFACE TO THE Exposition of Solomon's Song, by way of Justificacation;
that the Exposition ought to be Prophetical.
THAT This Book of Holy Scripture has been under a high Character of Honor in
the Church of God, and has Imprinted an Awe and Veneration of it self upon the
Minds of Wise and Holy Men, is out of doubt, both among Jews and Christians.

It is enough known, that the Jews prohibit any to read it, till the Sacerdotal
or Thirtieth Year of Age; Now though this may savor of an over Fear, which in
Religious Matters dwells at the next door to Superstition; Yet still it shows
of how sublime a Majesty and Estimation this Song appeared to them.

And with the same profound Reverence all Christians approach it, who have any
serious Sense of the Dread due to Sacred Oracles; This Thing therefore is not
of any doubt.

But it is a Question of much greater Intricacy and Perplexity, what the drift,
scope, and design of so uncontestably a Divine and Spiritual Song is.

The generality of Interpreters look upon it, as a Catholic seat, or Universe
of Allegories, representing the Mystical Communion betwixt Christ, and his
Spouse the Church, and every Believing Soul in it.

Now although I defer, as much as Any of the most Devoted to such Holy,
Spiritual, and Heavenly Meditations, as are derived with Advantages of Piety
and Prudence from this stupendous Allegory, Yet I cannot, for this very great
Reason, Rest in that Expository Sentiment, that makes it the grand scope of the
Holy Spirit to give Rist to such Meditations.

And this is my Reason; All parts of Scripture have some so limited,
determinate, defined scope and end, that they cannot be misled from it by any
Interpretation; But it cannot be imagined, or with any semblance supposed, that
from this Song, there can be drawn a Frame or Platform, either of the state of
the Church, or of particular Souls in Relation to their Communion with Christ,
or of Religious Discipline, or Rules of Life, that should traverse and cut with
variety of Motions, backward and forward, that so Indefinite variety, that
these so manifold, both new and repeated Emblematisms require.

If then there be not a Frame and Model to stint and confine Interpretation,
this Song must be left to the differing Fantasies of all its Interpreters, how
many soever, and nothing left to control or correct them, who do but keep to
the general Analogy of pious Sense, and natural Knowledge.

For when the whole Universe serves the Images of thi^ Sacred Poesy, and that
every Sprig may some way resemble God; It may consequently be made serviceable
to some spiritual Meditation, and moral Document; and so proportionably seeing
the Communion betwixt Christ and his Church, is of the same Divine, Spiritual,
and Holy Nature, every Particle of Nature used in this Song, shall be subject
to as many Descants upon it, as there are Ingenies to extract them, agreeably
to that foresaid Analogy of Faith, and common Philosophy: And so the Song, and
the several parts of it, unstable as Water, having no consistent Figure of
their own, shall receive s^ape from every Vessel the Interpreter brings to it.

But it surpasses my Understanding or Belief, that so infinitely Wise, and
divinely Prudent an Author, as the Holy Spirit, should write in such a Laxity
as this, Known to whom are all his Works of Scripture from the beginning to the
end; and all the various Censures and Senses each Iota of them shall undergo,
and has supreme and determinate Counsels of his own, which shall Overruled
them all. And so in this Song.

And indeed, if this Liberty, and Largeness of Interpretation were allowed, It
would yet be never possible to give any decent and congruous Agreement betwixt
the Spouse of Christ, and a Company of Horses in Pharaohs Chariot, Teeth like a
Flock of Sheep bearing Twins, Eyes as Fish pools, Locks bushy, and black as a
Raven, that should express the Communion betwixt Christ and his Church, without
some other Key of Interpretation, that keeps the whole Tight to such a Frame
and Model of things, as was before desired.

There are some Interpreters therefore (though so very few as hardly to escape
the Note of singularity) and of very Venerable Name, who have understood by it
a portraicture of the various States, through which the Kingdom of Christ has
passed in relation to his Church, and so reciprocally of his Church in relation
to his Kingdom. And from these, I confess, I received the first Thoughts, that
such a Table is most agreeable to this Divine Composure.

And herein I am not ashamed to acknowledgde, I have borrowed most light from
that very Admirable Man, Mr. Brightman, with whom Mr. Cotton, that great Light
of the Church of God in New England Symbolises.

And yet I have retired from them, in a careful Avoidance, to press these
Divine Figures too hard, lest wringing them should bring forth Blood; or to
make the pursuit too far, lest the Exposition should be too curious and minute:
For in all Prophetical Expositions, I think, there is most safety of Truth in
resting upon the Bulk and Body of Scripture Prophecy, and of History, when only
Humane History leads the Application; but when Sacred History conducts it, One
may be much more bold, or where the Instance is singular and notorious, as in
Antiochus Epiphanes.

And, as I have retired in these particularities of Interpretation, from those
two, by me so honored Expositors of this Song; so I have as freely dissented
from them, wheresoever I see Reason.

And upon this occasion, I take liberty to make this Digression, and to
observe; It is a very frivolous Undertaking, to attempt to bl^st the
Interpretation of Prophetical Interpreters, as of Mr Mede, Mr. Brightman, and
that to me above all others most Indear'd Name of the most Learned, Pious, and
Honored Dr. More, on Daniel, and the Apocalypse, and Others; Because either
Events have not answered their Calculations, or because they differ among
themselves.

For herein is the great Mistake, Men are angry These Prophetical Expositors do
not, as inspired Writers, give Oracles; Whereas God may wonderfully, and beyond
the ordinary standard, assist his Servants in some grand Points, to bring Light
into the World, and to make great Efforts into the retired parts of Scripture,
viz. the Prophecies, and yet leave them in many Particulars, to the Fallibility
of their own Minds, and so to Mistakes.

For this is the Distinction betwixt the immediate Assistances of God,
vouchsafed to the Sacred Penmen, and Those, whom he leads by the Mediation of
their own Learning, Search and Judgment: To the one, He dictates wholly from
himself, To the other, by an Excitation of their Faculties to make a due
Inquiry, and then to adjoin themselves to greatest Evidences of Reason:
Together with which, he may as he pleases extraordinarily awaken, inject,
infuse into their Minds, but so that the whole Assurance they have depends upon
Evidence, and all they claim to of Assent, is upon the same Evidence; where
this then fails, Mistake ensues, and Assent is not due.

From hence it follows; As they may mistake, so they may differ, and One be in
the right upon better Evidence, where another is in the wrong upon no Evidence,
or insufficient Evidence; Or Both may be Right, or in an Error on the same
accounts, and yet Both these may be in great Things eminent Ministers of the
Truth of God to his Church, and agree therein, being excited and conducted
beyond the ordinary level of Men, to attain Evidences true and firm in such
Points; where the generality, yea, where very few enter at all. And therefore
those Mistakes and Differences, shall not in the least invalidate the great
Truths, wherein they have Evidence, and wherein they Agree: For all is to be
valued by Evidence; And Ignorance, Inapprehensiveness, Want of Diligence in
others, in Trying and Judging these Evidences, to distinguish between Mistake
and Truth, and their Rejection of all for want of such Infallibility and
Agreement, makes no alterations in things themselves, which neither will
deceive, nor can be deceived.

And withal observe, here are no more Grains of Allowance required in this
Case, than in all kinds of Learning, Knowledge, Science, and Arts in the World,
which do not proceed upon Infallibility, nor determine in any greater
Universality of Consent. No not Theology it self, beyond the very express
Assertions of Scripture: If Men have a greater Antipathy and Aversion to make
out after, to try or to receive Prophetical Knowledge, and to think it Reason
enough to do so, because Men mistake and differ, (which same thing they do in
all things) and though their Agreements in grand Points (as in all other Cases)
is so valueable, It cannot be helped, till a better State of the World cure
this so general Malady.

But to return from this long, but most necessary Digression upon this
Occasion. Although I do with all Thankfulness acknowledge the Helps I have
received, yet I humbly avow with lowliest Thanksgivings to God; I have
proceeded upon these peculiar Grounds, derived from his Word alone.

I find no way of Interpretation so like to Circumscribe and Define the Sacred
Sense of this Song, as a Prophetical Course of Time, which the Church passing
through under the various Elevations and Depressions of the Kingdom of Christ,
it becomes capable of these so various Pictures; And, as in the Course of Time,
God requires and calls back what is past into wonderful Agreements with what is
present and to come, upon which Solomon says, There is no new thing under the
Sun; So in this Song, supposing it such a Table of Time, the Figures and
Allegories in which those past things are portrayed, may be required and
repeated; For the States come to be repeated in their likenesses also, and so
the old Emblems are often recalled, and no new ones chosen for them.

1. This then laid in the Foundation, I farther observe; From the very
Beginning to the End of this Song, there are under the Emblems of Spices of
sweetest Smell, and richest Perfume, couched a preparation to a Royal
Anointing, in agreement with the Great Title of Christ, Messiab, or Anointed,
and also in allusion to Paradise, the Palace Royal of his Kingdom; in all these
there is a Designation of his Kingdom, who is the Bridegroom, and the Beloved
of his Church, His Spouse, and Bride, which makes this Song Panegyrical or
Inaugurative.

2. Again therefore I observe, There is from the Beginning to the End of this
Song a constant Design of drawing all the Preparations to a Marriage and
Nuptial Solemnity, by the holiest, purest, and most ardent Affections, and all
kind of Ceremonies, and Retinue, and Courtship for Espousals, and for the
Glories and solemnization, that agree to the Nuptial Love and Honor Christ is
pleased to put upon his Spouse and Bride, the Church; And that as Marriage
(which is a great Mystery, as the Apostle says, speaking concerning Christ and
his Church) was instituted in Paradise, and there had its Beginning; So in the
Paradise of God it has its Complement and Perfection. Now hereunto agree the
so often mention of Flowers, Gardens, Virgins, a Bed, Espousals, and
innumerable the like: by which this Song looks so like an Epithalamium or
Marriage-Song between Christ and his Church, Revel. c. 19. c. 21.

3. Further, Because as the Grandeur of a Kingdom was by the Ancients addulced
and sweetened with the Emblems of the Tenderness, Care and Propriety of a
Shepherd in his Flock; and that the Entertainments of Love and Amorous
Contemplations were agreeable to the Shepherd's Life: Therefore in this Song,
there is so often mention of Kids, Sheep, Goats, Roes, and Hinds, Lions,
Leopards, Roes and Hinds of the Field of a wilder Race; of Shepherds, and the
Mountains They and their Flocks walk upon, whereby this Song has so much of a
Pastoral in it.

4. And lastly, Because Enemies are often to be overcome, before Kingdoms can be
enjoyed in Peace and Luster; there is therefore so often mention of Valiant
Men, Arms, Armory, and Armies, by which this Song becomes Heroic and Triumphal.

And all these things are drawn into Song, according to the general Usage in
ancient Times to Compose into Poesy* both their Wars, the Glory of their Kings,
and also their Amors, and Pastoral Divertisements.

From these Considerations then, we may have a general prospect and view upon
the Frame and Model of this Song, and so as to fix it, and not leave it to the
Pleasure of every Mercurial Fantasy.

5. Seeing every Course of Time, that is to be limited and circumscribed, and
pourtrayed, as in a Model and Table, must have a Point, when it begins, and
when it ends, and a medium or middle Line, in which it runs along; I observe
there are great Inducements, as possibly we can desire, to begin the Song in
David, who was the first Royal Ancestor of Jesus Christ, the King of his
Church, and the most Eminent Typical Messiah, or Anointed of the Lord,
Anointed with holy Oil: A King raised from a Shepherd to be so, wherein he was
as it were by Education fitted to a Pastoral Government, and prepared to become
the sweet Singer of Israel, in agreement so far with this Song, and a most
renowned* Warrior, who Achieved by Conquest his Kingdom, and was therein
eminently a Prophet and a King, and not without some providential Resemblance
of a Priest, in being girded with the Priestly Ephod before the Lord; Thus
every way in so Eminent a Personage, this Song was to begin, who was so great a
Type, and also in his Psalms so great a Prophet of Christ's Kingdom, as therein
to give the Kisses of Christ's mouth, as he in his several Annointings, diffused
the savor of Christ's Ointments, and drew the Virgins after him.

In Union with David, Solomon his Son is to be joined, who enjoyed in Splendour,
Peace, and Magnificence the Kingdom that was the Acquest of David's Wars, whose
many Wives and Concubines, like the sixty Queens, the eighty Concubines, and
Virgins without number, [c. 6. 8.] which make the Spouse of Christ, and
especially his Marriage of Pharaoh 's Daughter with Royal Estate, are greatly
serviceable to this Song, and to the Representations it gives of the Spouse of
Christ, and of his Marriage to it: For that most Illustrious and Celebrated
Queen, Pharaohs Daughter, (undoubtedly a Convert to the God of Israel,) was not
only a Type of the Gentile Church in general but particularly of its State in
the Philadelphian Interval, so highly Honored, Revel. 3.

And for her, as a Type of the Church in that state, that Divinely Prophetic
Forty fifth Psalm was composed in so much Agreement with this Song; a Song of
Loves, set to a Musical Instrument, or Tune, called Shoshannim, or the Lillies,
among which, this Song Represents so often Christ and his Church Feeding; an
Emblem of Purity at last set in Glory and Luster.

Now the Principal Intention of that Psalm, is under the Type of Solomon and
Pharaoh's Daughter to Represent Christ Anointed, as on the Mount of Spices,
for his Appearance on his Royal Throne; and taking his Church in the
Philadelphian state to Himself, as his Bride, agreeable with the close of this
Song: agreeable with the Promises to the Philadelphian Church, agreeable with
Revel. 19. and c. 21.

And the very silence of Solomon's Israelitish Wives, seems not to be without a
Mystery; but to express that long Desolate state of the whole Seed of Israel
under the Gospel, and yet there is a Revival at last in the Shulamite, as
Solomon had undoubtedly Israelitish Wives, and in his Repentance Returned to
them, c. 6. 12, 13.

And even in those Wives of the Idolatrous Nations, Solomon took, who Turned
away his Heart from God, He may be thus far a Type of the Love of Christ to the
Heathen Idolatrous World, and also of that great Scandal, This has against him
the True Messiah given so long to the Jews, from which yet Christ shall be
vindicated at the Conversion of ALL, as Solomon is by this Song, together with
the Book of Ecclesiastes, Vindicated from the Infamy of his Idolatry; It being
so Royal a Monument of his Repentance: This Solomon was also He, who Built the
Temple of God, and his own House of State, that serve also in this song as
Types; who lastly was a great Prince in Wisdom, and the Largeness of his Mind.
This so great a Type, yea so great a Prophecy of Christ in his own Person and
Reign, and Marriages, is commissioned as the most Elect Person to sing this
song, this Prophetical song of the Kingdom of Christ, as David did in so many
Psalms. And such a Song was to be expected from so great a Prince, and such a
Son of Wisdom, whose Wisdom had not been perfect in Honor, without such a
Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ; Seeing Prophecy and Prophecy of Christ was
the highest point of Wisdom; And it stands with Ecclesiastes as a Monument of
the Repentance of this Great King after his Fall.

Let then the Epoch of this Song be David's and Solomon's Reign in Conjunction,
and the beginning of the Course of Time to Christ's Kingdom in this Song, fixed
here; And immediately after Solomon's death begins not a new Course, but a new
Character of this Course of Time, carried on from Time to Time in the most
Known, Remarkable, and Chronicular Events, of greatest Renown in
Scripture-History, or Prophecy, or Both; or Scripture Prophecy, and Humane
History that cannot be denied, nor to have been such noble Events.

Now then if in the very same order these Events keep with the Course of Time,
They have also such fit Emblems and Resemblances of them in this Song, and in
the same order that They have all along to this very Day in the Course of Time,
I cannot account this less than great Evidence, This Song is such a Frame or
Table of Time, as I assert it.

And that these may stand Fair, Visible, and Together; I have Calendar'd them
in the Annexed Table, and Referred them to each part of this Song, together
with their References to each Page of the Book; and also according to their
Situation, and Place in the Course of Time, and according to that Settlement I
have endeavored to vindicate to them that in Course of Time, by My Line of
Time.

Now I cannot but add, as a farther Evidence of the Epoch of this Song, and
that it designs a Course of Time, of which I gave Intimation just now, viz.
That after the Reign of David and Solomon, In the Division of the Ten, and the
Two Tribes, making a House of Judah, and a House of Israel, Ezekiel's Days for
Years Began, as an Introduction of Prophetical Time, and, as shall be declared
a Medium, or Mediation betwixt Historical and Prophetical Time: and on which
the whole Course of Prophetical Time Runs; Upon this very point of Time, This
Song gives those two Remarks. 1. Of that Division, by the Tents of Kedar, and
the Curtains of Solomon, And then of Rehoboam's Servitude under Shishak, King
of Egypt, where to distinguish, or rather to make most notorious that Time;
There is a more Uncouth Resemblance, than is to be found in the whole Song
beside, viz. I have compared Thee, O my Love, to a Company of Horses in Pharaoh
's Chariot, c. 1. 5. 9. as is Declared in the Exposition.

A Second Thing I cannot but add in Confirmation of the Cou rse of Time, is,
That forasmuch as it was Foreseen, there would not be after the History of the
Acts of the Apostles, Scripture History to bear up the Prophecy of Daniel,
looking beyond that Time; nor of the Apocalypse, Given after that Time, We have
therefore before the Apostolical Time a Precedent of depending upon the most
undoubted Humane History, for one of the most Remarkable Prophecies in the
Judgment of all Expositors, and in which some would fain Absolve all Daniel's
Prophecy, viz. the Tyranny of Antiochus, Taking away the Daily Sacrifice; as
great a Tyranny and Desolation of their Worship, for the short time it lasted,
or greater than any the Jewish Church suffered till their Final Desolation; And
This, though so solemnly prophesied of by Daniel, we have only the History of
the Maccabees and of Josephus to depend upon for the Exposition of it; And it
is counted so enough, that no Interpreter doubts it.

Why then should we not be as well satisfied in undoubted Humane History
concerning the Roman Antichrist, the Antitype to Antiochus, that he is that Man
of Sin in 2 Thessal. 2. and the Beast, Rev. c. 13. c. 17. And it is very
remarkable, how much in the same Emblems This Song may be fairly supposed to
Descant on Both, as it were the Type and the Antitype; The Type, c. 3. before
the Incarnation. The Antitype, c. 6. before the preparation of All Things, and
their running on to the Glory of Christ's Kingdom, in c. 7. c. 8. And while
there is an Agreement, the due Distances are also maintained.

Thus the Epoch, and so much of the Running on of the Course being Remonstrated
upon, let us consider the Period and Conclusion, and see if the Song does not
draw all things to their Consummation in the Glory of Christ's Kingdom, as into
the Time of the Fullest Confluence of all to the True Church of Christ, as one
Gentile Church, viz. the Fullness of the Gentiles; The Antichristian Converts;
and the Reformed Churches; Then the Jews or two Tribes Congregated to it, as
the Princes of the East looking out as the Morning; and at last the Ten Tribes;
And then the whole Mountain of Spices flows into an Everlasting Unction of
Christ into his Kingdom, who is then Anointed with the Oil of Joy above his
Fellows: A Kingdom above all Kingdoms, and beyond which, There is nothing but
Eternity.

And Concurrent with this End, is the Highest Purity, the most Ardent Love
betwixt Christ and his Church, the fullest Enjoyment, as in not only a Supreme,
but an only Kingdom; and, as in the Paradise of God; as is so Remarkable, that
it cannot be missed in the latter part, or the three last Chapters of the Song:
What then can, if This does not deserve to be the Period and Point of the
Course of Time, and of this Song Commensurate to it; and so Adequate to
Daniel's last Words of Prophecy, and the drawing up all to an End in the
Revelation.

Upon the whole then, There cannot be a greater proof of a Frame, system, or
Model in any Writing, that does not openly declare it self to be so, than to
find out a just Order and Series, and due Connection in the Parts; Nor in a
Mystical Frame, than that the Parts do fairly Express and Expose the Things,
that in such a Frame, They are supposed to Expose: And if it be accounted in
Philosophy a good Discharge to give an Hypothesis or Scheme of Nature
agreeable, and to keep All Appearances safe in Relation one to another; I hope
it will be Esteemed a good Acquittal of my Undertaking, not only to Project a
Frame or System of this, but to find that Frame laid in Scripture-History, and
Prophecy, or in Scripture-Prophecy, and Uncontestable Humane History, as of
Antiochus his Tyranny just now to this purpose Instanced, and to find the
Images of Prophetic Song all along Agreeing.

And I hope, it will be no more disallowed to Expound this Song into a
continued Parable without dowright Demonstration, than it is to Expound the
Parts of this Song in several and particular Parables, with as little
Demonstration as General Interpreters do: In fine, that the whole Song so laid
into a Parable, may be Accepted* as well as any other Theological Parable, of
which there are Examples, seeing all the Parts and Lines on which it is
grounded, are undoubtedly Divine, and the Exposition so fairly put for, to be
Justified as Divine also.

For I acknowledge, That which enabled me to bring this Song into the
Contexture, wherein it is now Presented, and that which gave me also the
occasion, and the Engagement to do it, is, The Scripture-Line of Time, I lately
Published, To which I have in the Title declared, It is Adjusted; and which I
have pursued along in the Exposition of the Song, both in the Signification of
the Emblems, and in the Notes of Time.

And it is upon This Hope, that These two may give Light and Strength, one to
another.

For the same Things variously Represented, make them clearer and easier to
general Apprehension; Some Things being plainer to some in one Dress, to some
in another, and each gives Light to the other, when They are Compared.

And in this Song, and its Exposition, Things lie much nearer and closer one to
another; They are more suddenly seen and Apprehended, more easily Grasped, and
more easily Remembered: And what requires either fuller Discourse, or Proof, may
be sought in those larger Prophetical Discussions of the Line of Time.

But above All, The Compare of these Three Great Prophets, (besides others)
viz. Solomon, Daniel, John, the Three Beloveds, does exceedingly inlighten and
strengthen my Prophetical Scheme; For when the Three Frames differ in
Circumstances, and yet agree in Essentials; There can be no greater Conviction
of a Designed Scheme of Prophecy, nor happier Conduct into it, than their
compare one with another: And such a threefold Cord is not easily broken. And
in the Mouth of not Two but Three Witnesses, every word is Established.

I have chosen to Present this Song in Verse, in Conformity to the Divine
Poesy, not pretending to Excel herein, much less to come within any distance of
the Original; but to come something nearer the High Spirit, and Lofty Air of
this Song, than plain Exposition in Prose could do; I am also in Hope, that the
Diversion and Acceptableness of Words in number and measure, may Invite to the
Consideration of the Matter so conveyed, and that while the Poetry is Censured
and Condemned, yet the Sense may slide in, and lay hold of the Judgment.

And lest any Difficulty in such a stinted Form of Words should occur, I have
by brief Notes Explaining Words and sense, endeavored to Illustrate such
Difficulties.

And, as I desire, This Poem should look backward to the Line of Time I have
already, or shall with this offer to any Hand, so I desire It should look
forward to a second Part, now in the Press, and wherein I Beg the assistance of
all who shall be induced to favor the Undertaking.

To conclude, That all Things may be made most plain, I have placed this Table,
as in Entrance to the Exposition of this Song; That every one may run and Read
those great Heads of Prophecy in their order, and in the Series of Time,
wherein they are set; the Events themselves none can deny to be the greatest,
that can be found in Scripture-History, or supposed in Scripture-prophecy, nor
call in question their successive Order in Time; So that every one may compare
the Images, which are undoubtedly Divine, and then set them close to the
Exposition, which is in the Line of Time endeavored to be proved Divine also,
by immediate Scripture Consequence; and when their place in Time cannot be
contested what can be doubted;

There is but one grand Event, which I can think of, which can in this Song be
supposed to be omitted; And that is the Desolation of the Jews by the Romans:
But that, asunfit for a Song of Loves is glided over, and rather supposed by
the Gentile Church, entering into the whole play of the Song then described,
even as Gods Casting the Ten Tribes out of his sight, is silently made known by
the Songs Reference to the House of Judah only: And observe, those Jewish
Desolations are shaded over in the Red Horse of War in the Apocalypse, and
given in Daniel, but in the way of Appendage to the Cutting off the Messiah.
But most fully given Ezekiel. c. 16. c. 23.

To Conclude, as I humbly Beg the Prayers of All, who have Favor for
Endeavors in the Clearing of Prophecy; So I most Humbly and Ardently Pray for
Blessing from Above, upon what is here Presented, that we may Read and
Understand this Prophecy, and may wait and come to the End of the 1335 Days,
For the Time is at Hand.

A TABLE OF THE GRAND EVENTS Relating to the Kingdom of Christ, and the States
of his Church, from the Kingdom of David begun, to his own Glorious Appearance
in his Kingdom; given in this Song.
AFTER the general Argument, Solomon's Preface, and the Expositors Preface, p.
1. p. 2. David's Reign began, and with Solomon's Reign made eighty years, p. 3.
p. 4, 5. Jeroboams Reign, and the parting of the Kingdoms, p. 6, 7. Rehoboams
Reign, p. 8. Asaes and Jehosaphats Reign, p. 9. The Reign of Ahaziah, Joash,
Amaziah, omitted in the Genealogy of Christ, compared to a bundle of Myrrh in
the Night p. 10. Abiiam, Joram, Ahaz, Manasseh, before Repentance, Amon, those
worst Kings bundled with Uzziah, and Jotham, and Manasseh after Repentance, as
Camphire or Cypress giving some sweetness p. 11. Hezekiahs, and Josiahs Reign
p. 11. The Reigns of Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, Zedekiah, p. 12, 13.
Jehoiakims sixth and seventh years, p. 13, 14. The end of the 70 years,
The return of the Captivity, p. 15, 16, 17. Ezra and Nehemiah, p. 17, 18. At
Cyrus his first year, the same 3459, when began Daniels 2300 Even. Morn. and
after 75 years of the words going forth, the 70 weeks of years.
The division of Time by the Mountains of Bether, before and after the
Captivity, p. 19, 20. Antiochus Epiphanes making the Sanctuary desolate;
according to Daniels Prophecy, and the History of the Maccabees, p. 21. The
Recovery of the Temple-Worship, and Christ in it, till the Incarnation, p. 22.
p. 24. p. 25. p. 26, 27. The Ascension of Christ, p. 28, 29. The sending down
of the Holy Spirit, p. 29, 30. The Gentiles called, and becoming a Sister
Church, p. 31. The Gentile Church becoming as the only Church, and the Jews
under silence: with the Scripture Admonitions in that case, p. 32. The same 33.
and 34 years.
The sealed Time entering, wherein the Kingdom of Christ is stayed, and the
State of the Churches under the Apocalyptick Symbols of Ephesus; and of Smyrna,
under the Heathen, and under the Christian Emperors, p. 33, 34, 35, 36. The
beginning of the 1260 Days.
The Apostasy of the Christian Church, under the Church of Pergamus, symboliz'd
in the Revelation, p. 37, 38, 39, 40. The distribution of the 1260 Days of the
Witnesses Sackcloth, the Woman in the Wilderness, under the Gentiles 42 months,
and the Beasts 42 months knitting one into another, and becoming equal with the
1260 days, p. 41, 42. Thyatira, in opposition to Antichrist, p. 43, 44, 45,
46. Thyatyra; Sardis, and Philadelphia, searching for the Beloved, and called
Protestants, p. 47, 48. Philadelphian Churches Interval, or the last 75 years
of the 2300, p. 49, 50, 51. The calling of the Jews of the two Tribes, p. 56.
The Spouse praises the Jewish Body coming into Union with it, p. 58, 59, [60,
61, 62. The Jews return thus distinctly placed, the Song returns to the one
Spouse so graced, who now speaks, p. 63, 64. The earnest desire of the Church
for the Personal Appearance, and Reign of Christ in Humane Nature, p. 64, 65.
The Appearance of the Ten Tribes as on the sudden, p. 65, 66. The Spouse
concerning those Ten Tribes newly returned, and the Answer of the Ten Tribes,
p. 67, 68. It is done. It is done.
A Description of the supreme Kingdom of Christ under the Parable of Solomon's
Royal Vineyard; with a Conclusion comprizing Christ's Incitation of his Church
to desire his Appearance, and the Churches Prayers for it; like the end of the
Revelation, p. 69, 70.
Cant. 8. 13, 14. Revel. 22, 17, 20. compared.
Christ says.
Cause me to hear the Companions Harkening to thy Voice.

The Answer of all.
Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou like a young Roe on the Mountain of Spices.

The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. Let him that hears or hearkneth to this
Voice, say, Come. ALL SAID, Come Lord Jesus come quickly.

The Argument.
AN Exposition of the Divinely Prophetic Song of Songs, which is Solomon's: The
Epoch or Beginning of which is to be Fixed at David's Unction, Judah and
Israel, who was the Grand Typical Messiah: The Period of this Song is in The
Glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the True Solomon, King of Peace, King of
Glory, the Son of David, the Only True Messiah: In a Prayer for this Kingdom,
This Song of Solomon, Jedidiah, the Beloved of the Lord, Ends; Thus --

Make haste, my Beloved; And be Thou as a Roe, or a young Heart on the Mountain
of Spices, chap. 8. ult. Even as the Beloved Daniel Ends in the Blessedness of
that End of Days, Dan. 12. ult.

And the Beloved Disciple John in that Prayer, Even so come Lord Jesus, shuts
up his Revelation.

The Exposition is composed into Verse, in Imitation of the Divinely Inspired
Poesy, in which the Holy Spirit Dictated it to Solomon.

The Persons speaking are,
The Spouse of the King, The True Church. The King himself, Jesus Christ,
God-Man. The Chorus, or Quire, The Saints of every Age.
The Sacred Text, with the Times of each Stanza, or Canticle of this Song,
Adjusted to the Expositor's Line of Time, and Illustrating it, is given, with
short Marginal Notes for the Explication of any Difficulties in Words, or Sense.

Solomon 's Preface.
Solomon's.
THis Divine Song of Songs
To Solomon belongs;
The Christ is plainly the Truth of what Solomon was the Shadow or Image. And
his Wives, both Jewish and of the Gentiles (most especially Pharaohs Daughter)
are fit Emblems of the Church.
Type to Solomon,
The Life to Christ alone.
The Preface of the Expositor.
MAy A Prayer for the Assistance of the Divine Spirit in so mystical a Book.
the Holy Breath now fill my humble Sails,
That swelled King Solomon from the Hebrew Schelomoh.
Schelom's Thoughts with first born Gales;
While Sp'rite Divine did the Royal Phant'sy steer,
He sung the Song, the World of Songs cannot Peer;
A Song, that Sacred Senses Enterweaves
With Prophecies so high, that Allow this a Prophecy, as undoubtedly it must,
as has been set out in the Preface, and it must be above all the Names of
Prophecy in the world.
The great Pagan Prophetess, supposed yet to foretell Christ.
Sybils leaves
So famed, to Ballads dwindle in Compare,
Or silenced Heathen Oracles struck dumb by Christ, the Great Pan, or Shepherd,
as Plutarch witnesses.
Oracles; This does declare
That Princely Stem, whom David's Kingly Root
From Low Beginnings did in Schelom shoot
'Bove Earthly Kings, and still in David's Son,
And Lord, much higher lifts true Solomon
Rev. 19. 9.
Till Heaven opens, and on Skies he rides
Triumphant, and all Power Endless guides:
Fix then the Foot of Schelom's Inspired Lays
In Regnant David's first Anointed Days;
And there of Right; For there the Olive thrived
Into a Scepter, and its Oil derived:
From It runs from David to Christ's Supreme Kingdom.
hence those Holy Concerts are displayed
Which 'twixt True Schelom and his Church are laid,
Wherein its Holy Veils, or Likenesses in Parables.
Hieroglyphics are carved out
Through every Stage of Time, and which Make famous.
Redoubt
Its State; not such oft-times as Poets paint
Their Beauties in, not in the vulgar Quaint
Of Fancy, but in Images, low, plain,
The Song has great Sense, even where the Types are lowest and plainest.
Divinely Full of Sense.
sensy, solid, free from vain,
And yet so High, no mortal Quill can touch,
Nor Mysteries in humble Phrase so couch:
This Song is enterchang'd 'twixt There is by the several words used, My Love,
or Beloved, by the Spouse; my Love or Companion; Spouse, Sister Spouse, by
Christ; and Persons of a Third or middle betwixt both, and calling Christ the
King, a plain distinction of the Persons, viz. The Spouse of the King, the
King, the Chorus, or Quire of Saints. g The kisses of Christ's Lips are a most
proper Emblem of David's time, because David was so eminent a Prophet, and
King, and the Penman of so excellent a Book of Scripture, so full of Divine
Truth, as the Book of Psalms, wherein are also so great discoveries of Christ's
Kingdom.
the Spouse, and King,
Who turn it round, as 'twere in Holy Ring;
The or Quire.
Choir of Saints informs, censures, approves,
Grieves with.
Condoles, Rejoices with.
conjoyes, as each occasion moves.
The Spouse. David 's Reign of forty Years.
LET thirsty me now drink the Crystal Breath,
That from his Word, like Kisses follows, [Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth]

While Isreal's sweetest Singer with Harp skims
The tuned melting Air; The A rich Drink.
Nectar swims
Around my Lips, with Raptures all Divine,
More Rich, more Flows out.
Vivid than the flavour'd Wine; [Thy Love is better than Wine]

While Truth in Streams it self thus Disembogues,
As chastest Kisses, Loves sweet Mutual Discourses.
Dialogues,
I own them; and from Him, whom my Soul loves,
Who all His Favors into Life improves.
[Because of the Savor of thy Good Oyntments]
Oh thou the True Annoint'd, Christ, Dan. 9. 25.
Messiah named.
hight,
Thy God-like This Symbol also of Ointments is most proper to David, God's
Anointed, whose Anointing with holy Oil, and to an Everlasting Kingdom, is so
often mentioned in Scripture: from which Anointing Saul was rejected. Now all
this referrs to Christ, the true Prince David, or Messiah, whom David though
his Son in spirit calls Lord.
Ointments give thy Name the Right.
[Thy Name is as Ointment poured out]
Thy fragrant Small Motes flying from Bodies.
Atoms draw the An Emblem of which were those Songs of the Women; Saul has
killed his thousands, and David his ten thousands, 1 Samuel 18. 7. k Solomon, a
Prince of Peace, had this the great Glory of his Reign, That he built the
Temple; elegantly here called Chambers, viz. of Love and State. l Wine is an
Empharical Symbol, or Representation of the Dedication of the Temple, with
those magnificent Feasts. The remembering of the Love of Christ more than Wine,
implies Solomon's Fall into Idolatry, and yet the sincere upright Servants of
God keeping close to him.
Virgin Souls,
Seized with thy Holy Flames, they meet in Great Companies. 5 Thy Great Father
David.
Sholes
Within thy pure Embrace, piercing the Type
Of thy Grand Sire, and by that Conduit Pipe
[The Virgins love Thee]
Arrive to thee, Great Savior, whose large Wing
Shaded thy Father, who of Thee did sing
With highest Pleasure, and with strongest Trust
Thou Would raise His Scepter with himself from Dust.
Solomon's Reign, 36 years, from the Temple begun; 40 in the whole.
[Draw me, We willrun after Thee; The King has brought me into his Chambers]
But though thy fragrant Ointments Virgins win
To thee, the The Camp typ'd Christ in his Judgments, as in David a Warrier.
bloody Fields, and Camps within
Yet more them move, The Rooms of Love, and State
Christ's gracious Communion typ'd by Solomon's Temple, as Chambers.
Chambers in Schelom's Temple Emblemate
Where greater Freedoms of Thy Love, Thy Grace,
May former Wars full of Horror.
Scenes of Misery efface.
[We will rejoice in thee, we will remember thy Love more than Wine.]
The Goblets crowned with the lusty Wine
Did not at the The Feast at Solomon's Temple Dedicated, 1 Kin. 8. 65.
Dedication so Refine
Our drooping Spirits, as Thy nobler Love,
The Characters of which what can remove?
Not 1 Kings 11. 5.
Schelom's After-fall, no tempting Feasts [We will remember]

On Idol Sacrifices; Our warm Searches with Sorrow.
Quests
Still Thee alone pursue; no foolish Fire
Of Ast'roth, Milchom, Chemosh, us inspire;
The Upright love Thee, and recall Thy Love,
However Schelom with his Pleasures move.

Chorus. But even He From this Fall Solomon rose by Repentance, testified by
his Book of Ecclesiastes, or of the Royal Preacher, and this his Prophetical
Song of Christ's Kingdom.
repenting to this Point
Thy Self returned, King and Preacher, Eccles. 11.
Ecclesiast Anoinct
And so Atton'd, this Song of Songs He sings,
As Royal Prophet mount'd on Heavenly Wings,
Leading thy Spouse through all its Shades and Vales,
Till in thy lasting Arms He it Empales
On Mount of Spices, where this Song is drowned,
Rather with lasting Chap. 8. 14. with Revel. 19. 3, 4.
Hallelujahs Crowned:
Thus happy were the Days of David.
Davidean Days,
Thus happy Schelom's, till His Fall deep lays
The Ground of future Woe Division of the Two and Ten Tribes.
the lasting Schism
Of Tribes united in the Holy Or Anointing of David and Solomon Types of Christ.
Chrisme.
The Church is still but One, for Truth, for God
Are only one, Churches under one Rod
Are therefore gathered; One, However styled
By the differing Names of People, where they are Filled;
Thus does the Church in Here begins the first of Ezekiels 390 Days lying on
his side, Ezekiel. 4. 5. Year of the World, about 3030.
Jeroboams share
Of the Ten Trib'd Kingdom, celebrate its Care
To be reputed; Those whose Lips, whose Knees
Never kissed, never bowed to Calvish Deities:
Thus does the Spouse in those unspotted Souls
With Reason mourn;

The Spouse. Here the Prophetical Cipher of Time, or of a Day for a Year
begins; or of Ezekiels 390 days, and so go on to the 40, and join to the 2300
Even. and Morn. and so reach the very Kingdom of Christ.
Jeroboam 's Reign.
While I in sable Garments.
Stoles
[I am black but comely]
Look black: Through coursest shades my Beauty shines,
My graceful Meine the thickest Clouds Refines;
[As the Tents of Kedar]
While Tyranny secludes me from my Love,
Shrin'd in his Temple; Grant, The Tents of Kedar and the Curtains of Solomon
were the fittest Representation that could be chosen to set out the divided
state of the ten Tribes from the Two: For while there was a true Church among
them, they were as the Curtains of Solomon, they had Communion with the Temple,
and yet they were also as Kedars Tents, by their distance from it and its
Worship.
I seem to move
[As the Curtains of Solomon]
Like Kedars Tents, a likeness of Heathenish Worship.
Kedars Tents, yet whilst my Worship's Pure,
[Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, look not on me because I am black, because the Sun
has looked upon me]
Still Scheloms Solomon's Curtains of true Worship.
Curtains as my Guard ensure
My Chaste Embraces; Let no scornful Eye
Dwell on my tawn'd discolored Complexion.
Physnomy.
To Jerusalem.
Salem's Daughters do I now appeal,
That they all rigid Censures would repeal,
'Cause near All Idolatry looked that way to the Sun.
Baal-Sun, I Am placed; Too close his Beams
[My Mothers Daughters were angry with me, They made me the keeper of the
Vineyards, my own vineyard I have not kept.]
Have played upon me, The Sun looking upon, etc. is a very lively Emblem of an
endeavor to seduce to Idolatry, and when it was done by the Tribes under the
same Covenant of Religion, it is most fitly expressed by Angry Daughters of the
same Mother, setting the true Church among them to keep other Vineyards to
neglect its own Vineyard; that is, its state in the true Church, and to be of a
false Church.
in his scorching Gleams
The angry Tribes have set me, to enforce my Care
Of Vineyards, Churches wild, and strange, I dare
Not own; But Guardian of my only Own
Idolatry encircul'd with a Jeroboam and his ten Tribes.
Crown
Forbids me, Oh may this deep'^st Claim
[Tell me O Thou whom my Soul loveth]
To latest Ages sound, and Purge my Name.
The Spouse, the true Servants of God among the Tribes desire to know, whether
they should set up a Church state among themselves, in that division of the
Kingdom, to worship God in.
Tell me, my Love, Thou deep Love of my Soul,
[Where thou feedest, where thou make thy stock to rest at noon]
From thy own Lips I Would hear't; No feigned Any loose Writing; like Tradition
compared with the written Word.
Escroul
Shall me seduce, when superstitious Rage
Pursues like Noontide Beams, and would engage
All to it self; My Love, where is it then
[For why should I be as one that turns aside by the Flocks of thy Companions
(false shepherds)] For why should I be as one that turns aside, etc. The
sense is, what the holy Souls among the ten Tribes should do when Jeroboam
forbad them the Temple.

Thoud'st have thy Flock to Feed, and Rest? For when
I would not lewdly stray, and Prostitute
What Is Sacred to thy self at the false Suit
Of those would be thy Rivals, I Am in fear
How to secure my Faith and Love, and where
I ought to wait thy Presence; Tell me now,
What I, my Love, from Thee alone would know.

The King. The Answer of Direction is, To do all they can to keep close to the
Church of God, and the Temple at Jerusalem, being so fixed by God as to be the
only place of true Public Worship: and it shows, That where Worship can be
true and pure, the most Public and United is best. This is signified by the
Footsteps of the Flock, and the shepherds Tents, or the Priests Residences in
the Temple at Jerusalem, in Attendance upon which they were to bring up their
Children.
Oh fairest Beauty of the Female Race,
Thy Chastness, not thy Ignorance I Grace, [If thou know not, O thou fairest
among women.]

For since thy Faith thy Love led by my word
Is true to me, thy Savior, Husband, Lord,
If thou know not what easily may be known;
As where my Word is, there is my Flock alone,
So where thou find'st my Flock to numbers swell,
And where my Shepherds in their fixed Tents dwell [Go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the flock, and feed thy sheep besides the shepherds tents]

There do I choose my Rest; with two, or three,
(Where with my Word more cannot) yet I Will Be:
Thou know Salem has my Temple now
Its Chambers, as with Tents, my Priests endow:
My Flock is folded there, whose frequent Print
Guides thee, the Shepherds Tents thy motions stint,
Where, as by Natures instinct thy soft Kids
May learn to Feed, as Holy Order bids.

Chorus. The ten Tribes have only this short Description of their state, being
by degrees loft from the true Church, till they are Restored, as those ten
Tribes, at the approach of Christ's glorious Kingdom, wherein they are
described, chap. 8. 5. and Ezekiel. 37.
This is the Image of the Ten-Trib'd state,
Till it is so long Assyrian Its banishment from its own Land, ever since the
Assyrian Captivity, 2 Kings 17.
exulate,
But as to Judah's Scepter-bearing Tribe,
And to the Church in that, thus does describe
This Holy Song: What the Sovereign Powers are,
As such, it does bespeak the Church; with Care
It Is Beauty's yet secured; And the Kings Love
It still is duly styled; Nothing does move
That Character; A Priestly Kingdom it
Is This Song therefore wholly exercised upon the two Tribes and Levites with
them; among which the Spouse and Church of Christ is described according to
each King of David's House, and his Religious or Corrupt Reign. But when they
are Bad, their Corruptions are as much hid as may be, to preserve the Grace of
this Song of Love.
made by Christ, so must its Beauty sit
To such Portraictures, as its Princes Reigns
Deserve; while richer Blood yet fills its Veins,
Then by its Counterfeits is seen; when ill,
To give them yet with Grace approves the skill;
To these plain shades the King too's pleased to stoop
Himself, that under them his Spouse may not droop:
Distinct the Kings are set, who are the Spouses joy;
Whose As current Coin, so were the pure Reigns.
sterling Reigns are all of pure alloy;
These in their Order, but those ranked between
Who were the Bad, that the Good may be their screen,
Wrapped up in short to heal the Churches wrong,
This Be the Key to the Ciphers of this Song:
But The Spouse in Rehoboams time is uncouthly to the Grace of such a Song
compared to a company of horses in Pharaohs chariot, and yet with great Grace to
Rehoboam's Reign, as a new source
Of Time to fix, and guide the certain course
Must have its single shade, and though not fine
(Blessed Spouse) to sort the Beauty, that is Thine
Yet by its service, it must Recompense
Its Uncouth disagreement to Loves sense.

The King. Rehoboam's Reign.
[I have compared thee, O my Love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh's chariots]
Oh how am I, my Love, surpised to see
Thy The two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin united under David's Family.
Two-trib'd Judah's low Shishaks Servants, 2 Chro. 12. 8.
servility,
As if in Triumph Pharaoh-Shishak's state
Were Chariotted by thy A Power of any two united.
Duumvirate
Of Tribes, as lofty Steeds are curbed and bowd
To serve such proud Grandezza; this black Cloud
Encloses thee, my Spouse, and dwells upon
Thy Glory under Schelom's Less-wise Rohoboam.
Son.
The rest of the Kings Reigns, and their Symbols here are so plain, that the
Compare of their History and the Expressions of the Song, are as an Exposition
upon them.
Asa's Reign.
But I, my Love, am Ravished with the change
That Asa's brighter Days bring on; The Range [Thy Cheeks are comely with Rows
of Jewels, Thy Neck with Chains of Gold.]

Of Grace, and Beauty on thy Cheeks, like rows
Of Jewels, from whence Jewels bearing the likeness of Turtles. 2 Chronicles. 15.
chastest Luster grows:
The Wreaths of the Holy League, like Golden chains
Twine round thy Neck, guarding thy Azure Veins:
His Reformation purged off the Soil
That had so deep Attaint'd the Sacred Oil;
Divine Favors shall soon Remark Thy Zeal
Of Purity; Victory and Public Weal
Shall be like Golden Borders, whose grave site [We will make Thee Borders of
Gold, with Studs of Silver]

Enliv'd with Silver Stars shall sparkle Light;
The Medal of thy Well-mix'd Reformation
Is Peace, and Glory's Concert through thy Nation.

The Spouse. 2 Chronicles. 17. c. 19. etc.
Jehoshaphat's Reign.
To Thee, my Princely Love, I thus rej'yne,
Blessed be thy Favor, blessed thy Grace Divine;
For while thy Table condescends so low,
My Spicknard feels the Virtue, and does flow [While the King sits at his
Table My Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof.]

In Streams so free, that Judah's utmost Bounds
Find the Attractive, Echo back the sounds
Of Truth; while the A costly Ointment, sending out its smell, resembling pure
Religion.
Spikenard's Effluxes fly,
And make returns to Thee by The desire of things to their own kind.
Sympathy.

Chorus. This is the state of Things, while Asa's Son
The Good Jehoshaphat, ascends the Throne.

The Spouse. But now, my highest Love, a blacker frame
Of things I sing, under thy Royal Name;
While wicked Ahab's Ahazia, Joash, Amazia.
Line create a Night
Of Their Reign omitted in the Genealogy of Jesus Christ, Matt 1. 8.
Inter-reign in Sacred Rolls: Delight
In thy Pure self, becomes my only stay,
Without the Kingly Types to underlay
My Thoughts; Lodged 'twixt my Breasts, like rich Perfume*
[A Bundle of Myrrh is my wellbeloved to me, He shall lie all Night betwixt my
breasts]
Of Myrrh shall lie thy Oil, till Thou resume
My Kings into thy Omitted -- As if there had been no Kings betwixt Jehoram and
Vzziah.
Genealogy;
Of Myrrh, I say, Thy Discipline and Correction.
of thy Pedagogy
Fit Emblem; whose wise Rod chastises Sin
With Mercy; thus Myrrhs sweetest Odours win
The enticed Smell, while bitter Relishes.
Gustoes chide
The too bold Taste, and Appetite deride.
The Spouse goes on.
As I my Love have modestly conveyed,
In least offensive terms, what would upbreid
[My Love is to me as a bundle of Camphire [Cypress] in the Vineyards of
Hen-gedi]
Our Pleasure in those three Attainted Kings;
With Awes so of my Love, my Sorrow sings
Their Reigns, Abijam, Joram, Abaz, Manasseh, (before repentance) Amon, their
worst Reigns.
Whose Character is much too foul
For Holy Love in Crystal Airs to Enroul,
Except Attoned in their worst Ferment
By those of Vzziah, Jotham, Amaziah, their better Reigns.
some, though not the richest scent,
Whose A Shrub, of some, though not of so precious Scent, growing in Judaea.
Cypress is the Nobler cause it grows,
And with A place of choicest Vineyards.
Hen-Gedies Vines its Odor flows;
For the rich Soil of the Holy Land does raise
The Virtue of its Shrubs, if any Praise
Of true Religion shall in them be found,
Though not with David's Purity they are Crowned.

The King. Hezekiah's Reign.
But now the Scene is changed, my Love's all Fair,
And only Fair, no Clouds near to Impair ]Behold thou art fair, my Love,
Behold thou art fair, Thou have Doves Eyes]

Thy Beauty; But thy Eyes are Chaste and Clear
As Doves; No Idols Antic look.
Grimace dares appear;
Thus Hezekiah's well Reformed State
Thy Beauties Fame to Ages does dilate.

The Spouse. Josiah's Reign.
My best Beloved, the Praise of all is Thine,
Thine is the Glory, while the Comfort's mine; [Behold thou art fair, my
Beloved, Also our Bed is Green]

All Beauty I can own is Thine reflex'd,
As the Worlds Light is Heavens Ray's As an Arch of Light.
convex'd;
Thou dart'st those purest Splendors from thy Face,
Josiah's Holy Reign is from thy Grace;
Whose Early years, as Greens of the Verdant Spring
Give flourish to our Bed, and Pleasures bring,
Fresh as the Blossoms of his blooming Youth,
In purest Worship, and Research of Truth,
Which still his growing Years Strengthen.
consolidate [The Beams of our House are Cedars, our Rafters of Firr]

Firm as the Cedar Beams, those Trees of State,
And the Firr Rafters, which the Temples Pile
By his Repairing hand secured in File.

CHAP. II.
Chorus. THus far the Churches Sceptred Time is brought,
Guarded by 2 Chro. 34. 8.
Princes, and its Battles fought
The time of their most p^tent Kings, not subject to Heathen Princes.
By Absolute Supremes; The similitude taken from Ezekiel. 19. 10.
The feeble Tree,
As now Effete for Scepters 2 Kings c. 23. 31. c. 24. c. 25.
yields in After Josiah the Kingdom of Judah was held in Fealty of the Heathen
Princes of Egypt and Babylon.
Fee
The Crown to Egypts, Babels Princes; For to stem
The Tide her own sustain not; Ezekiel. 21. 26. 27.
The Diadem
At length from off The tottering State.
the Palsey'd Head was spurned
That Great Prophecy of Ezekiel began to be fulfilled in Zedekiah, and was
perfected at the coming of Shiloh, or soon after, in the destruction of all
show of Sovereignty by the Romans. And so it will continue till Christ's
Glorious Coming, when among his many Crowns He shall have this on his Head, as
highest of all.
By Heavens just Decree, thrice overturned;
Decreed so to remain; Till He shall come
Whose Right's recorded in the Sacred Tome;
And to that Rightful Prince the mournful Spouse,
Defenseless seeming, thus her Plaints does rouse;

The Spouse. The Reigns of Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, Zedekiah.
I am the The Rose of Scharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys are very
significant Resemblances of the Church in perpetual danger to be seized by
Heathen Princes, as those Flowers in a Field are by Beasts; yet the Rose having
some better Defense than the Lilly, shows the still decaying state of Power.
Rose in A fruitful Pasture in Bashan.
Scharon's open Field
[I am the Rose of Scharon, the Lilly of the Valleys]
Exposed to Danger, covered with no Shield,
Licked off by the Beast, whose undiscerning Nose
No odds makes 'twixt the Thistle and the Rose,
Except more easily crop'd; And yet its Beard
Of prickles warns the unwary Heard.
But more defenseless I, the Lilly like
The Vales along, no Weapon have to strike
The untaught Foot, trampling without offense
My Beauty, and unarmed Innocence.

The King. My Love, thou slipp'st the wisdom of my Care,
For while thy Native Guards thus leave thee bare,
[As the Lilly among the Thorns]
The The Heathen Nations compared to Beasts.
Brutal Nations have not yet the scope
To range upon Thee The Lilly surrounded with Thorns shows the Defense that
Heathen Princes gave the Church, one against another, as by balance of Power,
as even to this day we see in the World, weak States are in the way of
Emulation of stronger Princes one against another secured. This was an
admirable Method of Providence over the Church.
; For they Enterlope
One on another, wreathed by my hand,
Like Thorns around the Lilly, till they stand
As Defended as Breast-works in a Fortification by sharp Stakes.
Palizado'd on each side so strong, [So is my Love among the Daughters.]

That what may seem to press, shields thee from wrong.
The Daughters of the Nations pay defense,
Though unawares, to my Loves Excellence;
Surpassing them as Lillies do the Thorn,
Which take Defense but their Defense adorn:

The Spouse. My Dearest Love, by thee instruct'd I own
Thy Goodness, Wisdom, Power, all are shown
In this The Wise Order.
Economy of Guard; And I repay
Thy Love with Love of parallel Essay [As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the
Wood]

For as the The Apple Tree.
Tree whose Fruit, and not whose It is most plain the Apple Tree is a most
pregnant Emblem of a low, yet pleasant Government, even as the Cedars are of a
High, Supreme, Royal Government.
State
Exalts its Name in the Trees Popular Government.
Democrate
So now Kingly Government.
thy Cedar-Rule torn up by The Babylonish Army.
storm
Is lowered to a From Kings to Rulers, Zerobbabel, Nehemiah, etc.
Presidential Form,
Yet with most Thankful sense, I praise the Grace
Of Rule, but just removed from The Government of the People.
Populace; [So is my beloved among the Sons]

For this dwarf Government still leads to Thee
Great King of Kings made by Gods Supreme Decree.
August'st Decree
How pleasant therefore is its shade, how sweet its Fruit?
Both swelling with Delights that draw pursuit!

Chorus. This is the Prospect while the Scepter Val'd
Till Judah's Legislator even failed.

The Spouse goes on. The Captivity.
Nay, let me publish through Gaths Streets his Praise,
Through Their Confession in the midst of the Heathen Nations.
Askelon, and Babel, may these Lays
Sound to his Glory; That while Ezekiel. 1. 1.
Chebar's Streams
Me a Thrall'd Captive knew, The presence of Christ in his Church is Elegantly
described by Entertainment in a low Vault and Cellars of Wine, while it was in
Captivity.
(I Sing no Dreams)
What seemed a Dungeon was a The Wine Cellar.
Vault of Wine,
His Grace with me deigned so much to Or to Rest.
recline.
[His Banner over me was Love]
The Streaming Ensigns of High Babels Pride
Were Banners of his Love to me; As Scarlet Streamers. From Cyrus (the most
Eminent Type of Christ, and the only of any Heathen Prince called Messiah)
till the very Glorious Appearance of Christ the Churches Condition is full of
Varieties and continual Changes, of better and worse Condition.
Twice died,
Which flowed me round; But finding some Retreat
Of his Loved shade, the Sunbeams me su^beat;
That swooning, sinking, with a Dying Breath
[Stay me with Flagons]
I beg the Spirits, that recall from Death;
In liberal Flagons; Haste the Golden Fruit,
[Comfort me with Apples]
The Apples of that Tree, that may recruit
My Life near flown; For in Love's Agony
[For I am sick of Love]
If in the Moment not Relieved, I Dye.
As him I importuned, I found him come,
Whom my Soul Loves; I found him coming Home;
[His left Hand is under my Head, His right Hand does Embrace me]
His left Hand bore my My Fainting Swooning state.
Apoplectic Head,
His right Embracing me Love's Circle led.
Then by the Lawless The Roes and Hinds, meaning the Pagan Powers ready to be
Cruel and Savage.
Heroes of the Field,
That now, (how sad is it?) our Scepter weild,
[I charge you, oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of
the Field, that ye stir not up nor awake my Love till he please]
And did not This his Goodness interpose
Would soon with Rampant Paws us interclose;
I Salem's Daughters with deep Vows contest
By no Offense to startle my Loves Rest;
And while he pleases let this be our Cell,
So long Love's Place of Retirement.
Hermitage, and not a Hell.

Chorus. Thus to those Captive Years twice thirty five
In Womb of Grace, the Spouse was kept alive;
But now its liberty from Cyrus was called Messiah or Gods Anointed.
Cyrus, Type
Of Great Messiah, played in various stripe
Is checkered white and black, till he shall Chase
By his own Rays the shades that veiled his Face. In the very lowest of the
Captivity, there were notable Tokens of Gods Presence, as of Wine, though in a
deep Cellar or Vault; such was Ezekiel's Prophecy, Daniel's Prophecy and
Exaltation, Nebuchadnezzar's Dream and Exaltation of God.
There was great Reason of fearing to offend in this Time, seeing his Goodness
turned those Lions, Tigers, and Wolves, into any degrees of mildness of Roes
and Hinds of the Field. The Awes therefore of their Salvageness was to keep
them from Murmuring and Repining at Gods Hand in their Captivity, and to wait
his appointed time: And this is thus Poetically Expressed, I Charge you, etc.


The Spouse goes on. The return of the Captivity.
But hark, the Alarm of my Beloved's Voice,
How quick it strikes? The very Skies Rejoice;
He held me while the The Captivity yet allowed Peace and Quiet.
gentle Vapors sealed [The Voice of my Beloved]

Me up in softest slumbers now Repealed;
He shrill Commands to quit my The Cell and the Mountains are opposed, one
signifying Captivity, the other Liberty.
Cell, and meet
Him on the Airy Mountains, where his Feet [Behold he comes leaping upon the
Mountains, skipping upon the Hills]

Rebound more nimbly, than The Earth it self seems to fly in the Airy leaps of
those Creatures.
the Roes, or Hearts
When the dull Earth flies from their youthful starts;
I know, this does my Fredom indicate,
From Babels Chains; For as The Churches moves upon the Mountains, in return
from Babel, are set out by the Motions of her Beloved; even as Christ is
Resembled with the Churches Condition.
his higher State [My Beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart; Behold he
stands behind our Wall; He looks forth at the Windows, showing himself
through the Lattise]

Submits, to what he Destines mine; So mine
With that he samples for me may well twine.
There Cannot be a more exact Description of the state of the Church, when
Cyrus Proclaimed its Liberty, Ezr. 1. And the Adversaries of Judah hindered the
Progress of Things till Darius, Ezr. 1. And Darius Retriv'd all Ezr. 5. and
Artaxerxes fully settled them in their former state, Ezr. 7. and throughout his
and Nehemiah's History.
But yet my Liberty's not all at once
For as those Hearts and Roes themselves do sconce
In coverts of the Walls, and stand at bay,
Through Windows peeping quick, and so away;
So do my Love's kind Visits, short, but brisk,
Half open first, bode me a freer Risque,

Chorus. And thus does Sacred History depaint
The Persian Edicts lively first, then faint,
Lost and revived; Till It seems on all accounts of Scripture and History most
probable Artaxerxes called Longimanus was by Esther the Son of Xerxes Ahasuerus
spoken of, Esth. 1. etc.
Esthers Royal Son
night Artaxerxes for our Solomon
Spoke once for all in his so Full decree
The Word here fully went forth according to Ezr. 6. 14. compared with Dan. 9.
23. 25.
Then 'twas Heavens word spoke out for Liberty.

The Spouse goes on. Artaxerxes last Decree, Ezr. 7.
For then my Love in Accents high and clear
Both spoke, and said aloud; My Fair, my Dear;
[My Beloved spoke and said unto me]
Rise thee my Love; Let no benumbed delay
One minute stay thee; Come, yea, come away;
[Rise up my Love and Fair one* come away]
For now're the sullen Glooms All the Tokens of the Spring are made use of to
set out this Liberty.
of Winter gone,
Its Clouds, its stormy Rains, see there are none;
[For lo the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone]
The Earth, its Carpets rich Embroy'ds with Green,
With Flowers, as Pearls enammell'd all between;
The chanting Birds, Natures sweet Harmony
Proclaim the Spring with their soft Heraldry;
[The Flowers appear on the Earth]
The Turtles modest moan now charms our Ears
With sounds of chastest Peace, and calms our Fears.
[The time of the Singing of Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is
heard in our Land]
The World of Trees warned by the budding Figs;
Equips The Summer is like the setting out of a Royal Navy.
the Summer, its Top gallant Rigs;
The twisting Vine swells out its clustered Grapes
Perfumed, adorned, with all their pretty Shapes:
[The Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vine with the tender
Grapes give a good smell]
All these, my Love, declare thy Spring-like state,
Usher thy Summer, and thy Joys dilate;
Haste then, my Love, haste with thy Captive Train,
Oh, why so slow? From Babel haste amain.

The King by himself. [Arise my Love my fair One, and come away]
Its I indeed, my Love, its I that Call
[O my Dove that art in the clefts of the Rock in the secret place of the
Stairs]
To thee, my Dove, whom the Rocks Clefts, The delay of the Jews returns is most
Elegantly set out by Clefts of Rocks, and secret Stairs; and by Haggai and
Zechariah were given out, and by Ezra and Nehemiah, the continued Calls of
Christ to come away.
enthrall,
Whom corners now infold, and secret stairs
Wind thee into this maze, which thee insnares;
[Let me hear thy Voice]
Oh let the melting Airs of thy By the Churches Voice and Countenance we may
understand the Order of the Temple Worship, so taken care of by Artaxerxes and
Ezra, commissioned by him.
sweet Voice
Flow in my Ears, no other has my Choice; There cannot be a clearer
Explanation of this part of the Song, than the compare of it with the History
of Ezra and Nehemiah.

[Let me see thy Countenance; for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is
comely]
Address me with thy Taking Physnomy,
None else Reports those Graces from my Eye.
But now our Vines begin to germinate,
The Fox-like Sanballat, Tobiah, etc. Nehem. 6.
envy does our Fruit regrate
And fain would Ravage it; But let us set, [Take us the Foxes, the little
Foxes, for our Vines have tender Grapes]

And wrap that subtle Kindred in our Net.

Chorus. How the All-seeing Spirit (that Divines
Things Future, as the Past) draws here the lines,
As they are drawn after by the Ezra the ready Scribe in the Law of God, Ezr. 7.
6.
ready Scribe;
And the Nehemiah the Tirshatha, Nehem. 7. 65. Who were Raised up by God under
the fore-nam'd King ^rtaxerxes, called Longimanus, to restore the Temple, and
the whole Order of the Jewish Law;
Tirshatha of the Royal Tribe,
Thus once, and twice, and once again the Voice
The Captives Called, ever the Ha'vre de Poiz
Of Just Obedience gained; They lay entwined*
In The closer Fetters of a servile Mind,
Till this unwearied Love thus sets them free
From double Chains of their Captivity;
Then did the Temple, Walls, and City Rise;
But While the foresaid Sanballat and Tobiah, by a Fox-like Cunning, pretended
to Build with them; as is to be seen in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
Fox-like Foes, as Builders in Disguise,
(So here the Royal Prophet Sings) durst Enterlope,
Till by great Schelom's Care their envious hope
Was vain, That pair of Worthies then Restored
The Temples Order, and the Pillars shor'd
Of Salem's Policy; During their days
The Gladded Spouse, thus Issues into Praise.

The Spouse. The settled state of the Church, under Ezra and Nehemiah.
The Circle is now Perfect, my Love mine,
By Faith I claim; and strait return This is the Circle, He is mine, I am His.
the Line [My Beloved is mine, and I am His]

Into it self, that I am His; and While
My State, though low, no Falseness does defile,
[He feeds among the Lillies]
As in a Feeding among the Lillies, represents the Churches pure state in
Faith, Worship, and Life, wherein Christ delights.
Field of Lillies white and pure,
When Nehemiah had settled the Jewish State according the Law of God, then was
this mutual Affiance betwixt Christ and the Church.
He takes Repast; and does himself ensure
[Vntill the Day break, and the shadows* fly away]
To me; The Church prays for the speedy returns of Christ, foreseeing times of
his Absence, as Daniel calls them, Troublous Times, which as Christ and his
Apostles, especially the Revelation assure us, are to continue till his Coming.
Till all Dark Veiles and Shades shall fly,
And vanish off from the Inlightn'd Sky,
And himself visible shall lead the Day,
[Turn my Beloved]
(Though I Foresee my Love sometimes away
Provoked by new Offense,) yet turn my Love,
Let not Thy absence a Desertion prove,
[And be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart on the Mountains of Bether, or
Division]
Be Thou like to the youthful Heart and Roe,
That cuts its hasty Motions to and fro:
So Traverse thou the Mountains that define
Each side of Time, as the As the Equinoctial-Line divides the Year into its
two halves of Summer and Winter, before each of which the Sun comes upon that
Line; so the two halves of the Worlds time, are in Cyrus divided into the times
of old, and the latter times.
Equinoctial-Line
Cuts into equal parts the Globe, so steer
Thy hasty steps around Times lower Sphere,
Those latter Gentile Times, that just commence
When Cyrus bears Messiah's Reference:
On this same mount of Time, There could not be a more Elegant Description of
the last half of time, then by the Mountains of Bether, and of the state of
that Time, as a time with Troubles, then by such a desire of Christ's sudden
Visits after some short Absences, nor of the end of it, then by Christ's
Glorious Appearance, then by Shades flying away, and the bright Morning Star
appearing, and shaded no longer by such waved Dicisions of Absence and
Presence, or of Eves and Morns.
like The last half is fitly signified by the Mountains of Bether, or of
Division and Dissection, viz. of time parted and cut asunder from its self, and
also divided betwixt Christ's Absence and Presence, as Eves and Morns.
Bethers Hill
Lets passing and repassing, see thee still;
The end of this last half of time is, that all shades fly away, and the Day of
the Glorious Kingdom of Christ appears.
Till Thou bright Morning Star without a Cloud
Shall spread the Beams so bright, no shade can shroud.

The Chorus. Here part the Whole Time being compared to a Globe, the two halves
may be compared to two Hemispheres, or half Globes, while Eternity, as before
and after Time, flows round the whole Globe of Time.
Hemispheres of Times whole Globe,
Encompassed with the Endless flowing Robe
Of vast Eternity; From Times first Spring
Out of that Womb, till Cyrus (greatest King
Of all the Gentile Race, whom sacred Fame Esaias. 45. 1.

Records, alone Crowned with Among all the Heathen Kings named in Scripture,
Cyrus alone is called Gods Anointed.
Messiah's Name)
Flow The Years from the Creation, when the Womb of Eternity brought forth
Time, computed first by the Patriarchs Lives to the Flood; thence to Abraham's
Sojourning at Terah's Death; thence to the going out of Egypt; thence to
Solomon beginning the Temple; thence to Solomon's Death; thence to Cyrus by
Ezekiel's 390, and 40 Prophetic Years, arise just to 3459 years, as will
appear on Trial.
Years in thousands three, hundreds twice two;
And unites fifty nine in plainest View,
Of Numbered Numbers are Numbers plainly set down in the Scripture Calendar, or
Account of Time.
numbered Numbers, if we will allow
(As does the Sacred Calendar a-vow)
Ezekiel's Ezekiel's 390 Years accounted by the Reigns of the Kings of Israel
till their Captivity (as they ought to be, because this Sin of Israel was born
in them,) then by the Kings of Judah, till the City Smitten; then by the 14
years after the City Smitten, rise exactly so many at the Vision of the New
Jerusalem, which Vision accomplished, they shall be Restored, and their Sin no
longer borne. The 40 Years of Judah, being the remainder of the 70 Years
Captivity from that Vision, run to their Redemption by Cyrus, when their Sin no
longer borne, and so ought to be joined to the 390, as is said in the Verses.
Forty to draw out the length Ezekiel. 4, 5, 6.

Of his three hundred ninety from the strength
Of twelve Tribes parted into Two and Ten.
Thus Reason does enforce the Time to Ken,
Till Salem's Temple in new Measures seen
Drawn by * Ezechiel's Man of Brass had been; Ezekiel. 41. 1. etc.

And further forty Years themselves had worn
When Judah's Sin was now no longer born;
For Cyrus Type of Great Messiah's Grace
Did now just introduce Times last half space;
From Cyrus draw Times second half, 'twill flow
In thousands two, and hundreds three a-row,
Measured by Daniel's 2300 Even. Morn. and the thousand Years make the other
half of Time, together with the little Time after Satan loosed at the end of
the thousand Years.
Daniel's Eves and Morns, that shoot
Days into Years, as Prophets may compute,
And so the thousand Years of The thousand Years are an entire Sabbatism
without Rent.
Sabbatism
They reach, when one blessed State shall know no Schism.
The thousand Years are an entire Sabbatism without Rent.
Thus Eves and Morns at first made Days t^^ice three
Of the All-potent Work, and then left free
Undoubtedly Evenings and Mornings making Days, are taken by the Spirit of God
in Daniel from it self in Moses, Leading the six Evenings and Mornings to the
Seventh Day or Sabbath: So these 2300 Ev. Morn. lead to the great Sabbatism of
the thousand Years.
The Seventh for a Sabbaths sacred Rest;
Thus ran times The Beginning.
East and thus shall run its The End.
West,
For the The World has been generally supposed to consist of six Millenaries
or Thousands answerable to the six Days of Creation, and the Seventh thousand
to be a Sabbath.
six thousandth almost spent in Toil
To the Sevenths Rest the whole is but a Foyl;
According to general Computation, an Objection may arise; The sixth
thousandth, or Millenary, wants two hundred forty one of the thousand; To this
may be Answered, 1. Christ tells us, the last time of the Tribulation of the
Vials shall be shortened for the Elects sake, when Philadelphia or the true
Church shall be preserved from the Temptation that shall come on all the Earth,
2. We know not what time may be after the thousand Years, as in Recompense of
that shortened Time.
If we half-witted then create a Doubt,
How the Sixth Millenary turns about,
When Merge yet hundreds two and forty one;
If us no other Answer can atone,
Does not our Lord in Prophecy cut short
Matthew. 24. 22.
The The last end of Time Christ foretold shall be shortened.
curtaill'd Fag of Time? lest the Effort
Of Evils then so strong should reach t'Affect
With overflowing Vials his Elect;
Then what is the space of Time, how ever short,
Revel. 20. 3. 8, 9.
We must beyond the thousand Years Transport,
Lies secret from created Minds, but still
May what was wanting to Times measure fill.
Now of these Eves and Morns, the first sev'nty five,
By these repeated Calls, the Spouse retrive
From foreign Lands, become too much her The Jews were too much naturalized to
those Heathen Countries, that they needed many Call home to their own.
own
Which Daniel calls in brief, Dan. 9. 25. The Commandment going forth. 6 Things
given with great Life, and in short, as by the Art of Perspective.
this Word All those Calls were the Commandment going forth till all was
finished by the Commandment of the God of Israel, of Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes
King of Persia. Ezra 6. 24.
forth gone:
From hence At the Word perfectly gone forth the seventy Weeks began, viz.
Artaxerxes his seventh Year.
the sev'nty Weeks Tide strait along,
So lively's the perspective of this Song;
Wherein the Spouses troublous Times most swell
In Black Antiochus Epiphanes, that Famous Tyrant over the People of God, whose
Tyranny is Related, 1 Maccab. c. 1, etc. to his Death, and by Josephus.
Epiphanes, The most eminent and renewed Trouble of those seventy Weeks was the
Cruel Tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, to which this Song now goes on.
as now She Will tell.

CHAP. III.
The Spouse. Antiochus Epiphanes, Defiling the Temple, and taking away the
Daily Sacrifice, is now set out in this following Canticle.
Although the Jews, after their Captivity met with many Troubles, and were a
low Tributary Government, as before declared by the Apple Tree; Yet there was
no Calamity from the days of Cyrus till Christ, so renowned by Daniel's
Prophecy, and Explained by the Maccabean History, and the History of Josephus,
provided by God on purpose, as for that Tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes: and its
so Renowned, that it might be a Type of Antichrist.
HOw quick the The Night of Adversity and Troubles.
Night o'ertakes me, yet in Solomon's Temple was the Bed.
Bed
I thought to find that The Enjoyment of Christ.
Princely Loved Head: [By Night on my Bed I sought Him whom my Soul loveth]

Whom my Soul clasps in dearest Ties, but He
Was thence withdrawn, the Temple could not be
Our Bed in this Black Time, when violate [I sought Him but I found Him not]

By the Bestial Fury of Who according to Daniel's Prophecy, cast down the
Sanctuary by his profane Tyranny, 1 Mal. c. 1. etc.
Antioch's Hate;
Our ravished Bed could then no longer ease [I will rise and go about the City
in the Streets, and the broad Ways]

My Thoughts so full of Anguish, nor appease
My boiling Heart one minute, I start out
From its now-loathed The Temple so defiled could not be used for Sacrifice;
But as Dan. foretold the Daily was taken away, Dan. 8. 13.
Shroud, and search about
The Streets and open'st Ways, if in the Throng [I will seek Him whom my Soul
loveth]

I meeting Him Remonstrate might my Wrong:
But Oh, I found The Multitude were corrupted by Fear and Flatteries, according
to Dan. 11. 31, 32. Compared with the Maccabean History*
the Public had betrayed [I sought Him, but I found Him not]

Their Faith to the Tyrant, I no longer stayed
In such a Fruitless search, The Priests whose Lips preserve Knowledge, of
which Judas Maccabeus was a Principal.
the Watchmen I apply, [The Watchmen that go about the City found me]

Who are in Trust such Questions to unty;
The sacred Guard my Love fixed to their Bounds,
My quick Enquiries visit all their Rounds, [I said, saw ye Him whom my Soul
loves?]

With this one Question; Have ye seen the Him
The Him, whom my Soul Love's, that only Him?
[It was but a little I passed from them]
They durst not The Violence of the Tyranny of Antiochus was so great, there
was no public Ministry.
loudly Speak, but silent Guides
Of Truth they gave me unto him, who slides
[But I saw him whom my Soul loveth]
Into my Chaste Embrace; Just as I moved
From that so happy Watch; Him my Soul loved
I Yet the Action, and the Example was such, and the Zeal for Truth, and
Resistance to that Corruption so bold, that Christ soon appeared, 1 Mac. c. 1.
soon espied, By Faith and Love I hold,
[I held him, and would not let him go]
Armed with my Prayers, strongest when most bold;
And Jacob wrestled with the Angel, and would not let him go, Genesis 2. 32. 28.
etc.
Jacob-like my Love I Would not let go
There is nothing so Remarkable in prophecy as the Re-settling Jerusalem, after
the Tyranny of Antiochus, so that on that Account the Church is said to hold
Christ, and not to let him go till the Incarnation; for notwithstanding the
after Troubles of the Jews, the Public Worship of God was not disturbed till
the very coming of Christ.
Once from me more, till he had Blessed me so,
[Vntil I brought him into my Mothers House]
That humane Nature should the The Body of Christ, representing his Humane
Nature, He Calls a Temple, John 2. 19.
Temple be,
Where I might Worship His Divinity.
[And into the Chambers of her that conceived me]
Thus dwelt the Word in Flesh, as in the There cannot be a more significant
Representation of the Incarnation, than of Christ brought into the House of the
Churches Mother, and into the Chambers of Her that Conceived the Church, that
is Eve the Mother of all Living, from whom the Blessed Virgin descended, and
out of whose Chambers Christ came so peculiarly.
House
My The Promise was especially vested in the Seed of the Woman, of which Eve
was the Mother.
Mother bred Poor Me; Here me t'Espouse
In Promise first he graciously did deign;
As The humane Nature of Christ was as private Chambers.
private Chambers, here His Mystic Reign
In Christ began his Spiritual Reign in the Form of a Servant, in the Preaching
the Gospel.
Servants humble Form began; In this He In that Nature he Ascended on High.
climbed
A Glory yet not seen, but duly timed
For its Appearance: While thus my Love rests
[I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of
the Field]
Contented not to stir, my Care contests
Anew, You Salem's Daughters, by the Hinds
And Roes of the Field, Gentiles whom nothing binds,
But my Love's Power; Which if You displease,
[That ye stir not up, nor awake my Love till he please]
These Roes and Hinds, as Wolves and Tigers seize
You as their Prey; Oh then let no There was no Offense of Christ so great at
that time, as not to wait the Messenger of the Covenant coming into his Temple,
and aright to prepare for Him, who was as a Refiners Fire to Purify the Sons
of Levi, to which the fore-nam'd Sects were such Enemies.
The Great Offense, that at this time might provoke Christ, was not waiting for
the true Messiah, and disacknowledging the true Signs of Him, by those
prejudiced Sects among them, viz. the chief Priests, Scribes, Pharisees,
Sadducees, and Sanhedrim of the Jews.
Offense
Till my Love please Him waken, and Incense:
Let no false Sects presume to Antedate
My True Love's coming, and awake Debate
'Twixt Him and Salem's Daughters till He come
An humble Shepherd to his Flock, and bring them Home.

The Incarnation of Jesus Christ, set out by the Chorus of Saints.
While seven Seventy or seven Tens of Weeks, making 490 Years.
Decads of Prophetic Weeks
Had About the end of the sixty fifth of the seventy Weeks, Christ was born.
almost run their Course, what Time is as it were Ambitious of the most noble
Productions.
all Time seeks,
Some noble Product, that may guild its Sphere
Does here Ennoble it; One 'gins to appear,
No The greatest Production Time can hitherto boast of, is, the Coming of
Christ in the Flesh.
Age can second; The Lord whom you seek shall suddenly come into his Temple;
But who may abide? etc. The Desire of all Nations, so was the Reception of
Christ's Birth by the Angels, the Shepherds, and other holy Persons in the
Gospel History.
Wonder, Fear, Desire
Are each its Harbingers; Natures dull Fire
Can One of the greatest Mysteries of Religion, is, God Manifest in the Flesh.
no such Birth Refine and exalt Nature unto a higher pitch.
Calcine; Who can declare this Generation? The Word was made Flesh, John 14. 5.
Incarnation
Empales this Mysterious Generation,
All vulgar Style's too low; Schelom speaks in the name of the Saints.
Schelom Wise King
Inspired Divinely, does this Secret sing
By us, who with profoundest Reverence
Of Love, and Wonder, thus Sing With Triumph.
Caroll our Sense.
[Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness]
As nothing followed more fitly according to Daniel's Prophecy, than the
Incarnation of Christ, (Messiah on the troublous Times of Antiochus) so all
humane Wit and Fancy may be appealed to, whether any thing can be more fitly
expressed.
Who Is A Question of Holy Admiration
this that comes as from a In regard of the Solitude and Meanness in which
Christ was born and lived.
Wilderness,
Unknown and unattended? Who Will confess
To Glorys hid'd? Triumphant Pillars of Divine Knowledge, Power, Grace, but
covered with the Smoke of outward Poverty, and the malicious slanders of the
Pharisees.
Pillars indeed arise
[Like pillars of Smoke]
With him, but still of Smoke, which does disguise
The flame of Either; oiled yet with Perfumes
[Perfum'd with Myrrh and Frankincense]
Of Myrrh, of Incense Richly yet perfumed with all Heavenly Graces.
Frank, of all the Gumms,
And Powders, that from far the Merchants bring:
His very Infancy was Homag'd by the three Magi or Wise Men from far with Gold,
Myrrh, and Frankincense, as an Emblem hereof, but the Glory of his own Divinity
far excelled.
Three Sages Homag'd thus the Infant King:
[With all the Powders of the Merchant]
Far Richer yet in*s native Glory He,
The Treasures of his own Divinity.
Thus rose the Miracles of his whole Life,
Where Cloud and Luster still maintained a strife:
The outside Meanness, and the inside Glory
Enrich the whole most mysterious story.
[Behold His Bed, which is Solowons]
Consider well the The humane Nature may be compared to a Bed, where the
Divinity lodged as in a Temple.
Bed, where the Word lay,
'Twas Schelom's humane Nature, which had stay
Truly Divine; Angelic Angels continually attended upon Christ, as his
constant Guard; when He brings his first Begotten into the World, He said,
Let all the Angels of God Worship Him.
Guards attend,
Who can this Sacred Bed safer defend,
[Threescorevaliant Men are about it]
Then Schelom's threescore Valiant Israelites;
[Every Man has his Sword on his Thigh, because of Fear in the Night]
Whom Skill and Valor shield against all affrights,
While they armed at all points defy the Dread,
Wherewith the Night can threat the Royal Bed.
[King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the Wood of Lebanon, he made the
Pillars thereof of Silver, the bottom thereof of Gold, the covering of it of
Purple, the midst thereof being paved with Love for the Daughters of Jerusalem]
This Schelom, God with us, His Body framed
So rich with all the Graces, that are named,
That Schelom's Solomon's Royal Chariot is described with all its rich and
costly Materials from top to bottom.
Chariot of sweet Lebans Wood,
Which on its Silver Pillars firmly stood,
Founded in Gold, and with the Purple crowned
Is Emblem faint this Mystery to expound:
But yet which all Types still excels in Grace,
While Schelom Solomon's Chariot was adorned with the most beautiful pictures
of the Daughters of Zion, to express his Love to them.
Salem's Daughters did enchase
In beauteous Images throughout this State,
That thus Triumphing He might celebrate
His love to them; This was a faint Image of the Excellent Humane Nature of
Christ, in which, even to the Death of the Cross; He bare the Names of the
People on his Heart, and offered himself a whole Burnt-offering for them
through the greatness of his Love.
Great Schelom was inspired
With hotter Flames, which his whole Body fired
In^^ Sacrifice to Justice, while He bore
These Salems Daughters on his Heart, and wore
Their Names wrought into his with Love so high,
No parallel can ever be found to Vye:
And in this Chariot, thus inflamed He rode
In The Crown of Christ is that which he received at his Resurrection, when he
was Anointed with the oil of Joy above his Fellows, (as Solomon was Crowned
with highest Joy,) a Pledge of his Eternal Kingdom, and Espousal to his Church;
Revel. 19. 1.
Triumph over Hell, it captive showed; [Go forth, oh ye Daughters of Zion,
Behold King Solomon with the Crown]

And as the As Bathsheba received the Crown from David for Solomon, so God made
good his Promise to Eve, the Seed of the Woman, etc. by this Crown of Christ's
Resurrection and Kingdom.
Royal * Bathsheba received
The Crown from David's Mouth, that Schelom wreathed,
With which to Salem's Daughter He espoused
Himself, and swelling Bowls of joy Carous'd.
Thus Zion's Daughters, Holy Souls, come forth
From meaner Thoughts to those of higher Worth,
Behold King Schelom risen from the Dead, [Wherewith His Mother Crowned Him in
the Day of his Espousals, and in the Day of the Gladness of his Heart]

A Crown of Majesty Empales his Head:
His Mother Crowned Him; For to the Woman's Seed
By promise of the Father 'twas decreed:
And yet his greatest Joy is to Espouse
His Church, till He his Crowned Glory shows;
In Seal of which, this Eulogy of praise,
That follows next, is like a Crown of Rays,
Set on his Spouses Head by his own Hand,
Whose Act no Gate of Hell can countermand.

CHAP. IV.
The King. A Description of the Apostolic Church in its Primitive Excellency,
and in the Calling of the Gentiles.
How admirably does this Description fit the Apostolic Church, which had
excellency of Beauty, sufficiency of Spiritual Food, signified by Teeth of
purest Cleanness and Unity, as washed and even shorn; Durable clothing Garments
of Justification and Sanctification, numerous Offspring in the multitude of
the Converts.
BEhold thy self, my Love, the Fair, To express singular Fairness, the Word is
doubled.
the Fair
[Behold thou art Fair my Love, behold thou art Fair]
Alone; my Blood, my Spirit, give the Air
Of thy great Beauty, while thy Doctine pure,
Thy Worship Chaste a holy Life assure:
[Thou have Doves Eyes]
So that thy Eyes the Crystal do excel
Of the unspotted Doves, and glistring swell
[Thy Hair is a Flock of Goats that appear fron Mount Gilead]
From out thy Locks, whose modest shade does Grace
In mean Attire the Beauties of thy Face;
That while no Art does Curl in form thy Hair,
Of Pomp, or Ceremony; It Is like the Glare
Of The Apostolic Purity without outward Pomp or Splendour, was covered like
the Ark with Goats Hair, despised by Jews, as not having the Signs of a present
Kingdom; by the Gentiles as Foolishness; but was indeed Expression of the
Wisdom and Power of God.
Gilead's Goats; The too Censorious Eye
Of Jew and Gentile scorns thy Polity:
But I that value by their in side Things,
Can see thy Graces through those Coverings:
Thus clouded were the Glories of the Ark
When the same Goats hair looked so rude, so dark.
[Thy Teeth are as a Flock which come up from the Washing]
The fruitful The Rumination or Chewing the Food of Life, to prepare it for
others by Expounding the Old Testament, and farther Revealing the New, was the
Excellency of the Apostolic Church.
Mastication of my Word
Is like the gainful Flock, that serves its Lord
With double Pure in all Holiness of Doctrine, Worship, and Life, and even
without Ambition, or loving Pre-eminence. Blessed with abundant Power of
Converting Grace.
Off*spring, and the lusty Fleece
That falls so white, so even in a Piece;
And when so even shorn, when washed so white,
The Flock appears one entire sheet of Light.

The Chorus. Now This whole Flock of Teeth, so white, so shorn,
Speaks Apostolic Power in equal borne;
And does expose the falsehood of the Dream,
How far are all things in the Gospel from such a forged Supremacy of the
Apostle Peter; observe his Fall, his being Reproved, Gal. 2. his humble Style
Compresbyter or equal Elder. 1 Christ's Blood in the Gospel Ministry, is as
Rahabs Scarlet Line twined within it, as a Pledge of Redemption from Wrath.
That Peter in that Order was Supreme:
By all with Peace, and Parile order fenced
The Food of Life was equally dispensed;
And equal was the Fruit, For barren none
Was found, with all so great a Glory shone.

The King goes on. My expiating Blood so soundly Taught,
Within thy Lips like Scarlet Thread is wrought:
My Cross those Graces gives thy Speech That Sense, [Thy Lips are like a thread
of Scarlet]

I desire to know nothing but Christ, and him Crucified; Not the Wisdom of this
World, but the Wisdom which God ordained before the World to our Glory.
That shrinks the Pagan Wisdom's Eloquence
To empty sounds; The many Seeds of the Pomegranate, the Emblem of Wisdom,
yield a most pleasant Juice.
Thy Temples are the seat [And thy Speech is comely]

Of soundest Judgment, which prepares the Meat [Thy Temples are like a piece of
Pomegranate within thy Locks]

During to life, like Food of Pomegranate,
In which Seeds, as of Life, accumulate:
The strict and holy Order of the Apostolic Church, that as the best state of
the Church of Ephesus, the Type of that Church Apostolic, tried those that
said they were Apostles, and were not, but found them Liars, and that could not
bear them that were Evil, were like Locks gracing and guarding the Temples.
Those enterweaves of Holy Order like
The well-curl'd Locks, all falsehood that Repique, [Thy Neck is as the Tower of
David]

Secures thy Temples Graces, and thy Neck,
Which Those thousand Shields and Bucklers most fitly resemble the mighty Power
of Miracles, Gifts of Tongues, and that severe Apostolical Rod, which the
Apostle Peter showed in the Death of Ananias and Sapphira, and the Apostle
Paul's delivery to Satan intimates, all which bore up the majesty of that
Church.
thousand Shields, and Bucklers round bedeck,
Rising as David's Tower, Bears up thy Head.

Chorus. This is Truth sealed with Miracles, that shed
It self into the Christian Church, and armed [Builded for an Armory, all
Shields of mighty Men]

It against its Foes, and its Believers charmed
Into its Services The Primitive Christians were resolved either to defend
Christianity by these powers of Truth and Miracles, or as Martyrs to dye in
defense of it, and so they were the Shields of mighty Men.
All as Men of might
To do, or dye in defense of its Right:
The full Effect of the Apostolic Ministry and Miracles will not be seen till
the New Jerusalem.
But yet these Arms are Magazin'd, not used,
As to their utmost Service, but diffused
Defense as yet, not perfect Victory:
Still They Are designed within this Armory,
And for the c. 6. 10.
Banner'd Armies They Are prepared
Then to each Use their Service shall be shared.

The King goes on. The Doctrine of Christianity in the Apostolic Ministry, was
like two full Breasts deriving their Lillies Milk from the two Testaments, in
which, as in Fields of Lillies, they Feed as two young Roes: According to which
all the Apostlick Motions, and the Churches settled by them were governed, now
these two Breasts, as a double Sluice, or outlet of Water, send out their
Streams.
The milky streams of Thy two Breasts, as Roes
Flow to all Parts, and plenteously dispose
[Thy two Breasts are like two Roes, that feed among the Lillies]
To Jew and Gentile, that so vital Juice,
(Pure as the Lillies through that double Sluice,)
Of the Two Testaments, where, as in Fields
Thou feedest, and that Truth thy motion weilds.

The King goes on. The Ascension of Christ, after he had by His Ministry, His
Death, His Resurrection, His Forty Days giving Commandments to His Disciples
prepared this so Praised Apostolic Church.
Now till Nights shades, Shades of the Atmosphere, is the foggy black Air
arising from Earths black Steams like Night, which flying away Emblems this
dark State removing, and Christ's Kingdom, who is the bright Morning Star
appearing.
Atmosphere
Are flown, and the bright Morning Star appear
[Vntill the Day break, and the Shadows fly away, I*ll get me to the Hill of
Myrrh, and the Mountains of Frankincense]
Breaking to Day; I Will hye me to the Hill,
Where Myrrh and Incense the whole Monntain fill,
The Heavens shall contain me, Just as Christ was seen by his Disciples in the
Air, Ascending upon their very earnest gazing; so shall he be seen in his
Return, which is to be fixed in the very point of time, and of space in the
Heavens, or upper Regions, where the Cloud received him; For so the Angels
Speech Implies: This same Jesus, taken into Heaven shall so return, as ye have
seen him go or going into Heaven, upon that very point I say, it is to be
fix*d, and is Expounded by the Apostle of Christ Descending not upon the Earth,
but into the Air, whither the Saints are caught up to meet Him, and so to be
ever with Him, 1 These. 4. 17.
till as now
^ mount, the Heavens back again I bow,
In a serene and perfect Cloudless Day,
All shadows gone, and darkness flown away.

Chorus. The King Himself, this brightest Morning Star
By his own glorious Presence brings from far
The Day Exiled ever since the Fall of Man, and the loss of the Sabbatism of
Creation.
so long Exiled; When He all Crowns
Shall in his Kingdom According to Revel. 19. 15. etc.
swallow, when the Frowns
Of his bright Face, as Thunder shafts shall send
The Dark Kings with their Night to their black End.
So He ascends this Kingdom to receive,
And to return at time of The Decree of God in whose Power the time especially
of this Kingdom is Reserved.
Sacred Breve.
This in With how great Skill is this Parenthesis or Description of Christ's
Ascension and Return with his Kingdom here brought in, to settle Time.
Parenthesis is interposed
Amidst the Churches Praises, and disposed
On purpose so, that thus the time made plain
From Christ's Ascension to's Return again,
The flowing Cantoes might with Time keep touch,
And the Churches various States fit Emblems couch.
And how Admirable the Churches most spotless State when the Holy Spirit was
given, and the Gentiles Called, subjoined to it, as we shall next see.
First, as its Spotless, Apostolic state
It self to Salvage Gentiles did dilate;
Of which how high the Sequent Emblems play,
Their Airs to listen, is our next Essay.

The King goes on. The sending down of the Holy Spirit.
Now when my Love, my Hand has formed thee true
To my own The Church formed as Man by the Image of God at first, so now by the
Image of Christ, is pronounced perfectly Fair and without spot.
Image, and I Thee endue John c. 14. c. 15. c. 16. Translated the Comforter.

By the The giving of the Holy Spirit, called by Christ (...), or the Paraclete
was like breathing into Adam the Breath of Life.
Holy * Paraclete sent down from Me,
As my Triumphant Bounty, Ample, Free
[Thou art all Fair my Love]
With Gifts and Graces; Now the Church is pronounced Pure, as Adam was made
Upright.
Oh Thy Fairest hue,
Thou Beauties highest point in this Review*
[There is no spot in thee]
Do spotless touch; It Is now thy Beauties clear
Without a Blemish, now Thou do appear
Like the first Church in Paradise comprised,
Which by the Serpent Fell; Ephesus the Type of this Church as leaving its
first Love lost its Birthright, and the first Place of its Candlestick
Translated to Philadelph. upon which the New Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of
Christ are settled, till when the Apostolic Glory does not Return.
Thou art repriz'd
From the Serpents Hand; To stand, see, that thou choose
Lest thy first Candlestick its Place should loose,
And now my Song of Love does thee Enroll
[My Spouse, Come with me from Lebanon, with me from Lebanon]
Into the state of Here in this Gospel state, the Church is called Spouse the
first Time; For though it was so before, yet to distinguish Times, the Title is
reserved till now, and this State is most suitable to such an Honor.
Spouse; Thy Nuptial stole
My Gospel Graces are: The Gentile Wolds are wild and desert Places, where wild
Beasts inhabit.
wolds
Come we'll survey now which the Devil holds,
As Dens of Lions, and the Leopards mounts,
[Look from the Top of Amana, from the Top of Shenir, and Hermon; from the
Lions Dens, and from the Mountains of the Leopards]
Although my Kingdom's right by holy Counts,
From What more graceful Description of the Heathen World in order to their
Conversion, going out from the Land of Canaan, then the view of the Mountain of
Leopards, and the Dens of Lions from the Mountains of Judaea next the Gentiles,
or more orderly Succession in course of Time, or how could there be a fitter
Figure of the Wicked Heathen World, than by wild Beasts, so Dan. c. 7. c. 8.
Canaans Mountains let us give them view,
Which lie within the Holy Lands Or within the Lines of its Borders.
purliew;
From Liban come, my Spouse, come thou with me
From Liban come, from Aman's Top look thee;
From Shenir's, and from Herman's Brows with Eye
Of Grace lets look, where Lions, Leopards lie.

The Chorus. The Gentiles Called, and becoming a Sister Church with the Jews
First, and after some Ages, the only Church in view till the Jews Conversion.
Upon this Gracious prospect from the Hills
The Sister-Church the following Cantoes fills.

The King goes on. How soon I see a Sister Spouse arise,
So fruitful is the Favor of my Eyes; [My Sister-Spouse]

How soon the Gentile Church that Sister-Spouse [Thou have ravished or taken my
Heart, with one of Thy Eyes]

One Body with the Jews in my Love grows:
Thou art Adopted now one of the Eyes,
That does complete the Beauty; its surprise [With one chain of thy Neck]

My Heart transports, as does that lovely Chain
Which to the Head unite does thee retain [How fair is thy Love, my Sister, my
Spouse]

In whole, as by one Neck, and still recalls
Thy Name, my Sister-Spouse, which thee installs
In Nuptial Rights, so that thy Love enshrines [How much better is thy Love
than Wine!]

Thy Beauty in my Heart 'bove richest Wines,
Which Sacrifices graced, now out of date [And the smell of thy Ointments, than
of all Spices]

In this new Spoused Jew, and Gentile State;
The Odours of thy Ointments much excel
The Spices that in Typic Unguents smell; [Thy Lips, oh my Spouse, drop as the
Honey Comb]

For Gifts and Graces are my Spirits Oil,
To which most Fragrant Matter's but a Foil:
The combed Cells, which sweetest Honies fill [Honey and Milk are under thy
Tongue]

Drop not the Pleasures, Spouse, thy Lips distill;
The staple Dainties of the Promised Land, [And the smell of thy Garments is as
the smell of Lebanon]

Honey and Milk are in thy Tongues Command,
The potent Flavors of Thy Vests confine
Those fainter of the Mount Liban. -- 1 What can come more just with the Time,
as we have settled it, then this very Word [Sister-Spouse] when the Gentiles
came in to be one Body with the Jews.
2 The Gentile Church, as another Eye was so unexpected to the very Apostles,
that Christ is pleased to express himself, as taken by the very Heart, as the
Hebrew word signifies; Such is the importance of one Chain of the Neck.
3 There is a very plain preferring the state of the Jew and Gentile Church
united, above the single state of the Jewish Church; So the rich Wines of the
Sacrifice, the Perfumes used in the Kingly, Priestly, and Temple Ointment, the
Honey, Milk, and Cedars of the Promised Land, and the state of this Church
common by them, and preferred before them.


-- Chorus. -- Thus Divine
The Spirit poured from on High, the Church composed of Jews and Gentiles, wild
by Nature, much excells the Jewish Church alone, and, as in its earthly Canaan.
Influxes make the barren Wilds outdo
An earthly Canaan, and its Types out-go:
Its Doctrines, Sufferings, Graces, all combine,
As sweetest Odours, and the richest Wine:
For now the After the Gentile Church came in, the Israelitish Church was still
declining till all mention of it was lost, and so this Song especially minds
the Gentile Church, as the Israel of God.
Jewish Spouse in silent shade
Vales off this Song, Ensuing Emblems laid
Are in the Sister-Spouse; Till all the Tribes
First Two, then Ten returning It describes:
So now the Gentile Church, Great Isreal's Name
Inherits, as the only Spouses claim:
But Fear, Ingrafted Israel the fate By what follows, it will appear the
Gentile Church was in a decayed State.

Of native Branches, Dread t'usurp the State
Of Church so Catholic, The Apostles Caution to the Romans, chapter 11. 17. etc.
as if the Root
Thou Bor'st from whence the Branches shoot,
And not the Root Bare thee a Branch at will,
Standing by Faith, but pruned off, if Ill.
Or, as without the Natural For any Church or Churches of what Name soever, to
look upon themselves as in the perfect state of the Evangelick Church, much
more as the Catholic Church before the Jews converted, is to be only Wise in
our own conceits.
Israel Thou
Could be the Perfect Spouse, Proud Fancies glow
Thus in the The Roman Name of a Church has certainly dashed on that Rock of
assuming to it self, as the Jews dashed against, To be the Root, and to be the
Catholic Church.
Roman Breast; Conceits its own
Are Canonized for Wise; But Gentiles.
Gents alone,
No more than Jews this Catholic can be,
Jews first split on this Rock, and now Fear Thee.
The Chorus goes on.
Besides it is now the Gentiles Times run deep,
While Jewish Church and State thus lie asleep:
The Chorus goes on.
Then in the Gentiles Times, a Gentile Pest
Will likely Rise a Gentile Church to infest,
Of these Adopted Jews some false Christ's Preach,
And Antichrists Supplants True Christ impeach.

The King. The whole Time of the Gentile Church till the Kingdoms of this World
become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, is in the Revelation given
under several Sealings. First of seven Seals opened, then of the 144000 Sealed,
and the Temple measured and shut, then of the seven Thunders Sealed, etc.
Thou Gentile Church, Thou Sister in a Spouse,
Thy whole Time in a Glance my Foresight shows; [A Garden enclosed is my
Sister, my Spouse]

A Garden Barred, a Spring shut up, a Fount
That Is Sealed, throughout Thy Emblems I recount; [A Spring shut up]

For when Seals open All, my Kingdom strait [A Fountain sealed]

Will open with Them; But I patient wait,
Even till The Kingdom of Christ proclaimed; The Gentiles come in in Fullness;
The Natural Israel Called, and so the whole Israel sum'd up; The Kingdom of
Christ Appears.
that Israel, of which I come
Joining with Thee make up my Isreal's Sum;
That Time my Father set, Successive seals
Still therefore stay my Kingdoms just Appeals,
Each sealed Time I Will Character to Thee,
Successions each in Order thou shall see:
First Ephesus, as the Apostolic, Primitive Church, may be most fidy compared
to a Paradise of Truth.
Ephesus the Seat of Truth revealed,
Each Plant an Orchard of Pomegranates sealed [Thy Plants are an Orchard of
Pomegranates with pleasant Fruits]

With Heavens Impress, I depaint: --

Chorus. -- Then Truth did flow,
As if each Plant a Paradise would grow.

The King goes on. Next Thee a Spicy Region I describe,
Where thrive, where smell, Spices of every Tribe, [Camphire with Spikenard,
Spikenard and Saffron, with all Trees of Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with
all chief Spices]

Those of the Royalty, those Popular
All justly mixed, each in their Order are,
The Camphire meets the Spike, Spike Saffron meets,
The Aromatic Reed with Odours greets
The Fragrant Bark; Sweet Frankincense indents;
With Myrrh the flavor'd Aloes joins scents.

Chorus. Thus Spices of Afflictions bitter Taste
Bruised by the pondrous Pestel, while they waste
Into Perfumes, give The Church of Smyrna in its Sufferings, is fitly compared
to a Region of Spices, which by pounding send out their Smells.
Smyrna's suffering Days
Which lasted till the Christian Empire sways.

The King goes on. From the Reign of Constantine, during the time of the
Christian Emperors, all Apostolical Truth flowed out as a Fountain of Gardens,
etc.
It Is then, as if unsealed, I do allow
Thy Gardens to stream out, Thy Springs to flow,
[A Fountain of Gardens, a Well of Living Waters streaming from Lebanon]
As if a Fount of Gardens Thou, A Mount of Wells,
That roll down with sweet streams of Liban's Smells:
The Winds, that Fan thy Redolent Perfumes
With Gales so brisk, each point my Care Assumes,
[Awake, oh South Wind, Blow O South Wind upon my Garden, that the Spices may
flow out]
First the Christ was pleased to use the North Wind, First of Persecution, then
the gentle South Wind, that the Odours of Christianity might flow, How Elegant
is this Hieroglyphic, how agreeable with the Time.
stern North, and then the softer South;
That all thy Spicy Atoms, as from Mouth
Of Arab's Gummy Land may blow; I Joy
In publick'st Graces, when of pure Alloy:
All Virtues from thee I let out, but In --
-- To Thee shut out the subtle streams of Sin:
Now cause That Man of Sin has his The Time, Times, Half Time, sworn by
Christ, Dan. 12. 7.
sworn Time
Before my Kingdom; To turn back that slime
Foul, as the Serpents, see thy Springs new barred,
Thy Fountain sealed under The securest way of Sealing used by Chemists.
Hermetic Guard;
Now Satan's Synagogue is creeping out
Thy noble Seeds to taint, it is now about
Thy spring to Poison, and thy streams to stain,
My early Care starts up to curb the Main
Of that bad Torrent; And I Will now In the Revelation Cap. 7. Immediately after
the Ruin of Heatheanism by the Christian Empire followed a second Sealing with
Agreeable Symbols, importing the delay of Christ's Kingdom, and the securing his
Servants for it from Corruption.
Shut up close within Walls.
immure
Thy Garden, Spring, and Fount, to keep them pure

Chorus. Thus for some time Truths Floodgates open stood,
But oh how soon Apostasy a Flood
Became, which quick does shift the Holy Scenes;
Iniquities The Mystery of Iniquity began in low degrees in the Apostolic
Times, and in Ephesus, forsaking its First Love, and grew up to a Synagogue of
Satan, under Smyrna's Suffering Martyrs; From whom it took occasion to exalt it
self.
Mysterious Womb by means
Most unespy'd, pregnant became,
And as in lowest Parts, submiss and tame
Worked on yet; For while Ephesus derived
Its Springs of Wells, and Gardens, Smyrna strived
By Cruel Princes pounded to diffuse
Its Myrrhine Odours; And those strokes did bruise
Its Spices with a Northern Fury, till
Controlls of Christian Princes did it still,
And with Their Yet Christ accounted the Church it self Pure, and made use of
the South Wind of Prosperity under the Christian Emperors to draw out its
Graces; Although by Accident, Corruptions showed themselves also.
Southern Breath persuaded out
Those Fragrant Graces, as from Springs to spout.
But even in Suffering Times bad Vapors crept
Into the better Odours, where they slept;
Till best and worst fly out, while South-winds Blow,
And Christian Fervors lost, the worst o'er-flow;
Thus by degrees the Fragrant Spices dye
Into a Superstition and worldly Riches and Pleasure grew up together. 4 The
great Pretense for the first bringing in Superstition into the Christian
Church, was as it were to Christianize Heathenish Customs. But as Atoms sent
out by Bodies into a Contagious Air, return to those Bodies that sent them out
with Infection, so the Christians sending out their Principals as it were to
better Heathenish Customs; They return to them as it were larded with
Heatheanism, so that they became Pagan Christians.
Languid Sensuality:
For why'll best Odours try to Meliorate
The Pagan steams, they soon Incorporate,
And, as the Sympathetic Atoms fly
Back to their native Bed, so these Scents hye
To their own Sourse, larded with the Attaint
Of Superstition, that would hence write Saint:
While Vizord-Christians Pagans meet half way
Truth Christian, and chaste Worship fly away;
It is Evident, Christ is first in showing love to his Church, in coming to it,
in resting with it, so that this very calling to Christ to come, shows anew,
but a corrupted State of the Church.
So that when now the Spouse her Prince Invites
To Banquet with Her, He her offer slights.

The Spouse. Let now with Pleasure to his Garden come
[Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and Eat his pleasant Fruits]
He my Beloved and His Palate some
Choose of my New-ripe Fruits, which I call His,
Now let him Eat what for Him sweetened is.

Chorus. This very Call assures, He was withdrawn
Whose Love to's Spouse had ever the first dawn:
Both Fruits and Church are new: It has not known
The Blessed Jesus, always with his own:
Chorus goes on.
That Christ said he had Eaten, shows he liked to Eat no farther, but disliked
the Churches present State.
His Answer to this Call assures us more
He was disgusted, For He praised before
The Weeks ended An. M. 4024. An. Chr. 37.
And there He staid, as One no farther pleased;
For what he liked, he had already seized;
Now from the Sev'nty Weeks fore-nam'd runn out,
Four hundred Years had turned their course about;
[The Time of the seven Seals ended, and of the Trumpets began, An. M. 4424.
An. Chr. 437.
The seven All the Time of the seven Seals, and of the Churches pure State was
run out; Because therefore through the Corruptions of the Christian World,
notwithstanding the Christian Empire; Then is a new Sealing; The Temple is
Measured; The outward Court cast out to the Gentiles; The Holy Worshippers
immured in the Temple; The Witnesses in Sackcloth, and the Church in the
Wilderness, all Emblems of the Churches Fountain and Garden Sealed, and of the
Kingdom of Christ stayed from its Appearance.
Seals their Charge.
Cargo had discharged;
And for the following Trumpets Time enlarged,
Ever which all Emblems of Time sealed new
The Apocalypse does give, that it might show
The Kingdom just looked out, and then withdrew.

CHAP. V.
The King. The Apostasy of the Christian Church.
This Invitation of Christ to come, shows the earnestness of the Apostasy to
entitle Christ to this False Christianity, and Christ's refusal upon the account
that he had Eaten shows the time of the Churches purity past.
WHY do Thou call, Spouse-Sister, why so fast
To do what is done, and now the Seasons past? [I am come into my Garden, my
Sister-Spouse]

My Garden I have viewed, my Myrrh, my Spice
I have secured; Have Eaten once, and twice [I have gathered my Spice, with my
Myrrh, I have eaten my Honey Comb with my Honey; I have drunk my Wine with my
Milk; Eat O Friends, drink abundantly, O Beloveds]

My Honey with its Comb; My Milk with Wine
Have drunk; There Is nothing that is mine,
But I enjoyed my self; This latter Spring
Is nothing to me; What could be more plainly significant of the Churches
having embraced other Lovers than Christ, than refusing himself, and throwing
those Provisions upon them by a Sarcastical Excitation of them to Eat and Drink
abundantly; Like Solomon, Ecceles. Rejoice Oh young Men, etc.
To my Rivals bring
All this new store; You new Loves, Eat and Drink,
Let all that is new into your Banquet sink:
What Is from my Word derived, on that I Feast,
Let those upstart Beloved's take the rest,
And now you your selves glut, you Loves of sense,
I give you Freedom, though It was at Christ's Expense, He being Robbed of that
was indeed due to him, and though, as corrupted, He would not accept it, yet it
was in pretension of Service and Devotion to Him, as all Superstitions, Honors
of Saints, Images, Days, the Host, etc. are.
at my Expense.

The Spouse. I find my Senses tied, my Parts benumbed,
That outward lie; These Superstitions are like Vapors of stumm'd Wine that
benum and stupifie the Soul in True Religion.
The dull Narcotick stumm [I Sleep]

Of my new mingled Wines, Mushrom Fruits, like the Gods new come up, Deuteron.
32.
the Mushrom Fruits
To which my Love I called, which He Refutes
In claiming to be his; Oppress my Sense;
Yet still my Heart resists the Violence;
And wakes 'midst of these Charms; Better I know, [But my Heart waketh]

Better I love, while these Fumes overflow
There was in the worst of the Times of the Apostles a number of the Elect,
that like a waking Heart heard Christ's Voice, rose to seek Him: And this was
the True Church before Luther.
My free'r Mind my Love's so fast Ally,
That He Will reprize it from the Sorcery, [It is the Voice of my Beloved that
knocketh]

That would Enchant it; Hark, it is his Voice
That now does Call, He Knocks; now I rejoice.
While yet I fear, for thus He me Essays,
As in that nobler Heart, that never betrays
Its Faith. --

The King. [Open to me my Sister, my Love, my undefiled]
It is most carefully to be heeded, before the True Church came to separate
from the False, and to Renounce it; It is spoken to, as having them that hold
the Doctrine of Balam, Revel. 2. as the Church of Pergamus is addressed.
My Love, my Dove, my Undefiled
Open right now to me who am beguiled
Christ could not reside in his Church as a Church, but makes a private Visit
to his Witnesses and Servants, and complains as one thrust out in the dark and
moisture of the Night.
Of my due Residence; Who in this Night
[For my Head is wet with Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the Night]
Under the Moons moist Empire am bedight,
My Head and Locks, with Drops that on them light,
The False Honor put upon Christ by Superstitious Devotions, may well be
compared to the Drops and Dew of the Night, as its counterfeit Jewels: And so
this Night and the Months under the Moon and Empress of the Night twice
mentioned in the Revelation Agree, Revel. 11. Revel. 13.
As counterfeited Jewels of the Dark,
Exhaled, but not Concoc't, they bear the mark
Of the half-virtu'd Beams, that from the Moon
Fall Chill and Pale; whose Influences soon
Are lost, and can to no Perfection mount;
Of all that is True my higher Light's the Fount.

The Spouse Answers. The Coat put off, was that simplicity of the Gospel: The
Bed a Bed of Ease, Sensuality, Pomp and State of a Ceremonious Religion, and
full of Spiritual Fornication and Adultery, as it after grew.
That plainer Coat of Holiness and Zeal
Of Truth, that did at first the Gospel Seal
[I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on?]
I have put off, with that simplicity;
Now in a Bed of Ease and State I lie
Bedecked with Ceremonious Gayeties show,
How can I then that Former state renew?
[I have washed my Feet, how shall I defile them again]
The true Mortification, Travel, and Sufferings of Religion were laid a side,
like the washing the Feet, and must be no more defiled with the former Poverty
and Hardships.
The soil of Gospel Travels, rough and poor,
I have washd from my Feet; This the True Servants of God spoke, as having the
False Christianity encumbring them.
Not from my Door
I move now but in Equipage; To tread the Ground
With new Defilement, but to Think does wound
My Sense so delicate; I paint the Dream
That Fascinates my Foreign Members, still the stream
Of a much higher Soul to thee does run,
Though under Ground impurer Veins to shun. [My Beloved put his Hand in by the
hole of the Lock]

But at thy Summons it starts out, This very gracious Approach of Christ to his
sealed Servants preserved a True Church of Pergamus, under the Name of the
Apostasy, even where the Throne of Satan was.
for when my love
His Fragrant Fingers in the Lock did move,
This In this Church those Servants of God were the waking Heart.
reached my Heart; Eftsoons my Bowels turned, [And my Bowels were moved for Him]

As by elastic Force to Him; My Passions burned
And sparkled to a Flame, strait to the Door [I rose up to open to my Beloved]

I poast t'unseal the Lock; No soyling Floor
Now frights my Feet, There were such gracious Intimations of Christ from
himself that were fitly expressed by such Emblems, as we here find, viz. Christ
Knocking, Speaking, putting his Odoriferous Hands into the holes of the Locks.
and when I touched the Lock, [My Hands dropped with Myrrh, my Fingers with the
sweet smelling Myrrh]

The smelling Myrrh, as Waters from a Rock,
The smelling Myrrhs gushed from the Lock; The Oils
Around my Hands, my Fingers swim, this boyls
My Heart with Passions fresh, in haste I open [I opened to my Beloved]

To my Beloved, moved with a joyful Hope
To find Him there; All which prevailed to this, that Christ should be sought
after in another way than the general state of the Apostasy allowed, and gave
Countenance to.
But then I soon descried [But my Beloved, had withdrawn himself]

Withdrawn from me he far himself did hide,
Not from my Soul to him indear'd, but from that load
Of outward Parts my new encumbring mode: [My Soul failed when He spoke]

His Spirit moves that very Soul, the swoon [I sought Him, but I could not find
Him]

Goes off, For the Servants of God seeking him in that Public and General
Apostasy called a Church, could not find Him.
all ways I fly to find him soon,
Repeated Calls I send, no Answer greets
From Him my thirsty Ear; Nor in the Streets [I called Him, but he gave me no
Answer]

My close Researches gain the hoped success,
That should my wearied steps with my Love bless;
[The Watchmen that went about the City, found me]
The City Watch of Prophets, that espy
All passes, Jealous spied me sailing by,
Of the public Preachers or Prophets compared to Watchmen, the Servants of
God knew it was in vain to ask.
These Prophets in disguise my Soul disdained:
I asked them nothing, 'cause I knew them wain'd
From my best Love to their Beloved's new,
[They smote me]
So at my search for only mine they grew
[They wounded me]
To heights of Rage; They smite, they deeply wound,
[The Keepers of the Wall took away my Veil from me]
As with a Past'ral Staff, Curses they sound,
And loud Anathema's; The Guards of the Walls,
The higher The Church Rulers, and all that Authority smote the Church with all
kind of Spiritual Punishments, and gave them up also to the Secular Power.
Highpriests.
Pontiffes leave their Reverend Stalls,
And as the Sons of Belial force my Veil,
Of my inviolable Faith the Seal.
As Excommunication cannot be more emphatically described, than by taking away
the Churches Veil, the Emblem of its True Faith, and Holy Worship, wherein the
Chastity of a Church consists.
Excommunicate They strip the Name
Of Spouse from me, my modesty defame;
My Veil rend from me, as upbreiding them
Now prostitute to a false spurious Stem
Of Baal's, as Husbands; Salem's Daughters pure,
Whom though the grand Apostasy immure,
As in a secret Temple, and your Hue
[I charge you oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye
tell Him I am sick of Love]
The Sackcloth mar, your Witness yet stands true;
I charge you, if my Love you find, you tell,
How high my Passions to a Sickness swell,
Of Love, till I may Him, like him enjoy,
And for himself my Service whole employ;
Tell him by Prayer, tell him by earnest Cries,
His Spouse is sick, and if He comes not, Dies.

Chorus. Thus the True Church in Pergamus did Wake,
As that much higher Soul, when the Bulk did take
*Balaam signifies too lofty.
Lethargick slumbers, thick with The Apostate part of the Church were as Men in
in a Spiritual Lethargy by the Fumes of the Doctrine of Balaam.
Balaam's Fumes;
When that High Prophet, and his Church their Plumes
So wide is spread, that the The True Church were in the mean time earnest for
a purer Enjoyment of Christ.
True Church must fly
Into the Wilds, and Antipapal. Revel. 2. 12. etc. c. 11. 3. Revel. 12. 17. 19.
Antipas must dye,
Because The Servants of God, who kept the Commandments of God, and held the
Testimony of Jesus, were true Witnesses, however in Sackcloth, and made up the
true Church however in a Wilderness.
They held their Faith to the Sovereign Name,
When Satan's Throne presumed so high a Claim.
The time of the Witnesses killing, of Antipas or the Antipapal Witnesses being
slain, was the very Time that the Watchmen and Keepers of the Walls wounded the
Spouse, and took away her Veil. The Apostasy, as appears by the Line of Time,
began in the Vulgar Year 437, and the Beast came to his Power of Forty Two
Months at the Vulgar Year 475, when the Western Empire ceased.
The Year four hundred thirty seven
Mounts to height this Apostatic Leven;
Add thirty eight, and to the Throne they bring
Revel. 17. 11. He is the Eighth, and is of the Seven.
Baal Pope, the Eighth, and yet the Seventh King;
Here the Times of the Gentiles, that the Scripture especially designed begin,
and with them the Gentile Pest, before spoken of, viz. The treading under foot
the outward Profession of Christianity, and abusing the Name of the Catholic
Church by those who pretended to be Christians, that is, Adopted Jews, but lied
and were Antichristians: Together with this Apostasy begin those repeated
Characters of Time, the 1260 Days for Years; The Gentiles 42 Months, into which
are engrasted the Beasts 42 Months, Ann. 47^, the three Days and a half, and
Time, Times, Half a Time; Now joining the Gentiles, and the Beasts 42 Months
one into another; all these begin and end together.
Here The Twelve hundred sixty Sackcloth Days
With the Wilderness concurring, Tread their Lays:
The Gentile-Times, Moons forty two Confine,
And here begin; Imp'd into which consign
To the Beast like Forty Two, To Sev'nty Five
'Bove Hundreds four, when the Vulgar Ere did thrive;
The times of Apostasy are fitly described by the time of the Night in this
Song, and of the Moon in the Revelation, as the Kingdom of Christ by the Day,
and the full Glory of his Kingdom by the Day Breaking, and all Shadows flying
away.
Thus Time of the Moon, the Empress of the Night
Equals the Days under the Lord of Light:
Thus both set out, and end alike; with both
Time, Times, Half Time, are settled under Oath:
The Smiting, Wounding, and taking away the Veil by the Watchmen Keepers of
the Wall, does most remarkably correspond with the Death of the Witnesses, that
I date to the Beasts Number 666, in the Year of the Vulgar Account 725.
Now from six Hundred sixty six Famed Year
(Seven Hundred Twenty Fifth of the common Ere)
Till sixteen Hundred ninety seven shall
Of the same Ere in Circle rise, and fall;
The Antipapal Witnesses shall seek
(While Curses of Excommunication.
Anathems, Wounds and Death still reek
From Hell them round;) and for their true Love cry
With public Voice; They cry and then they Dye
Unheard; Till Salem's Daughters toward the Time
There were continual strugglings to rise out of the Apostasy from the Year
1400, till Luther rose 1517, when the Daughters of Jerusalem began to enquire
after the true Beloved of the Church the Reformation.
Of fourteen Hundred listen to the Chime,
Then Thyatyra's Church Reformed does rise,
And lasts midst Death, till Morning Star it spies:
The Music first was low, then louder Peals
By Luther sounded in those high Appeals
To those same Salem's Daughters; Who will know
Now whence those Cries, those solemn Charges grow.
The last One Hundred Eighty then remain
Of those Twelve Hundred Sixty, which retain
Their just Allotment, and the whole are locked
In three Days and a half, wherein are shocked
From Ann. Christ. Seven hundred twenty five or six, on which that so famous
Year of the Beasts Number fell to 1727, when the Witnesses Protested; I look
upon as the time of Witnesses deep state in Death, after the manner of our
Lords being in the Grave.
The Witnesses by Death, that is, a part of each,
As Christ's three Days in Grave, without the breach
Of Prophecy, are understood; So here the last
Of Day the First, the whole of Two, then Fast
On the Morning of the last half Day ensue
Protested Witnesses, who thus review
The The Enquiry after the true Knowledge of Christ, was the very beginning of
the Reformation, viz. of his Death and Redemption.
true Beloved, as from the Spouse we hear,
To which increasing Churches yield their Ear;
And now It is most observable; Here is given a full Description of Christ, and
not of the Church, as throughout this Song in other Parts of it the Church is
described, it not agreeing with its Beauty, of which two Reasons may be given,
1. The Church is not described from the beginning of the Apostasy, till the end
of it, 2. Because nothing does more detect the Falsehood of the Papacy* and its
Antichristianism, than to set the Description of Christ part by part in
opposition to it.
the Spouse describes the King, the King
Not of the Spouse (as through this Song) does sing;
For while the Antichristian Beast does Reign,
The Spouse could not be drawn in Full Sans stain
Too foul for her to bear; Besides the Loss
Of Her Beloved under so false a Gloss
Was first to be detected by this Piece,
Which giving From Head to Foot.
Cap a Pe the King, unfleece
Must strait the Wolf in Lambs disguize, each Grace
Resplendent in the King must needs Efface
The counterfeit, For There is nothing, in which the Opposition is made more
notorious than in the Flourishing Youth of Christ, as it were Reproaching the
Papal Old Age.
ever blooming Youth,
Strength, Beauty, Vigor, Life, Emblems of Truth
Make up the Portraict of the King so known
To every seeing Eye, that is its own,
It pulls the Vizor from the hoary Pape,
Who claiming from his Age commits the Rape
Of Antichristship, Languid, Pale and Wan,
Chill, Decrepid, Dying, can this Old Man
Vicar this Ever-living, Splendid, Frow'ring Prince?
Who now this Lying Bubble cannot Evince
That hears the Spouse thus Emblemate her Love?
To Love, whom will not those lovely Emblems move?

The Chorus by the Daughters of Salem.
The Portraicture of the Churches True Beloved, in Opposition to Antichrist, as
may be fairly Expounded, Given by the Church of Thyatyra, Inducing the
Reformation.
The first beginning of the Reformation, was the Acknowledgment of the Beauty
of the sincere Profession of Christ, and that Then was the True Church.
Oh Fairest Woman, notwithstand the Cloud
From thy Love lost, that does thy Beauty shroud,
Draw us the Picture of thy Love, This stirs up to that Inquiry that was made
after Christ, and the true Knowledge of Him, and does very illustriously
describe the Reasonableness of the Reformation.
that we [What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved, Oh thou Fairest among
Women, that thou do thus Charge Us?]

May know the Reasons of thy Charge, and see
They Are Good, and so be moved thee to obey,
When Reason, and not Passion leads our way;
What is it, wherein thy Love so much excells
All Loves; Instruct us, how his Beauty swells,
His Praises so above those Loves, whose din
The World of Women now does Captive win?

The Spouse Answers, [My Beloved is White and Ruddy.]
The true Doctrine of Justification by Christ, and of Sanctification by his
Spirit, who came by Water and by Blood, very lively Expressed by his being
White and Ruddy.
Beauty's brisk Colors, the pure White and Red
Sit in my Love, not as in the withered Bed
Of Age, but as the Lillies and the Rose
In Youth concert, so in my Love Repose
The White and Red; Behold the Rosy Blood
Of his great Sacrifice in the Lilly Flood
Of the Sanctifying Spirit, Both which fade
Under the Antichristian poysonons shade;
[The Chief or the Standard among Ten Thousand, or Myriads]
The great Excellency of such a King and Savior, as Christ is Emblem'd by the
Excellency of Personage, Standard-bearers are chosen out of many, and wherein
Christ Excells Ten thousands.
He, as a Standard Bearer stands erect,
A just Supreme from Myriads Elect;
No Palsy Title croutches under Guilt
In Him, As known to be usurped; nor built
On Forged Donations, But Popes crooked Age
Denis to them high Standard bearers gage
Of stature, and the Graces of Tall Personage.
[His Head is of most fine Gold]
To speak Christ a Head of Eternal Life, his Head is compared to the finest and
most substantial Gold, and not like the Golden Bowl or Shell that breaks at the
Well, Eccles. 12. 6.
His Royal Head of Massive purest Gold,
A Fount of Life eternally does hold,
Not like the Counterfeit, that as the Bowl,
That broken at the Well leaks out the Soul,
[His Locks bushy, and black as a Raven]
And Lives, but by Successions; The Compare of his Locks, as bushy and black as
the Raven, is certainly allusive to the Strength and Vigor of Youth, and to
the known long Life of the Raven.
His curled Locks
Strong enterwove with Truth firm, as the Rocks,
Speak Truth, and Life long, as the Ravens jet,
Not like That faded Head to Death in Debt;
[His Eyes as of Doves by Rivers of Water]
The chaste Eyes of the Dove, reflected by the purest streams, and washed with
Milk, are most fit Resemblances of the Purity, Mercy, and Grace of Christ, so
contrary to the impure and bloody Eyes of Antichrist.
His Eyes chaste Clear, and beaming as the Dove
Reflex'd by limpid'st streams; Arrows from Loves
Full quiver thence do fly, not like those Eyne,
Dull, Hollow, Sunk, Bloodshot with Lust and Wine,
And Sanguinary Laws, but bathed in Milk,
Retines are that Network Coat of the Eyes, that catch the Objects for sight;
Even as the gracious Eyes of Christ take Souls with those Rays of Light, as of
Jewels set in Rings, that draw them in.
Whose Retines Souls enclose, as Nets of Silk
Which Life wraps up, thus Truth and Mercy stream
From his blessed Aspect, as if both one Beam [Fitly set, or sitting in
Fullness, as precious Stones in the Foyl of a Ring]

Of Light, or like Pearls set by Art in Rings
Of Gold, whence double, yet one Luster springs;
The Cheeks of Christ as Beds of Spices and Flowers, Expressing all the Grace
and Salvation of the Gospel, are justly opposed to withered and faded
Antichristianism.
His Cheeks the Seats of Love, as Beds of Spice,
And Flowers preserve a fragrancy so nice,
That no foul Vapor can one Pore trapan
To let it in, no Breath of wind can Fan,
Nor poisoned Atoms with its Hooks can pull [His Cheeks are as a Bed of Spices,
as sweet Flowers]

One putrid steam into those scents; All full,
And croud'd with Sweets, but oh the ghastly Cheeks
Of Antichrist, how loathsome thence the Reeks;
The Truth of Christ in his Word, into whose Lips Grace is powered, is most
contrary to the Impurity and Falsehood, the Cursing and Bitterness in
Antichristian Doctrine, and Censures, that Breath Sulphur Fire, Blood, and
Death, like the Lake of Sodom called Asphaltites.
The Lips of my Beloved so full of Grace [His Lips are like Lillies, Dropping
sweet smelling Myrrh]

From purest Lillies drop their Myrrh apace
In perfumed Gales of Truth; While Asphaltite
Belches its Sulphur after Sodoms Rite.
The Truths of the Gospel, are like gracious Enclasping of Hands, set off with
Beams of Light, as Rings of Gold, and attemper'd to Reason and Understanding,
as the light and pleasant Green of the Beryl; Whereas the bold and unreasonable
Falsehood of Antichristianism, forced on by Infallibility and secular
Punishments, are like Iron gripes.
[His Hands are as Gold Rings]
His gentle Hands to benign Clasps inclined,
As into Golden Rings of Love are twined;
Shaded with Arbors, of the pleasing Green, [Set with the Beryl]

Green of Lights Beams too quick the modest screen
From Beryl cast; Far from the cruel stripes
Of Antichristian Hands, or their Iron gripes; [His Belly is as bright Ivory
overlaid with Sapphirs]

There is a Fruitful Hill, where ever True Christianity is planted and
Flourishes; Emblem'd by a Belly of Ivory overlaid with Sapphirs, as Veins of
purest Water, enriching a cleanest Soil, whereas Barrenness and Cruelty are the
very Nature of Antichristianism, and Countries overpowered by it.
His Belly as an Eburn Hill is vein'd
With azur'd streams, which from this Mountain strein'd,
Enrich its Fruitfulness; But Heath and Sands,
Impov'rish'd Soil, barren and thirsty Lands,
That barren Womb of the seven Headed mount
Describe; streaming with Fire, as Etna's Fount.
[His Legs are Pillars of Marble set upon Sockets of fine Gold]
The Feet of Marble upon Sockets of Gold, are a very fair Opposition to the
Legs of Iron upon Feet of Clay in the Image, Dan. 2. which Feet of Clay being
struck, the Image falls, and all its Metals are beaten to the Dust of the
Threshing Floor; Showing the certain Ruin of all other Monarchies, and the
stable Kingdom of Christ.
His Legs supporting all with Marble rise
Firm, Certain, Stable, Steady, Pillar wise,
Fixed on their Feet, as stalls of Gold, not Clay,
On which the Gentile-Image had its stay,
The very Papal Feet, false to the weight
They Are trusted with, false to Proud Babel's height.
Thus Truth and power Divine must needs endure,
Whose Groundwork, as the Top is rich, is sure;
Whereas when ever stuck those Feet of Clay
[His Countenance is as Lebanon, Excellent as the Cedars]
Their Head of Gold to Ruin must betray.
The whole Administration of the Gospel, is like the lofty Cedars of Lebanon,
rising to Eternal Glory, and Papal Falsehood like the Chaff that the Wind drives
away.
His Port, His Air, His mien Majestic great,
As Liban's Cedars, and their lofty Seat,
Such is the Greatness.
Grandez, such the Reason sense
[His Mouth is most sweet]
Of all that is from the Eternal Sapience.
When Papal Faith, and Rites become the scoff
[Yea, He is altogether lovely]
Of Divine Wisdom, and like Chaff huff'd off.
The sweetness of Christ's Mouth, is a plain Signification of the Excellency of
his Word.
As sweetest The sweetest of Foods.
Ambrose, so His Mouth does flow
With Truth, Heavens Eloquence; His Praises grow
Upon me quick, so to a point I draw,
[This is my Love, and this is my Friend, oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem]
Christ is Loveliness it self to every Spiritual discerning Eye.
His Loveliness to Beauty's self gives Law:
This Salem's Daughters is my Love, here end,
If you but lovely know, you know my Friend:
The constant Descriptions of Antichrist, are as if he were an abstract of
Evil, the Wicked One, the Man of Sin, the Beast.
But oh the Antichrist.
Counter-Christ has The False Prophet so intimate to, and united with the
Beast, speaks as a Dragon.
Dragons Jaws,
Who Poison Vomits in his Feral Laws,
The Salvagest of Beasts his Form display,
Sin makes the Man in Him, if Him you would say,
He Is one Deformity, if that you know,
It Is He among Thousands, He himself does show.

The Churches of the Reformation, Those three Churches make the Order of the
Reformed Churches.
Thyatyra, Sardis, Philadelphia, displayed, according to this Earnest Search
after the Beloved.
With what stupendous Art is here now drawn
The Churches It is not possible the state of the Reformation could be more
notably described than by this Portraicture of Christ, and the Churches
harkning to it, and seeking after Him. This State shall last till the Year
1697, as is made out by the Line of Time.
Reformation from its dawn;
Till the Twelve Hundred Sixty Days shall end,
On which the Apostasy's permitted to extend
It self; Wherein the Church does search about
All Places, Forms, to find Her Loved out.
The Church indeed is The one Church of the Reformation is Represented by three
in regard of different Circumstances, and especially different intervals of
Time, in which, first Thyatyra, then Sardis, then Philadelphia, have the
ascendency successively, and all with a Continuance near to the Glorious
Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
One, yet into Three
Must from its various scites distinguished be,
In The midst of Antichristian Bowels The Reformation of the Church of Thyatyra,
Rev. 2. 18. attended with Burnings alive.
Thyatyre
Lies paled round with Vive Comburian Fire;
That heats that Furnace, where the Sovereign feels,
What in his lowest Members burns, who steels
Their Constancy, even when They Are pil'd in Flames
For Flames he to a Bed of Roses tames.
The Protestants of Hungary, France, and in other Popish Countries, are the
(...), the remaining sufferers till the Kingdom of Christ in every Eye to this
Day.
Hungary, France, others, Thyatyra 's Revel. 3. 24.
Rest
Do now the cruel Ravages Attest;
How far those Sufferings may spread over other Protestant Countries is known
to God, who knows the Secrets of all future Events.
Where Papal Rage may farther come, He knows
Who trys the deepest Reins of Things, and shows
A certain Blessed End we know, but what may fall out before, is as to
particulars concealed, though we certainly know; Then shall be a Church of
Thyatyra, of Sardis, till the approach of Christ's Kingdom.
The Blessed End, but still concealed
What may fall out, ever th'Morning Star revealed;
How much clearer and brighter shall Christianity, and the knowledge of the
Churches be, when that Morning Star appears.
For at that Summons the whole Church shall fly
To higher Things than now it can descry.
Sardis is the state of the Protestant Churches, where they are protected by
States and Laws, and so is ready to believe, there is not to be a higher and a
more glorious State of the Church in the World, except its undefiled Names, who
look principally to the Appearance of Christ, and bewail the Low State of the
Church till then.
Sardis ascends to Splendour, and would bear,
As high as if the Spouses Love were there;
Its undefiled Names does yet dissent,
Lest Acquiescing in what is now, prevent
Those splendid Robes, assured them, when in white
Heavens Armies shall attend the Bride Grooms Light.
Philadelphia rises out of the Suffering Saints in Thyatyra, and those
undefiled Names in Sardis, who cannot be satisfied in any present state of the
Church, but wait for Christ's coming: It is settled upon the pure Laws and
Ordinances of Christ, resting upon the consent of Christians in that, and in
his Power and Favor, working this brotherly Love of Christianity, however it
come to have the Favor of Princes and States also, after it comes to its
Interval.
Now Philadelph. with smallest Humane strength
Of Laws, or Power supports the Restant length
Of Time, upon the Name, the Faith, the Word,
The Patience of her single loved Lord;
While Satan's Smyrna-Synagogue revived
Appears, as 'twere Antiquity retriv'd,
And fain would Bolt this Churches Open Door,
As if not Ancient, and, as if too Poor
In Ceremonious Pomp, in Mitred Names,
In Feasts, in Fasts, its simple Order blames
With rigid Censure; But Davidean Key,
That binds and looses Bars the lofty Plea
Of Jurisdiction, till New Salem's state
Approach so near, as to compose the Bate.
The Synagogue of Satan is that which rises out of the worst part of Sardis,
that contend hard for the old Antiquity, not resting wholly on Gods Word, and
finding fault for want of Fasts, Feasts, Episcopal Power, etc. which is
especially, while the Church of Philadelphia is low, and is not come to its
proper Interval.
Even Satan's Synagogue shall then sit low
The great Dispute has been about Jurisdiction, or the Power of the Keys,
Christ will resolve that by showing this supreme Key of David. 5 Philadelphia
being, as was said, a Church that lies scattered in the suffering Protestants
of Thyatyra, and the undefiled Names of Sardis, its Door is endeavored to be
shut, and not to be acknowledged by the Synagogue of Satan, they are zealous
for the Rites and Customs of the Primitive Church for the four first Centuries,
and would reduce all under pain of Excommunication, and all severe Penalties to
that Time, not considering the Apostasy rose gradually from thence. 6 But when
Philadelphia comes to its proper Time, Christ shows David's Key; His Key of
Supreme Jurisdiction, and that Synagogue sits low, and learns of Phidelph. And
All of the Reformed Churches, seek Christ together.
At Feet of Philadelph, and Pray to know,
Whither the Churches Love is gone, and all
Unite to seek Him with Uncloven Call:
For though His All Protestants agree concerning Christ, the only Head and
Supreme of his Church against Papal Tyranny, but they differed where he was to
be found, whether in the present Order and Government of the Church, or in a
greater Glory of his Kingdom.
peerless Person was agreed,
No Pontiffs claim allowed, yet how with speed
To find, It has been looked upon hitherto by too many, as Faction and Schism
to desire a greater Reformation of the Church than we see yet.
This Synagogue from Sardis teemed
Disputed hard: For in their Dream they deemed
Their Golden Dream, that He already here,
As much as the Spouse could hope did now appear;
To wait Him farther Factious discontent,
Against present Things did future Represent
To hot Schismatic Brains; But what follows now,
Shows, This all Salem's Daughters disavow;
With whom the Synagogue submits to Philadelph.
For to the Spouse by Her Christ showed himself;
When the Kingdom of Christ comes to be Proclaimed at 1697, it shall then be
agreed by all the Reformed Churches to seek Him, and wait for his coming in
greater Glory.
And now the Philadelphian Intervall
Enters; Voices on High all Kingdoms call
To Christ, Dates of Apostate Times expire,
With how great Elegancy is Satan's Synagogue, which gave the Elevation of the
Apostasy in Smyrna, again parallelled to that Over-zealous Contention, to
bring things in the Reformed Churches to that state again, as the most perfect
state, whereas the Apostasy rose out of it, but to show Christ's Favor to all
of the Reformation; He brings these to acknowledge their Error, and to
acknowledge also Christ's Love to a Church settled by his Word, and not by
Antiquity, which is here by this Song given in the Daughters of Jerusalem
waiting so long to hear the Description of Christ's Person, ever they all
agreed to seek him with the Philadelphian Church, as we shall find they did
agree in the following Chapter.
In one the Churches their True Prince enquire.
CHAP. VI.
[The Chorus by Salem's Daughters]
The State of the Church in the Philadelphian Interval, or the Last Seventy
Five Years of the Two Thousand Three Hundred.
[Whither is thy Beloved gone, Oh thou Fairest among Women? Whither is thy
Beloved turned aside?]
Here is the very Worshipping of the sleepy Sardians, even superstitiously fond
of Antiquity, at the Feet of Philadelphia, expressed by owning her the Fairest
of Women, by seeking Christ with her, as the True Spouse.
THou Fairest of the Female, Beauteous Name,
We now our slumbring Sentiments disclaim,
And fain would know from thee, whither is gone,
And whither is Retreat, Thy Loved ONE.
Thou, that so long thy searches have maintained
Can guide us best, for sleepy we restrained
[That we may seek Him with Thee]
Our Home pursuits, and The (...); Revel. 3. 2. the Things that remain, are
properly Expressed by Remainders in order to the Kingdom of Christ, which were
to be strengthened in Sardis, as ready to dye.
our remainders marred,
Of The present over-fond, futures we barred:
Now we would seek with Thee, with Thee be ONE
In the Research where Thy Beloved is gone.
[My Beloved is gone down into his Garden]
It cannot but be observed by every Thoughtful Reader, that the Account the
Spouse gives of Christ Returned, is just opposite to the State of the Apostasy
before Chap. 5. to v. 9.
Not Gones now my Beloved, as in my swoon,
When I had lost him so; But He Is gone down,
Just now gone down into that Garden, He
Had left so long to the Apostasy:
[To the Beds of Spices]
Before Christ had come into his Garden, as a Time past, and then could not be
found.
The Spicy Beds He now returns to Left,
As covered wish Black Vapors, and bereft
Of their True Odor; Now a new Repast
He takes of Fruits after so long a Fast;
[To Feed in the Gardens, and to gather Lillies]
He had Eaten and gathered, etc. and left all to other Beloveds: Now He is
again returned to the Beds of Spices, and to gather Lillies.
He now his Lillies gathers, a new spring
Of Graces, Worship, Truth in return bring
The Approaches of his Kingdom so long veiled
By Antichrist, and close his Servants sealed;
[I am my Beloveds]
His sealed now on Sion's Mount stand clear,
And with his Fathers written Name appear
On open Forehead; Before the Church had put off its Coat, and washed its
Feet, and could not open to Christ, now it says, I am my Beloveds, This is in
Revel. c. 14. 1. the Servants of God, having his Name on their Forehead.
Now I Him enjoy,
As singly with his Faith of pure Alloy,
Before the Church could not find Christ, now Christ is the Churches. 2 It is
very observable, chapter 2. v. 16. These Words are used, but in another Order, then
it is first said, My Beloved is mine; For in the Captivity the Church was under
Judgment, not under Apostasy: So the first Remarkable was Christ Returned to
his Church in Mercy, which thereupon cried out: My Beloved is Mine. Here the
Church having been under Apostasy, Expresses first its own Loyal Return to
Christ, I am my Beloveds; And as that was the Triumphal Note of the Return from
Litteral Babylon, so now with this Remarkable Alteration, it is taken up again
as the Motto of its Return from Spiritual Babylon.
And while His love in me is pleased to Rest, [And He is mine]

He with himself as mine does me Invest:
Then He along the Beds of Lillies Feeds,
As of the Future The constant Allusion of this Song to the most Excellent
Plants, Spices, and Trees watered by the Purest streams, is most agreeable to
the Paradise of God, with its Tree of Life, bearing twelve sorts of Fruit, and
the River of Life running through the Streets of the New Jerusalem.
Paradise the Seeds.
Chorus. From Christ the True Schelom or Solomon.
Schelom Born, I account the proper Time or Interval of Philadelphia, the last
of the Six Churches, that draw so many spaces of Time from the Resurrection to
the New Jerusalem to begin 1697.
now Hundreds Ten and Six
A Nine of Tens, and unites Seven Fix
Our Philadelphs. Beginning Interval
Till the Worlds Kingdoms to the best King fall,
As in just Homage first Mother Cities.
proclaimed his own,
At last together Build his Royal Throne,
It comprehends so many Years betwixt the Fall of the Tenth Part, or december
Principality of the Great City, as were between the Fall of Litteral Babylon,
and that completing Decree, Ezra the 7 th, when the Word for restoring
Jerusalem was Perfect.
And, as while Salem's Ruins were restored
From Babel's spoil Years Sev'nty Five were scor'd
Of Old; so many now exact do Flow
To Salem New from Babel's Overthrow
Babel the Mystic; To New Salem's Throne,
It comprehends also the Seven Voices, and the Seven Vials.
Seven Voices, and as many Vials Groan
In earnest Motion; As it were to declare the Conversion of both the House of
Judah, and of the House of Israel with Philadelphia's Interval, the Church is
compared to Jerusalem, the Metropolis or chief City of Judah's Kingdom, and to
Tirzah the Metropolis or chief City of Israel's Kingdom, both which unite in
Christ's Kingdom.
Those two Royal Towns,
Salem and Tirzah seat the many Crowns,
As the Mother Cities.
Metropoles, and show unite
In Schelom Twelve Tribes so long Bipartite,
Which now returning Philadelph adorn,
And matched with it, are in its Scutcheon borne,
So in this Landscaph the streamed The Banner'd Armies, are those Armies of
Heaven, that come down to Armageddon in this Churches Time.
Banners play
Before his Hosts, Terrors with them Array
Themselves, Jehovah's Mighty Ones come down
To Armageddons Plains, and them Renown
With Victory; All these are so displayed,
That to the There is both an agreement in the Description of the first
Apostolic Church, and of the Church in this State, to show one lies at the
Foundation, the other is placed at the very Top and Heights of the Church in
the New Jerusalem.
Apostolic First state laid,
And yet distinguished, They may both ascend,
And Salem's Glory both may Comprehend.

The King. My Love's, as Tirzah, the Beautiful City, where Jeroboam settled his
Kingdom over the Ten Tribes, represents the Ten Tribes, 1 Kings 14. 17.
Jerusalem eminently the City of Two Tribes, these united, as the two Sticks,
Ezeck. 37.
Tirzah Fair, as Salem it does shine
[Thou art Beautiful Oh my Love as Tirzah, Comely as Jerusalem]
With graceful Airs, my Kingdom both entwine,
As sticks unite; So Prophecies require
Those parted Palaces in mine entire.
Herein it is the Glory of thy Rays
Surmounts, even that of the Apostolic Days;
[Terrible as an Army with Banners]
The Weapons, that in the (As between a furnished Armory, and a Banner'd Army)
betwixt the State of the Church in the Apostles days, and the State of it in
this Approach of Christ's Kingdom: In the First, There was a Visible Preparation
to a Kingdom, and Victory; Here all things are ready for Execution, according
to that Preparation.
Magazine then stored
Did hang for greater Service, Now they are soared
On Armies Wings, which round their Terrors spread,
And yet those Terrors with thy Beauties wed.
[Turn away thy Eyes from, for they have overcome me]
But Oh the dazzling Luster of Thy Eyes,
Too quick their Beams they dart, for while they rise*
As with my Kingdoms Light, shade still their Rays
[Thy Hair is as a Flock of Goats, that appear from Gilead]
With the The Goats-Hair shading as Hair, the overcoming Eyes, speaks an
admirable Glory, as of the Tabernacle, and yet covered with Goats-Hair, till
the very Temple Built, and the Voice from the Throne; It is Done, Revel. 27. 6.
Goat-like Hair of the Apostolic Days;
The Tabernacle of my presence, free
From those Dark Covers yet it cannot be;
My Throne, My Temple near are both in one,
And not uncovered till the Voice, ITS DONE.
[Thy Teeth are as a Flock of Sheep that go up from the Washing]
Then are the very same Expressions used to set out the Fruitfulness of this
Time in the abundance of Converts to God and Christ, that were used in the very
Apostles Days, when the Holy Spirit came down from Heaven as Fire, in the form
of Cloven Tongues, and the Seeds of Life, which the Pomegranates Import.
Thy Doctrine now prepared by Teeth so washed
Declare my Truth Restored, as when it flashed
Like Tongues of Fire from Heaven, A like spring,
As drops from Mornings Womb are issuing, [Whereof every one bears Twins, and
there is none Barren among them]

Blesses with Fruitfulness thy Time; So dwells
The same Wise Judgment, as in safest Cells
Entempled, which my Primiere Servants swayed,
For so with them thy Parallel I Have laid. [As a piece of Pomegranate are thy
Temples within thy Locks]

The distribution of those who are gathered to the Church of Christ, as in the
Philadelphian State and Interval, and preserving that in a single, and singular
Consideration, One, and the only One of her Mother, is most natural and
agreeable.
Churches Reformed like First, Reformed Churches justly deserve the Honorable
Names of Queens, because Reformed; These gather to it from Thyatyra, and Sardis.
Queens unite to Thee,
Without disdain at thy Prioritie.
[There are Threescore Queens]
Converts from Babel through those Nations spread,
Whose Sovereigns Armed the Ten-horn'd Be'stian Head,
Now are received in Thee, who had before
Right of Concubines may be understood very Elegantly such as pretend a*right
to Christ by the Profession of his Name, and of his Religion, and yet are not
in such a holy State, through the Corruption of that Profession, as not to be
esteemed in the Rank of Conjugal Honor, being Apostatized.
Concubinage, because They bore [Fourscore Concubines]

My Name Confessed, though in polluted State,
Espoused anew, They higher now relate
To Me in Thee; In whom I Will now embrace
Reformed, all Churches of the Christian Race.
[Virgins without number]
The Gentiles Fullness Thou to me present,
As Virgins Chaste by Grace of new descent.
[My Dove my Vnfiled is but one, She is the only One of her that bare her; The
Daughters saw her and Blessed her; The Queens and Concubines, and they Praised
her]
Each of these Orders Three their proper space
In Number fill, as They before their Place
In this World had: Threescore the Queens Account
Confines; Fourscore's the Concubines amount;
The Gentiles Fullness no Just figures hold,
In Numbers heaped on Numbers They are told,
That know no End; But Thou art only One,
My Impolluted Love, Thee, Thee alone
Thy Mother bare into that high degree;
That The Converts from Paganism, are also most Elegantly represented by
Virgins, who had not before professed Christ, but are now Espoused to Him: The
Reason of each Number is after to be given.
Virgins Queens and Concubines in thee
Make up my Spouse, The Philadelphian most pure and perfect state of the
Church, is the only One of her Mother, that is, That only pure Church, in whose
state the great Promise to Christ, the great Seed of the Woman shall be
fulfilled; This Emblem is most aptly taken from Solomon's many Wives and
Concubines, with a preference to Pharaoh's Daughter, even as to Philadelphia,
the most Excellent state of the Gentile Church.
Thee Envy cannot Touch,
For all concert thy Praise, thy Blessed state Vouch;

Chorus. The Virgins All these do not Envy but Praise and Bless this Church, as
happy in it themselves.
Bless, Queens, Concubines thee Praise,
Those, as thy Daughters, These in Sisters phrase;
In Thee Eve the Mother of all Living.
the Mother-Woman sees alone
The Serpent bruised, and her Great Son on Throne.

The Chorus goes on. What This must needs be evident to every one that compares
the Symbols of the Apostasy, and the Reformation, as Solomon has here
described them.
Artist of the most reported Name,
Ever drew in Prophecy so Rich a Frame,
Embellishing Apocalyptic Lines?
Thus Solomon in this Song, and the Apostle John in the Revelation, do
Admirably agree.
John with Schelom, as two grand Divines
Cenferr their Symbols, how does There will be found an Admirable Agreement
betwixt the Apostolic Church, and the Church of Philadelphia.
Philadelph
Fill out this Picture with its single self?
All Is Apostolic, and There will be found an Admirable Agreement betwixt the
Apostolic Church, and the Church of Philadelphia.
That Song, that sprung
In those first Times, is now, as new, Resung:
For That Song, Revel. 14. 3. etc. is the same Song of Redemption sung by the
Apostolic Church, Revel. 4. ult. Revel. 5. 9. which is sung again as new, but
not new, Revel. 14. 3.
the Everlasting Gospel cannot be new,
Yet is renewed into its Native Hue;
Apostleship no second ever can Rise,
The There cannot be another Gospel, Gal. 1. v. 7. But the Gospel covered with
the Apostasy, is as new in the Glory of the Church Appearing. 9 It is
therefore Remarkable, the Twelve Names of the Apostles of the Lamb are in the
Foundations of the Wall of the New Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 14.
Twelve that were at first preserve the size
Of Salem's Walls, when new, it from Above
Descends, the Palace of the Princely Love.
Those This both Agreement, and yet variation of the Types in this Song show
the oneness, and yet the difference of the Church in the Foundation, and in the
highest of its States.
Scarlet Threadded Lips, those even shorn
(White washed Teeth) are therefore here not borne
In this new Emblem, nor the comely Talk,
Nor those twin Breasts, that as Two Roes do walk
Among the Lillies feeding; For all these
The Apostolic High Commission seife,
And undisseiz'd their Fundamental Right
By after Notes is to that ONCE kept tight.
Nothing can now be added nor taken from the Scripture sealed up.
The Sacred Canon of two Testaments
Once sealed, no farther swells; Faith's Ligaments
Close up are Wound; ONCE given, they remain
To shine more bright, but never given over again.
Yet the Apostolic Time was an Armory for after Use; This, as an Army in
making that Use to Victory.
But now an Army for an Armory
Paints Expedition to a Victory;
These Daughters, Concubines, and Queens describe
The Revel. 14. 6.
Eternal Gospel Preached to every Tribe
Of Nations with Success; The numbers weigh
Each sort so justly out, that they allay
It is one great Objection of the Atheist, that the Christian Religion
possesses the least part of the World; and of the Romanist, that the Reformed
Religion holds such a small part of the Christian World in Union with it in
comparison of the Roman.
The scandal, that upbreids the Church Reformed,
As least in the World's Map, as if o'er-swarm'd
By worser Names, For this these Numbers own;
To this there cannot be a greater Answer, than, that Prophecy of Scripture
has told us both before, as Christ says, Lo I have told you before.
The Virgins, Daughters now become, are thrown
Into a kind of There is no end of the number of Convert Heathens, the Heathen
World being so numerous before Conversion.
Infinite; Thus swell
In Rate the Regions, that are Infidel,
As they are spread in space, to them assigned,
By this Prophetic Truth, that The Truth of Prophecy, assuring the Conversion
of the Fullness of the Gentiles, shall not be resisted in its own Time, in the
mean none ought to be affrighted with the Ghost of this Objection.
Countermin'd
Can never be; Though till it be fulfilled
Some Bugbears.
Mormocs may affright the too unskilled
In Sacred Calendar, The Popish World, compared with the Protestant, is here
given, as Eight to Six, till the Great Conversion of the Reformation in the
Philadelphian Church, which takes away that Objection also.
the Sixty Queens,
Of Churches, that protest, each one that weens
Of things aright, sees eighty Concubines
Of Romish Name o'er-number'd in these Lines,
As Eight with Six compared, which in a Glance,
Redeems the wonder of the Proud enhance
Of Popish 'bove Reformed in this Earths Tract,
Till the Great Change foretold Them into act.
Now follows the Call and Conversion of the Jews within the time of this
Philadelphian Church, as before Explained: First, The Two Tribes, then the Ten.
And now those Twelve peculiar Tribes, that branch
From their true Native Olive, 'gin to Lanch
Fro' their long captived State, first come those two,
We call the Jews, which in more open view
We see, and on the sudden start to sight
The Ten Tribes rising from their long-some Night;
Of these their Solomon was the great peacable Prince of both the Ten and Two
throughout his Reign, which none before him nor after of the Kings was; Herein
Solomon was an Eminent Type of Christ, in whose Kingdom both shall Unite.
Schelom Prince now sings, and Ends
[The Spouse, or Christian Church to the Jews, or Two Tribes coming into Union
with it]
In that Blessed Mount, this Song of Songs Ascends.

The Calling of the Jews of the Two Tribes.
[Who is this that looks forth as the Morning, Fair as the Moon, Clear as the
Sun]
What Fair is This, The compare of the Jewish Church to the Beauty of the Moon,
and then of the Sun, is most significant of its Exaltation from those Types and
Feasts so dependent on the Moon, to the Clearness of a Gospel state, and the
looking forth as the Morning speaks, the Dawn of the Kingdom of Christ near.
that as the Morning starts
Fair as the Moon, that Light with shades imparts,
And then clears up to the brightness of the Sun?
The Calling of the Jews was as dreadful as an Army with Banners, for
immediately upon the Kings of the East having their way made, the Spirits went
out to congregate the whole World to the Battle, Revel. 16. 12.
And, as with displayed Banners Terrors run
[Terrible as an Army with Banners?]
From the Puissant Army, so'es the view
Of this return, a Spectacle so new
[I went down into the Garden of Nuts to see the Fruits of the Valleys, and to
see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates Budded]
Of such Surprise, and even so to me;
For in the The Prophecies of Scripture are fitly compared to a Garden of Nuts,
because of Divine Truth wrapped up in Parables and Riddles, especially in
Ezekiel and Daniel's Prophecy.
Gardens Rich with Prophecy,
Though shell'd in Symbols, as the pleasing Nuts
Barred round to those, who do not pierce their shuts,
The Many Excellent and Spiritual, yet very plain Doctrines among those
Prophecies, are as the Fruits that are not locked up in Shells, but of an
inviting Beauty and Pleasantness, and which shall be in an exceeding Flourish
at this time of the Church. These Truths and Prophecies inlightning one
another, there arise at the same time most earnest Desires and Prayers for the
Return of the Jews, as of the Princely People, or Kings of the East.
open Fruits I minded most, that grow
Along the Vales with an inviting show,
The flowered Vine, and the Pomegranates blooms,
The open Truths in Prophets, which the glooms
Clear up of Hieroglyphics; While I pried
Thus every way, most unawares I Ride, [Or ever I was aware, my Soul made me,
as the the Chariots of Ammi-nadib]

As in Elijah's Chariot snatched, and burn
In Flames of Passion for the swift Return
Of those my Princely People, Kings of the East,
For whom my Prayers, as Chariots are Impressed;
With Voice twice doubled, as their Charioteer
I call, Return, Return, with quick Career
Thou Native Shulamite, or Salemite, is a Distinction of the Converted Jews
from all the Members of the True Church, which are called Daughters of
Jerusalem.
Salemite, that we may view
All we, Adopted Salemites, the hew
Of Salemites by Nature, Eldest, First,
R'-ingraff'd into their Olive Own, They are re-ingraffed into their own Olive,
whom they pierced by Crucifying Him, for which they were cut off by God, and
became a Taunt, and Proverb to the whole World.
they pierced
With Rage unnatural; And so cut off
Were doomed as Parricides to the Nations scoff.
Chorus. [What would ye see in the Shulamite]
Seeing these Salemites are those that have been so long under the Curse and
Wrath of God, the Reproach and Proverb of the Nations, a People of no
Reputation, but for Traffic and getting Riches by Usury, what would you now
see in them? This is a Question made on purpose to draw out this Answer.
What then is to be seen, that so invites
Your flowing Passions to such Salemites.

The Spouse. The Answer is, It Is not for themselves, but for those Eminent
Appearances from Heaven, that shall be at the time of their Conversion, which
shall be the Riches of the World, and as Life from the Dead, and like Jacob's
Vision of Angels, when He called the Place, Genesis 32. 2. Mahanaim. And it seems
to relate to that Battle at Armageddon, immediately on the Calling of the Jews,
even as Jacob's Vision of Angels was his defense against Esau's Hoasts.
It Is not themselves, that for themselves we'd see,
[As it were the company of two Armies or Mahanaim]
But Hoasts of Angels, Heavens Embassy,
As Jacob's Vision of Mahanaim;
Conducting Home those Jews, and bringing Him,
Our Souls so love attended with his Choire
Of Cherubs, Myriads waiting with Devoir
On Him, with Heavens Armies, till His Foes
Crouch basely under, as his Feets Repose;
And David's People thus Build up his Throne,
For which Blessed state the weary Creatures Groan,
For Life it is from the Dead to us foretold
By Prophecies Both Testaments Enrolled.

CHAP. VII.
The Spouse Praises the Jewish Body Coming into Union with it.
[How Beautiful are thy Feet with Shoes, oh Princes Daughter?]
Bare Feet are in Scripture Language an Emblem of Captivity, even as shod are
of Liberty.
HOW Beauteous are the princely Feet now shod
With Liberty, that captived naked trod
On Earth's hard Pavements; and The Joints of the Thighs, like Jewels framed by
so cunning a Workman, denote a princely Gate and Motion, and speak the Dignity
put upon the Jews at their Conversion.
the Royal Thighs,
[The Joints of thy Thighs are like Jewels, the work of the Hands of a cunning
Work-man]
Whose motion was distorted, and the Guise
Of the Princes Daughter so deformed with Chains,
Are joynted now with Pearl, that state maintains
To all her Motion; Which the Artists Hand
With deepest cunning Framed, so to command
[Thy Navel is like a round Goblet, that wants not Liquor]
The noblest Goings: Princess, The Belly, as a Hill of Wheat, and the Navel, as
a Goblet full of Liquor, speak the Abundance of Truth and Spiritual Plenty,
that shall be at that Time the Riches of the World.
Thy Navel's Twirl'd
So close with Truth, that like a Goblet Curled
Into a Circle, fast must hold the Juice
Entrusted to it, and preserve to use
[Thy Belly is like a heap of Wheat]
The Vital Liquor; while a fruitful Hill
Of Wheat thy Belly rises, that does fill
The unveiling the Types and Prophecies of the Old Testament, will be as a heap
of Wheat set about with Lillies, and a Goblet wanting no Liquor: Highest
Nourishment with greatest Delight to Souls, as the other is to Bodies.
Each gracious Appetite with Food so pure, [Set about with Lillies]

That Lillies with their Milk-white Guard secure
It all about: For Thy great Types unveiled,
Thy Prophecies unlocked are Truth Rayl'd about with Ornament, a term in
Heraldry.
engrail'd
With highest Pleasures, which (as finest Wheat,
And noblest Moystures Bodies) Spirits treat;
Upon which the two Testaments, the New received with the Old, become as two
Breasts that are Twins of these new Converts, and disperse Truth every way.
Thy Testaments entwist't with so great Light
Of Exposition offered to all sight,
At this great Revolution shall, like Breasts, [Thy two Breasts are two young
Roes that are Twins]

Dispose their Milk abroad; As Roes whose rests
Are Rists to Motions fresh and new, so Truth
From thy Returns its leaps, and bounds renew'th,
And never flags; As Fountains pressed by Art
Mount High, so Thy two Breasts shall shoot and dart
On every side their Milky way, when thou
United to me shall to my Love bow:
And though those Testaments are never new given,
By thy Conversion They divinely thriv'n
Swell like young Breasts, when soon the So New Jerusalem's Gates and Walls
have the Names of the Twelve Tribes, and Twelve Apostles.
Twelve of Tribes
Shall join Apostles Twelve, which thing describes
New Salem's Gates and Walls, when each these Twelves
By Names engraven deep, Record themselves.
Now that I may define Thee with just Art
Distinguished from the Nations, thus each Part
Of the The Neck, Eyes, Nose and Head, the most conspicuous parts in Nature,
are here Charactered by some most Remarkable Points in Judaea, to ascertain the
Calling of the Jews is here meant.
Superior Order, I descry
By Figures of thy own Lands Royalty;
These, as the noblest Carriages.
Vehicles of Life,
Life from the Dead, without intestine strife Romans 11, 12. 15.

To the whole World convey, and as the Rest
Of universal Riches; East and West
[Thy Neck is as the Tower of Ivory]
Send it abroad: Thy Neck's that Eburn Throne
King Solomon's Ivory Throne described, 2 Chronicles. 9. 17. is here made the Emblem
of the Royal Enthronization of Christ at the New Jerusalem state, much exalted
by the Jews Conversion.
King Schelom mounted to a Towers Cone,
On which Great Christ sitting on this Exalted Throne, Judges the World with
Equity, and the whole Creation Bejoyces, according to Psalm. 96, 97, 98. Romans 8.
22, 23.
Schelom Exalted to the Highest.
Zenith'd sits in Reign,
When equal Judgment to Earth's Globe He Will deign:
And Trees in crowds of Woods shall clap their hands
For Joy; Then swelling Floods forsake their Sands,
In Thunders The highest Note in Music.
Elah to mount Praise: And Groans
Of the Creation melt into sweet Tones.
[Thy Eyes are like the Fish-pools of Heshbon by the Gate of Bath-rabbim]
Clear as the Heshbon the Royal Seat of the Amorites, Number. 21. 26. is called
the Gate of Bath-Rabbim, which signifies both Multitude, and the Gate of the
Wise Judges, and Learned Masters in Knowledge, and may fitly Type the Knowledge
of the Lord Abounding, as the Sea, or Ezekiel's Holy Waters in which all things
Live, Ezekiel. 47. 9.
Heshbon Fish-pools are thy Eyes,
Those Pools that by Bath-Rabbims Gate do rise,
Where Multitudes do flock to hear the Wise:
Ezekiel's Landscaph of the Blessed state
Of Life by Waters, that as Seas dilate,
Agrees, For as the Scaled Habitants
Swim in unnumber'd sholes, and find no wants
Of room for Life in the vast Ocean, so
Men, as the Fishes shall these Waters Row;
And as successive Billows, Life shall rise
On all that moves; Here nothing moves and dies,
What Is Dead, or Dies into a Sea of Salt,
Is cast like Sodom's Lake, the Dead-Seas Vault.
[Thy Nose is like the Tower of Lebanon that looks toward Damascus]
Thy Nose like The Tower of Libanus in allusion to Solomon's House of the
Forest, 1 Kings, 7. 2. takes in the Cedar Perfumes, and both Beautifies all
within its prospect even to Damascus, and by Repercussion sends back those
sweet Airs: So the Jews Converted, as they receive the Gospel themselves, so
shall Minister to the abundant Propagation of it to the World about, Typ'd here
by Damascus.
Liban's Tower, Liban's Perfumes
Drinks, and, as the blissful Odours it assumes,
It thence diffuses, while Damascus Types
The World around thee; Thus thy Nose, as Pipes
Conveys Life's Savor, it had drunk, Thy Eyes
As Princes Bless, what in their prospect lies,
Thus thou, this Royal Tower, by thy Nose
Draw'st in, and do again dispose
The Royal Savors; sending out those Breaths,
That thou did first exhale; Thus Incense wreaths
In sweetest Circles: Thus whatever lies
Within thy point is Blessed; For from thee hyes
The Incense down, that first to thee did rise.
The Head that had Hair, as of a Flock of Goats from Mount Gilead, is now as
covered with Scarlet or Crimson (as Carmel signifies) and Purple, showing the
Exaltation of the meanness of the Gospels outside to Princely Greatness at the
Jews Conversion, signified by these Royal Colors.
Now in this lofty Temple State, and Air
Serene, grows useless the Goats Hair.
[Thy Head upon Thee is like Carmel or Crimson]
Thy Carmel Head Blazons an high Estate,
Bound with the Crimson, and the purpurate,
Blessed Sch^^m's high Estate, in Colors Plait
Of Royalty within thy Locks, for lo [The Hair of thy Head is as Purple]

The King not in the presence, but so,
As in his Palaces chief Rooms of state have Ante-rooms before them.
Ante-rooms [The King is held in the Galleries]

He in the Galleries is held; He comes
From thence in State: My Ravished Thoughts rush on
In foretasts of the Pleasures we are upon.
[This Thy stature is like the Palm-Tree]
I do not understand here by Love, (as in this Song in other Places) Christ the
Beloved of the Spouse, but Love in the Abstract, placed, and seated in the
Delights of a great Condition, suitable to the Approaching blessed Estate.
How great's the Beauty, and the Pleasure high
When Love set free from all Adversity
Baths in the Liquid streams of pure Delight?
What Inspired Pen can to this Love do right? [And thy Breasts to Clusters of
Grapes]

But I return to Thee, whose statures flown
To the The Palm Tree I account the Emblem of the High Victorious State of
Christ and his Gospel, agreeable to Revel. 7. 9. when the Jews and the Gentiles
shall be united.
Palm Trees Height, and near its Top is grown;
Mean whilst, as generous Clusters on the Vine,
That twists about that Height, swell out of Line;
So don't The so often Mention of Breasts and Clusters, speaks the Admirable
Fruitfulness of the Gospel Light and Grace, as well as Height of Condition.
Thy Breasts their Fruitfulness forget,
Whilst thou in Heights so near the Clouds are set. [Behold I will go up to the
Palm-Tree]

I said, with Thee I will unite, and climb
Thy Highest Boughs; Thy Top that is so sublime,
I Will reach with great Delights; For in thy H'ight [I will take hold of the
Boughs thereof]

All Saints are equally advanced; Of Right
By the Height of the Jewish Palm Tree, is not to be understood any Dominion of
the Jews alone, but the state of most Excellent Grace and Glory, accruing to
all the Saints from Christ's Exalted Kingdom at their Conversion in which the
Jews may be first, but yet no more than equal with all Saints.
Thy Palms so high are grown; For they are due
To each of my Love's Victors, at that view
[Now also thy Breast shall be as Clusters of the Vines]
Triumphant; In due time thy Palm Tree stands
With Branches to adorn the Conqu'rers Hands.
While Thou so graceful art, and while so High,
With both Thy Fruitfulness at once does vie;
[And the smell of thy Nose like Apples]
I joy thy Clusters to Repeat again,
Those pleasing fertile Smells Thy Nose amain
Breaths out, while as from Mention of Apples, and all Fruits as was said,
allude to the Paradise of God.
Apples, Atoms fly
[And the Roof of thy Mouth like the best Wine, causing the Lips of those that
were asleep to speak]
With loud Reports, that Paradise is nigh,
And thy Mouths Roof, such Doctrines does send down
Of the Sacrifice, that is my Beloveds own,
Of greater Worth, then The Blood of Christ, and the Doctrine and Sacrament of
it are fitly expressed by Wine, as the Scripture Witnesses.
blood of choicest Vines
Which into Consciences by such strait As we say to Rights.
Lines
Go down, that sleepy Lips awakened Praise
Heavens Bounty, that does such Redemption raise.
Chorus. The Order God has set betwixt the Jews and Gentiles in the
Communications of his Mercy, is very Admirable, according to Romans 11. the Jews
Falling, of necessity God must have a People, Christ a Church: The Gentiles
then are called to supply their Vacancy; So the Jews Fall is the Riches of the
World.
Thus does the Jew and Gentile Church unite,
While yet the Jew does Elder Sister write;
But so that Mercies each Reciprocate
One to another in this proper state.
For first the blinded Isra'ls lowest Fall
Was Supplied.
Surrogated by the Gentiles Call,
And so did Mercy reach to the Pagan wild,
Much more their Fullness is by Mercy Filled.
For when this People's (whose the Promise) Called,
Christ in his Glory then shall be Installed;
And Gentiles Churches perfect; Now to repay
This Mercy to the Jews, In full display
Wisdom Contrives; For 'twas the Gentile Spouse,
The Gentile Church has yielded that Army of Martyrs, first under Heathen,
then under Popish Powers; These must be Recompensed in Christ's Kingdom:
Christ's Kingdom cannot be without the Conversion of the Jews, whose are the
Promises, and of whom Christ Blessed for ever came; So then because the Gentile
Martyrs must be Crowned through Mercy, the Mercy promised to them, assures and
hastens Mercy to the Jews in its time, that so the Kingdom of Christ, the
Riches of the World, and Life from the Dead, may come in at the Fullness of the
Jews.
That bore the Dragons, and the Beast's Carouse
Of Blood so long, upon THIS Kingdoms Hope,
Which cannot fail; THIS Kingdom then must Cope
These Martyrs with Reward; So Jews obtain
Mercy through Gentiles Mercy; Thus remain
Both under Mercy; Romans 11. Vlt.
Oh the Waters deep
In which this Wisdom Sovereign does steep
Its Footsteps; But from Him's the Sourse of all,
Then to His Glory All things justly fall.

The Jews Conversion thus distinctly placed, the Song Returns to the One Spouse
thus Graced, who now Speaks.
[My Beloved is mine]
The Royal State of Christ figured by the Jews Return, as the Kings of the East
being given, the Church, as one Spouse anew entitles it self to Christ.
In this new Royal State, through the Kings of the East
With me the Gentile Church Now One; I vest
My only Loved in my self; To Him entire
I am Devote; And now I feel the Fire
Of his approaching Coming, to receive [And his desire is toward me]

With New Desire His Spouse; To enterweave
His Love with Mine; Come therefore my Beloved
This particular Visitation of all parts, and of the Fruits appearing, relate
to the Kingdom of Christ, and show the near Approach of it, when all things
were thus prepared.
Let us in Circuit visit the Improved [Come my Beloved, let us go forth]

State of thy Church, in all its various Seats,
In all its Fruits, midst them let our Retreats
Now be disposed; Into the Fields let us walk, [Into the Field]

And view thy Gospels spread, where late no stalk
Of Truth did grow: Thou in the Hamlets please
With me to Lodge, where Quiet does appease [Let us Lodge in the Villages]

All Noise, and yet Thy Truth does there diffuse
Into those private Thoughts; The silent Muse
[Let us get up early to the Vineyards]
Of thy great Kingdom in that privacy
The very Trees Applaud, and Woods revy;
[Let us see if the Vine flourish, whether the tender Grapes appear, and the
Pomegranate bud forth]
Then with the Morning Light, our early steps
Shall to the Vineyards haste, we'll see the Leaps
The Vine makes into Clusters; The Granate
Pearl'd into Buds; For hereby we'll Rate
Thy Governments Approach; Those splendid Fruits
Of Truth are thy Gemm'd Scepters blooming shoots
[There will I give thee my Loves: Or I will yield up my self to my Beloved]
Into its Glory, Strength, and just Extent;
The Words Translated, My Loves, I rather render by an Elegant Abundance; I
will give my self to my Beloved, to Thee, signifying the Spouses State, even
prepared as a Bride adorned for the Bridegroom, by the universal Readiness of
all things for the Kingdom of Christ: On which follows a Representation of a
Feastival Abundance waiting at the Gates, as for the Marriage Supper in the
next Canticle.
Amidst those Fruits, my Love, thou shall resent
That I thy Bride to Thee my self present:
[The Mandrakes, or lovely Fruits give a smell]
Now on this Visit, I with Joy report;
All Flowers of Love, and Fruits of Pleasure sort
Themselves together; Eldest, latest Dates
[And at our gates are all manner of pleasant Fruits, new and old]
Conspire, and place themselves around our Gates:
For since the World began to this Times joint,
All Truths and Graces flow, as to a point;
[Which I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved]
Which Treasured up for Thee, now make their Court
To thee, my Love, as in their last Effort.
CHAP. VIII.
[O that thou were, or one would give thee, as my Brother]
The Earnest Desire of the Church, for the Personal Appearance, and Reign of
Christ in Humane Nature.
After the Account of this complete Preparation to a Nuptial Banquet, as it
were in Paradise, the Spouse desires the Appearance of Christ in the Glory of
His Humane Nature, or, as the Great Son of Man, under the Modesty of desiring
Him to be given as her Brother; of the same Nature with her self.
I Ask with flaming Passions, and yet veiled
With Modesty, I Ask, as One appal'd,
With my own boldness, thus I shade desire,
[That sucked the Breasts of my Mother]
Who Will Thee me Give in Freedoms so entire,
Yet so uncensur'd, as my Brother Thou,
That the same Breasts with me did Suck! I Would Vow
My Chastest Kisses to thy Lips; In streets [I would Kiss thee when I should
find thee without, yet I should not be despised]

I Would find Thee, and Thou Would not despise my Greets,
To which also relates the bringing him into the House of her Mother, as the
Incarnation was before Expressed, Chap. 3, 4.
Into my Mothers House I Would draw my Love,
Who did me teach, that Promise first to move;
Which as the The spiced Wine and Juice of the Pomegranate, is that first great
Promise of Life, and of the Kingdom, to the Seed of the Woman, etc. in which
the Spouse would be visibly and experimentally Instructed by Christ Appearing.
Granates Juice, and spiced Wine [I would lead thee and bring thee into my
Mothers House, who would instruct me]

I press into thy Crowned Cup; Divine
I know thy Person is: The Woman's Seed
Yet is to Reign in view: Thy happy speed
I urge now at the Time so just; An Age
Each Minute seems; I give in Umpirage [I would cause thee to drink of the
spiced Wine, of the Juice of the Pomegranate]

Betwixt my Love and me, what er'st I prayed,
When Liberty from This and the next Expression are used just at the
Deliverance from Literal Babel, and so here from Spiritual, of which That was a
great Type, as appears by Ezekiel's Temple.
Babels Thrall delayed
Pressed me so hard; (be it of this time
The happy Signal) Now when FALLS in chime
The Babel, night Spiritual, I pray [His left Hand should be under my Head, His
right Hand should embrace me]

Let His Left Hand my Head support, each Day
He stays; His Right me embrace, as loves dear pawn,
My Nuptial Morn is now just at its dawn.
[I charge you oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem]
This Adjuring the Daughters of Salem, is used three Times in this Song. 1.
Before Christ Appearing in Liberty by Cyrus, that so Eminent Type of him, Chap.
2. 7. 2. Before the Incarnation, Chap. 3. 5. and 3. here before his Appearance
to his Glorious Kingdom, and here it is very Remarkable, it is without that
Intimation of Terror by the Roes and Hinds of the Field, now brought in
subjection to Christ: Thus in Prophetical Scripture it is a Rule; Likeness of
Expression, signifies some especial Resemblance of Times and States.
And until then, you Salem's Daughters hear
My solemn Charge; Which now no weight of fear
Is possible, or needs to enforce, Those Roes
And Hinds so wild now tamed will not discompose [That ye stir not up nor awake my
Love till he please]

Your Peace, as Salvages enraged; But the Awes
Of my Great Love so near to come are Laws
Of greatest Power; That Him you not displease
In gracious Posture; Ruffle not his Ease,
Until that often Repeated, Self-same-day
Be broke, and the last Shadows fly away.
Chorus. The Appearance of the Ten Tribes, as on a sudden.
[Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning on her Beloved]
The Desert, and coming up the from Wilderness, leaning on the Everlasting Arms
of her Beloved, as Israel of Old, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. is a High Expression of this
long Exiled State of the Ten Tribes, and Deliverance from it.
Who Is This, that from a tedious Exile mounts,
As if in Desert lost, that all accounts
Of her have failed; Till now propp'd by the Arm
Of Him, who is pleased to Love without a Charm
Of Merit; This ever lasting Arm can reach
All Times, and none that is past his Grasp Impeach.

These are the Ten Tribes now returned, long lost
From all Appearance, on the Four Winds Tossed,
Now stayed, and guided by the Arms, that bear
Whole Nature up, we see them thus appear.
The King. Though others wonder, yet not new to me,
[I raised Thee up under the Apple-Tree]
Of Old I raised Thee, from the The Apple Tree calls to mind the Promise, by
which the Church was first Conceived after Paradise Lost, and fitly here
Remembered.
Apple Tree
Of thy Lost Paradise, (as now from thy desert
[There thy Mother brought thee forth; There she brought Thee forth that bare
Thee]
I call home to my self thy wild'red Heart)
There Eve, All Livings Mother, did adorn
Thy Cradle, There my Church conceived and born,
Was of that Sovereign Promise to Eves Seed,
Wherein I am Supreme; Thus 'twas Decreed.
[The Spouse, as in the Ten Tribes]
This was the universal Temper, and earnest Desire of the Spouse in all parts
of it, to be in the most immediate Enjoyment of Christ personally Appearing.
So long forgotten, I by Love revised
[Set me as a Seal on thy]
Would now from future Forfeiture Fore-pris'd,
Stand sealed; on Thy Heart; Thy Arm; Thy Heart,
[As a Seal on thy Arm]
As deep engraven there, and never to part
From thy endeared Thoughts; and on Thy Arm,
[Thy Love is strong as death; Jealousy is cruel as the Grave]
That to Love's Eye I may be still a Charm.
All these passionate Expressions, signify a jealousy of any Absence of
Christ, Vehement as Fire, and Cruel as the Grave.
Thy Love my Heart does with that Passion fill,
That it without Enjoyment cannot be still;
How Vehement the Coals, how Hot They glow, [The Coals thereof are as Coals of
Fire, which has a most vehement Flame]

That by Love's force Spirits Immortal Blow?
Love unenjoy'd's strong, as the Dismal Gloom
Of Death I have Endured; I feel and dread the Doom
Repeat't; Of loosing Thee anew, does Rave
A Jealousy like to the Cruel Grave,
I have been Cloistered in; Whose Womb does crave
Still Endless more, No Rolling Floods can Quench [Many Waters cannot quench
Love, nor the Floods drown it]

Love's Flames, nor flowing Oceans too deep drench
Its Spirits, or it self to Loss; It has been too shamefully the Sin of
Christian Churches, especially the Grand Apostate, the Roman Church, to take
worldly Glory for Christ's Kingdom, even as a Desire of a Carnal, Pompous
Messiah, was the Sin of the Jews, not understanding this Exalted Kingdom of
Christ our Savior, in its Spiritual, yet Visible Glory.
Nor can
The Riches of the World Bribe off the Man,
That Loves, The Substance of a House would be, [If a Man would give all the
Substance of his House for Love, it would be utterly contemned]

If staked against Love, Refused with Scofferie:
Thy Self now Come, no Mammonized State
Can Vicar for Thee, nor my Passions Sat;
Thy Self I seek, Thy Self alone I prize,
The World of Worlds without Thee I despise.

The Spouse Concerning the Ten Tribes newly Returned.
[We have a little Sister, and she has no Breasts]
Christ having so far owned the Church of the Ten Tribes, the whole Church of
the Jews, (or the Two Tribes) with the Fullness of the Gentiles, apply
themselves to it with earnest Desires of being all manner of ways Serviceable
to it, both by Prayers and Consultations for the Advancement of her Full Gospel
state.
A Youngest Converts Sister's come to View,
Who has no Breasts yet, Her Return's so new:
The Gospel Knowledge is not Fashioned yet
Into those Breasts not yet grown, signify a State yet unformed in the
Knowledge and Doctrine of the Gospel.
Breasts, with Milky Veins so set,
That may Receive, and so disperse the Juice
Of Truth, as Childrens Food through every Sluice. [What shall we do for our
Sister in the day she shall be spoken for]

What shall we in our Prayers then Present?
In our Consults Resolve, That may Indent
With Succor to her Case? A Wall signifies knowledge of Salvation, but low, as
the Fundamentals; The Silver Palace, the highest Improvement so as to shine
into all Eyes.
If She shall stand
Firm, as a Wall of Stone, We'll Counter-band [If she be a Wall]

That Constancy in her Profession; We
With such a Frame of Truth and Sanctity
[We will build upon her a Palace of Silver]
Will her Ennoble, as a Palace Raised
Of Massive Silver, for its Luster Praised
Of every Eye, seating its Light and Beams
Of Holy Laws to flow in Milky streams
[If shebe a Door, we will enclose her with Boards of Cedar]
If She Is As Christ is supremely a Door, so every Church Society is
subordinately a Door, by which the Flock go in and out, and find Pasture, John,
10. 9.
a Door, by which the Tender Flock
May in and out be Guided without Shock
Of Force, or Falsehood, and sweet Pasture find;
That Door with A Door enclosed with Boards of Cedar speaks Princely State and
Safety, with sweetest Pleasure and Enjoyment.
Boards of Cedar we will bind;
With Cedar Boards, whose Safety, State, and Smell
So Princely, shall Attract, Secure and Swell
Its Converts to great Numbers: While these Marks
Of Royal Grace and Favor mount its Sparks
To a Victorious Flame; So Blessed this state
Of Times shall be Glorys to propagate.
Chorus. So Quick indeed is now the Churches Growth,
That nothing lingers with a Languid Sloth.
[The Spouse, as in the Ten Tribes]
Firm Wall of Rock I stand in the Temple Frame,
And my small Breasts swelled to High Towers Name,
[I am a Wall, and my Breasts like Towers]
That Spout from High the Gospel with Renown,
Renown so Great, that Circles in a Crown:
The World of Worlds, is in Scripture Phrase, the thousand Years Happy State of
no value without Christ.
For in the Princes Grace I stood so Fair,
[Then was I in his Eyes, as one that found Favour]
That as a Princely Spouse with Royal Air
Surround'd I Favor found; And His Delight
The Ten Tribes, whose Return is last described so sudden and unthought of, yet
it being in the Time of greatest Effusion of the Spirit, it rises suddenly to
all Perfection, and found Favor, as the Spouse of Christ.
Is now to Honor me with Spousal Right.

Chorus. A Description of the Supreme Kingdom of Christ, under the Parable of
Solomon's Royal Vineyard.
King Schelom had a Royal Vineyard placed,
So that This Vineyard of Baal-Hamon, is in every part most admirably
described, to set out the Glory of Christ's Kingdom, much Excelling Solomon's.
Baal Hamon's Name its Grandeur graced: [Solomon had a Vineyard at Baal-Hamon]

Princely Abundance that Great Name Imports,
This Schelom could not Grasp within the Efforts
Of his own Eye, though Greatest, Wisest, King; [He let out the Vineyard to
Keepers]

With Caution therefore, that each Farmer bring,
A thousand Silverings He Lets it out:
Thus to his State the Circle runs about; [Every one for the Fruit thereof, was
to bring a thousand pieces of Silver]

The Fruits in Silver thus returned supply
By Right the Expense of Schelom's Dignity.

The King. While This some shade to the Royal Vineyard gives,
That I call Mine, as Paint gives to what Lives, [My Vineyard, which is mine,
is before me]

How Dark yet, and how Dead are still the Lines!
How short of the Great Life! For my True Vines
With their whole Plat are The Vineyard of Christ, in his Eye speaks Christ's
Personal Reign, however His Throne is Above, yet it is visible, as Stephen saw
his Glory, on Earth.
always in my Eye;
Each Keeper that I place, I will stand by,
And by my Eye Guide All; No Error shall
So much as in a Point this State Appall:
For as my Saints alike my Vineyard keep
So I Them All, whose Eye's never chained by sleep.

Chorus. The Settlement of the Revenue of the Vineyard is Admirable; The
absolute thousand of the Kingdom, and its Glory and Power is Christ's.
The Thousand then whole Glories perfect Sum
To Thee the Great, the Schelom True must Come; [Thou, O Solomon, a thousand,
and those that keep the Fruit thereof two hundred]

Every Saint, as a Keeper under him has two hundred, not depending on the
hazard of his own Improvement, but upon the absolute Care of Christ, who
secures both his own thousand, and every Saints two hundred: As therefore the
Equality, each two hundred; So that there can be no Forfeiture, makes the
Allowance great.
Two Hundred, without hazard Run, Reward
Those, Thou acceptest, as thy Vineyards Guard.
Now as the Parrity Aggrands the Rate;
So that no Loss can be, Blesses the State:
Seeing all the Saints in this state are Priests of God and Christ, we may
fairly compute; out of Ten entire to Christ, his Communication of two in ten to
each Saint is by way of Eminency* when the Allowance to the Priesthood under
the Law was but one in ten to the whole Body of Priests.
How Royal is it, that the chief Shepherds Ten
Two as reward Communicates! For when
Old Salem's Priesthood Tithe.
Decimate but one
In Ten to a Community, the Tone
Of Blessed New Salem's Priests is stretched alike,
And to each Saint twice one in ten does strike:
For when Ten Hundred to the King does Rise,
Two Hundred to each Saint He does demise:
For every Saint's a Priest, and keeps the Vine,
Himself; The Vineyard by an equal Line
Rises from every Vine: So the Reward
Runs Equal to this Equal Priestly Guard.
This is Essential Glory, yet Degrees
May vary, as in Light the Stars One sees.

The King. Oh Thou that in the The Gardens as many, and the Mount of Spices as
one, speaks those Gardens rising to one Paradise of God, like the Mount of the
New Jerusalem.
Gardens yet do Dwell,
[Thou that dwell in the Gardens]
Which to Mount Paradise of God shall swell
In Beauty, and in Fruits; Now, Now, that All
[Let me hear the Companions harkening to thy Vrice]
Is thus prepared, The Translation of the Words, Let me hear, or cause me to
hear the Companions harkening to thy Voice (as the Hebrew is) is the very same
Sense, and almost those same Words of the Revelation; The Spirit, and the Bride
say, Come, and let him that hears say Come, as easily appears to any one
considerng those Words, Let him that hears say, Come, Revel. 22* 17.
My Spouse, I Would hear thy Call
Ecchoed by every Saint in Harmony;
And then I Come, I quickly Come to Thee.

The Spouse. And the Conclusion is of the very same Importance, I Come quickly,
even so Come Lord Jesus, with this, [Make Haste,] etc. v. 20.
My Voice, Lord Jesus, Thou shall hear, thy Bride
One Spirit Tunes to say with Holy Pride, [Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou
like to a Roe, or a young Heart on the Mountain of Spices]

At such a Day Approaching; Come, yea Come,
As youthful Hearts and Roes on Hills do Roame,
With Bounds so Quick, that every where They'reseen,
Thou on To be like a Roe and a young Heart on the Mountain of Spices, is
opposed to being like a Roe, or a young Heart on the Mountains of Bether, or of
Division: For that Division spoke Evening and Morning: The Mountain of Spices
is All Morning and Day, and to make haste like a young Roe, or young Heart upon
it, is to be always, and every where present on that Mountain.
the Spicy Mount without all screen
Of shade be seen, let no Dark Spot appear,
Unguilded by thy Lightning Quick each where;
So let the Redolency of thy Air
Perfume each Point, and no Ill Blast empair
Those sweetest Breaths; Now be there no Delay,
Haste thee, Lord Jesus, Come, yea Come Away.

The Royal Ointment to an Endless Kingdom, and the Mount of Spices well Agree.
Thee to Anoint, the Mount of Spices Grows,
And to an Endless Royal UNGUENT Flows.
THE EXPOSITOR'S CONCLUSION.
In a Protestant Land, but within the 1260 Days of Sackcloth, and the Beast's
Remaining Forty Two Months, of which one Ten of Years Remains.
THough not in Babel's Land, but Babel's Times
This Sion's Song I sing; As its sweet Chimes
I Skill not to Tune High; So the Repike
Of untuned Ears its True sounds back do strike
With Disacceptance; But One That Song, Revel. 14. 1. etc.
Decad more
Of Years to Light springs Prophecies deep store,
Then will a New Composure soon Inflame
Each Salem's Daughter to Rechant the same.
Then I Great Schelom's I have a firm Assurance, My Humble Endeavors on
Prophecies will be ten Years much better Understood and Accepted.
Humble Poet, whom
Contempt now Locks into a silent Tomb,
Shall by the Comment of those Brighter Days
Rise better Understood, and Crowned with Bays:
This in Diviner Warmths I dare Predict:
And if before that Time My Soul's In Death, the Body is left as the Souls
Widow.
Relic't
Lie down, I Bless God for Enabling me in the Explanation of this Song, above
any other Undertaking, and bind it to my Self as a Greatest Honor.
On it This Epitaph let Sit,
IN PROPHECY, ON SONG OF SONGS HE WRIT.
To Him be Glory by Jesus Christ for Ever. Amen.
FINIS.

