THE PSALMS OF DAVID IN English Meeter, set forth by FRANCIS Rous.

Psalm. 47. Ver. 7.

(...)

April 17. 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
for printing, that (...) Book, entitled, The Psalms of David, and (according
to the desires of many reverend Ministers) be published for the general use:
And for the true correcting of it, be printed by those the Author shall appoint.

John White.

I do appoint Philip N^ill and Peter (...) to print these Psalms.

Francis Rous.



LONDON,

Printed by Ia^ (...), for Philip (...), (...) (...) sign^ of (...) (...) (...)
(...) 164^.

A PREFACE.
THe excellent uses of the Psalms are manifold, yea universal; for they are
good for all spiritual uses and advantages. They have in them Instruction, to
increase our knowledge; Spiritual Fervor, to inflame our zeal; Consolation,
to refresh and revive our fainting souls; Prayers, to fetch blessings from
God; and Praises, to return to God for his blessings. Yea, the very
afflictions of the Saints therein expressed (even their outward sufferings, and
inward dejections and desertions) are no small consolations to us. For, by them
we see that fiery Trials are no strange matters to Saints, and Saints we may
be amid all these fiery Trials. But withal, if we mark the issue of th^se
Trials (often set forth in these Psalms) then we cannot but see strong and
vehement encouragements of Faith, and of that prayer of Faith, which saves the
sick, even those that are sick at heart: yea, sick at the very soul. For how
often do we see a sick soul to begin a Psalm, even in the belly of Hell,
and yet end it in Heaven? So that a Saints soul being as it were in Hell, yet
is near unto Heaven, if it can be earnest with God in these melodious Prayers
of Faith. For God, being thus called on, turns in to the soul; and when God
comes into a soul, he makes a Heaven there, though a Hell were there before.
And then naturally (I speak of a godly nature) do arise in the soul high
Jubilations and Ecstasies, and not these only, but glorious Thanksgivings to
God; to whom alone must be ascribed the bringing of light out of darkness: and
that voice of joy and gladness, which the Saints do hear even at the same
time, when their bones are broken with humiliation.

Briefly, the Psalms are characters and representations of the thoughts,
meditations, and affections of a sanctified soul, throughout all the changes
of her pilgrimage; so that a good man can be in no kind of estate, but he shall
find his own estate in a Psalm: and in a Psalm, he may find thoughts and
expressions which do well agree with that estate, and make it good unto him.

Thus, while the Psalms are ^itted to all the members of the Catholic Church
in all their estates, they may be truly called Catholic Songs, and accordingly
should be ever ready for the use of the truly Catholic members of the Church,
in all the changes of their several estates. And toward this universal use of
them, diverse well-affected persons have turned them into their own languages;
and not only so, but they have turned them also into harmonious Measures, that
they may be still used as Psalms, that is, as spiritual and heavenly Songs.

For the advancement of this profitable use, apprehending many years past
(which experience has showed to be a true conjecture) that a form wholly new
would not please many, who are fastened to things usual and accustomed (though
if Psalms of a new form be read before they be sung, there is no hinderance,
but that they may be presently used; and after a little use will grow familiar,
as the former) I assaied only to change some pieces of the usual version,
even such as seemed to call aloud, and, as it were, undeniably for a change.

These being seen, it was desired that they should be increased; which being
done, they are here subjoyned. I doubt not but the reasons of the changes will
mostly appear in the changes themselves; and the Reader may easily find, that
the places changed might well receive a change, for their Cadence or Currence,
or for some old and abolished words; or, which is more, for agreeing less with
the new Translation, yea, with the Original it self.

If hereby any Saint shall receive an increase of light in his understanding, or
of fervor in his will and affections, I shall desire, first, that God may have
the glory, who is the giver of every good gift; an^ then, that he will requite
the messenger by whom God has sent him a blessing, with this prayer (wherein
he may join himself as a Partner;) That, being freed from the guilt, spot,
and power of sin, and daily renewed in the inner man, amid the decays of the
outward, by the free mercy of a most gracious Father, and the precious Merits
of a most sufficient Savior, and the communion of a most holy and hallowing
Spirit, he may be admitted into the heavenly Quire of glorified Saints and
Angels, and with them sing everlasting Hallelujahs, to the most glorious
Trinity, in eternal felicity.

To the READER, for his more full and easy satisfaction.
IF it be too much to compare all the following Psalms with the old, and both
with the new Translation or Original, the Reader may take a taste of what has
been done by comparing only these Psalms (or some of them) whose numbers here
immediately follow:

2. 7. 10. 17. 18. 22. 27. 29. 31. 35. 36. 37. 42. 46. 49. 55. 57. 58. 62. 63.
71. 73. 74. 78. 80. 83. 89. 90. 91. 92. 104. 107. 119. 135. 137. 143.

Or if he desire to see some paternes of places, that seem to call aloud for
amendment (among diverse) these are presented to him:

Psalm. 24. 6.
This is the Bro^d of Travelers in seeking of his grace,
As Jacob did the Israelites in that time of his race.
Psalm. 35. 8.
Lord, when will thou amend this gear? why do thou stay and pause?
O rid my soul, my only dear, out of these Lions claws.
Psalm. 58. 6.
O God, break thou their teeth at once, within their mouths throughout:
The tuskes, that in their great jaw-bones, like Lions whelps hang out.
Psalm. 74. 12.
Why do thou draw thy hand a-backe, and hide it in thy lap?
O pluck it out; and be not slack to give thy soes a rap.
Psalm. 91. 10.
Thou shall not need none ill to fear, with thee it shall not ^ell.
Psalm. 92. 6.
The man unwise has not the wit this gear to pass to bring.
Psalm. 119 110.
In wisdom I do pass also the ancient men indeed;
And all because to keep thy Laws I held it aye best reed.
Verse 120.
My flesh, alas, is taken with fear, as though it were benumbed:
For when I see thy judgments, straight I am as one aston'd.
Psalm. 135. 9.
He has in thee showed wonders great, O Egypt, void of vaunts,
On Pharaoh thy cursed King, and his severe servants.
These, and the like places, may the Reader find amended; and some Psalms set
to harder Tunes, (and not easily sung by the unskilful, nor done without
roughness) changed: and the whole body of the Psalms not much short of a
tolerable smoothness.

THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM. I.
THe man is blessed, that to walk in wicked ways does fear;
And stands not in the sinners path* nor sits in scomers chair.

And on that Law does meditate with pleasure, day and night.

Which in his season does no^ ^aile his pleasant fruit to bea^e.
Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand:
Even so all things shall prosper well that this man takes in hand.

But as the dust, which from the earth the wind drives to and fro.

But sinners from the just shall divided, and removed.

Whereas the way of wicked men ends in their overthrow.
PSALM. II.
WHy did the Gentiles madly rage against the worlds great King?
Why did the people of the Jews imagine a vain thing?

And counsel took against the Lord, and Christ his Son most dear.

And cast away their cords from us, they shall not keep us under.

With scorn shall at their folly laugh, the Lord shall them deride.



He said to me, Thou art my Son, this day begat I thee.

The utmost ends of all the earth shall thy possession be.

And, like a potters vessel, them in pieces dash abroad.

And be ye well instructed all that judge the earth below.

And when in him ye do rejoice, withal yet tremble ye.

Lest angry he become, and so ye perish from the way.

Oh then all they that trust in Christ shall happy be, and blessed.
PSALM. III.
O Lord, how much do they increase which hate and trouble me!
Many say of my soul, For him in God no help shall be.
But, Lord, thou art a shield for me, in thee my help does lie;
Thou art my glory, and my head thou liftest up on hie.

He heard me from his holy hill, and help to me did send.

Because I knew assuredly the Lord did me sustain.

Though they themselves against me se^, and round incompast me.

On all my foes; the cheeks and teeth of sinners thou have broke.

And on thy chosen people is thy blessing, and thy love.
PSALM. IIII.
O God, that art my righteousness, Lord, hear me when I call;
Thou have set me at liberty, when I was bound and thrall.

For unto thee uncessantly to cry I will not rest.

Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies?

And when unto him I do call, the Lord then hears me.

And in your chamber quietly see you your selves convert.

And ever in the living Lord let your trust fixed be.

But, Lord, grant us thy countenance, thy favor, and thy grace.

Then they that of their corn and wine full great increase have had.

Because thou only me to dwell in safety, Lord, do make.
PSALM. V.
GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, consider what I say:

Lord, in the morning shall thou hear my voice, that calls on thee:
For in the morning shall my prayer to thee directed be.

With wickedness of sinful men, none evil shall dwell with thee.

The workers of iniquity to thee all hateful are.

And thou do hate the man of blood, and wicked policies.

And reverently will worship thee toward thine holy place.

And thine own way which I should walk before my face disclose.

Their throat an open sepulcher, their tongue does gloss and feign.

For much sin cast them out, who have rebellious been to thee.
But still make glad by thy defense all those that trust in thee;
And let them all that love thy Name, in thee right joyful be.

With favor him, as with a shield, thou compass wilt, and crown.
PSALM. VI.
Lord, though thine anger I deserve, in wrath rebuke me not;
Nor on me lay thy chastening hand in thy displeasure hot.

And heal me, Lord, because thou know my bones much vexed are.

But, Lord, how long will thou delay to cure my misery?

And for thy boundless mercies sake save, and deliver me.

Who with his tongue shall give thee thanks that sleeps in the grave?

Each night I cause my bed to swim, and wash it with my tears.

Because I many troubles bear from all my cruel foes.

Because the Lord has heard the voice of my complaint and cry.

But it received at my hands, and took it in good part.

Let them return, and suddenly ashamed let them be.
PSALM. VII.
OLord my God, I put my trust and confidence in thee:
From all that do me persecute save, and deliver me.

Whilst there is none to succor me, and rid me out of thrall.

Or else if I be found in fault, or guilty in thy sight:

(Yea even the man that caussesse was mine enemy, I did save.)

My life on earth, and in the dust mine honor make to lie.

Awake, according to thy word, my judgment to maintain.

Thou therefore for their sakes return, and high exalted be.

According to my righteousness, and mine integrity.
The second part.

The righteous man, O righteous God, who reins and hearts do try.

For those that are upright in heart he mightily does save.

But he with him that wi^ed is is angry every day.

Does whet his sword, and bend his bow, and will against him fight.

For those that do me persecute, and hate without a cause.

And mischief he conceived has, and forth a lie has brought.

But he is fallen into the ditch, which he himself did make.

And all the mischief that he wrought, shall fall upon his head.

And with my song will praise the Name of him that is most Hie.
PSALM. VIII.
O God our Lord, how wonderful are thy works every where!
Which have thy glory set on high, above the heavens clear.

For in those babes thy might is se^n, thy graces they disclose.

The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars in order as they stand:

Or, what the son of mortal man, that thou do him consider?

With glory and with honor great he crowned was by thee.

And at his feet have all things set, that he should keep them under.

Fowls of the air, fish in the sea, and all that therein breed.

How excellent in all the earth is thy most glorious Name?
PSALM. IX.
WIth my whole heart to thee, O Lord, will I give praises due;
And I thy great and mighty works of wonder forth will show.

I will sing praise unto thy Name, O thou that are most H^.

Even at thy glorious presence, Lord, they fall, and perish shall.

Thou sit in the throne, and there right judgment thou have past.

That afterward the memory of them cannot be found.

And with them wholly perished is their memorial.

And he prepared has his throne true judgment to maintain.

And all the people shall be judge with right and equity.

In times of trouble will he be their refuge and their rest.

Because thou never failedst them, that truly sought for thee.
The second part.

Among all nations show abroad his noble acts and will.

Forgetting not the afflicted heart, that seeks to him for rest.

Who from the gates of death art wont to raise me up again.

And that in thy salvation, Lord, my soul may still rejoice.

And in the net that they did set their own feet fast are shared.

When sinners hands do make the snares wherewith themselves are caught.

And all the nations that forget God, who their maker was.

Not shall the waiting of the poor in vain for ever be.

But let the heathen folk receive their judgment in thy sight.

That so themselves to be but men, the nations well may see.
PSALM. X.
O Lord, why from thy servants sight now stand thou so far?
Why hidest thou thy face from us, when times of trouble are?

But in the plots which they have framed, let their own solves be caught.

Who is inrich't by covetousness, whom yet God does detest.

So that they seek not God, but all their thoughts have God denide.

And at his enemies all in scorn he puffs, and sets them light.

And no adversity or grief for ever shall I see.

Under his tongue iniquity and mischief harbor still.

Against the poor that by him pass, his cruel eyes are bent.

And when he draws him to his net, the poor his prey does make.

That so more easily his strength the poor may overthrow.
The second part.

The Lord does closely hide his face, he will it never see.

Lift up thy hand, forget not, Lord, the poor that be oppressed.

Thou will not, in his heart he says, avenge his injuries.

The poor do hide themselves by thee, the orp^aus thou do aid.

Seek out, and judge his wickedness, till none by thee be found.

The heathen quite are perished, and driven from his land.

Thou will prepare their hearts, and thou will cause thine eat to hear.

That they may be no more oppressed by men of worldly might.
PSALM. XI.
I Trust in God, then to my soul how dare ye thus to say,
Unto your mountain as a bird escape, and fly away?

To shoot at the upright in heart, and closely him to hit.

Herein what can the righteous do, but humbly pray and mourn?

His eyes see all men, his eyelids do try them every one.

And those that violence do love, in his soul hates he.

This is the portion of their cup of sin, this is the gain.

And with a pleased countenance beholds the upright.
PSALM. XII.
HElp, Lord, for good and godly men do perish and decay;
And faith and truth from worldly men are parted clean away.

For every man bethinketh how to flatter, lie, and fain.

To speak proud words, and make great brags, the Lord shall cut them out.

Our tongues are ours, we ought to speak, what Lord shall us control?

Arise will I now, says the Lord, and them restore to rest.

And has no less then seven times in sire been purisi'd.

And save us now and evermore from this ill kind of men.

The vilest of the sons of men when they exalted see.
PSALM. XIII.
HOw long, Lord, shall I ever thus of thee forgotten be?
How long thy favor and thy face will thou thus hide from me?

How long yet shall mine enemy thus triumph over me?

Lighten mine eyes, lest that I sleep as one by death possessed.

And those that trouble me rejoice, when me they moved see.

In thy relief and saving health right glad shall be my heart.

For hearing my request, with me he has dealt bounteously.
PSALM. XIIII.
THe foolish man within his heart has said, God there is none:
Corrupt are they, their deeds are vile, and good not one has done.

To see if any one were wise, and sought his God to find.

That in the world did any good, I say, there was not one.

That they my people eat like bread? on God they do not call.

For in the generation of just men God does dwell.

Because he puts his trust in God, and calls upon his name.

Thy promise made to Israel from out of Sion Hill?

Then Jacob greatly shall rejoice, and Israel glad shall be.
PSALM. XV.
OLord, within thy Tabernacle, who shall inhabit still?
Or whom will thou receive to dwell in thy most holy Hill?

Whose heart does think the very truth, whose tongue speaks no deceit.

Nor willingly does move false tales, which might impair the same.

But he does greatly honor those who love and fear the Lord.

Although he make his covenant so, that he does lose thereby.

Nor has received a reward against the innocent.
He that does these things faithfully, which here approved we see,
Shall from the state of blessedness removed ^ever be.
PSALM. XVI.
LOrd, keep me, for I trust in thee: my soul thus speaks in me,


In those men only I delight in virtue that excel.

Who in their blind and carnal zeal to Idols do make haste.

I will not touch, nor yet thereof my lips shall make report.

He has appointed me my lot, and it he will maintain.

Mine heritage assigned to me does please me very well.

So that by night my inward thoughts do good instructions see.

For he does stand at my right hand, I therefore shall not fall.

My flesh, though sleeping in the grave, yet there in hope shall rest.

Nor will thou leave thine holy One corruption for to see.

Fullness of joy, at thy right hand there is eternal bliss.
PSALM. XVII.
OLord, give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain;
And hear my prayer that comes forth from lips that do not feign.

With favor let thine eyes behold the things that equal be.

For that my mouth shall not transgress, I purposed in my mind.
As for the works of wicked men, and paths perverse and ill;
Instructed by thy holy Word, from them I kept me still.

That from thy undefiled way my steps may never swerve.

Now therefore hear my speech and suit, incline thine care to me.

Does save all them that trust in thee, from those which them withstand.

And under covert of thy wings desend me secretly.

And from my foes that go about my soul for to destroy.

And with their mouths they do delight to talk presumptuously.
The second part.

And bowing down, they mischief muse, their eyes look to the ground.

Or like a Lions whelp, that lurkes within some secret place.

And save me from the wicked man, which is thy cutting sword.
From men which are thy hand, O Lord, men of this world they be;
Which have their portion in this lift, beyond they do not see.

Their children have enough, and leave to theirs the rest behind.

And with thy likeness, when I wake, I satisfied shall be.
PSALM. XVIII.
OGod, which art my rock and strength, thee dearly love will I:
Thou art my castle and defense in my necessity.

My refuge, buckler, and my shield, the horn of all my health.

So from my cruel enemies all, he will me safe preserve.

The violent floods of wicked men did make me much afraid.

And for my death there was prepared a deadly trapping net.

He from his Temple heard my voice, which came to him on hie.

The strong foundations of the hills: for they his wrath did fear.

His mouth breathed wasting fire, and coals were kindled by the same.

And underneath his feet he cast the darkness of the sky.

And he did fly, yea on the wings of winds did swiftly fly.
The second part.

He compast is with waters dark, and thick clouds of the sky.

And then of hail, and coals of fire a fearful storm there was.

Therewith abroad hot coals of fire, and battering hailstones went.

He shot his fearful lightnings out, and them did put to flight.

And at thy blasting breath the worlds foundations open lie.

And pluck me out of waters great, that would me overflow.

From those that hated me, for they were much too strong for me.

Of my calamity and grief; yet was the Lord my stay.
The third part.

He did deliver me, because he did delight in me.

After the cleanness of my hands he gave me my reward.

And have not with a wicked heart departed from my God.

From me his statutes out of mind I did not put away.

And watchfully I kept my self from mine iniquity.

After the cleanness of my hands, which his pure eyes did see.

And thou will show thy self upright to the upright in heart.

But thou to those that froward are thy self wilt froward show.

And wilt bring down the countenance of them, whose looks are hie.

The Lord my God will also make my darkness to be light.
The fourth part.

And by my God, assisting me, I over-leap a wall.

He is a sure defense to such as in his faith abide.

And to his Church, who is a rock, except our Lord alone?

And he it is that makes my way perfect, and right to be.

And then upon my places high he me aloft does lift.

So that to break a bow of steel mine arms from him have might.

Thy right hand holds me up, thy love greatly exalts me:

That I go safely, and my feet are kept from sliding free.
The fifth part.

Nor did I turn again, till I an end of them did make.

Under my feet my foes are cast, and there down fall they slain.

That under me mine enemies thou have enforced to bow.

That such as hate me causlesly slay and destroy I might.

Yea, they did cry unto the Lord, but he no answer gave.

And I did cast them out as dirt upon the street that lies.
The sixth part.

And to the heathen me have made a ruler, and a head.

As soon as they of me do hear, they shall submit to me.

And from those places be afraid, wherein they closely lay.

That is my rock and saving health, praised be he always.

The people under me that bow, by him subdued b^.

Above my foes; and from the man of violence set me free.

By me before them in a song thy Name shall praised be.

To David he does mercy show, and to his seed for ever.
PSALM. (...).
THe glory of Almighty God the heavens do speak and show;
The firmament his handy-worke presents to our view.

And a true knowledge of the same night shows unto night.

Their speech through all the earth, their words go to the wide worlds end.

Whom, as a bridegroom coming forth, we from his chamber see.

As a strong man he does rejoice, swiftly to run his race.

Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out.

His Testimony is most sure, and makes the simple wise.

Pure are his Precepts, and give light to eyes that be full blind.

The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.

The honey, and the hony-combe are not so sweet as they.

And in performance of the same there shall be great reward.

Then, Lord, from all my secret faults cleanse, and deliver me.

So I upright and innocent from the great sin shall be.

Accept, O Lord, for thou my strength, and my redeemer art.
PSALM. XX.
IN trouble and adversity the Lord God hear thee still;
The majesty of Jacobs God defend thee from all ill.

And let him out of Sion hill support and strengthen thee.

With favor thy burnt sacrifice let him receive from thee.

And all thy counsel and intents full well perform may he.

Display our banners; and the Lord thy prayers all fulfill.

Will answer him, by sending down salvation strong and great.

But we remember God our Lord, that keeps promise just.


PSALM. XXI.
O Lord, how joyful is the King in thy strength and thy power!
How vehemently does he rejoice in thee his Savior!

To him thou nothing have denied of that he did require.

And thou have set upon his head a crown of perfect gold.

To have long life, yea such a life as ever should endure.

Bright honor and great majesty thou have upon him laid.

And with thy cheerful countenance wilt comfort him always.

His mercy will not suffer him to be removed away.

Find out thy foes, and let them feel the power of thy right hand.

God shall them swallow in his wrath, his fire them up shall eat.

And from among the sons of men their seed shall end and cease.

Yet did they fail, and had no power for to perform the same.

And charge thy bow-strings readily against thine enemies face.

So will we greatly praise thy power, and gladly sing to thee.
PSALM. XXII.
MY God, my God, what is the cause that thou do me forsake?
And do not help me when my words a loud complaint do make?

I cease not in the night, and yet thou hear not at all.

The praises of thine Israel thou justly do possess.

They trusted, and from their distress then did thou set them free.

And for the faith they had in thee, they were not put to shame.

I am a vile reproach of men, the people me despise.

They shoot the lip, and shake the head, and thus in scorn they say,

Now let him help him, if his love so great unto him be.

When I was on my mothers breasts, thou me to hope did make.

And from my mothers belly thou my God most gracious art.
The second part.

Since I have none to be my help, my succor, and relief.

The chiefest B^ls of Basan hill ^e round about enclose.

Much like a Lion roaring out, and ramping for his prey.

My heart does in my body melt, like wax against the heat.

Unto my jaws, and I am brought to dust of death at last.

Conspire against me cursedly, they pierce my hands and feet.

Yet still upon me they do look, and still they me behold.

And they by casting lots did try to whom my coat would fall.

But rather, ^ith thou art my strength, to help me, Lord, make speed.

And keep my soul, my darling dear, from dogs that would devour.

From the sharp horns of Unicornes, when I was heard of thee.

And in the assembly of the Saints will give thee praises due.
The third part.

The seed of Jacob, fear him all that Isreal's children be.

Nor from him has he hid his face, but heard when he did cry.

And in their sight that do him fear, my vows performed shall be.

To know the Lord, shall praise his Name, their hearts shall live for ever.

The nations and their kin^eds all, shall bow before his face.

And as their highest governor he over them shall reign.

Yea, all shall bow before his face, which go down to the dust.

Yet shall a seed him serve, which shall be called Gods generation.

Unto a people yet unborne, and that this done has he.
PSALM. XXIII.
MY shepherd is the living Lord, and he that does eo feed;
How can I then lack any thing whereof I stand in need?

And after drives me to the streams which run most pleasantly.

Conducting me in his right paths, even for his own Names sake.

Thy rod, thy staff do comfort me, and thou art with me still.

My head with oil thou do anoint, my cup does overflow.

And ever in the house of God my dwelling place shall be.
PSALM. XXIIII.
THe earth is Gods, and wholly his the fullness of it is:
The world, and those that dwell therein he made, and they are his.

And laid below the liquid floods, to flow beneath the land.

Or pass into thy holy place, there to continue still?

His soul not set on vanity, who has not sworn to guile.

And he shall righteousness receive from God, that does him save.

Jacobs true seed, that of thy face does seek the blessed fight.

Then entering in by you ye shall the King of glory see.

The mighty Lord, that conquers all in war, that with him fight.

And for the King of glory great an entrance there shallbe.

He is the King, to whom most due all praise, and glory be.
PSALM. XXV.
I List mine heart to thee, my God, and guide most just;
Now suffer me to take no shame: for in thee do I trust.

And let them not be overthrown that put their trust in thee.

Therefore thy paths, and thy right ways unto me, Lord, descry.

Thou art my God and Savior, on thee I wait alway^

Think on thy loving kindnesses; for they have been for ever.

In mercy free, remember me, and for thy goodness great.
His mercy is full sweet, his truth a perfect guide:
Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, and such as go aside.

He will direct in all his ways the lowly and the meek.

To those that do his covenant keep, and do obey his will.
The second part.

To grant me pardon for my sin: for it is wondrous great.

To lead his life in such a way as he does best accept.

His seed and his posterity inherit shall the land.

and unto them his covenant, he by his spirit does show.

^e is my Savior, and shall pluck my feet out of the net.

For I am poor and desolate, and comfordesse alone.

Bring me out of this misery, necessity, and need.

Remit my sin, and mine offense, and make me clean again.
O Lord, behold my foes how they do still increase;
Pursuing me with deadly hate, that feign would live in peace.

And let me not be overthrown, because I trust in thee.

For on thee do I wait, whose love keeps those that do thee serve.

Redeem, O God, thine Israel out of his troubles all.
PSALM. XXVI.
LOrd, be my Judge, and thou shall (...) my paths be right and plain:
I trust in God, and therefore hope still steadfast to remain.

As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins and heart epsy.

And I have walked in thy truth, and kept that holy way.

To come in house I do refuse with the deceitful train.

I will not sit with wicked men, their company I fly.

Then I thine altar compass, Lord, mine offering there to make.

And solemnly thy mighty works of wonder to express.

And in that place I do delight where does thine honor dwell.

Nor yet my life among those men; that seek much blood to spill.

And whiles of justice sale they make, bribes their right hands do fill.

Redeem me, and thy mercy grant, when I through frailty slide.

I therefore will thee praise, O Lord, in all the peoples sight.
PSALM. XXVII.
THe Lord is both my health and light, shall man make me dismayed?
Since God does giveme strength and might, why should I be afraid?

But when against me they arose, they fell with all their power.

Though war against me rise, I will be confident in this.

The same of him I will require, and seek it instantly:
That while I live, my dwelling place may in Gods house be still;
To see the beauty of his face, and to inquire his will.

And keep me secret by his side, as on a rock most sure.

On high above mine enemies, that did encompasse me.
Therefore within his house will I give sacrifice of praise;
With Psalms, and Songs I will apply, to land the Lord always.

Have mercy on me graciously, and do thou answer me.

My heart did answer unto thee, Lord, I will seek thy face.
The second part.

My help thou have been to this day, be still my God and guide.

Yet then the Lord will me receive, and up he will me take.

Because mine enemies watch for me, to cause my steps to slide.

Because false witnesses do rise, that breathe out cruelty.

The goodness of the Lord to see in life that still shall last.

And then he strengthen shall thy heart; upon him wait and trust.
PSALM. XXVIII.
O Lord my rock, to thee I cry, to me an answer send;
Lest by thy silence I be like those that to grave descend.
that unto thee does cry:
When to thine holy Oracle I lift mine hands on ^ie.

Whose hearts do wish their neighbors hurt, when words of peace they say.

And wrought that mischief with their hands, give them due punishment.

Of Gods great works, nor did regard that which his hands have wrought.

My voice, my prayer, and my complaint that heard so willingly.

And by his help my heart made glad shall praise him in a song.

And he alone the saving strength of his anointed is.

Increase them, Lord, and rule their hearts, that they may never swerve.
PSALM. XXIX.
GIve, O ye mighty to the Lord, with hearts most willing give
All strength and glory to the Lord, by whom you move and live.

Worship the Lord that sits on high in beauteous holiness.

On many waters does the Lord send forth his voice of wonder.

The voice of God right glorious is, and full of majesty.

C^lars of Lebanon he does break in pieces with his thunder,

And like to a young ^corne, the mountain Syrion.



And in his Temple showed by all his glorious praises are,

Yea, as the King of all the world the Lord shall ever sit.

The Lord will bless his chosen flock with everlasting peace.
PSALM. XXX.
ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord, I give to thee;
Who did not make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me.

Thou ga^'st an ear, and did provide to ease me with relief.
Lord, thou have caused from the graw my soul up to ascend;
And from the pit thou did me save, life thou to me did send.

Still praise him, when remembered is his glorious holiness.

Though weeping for a night may last, the morning joy supplies.

Tush, I am sure to feel none ill, this wealth shall not decay.

But when thou turnd'st away thy face, my mind was much dismayed.

My humble supplication I up to the Lord did send.

For, shall the dust thee glorify? shall dust thy truth make known?

Do not my troubled soul forsake, but, Lord, mine helper be.

My sackcloth thou did take from me, and made me to rejoice.

My Lord my God, to thee will I give laud and thanks always.
PSALM. XXXI.
LOrd, let me never be ashamed, because I trust in thee;
But in thy righteousness and truth, save and deliver me.
and quickly set me free:
A rock of strength, a mighty fort of safety be to me.

For thy Names sake me therefore lead, and guide me in thy power.

Because thou only art my strength, I fly to thee for aid.

Of thy free grace, Lord God of truth, thou have redeemed me.

But on the Lord I put my trust, my heart on him relies.

Thou weighest, and do know my soul in her adversities.

But thou my feet at liberty in a large room have placed.
The second part.

My soul, my belly, and mine eye consume away with grief.
My life is spent with grief, my years in sighs away do fly:
My strength does fail, my bones consume for mine iniquity.

A fear unto my friends am I, who see me from me fly.

I like a broken vessel am that quite is perished.

While they against me did conspire to take my life away.

And then thou art my God, I said, a gracious God to me.

From bloody hands of all my foes, that follow after me.

O save me for thy mercies sake, I to thy mercy fly.
The third part.

But let the wicked be ashamed, and silent in the grave.

And hard reports in pride and scorn on righteous men do lay.

Whose trust before the sons of men fixed on thee does appear!

From strife of tongues thou closely shall as in a tent them hide.

In a strong city kindness great, and mavelous to me.

But even then thou heard'st the voice of my requests and cries.

And plentifully does reward the proud, as he deserves.

He shall you strengthen all, whose hope does on the Lord depend.
PSALM. XXXII.
THe man is blessed, all whose sins are graciously remitted;
And whose transgressions by the Lord are covered, and acquitted.

Which in his heart has hid no guile, nor fraud is found therein.

With plaint and ^oaring all the day through torments manifold.

Which made into the Summers drought my moisture turned to be.

I said, My sins I will confess, then did thou them remit.

Surely to him shall not come near the floods of waters great.

With songs of my deliverance thou do encompasse me.

And will thee guide as I my self have learned by proof and sight,

Whose mouth without a reine or bit from harm thou can not rule.

But mercy him that trusts in God shall round about enclose.

Let the upright of heart for joy in shouts lift up their voice.
PSALM. XXXIII.
YE righteous in the Lord rejoice, it comely is and right,
That upright men with thankful voice should praise the Lord of might.

Sing to him with an Instrument that has a ten-fold string.

Because right are his words, and true are all his works and ways.



And the great hosts of them the Lord all by his breath did make.
he of the seas does gather:
As in a storehouse he does set, and lay the depth together.

Let all that in the world do dwell an awe unto him bear.

So stable this whole world did make, that it does steadfast stand.

He does defeat the multitude of their device, and thought.

The thoughts which in his heart arise, from age to age endure.
The second part.



And from his place of glorious light all here on earth does see.

And he their works does understand, and of them notice take.
By greatness of an host no King assure his safety can;
Great strength does not deliverance bring unto a mighty man.

Nor shall deliver any man by his exceeding might.

Even those that fear him reverently, and on his mercy trust.

And them alive in famine keep, when others pined be.

He is our shield us to defend, he is our helper strong.

For in his holy Name we had our trust, and in his might.

As w^ always with one accord do only trust in the.
PSALM. XXXIIII.
I Will at all times bless the Lord, who still preserves me;
His praises in my thankful mouth continually shall be.

The humble men shall hear thereof, and hearing shall be glad.

Together with one heart and voice, let us exalt his Name.

And graciously delivered me from all that I did fear.

Their faces not ashamed are when they his light do see.

And him did in his mercy great from all his troubles save.

And safely does deliver them from dangers that are near.

Blessed is the man, that trusts in him with all his heart and mind.

For those that fear him never shall want any needful thing.

But they that truly seek the Lord shall not want any good.
The second part.

I shall you teach the perfect way how ye the Lord should fear.



Enquire for peace and quietness, and follow it with speed.

His ears he opens to receive their just complaints and cries.

And cuts away the memory that should of them remain.

And graciously delivers them out of their troubles all.

He saves also the sorrowful, the poor, and meek in spirit.

But out of all adversities the Lord does them deliver.

That by the most enraged foes not one shall broken be.

And those that hate the Saints, shall be to desolation brought.

And of all them that trust in him, none desolate shall be.
PSALM. XXXV.
LOrd, plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might;
Fight on my part against all those that seek with me to fight.

Stand up for me, and fight the field, to help me from distress.

And to my soul in mercy say, Thy Savior I will be.
that seek my soul to spill:
Let them turn back, and fly with shame, that think to work me ill.

So these men let Gods anger chase, and make them fly away.

And let an Angel come from thee, and persecute them all.

And without cause they in my way for my soul dug it.

Let them be trapt in their own snare, and in their mischief fall.

In him my soul shall much rejoice, because he says me.

My bones shall say, rejoicing all, Lord, who is like to thee*

The poor and needy safety have by thee from spoil and wrong.
to witness things untrue
And to accuse me they devise of that I never knew.
The second part.

When thus they pay my good with ill, my spoiled soul does mourn.

My humble soul did fast and pray, which prai'r to me returned.

I sadly bowed down, as one that mourns for his mother.

Abjects their secret meetings had, and ceast not me to tear.

Who mock me with their bitter jests, and gnash their teeth on me.

And let my soul, my darling be from Lions kept by thee.

And where the mighty throngs are met, thou shall be praised by me.
O do not glad mine enemy, which hates me wrongfully;
Nor let him winking with his eye enjoy my misery.

That craftily destroy they may the quiet of the land,

So, so, our hearts desire, they say, on him our eye does see.

O Lord, be thou not far from me, withholding still thine hand.

Awake, my cause in hand to take, my God, my Lord of might.
The third part.

And let them not for my distress on me triumphing be.

Let them not boast, O Lord, that they have wholly swallowed me.

Those that against me swell, their name in great contempt be had.

And let them still with heart and voice thus praise the Lord, and say:

His servants prosperousnesse to see, who greatly does delight.

My thankful tongue all the day long thy praises shall express.
PSALM. XXXVI.
WHen I consider in mine heart the (...) wicked way,
Gods fear is not before his eyes, it to mine heart does say.

Until the hatefulness be sound of his iniquities.

And he refuses to be wise, and to do good does leave.

He sets himself in ways not good, ill he abhors not.

So does thy truth it self extend unto the cloudy sky.

Like a great deep; Lord, man and beast preserved are by thee.

Therefore in shadow of thy wings men's sons their trust shall place.

And with thy river of delight they shall be filled by thee.

And in thy light we are full sure eternal light to see.

Thy righteousness declare and show to men upright in heart.

Let not the hand of wicked men me shake, and overthrow.

Down are they cast, and never shall have power again to rise.
PSALM. XXXVII.
FRet not thy self at wicked men, when great in power they be;
^vie those that sin commit, ^en thou their wealth do see.
^or as green grass, and flourishing herbs ^re cut and wither away;
shall their great prosperity soon pass, fade, and decay.
Trust thou therefore in God alone, to do well give thy mind;
(...) thou have the land as thine, and there sure ^ood shall find.
And in the Lord delight thy self; love him with all thy heart;
(...) then what shall thy heart desire, ^e will to thee impart.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, On him by faith depend;
^d he shall bring thine enterprise unto a blessed end.
He shall bring forth thy righteousness clear like the shining light:
(...) judgment that approves thy cause, as noon day shall be bright.
Rest in the Lord, and wait on him, within thee do not fret;
Or him who prospering in his way, success in sin does get.
Take heed that thou from anger cease, and causlesse wrath forsake;
^et not thy self in any wise, ^est evil ways thou take.
For evil doers shall the Lord cut off with his own hand;
But those that wait upon the Lord, inherit shall the land.

Though thou his place consider well, there him thou shall not see.
The second part.

And in great peace abundantly delight themselves they shall.

He g^sheth on him with his teeth, as if he would him slay.

For that his day, his day of grief is coming he does see.

The man upright in life to kill; the poor to overthrow.

And every bow shall broken be, which thus ill bended was.

Then unto many wicked men their plenteous riches are.

But he in safety shall preserve, and stablish the upright.

He knows that their inheritance shall everlasting be.

For in the days of famine them the Lord shall fill and feed.

They shall consume as fat of lambs, and like smoke pass away.
The third part.

Whereas the righteous mercy shows, and gives his own away.

But they that cursed be of him shall perish by his hand.

For in the path of righteous men he greatly does delight.

Because the Lord with his right hand upholds him graciously.

The just forsaken, nor his seed like beggars bread to crave.

And after him a blessing leaves unto his blessed seed.

And through Gods mercy then be sure for evermore to dwell.

Preserved still are they, but cut off the sinners race shall be.
The fourth part.

And in the same his dwelling place shall ever steadfast stand.

His tongue of judgment does discourse, he loves to speak the right.

So that his goings do not slide, nor steps away depart.

He hates him so, that cruelly he seeks him to slay.

The righteous will he not condemn, when he in judgment stands.

The earth to inherit, and the fall of wicked men shall see.

I saw him spreading out himself, like to a Laurel green.

Yea, though I sought him narrowly, yet found he could not be.

For thou shall see that this man's end is surely peace and bliss.

This is the end of wicked men, to be cut off for ever.

Who in their troubles sends them aid, of his mere grace and love.

The righteous he shall surely save, because in him they trust.
PSALM. XXXVIII.
LOrd, though thine anger I deserve, in wrath rebuke me not;
Nor lay on me thy chastning hard in thy displeasure hot.


This grief I have, because thy wrath is forth against me gone;
And in my bones there is no rest, for sin that I have done.

And, as a weighty burden, they too heavy are for me.

Because my foolishness and sin have loathsome been to thee.

And in great pain I all the day go mourning heavily.




The second part.

Those that to me before were near, now stand from the afar.

To do me hurt, spoke lies, and thought on treason all the day.

As a dumb man I did become, whose mouth not opened was.



Nor magnify themselves, when they my foot to slip do see.

My vexing sorrow in my sight appears continually.

I will be sorry for my sin, and from it I will turn,

The number of them does increase that causlesse are my foes.

Mine adversaries are, because what is good I sollow hard.

O Lord, thou my salvation art, haste to give help to me.
PSALM. XXXIX.
I Said, that I would carefully take heed unto my way;
Lest with my tongue I should offend and it should go astray.

Not once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sight.

Yea, from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will.

At length the fire kindled was, then spoke I with my tongue.

That I may know how frail I am, and herce must shortly go.

As nothing, surely, in his strength man is but vanity.

In getting goods, and cannot tell who shall the same enjoy.

Surely on thee my soul does wait, my hope is all in thee.
The second part.

And to the foolish a reproach, O let me never be.

Because I knew it was thy work, who do afflict in love.

I am consumed by the blow of thy correcting hand.

Thou fret'st his beauty like a moth, all men are vanity.

I sojourne like a stranger here, as did my fathersall

Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more.
PSALM. XL.
I Waited long, and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear;
At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear.

And on a rock he set my feet, and he did guide my way.

And sing new songs of thanks always unto the Lord our God.

And fearing, to the Lord shall flee, and trust in him for aid.
O blessed is he, whose hope and heart fixed in the Lord remain;
That with the proud does take no part, nor such as lie and feign.

Thy gracious thoughts to usward far beyond man's thoughts have gone.
So that when I to thee intend their number to express,
Of them then can I find no end, for they are numberless.

No not for sin, or made by fire, but pierced mine ears thou have.

For in the volume of thy book thus it is said of me:

Thy Law is in my heart and will, thy spirit there did it write.

Behold, my tongue no time does cease, O Lord, thou know full well.

But thy salvation show I did, and constant faithfulness.
The second part.
I kept not close thy loving mind, that no man should it know;
The trust that in thy truth I find, to all the Church I show.

But let my safety come from thee, and from thy truth and love.

My sins on me do take such hold, that up I cannot see.
And surely, many more they be then hairs upon my head:
Therefore my heart forsakes me, and is discouraged.

O Lord, with speed do thou afford thy saving help to me.

Drive back my foes, and them defame that work or wish me ill.

Even those that joying in my pain do say, Aha to me.

Let such as love thy saving health still say, To God be praise.
But as for me, right poor am I, and lie in need full low;
Yet God in this my poverty does think on me, I know.

Therefore thy succor to impart, my God, do not delay.
PSALM. XLI.
THe man is blessed that careful is the needy to consider:
For when the time of trouble comes, the Lord will him deliver.

And he will not deliver him into his enemies hand.
God will him strengthen on the bed, where he does faint and mourn;
and in his sickness thou, O Lord, his bed shall make and turn.
I being pained, thus did say, Have mercy, Lord, on me;
and heal my soul, for by my sins I have offended thee.
Of me mine enemies evil speak, When shall he die, they say;
(...) so his name from off the earth may vanish quite away.

^oth heap up mischief, which he tel^ when forth he does depart.

against me to procure my hurt they plot maliciously.

And surely now he lies down, he shall not rise again.

Though he did eat my bread, his heel against me lifted he.

that I may justly them requite, according to their ways.

Because mine enemy has no cause to triumph over me.

And thou for ever do me set before thy glorious face.

To everlasting, and Amen, Amen, say gladly we.
PSALM. XLII.
LIke as tho Heart does pant and bray the well-springs to obtain;
So does my soul desire always with thee, Lord, to remain.

Oh when shall I come and appear in presence of his sight?

While unto me continually, Where is thy God, they say?

That I with the great multitude into Gods house had gone.
With them into Gods house I went, with voice of joy and praise:
Yea with the multitude that kept the solemn holy days.
O why art thou cast down, my soul? what does disquiet thee?
Still hope in God, for him shall I yet praise for helping me.

From Hermonites, and Jordans land, and from the little hill.

And over me run furiously thy waves and billows all.

And to the God, by whom I live, my prayer yet shall be.

And why do I thus mourning go, oppressed with my foe?

While daily say my foes to me Thy God, now where is he?

Art thou disquieted in me? in God still hope and rest.
For yet I know I shall him praise, who graciously to me,
The health is of my countenance, yea mine own God is he.
PSALM. XLIII.
O Lord, against ungodly men me judge, and plea^ for me;
And from the man of fraud and wrong, O s^t me safe and free:

Why for the oppression of my foe thus mourning walk I now?

Which may conduct me to thy h^l, and to thy dwelling place.

And on the Harp, O God, my God, will praise thee thankfully.

And why with vexing thoughts art thou disquieted in me?

He of my countenance is the health, my God that does me save.
PSALM. XLIIII.
O God, we with our ears have heard, our fathers have us told,
What works thou in their days have done, and in the times of old.

Planting our fathers in their place, and gav'st to them their land.
Not by their sword, or arm, the land of promise they possessed:
But by thy hand, thy arm, and grace, because thou love them best.
O God, who art my King, command for Jacob victories:
Through thee we shall beat down our foes, which do against us rise.
For neither shall my sword me save, nor trust I in my bow:
But thou do save us from our foes, and them do overthrow.
In God we all the day do boast, and ever praise his Name:
But, Lord, now thou have cast us off, and have us put to shame.
(...) Thou with our armies go not forth, but us thou now do make
^o turn our backs before our foes, and they our spoils do take.
(...) Thou have us given up like sheep for meat that slain must be:
among the Heathen far and wide we scattered are by thee.
(...) Thou sell'st thy people, yet to thee no riches do arise:
^hou sell'st them, yet no wealth to thee is added by their price.
(...) Unto our neighbors a reproach thou have us made to be:
^hey mock us that dwell round about, ^o them a scorn are we.
The second part.

The Nations proudly in contempt at us their heads do shake.

Thus comes it that the shame of face does daily cover me.

By reason of the avenging man, and cruel enemy.



And though with dreadful shade of death by thee we covered be.



As sheep that are for slaughter kept, so we accounted be.



To dust our soul stoops down, to earth our belly fast does ^leave.

We pray thee for thy mercies sake redeem and set us free.
PSALM. XLV.
MY heart does utter forth good matter in a song;
I speak the things that I have made, which to the King belong.

As is the pen of any Scribe, that uses fast to write.

And therefore blessings evermore on thee does God bestow.

Appear in dreadful majesty, and in thy glory bright.

And thy right hand shall dreadful things bring forth before thy sight.

Whereby the people shall be forced to fall down under thee.

Because the scepter of thy reign does righteousness maintain.

Thy Lord God has anointed thee with joy above the rest.

Out of the Ivory palaces, whereby they made thee glad.

And thy fair Queen in precious gold does stand at thy right hand.
The second part.

Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dear.

And do thou humbly worship him, because thy Lord is he.

And all the wealthy of the land shall make their suit to thee.
is glorious all within;
Her outward garments which she wears made of wrought gold have bin.

The Virgins that do follow her shall unto thee be brought.

Into the palace of the King, and there they shall abide.

Shall be thy sons, whom Princes thou in all the earth may make.

Therefore the people evermore to thee give praises shall.
PSALM. XLVI.
GOd is our strength, to whom we fly, when dangers do abound;
A present help, and very nie in troubles he is found.

Though mountains lifted up, and laid within the seas we see.

Nor though the hills within the shore do at their swelling shake.
A river with his streams makes glad the city of our God;
The holy place, wherein he had his dwelling, and abode.

Right early God shall her sustain, and help her in his love.

His voice he uttered from on high, the earth did melt for fear.

The God of Jacob us sustaines, our refuge strong is he.

What desolations manifold he in the earth has wrought.

The spear he cuts, the bow he breaks, the chariots he does burn.

The Heathen me shall magnify, the earth shall honor me.

On Jacobs God we do depend, and on his mighty power.
PSALM. XLVII.
OClap your hands with one accord, all people, and rejoice;
Be glad, and shout unto the Lord with a triumphing voice.

A great and universal King through all the earth is he.

And he the Nations shall constrain under our feet to lie.

A glorious lot for Israel, whom he did dearly love.

The Lord go'th up above the sky with trumpets royal voice.



The Princes of the people are made with Gods people one.

The Shields of all the earth does keep, and rules it mightily.
PSALM. XLVIII.
GReat is the Lord, and with great praise to be advanced still:
^thin the City of our God upon his holy hill.

The City of the mighty King on her North-side does stand.



But being troubled at the sight, they thence did haste away.

Their griese was like a woman's pain, when she a child does bear.

The strongest ships of Tarshish thou with an Fast wind do break.

Even in Gods City, which he will establish evermore.

Of thy great kindness, and thy love, which humbly there we sought.

And with abundant righteousness thou sillest thy right hand.

Of Judah let the daughters all with gladness filled be.

And tell the towers that thereupon are builded on a row.

That to the following age ye may her strength and beauty tell.

He will not leave us, but ourguide even unto death will be.
PSALM. XLIX.
Hear this all people, all give ear that in the world do dwell:


Of understanding are the thoughts, which iss^e from my heart.

and then will open on the Harp the secret which I hear.

When close my sins do follow me, and compass me about?

And boast themselves in the great store of riches that do rust.

Nor can he for him unto God an equal ransom pay.

Wealth cannot make him ever live, and no corruption see.



And their fair dwellings, for their lands by their own names they call.

But passing hence may be compared unto the beasts that dye.
The second part.

Yet their posterity approves what they do fondly say.

And in the morning shall the just on them have rule and power.
Their beauty shall consume away, and perish in the grave;
When for a dwelling in the dust their house they changed baye.

For he at last will me receive with him in bliss to dwell.

Nor when the glory of his house thou do increased see.

Nor shall his glory after him into the grave descend.

(For when thou to thy self do well, men will thee praises giv^.)

Even to their generation, who light shall see no more.

His true felicity, is like the beasts that perish quite.
PSALM. L.
THe mighty God the Lord spoke, and the earth did call,
From the Sunrising to the place where he does set and fall.

Of beauty the perfection is, he gloriously does ^hine.

Before him sire shall waste, and storms shall round about him be.

He to the earth shall call, that he may judge his people all.

Those that by sacrifice have made a covenant sirme with me.

For God himself is Judge of all, whose judgments righteous are.

Against thee testify I will: God, even thy God am I.
thee blame I never will,
Nor for burnt-offerings; for the same appear before me still.

Or else so much desire to seed on goats out of thy fold?

And all the cattle which upon a thousand hills are found.

Wild beasts which in the fields do lie, even they are all mine own.

Because the world belongs to me, and what it does contain.
The second part.

Or else that I to quench my thirst the blood of goats would drink.

To the most High perform thy word, and fully pay thy vow.

And then I will deliver thee, and thou shall give me praise.
But to the wicked train, which talk of God each day;
And yet their works are soul and vain, to them the Lord will say:

Why does thy talk my Law allow, thy deeds deny the same?

My word, which thou do thus pretend, is cast behind thy back.

And with unclean adulterers thou have partaker bin.



Thy tongue against thy mothers son in slanders forth does break.

Thou thought that I was like to thee, who do delight in sin.

And I will them in order set plainly before thine eyes.
Consider this with fear, ye that forget the Lord;
Lest into pieces you he tear, when none can help afford.

And he that does uprightly walk, shall Gods salvation see.
PSALM. LI.
ACcording tothy goodness great have mercy, Lord, on me;
Blot out my sins, for numberless thy tender mercies be.

For my transgressions, I consesse, my sin I ever see.

Before thee evil have I done, thy glorious eyes it saw.

And wholly clear, when thou for sin do judge and chasten me.
B^hold, in wickedness my shape and being I received;
^infull of sin, and flesh of flesh my mother me conceived.
But ^o, the truth in inward parts (...) pleasant unto thee;
And secrets of thy wisdom thou revealed have to me.

Yea, wash thou me, and so I shall be whiter then the snow.

That so the bruised bones, which thou have broken, may rejoice.

And all my deeds of wickedness do utterly deface.

Within my bowels, Lord, renew a spirit sound and right.
The second part.

The joy of thy salvation give me again I pray.

Shall learn thy ways, and sinners she be turned unto thee.

That praises of thy righteousness my tongue may sing to thee.
Lord, open and untie;
My mouth shall freely speak thy praise, thus set at liberty.

But pleased with burnt-offering I know thou will not be.

A broken and a contrite heart, God, thou will not despise.

Th walls of thy Jerusalem build thou, and still maintain,

S^ll pleasing be, then bullocks shall laid on thine altar be.
PSALM. LII.
O Mighty man, in wickedness why do thou b^ast with pride?
(...) (...) thou sure, Gods graciousnesse for ever shall ^ide.

Like a sharp rasor it has wrought ^hiefe deceitfully.

And lying thou do more approve t^en to speak righteously.
Those deadly words thou love wel^ that may destroy and kill;
And thy deceitful tongue does tell the tales that blood may spill.

Thee from thy house, and from the la^ of life root out shall he.

Yet for thy folly, thus of thee with laughter say they shall:

But of his goods his God did make, and sin his confidence.

For in Gods mercy great shall be my trust continually.

And I will wait thy Name upon, for this thy Saints does please.
PSALM. LIII.
THe foolish man within his heart has said, God there is none:


To see if any one were wise, and sought God faithfully.

And there is none that good does work, surely there is not one.

That they my people eat like bread? on God they do not call.

Whereas there was no cause at all, why they should be afraid.

Thou have confounded them, for they rejected are of God.

Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill.

Then Jacob greatly shall rejoice, and Israel glad shall be.
PSALM. LIIII.
LOrd, by thy Name deliver me, and judge me by thy might;
Against those that mine enemies be keep, and maintain my right.
Regard, O Lord, and give an ear to me when I do pray;
Bow down thy self to me, and hear the words that I do say.

Which have not God before their eyes, they seek my soul to spill.

With them, by whom my soul is stayed, the Lord does ever stand.

Yea, in thy truth cut off all those that watch me spitefully.

And praise thy Name, for therein still great comfort I do take.

And now mine eye does plainly see my soes expected fall.
PSALM. LV.
O God, give ear, and do apply to hear me when I pray;
And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy self away.

With plaints I pray full sore oppressed, great grief does me constrain.
Mine enemies words affrighting be, the wicked me oppress:
They cast iniquity on me in wrath and spitefulness.
Great pain my heart disquieteth, it vexed is in me:
(...) terrors of untimely death upon me sallen be.
A trembling great, with fearfulness do come and seize on me;
honor does me so much oppress, I no way out can see.
Then did I say thus O that I the wings had of a Dove!
^m wrong then I away would fly^, and me to rest remove.
Lo, then I would go far away, to ^ee I would not cease;
^ll with safety I might stay in some great wilderness.
And my escape more sure to make, I would be gone in ^aste;
(...) me the tempest do not take, nor the fierce stormy blast,
Destroy, O Lord, and do consound their tongues, and them divide:
Or in their city strife I found, and violence I ^spi'd.
These on the walls both night and day do go about it round;
^d in the midst does mischief stay, and sorrow does abound.

And from her streets deceitfulness and guile do not depart.

If open foes my scorner^ be, from such me hide I would.

And who to guide me did pretend, and my acquaintance wast.

And we together often did walk within the house of God.
The second part.

For mischief is among them all, and dwells where they dwell:

And me the Lord deliver shall, he surely shall me save.

Yea, I to him aloud will cry, and he my voice shall ^eare.

Because of those that were with me, the multitude was great.

And them he shall afflict with pain, and judgments manifold.

Therefore presumptuous they have been, and God they do not fear.

Of friendship thus the solemn band and covenant he brake.

Whiles smooth as oil his speeches are; yet be they sharp dr^wn swords.

His Saints he does so strongly stay, that moved they shall not be.

For half their days such shall not live, but I in thee will trust.
PSALM. LVI.
HAve mercy, Lord, on me, I pray, for man would me devour;
He sighteth with me day by day, and troubles me each hour.

For those, O thou most High, that sight against me, many be.

I even in that time and hour will put my trust in thee.

I therefore will not fear at all what flesh can do to me.

And all the counsel that they take, is how to work me ill.

They spy my paths, and snares have ti'd to take my life away.

Lord, let the people searfully cast down in fury be.

Them in a bottle keep by thee; are they not in thy book?

This do I know assuredly, for God does stand for me.

His word which thus he good dot^ mak^ praise will I in the Lord.

Therefore I will not be afraid what man can do to me.

And hearty praises unto thee I gladly render will.

To walk before thee in the light of those that living be.
PSALM. LVII.
BF merciful to me, O Lord, be merciful to me;
Because according to thy word my so^le does trust in thee.

Until these sa^ calamities be wholly passed over.

Even to that God, who graciou^ly performs all for me.

That would ^voure me, God shall send his mercy, truth, and might.

Their fury amongst whom I lie, is set on fire of hell.

Their teeth like speare^ and arrows pierce a sharp sword is their tongue.

Let men on all the earth abroad aloft thy glory raise.

Before me they have dug a pit, but fallen therein they be.

My heart is fixed Lord, and I will sing, and give thee praise.

For early God to magnify I will break off my sleep.

And show his praise that does excel, in heathen lands abroad.

Thy truth does also gloriously unto the clouds extend.

Let men on all the earth abroad alost thy glory raise.
PSALM. LVIII.
YE Rulers, that are put in trust, to judge of wrong and right:
Be all your judgments true and just, not knowing gift, or might?

And violence in the earth you use, you with your hands oppress.

As soon as to the world they come, in lies they go astray.

And like the Adder deaf they be, which fast does stop his ear.

No* not though he most cunning were, and cha^me most wisely could.

Let the young Lions jaws be quite asunder ^orne by thee.

And when their arrows they prepare, in pieces them divide.

That, as a birth untimely, they the Sun may never see.

His whirlwind takes them hence alive, and his wraths dreadful blast.

And in the blood of wicked men his feet shall washed be.

And that a God is certainly the Judge of all mankind.
PSALM. LIX.
FRom all my cruel enemies, my God, deliver me;
From all that do against me rise, let me be kept by thee.

From men of blood and cruelty, save and deliver me.

Against me ^deservedly, and for no fault of mine.

Awake, and from me be not far, look out for my defense.

Spare none that wilfully rebel, but on them vengeance take.

About the city food to gain, their hungry walk they take.

For who, say they, is here so nigh, that he can hear our words?

The unbeleeving (...) all, O Lord, thou shall de^ide.

I will depend, and wait on thee, for God is my defense.

That I upon my soes may see deserved punishment.
The second part.

And bring them down in all their pride, O Lord our shield and tower.

Their lips to cursing used have bin, and their mouth lies to make.

That God all rule in Jacob has, so let them plainly see.

About the City food to gain, their hungry walk they take.

And grudge when they do hungry grow, and be not filled with meat.

For thou have been my refuge still, and help in troublous days.

For God is my defense and aid, a gracious God to me.
PSALM. LX.
LOrd, thou of late us off ^ast cast, and scattered us abroad:
For thou with us displeased wast, return to us, O God.

Yet whole the breaches of it make, for it does greatly shake.

And thou have given unto us a drink of deadly wine.

That it displaid might witness bear, thou do the truth defend.

O save with thy right hand, and hear when I do pray to thee.

Sichem in parts divide I will; and Succoths valley mete.

Ephraim is of my hea^ the might, Judah gives laws for me.

I cast my shoe, Philistia make a shout because of me.

Who into Edom will me guide, to enter conquering?

Thou, Lord, who with our hosts no more have marched forth of late.

Because the help which men afford we find most vain to be.

For he our enemies down shall tread, and make them low to lie.
PSALM. LXI.
REgard (O Lord) for I complain, and make my suit to thee;
Let not my prayer ascend in vain, but give an ear to me.

When with the weight of grief my heart is overwhelmed in me.

For my strong tower and fort wast thou against mine enemy.

Under thy wings I ever will my self in safety hide.

Thou giv'st with those thy Name that fear, an heritage to me.

Like many generations be the years which he shall live.

Prepare thy mercy, truth, and grace, him to preserve and save.
So ever thankfully I will sing praises to thy Name;
^at all my vows I may fulfill, and daily pay the same.
PSALM. LXII.
TRuly my soul does wait upon the high and holy One;
because all my salvation does come from him alone.
He only is my rock and tower, my Savior is he:
^e is my strength, and with no power I greatly moved shall be.

For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tottering wall.

When with their mouth they seem to bless, then curse they inwardly.

Because my expectation does all on him depend.

He is my strength, and by no power I now shall moved be.

My rock of strength, to God I fly when dangers threaten me.

Pour out your hearts to him, and say, Our refuge is the Lord.

With vanity do them compare, and they will prove more light.

Set not your heart upon your wealth, when ye much riches gain.

That power does to God pertain, and that all strength is his.

For thou shall give to every one, as here his work shall be.
PSALM. LXIII.
O God, my God, thou only art a spring of li^e to me;
And early I for thee will seek, my soul does thirst for thee.
And in this barren wi^nesse, where waters there are none:
My flesh does greatly long for thee, for thee I wish alone.

As in thy house I heretofore have seen and worshiped thee.

Therefore my lips shall thankfully thy glorious praises tell.

And in thy Name lift up my hands in prayer all my days.

Also my mouth with joyful lips shall praises sing to thee.

And when on thee I meditate in watches of the night.

In the safe shadow of thy wings, therefore rejoice I will.

And thou again with thy right hand in love upholdest me.

The sword shall slay them, and a prey to Foxes they shall be.

That worship him, but stopped shallbe the mouth of liars all.
PSALM. LXIIII.
O Lord, unto my voice give ear, when I to thee do pray;
And sa^e preserve my soul from fe^ of ^oes that would me (...).

And from the rising up of those that evil workers be.

And in whose bows are ^owes se^, even sharp and bitte^ words.

At him they do shoot suddenly, and do not fear^ thy sight.

They talk together privil^, Who does us se^* they say.

From the (...) depth and inmost wi^ each one his plots does take.

For wi^h his arrow suddenly these plotters he shall wound.

All that them see shall them forsake, and swif^ly fly away.

For wisely they consider shall, that these his doings are.

And glory gr^atly shall the just in heart, that are upright.
PSALM. LXV.
ON thee, Lord, who do Sion save, praise waits in Sion hill:
And all the vows which made they have to thee they shall fulfill.

Therefore all flesh shall humbly come in prayer unto thee.

Yet from sins great and numberless we shall b^ purged by thee.

With goodness of thy holy place and house they filled shall be.

On whom all the earths ends rely, and the seas far abroad.

As with a girdle, so with might he is encompassed.

Thou do restrain the peoples rage, and ^ul'st them at thy will.

The rising Sun sings praise to thee, and when he down does fall.

And so enrich't abundantly by thee much fruit it brings.
Gods river does* it overflow, whose waters plen^eous are:
When for it thou provid^st so, their corn thou do prepare.

With showers thou it soft do m^ke, the spring is blessed by thee.

And thus on us abundant^y thy paths drop fatness down.

The little hills on every si le rejoice right pleasantly.

(...) now they thout and sing to thee, f^r thou have made them glad.
PSALM. LXV^.
(...) men on earth, in God rejoice, with praise s^t for^h his Name;
^oll both with your heart and voice h^s glory, and h^s same.
How wonderful O Lord, say ye, in (...) thy works thou art?
(...) enemies shall bow down to thee, though with a saining heart.
T^ earth throughout shall worship thee, (...) earths (...) Lord and King;
(...) thy Name shall praised be, (...) pr^se to thee shall sing.
All men come forth, behold and see what things the Lord has wrought;
^k well the wondrous works that he for man to pass has brought.
The sea to dry land turned he, they through the flood did pass;
(...) they past, and there in thee, Lord, great their gladness was.
(...) rule^ for ever by his might, his (...) all Nations see:
(...) not those that against t^ee sight, in pride exalted be.

Of his due praise be heard abroad, in him with thanks rejoice.

Suffers not dangers manifold our feet away to move.

Men try their silver, thou have thus tried us with sorrows great.

Upon our loins affliction great thou did us make to bear.

And we distressed on every side, through fire and water went.
Yet when we were abased thus, and hopeless seemed our case;
Then, even then, forth thou broughtest (...) into a wealthy place.
The second part.

And the^e I will my self apply my vow, to thee to pay.

The vows (I say) which I did make in sorrow of my heart.

And goats with bullocks thankfully by me shall offered be.

And what he for my soul has done, you now from me shall hear.

And with my tongue I the most Hie with praise did magnify.

For then I knew, when I did pray, my prai'r would not be heard.

Unto my prayers, voice, and cry, which did to him ascend.

Nor does his mercy turn from me, for which to him I pray.
PSALM. LXVII.
HAve mercy on us, Lord, and grant to us thy grace;
To show to us do thou accord the brightness of thy face.

And all the Nations here below thy saving health may see.

O let the people all abroad extol and la^d the same.

For thou with truth and right do guide the Nations of the earth.

O let the people all abroa^ ex^oll an^ land the same.

And then our God, the God of peace, shall greatly bless us all.

And men him fear, and worship shall in the earths utmost parts.
PSALM. LXVIII.
LEt God arise, and let his f^es be ^attered in their ^ght:
An^ let them all that do him ^te (...) ^om before his sight.

B^ore Go^ face let wicked men so perish an^ decay.

L^ them rejoice, yea, let the Saints rejoice with all their might.

And by his Name of Jah him praise, before his face rejoice.

(...) God in his most holy place, who thence does all men see.

The chained does free; while rebels dwell in dry and desert lands.

^ching before them as their guide t^rough the great wilderness:

Sin^i did shake before the Lord, the God of Israel.

Whereby when weary it became, it was refresh't again.

O God, for thy poor people there prepared a dwelling place.
The second part.

Great was the company of those that published it abroad.

And she that tarried then at home, did take and part the prey.

Whose wings with silver, and with gold whole feathers covered were.

Then was it like to Salmon hill, when it was white with snow.

As Basan hill, so is his hill exalted up on hie.

Where he desires to dwell, and where he dwell for ever will.

With them, as in the holy place, on Sinai mount is he.

And with thee thou have captive led our sad captivity.
Thou have received gifts for men, even those that did rebel:
That being turned to the Lord, the Lord with them may dwell.

Blessed be God, because alone our Savior is he.

The issues from expected death to God the Lord belong.

The hairy scalp of him that walks still in a sinful path.
The third part.

Yea, from the seas devouring depths them bring again I will.

And that while dogs do lick the same, their tongues thou red may see.

How thou do go* my God and King, into thy Sanctuary.

The Damsels that on Timbrels played were with them in the way.

And Jacobs whole pos^erity give thanks with one accord.

Of Judah were, there Zab^lons and Nepthalies Princes were.

And, Lord, we pray thee, strengthen n^ what thou for us have wrought.

Therefore shall many Princes come, and presents bring to thee.

Make them pay tribute, and confound those that in war delight.

The Blackmoores shall stretch out the^ hand^ unto their Lord and King.

For he is Lord of all the earth, unto him praises sing.

Yea, thence he sendsa mighty voice, a voice that strikes fear.

On Israel shows, and from the clouds his strength he makes us see.

Who gives his people strength and power: God therefore blessed be.
PSALM. LXIX.
O God, s^ve and deliver me, the waters so increase,
That near my soul the^ entered be; Lord, make their rag^ to cease.

In the deep waters while I go, floods me have overflowne.

Mine eyes do fail, while long on thee I wait, my God most hi^.

Yea, more then hairs upon my head; these men in number be.

So to restore they forced me, what I took not away.

My faults, and all my sinfulness cannot be hid from thee.

And let not those that seek to thee, for me confounded be.

And for thy sake, and not mine own, shame covered has my face.

One mother bare us in her womb, yet me they would not own.

And the reproaches cast at thee, upon me fallen are.
The second part.

This in a scoff at me is cast, for this they me control.

But for a proverb me they take, and at my grief are glad.

On me the drunkards make their song^ with wicked scoffing wit.

In thy great mercy hear thou me, for thy true saying word.

From such as do my hurt desire, and from the waters deep.

And let not the pits mouth below upon meclosed be.

Lord, turn to me, thy wrath remove, for great thy mercies be.

I am oppressed on every side, in haste give ear I pray.

And from mine enemies tyranny, save and deliver me.

Mine enemies which procure the same are all before thy face.

I looked who pity would impart, but none did give relief.

For drink, even when my thirst was great, sharp ^inegar they gave.
The third part.

Let that by which they well should (...) to a trap changed be.

And let the lo^nes be made by thee continually to shake.

Let t^y sierce wrath them seize upon, an^ h^vie on them lve*

And in their empty tents not one inhabitant be pla^t.

With talk to grieve him they delight, whom thou did wound before.

And let them not come happily into thy righteousness.

And never let them in the roules of just men written be.

(...) thy salvation give ^liefe, ^d (...) me up on hi^,

And with thanksgiving shall my tongue him greatly magnify.

Then of young ^ulls and oxen store, with (...) and horns can be.

And, Lord, all those that seek for thee, their heart shall ever live.

And not despises (...) that were made prisoners for his sake.

Praise hi^, ve sea^, and ever^ thing which there do move and live.

That men possession there may have, and houses may be filled.

And they shall have their dwelling there, that love thy blessed Name.
PSALM. LXX.
O God* to me take heed, I he^ of thee require;
O Lo^ of hosts, (...) and make speed, help, help, I thee desire.

Rebuke them back with blame to fall, that think and wish me ill.

That in my trouble say of me, So, so, we have our will.

Which only trust and seek to thee, and to thy saving health.

All glory, honor, laud, and praise be given to thee, O Lord.

Thou art my stay and help, therefore make speed, and be not slack.
PSALM. LXXI.
MY Lord my God, in all distress my hope is whole in thee,
Then let no shame my soul oppress, nor once take hold on me.

Give ear to me, my Savior be, when men would me oppress.

Thou gav'st commandment me to save, O thou my strength and fort.

From hands of them that hate the right, from cruel men me free.

Yea from my youth my trust art thou, on thee I did depend.

I from my mothers bowel* did come, and I will praise thee still.

Yet still by faith I fly to thee, thou art my hiding place.

My mouth and tongue all the day long* let thine high honor ^ill.

And when my strength does fail in me, then do not me forsake.

They for my soul in wait that lie, together counsel take.

Him let us persecute and take, now God from him is gone.

Yea now, my God, without delay come to give help to me.
The second part.

And let dishonor co^er those, that think and wish me ill.

And to thy praise continually new praise shall added be.

And thy salvation; for of these an end I never knew.

And thy pure righteousness alone by me shall mentioned be.

Thy wonders ^ith r^o abroad have been declared by me.

Forsake me not, thou Holy One, but with me ever stay.

And of thy power the knowledge give to those unborne that are.

Great things thou do, I do confess, Lord, who is like to thee?

And ^om the depths of earth below I shall be raised by thee.

For wit^ thy comforts and thy peace, thou s^lt me compass round.

My (...) shall with a song agree to thee, O Holy One.

My soul shall show great joyfulnesse, which thou from death did free.

For th^se thou justly do destroy, that sought for my de^ay.
PSALM. LXXII.
LOrd, give thy judgments to the King, therein instruct him well;
And with his Son in governing, Lord, let thy justice dwell.
and give thy people right;
Then shall he judge with equity thy poor that have no might.

Then little hills shall fruitfully by justice peace increase.

And those he shall in pieces break, who them oppressed have.

As shall the Sun and Moon appear, through generations all.

And like mild showers, whose water down on the dry earth do fall.

He shall, while does the Moon endure, abundant peace maintain.

It from the river shall go on, to the earths utmost ends.

His enemies that refuse his reign, shall stoop, and lick the dust.
those that the Isles command:
^ba's and Seba's Kings to thee shall bring gifts in their hand.

And him shall serve the Nations all, yea serve him with delight.

He to the poor shall give supply, who else no helper have.
The second part.

He shall preserve them evermore, and bring their soul to rest.

Their blood right precious in his sight shall still esteemed be.

And ever for him shall they pray, and daily bless the King.

On tops of mountains high shall be the place, where it shall stand.

Those of the City will he make like grass to spring and grow.
His Name shall be continued still, last like the Sun it shall:
He men shall bless; him also will all Nations blessed call.

For wondrous works alone does he, and ^e does all excel.

Let the whole earth his glory fill, say all, Amen, Amen.
PSALM. LXXIII.
TRuly to Israel God is good, yea gracious is he:
To all that in their heart upright, and clean before him by.

My wavering and unstedfast steps, now ready were to slide.

And at the wicked, when I saw their great prosperity.

But firm and flourishing does their strength abide continually.

Not are they plagued outwardly, like unto other men.
Therefore great pride like a strong chain them compasses about;
and, like a garment violence does cover them throughout.
Their eyes with fatness out do stand, so full themselves they feed:
Their store of wealth is such, that it their wishes does exceed.
They are corrupt in heart and life, and they speak wickedly
Of their oppressions and their wrongs, yea they talk loftily.
For they against the heavens set their mouth in daring talk:
And proudly their unbrid^d tongue throughout the earth does walk.
^o Gods people oftentimes for this looks back, and turns about;
Since waters from so full a cup to them are powered out.
The second part.

Or in the Highest can there be knowledge of things below?

And they do prosper in the world, in riches they increase.

And washed my hands in innocence, and did from sin abstain.

And every morning heavily a scourge upon me lay.

Against thy people and thy sons, that under crosses lie.

But it so painful was, that I it could not comprehend.

I plainly understood the end of prosperous wicked men.

And that into destruction down they by thy hand are cast.

They utterly consumed are with terrors in a thought.

O Lord, thou when thou shall awake, their image shall del^ise,
The third part.



though I was weak, by my right hand thou, Lord, have holden me.

And afterward shall me receive to glory in thy sight.

And besides thee I none on earth so much desire and love.

For my hearts strength is God, and he my portion is for ever.

And those that whoring go from thee, shall be destroyed all.

I trust in God, that so I may show all thy works abroad.
PSALM. LXXIIII.
WHy art thou, Lord, so long from us* in all this danger deep?
Why does thine anger kindle thus at thine own pasture sheep?

And thine inheritance think upon, which thou from bonds did free.
Still look upon thy chosen place, and it remember well;
This Sion Mount, where of thy grace thou pleased wast to dwell.

Which wrought within thy holy place by wicked enemies be.

And they for signs of triumph there, their ensigns set on hie.

Upon the trees that thickest be, thy house to beautify.

Thy house with axes to deface and lummers they delight.

Desiling it, though once thy Name to dwell there thou had placed.

Then burnt they up in every part Gods houses through the land.

To tell when this our plague shall end, among us there is none.
The second part.

And shall his spiteful blasphemy against thee ever last?

O pluck it out, and be not slack to strike thine enemies.

Amid the earth men might behold what help to his he brought.

Of dragons which through waters pass, the heads thou there did break.

To those in deserts that abide thou gave him for meat.

And mighty rivers making dry, paths there for thine did leave.

The glorious Sun, and all the light thou only did prepare.

Both Summer heat, and winter frosts thy hand has found them out.
The third part.

And foolish people blasphemies against thy Name do say.

Thy congregations poor estate do not forget for ever.

Even the dark places filled be with men of cruelty.

But help the needy and distressed, and let them praise thy Name.

Remember how the man unwise daily reproacheth thee.

Because still grows the rage of those, that do against thee rise.
PSALM. LXXV.
TO thee, O Lord, we thanks do give, we do give thanks to thee:
For that thy Name to us is near, we by thy wonders see.

The earth and men therein do faint, I stay her pillars all.

And to the wicked, Lift not up the horn so lostily.

And with a stiff-neck do not speak, though you in honor grow.

Nor from the East nor West does come, nor from the Southern coast.

He puts down the one, and sets another in the throne.

This wine is of a mixture full, this mixture is his wrath.

Yea sinners all, though high on earth, wring out, and drink them shall.

And unto thee, O Jacobs God, I will sing prays still.

But then the horns of righteous men shall high exalted be.
PSALM. LXXVI.
THe Lord is known in Judah well, and his most glorious Name
Is very great in Israel, which does extol the same.

For his abode and dwelling he did choose out Sion hill.

The sword and shield of mighty foes, and battle there he brake.

In mighty troops that gathered were, on mountains high of prey.

Their hands the mighty could not find, their lives they could not keep.

With a dread sleep possessed then ^oth (...) and chariot was.

And who dares stand before thy sight, if once thy wrath appear?

The earth surprised was with fear, and silent it did stand.

Even those to save* whom most despise, the earth stood silent then.

And of his wrath what does remain, shall be restrained by thee.

Bring gifts to him, whose voice obey should all, whom all should fear.

To Kings that hold the highest seat he terrible shall be.
PSALM. LXXVII.
I With my voice to God did cry, when great my troubles were:
My voice did cry to God on hie, and he to me gave ear.

My wearied soul did put away all comfort and delight.

I did complain, yet grief withal my spirit did overflow.

I am so vexed and full of pain, my speech does me forsake.

Which saw Gods mercies manifold amid great griefs and fears.

My spirit made earnest search to find what issue thou would make.

Will he no more extend his grace, and show his favor never?

The promise of the Holy One, shall it ^aile evermore?

His tender mercie^ in his wrath, wholly shut up has he?

I will recall what the most High has done in former years.
The second part.

Even his strange works wrought wondrously, in ages past and gone.

I in my talk will mention what has been done by thee.

And who so great a God has been, as our almighty One?

And plainly in the peoples sight thy strength thou did declare.

Even Jacobs sons their liberty, and Joseph's had from thee.

And they for fear aside did flee, the depths on trembling fell.

And then abroad a stormy shower of thy swift arrows flie^.
and lightnings light did make:
In this low world then men did fear, and trembling earth did shake.

Was in great waters, where none has thy footsteps seen and known.

Thy people, to the promised land, like to a flock of sheep.
PSALM. LXXVIII.
ATtend, my people, to my Law, incline your harkening ear
Unto the words which I shall speak, and ponder what you hear.



Gods praises, and almighty strength, and wonders, teach will we.

Which by our fathers to their ^eed he surely taught would have.

That children yet unborne the same might to their children show.
That they might set their hope in God, and suffer not to fall
His mighty works out of their mind, but keep his precepts all.

Whose heart not right, whose spirit with God not steadfast was, nor sound.

B^ck in the day of battle turned, and fled before their foes.
The second part.

And after his most perfect laws they did refuse to live.

Yea, they ^orgat those wonders great, which Isreal's eyes had seen.

In Egypts land, and Zoans field he showed his glorious might.

And he did make the waters stand like to an heap or wall.

And with a shining light of (...) he led them in the night.

And as from the great swelling depth^ thence drink to them he gave.
The third part.

And thence he caused waters great like rivers down to go.

And the most High they did provoke in the great wilderness.

They greedily did meat require to satisfy their lust.

A table in the wilderness can God prepare for us?

And can he give his people bread, and send them flesh to eat?

In Jacobs house, and anger great up against Israel came.

As if his goodness and his power, them could not feed and save.

And he the doors of heaven high had opened with his hand.

And though he gave unto them* corn of heaven, them to sustain.

Yea, of his bounty to the full down to them sent he meat.
The fourth part.

And by his all-commanding power brought in a South Wind was*



And they from that were not estranged, which their own lust di^ crave.



For all the wonders that he wrought, they would him not believe.

And by his wrath their wretched yeare^ away in troubles past.

Remembering that God was their strength and Savior most hye.



And steadfast in his covenant they were not in his sight.

When justice them might have destroi'd, he suffered them to live.
The fifth part.
Ye^, many a time his anger fierce away he turned has;
And he (though they provoked him) stirred no^ up all his wrath.

A wind which passes soon away, and comes not again.

And in the desert did him grieve with their rebelliousnesse?

They did set limits, and would show what could by him be done.

From their oppressing enemy did mightily them free.

And wonders great in Zoans field done by his dreadful might.

That so the thirsty could not fetch their drink at any flood.

And filled their countries full of frogs* which did their land destroy.

To Locusts he their labors gave, whereon they thought to live.

And ^e their pleasant Sicamores with frost did make to quail.

And to hot thunderbolts their flocks to be destroi'd and killed.

Trouble and anger God on them by evil spirits did send.
The sixth part.

But to the killing pestilence gave up their life and breath.

And in the tents of Ham the chief of all their strength and might.

And led them in the wilderness, like to a flock of sheep.

But by the seas their cruel foes all overwhelmed were.

Even to the Mount which he did get by his strong arm and hand.

And in their tents he set the Tribes of Israel to abide.

His testimonies they forsook, and did not them obey.

Aside they turned, like a bow that shoots deceitfully.

And with their graven images him moved to jealousy.

He waxed wroth, and Israel then abhorred vehemently.

The tent and place where he to men his presence known did make.

His glory to the enemies hand he then delivered.
The seventh part.



Their widows lamentations to them did not afford.

And like a Giant, that by wine refresh't, a shout does make.

And so upon them did he put a shame perpetual.

The fruitful Tribe of Ephraim he was not pleased to choose.

The Mount of Sion he did choose, for it he loved well.

And, like the earth, it stablished; to stand continually.

Whom of his special grace he took, even from the folds of sheep.

To feed his people Israel, and his inheritance.

And he with skilfulnesse of hands them wisely governed.
PSALM. LXXIX.
THine heritage the Heathen take, and, Lord, thy house by them
Defiled is, and heaps they make of thy Jerusalem.

Their flesh, whose souls with thee do live, to beasts they give to eat.

And none there was that gave to them a burial and a grave.

And they derlde us scornfully, that round about us be.

And shall thy kindled jealousy like fire still burn and waste?

Powered out on Kingdoms let it be, that on thee do not call.

His habitation and his land, they have left waste and void.

With tender mercies graciously, for down we low are cast.
The second part.

In mercy purge our sins away, that praise thy Name may have.

Say to thy great dishonor thus, Their God, now where is he?
O let that God be known among the heathen in our sight;
Whiles thy Saints blood shed forth by wrong, thou do revenge by right.

Those in thy mighty power defend, that are condemned to die.

For that reproach wherewith most bold they have reproached thee.

And we thy people shall declare thy praise to ages all.
PSALM. LXXX.
O Shepherd, by whose grace and might kept Israel is, and fed;
Thou, by whom Joseph's house aright like to a flock is led.

Thou between Cherubs that do dwell, upon us brightly shine.

In Benjamins sight stir up thy might, to save us, Lord, draw near.

Show us the brightness of thy face, and then full safe are we.

And with thy peoples prayer how long, Lord, angry will thou be?

And drink the tears that they do weep, in measure full and great.

They laugh at us that are our fors, when they our sorrows see.

Show forth to us thy joyful face, and we full safe shall be.
The second part.

And thou the heathen out did cast, to plant it in their land.
where it might grow and stand;
Thou caused'st it deep root to take, and it did fill the land.

The spreading boughs that from ca^ like Cedars did appear.

That those who pass upon the way, this vine do pluck and waste?

The wild beast of the field for food devoures it greedily.

From heaven look down, in love maintain, and visit this thy vine.

The branch which for thy glory thou made strong, do not forget.

Thy people perish, when thy face on them in wrath does frown.

Upon him whom thou strong to stand, did for thy self maintain.
nor from thy worship fall:
(...) quicken us, then gladly we upon thy Name shall call.

^hold us with a pleasant face, and then full safe are we.
PSALM. LXXXI.
SIng unto God our strength and might, lift up aloud your voice;
To Jacobs God sing with delight, and make a joyful noise.

The pleasant Harp and Timbrell bring, with the sweet Psaltery.

In the new Moon, a time of choice, and day of solemn feast.

This Law from Jacobs God did pass, unto all Jacobs seed.



And from the furnace set him free, from burning brick of clay.

And from the secret place on hie of thunder answered thee.

Where waters thou did ask of me with doubt and grudgingly.
The second part.

O Israel, if thou will me hear, and serve obediently:

And no strange god shall worshiped be; to such thou shall not bow.

Thy mouth then open wide to me, and full thou shall be fed.

To hear my voice he did refuse, and he would none of me.

And so in their own counsels path they vainly wandered.

And O that Israel would me fear, and walk still in my way*

And turn my hand upon all those that would them overthrow?

But my beloved peoples time still flourishing should last.

And made the rock with honey drop, that they their fills should eat.
PSALM. LXXXII.
GOD in the congregation of mighty men does stand;
With earthly gods the Highest One does stand, and judge the land.

Men's persons, though they wicked be, accepting partially.

Do justice to the comfortless, the poor man's cause maintain.

Let them by you delivered be from the oppressors might.

The earths foundations shaken be, and out of course they go.

I said to you, The children ye of the most High are all.

As any mortal Prince does fall, even ye shall perish so.

Because to thee, as Lord, of right belong the Nations all.
PSALM. LXXXIII.
O God, no longer silent stand, do not thy voice restrain:
Be still no more, let thine own hand, Lord, thine own cause maintain.

Yea, they that hate thee do arise, and lift their heads on hye.

Their heads together do they lay, most cruel plots to make.

Let Isreal's name be put away, when none can Israel see.

They are with mischievous intent confederate against thee.

With them were joined the Moabites, the Hagarens were there.

With them the Philistims agree, and those that dwell at Tire.

That to Lots children he an aid, and arm of strength may be.

With his King Jabin, who did fall, where Kish^s brook does pass.

Make them like those whose bodies lay as dung upon the land.
The second part.

As Zeba and Zalmunna then, now make their Princes all,

Let us his houses through the land our own possessions make.

As winds away the chafe do take, so make them fly away.

And as the mountains high that stood, the lightning flames do burn.

And let thy storm sent from on hie, with terror them affright.

That they may humbly beg thy grace, and seek thy glorious Name.

Yea, be they put to shame by thee, and perish fearfully.

And thee alone on earth to be the Highest over all.
PSALM. LXXXIV.
HOw lovely is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts, to me!
The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant, Lord, they be!

My very heart and flesh do cry, O living God, for thee.

The Swallow makes her self a nest, wherein to lay her young.

While me, my God and King, they chase, and force far thence to fly.

They ever thy great acts will tell, and still be praising thee.

Which to thy house do mind the way, and seek it with their heart.

Which, like a fountain, springs so, that it their pits does fill.

And thus before the Lord at length in Zion all appear.

O God of Jacob, give an ear to that which I shall say.

Look upon thine Anointeds face, and bring him back at last.

Then in another place to stay a thousand days beside.

Then in the tents of sin I would dwell with all wealth and store.

And he no good will keep from his, that do uprightly live.

Whose heart by faith does ever rest, and firmly trust in thee.
PSALM. LXXXV.
UNto thy land, our Lord and King, thou have done graciously:
For Jacob thou again did bring from his captivity.

All sins wherein they once did live, thou cover'dst from thine eyes.

And thou art turned from thy rage, with them to be at one.

From us let all thy wrath depart, and angry cease to be.

And shall thy wrath it self extend upon all ages thus?

Who are thy people evermore in thee may joyful be?

And unto us, thy flock that are, thy free salvation give.

His Saints, and flock, yet must not they return to foolishness.

That glory may to us appear, and dwell here constantly.

And peace with kiss shall justice greet, and here they shall embrace.

And on us shining righteousness, from heaven shall look down.

Our land with fruit shall us supply, and give us store of food.

And in the way shall set us so, that we his steps shall tread.
PSALM. LXXXVI.
O Lord, to me bow down thine ear, and hear me graciously;
Thou that do help the weak, me hear, for poor and low am I.

O thou my God, thy servant save, that puts his trust in thee.

For through the day I do not cease on thee to call and cry.

For unto thee, Lord, I extol, and lift my soul and mind.

In mercy thou art plentiful to all that call on thee.

Mark well the words that I do say, my supplication hear.

Because I know, and well do prove thou answerest me again.

And of all works that have been done, like thine not any be.

Before thee come and worship shall, and glorify thy Name.

Thou workest wonders strange in sight, for thou art God alone.
The second part.

Unite my heart to thee so nigh, that fear thy Name I may.

And I thy glorious Name always will highly glorify.

My soul by thee has been set free out from the lowest hell.

That for my soul have sought, and thee before them have not set.

Long suffering, and most merciful, and does in truth abound.

Strengthen thy servant, and the son of thine own handmaid save.

And be ashamed, Lord, since thou do help and comfort me.
PSALM. LXXXVII.
THe ground-works of Gods city be for ever firmly stayed:
Upon the holy mountains he his strong foundations laid.

He loves them more then all the rest of Jacobs tents beside.

Great things, I say, are said of thee, thou City of our God.

I before those will notice take, that do acknowledge me.

See also Ethiopia, for borne this man was there.
that diverse men of fame
Have there sprung up, and the high God has founded fast the same.

This man, who was the chief of all, had his beginning there.

On Instruments shall consort there, my springs are all in thee.
PSALM. LXXXVIII.
O Lord, who of salvation art God alone to me;
My cry and supplication are day and night to thee.

Incline thine ear (O Lord) intend and hearken to my cry.

That now my life does faint and yield and draws nigh to the grave.

As a weak man they me esteem, that has nor strength nor friend.

In this estate I seem to be, like those which have been slain.
Like slaughtred men in grave that lay, whom now thou have forgot;
Which by thy hand are cut away, and thou remembrest not.

In darkness where I could not see, in deeps I have been placed.

Thou with thy waves and billows all do vex me grievously.

I am shut up in grief so fast, that forth I cannot go.

And unto thee for some relief my hands outstretched be.
The second part.

Or shall the dead arise, and here thy glorious praises spread?
Or shall thy loving graciousnesse be mentioned in the grave?


In the land of forgetfulness who shall thy justice know?

And early, ere the morning rise, my prayers shall thee prevent.

And why thy favor and thy face do thou thus hide from me?

Thy terrors that on me do lie, distract me fearfully.

The sharpness of thy terrors has me cut off, and undone.

Even so together gathering, they about do compass me.

To darkness thou do those remove that mine acquaintance be.
PSALM. LXXXIX.
GOds mercies I will ever sing, and with my mouth I shall
Make known thy constant faithfulness to generations all.

And in the heavens high shall thou thy faithfulness maintain.

And to my servant, whom I loved, to David sworn have I.

And I to generations all will build thy throne most sure.

Thy Saints shall in thy Church on earth thy faithfulness record.

Among the sons of mighty ones, who with him equal are?

He should be reverenc't of all that are about him near.

And who can show such faithfulness, as does encompasse thee?

The waves thereof, though mounting hie, thou make calm and still.

Thine enemies with thy mighty anne have scattered been by thee.
The second part.

The world, and all that does it fill, thy power did found and make.

Both Tabor Mount, and Hermon Hill shall in thy Name be glad.

Strong is thy hand, and thy right hand in power is very hye.

Mercy and truth are still with thee, and go before thy face.

In bright light of thy countenance, Lord, they shall walk with thee.

They in thy righteousness shall be exalted to great height.

And in thy favor shall our horn and power exalted be.
to us does safety bring:
The holy One of Israel is our almighty King.

Speaking to him in vision, thus it thou did reveal.

One from the people chosen out, I have exalted hye.
The third part.

And therefore with my holy oil I him anointed have.

And with my mighty arm I will him strengthen and sustain.

Nor shall the sons of wickedness on him have any power.

I will them greatly plague that do with hatred him oppose.

And in my Name his horn and might men shall exalted see.
And in the sea far off his hand and power I will place:
He gloriously with his right hand the rivers shall embrace.

And he shall say, Thou art the rock of my salvation.

And he the Kings of all the earth shall far excel in height.

And my unchanged covenant shall with him stand sted fast still.

And, as the days of heaven, his Throne shall stable be and sure.
The fourth part.

And in my Judgments shall not walk, but wander from my way.

And do not my Commandments keep, but from them turn aside.

And chastise them I will with stripes for their iniquity.

Nor suffer that my faithfulness to him a lie should make.

That thing I never alter will, which once my lips did speak.

With David I will promise keep, to him I will not lie.

Shall steadfast as the Sun remain for ever in my sight.

A faithful witness from on hie, so shall his Kingdom last.
The fifth part.

Yea, thou art wroth with thine elect, thine own anointed dear.

Thou have profaned his crown, while it thou to the ground do cast.

Thou his strong holds have overthrown, and they to ruin fall.

And a reproach he is to those that near him dwelling be.

And thou have caused to rejoice his cruel enemies.

Thou have not strengthened him, that he might in the battle stand.

And thou his crown of majesty down to the ground have cast.

As with a garment, so with shame he covered is by thee.
The sixth part.

And shall thine anger evermore like fire consume and waste?

If life be spent in grief, why then are all men made in vain?

Or from the power of the grave, what man his soul can free?

Those which in truth and faithfulness to David sworn have thou.

Those which from all the mighty ones; I in my bosom bear.

Yea, they reproached have the steps of thine Anointed dear.

And let the Church, Amen, Amen, with hearts and voices say.
PSALM. XC.
LOrd, thou have been our dwelling place, where safety we have seen:
Our dwelling place from race to race, Lord, thou to us have been.

Thou God from all eternity for ever art the same.

And unto Adams children then thou sai'st, Return again.
it seems in thy sight
As yesterday, when it is past, or as a watch by night.

And in the morn as grass are they, which soon we changed see.

But cut at evening it is seen soon withered down to lie.

And we by thy afflicting wrath are troubled and dismayed.

Our secret sins, yea sins of thought thy countenance espies.

And, like a tale that is told and past, so we our years do spend.

And if by reason of their strength, men fourscore years do see:

For soon it is cut off, and then away we swiftly flee.
what power thine anger has?
For mighty terrors from it grow, and mighty is thy wrath.
The second part.

That so we may our hearts apply true wisdom to attain.

Show favor to thy servants now, and help them at their need.

And then through thee rejoice we will, and all our days be glad.

As years of evil we have seen, so long now make us glad.

And show unto their children dear thy glory and thy might.

Let it established be by thee: O make it firm to stand!
PSALM. XCI.
IN secret place of God most high, he that shall dwell and hide
In the Almighties shadow safe, and quiet shall abide.
Thou^ my hope, and my strong hold, I to the Lord will say;
My God is he, in him will I my whole affiance stay.

And from the noisome pestilence thee safe preserve shall he.

A buckler and a shield of proof his truth shall be to thee.

Nor yet the arrow shall thou fear by day, that makes his flight.

Nor for destruction that does waste at noon day openly.

Ten thousand dead, yet unto thee it shall not once come nigh.

And thou therein the just reward of wicked men shall see.

Even the most High is made by thee thy habitation.
None evil shall thou need to fear, it shall not thee befall:
Neither to hurt thee any plague come nigh thy dwelling shall.

That constantly in all thy ways they keep and succor thee.

Lest thou at any time should dash thy foot against a stone.

Thy feet on Dragons trample shall, and on the Lions young.

Because my Name he well has known, him will I set on hye.

In trouble to deliver him: yea honor him I will.

And my salvation and my bliss for ever shall he see.
PSALM. XCII.
TO give thanks to the Lord it is a good and comely thing;
And to thy Name, O thou most High, due praise aloud to sing.

And to declare thy faithfulness, with pleasure every night.

With solemn sound upon the Harp, and grave sweet melody.

And in the works I will triumph which have been wrought by thee.

So deep thy thoughts and counsels are, none can them understand.

Nor can in this the foolish man thy wisdom well perceive.

It is that they for ever may into destruction fall.

And thou most high above thy foes for evermore shall reign.

The workers of iniquity they shall be scattered all.

And me anointed with fresh oil, to glory wilt exalt.

I of those sinners fall shall hear, that do against me rise.

Increasing, as in Lebanon, does grow the Cedar tall.

In our Gods courts they flourish shall, as in a fruitful place.

And watered from above they shall be fat and flourishing.

He is my rock and strength, in him is no unrighteousness.
PSALM. XCIII.
THe Lord does reign, and clothed is he with majesty and light;
His works do show him clothed to be, and gir^ about with might.

Yea, he so surely has it set, that moved it cannot be.

And thou without beginning art from all eternity.

The floods have lifted up their waves, and made a mighty noise.

The Highest overcomes the sea, when his waves mighty are.

And holiness for ever, Lord, in thine house comely is.
PSALM. XCIV.
O Lord God, to avenge all wrongs belongs alone to thee;
Vengeance to thee alone belongs, thy vengeance let us see.

With due reward the proud requite, that speak presumptuously.

And, Lord, how long yet shall we see say, the wicked to rejoice?
and utter cruelty?
How long triumph and boast shall they that work iniquity?

And they afflict thine heritage, to thee that has been dear.

And they the children fatherless by murder make away.

Nor by the God of Jacob shall these things regarded be.

And ye that foolish are and rude, at length this wisdom learn?

The eye he only formed, and then shall he not clearly see?

I Will knowledge into man does breathe, and shall himself not know?
The second part.

And having seen them, he does find that vanity they be.
O blessed is that man, O Lord, who chastened is by thee;
That so he in thy Law and Word may well instructed be.

Until the pit be dug for those that wickedly do live.

He in his love will not forsake his heritage for ever.

They in whose hearts is uprightness, of it shall followers be.

Or who shall rid me from their hand, that wicked works maintain?

In place of darkness down been laid, and dwelt in silence sad.

Thy mercy held me up, O Lord, thy goodness did me stay.

My soul did in thy comforts find even then delight and rest.
Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee?
Where mischiefs most unrighteously for laws enacted be?

And by their counsels they desire to shed the guilt less blood.

My refuge and my hiding place, and rock of strength is he.

And slay them in their wickedness, God shall them surely slay.
PSALM. XCV.
OCome, let us list up our voice, and sing unto the Lord;
In him our rock of health rejoice let us with one accord.

Let us sing Psalms to him with grace, and with a joyful noise.

And far above all gods is he in power and glory set.

His are the mountains high and sleep, their strength by him does stand.

Of the dry land great Lord he is, for it his hands did frame.

And kneel to him with one accord, for he has made us all.

Of his own hand the sheep we be, and still kept by his c^re.

As in the day of tempting were theirs, who in desert strave.

Yet then my works I made them see, and wonders from above.

They err in heart, and not believe, they have not known my way.

I swear, that they should never pass into my blessed rest.
PSALM. XCVI.
SIng ye with praise unto the Lord new songs of joy and mirth:
Sing unto him with one accord, all people on the earth.

Declare and show from day to day salvation by the same.

Show forth how great his wonders are, to all on earth that dwell.

Above all gods to be adored, and to be feared is he.

The Lord is only he by whom the heavens created were.

Strength is within his holy place, and there does beauty shine.

Give to the Lord, who still does live, all glory, and all might.

Come (...) into his courts, and bring an offering free with you.

Let all the earth appear with fear before his glorious face.

The stable world, and judge he shall the people righteously.

Let the sea roar and make a noise, with all that does it fill.

The wood, and every tree shall sing with gladness, and with mirth

With truth shall he judge Nations all, the world most righteously.
PSALM. XCVII.
THe Lord does reign, whereat the earth may joy with pleasant voice;
The multitude of Isles with mirth may triumph and rejoice.

In perfect judgment, and in right his Throne is stablished.

(...) find^, and compasses his foes, and burns them round about.

The earth it saw, and at the sight did tremble at the heart.

When they Gods glorious presence felt, who does the earth command.

The people all may see and know the glory of our God.

And who in Idols glory shall, all gods him worship ye.

Lord, Judahs daughters gladness had, and joy'd exceedingly.

And high art lifted far above all whom men Gods do call.

He saves the Saints, and from the might of sinners sets them free.

And joy to men of heart upright, in plenty great shall grow.

At mention of his holiness give thanks with heart and voice.
PSALM. XCVIII.
SIng a new song to God most hye, for he wrought wonders great:
His own right hand the victory and holy arm did get.

And he his righteousness did show in all the h^ens fight.

The (...) of all the earth did well our Gods salvation see.

Give thanks to God, sing and rejoice to him with joy and mirth.



And let the earth be joyful seen, and all that in it dwell.

Before the Lord, because the earth to judge now comes he.

And he shall judge the people all with perfect equity.
PSALM. XCIX.
THe Lord does reign with trembling great, then let the people shake.
He between C^bs has his seat, let the earth move and quake.

Yea, he all people does surmount, and si^ above them hye.

High thy Names honor let them raise, for holy is the same.

Thou judgment execut'st, and right in Jacob steadfastly.

Let men (...) his footstool fall, an holy God is he.

Was Samuel; all th^se made requests, and God did answer all.

And they such laws as he did make, endeavored to fulfill.

Yet thou their errors chastised'st, which they invented have.

Our God upon his holy hill, for holy still is he.
PSALM. C.
ALl people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with cheerful voice,
Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him and rejoice.

We are his flock, he does us ^eed, and for his sheep he does us take.

Praise, land, and bless his Name always, for it is seemly so to do.

His truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure.
PSALM. CI.
I Mercy will and judgment sing, O Lord God, unto thee;
And wisely do in perfect way; ^come with haste to me.
Within my house with perfect heart uprightly walk I will:


From me shall part the froward heart, none evil will I see.

The lofty heart I cannot bear, nor him that looks hie.

In perfect way who walks, shall be servant unto me.

And in my presence shall he not remain that lies does tell.

All from Gods City to cut off that work iniquity.
PSALM. CII.
LOrd, hear^ my pr^er, let my cry have leave to come to thee;


Because my days consume like smoke, and vanish soon away.

My heart is smitten, so that I forget my bread to eat.



I watch, and as a Sparrow on the house top am alone.

And being mad at me with rage, against me sworn they be.

In grief I mingled have my drink with tears, that I did weep.

For thou have lifted me on high, and cast me down again.

And I am withered like the grass that soon away does fade.

And unto generations all shall thy remembrance be.

The time of mercy, now the time fore-set is come to end.

And the despised dust thereof finds favor in their sight.
The second part.

And all the Kings on earth shall dread thy glory, and thy same.

In glory then and dreadful power, to men appear shall he.

Their prayer will be not despise, by him it shall be heard.

So shall that people praise the Lord, which shall created be.

The Lord with pity did behold the earth from heaven hye.
the groanings he might hear;
And those might loose, which unto death condemned unjustly were.

And in Jerusalem set forth the praises of the same.

When Kingdoms shall assembled be, to serve the bighest Lord.

And shorter he did cut my days, thus therefore did I say:

From age to age eternally thy years endure and stay.

And, Lord, the heavens are the work which thine own hands have made.

Yea, like a garment shall they all wax old, and pass away.

But thou do still abide the same, thy years no end shall see.
continually endure;
And in thy sight their happy seed shall stand for ever sure.
PSALM. CIII
O Bless and praise the Lord, my soul, and to him thankful be:
Yea, blessed be his holy Name by all that is in me.

And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind.

For all thy weak and frail disease, and healed thee of thy pain.

His mercy and compassion both he did extend to thee.

That, like the E^gles, now agame rerewed is thy youth.

So that their sufferings and their wrongs are turned to the best.

His counsel and his valiant acts the Israelites did know.
The Lord is kind and merciful, when sinners do him grieve;
And he is very slow to wrath, and ready to forgive.

Nor keeps our faults in memory, for all our sinful life.

After our great iniquities he does us not reward.

So high to those that do him fear his tender mercies are.

As far as is the rising Sun full distant from his fall.
The second part.

Like pity bears the lord to such as worship him in fear.

How weak and frail our nature is, and how we be but dust.

Or like the flower right fair in field, that fades full soon away.
For gone it is, when over it the stormy wind does pass:
The place shall never know it more, where once it standing was.

And to their childrens children down his righteousness does pass.

The just commandments of his mouth that in them walk they do.

His Kingdom rules over all, and all his subjects are.

Which to obey and do his will immediately accord.

Which ready are to execute his pleasure and his will.

Praise ye the Lord, and thou, my soul, his praises ever sing.
PSALM. CIV.
O Praise and bless the Lord, my soul, for thou art very great:
O Lord my God, with honor clothed, and majesty beset.

And, like a spacious curtain, thou the heavens stretchest out.

Thy speedy chariots are the clouds that swiftly fly away.

For messengers: and ministers a flaming fire do make.

That never from her fixed place she may be moved away.

The deep, whose swelling waters once the mountains flowed over.

And at thy thunders dreadful voice they hasted swift away.

To their own home, with thou for them have founded, down do go.

That back they never do return, the earth to drown again.

Which to the sea among the hills their winding course do bend.

And these their waters give to quench the thirst of Asses wild.

Which in the branches of the trees do pleasant music yield.
The second part.

And with the fruits of his own works the spacious earth he fills.

And thence for service of mankind the herb he forth does bring.

And wine, which the sad heart of man makes glad, and cheeres with mirth.

And bread, that to the heart of man supplieth strength and might.

Lebanon, which planted were by thine own mighty hand.

(...) for the Stork, the fur trees she does for her dwelling take.

The Conies also to the rocks do for their safety flee.

^om thee the Sun his certain time of going down does learn.

All beasts of forests, from their dens creep forth then to be fed.

^gging in that their speechless speech that he would give them meat.

And hiding them from light, and sight, down in their dens do lie.

Unto his work, wherein the day till evening he bestows.
The third part.

And they in wisdom great have been created all by thee.

This great wide sea within her womb, does the like treasures hold.

There diverse sorts of living beasts, both great and small we see.

There the great Whales do swim, which thou have made therein to play.

That thou sufficient food to them in season due may send.

But presently they troubled are, if thou thy face do hide.

They die, and quickly do return unto their former earth.

And then the earths decayed face renewed is by thee.
The fourth part.

An^ in the works of thy right hand, thou greatly shall delight.
The Lord from heaven beheld the earth, the earth then trembled much;
^e hills are set on fire and smoke, when thou the hills do touch.
I will sing gladly to the Lord, as long as I shall live:
(...) will sing praises to my God, while he does being give.
My meditation of the Lord most sweet shall be to me;
^d in my good and gracious God ^ght joyful will I be.

^d let the wicked be no more, that will not thee obey.

and, all ye Saints, throughout the world with me, him praise and bless.
PSALM. CV.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name:
among his people show his works, and spread abroad his fame.
Sing unto him, yea joyfully in Psalms unto him sing;
^alk ye of all the wondrous works of our almighty King.
(...) honor of his holy Name rejoice with one accord;
And let the hearts of them rejoice, that truly seek the Lord.

And of his face continually seek to enjoy the sight.

Nor let the judgments of his mouth out of your mind depart.

Ye his elect, the children that of Jacob do proceed.

And his most rightful judgments are through all the earth abroad.

To thousand generations commanded down to pass.

And unto Isaac by his oath he did renew the same.

A Covenant to (...), which ever should endure.

The lot of your inheritance, wherein your seed shall live.

Yea, very small, and in the land they then but strangers were.
The second part.

And while through sundry Kingdoms they did wander far abroad.

But for their sakes he did reprove Kings glorious, great, and strong.

Nor do the Prophets any harm, that do pertain to me.

But yet he sent a man before, by whom they should be fed.



The word and purpose of the Lord did him in prison ^y.

That of the people Ruler was, he made him to go free.

And gave command, that he the rule should of his substance take.

And he might cause his ancient men wisdom to understand.

And Jacob, as a sojourner, lived in the land of Ham.

That stronger then their enemies all, they by his blessing were.

And even with these his servants dear, to deal in subtilty.
The third part.

He did command to them to go, his message to disclose.

And in the cursed land of Ham his wonders great and new.

And his command and mighty word his creatures did obey.

Their land brought Frog^ even in the place where their King Pharaoh lay.

And all the quarters of their land were filled with crawling Lice.

And with the haile-affrighting flames of fire consuming went.

Yea, ^e the trees within their coasts did break and overthrow.

And Caterpillars numberless among them creeping were.

And these the fruits grown in their ground, devoured for their meat.

Yea, the beginning and the chief of all their strength and might.

And in the number of their Tribes no feeble one there was.

For terror, and the fear of them was fallen upon their heart.
The fourth part.

To guide them rightly in their way, by fire he gave them light.

And with the bread of heaven did he their hunger satisfy.

Which in the dry and parched ground like rivers, ran about.

And his dear servant Abraham, in faith that did excel.

With gladness he his chosen led and for them wonders wrought.

That of the peoples labors they inheritance might have.

The pathway of his laws might keep: praise ye the living Lord.
PSALM. CVI.
PRaise ye the Lord. O give ye thanks to God, for good is he;
And everlasting to his Saints his grace and mercy be.

Who can set forth sufficiently, and all his praises tell?

With favor of thy people, Lord, remember me, I pray.

That I the great felicity of thine elect may see.

And may with thine inheritance a glorying heart express.

We have committed wickedness, and (...) we have done.

Our fathers, though they saw them all, yet did not understand.
did keep in thankful mind:
But at the sea, even the red sea, rebelled most unkind.

That he might make his power known, and spread abroad his same.

Through deeps, as through the wilderness, so made he them to pass.

And from the enemies cruel hand to them redemption gave.

Then they believed his word, and praise in songs to him did give.
The second part.

And on his counsel, and his will did not wait patiently.

And in the desert tempted God, the stay of all their trust.

But wasting leanness there withal into their soul he gave.
And against Moses in the camp their envy did appear:
At Aaron, though a Saint of God, they envious also were.

And all Abirams company did cover in that hour.

And wasting flame did then burn up the wicked in his ir^.

A molten Image they did make, and worshipped the same.

Into the likeness of an Ox, that eats grass and ^ay.

In Egypt, who for them had done things mavelous and great.

By the red sea his mighty arm things terrible had wrought.

That he this people would destroy, he in his wrath did say:
Did not before him in the breac^ his chosen Moses stand,
To stop his anger, lest he should destroy them out of hand.
The third part.

And his sure promise, and his word, these men would not believe.

Unto the Lords command and voice, refusing to obey.

Them in the desert to destroy, ere they should see the land.

And through the countries of the world, to scatter them abroad.

And then the offerings of the dead pr^ly they did taste

And in his hot inkindled wrath the plague upon them broke.

So judgment he did execute, and then the plague did stay.

And so esteemed for evermore shall be from race to race.
The fourth part.

They moved him so, that it went ill with Moses for their sake.

That he in passion with his lips spoke unadvisedly.

But with the heathen mixed, of them did learn their wicked way.

To Devils their daughters and their sons then sacrificed they.

Of their own daughters and their sons, with blind devotion led.

And so with blood of innocents defiled was their land.

And with their own inventions a whoring they did stray.

And even his own inheritance he therefore did abhor.
The fifth part.

And made their foes their lords, wh^ the were forced to obey.

And they were humbly made to stoop, as subjects to their hand.

But with their counsel they to wrath provoked him evermore.

Yet when he saw them in distress, he hearkened to their cry.

And did regent, because in him most plenteous mercies are.

That led them captives from their lan^ and which had been their foes.

And from among the heathen folk, Lord, gather us away.

That we may glory in thy praise, and sounding of thy fame.

^et all the people say, Amen, praise ye the Lord most hie.
PSALM. CVII.
GIve thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he:
Praise him, because his mercies great, and everlasting be.

Whom he has from their enemies hand redeemed, and brought away.

He gathered them from North and South, from East, and from the West.

And where no City they could find, therein to dwell and stay.

That through the same their soul and life did faint, and p^ away.
unto the Lord for aid:
Who did them free from their dist^ according as they prayed.

That they might to a City go, wherein they might abide.

And for his strange and wondrous wo^ done to the sons of men.
The second part.

With goodness souls that hungry (...) he fills plenteously.

Whom strongly has affliction bound and ^ons fast have ti'd.

And they the counsel did contemn of him that is most Hve.

Down did they fall, and there was (...) to help or give relief.

Who did them free from their distr^ according as they prayed.
Them did he out of darkness bring, and from deaths shadow take;
And setting them at liberty, their bands asunder brake.

And for his strange and wondrous works done to the sons of men.

And by his power iron bands asunder broken were.
The third part.

And by their great iniquities plagues on themselves do draw.

So weak they are, that to the gates of death they now draw me.

Who saves them from their distress, according as they prayed.

And brought them from those dangers deep, wherein they were before.

And for his strange and wondrous works done to the sons of men.

And let them his great works declare with songs of joyfulnesse.
The fourth part.

Their merchandise through fearful floods to compass, and to end:

And in the dreadful deep do see his wonders manifold.

Whose rage does make the rolling waves aloft to swell and rise.

Their soul does saint, and melt away with trouble, and with pain.

And are like men of wits bereft, and all whose skill is lost.

Who brought them out from their di^ according as they prayed.

So that the waves which raged before, now quiet are, and still.

So to the haven them he brings, which they desire to see.

And for his strange and wondrous works done to the sons of men.

And even when the elders meet, with praise him glorify.
The fifth part.

And land, where water-springs did flow, to dry and thirsty ground.

When on their sins that dwell therein he does just vengeance take.

And he the dry and thirsty ground does turn to water-springs.

That for their habitation they may build a city there.

Which unto them abundantly fruits of increase may yield.

Yea, of his goodness suffers not their cattle to decrease.

Being afflicted and oppressed, and filled with grief and pain.

In the forsaken wilderness, where is no path or way.

And makes his families like a flock to grow and multiply.

But then of all iniquity the mouth shall stopped be.

The loving kindness of the Lord, that man shall know and find.
PSALM. CVIII.
O God, my heart now sixed is, and ^o ^e in a song
I with my glory praise will give, even with my heart and tongue.
sweet melody to make;
(...) in the morning I my self right early will awake.
Among the people, Lord, by me still praised shall thou be:
Among the nations cheerfully will I sing praise to thee.
Because thy mercy, Lord, is great above the heavens hie:
^hy truth does reach unto the clouds, within the lofty sky.
Above the starry heavens high exalt thy self, O God;
And, Lord, display upon the earth thy glory all abroad.

^ave them, O Lord, with thy right hand, and herein answer me.

^chem in parts I will divide, and Succoths valley mete.

Ephraim is of my head the strength, Judah gives Laws for me.

I cast my shoe; Philistia, make a shout because of me.
who will me safely bring?
Who into Edom will me guide, to enter conquering?

Thou, Lord, who with our hosts no m^ have marched forth of late.

Because the help of mortal men we find most vain to be.

For he it is that shall tread down our enemies with his might.
PSALM. CIX.
O Thou the God of all my praise, to help me do not cease;
When sinners do against me speak, do not thou hold thy peace.

And with a false and lying tongue they have accused me.

And though to them no cause I gave, against me they did fight.


Set thou the wicked over him, and at his own right hand
^ve thou his greatest enemy leave, even Satan, there to stand.
And when by thee he shall be judged, condemned let him be;
and let his prayer turn to sin, which he shall make to thee.
Few be his days, and after him his charge another take;
And fatherless his children be, his wife a widow make.

And from their places desolate seek bread for their supply.

Of all for which he labored has, let strangers make a prey.

That on his children fatherless will let their mercy fall.
The second part.

And in the following age his name be blotted out by thee.

Let not from him his mothers sin be blotted out at all.

That he may wholly from the earth cut off their memory.

The poor sad man, that him whose hea^ was broken, slay he might.

As blessing was not his delight, far from him be it so.

Like water, and into his bones, like oil, down let it go.

And as a girdle, girt wherewith continually is he.

Who evil speak against my soul, and mischief do devise.
The third part.

From my distress deliver me, for good thy mercies be.

And in me my afflicted heart does feel a piercing wound.

And as the Gr^shopper, so I am tossed to and fro.

My flesh of fatness now does fail, and I consume and waste.

And they that did upon me look, did shake their heads at me.

According to thy promise, Lord, save and deliver me.

And that, O Lord, thou have it done, so shall they understand.

They shall arise, and come to shame, thy servant shall rejoice.

Let their confusion, as a cloak, to them a cover be.

And even in the great multitude his praise I will record.

From those to save him, of his soul that cruel Judges be.
PSALM. CX.
THe Lord did say unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
Till I have made thy foes a stool, whereon thy feet may stand.

Amid thy mortal foes be thou the ruler in their sight.

The people with a willing heart shall subject be to thee.

Thy births dew is the dew that does from womb of morning fall.

Of the order of Melchisedeck thou art a Priest for ever.

Shall in his day of wrath strike through great Kings that him withstand.

And over many countries he shall smite and wound the head.
And he shall drink out of the brook that runs in the way;
^erefore he shall lift up on high his royal head that day.
PSALM. CXI.
PRaise ye the Lord, him will I praise with all my heart and might;
(...) the assembly of the just, and in the Churches sight.
The works of our almighty God in greatness do excel;
And ought to be sought out and seen of all that love them well.
His works are very beautiful, and shine full gloriously;
And his most perfect righteousness endures eternally.

The Lord is of compassion full, and merciful is he.

And his sweet covenant of grace in mind he still does bear.

While he the heathens heritage upon his Saints bestows.

His precepts and commandments all are very sure and right.

And they most righteously are done in truth and equity.

His Covenant he commanded has, that it should never end.

And only from the fear of God does all true wisdom spring.

His glory everlasting is, his praise endures still.
PSALM. CXII.
PRaise ye the Lord: The man is bl^ that fears the Lord of might;
And in his just commandments all that takes great delight.

The generation of the just full blessed shall we see.

And in Gods sight his righteousness for ever shall endure.
amid the darkness light;
Kind, and compassionate is he, and leads his life aright.

And he is wise, and his affairs he guides with discretion.

The just shall be remembered still in Gods eternal love.

Because his heart upon his God by faith is sixth and stayed.

Until upon his enemies Gods justice he do see.

His righteousness does still remain, and with him ever live.

And this the wicked man shall see, and seeing, rage and fret.

The wicked man's desire and hope shall perish and decay.
PSALM. CXIII.
PRaise ye the living Lord, praise ye your Lord and King,
All ye his servants, to his Name all praise and honor bring.

And his great Name in places all be praised, from East to West.

Above the highest heavens he sits in glorious majesty.

Whose dwellings far above the world so high exalted are?

As in the heavens and the earth the things to see and know.

And from the dunghill lifts the man oppressed with poverty.

With those that of his people are the chief, even Princes great.

So she keeps house, a mother glad; praise ye the living Lord.
PSALM. CXIV.
WHen Israel from Egypt came, and did his dwelling change;
When Jacobs house from those did part that were of language strange.

And his dominion Israel was, and they his people were.

And back the river Jordans streams were driven mightily.

And, like young lambs, the little hills did move and leap away.

Ye rolling waves of Jordans flood, why ran ye backwardly?

Ye little hills, why did ye leap and skip like little lambs?

Before the presence of the God of Jacob do thou shake.

And by his power did turn the ^int into a water-spring.
PSALM. CXV.
NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give praise;
Both for the mercy and the truth that are in thee always.



They have a mouth, and do not speak, and eyes, and do not see.



A throat they have, and yet no speech through it a sound does make.





Both Isreal's and Aarons house bless certainly he will.

The Lord his blessing will impart both to the great and small.

He will increase it more and more to you, and to your race.

Who has the heavens and the earth created by his word.

But freely on the sons of men the earth bestowed he.

Nor any that into the place of silence down do go.

Henceforth and ever will him praise: to God due praises give.
PSALM. CXVI.
I Love the Lord, because my voice and prayer heard has he:


When pains of hell me caught, and when I woe and sorrow found.

Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray.

Yea, in our God depths infinite of tender mercies be.

Even I my self was brought full low, and he relieved me.

For largely lo, the Lord to thee his bounty has expressed.

By thee mine eyes from tears, my feet from falls delivered be.


The second part.


The wholesome cup of saving health I thankfully will take;
(...) on the Lords Name will I call, when I my prayer make.

(...) presence of his people all, even now without delay.

Though carnal men do them despise, yet are they Gods delight.

(...) of thine handmaid, thou have broke the bands of my distress.

(...) I will call upon the Name of God the Lord always.

(...) presence of his people all, even now without delay.

(...) glorious Jerusalem, the Lord still praised be.
PSALM. CXVII.
O All ye Nations of the world, praise ye the Lord always;
And all the people every where set forth his noble praise.

Then to the Lord give praises great, praise to him ever give.
PSALM. CXVIII.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he;
Because his mercies very sure, and everlasting be.

Let Aarons house say now, that still his mercies are most sure.

Which he does show unto his Saints for ever do endure.

In a large place he did me set, wherein I might go free.

When God is on my side, what hurt can man then do to me?

Therefore on those that do me hate, I my desire shall see.

Or to put considence in Kings, or Princes in our need.

But in the Name of God shall I them conquer, and confound.

But I will surely them destroy in Gods most mighty Name.

They quenched are; for them shall I destroy in Gods great Name.
The second part.

But yet the Lord sustained me, and made me stand upright.

He my salvation is become, and my preserver strong.

Of joy, and health; for the right hand of God does valiantly.

The right hand of the mighty Lord has done most valiantly.

The works and wonders of the Lord, which great and many are.

Yet wholly over unto death be has not given me.

That I may enter into them the Lord to praise and bless.

That into it the righteous men shall with his praises go.
The third part.

For thou art graciously become a Savior unto me.

Now the head-corner stone is made, and s^t in chiefest place.

And it is mavelous to behold with eyes that noble act.

And we his servants will therein great joy and pleasure take.

And now, I do bes^h thee, Lord, prosperity to send.

We from the house which to the Lord pertaines, you blessed have.

An offering to the altars horns, a sign of thanks to be.

Thou art my God, therefore by me thou shall exalted be.

Because for ever to his Saints his mercies lasting be.
PSALM. CXIX. N. Aleph.

BLessed are they that are sincere, and perfect in the way;
Who in their lives do walk with God and do his laws obey.

And who do seek with all their heart the living God to find.

But searching out the way of God, they strive to walk in it.

That we with care and diligence thy statutes should observe.

Thy statutes faithfully to keep, O Lord, direct my way.

To all thy just commandments when my respect shall be.

When I shall well the judgments learn of thy pure righteousness.

Forsake me not for ever, Lord, but show thy grace and might.
The 2. part. (...). Beth.


If he according to thy word thereto good heed do take.

Let me not w^nder from thy laws, nor from them turn aside.

That I might not at any time offend thy holy will.

Then for the glory of thy grace, thy statutes teach thou me.

My lips to others willingly them all declared have.

As if the riches and the wealth of all the earth I had.

As at a mark, so will I aim thy ways how I may walk.

That by thy grace I never will thy holy word forget.
The 3. part. (...). Gimel.


That by thy favor I may live, and duly keep thy word.

That wondrous things out of thy law I may perceive and se^.

Thither thy precepts are the way, O hide them not from me!

But seeks to know thy judgments high, and what may please thee best.

For by their lusts they being led, from thy commandments err.

For I thy testimonies kept, and on them set my love.

But then thy servant thought how he thy statutes might not break.

And they amidst all doubts and seares are counselors to me.
The 4. part. (...). Daleth.


According to thy faithful word, quicken thou me again.

Teach me thy righteous laws to keep, and thee to love and fear.

So of thy wonders shall I talk, that others may them know.

To me, according to thy word, send strength, and give relief.

To me grant graciously thy law, and write it in my heart.

And in that way thy judgments just before mine eyes did lay.

The^ to be put to shame, O Lord, thy servant never leave.

When with thy spirit thou have my heart enlarged graciously.
The 5. part. (...). He.


Th^n shall I keep it to the end, even till I come to thee.

Yea, then with my whole heart I shall observe it carefully.

O teach me in that path to go, for I therein delight.

But from all filthy covetousness; Lord, far my heart remove.

Give me the spirit of life, and power to walk thy ways aright.

Who am thy servant, and desire to fear and honor thee.

Because thy judgments to thy Saints good and most gracious be.

Lord, quicken me so with thy grace, that them fulfill I may.
The 6. part. (...). Va^.


Thy saving health let me enjoy, according to thy word.

Who me with scorn reproach, because (...) in thy word do trust.

For on thy judgments righteous my hope and trust rely.

Ever, and ever constantly then shall I keep thy law.

For thy commands to seek and keep, my self I do apply.

I before Kings of them will speak, and not ashamed be.

Which I have loved servently, and so would love them still.

And in thy statutes meditate, and strive them to fulfill.
The 7. part. (...). Zain.


For on the same to set mine hope and trust thou causedst me.

For when griefs bring me near to death, that quickens me again.

From thee my service, nor have I declined from thy law.

Whereby I comforted my self, and ease from grief did find.

Because the wicked fearlesly thy holy law forsake.

Thy statutes did become my songs, such joy in them I felt.

And by this thought of thee, thy law more carefully I kept.

Because thy precepts carefully have been observed by me.
The 8. part. (...). Cheth.


That I thy holy words would keep I said, and did profess.

O then be merciful to me, according to thy word.
I thought upon my former ways, mine actions I did try;
(...) to thy testimonies pure my feet then turned I.

(...) hastily thy laws to keep, I did my self prepare.

(...) would I not thy laws forget, nor from thee go astray.

That even at midnight I will rise, to render thanks to thee.

Of all thy Saints, that constantly thy precepts do observe.

Oh teach me how I may obey thy statutes and thy will.
The 9. part. (...). Teth.


Thy bounty have thou showed to me, according to thy word.

For thy commandments I believe to be most true and right.

But now I keep thine holy word, and by it guide my way.

Then teach me by thy grace, that I thy statutes well may know.

Yet thy commandments still observe with all my heart will I.

But in thy law I do delight, and that is sweet to me.

For as a guide to learn thy law, thy rod did me direct.

Then thousand corruptible heaps of gold and silver be.
The 10. part. (...). Jod.


That I may thy commandments learn, me understanding give.

Because I by thy word have learned to put my hope in thee.

And that in very faithfulness thou have afflicted me.

As to thy servant in thy word was promised by thee.

For consolation and delight thy law to me does give.

But I will meditate upon thy precepts and thy laws.

Those that thy testimonies know shall my companions be.

And then I may assured be no shame shall me confound.
The 11. part. (...). Caph.


Yet does my hope upon thy word my fainting soul sustain.

Oh when will thou me comfort, Lord* why do thou thus delay?

Though parch't with grief, thy statutes just yet do I not forget.

When thou will judgment execute on those that trouble me?

Which with thy law do not agree, to hurt me they do sin.

They persecute me wrongfully, but thou my helper be.

Thy precepts yet forsook I not, but close to them did cleave.

The testimonies of thy mouth by me then kept shall be.
The 12. part. (...). Lamed.


As in the heavens constant course it ever does endure.

Even as the earth abides, since thou did stablish her foundation.

According to thine ordinance, for all thy servants be.

When I in great affliction was, I should have perish't quite.

For thou, when heavy was my soul, by them have quickened me.

For with a great and servent love thy precepts sought I have.

But I thy testimonies true will think upon with joy.

But thy commandments very large, and everlasting be.
The 13. part. (...). Mem.


For thereupon throughout the day I fix my meditation.

Then are my foes, because thy laws do still abide with me.

Because thy testimonies just my meditation be.

Because I straightly strive to keep thy precepts and thy ways.

That of thy word the holy path precisely keep I may.

For thou did teach me inwardly, and wrot'st them in my heart.

Doubtless, that sweetness to my mouth more sweet then honey was.

That all false ways my soul does hate, in them I will not go.
The 14. part. (...). Nun.


And for direction of my path it is a glorious light.

That I will keep thy judgments just, and strive them to fulfill.

And raise me to an holy life, according to thy word.

Accept, and teach me how I may after thy judgments live.

Yet in my deepest troubles I thy law do not forget.

Yet from thy precepts would I not for danger go astray.

Because they are my hearts delight, with joy they do it fill.

Thy statutes always to perform, and shall do to the end.
The 15. part. (...). Samech.


But that most perfect law of thine I heartily do love.

and in thy faithful word I fix my hope and confidence.

For the commandments of my God I purpose to obey.

That I may live, and of my hope ashamed may not be.

And to thy statutes I will have respect continually.

For their deceit mere falsehood is, and will themselves beguile.

Therefore thy testimonies just I fervently do love.

I of thy judgments am afraid, which high and dreadful be.
The 16 part. (...). Ain.


Then leave me not to them that would oppress me with their might.

From the oppressions of the proud do thou deliver me.

And while performance they expect of thy most faithful word.

And unto me thy statutes teach, thy laws to me reveal.

Thy testimonies, so that I may do what they command.

For sinners have made void thy law, from it they do depart.

I above gold do love them all, yea finest gold above.

But all false ways I do abhor, though pleasant they may seem.
The 17. part. (...). Pe.


Therefore my soul them strives to keep with diligence and care.

Yea, to the simple it does give an understanding right.

For thy commandments I did love, and fervently desire.

As thou art wont to do to those thy Name that fear and love.

Let no iniquity obtain dominion over me.

By me with greater freedom then thy precepts kept shall be.

And me thy righteous statutes teac^, by thy effectual grace.

How wicked men run on in sin, and do not keep thy law.
The 18. part. (...). Tsade.


Thy judgments also are upright, and them men ought to praise.

They also very faithful are, their truth shall ever last.

Thy holy words forgotten have, and do thy laws despise.

Therefore thy servant loves it, and does it much desire.

Thy precepts yet forget I not, but in them do delight.

Thy law is also truth it self, most constant and most pure.

Yet in this trouble my delights thy just commandments be

O to me understanding give, then ever live I shall.
The 19 part. (...). Koph.


And then will I thy statutes keep, I will obey thy word.

And I thy testimonies then will carefully observe.

For in my trouble did my hope upon thy word rely.

That in thy word of light and life more meditate I might.

Thy judgment to thy Saints is good, and with it quicken me.

But such as are to mischief nigh, are then far from thy law.

Since thy commandments all are truth, they by this rule shall live.

That them for ever to endure thou firmly founded have.
The 20. part. (...). Resh.


Thy covenant is with me, for I thy law do not forget.

According to thy holy word give me a holy life.

For they thy statutes do not keep, nor for thy l^wes do care.

According to thy judgments then in mercy quicken me.

Yet from thy testimonies just my heart does not decline.

Because they did not keep thy word, but sinned against thy law.

After thy loving kindness then quicken thou me, O Lord.

Thy righteous judgments every one for ever shall endure.
The 21. part. (...). Schin.


But still of thy most holy word my heart does stand in awe.

As they that by their victories great spoils obtained had.

But thy pure law is perfect truth, I therefore do it love.

Because thy judgments righteous are, and they have helped me.

No danger shall their blessed state empaire, or once remove.

And I do strive those laws to keep, which thou command me.

On them my heart is set, and them I love exceedingly.

For all my work's and all my ways before thee open are.
The 22. part. (...). Tau.


Good under^anding give to me, to know thy word aright.

According to thy faithful word do thou deliver me.

When thou have taught me well to know thy statute, and thy ways.

Because thy just commandments all are perfect righteousness.

For thy commandments to observe, O Lord, I chosen have.

Thy law is ever my delight, in it I pleasure have.

And let thy judgments gracious still (...) an succor me.

For thy commandments have I not put wholly out of mind.
PSALM. CXX.
IN my distress unto the Lord I did complain and cry;
And from his glorious throne above he heard me graciously.

From double and deceitful tongues, good Lord, deliver me.

Sharp arrows of the mighty man, and coals of Juniper.

In Meshech, and in Kedars tents my dwelling yet must see.

For peace am I, but when I speak, for war do they provide.
PSALM. CXXI.
UNto the mountains high lift up mine eyes shall I,
To see from whence the help does come that safety does supply.

He stays thy feet, that nothing can remove away the same.

He slumbers not that Israel keeps, nor shall he ever sleep.

To be thy shade and thy defense, he stands at thy right hand.

Nor shall the Moons cold influence thee strike, or hurt by night.

Thy dear and precious soul the Lord preserve in safety shall.

From this time forth for evermore, till time it self do end.
PSALM. CXXII.
RIght glad I was, when thus to me they spoke, and framed their talk;
Unto the house of God the Lord together let us walk.

Within thy gates our feet shall stand, Jerusalem most fair.

Even like a City, all whose parts compact together be.

Unto the Ark of Israel, which does therein remain.

There thrones of judgment sit, the thrones of David's house are there.

For they that love thee and thy peace, shall have prosperity.

And ever may thy palaces prosperity retain.

And sweet companions, I will wish that peace still dwell in thee.

Still to procure and seek thy good I greatly will delight.
PSALM. CXXIII.
LOrd, from the earth below lift up mir^ies will I
To thee, whose dwelling is above, even in the heavens hye.

As to her m^tresse hand the maid does look, and waiting stand:
So on the Lord our God we look, (...) (...) attend;
Until on as he ver^ have, until he mercy send.
Have mercy on us, Lord, thy mercy on us be;
For filled with contempt and scorn exceedingly are we.

And with contempt of haughty men, whom scoffs at Saints do please.
PSALM. CXXIV.
IF on our side God had not been, now Israel may say;
If on our side God had not been, when men sought our decay:

The waters had us drowned, the streams our souls ore whelmed had.

That with their swelling pride, our souls had quite been overflowne.

A prey to their devouring teeth our souls who did not give.

The snare is broken which they laid, and we delivered are.

Who has created heaven and earth by his almighty hand.
PSALM. CXXV.
ALl those that trust in God shall be like Sion hill;
That cannot be removed away, but stands steadfast still.

Like bulwarks compassing about do guard and fortify:

Saving them now and evermore with his most mighty hand.

Shall not for ever on the lot of righteous men repose.

Weary and hopeless, they put forth their hands to wickedness.

Unto the good, thine Israelites that are upright in heart.

Led by their loose and wandering lusts in their own crooked way.
These in the fearful path to judgment God shall guide,
With wicked workers, but his peace on Israel shall abide.
PSALM. CXXVI.
WHen Sions sad captivity the Lord again did bring;
Like to a dream it did appear, and as a fained thing.

And of this wonder thus they spoke the heathen folk among.

The Lord for us has done, which call them, for joy and thankfulness.

As flowing streams do change the ground, which parching heat did burn.

At harvest they their corn with joy shall gladly reap and mow.

But bringing home their sheaves with joy, they gladly shall return.
EXcept the Lord do build the house, man builds but in vain;
And man in building does but lose his labor and his pain.

In vain the watchmans waking eye does hold it self from sleep.

Vain is it pensively to eat the bread of grief and care.

That unto them he freely gives most quiet sleep and rest.

And the wombs fruit is his reward, Gods bounty does it send.

Such strength are children blessed with grace amid their youthful flower.

For they undaunted in the gate shall speak unto their foes.
PSALM. CXXVIII.
BLessed art thou that fear God, and walk in his way:
For of thy labor thou shall eat, happy art thou, I say.

Thy children stand like olive-plants thy table round about.



And likewise grace on Israel, prosperity and peace.
PSALM. CXXIX.
Often they, now Israel may say, me from my youth assailed:




That do to Sion hatred bear, and cursed enmity.

That fades and dries away, before grown up it fully be.

Nor can the man his bosom fill, whose work is sheaves to bind.

Nor do they say, In the great Name of God you bless do we.
PSALM. CXXX.
OUt from the overflowing depths of grief and misery;
My sad afflicted soul to thee, O Lord, has sent her cry.

Unto the voice of my requests, which humbly does ascend.

Lord, who shall dare to stand before thy pure all-seeing eyes?

That with a son-like awe obeyed, and feared thou may be.

For I have fully purposed to hope upon his word.

The morning light, then they that watch the morning to descry.

Is with the Lord, and with him is most plentiful redemption.

He shall them freely justify from their offenses all.
PSALM. CXXXI.
O Lord, I am not pust in mind, I have no scornful eye;
I do not exercise my self in things that are too hie.

So have I (Lord) behaved my self in silence and in rest.

And let this hope from this time forth for evermore remain.
PSALM. CXXXII.
REmember David's troubles, Lord, and how he swear to thee:

nor rest in bed at all:


Till I an habitation find for Jacobs mighty God.

And we did find it in the fields, where once woods growing were.

And at his footstool worship him, kneeling and bowing low:

Thou, and thy Ark, by which thy strength thou have made manifest.

Let all thy Saints rejoice in thee, and shout for joyfulnesse.

Nor of thine own anointed dear, turn thou away the face.
The second part.

The fruit of thine own body shall on thy throne surely sit.
And if thy sons my covenant keep, and precepts taught by me;
Then evermore upon thy throne their childrens seat shall be.

There do I love to dwell and rest, and never to remove.



Her Saints shall shout aloud for joy, wherewith I will them fill.

For mine anointed I have set an everlasting light.

But on himself his glorious crown shine forth and flourish shall.
PSALM. CXXXIII.
HOw pleasant, and how good it is, ^ow does that grace excel;
When in the unity of love together brethren dwell!
wherewith anointed was
The head of Aaron, whence it down unto his beard did pass.

And down from thence unto the skins it of his garments went.

And as the dew does from above on Sions hills descend:

Yea, he does bless them with a life, which never shall have end.
PSALM. CXXXIV.
BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord,
Which in his house by night do watch, praise him with one accord.

And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace.

And God that earth and heaven did make, thee out of Sion bless.
PSALM. CXXXV.
PRaise ye the Lord, and his great Name praise ye with one accord:
O praise him still, all ye that be the servants of the Lord.

Praise him all ye that in the Courts of our great God are found.

Sing praises to his Name, because it is a pleasant thing.

And Israel he did choose to be his own peculiar treasure.

And that the Lord above all gods in glory has his seat.

And in the low descending depths, what ever did him please.

With lightnings rain he makes, and winds does from his treasures send.

Even the chief strength of man and beast, in his provoked wrath.

On Pharaoh thy hard-hearted king, and on his servants all.

And though their rulers mighty were, their mighty Kings he slew.

Of Canaan be the Kingdoms all did to subjection bring.

An heritage which Israel his people dear should have.
The second part.

With honor shall preserved be, through generations all.

And of his servants miseries he will himself repent.

Surely but gold and silver be, the work even of men^ hands.



And such are all that trust in them, or who their power do fear.

O Aarons house, bless thou the Lord, in might that does excel.

And ever bless and praise the Lord, all ye the Lord that fear.

Which dwells in Jerusalem: praise him with one accord.
PSALM. CXXXVI.
Sung as the 100. Psalm.
PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, for still his mercy does endure:





Which made great lights to shine abroad, for still his mercy does endure:















Remembering us in base estate, for still his mercy does endure:



PSALM. CXXXVII.
WHen captives we at Babylon did by the rivers sit,
We thought on Sion, yea we wept when we remembered it.

And, being full of grief, delight in music we had none.

Our spoilers called for mirth, and said, A song of Sion sing.

When captives in a foreign land we among heathen be?

Let my forgotten cunning then from my right hand depart.

If I do not Jerusalem set my chief joys above.

To the foundations raze it down, yea raze it, often did say.

Happy the man thy deeds to us who shall reward to thee.

And in his zeal to Sion shall them dash against the stones.
PSALM. CXXXVIII.
WIth my whole heart, O gracious Lord, will I give praise to thee;
Even in the presence of the gods, thou shall be praised by me.

And praised in my thankful mouth thy holy Name shall be.

For thou have magnified thy word high above all thy Name.
Thou did me answer in that day, when I to thee did cry;
And thou my fainting soul with strengt^ did strengthen inwardly.

When they shall from thy mouth receive thy true and holy word.

For great the glory is of God, the universal King.

Whereas the high and proud of heart a far off knows he.

Thou with thine band wilt stop the mouth of foes that with me strive.
And as against mine enemies wrath thy band thou do extend;
So thy right hand outstretched shall me save, and still defend.

Do not, O ever gracious Lord, thine own hands-work forsake.
PSALM. CXXXIX.
O Lord, thou have me searched and known, thou know my sitting down;


And art with all my works and ways acquainted perfectly.



It is so high, that it by me attained cannot be.

And from thy presence to remove, Lord, whither should I fly?

In hell if I lie down below, behold, there art thou near.

Far hence, even in the utmost parts, where slowing sea does slide.

And even there shall thy right hand seize and take hold on me.

Lo, unto thee the darkest night about me shall be light.

Before thy piercing eyes alike both darkness are and light.
The second part.

When I within my mothers womb enclosed was by thee.

Thy works are mavelous, and my soul right well does know the same.

I have been made, and in the earth beneath I fashioned was.

Were all my parts, though yet not made, but after fashion took.

And in their sum how passing great and numberless they be?

When I awake, then am I still in heart and thought with thee.

Therefore far-off, ye bloody men, from me depart away.

And thy malicious enemies in vain thy Name do take.

Contend not I against them all, against thee that arise?



And in thy everlasting way direct and lead thou me.
PSALM. CXL.
LOrd, save me from the evil man, and be my strong defense;
Preserve me safely from the man of cruel violence.

When they together gathered be, their meeting is for war.

And Add^rs poison causing death, under their tongues is set.

My goings who to overthrow a wicked purpose have.

By the ways side where I should pass, they grins for me have set.

Hear me, O Lord, O hear the voice wherewith I pray and moan.

In day of battle has mine head been covered still by thee.

Perform not his ill thought, lest he with pride be set on sire.

(...) their own mischief of their lips their fall and ruin be.

And to deep pits, that up again thence they may never go.

Evil shall hunt the violent man unto his overthrow.

Surely the just shall praise his Name, and still dwell in his sight.
PSALM. CXLI.
O Lord, upon thee do I call, Lord, ^aste thee unto me;
And hearken, Lord, unto my voice, when I do cry to thee.

And the up-lifting of mine hands an evening sacrifice.

And of my lips keep thou the door, and guide them by thy grace.

With ill men of their delicates, Lord, let me eat no part.

Let him reprove me, and the same a precious (...) shall be.
Such smi^ing shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall;
When I shall in their misery make prayers for them all.

Then shall they ^are my words, for then they pleasantly will (...).

As wood, which (...) (...) or cleave, lies scattered on (...) (...).

In thee is all my trust, let not my soul forsaken be.

And from the subtle, guns of them that wicked workers a^e.

While I do by thy help escape the danger of them all.
PSALM. CXLII.
IN troubles great unto the Lord I with my voice did cry;
I supplication with my voice made to the Lord on hye.

My trouble I before him showed, and my perplexity.

In way where I did walk, a snare they closely laid for me.

All refuge wholly failed me, for my soul cared none.

Thou in the land of living art my portion and my part.

From those that do me persecute, and are too strong for me.

The Saints shall compass me about, when thou art good to me.
PSALM. CXLIII.
LOrd, hear my prayer hear my suit, sent up in great distress;
Answer me in thy faithfulness, and in thy righteousness.

For just^'d be in thy sight not one that lives shall.

And laid me in the dark, like them that dead are long agone.

My heart in me is desolate, and does no comfort see.

Upon the works I meditate, which thine own hands have wrought.
Behold, to thee, most gracious Lord, I stretch my craving hands;
My soul does greatly thirst for thee, like dry and thirsty lands.

To them that to the pit go down else likened shall I be.

The way wherein I ought to walk do thou disclose to me.

From all mine enemies, for I have hidden me with thee.

Let thy good Spirit into the land of righteousness me guide.

And for thy truth and righteousness my soul from trouble take.

That do afflict my soul, for I a servant am to thee.
PSALM. CXLIV.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, that does instruct mine ^nds to fight:
The Lord that does my fingers frame to battle by his might.

In him I trust, who does subdue my people under me.

Or son of man, that thou of him so great account do make?



And scatter them; thine arrows shoot, consume them with the same.

And take me from the waters great, from strangers hand me free.

And their right hand is a right hand of falsehood and deceit.

And a ten-stringed Instrument to thee sing praise will I.

His servant David be alone from hurtful sword defends.

And their right hand is a right hand of guile and subtilty.

Our daughters as car^'d corner stones, like to a palace fair.

Our sheep bring thousands, in our streets we may ten thousands see.

There be no going out, no cries within our streets be made.

Happy that people are, whose God the Lord Almighty is.
PSALM. CXLV.
THee will I laud, my God and King, and bless thy Name always:




And meditate upon thy works most wonderful, O Lord.

And I thy glory to advance, thy greatness will declare.

With songs of praise they shall extol thy perfect righteousness.

In mercy he is very great, and is to anger slow.





Thy Kingdom, Lord, a Kingdom is that shall for ever stand.

The Lord upholdeth them that fall, their sliding he does stay.
The second part.

And thou to each sufficient food in season due do give.

Enough to satisfy the need of every thing that lives.



Yea, he will surely save them all, for he their cry does hear.

But he all them that wicked are will utterly subvert.

Yea, let all flesh his holy Name for ever praise and bless.
PSALM. CXLVI.
PRaise ye the Lord, my soul him praise; to God that does me save


Nor in the sons of mortal men, in whom there is no health.

And then the counsels of their heart decay and perish all.

Whose hope upon the Lord does rest, and on his God is stayed.

And all that in the sea does lie, who truth does ever keep.

He gives food; the gracious Lord does set the prisoners free.

The Lord does in his Saints delight, and loves them evermore.

But yet by him the sinners way turned up-side down shall be.

Thy God to reign through ages all; the Lord still praised be.
PSALM. CXLVII.
PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto our God to sing;
For it is pleasant, and to praise it is a comely thing.

And the dispersed of Israel does gather into one.





In singing praises to our God join both the Harp and voice.

^epareth rain, who makes the grass on mountains high to grow.



And on his mercy set their hope; even his delight are they.
The second part.



Does settle peace, and with the flower of wheat he fills thee.

His word does very swiftly run to his appointed end.



His wind he makes to blow, and then the waters flow amain.

His statutes and his judgments he gives Israel to know.

Not any one of them has known; praise ye the living Lord.
PSALM. CXLVIII.
PRaise ye and bless the Lord, his praise from heaven bring;
And in the heights above the world his glorious praises sing.

And praise ye him both Sun and Moon, and each bright shining Star.

Praise him, ye waters which above the heavens do remain.

For he commanded, and they were created by his word.

He has appointed them a law that (...) shall endure.

Ye depths and monsters of the sea, unto him praises send.

Ye fruitful trees and cedars all, him praise and glorify.

And feathered foul, that through the air do swiftly cut your ways.

Ye Princes great, and Magistrates, the world that judge and hear.

Old men and children, ye that have both most and least of days.

His Name that only does deserve all glory and all fame.

And of his Church the horn and power he does exalt and raise.

To Israel his dearest flock; therefore his praises sing.
PSALM. CXLIX.
SIng ye unto the Lord our God a new rejoicing song;
And let the praise of him be heard his holy Saints among.

Let all that Sions children are be joyful in their King.

Let them with Timbrell and with Harp sing praises to the same.

The meek with his salvation he beautiful will make.

Let them to him upon their beds in songs lift up their voice.

Yet let them hold within their hands a double-edged sword.



This honor great have all the Saints; ye therefore praise the Lord.
PSALM. CL.
PRaise God within his Sanctuary, praised highly let him be;
And praise him in the s^ament, wherein his power we see.

His majesty and greatness praise, in which he does excel.

Set forth his praises with the Harp, and with the Psalterie.

And on the Cymbals sounding high, aloft his praises raise.

To praise the Lord, that breath does give, the Lord still praised be.
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever.

Amen.
Psalms of harder and less usual Tunes corrected, and the Tunes not altered.
BEcause to sundry Congregations, Families, and Persons, the harder Tunes of
diverse Psalms by custom or skill are easy and delightful; which delight, as
it makes them desired, so it may also make the Psalms themselves more used,
and familiar: These Psalms are now set forth corrected (whereof they had great
need) that satisfaction be not wanting to a reasonable desire, or a profitable
delight.

PSALM. LI.
MErcy, Lord, mercy grant to me
Of thy great goodness, and free grace:
And, as thy mercies many be,
Blot out my faults, my sins deface.

O thoroughly from them wash thou me;
Foul mine iniquities have bin,
From them let me be cleans'd by thee.

Acknowledge mine iniquities;
My loathsome sin, and mine offense
Do still appear before mine eyes.

And done this evil in thy sight;
Which does thy sayings justify,
And clear thee in thy judgments right.

My shape in sin I did receive;
And me defiled with wickedness
At first my mother did conceive.

Truth in the inward parts do love;
And thou shall in the hidden part
Make me know wisdom from above:

And clean I shall be in thy sight;
Wash me, and, being washed by thee,
Above the snow I shall be white.

Within my soul the pleasant voice;
That so the bones which broken were,
Made whole by thee may now rejoyce^

And turn away thy purest eyes;
And by thy free forgiving grace,
Blot out all mine iniquities.

Clean and unspotted in thy sight;
Renew in my most inward part
A spirit firmly good and right.
The second part.

From thy sweet favor, and thy face;
And let me not forsaken be
Of thy most holy Spirit of grace.

Of thy most dear salvation give;
Uphold me with thy Spirit free,
In steadfast holiness to live.

Will teach transgressors thy right wa^;
And sinners taught from sin to fly,
Shall turn to thee, and give thee praise.

O God, of my salvation God:
My tongue thy righteousness aloud
Shall then sing out, and show abroad.

Do thou, Lord, open graciously;
My mouth then opened thus by thee,
Shall speak thy praise abundantly.

Which willingly I would present;
Burnt-offrings, though they many be,
Yet will they not give thee content.

A great and pleasing sacrifice;
A broken heart, and soul contrite,
O God, thou never wilt despise.

Do good to Sion, bless it still;
And of Jerusalem mightily
Build up the walls; with peace it sill.

With offerings burnt shall then please thee,
And bullocks then with thankfulness
Shall on thine altar offered be.
PSALM. CXI.
WIth my whole heart will I
Give praise to the most Hie,
In meetings of the upright.

Of all out to be sought,
That in them do delight.

His righteousness has he
Por ever stable set.

We still remember should,
His grace and love are great.

And food for them prepare,
That do him love and fear;
He them remember will,
For he his Covenant still
In faithful mind does bear.

Before his peoples sight
He plainly did make known.
The heritage and lands,
Then in the heathens hands,
To give unto his own.

Works of his hands to be;
His statutes all are sure.

In truth was each command,
And uprightness most pure.
Redemption great he gave
His people dear to save:

He did command and frame;
Most reverend is his Name,
His Name is holy ever.

Is wisdoms spring and head:
Those that obey the will
Of him that does them save,
Good understanding have;
His praise endures still.
PSALM. CXII.
THe man is blessed that God does fear,
And in his laws does much delight;

Blessed is the race of the upright.

His righteousness endures still.

Who shines himself in graciousnesse;
And in compassion does delight,
And leads his life in righteousness:

And his affairs guides with discretion.

Still lasts the memory of the just:

His fixed heart in God does trust.

Until he see his enemies fall.

His righteousness shall ever live,
His horn with honor raised shall be:
The sinner shall this see, and grieve;

The wicked man's desire shall fail.
PSALM. CXIII.
PRaise God; his servants give him praise,
To the Lords Name give praise always;
His (...) for evermore be blessed:

Unto the place where down he goes,
His Names due praises be expressed.

His glory and his majesty
Above the highest heavens are

Since the great God does sit alone,
With our Lord God who may compare?

As to look down, behold, and know
Things that in earth and heaven be.

And from the dunghill up he takes
The needy man of low degree;

And to high place with Princes great
Of his own people may him raise.

A mother glad of children dear:
Therefore unto the Lord give praise.
PSALM. CXX.
IN grief and misery
I to the Lord did cry,
Who heard me graciously.

Of a deceitful tongue,
And from the lips that lie.

What to thee done shall be,
Thou false tongue of the liar?

Words that destroy and wast,
Like burning coals of fire.

A sojourner must lie
In M^sechs land so long:
That I day after day
In banishment must stay
Black ^edars tents among.
My soul (now weary) has
Long dwelt with men of wrath,
Of peace that haters are:

I speak for peace, these men
Are then for cruel war.
PSALM. CXXI.
UNto the hills look up shall I,
From whence the help I have,
Which does me keep and save.

Did both earth and heaven make,
I do help and succor take.

By his might and his love,
That no power shall it move.

His dear Israel to keep,
Shall not slumber, shall not sleep.

God as thy shade does stand
Near thee at thy right hand.

With his beams of heat and light;
Nor the Moon thee hurt by night.

The Lord preserve thee shall
Most safe from evils all.

And thy coming in defend,
From henceforth till time do end.
PSALM. CXXII.
I Was right glad when they
Thus unto me did say,
To the Lords House let us repair.

With joy within thy wall
Shall stand, Jerusalem most fair.

Right strongly built to be,
Like to a city knit together.

And there assemble do;
Even Gods beloved Tribes go thither.
Unto the Ark they pass,
Wherein Gods covenant was,
Thanks to the Name of God to bear.

That set for judgment be;
The thrones of David's house are there.

That it may never cease;
They prosper shall that love thee well.

And in thy palaces
Prosperity for ever dwell.

Whom I as brethren take,
I will say, Peace be in thee still.

Our Gods, the Lord of bliss,
Thy peace for ever seek I will.
PSALM. CXXIV.
If on our side the great Lord had not been,
Even now his saved people Israel ^y
Truly unto his praise coas^ and (...)

When up against us rose (...) men:

Swallowed us up alive, when the hot flame
Of their en^indled wrath against us came:

Had overwhelmed and drowned us utterly.

Over our souls had gone the lofty wa^,

And by his mercy, which does ever last,
A prey unto their teeth us has not cast.

Even as a bird out of the Fowlers snare,
The snare is broken, we escaped are;

Who earth and heaven made by his command.
PSALM. CXXV.
THose that do put their confidence
In God the Lord, and on him rest,
Seeking to him for their defense,
When they with dangers are distressed:
They shall be sure still to endure,
And shall not be removed away;
Like Sion hill abiding still,
Established they shall stand and stay.

Like bulwarks strong the mountains hye
About Jerusalem do stand,
The same to guard and fortify:
So God that is a shield to his,
From dangers great them to deliver,
His people dear that do him fear,
Does compass round hence forth for ever.

Who chastens those whom he does love,
Suffers the wicked by their rod
The righteous to afflict and prove:
Yet shall it not upon the lot
Of righteous men for ever rest,
Lest in distress, to wickedness
They put their hands, with grief oppressed.

Do good, O Lord, we humbly pray,
Even to the men in heart upright.

Aside that stray, and turn away,
With those that do work wickedness,
The Lord and King them forth shall bring:
But he with peace shall Israel bless.
PSALM. CXXVI.
WHen the good Lord made Sions sad captivity
To turn again, and us from bondage did set free,
To us appeared this strange and wondrous liberty;
As i^ (...) dream or feigned thing beheld had we.

With singing then was sill'd our tongue and voice.

Wondering thereat, among themselves this speech they had,
Great things for them
The Lord has done: Things very great glad.
Surely for us the Lord has done, which make us

Lord, our captivity,
As in the South streams upon pastures dry.

That they which sow sadly in sorrow, and with tears,
Shall reap with joy.

And precious seed with him in his sowing bears,
Shall with rejoicing doubtless come again,
Bringing his sheaves with comfort, and with gain.
PSALM. CXXVII.
EXcept the Lord the house do build,
The skillful labor and the pain
Of builders, wholly are in vain:

The city to defend and keep,
In vain the watchman leave, his sleep.

In mornings early, full of care;
In vain all your late watchings are:
It Is vain to think wealth must arise
By eating bread with sorrows deep:
To his beloved God gives sleep.

Which from the gift of God do come,
The fruit that springs from the womb,
Is also his reward most free;

In th'^ and of some strongman of war^e.

Whose plenteous race does so increase,
That full his quiver is of these;
That man ashamed shall not be,
But to his soes that do him hate,
He shall speak boldly in the gate.
PSALM. CXXX.
FRom the depths of woe and grief,
O Lord, I cry to thee;
Hear my voice, and ^Wourd^ (...),
O gracious God to me.

To my voice and cry,
When I supplications send
Unto thy Majesty.

And mark iniquities;
T^n what (...) of mortal man
Can stand before thine eyes?

Forgiveness is with thee;
That when sins thou do remove,
Feared with love thou may be.

My soul waits patiently;
And upon his faithful Word
Hope do I steadfastly.

For the Lord, then does he,
That the morning watch'th to spy,
That waits the morn to see.

His hope for ever place;
For still with the Lord does dwell
Rich mercy, and free grace.

Therein abounds he still;
And his Israel set free
From all their sins he will.
PSALM. CXLVIII.
PRaise ye the Lord of might:
Him from the heavens praise;
Even in the highest height
Praise ye the Lord always.

His Angels all,
Hosts spiritual,
His face that see.

And Moon, the lamp of night;
And while your race ye run,
Praise him all Stars of light.

The Lord praise ye;
And waters that be
Above the sky.

Of the Almighty Lord,
Who did them make and frame
By his commanding word.

Stablish't has he;
And set a decree
Not to be past.

Gods praise, ye Dragons, tell;
His praises speak and show,
All deeps that roar and swell.

Fire, have, and snow,
Fierce winds that blow,
His word obeying.

And Trees that fruitful are;
Ye Cedars great and tall,
His worthy praise declare:

Each creeping thing,
All birds of wing,
Both great and small.

All people that do live,
Princes, and ye that right
On earth by judging give.

And maids him praise;
Men full of days,
And children small.

Unto his glorious Name;
Because most excellent
Alone appe^res the same:

And honor are,
Above earth fa^e;
Yea, above the sky.

His peoples horn and might;
Praise of his Saints is he,
Of Israel his delight;
A people that be
Unto him near,
And very dear:
The Lord praise ye.
A Table how to find every Psalm in his right Page.
Psalm. A. Page.
30 ALl laud and praise, with heart and voice. 50 51 According to thy goodness
great. 97 78 Attend my people to my law. 152 100 All people that on earth do
dwell. 203 125 All those that trust in God. 278
Psalm. B. Page.
57 BE merciful to me, O Lord. 107 119 Blessed are they that are sincere. 251
128 Blessed art thou that fear God. 280 134 Behold, and have regard. 286 144
Blessed be the Lord my strength, that does. 311
Psalm. E. Page.
127 EXcept the Lord do build the house. 280
Psalm. F. Page.
37 FRet not thy self at wicked men. 66 59 From all my cruel enemies. 110
Psalm. G. Page.
5 GIve ear unto my words, O Lord. 5 29 Give, O ye mighty, to the Lord. 49 46
God is our strength to whom we fly. 87 48 Great is the Lord, and with great
praise. 90 82 God in the congregation. 167 89 Gods mercies I will ever sing.
179 107 Give thanks unto the Lord our God. 227
Psalm. H. Page.
12 HElp, Lord, for good and godly men. 17 13 How, Lord, shall I for ever thus.
18 49 Hear this, all people, all give ear. 91 56 Have mercy, Lord, on me I
pray 105 67 Have mercy on us, Lord. 123 84 How lovely is thy dwelling place.
170 133 How pleasant, and how good it is. 285
Psalm. I. Page.
11 I Trust in God, then to my soul. 16 20 In trouble and adversity. 32 25 I
lift mine heart to thee. 41 34 I will at all times bless the Lord. 58 39 I
said, that I would carefully. 74 40 I waited long, and sought the Lord 76 77 I
with my voice to God did cry. 149 91 In secret place of God most high. 188 101
I mercy will and judgment sing. 203 116 I love the Lord, because my voice. 245
120 In my distress unto the Lord. 273 124 If on our side God had not been. 277
142 In troubles great unto the Lord. 299
Psalm. L. Page.
6 LOrd, though thine anger I deserve. 7 16 Lord, keep me, for I trust in thee.
21 26 Lord, be my Judge, and thou shall see. 44 31 Lord, let me never be
ashamed. 51 35 Lord, plead my cause against my foes. 61 38 Lord, though thine
anger I deserve. 71 42 Like as the Heart does pant and bray. 80 54 Lord, by thy
Name deliver me. 101 60 Lord, thou of late us off have cast. 112 68 Let God
arise, and let his foes. 124 72 Lord, give thy judgments to the King. 137 90
Lord, thou have bin our dwelling place. 186 102 Lord, hear my prayer, let my
cry. 204 123 Lord, from the earth below. 276 140 Lord, save me from the evil
man. 296 143 Lord, hear my prayer, hear^ my suit. 300
Psalm. M. Page.
22 MY God, my God, what is the cause. 35 23 My shepherd is the living Lord. 39
45 My heart does utter forth. 85 71 My Lord my God, in all distress. 134
Psalm. N. Page.
115 NOt unto us, Lord, not to us. 244
Psalm. O. Page.
3 O Lord, how much do they increase. 3 4 O God that art my righteousness. 4
7 O Lord my God, I put my trust. 8 8 O God our Lord, how wonderful. 10 10 O
Lord, why from thy servants sight. 14 15 O Lord, within thy Tabernacle. 20 17 O
Lord, give ear to my just cause. 22 18 O God, which art my rock and strength.
24 21 O Lord, how joyful is the King. 33 28 O Lord my rock, to thee I cry. 47
44 O God, we with our ears have heard. 82 47 O clap your hands with one
accord. 89 52 O mighty man in wickedness. 99 55 O God give ear, and do
apply. 102 63 O God my God, thou only art. 116 64 O Lord, unto my voice give
ear. 118 65 On thee, Lord, who do Sion save. 119 69 O God, save and deliver
me. 129 70 O God, to me take heed. 133 80 O Shepherd, by whose grace and might.
162 83 O God, no longer silent stand. 168 86 O Lord, to me bow down thine
ear. 174 88 O Lord, who of salvation. 177 94 O Lord God, to avenge all wrong.
193 95 O come, let us lift up our voice. 196 103 O bless and praise the Lord,
my soul. 208 104 O praise and bless the Lord, my soul. 210 105 O give ye
thanks unto the Lord. 215 108 O God, my heart now fixed is. 232 109 O thou the
God of all my praise. 234 117 O all ye Nations of the world. 247 118 O give ye
thanks unto the Lord. 248 129 Often they, now Israel may say. 281 130 Out from
the overflowing depths. 282 131 O Lord, I am not (...) in mind. 283 139 O Lord,
thou have me searched and known. 293 141 O Lord, upon thee do I call. 298
Psalm. P. Page.
106 PRaise ye the Lord, O give ye thanks. 221 111 Praise ye the Lord, him
will I praise. 239 112 Praise ye the Lord: The man is blessed. 240 113 Praise ye
the living Lord. 242 135 Praise ye the Lord, and his great Name. 287 136
Praise ye the Lord, for he is good. 289 146 Praise ye the Lord, my soul him
praise. 305 147 Praise ye the Lord, for it is good. 307 148 Praise ye and
bless the Lord. 309 150 Praise God within his Sanctuary. 311
Psalm. R. Page.
61 REgard, O Lord, for I complain. 114 122 Right glad I was, when thus to
me. 275 132 Remember David's troubles, Lord 292
Psalm. S. Page.
81 SIng unto God our strength and might. 165 96 Sing ye with praise unto the
Lord. 198 98 Sing a new song to God most hye. 2^ 149 Sing ye unto the Lord our
God. 310
Psalm. T. Page.
1 THe man is blessed. 1 14 The foolish man within his heart. 19 19 The glory
of Almighty God. 31 24 The earth is Gods, and wholly his. 40 27 The Lord is
both my health and light. 45 32 The man is blessed, all whose sins. 54 41 The
man is blessed that careful is. 78 50 The mighty God, the Lord. 94 53 The
foolish man within his heart. 100 62 Truly my soul does wait upon. 115 73
Truly to Israel God is good. 140 75 To thee, O Lord, we thanks do give. 147
76 The Lord is known in Judah well. 148 79 Thine heritage the heathen take.
161 87 The groundworkes of Gods cities be. 176 92 To give thanks to the Lord,
it is. 190 93 The Lord does reign, and clothed is he. 192 97 The Lord does
reign, whereat the earth. 199 99 The Lord does reign, with trembling great.
202 110 The Lord did say unto my Lord. 238 145 Thee will I ^d, my God and King.
303
Psalm. V. Page.
85 Unto thy land, our Lord our King. 172 121 Unto the mountains high. 274
Psalm. W. Page.
2 WHy did the Gentiles madly rage. 2 9 With my whole heart to thee, O Lord. 11
36 When I consider in mine heart. 65 74 Why art thou, Lord, so long from us.
145 114 When Israel from Egypt came. 243 126 When Sions sad captivity. 279 137
When captives we at Babylon. 291 138 With my whole heart, O gracious Lord. 292
Psalm. Y. Page.
33 YE righteous in the Lord, rejoice. 56 58 Ye Rulers, that are put in trust.
119 66 Ye men on earth, in God rejoice. 121
FINIS.

