THE BOOK OF PSALMS: Englished both in Prose and Meter.

With Annotations, opening the words and sentences, by conference with other
Scriptures.

BY Henry Ainsworth.

Ephesians. 5.18.19. Be ye filled with the Spirit: speaking to yourselves in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs: singing and making melody in your
hearts to the Lord.

AMSTERDAM, Printed by THOMAS STAFFORD; and are to be sold at his House at the
sign of the Flight of Brabant, upon the Milke-Market, over against the
Deventer Wood-Market. MDCXLIV.

A Preface, declaring the reason and use of this Book.
I Have enterprised (Christian reader) this work, with regard of Gods honor,
and comfort of his people; that his word might dwell in us richly, in all
wisdom; and that we might teach and admonish our selves, in Psalms and hymns
and songs spiritual. This I have labored to effect, by setting over into our
tongue the Psalms in meter, as agreeable to the original Hebrew, as are other
usual translations. For the better discerning hereof, I turned them also into
prose, and set these versions one by another, to be the more easily compared.
And because the Psalms, have hard words and phrases: I have added notes to
explain them with brevity; which was to me as laborious, as if I had made a
larger commentary.

The Text I set down in such manner, as I neither omit the grace of the Hebrew
tongue, (wherein the Psalms were first penned,) minding how the Apostles
writing in Greek, do choose many Hebraisms, as having their weight: neither yet
use I such uncouth phrases, as the common reader understands not; having herein
both rule and example in the new Testament, as the learned in tongues do know,
and I occasionally manifest in sundry annotations. For this cause I add
necessary words of explanation, which may be known by their different letter;
and which by warrant of holy scripture may be expressed, as I prove in the
notes on Psalm. 2, 7, 8. and 10, 10. and in many other places. I differ somewhat
in phrase from our former English Bible, not because I affect novelty, but in
Christian liberty (which is not tied to words,) I use what I judge best,
without prejudice to other. And this falls out to be the more, because these
Psalms were not only translated, but many of them printed, before I could see
our late well amended Translation. In pawses, (which are more frequent here;) I
follow the Original text: where more are to be seen than our English can well
admit of; serving both to show the sense, and to read with consideration.

In the Meter I use somewhat more liberty, partly, for plainnes sake, as putting
words, for mouth, Ps. 49.14. chiefest for head, Ps. 137.6. and sundry the like
which in sense are the same, and easier for the simple: partly, for necessity,
adding sometime words, which yet are included in the Hebrew; as to bless
thankfully, Psalm. 103.1, 2. whereas in the prose, I use only bless; but the
scripture proves thanks to be included in our blessing of God, for when one
Evangelist says he blessed, Math. 26, 26. another says he gave thanks, Luke
22, 19. The like I do in many other epithites, taken from the force of the
Hebrew word, as the skillful in that tongue know; and the notes hereafter
manifest. The name of God, Jehovah (or Jehovih,) I keep in the prose always,
as I find it written; because of the force thereof, showed in the note on Psalm.
83.19. and to distinguish it from Adonai, which we English Lord: but in the
verse, I am forced sometime to contract it into Jah, (which is also the
scripture name, Psalm. 68.5.) sometime I turn it LORD, as the new Testament
expresses it: and sometime I add the word eternal, as the French version
turns it, and the Hebrew Jehovah implies.

The Verse is much of that measure which we had before, but because many
Psalms, (as the 119, and other) fall out better in a long verse of ten
syllables, which without too much adding or detracting I could not well
changed; I have therefore so set them. And because it is our manner to have the
verses answer each other with like sounds at the end, I also keep the same,
without violating (as I trust) the text: neither is it to be condemned, seeing
our language so uses, as also the Hebrew in some Psalms begins verses with
an order of letters Alphabetwise, as in Psalm. 25. and 34. and 37. and 111. and
112. and 119. and 145. Yet rather than I would stray from the text, I strain
now and then, with rules of our English poesy, in the just ending alike of
both verses, and sometime in the quantity of a syllable; which in a work of
this sort, I trust all sincere minded will forgive. Tunes for the Psalms, I
find none set of God: so that each people is to use the most grave, decent, and
comfortable manner of singing that they know, according to the general rule; 1
Cor. 14, 26.40. The singing notes therefore I have most taken from our former
Englished Psalms, when they will fit the measure of the verse; and for the
other long verses, I have also taken (for the most part) the gravest and
easiest tunes of the French and Dutch Psalms.

The Annotations, are partly to open the hebrew words and phrases; partly to
show the meaning of the text, where I find it opened by other Scriptures: for
otherwise I chose rather to be silent. And herein conference of the new
Testament with the old, giving much light to many mysteries, as may be seen in
the 2. the 16. the 22. the 40. the 68. the 110. and many other Psalms.

Among the translations which I have compared, I much respect the Greek work of
the LXX. Interpreters, which being abroad before the Apostles times, they much
followed, even where it varied from the Hebrew in words, but not in meaning: as
Angels, Heb. 2.7. for Gods, Psalm. 8, 6. a body thou have fitted to me, Heb.
10.5.10. for, mine ears thou have opened, Psalm. 40.7. and sundry the like.
Hereupon it is, that I so often follow and mention the Greek. Yet bind I not my
self always to their version, finding them often to mistake things, some of
which the Holy Ghost corrects: as Mat. 2.15. Out of Egypt I called my son;
which the LXX. had turned, his children, Hose. 11, 1. And where they
translated, Death prevailing has swallowed up, Isa. 25, 8. the Apostle
amendeth it, Death is swallowed up in victory; (or for ever,) 1. Cor. 15, 54.
Where they had weakened the text, Exodus 9, 16. turning it, thou have been kept
alive until now; he more fully expresses it, I have raised thee up: Romans 9,
17. Wisdom therefore would not have us to follow them in all things, but to
weigh the force of the original Hebrew. The Chaldee paraphrase being made by
ancient Jews near the Apostles time, I sometime allege for the meaning of
some places. Some of the annotations are specially for them that have judgment
in the Hebrew tongue, the proprieties whereof they explain: others are for
more general use of all, that will take pains to compare the Scriptures. The
Table in the end, is to help the Reader to find readily the places where words
are once opened: as Jehovah, God, Lord, and many other which are often used,
and but once explained, the Table directs to Psalm. 83.19. Psalm. 3.3. Psalm.
2.4. where in the annotations on those places, the explanations are found. By
this also the Reader may see the reasons of some words added in the meter,
which else might seem strange; as where I say O Lord-my stays, Psalm. 73, 20.
when in the prose it is but O lord; if he look the place where this word Lord
is opened, Psalm. 2, 4. he shall find the Hebrew to signify my stays, or
Sustainers, which therefore for the verse sake I sometime annexe. Now to speak
a word of singing in general. The scripture shows us two sorts of Psalms.
First, such as were written by the Prophets, (and specially David,) to be left
unto the Church as a part of the Canonical word of God, Luke. 24.44. Secondly
such as were uttered by voice in the assemblies, and not written, but served
for the present use of the Church, as other gifts of doctrine, interpretation,
etc. 1. Corinthians. 14.26. The first sort being Gods infallible word, were sung in
his Church, with harmony of voices; and the other scriptures were read, 1. Corinthians. 16.7.8. 2. Chron. 29.25.27.30. Act. 25.21. The later sort being but
inferior gifts, were sung by him that had them, and judged of by those that
heard; even as doctrines, interpretations, and other like gifts, 1. Corinthians.
14.26.29.32. Psalms of holy scripture, are perpetually to be sung in the
Church. For God has given his word, partly in prose, to be read, partly in
meter to be sung, Luke 4.16. 2. Sam. 23, 1, 2. Col. 3.16. 2. Chron. 29, 25, 27,
30. Psalm. 98, 1, 4, etc. Also God has given men the faculty not only of
speaking, but of singing: and all that is in us, is to be used to the lauding
of God, and edifying of his Church, Psalm. 103, 1, 2. 1. Corinthians. 14, 26. And
although psalteries, harps, and other instruments were used in Israel with the
song, Psalm. 150.3, 4, 5. 2. Chron. 29, 25, 26, 27. yet does not the ceasing of
that musik, abolish the singing of psalms with melody in our hearts: any more
than the ceasing of incense, which was burned with prayer, does abolish now
prayer out of the Church. Psalm. 141, 2. Luke 1, 10. But great use and benefit
there shall be always of singing Psalms; as The celebrating of God, his name,
and works, Exodus 15, 1. Psalm. 92.2, 3, 4, and 147, 1. The teaching,
instructing, comforting of our selves, Psalm. 32, 1, 8, and 78, 1, 2. Colos. 3,
16. The alaying of our inordinate passions, anger, grief, care, etc. Psalm. 77,
6, 7. 2. King. 3.13, 14, 15. Stirring up of good affections in us; joy,
comfort, fervencie in the spirit, etc. 2. Sam. 6, 15, 16. Psalm. 42.12. and 57,
8, 9, 10. Facility and ease for us to learn the law of God with more delight,
Psalm. 49.2, 3. etc. and 78, 2, 3, etc. Deuteronomy. 31, 19, 22, 30. with other like
comfortable uses, the godly do feel in themselves.

To help therefore the saints, in the comfortable use of this exercise; have I
employed my strength in this work: and shall think it well bestowed, if it may
serve to Gods glory and the benefit of his people.

Henry Ainsworth.

THE BOOK OF PSALMS OR HIMNES.
PSALM. I.
O Blessed is the man, that does not walk, in the counsel of the wicked; nor
stand in the way of sinners: nor sit, in the seat of the scornful.

has his delight, in the law of Jehovah: and in his law does meditate, day
and night.









PSALM. I.
^ O Blessed man, that does not in the wickeds counsel walk: nor stand in
sinners way; nor sit in seat of scornful- folk. 2. But sets in Jehovahs
laws, his pleasure, full delight: and in his law does meditate, by day and eke
by night.


by water brooks planted;
which in his time, shall give his fruit;
his leaf eke shall not fade;
and whatsoever he shall do,
it prosp'rously shall thrive.

which wind away-doth drive.

the judgment stand-upright:
and in the assembly of the just,
not any sinfull-wight.

acknowledged the way:
and way, of the ungracious
shall utterly-decay.
PSALM. II. Sing this as the 18. Psalm.
Why, do the heathens rage-tumultu'ously:
and peoples, mediate on vanity?

and princes for to plot together-get:
against Jehovah, against his Christ also.


the Lord, he them does mockingly-deride.

and in his wrath, them trouble-suddainlie.

the mountayn of my holiness, Sion.

thou art my son; this day begat-I thee.

heathens: and earths ends, thy firm-retenance.

as Potters vessel scatter them abroad.

ye earths Judges.
and joy, with trembling.
be wroth, and perish in the way doe-ye;
when burn-shall suddenly his angry-face:
O blessed, all their hope in him that place.
PSALM. II.
Why, do-the heathens tumultuously-rage: and the peoples, meditate vanity?











art my Son; I, thu day begat thee.

for thine inheritance: and the ends of the earth, for thy firm-possession.







in the way; when his anger shal-burn suddenly; O blessed, all that
hope-for-safety in him.

PSALM. III.

^ how many, that do rise-up against me
How many, that of my soul saying be:
^ there is no health, for him in God, Selah!
art, o Iah:
my glory, and up-lifter of my head.
with my voice, caled:
he heard me, from his holy mount, Selah.

for me Jehovah firmly-up-did-bear.

which me besetting round-about enclose.

for, all my foes thou smitest on cheek-bone:
breakst wickeds teeth.
the blessing, on thy people be, Selah.
PSALM. III. 1. Psalm of David, when he fled, from the face of Abshalom his Son.


ther-is no salvation, for him in God, Selah.

art a shield about me my glory, and lifter-up of my head.

With my voice, I called unto Jehovah: and he answered me, from the mountain of
his holiness, Selah





on the cheek-bone: thou breakest the teeth of the wicked.



PSALM. IV. 1. To the master of the music on Neginoth, a Psalm of David,


shall my glory be to ignominy, will ye love vanity: will ye seek, a lie, Selah?









more than of the time when their corn, and their new-wine were multipled.



PSALM. IV. Sing this as the 1. Psalm.

me answer, in this distress
thou made me roometh: shew-grace to me,
and hear thou my requests.

to ignominy be;
will ye love vanity: Selah?
will ye seek falsitie?

selected-wondrously,
his gracious-saint: Jehovah hears,
when unto him I cry.

considerately-say
within your hears, upon your bed;
and be you still, Selah.

for-sacrifices-slay:
and confidently-put-your-trust
in th'ever-being-Iah.
there be that say, o who
will cause us good to see?
the light, Jehovah, of thy face
upon us lifted be.

more then the time, wherein
their corn, and-also their new-wine
have multiplied been.

and-also sleep will I:
for tho a LORD wilt alone me seat,
in confident-safetie.
PSALM. V.
and understand
^my meditation, O Jah.

^of my cry: for to thee, I pray.

at morn: at morn will I address
to thee, and will look-out.
no God delighting wickedness:
None evil, with thee sojourn shall.

not set themselves: thou hate all
that work painful-iniquities.

them that be speakers of a lie:
Jehovah, does abhor, the man
of bloods and guiling fallacy.

in multitude of thy mercy:
in fear of thee, will worship-doe
to palace of thy sanctity.

because of them that me envy:
before me, make thou straight thy way.

There in-part woefull-evils is:
their throat, a grave is open-broad:
their tongue, they smooth with-flatteries.

From their consulted-purposes
fall let them: drive thou them away,
with their ful-many trespasses:
against thee, for rebel do they.

shall joy, shall showt eternally,
and thou shall cover them: and they
that love thy name, be glad in thee.

a blessing on the righteous-one:
him, as with buckler, crown will thou
with gracious-acceptation.
PSALM. V. 1 To the Master of the music on Nechiloth; a Psalm of David.




at morning, thou shalt-hear my voice: at morning will I orderly-address unto
thee, and will look out.

art not a God delighting wickedness: the evil, shall not sojourn with thee.









is no certainty; their inward part is woeful-evils: their throat is an open
grave: their tongue they-make-smooth.





with a bukler, with favourable-acceptation thou will crown-him about.

PSALM. VI. 1 To the Master of the music on Neginoth, upon the eight; a Psalm
of David.


am weak: heal me Jehovah; for, my bones are troubled.





is no memory of thee: in hell, who shall-confess to thee?









in a moment.

PSALM. VI. Sing this as the 3. Psalm,

neither chastise me in thine angry-heat:

heal me o Iah; for, my bones troubled be.

and thou Jehovah, how long will thou cease?

o save thou me, because of thy mercy.
appears:
who shall confess to thee, in deadly-lake?

each night: I bath my bed-sted, with my tears.

it is waxt-old, for all that me distress.

for heard has Iah, voice of my weeping-cry.

Jehovah, has my prayer accepted.

return, and be abasht in suddayn-space.
PSALM. VII. 1. Shigajon, of David: which he sang to Jehovah; upon the words of
Cush, son of Iemini.


there is none delivering.





it; and tread-down my life on the earth: and my glory, let him make- it-dwell,
in the dust, Selah.







thou triest the hearts, and reins, just God.

is in God: the savior, of the right in heart.

is a just judge: and God angerly-threatneth, every day.













PSALM. VII.
^ almighty-God, I hope-repose in thee: save me from all that me pursue, and
thou deliver me. renting-Lion like my soul in peeces-tear: breaking-asunder,
while there is no-one deliverer.

almighty-God,
if this- thing don have I,
if that there be within my palms
wrongful-iniquitie.

that with me was at-peace:
(yea him that my distresser was
causless, I did release.)

and tread my life on clay:
my glory also let him make-
dwell, in the dust, Selah,

for rages of my foes,
be thou lift-up: and wake to me,
judgment thou-diddst propose.

the peoples assembly:
and for the same, do thou return
unto the place-on-hie.

Jehovah judge thou me;
even-as my justice is, and as
my perfectnes in me.

and stablish-thou-firmly
the just- man: for, o just God, thou
the hearts and reins dost-try.

of the upright in heart.
is a just judge: and each day,
God, angry-threatned smart.
For if that he do not return,
his sword he sharp will whet:
his bow he bended has; and he
the same has ready-set.

the instruments of death:
for them that hotly-persecute,
his arrows he works.

painful-iniquitie:
for molestation he conceived,
and shall bring forth a lie.

and delved-deep the same:
and fallen he is, into the ditch
that he did working-frame.

upon his head turn-down:
his violent-wrong also shall
descend upon his crown.

is his just-equitie:
and will sing-psalm, unto the name
of Jehovah most-hye.
PSALM. VIII. 1 To the master of the musik upon Gittith; a Psalm of David.
is thy name in all the earth: which have given thy glorious-majesty, above the
heavens.





is sory-man that thou remembrest him: and the son of Adam, that thou-visitest
him?









is thy name, in all the earth.

PSALM. VIII.
is
^thy name in all the earth: thou which have given
^thy glorious-majesty above the heaven.

^foundest; because of them that thee distress:
To make the foe, and self-avenger cease.

the moon and stars, which thou have stablished,
is frail-man that him thou remembrest?
and Adams Son, that him thou visitest?

than be the Gods: and crowned him with glory,
and-eke with honourable-decency.

under his feet, thou set did everything.


that through the path-waies of the seas does go.

in all the earth has thy renouned-name.
PSALM. IX. 1. To the master of the music, upon Muth Labben; a Psalm of David.
I Will confess Jehovah, with all my heart: I will tell, all thy marveilous-
works.

to thy name O-most-high.

















in Sion: show forth among the peoples, his practices.







that they made: in the net, that they hidd, caught is their foot.





nor the exspectation of the poor-afflicted-ones, perish for aye. that they be,
sory-men, Selah.

PSALM. IX. Sing this as the 25. Psalm.

all thy works-marveilous, I will express.

I will sing-psalm, to thy name o most-hie.

they from thy face, stumbled and perished.

have sitten, judge of justice, on the throne.

the wicked-one have to-perdition-cast:
the name of them thou wiped have away,
to everlasting and perpetual-aye.

quite-ended are, to perpetuity!
and cities thou have pulld-up; of them- al
with them, is perished the memorial.

his throne for judgment, he prepareth-sit,

will judge the peoples, with right-equities.

a refuge-hye, at times in misery.

for thou, Iah, leavest not, them that seek thee.

his practices, shew-forth among peoples.

he forgets not, cry of th'afflicted-meek.

from my foes from deaths gates, up lifting me.

thy praises all: may in thy health rejoice.

caught is their foot, in net that close-they-laide.

in his hand-work, snared is the wicked-one.
O mind this well!
the wicked: heathens al, that God forget.

nor needies hope, perish for evermore.

let heathens judged be, before face of thee.

let heathens know, weak-men they be, Selah.
PSALM. X.
Wherefore Jehovah doest-thou stand in a place farr-off: do thou hide, at
times in distress?





that he seeks not: there is no God in all his crafty-purposes.

are on high, above his sight: all his distressers, he pusseth at them.

I shall not be in evil, to generation and generation.

is molestation and painfull-iniquity.





paws, a troup-of-poor.







it into thy hand: unto thee, the poor does leave it: thou art the helper, of
the fatherless.

man; seek-out his wickedness, till thou find none.

is King for ever and aye: perished are the heathens, out of his land.



that he add not any more; to daunt-with-terrour sory-man, out of the earth.

PSALM. X. Sing this as the 7. Psalm.
Wherefore Jehovah stand thou
removed-farr-aside?
at times when we are in distress,
Wherefore do thou thee hide?

hotly-pursues the poor:
Let them be taken in the crafts
that they have thought before.

praise does the wicked-wight:
the covetous eke he does bless,
he does the LORD despite.

is of such loftines,
That he seeks not: there is no God,
in all his purposes.

on high thy judgments be,
above his sight: his pressing-foes,
puff at them all does he.

not be remov'd-away;
For I shall not in evil be,
in any age for aye.

and fraud and fallacy:
under his tongue, is mischief and
plainfull-iniquitie.

he sits; in secrecies
he murdereth the innocent:
for poor do lurk his eyes.

as Lion in his denn;
he lies in wayt, to snatch away
the poor-afflicted men:
the afflicted-poor he snatcheth, him
when to his net he draws.

may fall, in his strong-pawes.
The second part.

forget: he hies-away
his face, so that he will not see
unto perpetuall-aye.

lift thou thine hand on hye:
let not the meek-afflicted- men
be out of memory.
man
despite the Almighty-one?
he in his heart says, thou will not
make-inquisition.

and grievance thou do see,
to take the thing into thine hand:
the poor leaves it to thee;
Thou helper art of fatherless.

and of the ev'l; his wickedness
seek, til thou find none.
for ever is
and to continuall-aye:
out of his land, the heathen-men
are perished-away.

Jehovah thou do hear:
thou firmly-doest-prepare their heart,
do make-attent thine ear.

that add no more he may,
that is frayl-man, out of the earth,
with-terrour to-dismay.
PSALM. XI. Sing this as the 1. Psalm.
I In Jehovah, hope-repose;
how (therefore) do ye say
unto my soul: as bird unto
your mountain, flee-away?

their shaft on string prepare:
to shoot even in the dark, at them
in heart that upright are.

the just, what has he done?
is;
Jah, in the heaven his throne:
his eyes will view; his eyelids prove,
the children of Adam.

also the wicked-man,
His soul eke hates, him that loves
wrongfull-transgression.

the snares: fire and brimston,
and wind of burning-storms, this shall
the part of their cup be.
is Jah, he justice loves:
his face, the right, will see.
PSALM. XI. 1 To the master of the Music, a Psalm of David.
IN Jehovah, do I hope-for-safety; how say ye to my soul: flee, to your
mountain as a bird?

that are upright in heart.







shall be the portion of their cup.



PSALM XII. 1 To the master of the music upon the eight, A Psalm of David.


each-man with his next-friend: with lip of flatteries; with a heart, and a
heart they speak.



are with us* who is Lord over us?



are pure sayings: as silver tried, in a subliming-fornace of earth; fined,
seven times.





PSALM XII. Sing this as the 50. Psalm.

for faithfull-ones, from Adams sonns, decay.
each-man with his next friend:
with flattring lip, with heart and heart speak they.

the tongue, that speaks arrogantly great things.

our lips are ours: who Lord is over us?

for needy-poor men's groning-pitteous:
now will I rise, the LORD says; in salvation
I will him set, he shall have respiration.
are sayings pure:
as silver tried, in earthen choise-fornace;
fined, sev'n times.
wilt him preserve, for ever, from this race.

when vileness is, of Adams sonns, exalted.
PSAM XIII. 1 To the master of the Music, a Psalm of David.
for ever: how long will thou hide, thy face from me?







bounteously-rewarded unto me.

PSALM XIII.
^ HOw long Jehovah, will thou me forget for aye: how long- while will thou
hide, thy face from me away? 3 How long shall, in my soul, I counsels set;
daily sad-sorrow in my heart: how long shall my foe be exalted above me?


illuminate mine eyes, least sleep of death me take.

mine adversaries they exsult will gladsomly,
when moved be shall I.

in thy mercy, my heart shalshew-forth-gladsomnes
in thy salvation: I sing will- cheerfully
unto the Eternal-one; for, bounteously has he
rewarded unto me.
PSALM XIV. Sing this as the 7. Psalm.
THe foolish-man says in his heart,
there is not any God:
they have corrupted, loathsome made
their practice; none does good.

on Adams sonns: to see,
if any that doeth-understand,
that seeks God, there-bee.

become are all-at-one
unprofitable: none does good;
none, no-not any-one.

painfull-iniquity:
that-eat my folk, as they-eat-bread;
to Jah, they do not cry.
is
in generation just.

because, Jah is trust.

His folks captivitee,
when Jah shall turn: Ja'kob shall joy,
Israel glad shall be.
PSALM XIV. 1 To the master of the music, a Psalm of David:
THe fool, says in his heart, there is no God: they have corrupted, they have
made-abominable their practice; there is none that does good.



there is none that does good: none, not one.

as they eat bread; they call not, on Jehovah.

is in the just generation.

is his hope.



PSALM XV.
^


and in his heart speaks truth.
That slandereth not with his tongue;
none ill to his friend does:
nor against his neighbor, takes reproach.
is in his eyes,
an abject; but he them that fear
Jehovah, glorifies:
that changes not, though he unto
his hinderance has sworn.
That has to biting-usury,
his money not forborne:
And has against the innocent,
received no bribery:
he that does these, shall not be moved
unto eternity.
PSALM XV. 1 A Psalm, of David;
Jehovah, who shall sojourne in thy tent: who shall dwell, in the mountain of
thy holiness?





is contemned; but be honors, them that fear Jehovah: swears to his hurt,
and changes not.



PSALM XVI. 1 Michtam of David:
PReserve me O God, for I hope-for-safety in thee.

art my Lord: my good, not unto thee.



that endow an other: I will not powr-out their powred-out-oblations of blood;
neither will I take-up their names, upon my lips.



places: yea the heritage, is fair for me.

in the nights, my reins do chastise me.

he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.





to perpetuity.

PSALM XVI. Sing this as the 7. Psalm.
PReserve thou me o God, for I
for safety hope in thee.
art my Lord:
my good is not to thee.

which are the earth upon:
and the excellent, in them is all
my delectation.

that give an other dower:
their powred-out-offrings of blood
I will not them out-power:
neither will I, upon my lips,
the names of them take-up.
is the portion
of my part and my cup:
Thou, art-sustainer of my lot.

in pleasant-places: yea fair is,
the heritage for me.
thankfully,
which has me counseled:
yea in the nights, my reins have me
severely-chastised.

continually fore me:
because he is at my right hand,
I shall not moved be.

and glad my glory is:
my flesh moreover, it shall dwell
in confident-surenes.

thou will not leave-alone:
thou will not give thy gracious-saint,
to see corruption.

of joys satiety,
before thy face; at thy right hand,
pleasures perpetually.
PSALM XVII. Sing this at the 8. or as the 35. Psalm.
HEar justice LORD; tend to my crying-shright;
hark to my pra'r: without lips fraudulent.

let thine eyes view, the equities-upright.

Thou have found nothing though thou did me try:
I purposed, my mouth shall not transgress.

paths of the breaker-through, observe do I.

That my footsteps may not removed be.

God: hear my speech, thine ear unto me bow.
me,
o Savior of them that hope in thee:
from them that raise themselves, with thy right hand.

in shade of thy wings, hide-me-privily.

my deadly foes, that round against me band.

in our steps they us do compass-round:
they set their eyes, down-bending to the ground.
is Lion like, to tear greedy:
like lurking-Lion, sitting secretly.

make him bow-down: deliver thou my soul,
from wicked with thy sword.
with thine hand, Lord, from men of mortal-race
worldlings; that have their part in this life-space:
Their belly thou do fill, with thine hid- see,
their children satisfied are: and they
do for their babes, their overplus up-lay.
But I; in justice, shall thy visage see:
shall when I wake, filld with thine Image be.
PSALM XVII. 1 A Prayer of David:
HEar thou Jehovah, justice* attend to my shril-cry; hearken to my prayer:
without, lips of deceit.



but have not found: I have purposed, my mouth shall not transgress.



that my footsteps be not removed.







that inviron-round against me. With their fat they have closed-up: with their
mouth, they speak in pride. In our steps now they compass us: their eyes they
set, bending-down into the earth.

is as a renting-Lion, that is greedy to tear: and as a lurking-Lion, sitting
in secret places.

with thy sword.

with thine hand Jehovah, from mortal-men of the transitory-world; who have
their part in this life; and their belly thou fillest with thine hidd- tresure,
satisfied are the sons: and they lay up their overplus, for their babes.

I awake, with thine image.

PSALM XVIII. 1 To the master of the music, a Psalm of the servant of Jehovah,
of David, which spoke, to Jehovah, the words of this song: in the day, that
Jehovah had delivered him, from the palm of al his enemies; and from the hand
of Saul.
















was under his feet.



place; round-about him his pavilion: darkness of waters, thick-clowds of the
skies.

that was before him: his thick-clowds passed-away; hayl, and coals of fire.



















were before me: and his decrees, I did not turn-away from me.











is perfect: the saying of Jehovah is tried: he is a shield, to all, that
hope-for-safetie in him.

is God, besides Jehovah: and who is a rock, except our God?



feet: and upon my high places, he maketh-me stand.

with mine arms.













there-was none to save: unto Jehovah, but he answered them not.



whom I have not known doe-serve me.





be my rock: and exalted be, the God of my salvation.









PSALM XVIII.

is my rock and my fortress;
^and my deliverer, my God is he,
^my rock, in whom I sheltred hope to be:
^my shield and horn, of my salvation;
^my fensed-hye-fortification.

And I was saved from mine enemies.

and me the streams of Belial frighted.

the snares of death, did me unwares-prevent.

upon Jehovah, and to my God cry:
and he my voice out of his palace hears;
my cry, before him, came into his ears.

grounds of the mou^ts: and shook, for wroth was he.

out of his mouth: coals, from it burnd-with-heat.

and gloomy-darknes, under his feet was.

and on wings of the wind, he flew-swiftly.
for his secret- bound;
for his pavilion about-him-round:
darkness of waters, thick-clowds of the skies.
eyes:
his clouds did pass: hayl and fire coals burned.

And give his voice, did he that is most-hye:
the hayl stones, and the coals of fire did fly.

and hurled lightnings, and them stroke-with-dread.

the worlds foundations, were eke reveald:
At thy rebuke Jehovah; at the blast,
of wind that from thy wrathfull-nosthril past.

he out of many waters, forth-drew me.

and from my foes, that stronger were than I.
The second part.

in day of my clowdy-calamity:
and for a staff to me, Jehovah was.

did bring me forth: he safely-me-released;
because, he was delitefull in me pleased,

as my hands pureness, he did me requite.

and did not from my God, ungodly-swerv.
be;
and his decrees, I turned not from me.

and kept my self, from mine iniquity.

as pureness of my hands, before his eyes.

with perfect man, thou do thee perfect show.

and with the froward, thou do show thee wry.

the lofty eyes, thou also bring low.

Jehovah my God, makes my darkness bright.

and by my God, I leaped over a wall.

a shield he is, to all that on him stay.
is God, besides the Eternal-one:
and who a Rock, except our God alone.
is he that with valor girdeth me:
and fully-perfect, makes my way to be.
feet: and
on mine hye-places, he does make me stand.

and with mine arms, a bow of brass is broke.

and thy right hand, has strongly-me-upheld:
also thy meek-humiliation
has caused me-multiplication.

and my legs, have not weakly-staggered.
The third part.

and, til I had consumed them, turned-not.

they down-did-fal, even underneath my feet.

unto the war, with active-valiantnes:
Thou caused have, under me down to stoop,
them that against me have arisen-up.

and I suppressed, them that hated me.
there was none to save:
to JAH, but he no answer to them gave.

as clay of streets, I powring-out-them-lay'd.

from peoples manifold-contention:
thou have me put the heathens head to be;
a people, which I knew not, serves me.

the strangers sonns, falsely to me deney.

and did, out of their closets, shrink-for-dread,
be:
and God of my health, hye-extoll'd be he.

and does the peoples under me depress.

also from them that up against me rise,
thou have exalted me; have ridd me-free,
from man of violent iniquitee.

will thee among nations confess;
and I unto thy name a psalm-will-sing.

and unto his anointed, does mercy;
to David and his seed; eternally.
PSALM XIX. Sing this as the 22. or as the 1. Psalm.

and firmament does preach
work of his hands.
does largely-utter-speach:
and night to night, does knowledge show.
are none:
their voice it-is not heard.
through all the earth is gone:
and to the worlds end, their speakings:
in them he did dispose,
tent for the Sun.
out of his champer goes:
joys strong-man like, to run a race.

and his regress to th'ends of them:
hidd from his heart, none is.
is;
the soul again-turning:
Jehovahs witness faithful is,
the simple wise-making.
are,
giving hearts glad-delight:
Jehovahs precept it is pure,
giving the eyes clear-light.
is clean,
abiding still for ay:
Jehovahs judgments verity;
together, just are they.
they are
to be desired, more:
and sweeter then the honey is,
or honey-comb-liquor.
is by them
admonished-clearly:
in keeping them, is much reward.

from secret- errors cleanse thou me.

from sinns-presumptuous; O let
them not within me reign,
then shall I perfect be; and clensd,
from much transgression.

to acceptance;
and meditation of my heart
before the face of thee:
Jehovah, my almighty-Rock
and my Redemer-free.
PSALM XIX. 1 To the master of the Music; a Psalm of David.










is his egress, and his compassing-regress, is unto the utmost-ends of them:
and none is hidd from his heat.

is perfect; returning the soul: the testimony of Jehovah is faithful,
making-wise the simple.

are right, giving-joy to the heart: the commandment of Jehovah is pure,
giving-light, to the eyes.

is clean, standing to perpetual-aye; the judgments of Jehovah are truth, just
they are, together. more-then gold, and then much fine-gold* and sweeter than
honey, and liquor of the honey-combs.

is clearly-admonished by them: in keeping them, there is much reward.

faults clense-thou me.

sins, withhold thou thy servant; let them not have dominion in me, then shall
I be perfect; and made-clean, from much trespass.



PSALM. XX. 1 To the master of the music; a Psalm of David.












make-mention of charrets, and these of horses: but we, make-mention of the
name of Jehovah, our God.





PSALM. XX. Sing this as the 84. Psalm.

in day of streight-adversitee:
the name of Jakobs mighty-God,
set thee upon a refuge-hye.

from Sion give thee sure-abode.

thy offering, ashes-make, Selah.
craves, give thee the same:
and all thy counsel he fulfill.

and banners-rear, in our Gods name:
All thy requests fullfill-doe JAH.

he saves his Anointed-one;
out of his heavens of sanctity,
he answreth him: with powers-mighty;
his right-hands safe-salvation.

but of the name of our God JAH
we mention-make.
but rise, and stand-upright do we.

us answer in the day we call.
PSALM XXI.

^and in thy safe-salvation, how veh'ment glad is he?

that which his heart did pray:
and the earnest-asking of his lips,
have not kept-back, Selah.

with blessings of goodness:
thou set on his head, a crown
of gold-of-preciousnes.

to him thou gavest-it:
even length of days, t'eternity
and to continuance-yet.
has his honor been,
in thy salvation:
glory and comely-dignity,
thou put him upon.

him to perpetuall-ay:
even with thy face, thou make him
chearfull-to-be with joy.

the King put trust: and he,
through mercy of the Highest-one
shall not removed be.

that are thine enemies:
even thy right hand, shall find-out them
that thee with-hate-invies.
fierce-face,
them as an oven of fire
thou will dispose: Jehovah, will
them swallow in his ire:
and fire shall eat them up.

'stroy from the earth: also their seed,
from sonns of earthly-men.

an evill-thing against thee:
a crafty-purpose they have thought,
but shall not able be.

even-as a shouldring-butt:
against their faces, with thy strings,
wilt ready-make to shoot.

do high-thy-self-advance:
and we will sing and praise-with-psalm,
thy pow'rfull-puissance.
PSALM XXI. 1 To the master of the music, a Psalm of David.






it him: length of days, ever and aye.

is his honor, in thy salvation, glorious-majesty and comly-honour, have thou
put upon him.

for blessings to perpetuall-ay, thou have made him cheerful with joy, with
thy face.



hand, shall find them that hate thee.





but they shall not be able.

as a but: with thy strings, thou will make-ready against their faces.



PSALM XXII. 1 To the master of the music, concerning the hind of the morning;
a Psalm of David.
art farr-off* from my salvation, from the words of my roaring.

there is no silence to me.

art holy: sitting, the praises of Israel.





am a worm and not a man: the reproach of earthly-men, and the contemned of the
people.





art the drawer of me forth out of the belly: the maker of me to trust, even at
my mothers breasts.

art my God.

is near: for there is no helper.

bulls, of Bashan have environed me.

as a renting and roaring Lion.













soul, from the hand of the dog.









shall be my praise; in the great Church: my vows I will pay, before them that
fear him.





pertains the kingdom: and he is ruler among the nations.

that quickens not, his soul.



that shall be born; that he has done it.

PSALM XXII.

^thou forsaken me: art far from my
^salvation; words of my roring-cry?

^not answerest: also by night, and unto me
^ there is no silent rest.

the praises of Is'rel.

thou them deliv'redst-well.

were safe-delivered:
in thee, they trusted and were not
with bashfullnes-shamed.

the vile-reproach am I
of earthly-men, of people eke
despis'd-contemptuously.

a scoff at me do make:
they with the lip do make a mow,
the head they scornfull-shake.

let him now ridd him quite:
let him deliver him; because,
in him he does delight.
it is thou that me out of
the belly forth-drewest:
that made me to trust-secure,
even at my mothers breast.

committed been have I:
even from my mothers belly, thou
have been my God- mighty.
therefore from me
farr-off away now gone;
for sorowfull-distress is near:
for helper there is none.

about-encompassed:
the mighty- bulls, of Basan have
me round-invironed.

set open-gapingly:
like to a Lion ravening
and roaring- terribly.

my bones dispart-themselves:
my heart is, like the wax: it melts,
in midds of my bowels.

dride; and my tongue, cleaves
unto my jaws: and thou have brought
me down to dust of death.
The second part.

the crew of men-perverse,
enclosed me: my hands and feet,
they lion-like-did-pierse.

they looked, they did me view.

and lot, for my cote, threw.

unto mine help make speed.
soul,
from dogs hand, safely-rid.
And from the renting-Lions mouth,
give me salvation-free:
and from the hands of Unicorns,
thou answer gave me.

will make narration:
I will thee praise, in midst of
the congregation.

him praise, him honour-well
all Jacobs seed: and dread-ye him,
all seed of Israel.

abhorrs not, nor despise;
nor hides his face from him: but hears,
when unto him he cries.
shall be my praise, within
the congregation large:
before them that him reverence,
my vows I will discharge.

Jehovah praise shall they,
that do him seek: your heart, shall live
unto perpetuall-aye.

and turn Jehovah to:
and all the heathens families,
before thee shall worship-doe.
does
the kingdom appertain:
and he among the nations
is ruler-soveraign.

shall eat and worship do:
low-bend before him, shall they all
that to the dust down-goe:
And he that quickneth not, his soul.
their seed:
it for a generation shall
be'fore the LORD counted.

by them declared be:
unto a folk that shall be born;
that done the same has he.
PSALM XXIII. 1 A Psalm of David.
Jehovah feeds me, I shall not lack.





wilt be with me: thy rod and thy staff, they shall comfort me.

in presence of my distressers: thou make fat my head with oil; my cup is
abundant.



PSALM. XXIII. Sing this as the 8. Psalm.


he gently-leads me, quiet waters by.

in paths of justice leads-me-quietly.

i will fear none ill; for with me thou will be:
thy rod thy staff eke, they shall comfort me.

in their presence that my distressers be:
Thou make fat mine head with ointing-oil;
my cup abounds.
shall all the days of my life follow me:
also within Iehovahs house, I shall
to length of days, repose-me-quietly.
PSALM XXIV.
it is Iehovahs, and the
^plenteousnes of it: the habitable-world,
^and they that in the same do sit.

^it secure: and on the flowing-rivers, has
^the same establisht-sure.

Jehovah up-ascend:
and in his place of holiness,
who is he that shall stand?

that to false-vanity
does not lift-up his soul: and does
not swear to fallacy.

a benediction:
and justice, from the mighty-God
of his salvation.
is their generation
that do him seek: even they
that make-inquiry for thy face;
this Jacob is, Selah.

doors of eternall-aye
be lifted-up: that-so the King
of glory, enter may.
is he?
Jehovah, puissant
and valiant; Jehovah, he
in battle valiant.

doors of eternal-aye
lift-up your-heads: that-so the King
of glory, enter may.
is he?
it is the eternall-JAH
of warlike-hosts: even-he the King
of glory is, Selah.
PSALM XXIV. 1 A Psalm of David.
THe earth is Iehovahs, and the plenty thereof: the world, and they that sit
therein.









is the generation of them that inquire for him: of them that seek thy face, of
Iaakob, Selah.



is this King of glory? Jehovah, strong and valiant: Jehovah valiant in battle.



is he this King of glory? Jehovah of hosts: he is the King, of glory, Selah.

PSALM XXV. 1 A Psalm of David;
Unto thee Jehovah, lift I up my soul.







art the God of my salvation: thee do I earnestly-exspect, all the day.





is: therefore will he teach, sinners in the way.



are mercy and truth: to them that keep his covenant, and his testimonies.

is much.

is the man, that fears Jehovah? he will teach him, in the way that he shall
choose.



is to them that fear him: and his covenant, to make them for to know.

are continually, unto Jehovah: for he will bringforth, my feet out of the net.

am solitary, and poor-afflicted.













PSALM XXV.
^I Lift my soul, Jehovah unto thee,

^O let me not with-shame-abashed be:
^shew-gladnes over me, let not my foes.

shall not abashed be-with-shamefulnes:
but they shall be abashed-shamefully,
that do in vain unfaithfully-transgress.

thy paths, me learn-by-information.

for thou, the God of my salvation:
I earnestly-exspect thee, all the day.

and thy kind mercies, o eternal-IAH:
for, they have been even from eternities.

remember not thou: but remember me
Jehovah, for thy bountiful-goodnes,
according to thy loving-kind-mercie.
is Jehovah, righteous also:
therefore will he teach, sinners in the way.

and learn he will, the lowly-meek his way.
are:
to them that keep his league, and witnesses.

wilt mine iniquity; for much it-is.
is the man, that does Jehovah fear?
him will he teach, in way that he shall-chuse.

his seed the land for-heritage-shall-use.
he does grant
to them that him with fear doe-reverence:
also his testamental-covenant,
to make them for to have-intelligence.
be:
for from the net my feet he will restore.

For I alone am, and afflicted-poore.

bring thou me forth, from my vexations.

and pardon, all mine aberrations.

and do, with hate most-violent, hate me.

shamed be I not, for I do hope in thee.

for, I do thee exspect-with earnestnes.

from all his strait-afflicting-anguishes.
PSALM XXVI. Sing this as the 5. or as the 66. Psalm.

in my perfect-simplicity:
I in Jehovah trust also;
I shall not slide-unstedfastly.

my reins and my heart, do thou try.

and I walk, in thy verity.

nor enter, with dissemblers-hidd.

and do not sit, with the-wicked.

and LORD, I compass thine altar.

and all thy marvailes, to declare.

of thine house, dearly-love do I:
place, of the habitation
of thy most glorious-majesty.

nor with blood-guilty men my life.

whose right hand, is with bribes full- rife,

redeem and use-me-graciously.

in Churches, bless the LORD will I.
PSALM XXVI 1 A psalm of David.
JUdge me Jehovah; for I, walk in my perfection: and do trust in Jehovah; I
shall not stagger.



is before mine eyes: and I walk, in thy truth.







works.





is a mischievous purpose: and their right hand, is full of bribes.





PSALM XXVII. 1 A Psalm, of David;
JEhovah, is my light and my salvation, for whom should I fear? Jehovah is the
strength of my life; for whom should I dread?

selves, stumbled and fell.



thing, I have asked of Jehovah, the same I will request: that I may sit in the
house of Jehovah, all the days of my life: to view the pleasantnes, of
Jehovah; and to inquire in his Palace.

place of his tent: on a rock, he will exalt me.



when I call; and be gracious to me and answer me.















PSALM XXVII.
is and mine health,
^for whom should I be 'ffeard?
^The LORD the strength is of my life;
^for whom should I have-dread?

^against me made-battel:
^my foes and m'enimies to me;
^themselves, stumbled and fell.

my heart unfearfull is:
if war shall up against me rise;
I boldly trust in this.

the same request I shall:
that in the LORDS house I may d'wel,
the days of my life all:
to view, Jehovahs pleasantnes;
and seek in his Palace.

will privily-me-place,
in the evil day: he will me keep-
secret, in secrecy
of his tent: and upon a rock,
he will exalt me-hye.

above, my foes 'bout me;
and I will offer in his tent,
offerings of showting-glee:
I sing will and sing-psalm to JAH.

when I call; and be gracious
to me and me answer
(Thou have said,)
for my face seek do ye:
thy face, Jehovah do I seek.

turn not thy servant back, in wrath,
my succor been have thou:
o God of mine health, leav me not
neither forsake me now.
both
though they should me forsake:
yet would Jehovah gathering-
unto himself me take.

and my conductour be,
in path of righteousness: because,
of them that envy me.

for, lying witnesses
do up against me stand, and he
that breaths violentnes.
(I fainted had,) except I had
believed, for to see
Iehovahs goodness; in the land
of them that living be.

confirmed be, and strong-
wax let thine heart: and earnestly-
think for Jehovah long.
PSALM XXVIII. 1 A Psalm of David
Unto thee Jehovah, do I call; my rock, cease not-as-deaf from me: least thou
be silent from me; and I be made-like to them that goe-down the pit.



is in their heart.





be Jehovah, for he has heard, the voice of my supplications-for-grace.



is a strength to them: and he, is the strong fort, of the salvations, of his
anointed.



PSALM XXVIII. Sing this as the 32. psalm.

my Rock, cease not as deaf from me:
least thou be mute from me; and I
them that goe-down the pit, like be.

when unto thee I out-doe-crye:
when I lift up mine hands, unto
thine Oracle of sanctity.

and with them that work painful-sin:
that with their neighbors speak of peace;
and malice, is their heart within.

as is their practices offense:
give them, as is their handy act;
render, to them their recompense.

unto Iehovahs works, employ;
neither unto his handy deed:
he will not build them, but destroy.
be; for he has heard,
the voice of my requests for grace.
is my strength and shield; my heart
trusted in him, and holp I was:
My heart therefore shewes-gladsomnes,
and I Will confess him with my song.
is their strength: and fort he is
of his Ointeds salvation.

and bless thou thine inheritance:
and even unto eternity,
do thou them feed and them advance.
PSALM XXIX. 1 A psalm, of David;
GIve yet to Jehovah, sonns of the mighties: give ye to Jehovah, glory and
strength,



is upon the waters; the God of glory thundereth: Jehovah, upon many waters.

is with able power: the voice of Jehovah, with comly-honour.















PSALM XXIX. Sing this as the 24. Psalm.

the sons of the mighty:
O give unto Jehovah ye,
glory and potency.

his names glorious-renown:
in th'honourable sanctuary
bow to Jehovah down.
is;
thunder does Gods honor:
Jehovah, on waters many.

Jehovahs voice, with comlines.

the cedars: Lebanons cedars,
Jehovah quite-doth-break.

he makes them up-to-spring:
the Lebanon and Shirjon mount,
like Unicorns yongling.


the desert quake: Jehovah makes
the Cadesh desert quake.

to travel-tremblingly;
and bares the woods: in his Palace,
ech-one does say glory.

Jehovah sitts, for aye.

his people, bless will JAH.
PSALM XXX. Sing this as the 27. Psalm.

for thou have drawn-up me:
and have at me mine enemies
not joifull made to be.

and thou did heal-me-safe.

up from the lowest-grave:
Thou have kept-me-alive from them
that down the pit do go.
that are his Saints-gracious,
sing-psalm Jehovah to:
and unto the remembrance of
his sainctity confess.

life in his favor is:
Weeping shall lodge at even-tide,
But joy at morning-day.

I shall not move for ay.

strength to my mount settled:
but thou did hide-away thy face,
and I was-soon-troubled.

and ask Jehovah grace.

goe-down to rotting-place?
Shall dust confess to thee, shall it
shew-forth thy veritee?

o Jah, my helper be.

to me into a dance:
my sackcloth thou unloosed have,
and girtt me with joyance.
my glory to thee may sing,
and may not silent be:
Jehovah my God, I for ay
wuth-thanks-confess will thee.
PSALM XXX. 1 A Psalm, a song of the dedication, of the house of David.








is in his anger, life, in his favourable-acceptation: in the evening; lodged
weeping; and at the morning showting-joy.













my glory may sing-psalm to thee, and not be silenced: Jehovah my God, I will
confess thee for ever.

PSALM XXXI. 1 To the master of the music; a Psalm of David.




art my firm-rock and my fortress: and for thy name sake, wilt guide me and
lead me.

art my firm-strength.









is on me: gnawn is with Indignation, mine eye, my soul and my belly,



acquaintance; seeing me in the street, they fled from me.

man out of heart: I am, as a vessel of perdition.



art my God.

are my times: ridd thou me, from the hand of my enemies, and from my
persecutors.





word; in haughtines and despite.

is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that sear thee: have wrought,
for the^ that hope-for-safetie in thee; before, the sons of Adam!

prides of man: do lay them up in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues.

be Jehovah: for he has made-marvailous, his mercy to me, in a city of
strong-defense.



him that does haughtines.



PSALM. XXXI Sing this as the 35. Psalm.

o let me not abashed be for ever:
thou in thy justice freely-me-deliver.

thou for a rock of strength, unto me be;
Be for an house of forts, me for to save.
art and my fort-fensed:
and for thy name sake, wilt me guide and lead.

for me: for thou, art my munition-safe.

LORD, God of truth, thou me did free-redeem.

of vanities of vain-deceitful-glose:
and I do in Jehovah trust-repose.

which have beheld my troublesom-distress;
have known, my soul in painful-anguishes.

have made my feet stand, in a place roomthie.

mine eye, my soul my belly eke, is gnawn
with grief.
my years with sighing also, quite are spent:
my strength decayed, with my sinns-punishment:
Also my bones with-gnawing-are-wasted.

Unto my neighbors also veh'mently:
Unto my known-acquaintance eke a dread
seeing me in the street, from me they fled.
The second part.

I am as broken vessel.
reproach of many; round about me fear:
when as against me they together plot,
to take my soul they craftily-allot.

I say, thou art my God. they be,
in thy hand: from my foes hand, rid thou me;
from them that me pursue.
on thy servant: save me, through thy good-grace.

do call on thee: shame let the wicked have,
be silenced unto the lowest-grave.

against the just, in spite and pride-haughty.

that fear thee: wrought, for them that in thee trust;
before the sons of men!
in secret of thy face, from prides of men:
from striefe of tongues, in tent thou laist-up them.
be: for to me his mercy
he wondrous-made, in city of defense.

from fore thine eyes: thou heardst yet-certainly
my prayers voice, when I to thee did cry.

Jehovah keeps, the faithful; and pays
him plenteously, that haughtines does.

all that wait for Jehovah hopefully.
PSALM. XXXII. 1 An instructing- psalm, of David.
O Blessed he whose trespass is forgiven, whose sin is covered.

is the earthly-man, to whom Jehovah shall not impute iniquity: and in whose
spirit, is no deceit.





me my trespasses, to Jehovah: and thou, forgavest the iniquity of my sin,
Selah.



art a secret-place to me, from distress thou will preserv me: with
showting-songs of deliverance, thou will compass me, Selah.

shall be upon thee.

must be stopped with bit and bridle; which come-not near unto thee.

are for the wicked: but he that trusts in Jehovah, mercy, shall compass him.



PSALM XXXII.
^O Blessed he whose transgression
^is pard'ned, whose sin cov'red is.
is the man to whom the
^LORD imputes no viciousnes:
^and in whose sp'rit, deceit none is:

^because from speaking I did cease:
^in mine out-roring, all the day.

on me: my moisture was turned,
into the summers droughts, Selah.

my viciousnes, I not cov'red;
I said, I will confess to JAH,
against me my faults: and thou pard'nedst,
my sins iniquity, Selah.

at time of finding pray to thee:
at many waters flood, surely,
to him they shall not reaching-bee.
art a secret-place to me,
me from distress thou keepst-away:
with shrill-songs of deliv'rance-free,
thou will encompass me, Selah.

in way wherein thou should go:
I counsell-will, on thee mine eye.

Which do not understand: whose jaw
with bitt and bridle must be tide;
which naer to thee else do not draw,
bides.
But he that in Jehovah trusts,
mercy shall compass him about.

and all right hearted-joyfull-shout.
PSALM XXXIII.

^becomes the righteous decently.

^with ten-stringd- Lute, Psalm to him sing.

with triumph make melodious noise.
is Iehovahs voice:
and faithful, all his action.

the earth is full of IAHS mercee.

and all their host, by his mouths sp'rit.

make as an heap together-rise:
he puts, the deeps in treasuries.

Let all the worlds inhabitants,
for him with-fearefulnesse-back-goe.
so:
he has commanded, and it stands.

the counsel of the nations:
the peoples cogitations,
he breaking-doth-annihilate.

shall stand unto eternitee:
and his hearts cogitations be
to every generation.
is the nation,
whereof Jehovah God shall be:
the people which chosen has he,
for to be his possession.

does all the sons of Adam see.

to, all that in the earth do dwell.

attends, unto their works all.

by multitude of army be:
Deliv^red is no Champion,
by multitude of able-force.
is an horse:
and by his much power, riddeth now.
IAHS eye, is to them that have
his fear: that wait for his mercy.

and them alive in famine save.
IAH waits-earnestly:
our succor, and our shield is he.

for we trust in his name holy.

thy merciful-benignity:
according as, we hopefully-
have expectation for thee.
PSALM XXXIII.
SHout-joyfully ye just, in Jehovah: praise, becomes the righteous.

with tenne-stringed-instrument, sing-Psalme unto him.



is the word of Jehovah: and all his work, is faith.















is the nation, whereof Jehovah is God: the people, that he hath-chosen, for a
possession to himself.







There is no King, saved by multitude of a power: a mighty-man, shall not be
delivered by multitude of able-strength.

is falsehood, for salvation: and shall not deliver, by multitude of his power.

is unto them that fear him: to them that hopefully-wait for his mercy.



is our help, and our shield.





PSALM. XXXIV. 1 A Psalm of David; when he had changed his behavior, before
Abimelech: and he had driven him away, and he was gone.
shall be in my mouth.









man c^^^^d, and Jehovah heard: and saved him, out of all his distresses.



is good: O-blessed is the man, that hopeth-for-safetie in him.

there is no want, to them that fear him.





is the man, that wills life: that loves days, to see good!





are unto the just: and his ears, unto their out-crie.

is against them that do evil: to cutoff, their memorial from the earth.





are the evils of the just: and out of them all, Jehovah will ridd-him free.







PSALM XXXIV.

^his praise within my mouth, always.

^the meek shall hear, and joy shall they.

^his name together, extol we,

and from my fears all, rid me free.

and shamed let not their faces be.
man did call:
and sav,d him, from his troubles all.

'bout them that fear him; and frees them.
is JAH:
o blessed man, that hopes in him.

for to his fearers, want none is.

and they do hunger greedily:
but any good shall they not want,
that seekers of Jehovah be.

I will you learn, Jehovahs fear.
is the man, that life does will:
that loves days, good for to see?

thy lips, from speaking fallacee.

seek peace, and after it pursew.

attend eke, unto their outcrie.
is against ev'l doers:
to raze from earth, their memory.

and them, from all their troubles, ridd.
is nie:
and contrite sp'rited, save will he.
man's evils are many:
and from them all, JAH ridds him free.

not any of them, broken is.

and haters of the just- man, they
shall be condemned-as-guilty.

and they shall not be judgd-unjust,
all that in him for safety-trust.
PSALM XXXV. 1 A Psalm, of David;
PLead thou Jehovah, with them that-plead with me: war thou, against them that
war against me.



am thy salvation.



them.









is like thee; that riddest-free the poor-afflicted, from the stronger then
himself: and the poor-afflicted and needy, from the spoiler of him.

things that I knew not, they did ask of me.



was sack; I afflicted my soul with fasting: and my prayer, returned upon my
bosom.

if he had been a fellow-friend as if he had been a brother to me: I bowed-down
sad, as he that bewaileth his mother.

it not: they rent, and were not silent.

for a cake of-bread: gnashing their teeth against me.

soul, from the Lions.



them that are my enemies with falsitie, rejoice at me: them that are my haters
without cause, wink with the eye.



















PSALM XXXV. This may be sung also as the 8. Psalm.
^ PLead thou O LORD, with them, that plead with me: war, against them that do
against me war. 2 Lay hold upon the shield and the bucklar: stand for mine
help.

Say to my soul, I thy salvation am.

turned back and hush; that evil think for me.
so be those-same:
and th'Angel of Jehovah driving them.

and th'Angel of the LORD them following.

without cause for me privily-did-lay,
without cause, dug for my soul have they.

and catch him let his privie-hidden grinn,
with wastfull-ruine, let him fall therein.

shall in his saving health; have joyfull-glee.
is like thee;
that from his stronger, riddest-free the poor:
even poor and needy, from his spoiler-sore.

things that I knew not, they did ask of me.

Even of my soul, the quit-bereaving-lack.

my soul I have with fasting afflicted:
my prayer on my bosom eke turned.
been he had
as-if he had my brother been, I went:
as one that for his mother does lament,
so bowed I me down obscurely-sad.
then they were glad,
Also together-they were-gathered:
the smiters against me were-together-come,
and I knew not: they rent and were not dum.
for cake-of-bread:
against me their teeth together they gnashed.
my-stayes, how long-while, will thou see?
return my soul from their vastations,
my solitary- soul, from the Lions.

I will thee praise, among a folk mighty.

mine enemies, be joyful over me:
and they that without cause my haters be,
let them not privily-wink with the eye.

And against them that the quiet of the earth be,
words of deceits they have imagined.

have said, aha, aha, our eye does see.

O Lord, from me far-be-not-thine-abode.

my God, and my Lord unto my debate.

judge me: and let them not at me be glad.

let them not say, we have him swallowed.

that joy at mine ill: clad with shame be they
and bashfulnesse, that against me magnify.

my justice that delight: and let them say,
Jehovah magnified be always;
his servants peace, that likes.
shall sound thy justice: thy praise, all day-long.
PSALM. XXXVI. 1 To the master of the music, a Psalm of David, the servant of
Jehovah.
is before his eyes.

self in his- own eyes: to find, his iniquity which he ought to hate.

are painfull-iniquity and deceit: he has left-off to be prudent to do good.



is in the heavens: thy faithfulness, unto the skies.



is thy mercy, O God: and the sons of Adam, hope-for-safety, in the shadow of
thy wings.



is the well of life: in thy light, we see light.



it not make-me-flee.

down, and have not been-able to rise.

PSALM. XXXVI. Sing this as the 27. Psalm.
THe trespass of the wicked- man

even in my heart: that dread of God
is not before his eyes.

in his-own eyes does he,
to find-out, his iniquity
that hated ought to be.
are deceit
and vaine-iniquity:
for to do good he has left-off
his prudence-to-apply.

he purposely-doth muse:
he sets himself, on way not good:
he ev'll does not refuse.
is
thy bountiful mercy:
thy constant-faithfulnesse does reach
unto the highest-sky.

thy judgments, a great deep:
Jehovah, thou do man and beast
in healthful safety-keep.
is thy mercy,
when Adams sons, O God,
within the shadow of thy wings
do hope-for-safe abode.

have plentifull-moistures
and thou will give-them for to drink
the stream of thy pleasures.

in thy light, light we-see.

unto them that know thee;
thy justice eke, to right of heart.

come-on me: and the wickeds hand,
not make-me-move-aside.

iniquity practice:
they have been thrust-down, and have not
ability to rise.
PSALM. XXXVII. This may be sung also as the 25. or as the 119. Psalm.

^envie not, them that do injuriousnesse.

^and fade, even-as the budding-herbs greennes*

inhabit thou the land, and feed on faith.

and he will give thee, that which thy heart pray'th.

and trust on him, and he will see-it-done.

and thy judgment, as the bright-shining-noon.

and for him wait thou still-with patientnesse:
fret not, for him that prosp'reth in his way;
for man, that does effect his purposes.

fret not thy self, eke to do naughtiness.

and they that wait on JAH, shall land possess.

and thou shall mark, and he not in his place.
free:
and in much peace, they shall themselves solace.

and does against him, gnashing-grind his teeth.

for, that his day a coming is, he sees.

to fell the poor and needy; for to slay
the right of way. 15, Their sword, shall enter in
their heart: their bows eke, broken be shall they.
man, better is:
then many wicked-mens wealth-manifold.
men-graceles:
whereas the just, Jehovah does uphold.

and their inheritance, shall be for aye.

in days of hunger, have enough shall they.

the enemies eke of Jehovah, shall.
be like unto the rams fat-precious:
they are consumed, with smoke consumed-all.
The second part.

and just-man, sheweth-grace and give does he.

and his accursed-ones, cut off shall be.

and he his way affects-delightfully.

because Jehovah, holds his hand firmly.

the just forsaken; and his seed seek bread.

and in the blessing, bides his afterseed.


his gracious-saints, for ever kept are they:
whereas seed of the wicked, is off-cut.
men they shall by inheritance-
have of the land rightfull-possession:
and to perpetuall-continuance,
they shall herein have habitation.
man's mouth, does wisdom forth-impart:
also his tongue, the rightful-judgement speaks.

his foot it shall not stagger in his steps.

and seeks, him by death for-to oppress.

neither condemn him, when he judged is.

and keep his way; and he exalt will thee,
for to possess the land by heritance:
when cut off are the wicked, thou shall see.

and spreading-forth himself, as Laurel green.
was no more:
and I him sought, but found he has not been.

for th'after-end of that man shall be peace.

the after-end of wicked, cut off is.
men's saving-health, of JAH proceeds:
Their strength in time of need.
and rids them freely: from the wicked rids,
and saves them: because they hope in him.
PSALM. XXXVII. 1. A Psalm of David;
FRet not thy self for the evill-doers: envy not, for them that do
injurious-evill.



in the land, and feed on faith.







in his way; for the man, that effects devices.





while, and the wicked shall not be: and thou shall consider his place, and he
shall not be.









own heart: and their bows, shall be broken.

is the little of a just- man: then the plenteous-mammon, of many wicked- men.

men, shall be broken: but Jehovah upholdeth the just.

men: and their inheritance, shall be for ever.



fat of rams: they-are consumed, with the smoke they are consumed.









man forsaken; and his seed, seeking bread.

are in the blessing,





men shall inherit the land: and shall dwell thereon, to perpetuall-aye.



is in his heart: it shall not stagger in his steps









was not: and I sought him, and he was not found.

man, and see the righteous: for the after-end of the man shall be peace.



men, is of Jehovah: their strength, in time of distress.



PSALM XXXVIII. Sing this as the 18 Psalm.

neither chastise me in thine angry-heat.

and thou thy hand upon me down do let.
is no soundness:
for my sin, in my bones there is no peace.

as weighty load, too weighty for me-is.

because of mine undiscreet-foolishnesse.

I all the day, do walk sad-mournfully.

and in my flesh, there is no entire-part.
I weakened am and crushed with vehementnesse:
I rore-out, for the groaning of my heart.
is thee before:
and hid from thee, is not my sighing-sore.

and mine eyes light, even they with me not are.

my neighbors eke, do stand removed-far.

and they that seek mine ill, do mischiefs speak:
All day deceits they meditating-plot.
am, I do not hear:
and as one mute, his mouth that opens not.

and in whose mouth, no reprehensions be.

O Lord my God, an answer thou wilt-graunt,

when my foot mooves, do against me greatly-vaunt.
am ready: and always,

my viciousnes: and for my sin shew-care.

are many, that me hate for cause-untrue.

are adverse to me, for I good pursue.


PSALM. XXXVIII. 1 A Psalm of David, for to record




is in my flesh, because of thy angry-threat: no peace is in my bones, because
of my sin.







there is no soundness, in my flesh.



is all my desire: and my sighing, is not hid from thee.

are not with me.

man, hear not: and as a mute- man opens not his mouth. are no reproofs.



and when my foot is moved, do magnify against me.

am ready to halting: and my pain, is before me continually.



are alive are mighty: and multiplied are they that hate me falsely.





PSALM XXXIX. 1 To the Master of the music to Ieduthun; a psalm of David.
is before me.





is: let me know, how soon-ceasing I am.

is as nothing before thee: surely all vanity is every earthly-man, though
settled, Selah.

each-man; surely in vanity do they make-a-stirre: he heapeth-up, and knows
not who shall gather them.

is for thee.



it.



is every earthly-man, Selah.

am with thee; a sojourner, as all my fathers,

my-selfe: ere-that, I go and I be not.

PSALM XXXIX.

^not with my tongue to miss:
^Ile keep a bridle on my mouth,
^whiles wicked fore me is.

^I silent was: my smart
^was also stirred-troublously.

Fire in my meditation burnd:
I with my tongue did speak.

what my days measure eke:
know let me how short lived I am.

as handbredths, and my worldly-time
fore thee as nothing weighes:
Sure wholly vain is every man
though setled-fast, Selah.

surely vain sturr make they:
one heaps-up goods, and knows not
who shall their gatherer be.

my longing is for thee.

fools mockage make not me.

for done it is of thee.

o turn-away the same:
for by the striking of thine hand,
I quite-consumed am.

a man thou chastisest;
and make melt even as a moth
his beauty-liked-best:
Sure all men vanity, Selah.

hark to my tears, cease not as deaf;
for stranger with thee I;
a pilgrim as my fathers all.

refresh my self: ere that I go,
and I no more shall be.
PSALM XL. Sing this at the 32. Psalm.

For Jehovah: and he did bend
unto me, and did hear my cry.

out of the dreadfull-sounding pit,
out of the mire of muddynes:
and on a rock, set-fast my feet;
ordered my steps with steadines.

a new song; to our God a praise:
many shall see shall fear also;
and in Jehovah trust-alwayes.

Jehovah, his security:
and to the proud respects not,
or them that turn unto a lie.

O JAH my God, many to be;
and thy thoughts-minded, toward us:
none can in order-count to thee;
would I declare and speak-of these;
more than to tell, increast they are.

mine ears, thou op'ning-doost-prepare:
Burnt-offring and oblation
for sin; thou have not asked- it,

in the books roll, it is of me writ.

and thy law, in my bowels is.

the joyfull-tidings of justice:
Lo I my lips have not closed;
O JAH, thou know.
thy justice I have not cov'red:
thy constant faith I have declared,
and thy healthfull-salvation:
Conceal I did not thy mercy,
to the great congregation,
and thine assured-veritie.

close up from me, O Jehovah:
but let thy mercy-bountifull
and thy truth, me preserve always.

have round-about-assailed me:
my crooked-sinnes on me take-hold,
and I not able am to see:
They do surmount hairs of my head:
also my heart does me forsake.

speed to mine help Jehovah make.

together, that the seekers are
of my soul, to consume the same:
Let them be back-returned-farre;
And blush let them, that would, my blame.

for a rewarding of their shame:
that say, aha, aha, to me.

all that do seek thee, let them say
that thy salvations lovers be,
the LORD be magnifide, always.
am and poor,
think on me does the Lord-my-stay:
my help and my deliverer
thou art; my God, do not delay.
PSALM XL. 1 To the master of the music David's Psalm.






is the man, that puts Jehovah, his secure-trust: and respects not unto
the proud, and them that turne-aside unto a lie.

works and thy thoughts, toward us: none can count-in-order unto thee; would I
declare and speak them; they are mightily-encreast, above telling.

offering, thou ask not.

it is written of me.

is within my bowels.







more-then the hairs of my head; and my heart forsakes me.









art my help and my deliverer; my God, delay not.

PSALM XLI. Sing this as the 39. Psalm.

does prudently-attend:
Jehovah, him in th'evil day
deliverance-wil-send.

he blessednes-shal-find
upon the earth: and give him not,
unto his foemens mind.

on sorrowful bedsted:
thou in his sick-infirmitie,
have turned al his bed.

unto me graciousnes:
heal thou my soul, for against thee
J sinned-have-amisse.

when shall his dying be,
and his name perish quite-away?

he speaks a vain-lye, in his heart
iniquity he heaps
unto himself: he goes forth,
abroad the same he speaks,

all that my haters be:
against me, they malicious-ill
do-think concerning me.

in him is fastned-sore:
and he that lies shall not add
to rise-up any more.

in whom put-trust did I,
that cats my bread: he has the heel
against me lifted-hye.
therefore thou be gracious
to me, o Jehovah,
and raise me up again: and I
shall unto them repay.

do willing-pleasure-take:
because mine enemy, shall not
against me triumph-make.

thou me sustained have:
and have me to eternity
before thy face, set fast.

has from eternal been;
and to eternal-ay so be;
Amen, yea-and Amen.
PSALM XLI. 1 To the master of the music; a Psalm of David.










in his heart* he heapeth up painful-iniquitie to him self: he goes forth,
abroad he speaks it.



is fastened in him: and he that lies, shall no more rise.









is Jehovah, the God of Israel; from eternity, and unto eternity; Amen, and
Amen.

The second Book.
PSALM XLII. 1 To the master of the music; and instructing- psalm to the sonns
of Korach.


before the face of God!

they say unto me all the day, where is thy God?

things I remember, and pour-out, upon me my soul; because I had passed with
tho throng, had resorted with them, unto the house of God: with voice of
showting and confession, a multitude keeping-festivitie.





water-spowts: all thy breaking-billowes and thy waves, do pass over me.





weapon in my bones, my distressers do reproach me, when they say unto me all
the day, where is thy God?



PSALM XLII.

^dooth bray-desirouslie:
^even-so desirouslie-dooth-bray,
^my soul, O God to thee.

^my soul it thirsts sore:
^O when shall I come, and appear,
^the face of God before!

for bread, both night and day:
while unto me, where is thy God,
they all the day do say.
things do I in-mind-record,
and on my self out-shed
my very soul; because I had
among the throng passed;
Gods house, with them I did frequent:
with voice of showting-glee
and thankful-praise, with multitude
keeping festivitie.

thy self down-heavily;
and wherefore in me make thou
a stirre-tumultuously?
With hopefull-expectation
wait thou for God, because
yet I shall him confess: for the
salvations of his face.

for, thee to mind I call,
from Jorden land, and Hermonim,
even from the mountain small.

deep unto deep does call:
thy waves pass over me, and-eke
thy breaking-billowes all.

his mercy: and with me
his song by night: a prayer, shall
to God of my life be.

why do thou me forget:
why go I sad, while the enemy
me pressing-doth-beset?

me my distressers check,
when all the day, where is thy God?
they unto me do speak.

thy selfe-downe-heavily;
and wherefore in me make thou
a stirre-tumultuously?
wait-hopefully for God, because
yet I shall him confess:
of my face the salvations,
my God he also is.
PSALM XLIII. Sing this as the 42. Psalm.

from nation merciless;
deliver me from man of guile,
and of injuriousnesse.
art of my strength,
why thrustest me thee fro:
why go I still sad-mournfull, for
th'oppression of the foe?

me lead: let them me bring
to mountain of thy holiness,
and unto thy dwellings.

to God, the joyfulnesse
of my gladness: and thee with harp,
o God my God, confess.

thy self down-heavily;
and wherefore in me make thou
a stirre-tumultuously?
wait-hopefully for God, because
yet I shall him confess:
of my face the salvations,
my God he also is.
PSALM XLIII.


art the God of my strength, why thrustest thou me-away: why go I still sad,
for the oppression of the enemy?

places.





PSALM XLIV. 1 To the master of the music, to the sons of Korach, an
instructing- Psalm.




own sword inherited they the land, and their arm saved them not; but thy
right hand and thy arm, and the light of thy face, because thou did favor
them.

art he my king O God: command, the salvations of Jaakob.









now thou thrustest-away, and make us ashamed: and go not forth with our
armies.







that be round about us.

for a parable, among the heathens: a nodding of the head, among the nations.

is before me: and the abashing of my face covers me.



















for an helpfulnes to us: and redeem us, for thy mercy sake.

PSALM XLIV.

^our fathers have us told:
^the work thou wroughtest in their days,
^in days before-of-old.
with thy hand did dispossess
^heathens, and plantedst them:
^unto the peoples did ev'll,
^and propagatedst them.

inherited the land;
and their arm, has not saved them;
but it was thy right hand
and thine arm, and thy faces light;
because thou would their wealth.

Jakobs ful-saving-health.

as with-the-horn-shall-push:
in thy name, we shall tread-down those
that rise up against us.

and my sword saves me not.

for us salvation-got:
Our haters thou didst-make-abasht.

and thy name, to eternity,
we will confess, Selah.
now thou do away-repell,
and us ashamed-make:
and with our ordred-armies, thou
do not thy journey-take.

us backward to recoile:
and they that hate us, for themselves
do make of us a spoil.

and us in nations fanned.

nor by their prices gaind.
The second part.

us for an opprobrie:
a scoffing and a scorn, to those
that round-about us be.
for a parable,
among the heathens put:
a nodding also of the head,
the nations through-out.
is
before me all the day:
and the abashing of my face,
me cov'ring-doth-aray.

and tantingly-despight:
and for the face of the en'mie,
and self-avenging-wight.

have not forgotten thee:
neither against thy covenant
committed-falsitie.

thy path, our step-estraid.

us cov'red with deaths shade.

to strange God spread our hands.

of the heart, he understands.

esteemd are, killed all day.

thrust not away for aye.

forgetst our case-distrest
and our oppression.
is to the dust down-prest:
Our belly also on the earth
fast-cleaving-hold does take.
for our full-help: and redeem
us, for thy mercy sake.
PSALM XLV. 1 To the master of the music upon Shoshannim, to the sons of
Korach: an instructing- psalm; a song of the welbeloved- virgins.






in thy comely-honour prosper-ride-on word of truth, and of meeknes and of
justice: and thy right hand, shall teach thee fearful things.

are sharp: peoples, shall fall under thee: in the heart, of the kings enemes.

is ever and perpetual, the scepter of thy kingdom, is a scepter of
righteousness.

with oil of joyfulnes, above thy fellows.

they that make thee joyful.

are among thy precious-ones: set is the Queen, at thy right hand, in fine-gold
of Ophir.



is thy Lord, and bow-down thy self to him.

even the rich of the people.

is al glorious within: her clothing is of purled-works of gold.





PSALM XLV. This may be sung also as the 8. Psalm.

^I to the King, do say mine actions:
^my tongue, the pen of writer speedily.
be Adams sonns;
^grace powered out is in thy lips: therefore
^God he has blessed thee for evermore.

thy glory, and thine honourablenesse.
in thy comely-honour, ride-thou-on
with-prosperous-speed, on word of faithfulness,
and of meeknes and of just-equitie:
and fearful- things, thy right hand teach shall thee.

even-in the heart, of the kings enemies.
is ever and perpetual,
o God: the septer of thy kingdom, is
a scepter of most-equal-righteousnes.

Therefore, God thy God has anointed thee,
above thy peers, with oil of joyfulnes.
be:
out of the yvorie fayr-pallaces,
more-than they that do make thee to rejoice.
are among thy precious-choise:
At thy right hand, the maried-Queen was set,
in Ophir gold.
And bend thine ear: and thine-own folk forget,
and-eke thy fathers house.
the King will covet: for thy Lord he is,
and unto him bow-down-thy self-submisse.

with gift, thy face shall earnestly-desire.
is within:
of purled works of gold is her attire.

mayds after her, her friends; brought in to thee.

they enter shall into the Kings Palace.

in all the earth, them princes shall thou place.

therefore for ay, folks shall thee celebrate.
PSALM XLVI. Sing this as the 44. Psalm.

unto us God will be:
a succor in distresses, find
vehemently shall we.

although the earth change place:
and though the mountayns moved be,
into heart of the seas.
Though waters thereof make a noise,
though muddy be shall they:
though for the haughtynes thereof,
the mountains quake, Selah.
There is flood, the streams thereof,
shall glad the city of God:
the holy-place, the places of
the Highest-ones abode.
is in midst of the same,
it shall not moved be:
at looking-forth of th'early-morn,
God help the same will he.

the kingdoms moved were:
give-forth did he his thundring-voice,
the earth did melt- with-fear.
The God of armies is with us,
the ever being-JAH:
the God of Ja'kob is for us
a refuge-high, Selah.

O come-on ye and see:
that wondrous-desolations
put in the earth does he.

he makes cease the wars:
he breaks the bow, and cutts the spear,
in fire he burns the carrs.
am God:
exalted be will I
among the heathens; through the earth
I Will be exalted-hye.
The God of armies is with us
the ever-being-JAH:
the God of Ia'kob is for us
a refuge-high, Selah.
PSALM XLVI. 1 To the master of the music, to the sons of Korach: upon Alamoth
a song.
will be to us, an hopeful-shelter and a strength a help in distresses, we shall
find vehemently.



Though the waters thereof make a noise, be muddy: though the mountains quake,
for the haughtynes thereof, Selah.







is with us: the God of Jaakob, a hye-refuge for us, Selah.





am God: I will be exalted in the nations, I will be exalted in the earth.

is with us: the God of Jaakob, a high refuge for us, Selah.

PSALM XLVII. 1 To the master of the music, to the sons of Korach a psalm.
triumphantly to God, with voice of shrilling.

is high, fearful: a great king, over all the earth.









is king, of all the earth: sing an instructing-psalm.



are Gods; vehemently is he exalted.

PSALM XLVII. Sing this as the 33. Psalm.

to God, with voice of shrilling-myrth.
is, fearful:
a great King, over all the earth.

and heathens, under our feet lay.

Jakobs glory, he loves, Selah.

the LORD, with voice of trumping-shaulin.

sing-psalm unto our King sing-psalm.
is King, of all the earth:
psalm-sing ye of instruction.

his holy throne God sitts upon.

people of Abra'ms God-mighty:
for unto God the earths shields are;
he is exalted vehemently.
PSALM XLVIII. Sing this as the 44. Psalm.
is Jehovah, and with-praise,
extolled veh'mentlie:
within the city of our God,
his mount of sanctity.
her situation.
the whole earths joyfulnes;
mount Sion, in sides of the North:
the great Kings city is.

for refuge known is he.

together gone they be.

they troubled frighted were.
and pain,
as hers that child-doth-beare.

thou-breakest-all-abroad.

in city of our God,
in city of the God of hosts
the everbeing-Jah:
God firmly-will-establish it,
eternally, Selah.

have minded thy mercy.

to ends of the earth shall be:
of justice, thy right hand is full.

for thy judgments, let daughters of
Judah make-gladsom-noyse.

the turrets thereof, tell.

her palaces view-well:
that ye may tell, to th'after age,
will be
our God, for ever and for ay:
guide us til death will he.
PSALM XLVIII. 1 A song a psalm, to the sonns of Korach,
is Jehovah, and praised vehemently: in the city of our God, the mountayn of
his holiness.

is mount Sion, in the sides of the North: it is the city of the great King.















is, unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand, is full of justice.







is our God, ever and aye: he, will guide us until death.

PSALM XLIX. 1 To the master of the music, to the sonns of Korach a psalm.








when the iniquity of my footsteps shall compass me?











thought is that their houses, shall be for ever; their dwelling-places, to
generation and generation: they proclaim their names, on lands.

he is likened to beasts that are silenced.

is unconstant folly to them: and their posterity, like-well of their mouth,
Selah.

men shall have rule over them at the morning: and their form wear-away in hell,
from his dewlling place.





that are silenced.

PSALM XLIX. Sing this as the 119. or as the 78. Psalm.

all in the world inhabitants that be.

together wealthy and poor-needy men.

and my hearts musing, is of prudencies.

I open will with harp, mine hidd-doctrine.
when as
my stepps iniquity shall me compass?

and glory, in their riches multitude.

he can no ransom give to God for him.

that it shall cease unto eternity.

and may not the pit-of-corruption see.
men dye-away;
the fool and brutish jointly do decay:
and unto others leave their wealthy-store.
be for evermore;
their dwellings to each generation:
their names they do proclaim, the lands upon.

he like is to the beasts, that perish-quite.
is to them: yet they
that them succeed, like-well their words, Selah.

death feeds them, and upright- men rule shall have
of them at morning: and their form in hell
shall wear-away, from place where each does dwell.

my soul: for he will me receive, Selah.

when glory of his house, is waxen-much.

nor descend after him, shall his glory

they laud, when to thy self thou good shall be.

the light for aye not see-at-all.

is like the beasts, that perish-utterly.
PSALM L.

^and calls the earth: from rising of the Sun,
^to going-in thereof,
^from Sion, beauties whole-perfection.

^and storm about him vehemently beats.

unto the earth, his folk to judge likewise.

that strike my covenant with sacrifice.

because-that God, himself the judge is, Selah.

Israel, and I will testify to thee:
I God thy God am.
for thy slain-beasts: for thy burnt-offerings, be
fore me always.
no bullock take: nor goats, out of thy closes.

the beasts, that on a thousand mountains be.

and store of-wild-beasts of the field, with me.

for mine the world, and plenty-that-doth-fil it.

and of the goat-bucks drink the blood will I?

and pay thy vows, to him that is most-high.

I Will thee release, and thou shall glorify me.

says God; to tell my statutes: and to take
my covenant on thy mouth?
do hate: and cast my words behind thy back.

and thy part, is with whoremongers-unhonest.

also thy tongue, does fraud together-frame.

against thy mothers son, giv'st evill-same.
things thou did, and I did silent-keep-me:
thou did suppose, that I was surely like thee:
I will thee blame and set-even to thy veiw.

least I do tear, and none be to reskew.

and he that does his way in-order-fashion;
I will cause him for to see, Gods salvation.
PSALM L. 1 A Psalm of Asaph.
THe God of Gods, Jehovah; speaks, and calls the earth: from the rising-up
of the Sun, unto the going-in thereof.











am God, thy God

are before me continually.



is mine: the beasts, that be on a thousand mountains.

is with me.

is the world, and the plenty thereof.

bulls: and drink, the blood of goat-bucks?





that thou should take-up, my covenant on thy mouth.



is with the adulterers.





things have thou done, and I ceased-as-deaf, thou did think, that I was
surely like thee: I will reprove thee, and set-in-order to thine eyes.

there be no reskewer. his way; I will cause him to see, the salvation of God.

PSALM. LI. 1 To the master of the music, a psame of David.




is before me continually.

which is evil in thine eyes: that thou may be just when thou speak, may
be pure when thou judge.



parts: and in the secret, thou have made me know wisdom.



that thou have crushed, shall be gladsom.







with a free spirit.







it: burnt offering, thou will not contentedly-accept.

are a broken spirit, a heart broken and contrite: O God, thou will not despise.





PSALM. IX.

^according unto thy kindness:
^as thy compassions many be,
^wipe thou away my trespasses.

^and from my sin me purify.

^and my sin, before me always is.

I sinned have; and in eyes of thee,
that which is evil I have done:
that when thou speakst thou just may be,
when as thou judge pure may be.

brought-forth-with-sorow: and in sin,
my mother has conceived me.

in th'inward-parts: in secrecy
have wisdom also made me know.

with hizop, and be clean shall I:
thou will me wash, and I than snow
shall whiter be.
to hear gladness and joyful-glee:
The bones thou did asunder-bray,
they shall be gladsom-chearfully.

wipe-out all mine iniquity.

and a firm sp'rit, in me new-make.

from me, thy spirit of sanctity.

to me restore: and steadfastly
with a free spirit me sustain.

and sinners, shall convert to thee.

God of my healthful-safe-abode:
my tongue shall showt, thine equity.

and my mouth, shall shew-forth thy praise.

else I would give: burnt-sacrifice,
thou takst not in contented-wise.
are a sp'rite:
broken; a heart broke and contrite:
O God, thou will not it despise.

on Sion, goodnes-bounteously:
walls of Jerusalem, build thou.

slayn-offrings of just-equity,
burnt-offring, whole-oblation:
and bullocks thine altar upon
then shall they offer-up-on-hye.
PSALM. LII. 1 To the master of the music; an instructing psalm of David.
endures all the day.



more-than good: falsehood, more-than to speak justice, Selah.







that put not God, for his strength: but trusted, in the multitude of his
riches: he was strong, in his woefull-evill.



this: and will patiently-exspect thy name for it is good, before thy
gracious-saints.

PSALM LII. Sing this as the 18. or as the 37. Psalm.

Gods mercy, all the day endureth-still.

as rasour sharp, doing deceitfulnes.

falsehood, rather than justice-true, Selah.

love them do thou, tongue of deceitfulnes.

destroy thee, pull thee hence; and pluck up thee
out of the tent: and root thee-quite-away
out of the land of living- men, Selah.
then the just shall it behold, and they
shall fear: shall also laugh at him. (And say,)

but trusted in his riches ample-plight:
He strong was in his evill-mischievous.
am as green olive, in Gods house:
I confidently-trust in Gods mercy,
for ever and for aye-continually.

for evermore, because thou have done this:
and will thy name with patient-hope-implore
for it is good, thy gracious-saints before.
PSALM. LIII. 1 To the master of the music on Machalath; an instructing- psalm
of David.
there is no God: they have corrupted, and have made themselves abominable with
enjurious-evill; there is none that does good.

any that understands; that-seeketh God.

there is none that does good; none, not one.

as they eat bread; they call not upon, God.

where no dread was: for God, has scattred the bones of him that besieges
thee: thou have made them abashed, for God has contemptuously-cast them off.



PSLM LIII. This may be sung also, as the 45. Psalm.

^they are corrupt, and with iniquity
^are made abominable, none does good.

^on Adams sonns: to see, if any were
^that understands; that does for God inquire.

unprofitable: none, not one, does good.

that eat my people, as they eat up food;
to God, they do not invocating-pray.
where no dread was, there dreaded they:
For God, scattred his bones that siegeth thee:
thou have them put-unto-confusion,
for God has cast them off-contemptuouslie.

When God returns, his folks captivitee:
Jakob be glad, Isr'ls shall joyful be.
PSALM. LIVE.

^and in thy power judge me.

^of my mouth, heedful be.

and daunting-tirants, they
do seek my soul: they have not God
before them set, Selah.
is with
them that upholders be
of my soul.
the evil turn will he:
o in thy truth, suppress thou them.

to thee I will doe-sacrifie
thy name I will confess,
because (Jehovah) it is good.

out of all trouble: and mine eye
upon my foes did see.
PSALM LIVE. 1 To the master of the music on Neginoth: an instructing- psalm of
David.






is mine helper: the Lord, is with them that uphold my soul.



it is good.



PSALM. LV. 1 To the master of the music on Neginoth, an instructing- psalm of
David.










that I might fly and dwell.

my wandring-flight: I would lodge, in the wilderness, Selah.



them Lord, divide their tongue: far I see violent-wrong and strife in the
city.

are within it.

are within it: and fraud and guile, departs not from the street thereof.

it: not my hater, magnified against me; for I could be hidden from him.

it was thou O man esteemed of as my self* my guide, and my known-acquaintance.

counsel: went into Gods house, with the society.

to hell; for evils, are in their dwelling- place in their inmost- part.



at noon, will I meditate and make a noise: and he heard my voice.



from antiquity, Selah: for that they have no changes; neither fear they God.

friends: he profaned his covenant.

The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but battle, was in his
heart: his words, were softer than oil, but they were drawn-swords.

man, for ever to be moved. live-half their days: but I, will trust in thee.

PSALM LV. This may be sung also as the 3. Psalm.

^from my request-for-grace.
^and answer me: I utter-mournful-voice
^in my musing, and make a troubled-noice.

^because of vexing of the ungodly:
^for they bring on me painfulnes-unright,
^and do in anger hatefully-me-spight.

terrors of death eke falln upon me be.

and quaking-horrour, has me covered.

as dove: that I might fly and find-dwelling.

lodge would I, in the wilderness, Selah.

from driving wind, from the tempestuous-blast.
them, divide their tongue: for I
see in the city, strifs and violencie.

in it is molestation and unright.
are woeful-evill: fraud also
and guile, from street thereof out does not go.
it was not an adverse-enemie
that me reproacht; for bear it then could I:
't was not my foe, that magnifide against me,
for I from him away could hidden be.
it was thou man mine estemed-peer:
even my chief-guide, and mine acquaintances-neer.

into Gods house, went with society.
The second part.

for evils, are within them where they dwell.

and me Jehovah gives-salvation.

and meditate: and he did hear my voice.

in peace: for very many were with me.

even he that sits from ancient-aye, Selah:
because-that unto them no changes be;
and God they have not feared-rev'rentlie.
friends-peaceable, he laid his hand:
his covenant he breaking-hath-profan'd.
Words of his mouth smoother than butter been;
but fighting-battel is his heart within:
His words more soft than oil, but swords they are.

and he will thee sustain, give will not he,
for ever that the just- man moved be.

the low-pitt of corruption into:
the men of bloods and guile, alive shall be
not half their days: but I, will trust in thee.
PSALM. LVI. Sing this as the 53. Psalm.

for miserable-man would me devour:
all day, he warring sore-oppresseth me.

for many, war against me O most-hie.
What day I fear: trust unto thee will, I.

I will not fear, what flesh can do to me.

against me, all their thoughts for evil be.

my footsteps heedfully-observe do they;
For, they my soul exspect-with earnestnes.

O God, in wrath, the peoples down-depresse.

thou in thy bottel put my weeping-tears:
yea are they not within thy registers?

this do I know, that God will be me by.

in JAH, the word with-praise-extoll-will I.

afraid: what earthly-man can do to me.
are on me: I will pay,
confessions to thee.
my soul from death, delivered-away;
have not thou eke my feet from sliding-fast?
That I before Gods face, continually
may walk, in light of them that living be.
PSALM LVI. 1 To the master of the music, concerning the dumb dove in far-
places, Michtam of David: when the Philistims took him in Gath.




In the day I shall fear: I will trust unto thee.

be for ever.





are they not in thy register?

that I call: this I know, that God will be for me.





are upon me O God; I will pay, confessions unto thee.

thou not also my feet, from sliding? for to walk on, before God; in the light,
of the living.

PSALM LVII. 1 To the master of the music, Corrupt not, Michtam of David: when
he fled from the face of Saul into the cave.






is among Lions; I lie among inflamers: the sonns of Adam; their teeth, are
spears and arrows and their; tongue, a sharp sword.



steps, he bowed my soul, they dug a pit before me; they are fallen, into
the midds of it, Selah.

is my heart O God, firmly-prepared, is my heart: I will sing, and
praise-with-psalm.

at the day-dawning.



is great unto the heavens: and thy truth unto the skies.



PSALM LVII. Sing this as the 60. Psalm.

to me be gracious; for in thee,
my soul for shelter-safe-hopeth:
and in shade of thy wings I will
hope for my shelter-safe: until
each-woefull-ev'l away passes.

unto the God, that perfectly-
does for me bring- things-to-a stay.

put him unto reproach does he
that would me swallow-up, Selah.
God he does send-forth, his mercy
and his assured-veritie.

I lie among the inflamers,
the sonns of men, whose teeth, are spears
and arrows: and sharp sword, their tongue.

over the whole earth, thy glory.

he bowed my soul: they diggd a pit
before me; and in midds of it,
themselves are fallen-down, Selah.

mine heart prepar^d is steadfastly:
I sing will, and with psalm-wil-praise.

raise-up thee, harp and psalterie:
at dawning-day I wil-up-raise.

in nations, thee with-psalm-applaud.
is thy mercy:
and to the skies thy verity.

over the whole earth thy glory.
PSALM LVIII. Sing this as the 45. Psalm.

judge ye o Adams sonns, righteousnesses?

ye in the land, weigh your hands violentnes,

err from the belly, speaking falsitie.

as of the dead asp, that does stop his ear.

of the most-wise enchanting sorcerer.

the Lions toshes, burst thou out, O JAH.
that goe-hence, refused be they:
bend he his shafts, as cut off let them been.

as woman's fore-birth, Sun, that have not seen.
thorns of the Brier:
even quick, he will whirle each away in ire.

shall wash his feet, in blood of the godless.

surely a God, judging in earth there is.
PSALM LVIII. 1 To the master of the music, Corrupt not; Michtam of David.






that stops his ear.





that passe-away: bend he his arrows, be they as cut off.

that melts let him goe-away: as the untimely-birth of a woman; as they that
have not seen the Sun.

in wrath, he will tempestously-whirl it away.

there is fruit for the just: surely there is a God, that judge in the earth.

PSALM. LIX. 1 To the master of the music, Corrupt not; Michtam of David: when
Saul sent, and they kept the house, for to kill him.




for my sin Jehovah.

in me, they run and make-ready: raise thee up, to meet me, and see.





are in their lips: for who hears?



is mine high defense.







be no more: and let them know, that God, rules in Jaakob: to the ends of the
earth, Selah.







is mine high defense, the God of my mercy.

PSALM LIX.

^that are mine enemies:
^set thou me up on high, from them
^that up against me rise.

^painfull-transgression:
^and from the men of bloods, vouchsafe-
^to me-salvation.

the strong together-draw
against me: not for my trespass,
nor for my sin o JAH.
in me,
they run and ready-make:
rise-up to meet me, and behold.
And thou Jehovah, wake,
wake God of hosts, God of Israel,
to visit heathens all:
be gracious to none [Selah]
that works sin disloyal.

and city round-belay.

swords, in their lips have they:
For who (say they) is he that hears?

wilt laugh at them: wilt heathens all
have in derision.
O thou that art his fortitude,
to thee attentively-
will I take-heed: because-that God,
is my munition-high.

he first-prevent will me:
on mine envious-enemies,
God, he will let me see.

make them abroad-to stray
in thy power, and down bring thou them;
our shield, o Lord-my stay.

when in their haughtines
they taken are, and let them tell:
of cursing and falsenesse.

them be no more: that they
may know, that God in Iaakob rules;
to the end of the earth, Selah.

and city round belay.

if filled be not they.

at morning thy kindness:
for thou my fense, and refuge art,
in day of my distress.
O thou that art my fortitude,
to thee sing-psalm will I
for God mine high-munition is,
the God of my mercy.
PSALM. LX. This may be sung also as the 84. Psalm.

^break: thou angry wast; again-return thou unto us.

^thou did it rive: again whole-make,
^her breaches, for it moved is.

hard-things: to drink given us have thou,
the wine of stonishing-dismay.

a banner, high-displaid-to bear:
because of certaine-truth, Selah.

deliverance: o do thou save,
with thy right hand, and me answer.

I will be glad: divide shall I
Shechem, and Succoth dale measure.

and strength of mine head, Ephraim:
Judah shall my lawgiver be.

over Idumea my shoe:
shout Palestina, over me.

unto the city fortifide:
who will me lead AEdom unto?
Is it not thou, God, that have thrust
us from thee; and within our hosts
that would not, o God, forth-go?

because deceitfull-falshood is,
the earthly-mans salvation.

and them that our distressers be,
he with contempt-will-tread-upon.
PSALM. LX. 1 To the master of the music; upon Shushan eduth: Michtam, of
David; for to teach.




thing: thou did give us to drink, the wine of astonishing-honour.



with thy right hand, and answer me.



shall be mine, and Manasseh mine; and Ephraim, the strength of mine head;
Iehudah, shall be my lawgiver.



to the city of strong-defence: who will lead me into Aedom?

Is it not thou. O God that had cast us away: and would not go-forth, O
God, in our hosts.

is the salvation of earthly-man.



PSALM LXI. 1 To the master of the Music upon Neginoth, a Psalm of David.
to my prayer.





for ever: I will hope-for-safety, in the seeret of thy wings, Selah.



shall be as generation and generation.

for ever before God: prepare thou mercy and truth, which may keep him.

PSALM LXI. Sing this as the 37. Psalm.


when my heart overwhelm'd-is-heavily:
lead thou me to the rock more high then I.

a towr of strength, from th'adversaries face.

will hope, in seeret of thy wings, Selah.

given heritage, to them that thy name fear.

his years, as unto age and age shall be.
to eternal-aie:
mercy and truth prepare, which keep him may.

sing-psalm: that I may pay my vows, daily.
PSALM LXII. Sing this as the 25 or as the 55 Psalm.
keeps silentnesse:
because from him, my safe salvation is.

mine high-defence, much moved I shall not be.

will ye against a man? ye shall killed
be, all of you: shall be as bowed wall:
and as a fence, that shoved- is-to fall.

to thrust him, from his exaltation;
they do delight in falsehood: bless do they
with mouth; but with their in-part, curse, Selah

because from him, mine expectation is.

mine high defense, I shall not moved be.
is in God:
in God, my Rock of strength, my safe-abode.

before him your heart: God, is our hope, Selah.
are vanity;
the sons of noblemen are but a lie:
in balances together them to lay,
lighter than vanity it self, are they.

also become not vain in robbery:
if powerful-wealth do plentifully-grow,
do not the heart upon the same bestow.

that powerfulnes does unto God pertain.

for thou, wilt pay each-man, as his work is.
PSALM. LXII. 1 To the master of the music, over Ieduthun, a psalm of David.
keeps silence: from him, is my salvation.

is my rock, and my salvation: mine high defense, I shall not be moved much.

ye shall be as a bowed wall; as a fense, that is shoved at.

him down, from his high dignity; they delight in a lie: with his mouth each of
them blesses; and with their inward-part, they curse, Selah.

is my expectation.

is my rock, and my salvation: mine high-defence, I shall not be moved.

is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength my safe-hope, is in God.

is a safe-hope for us, Selah.

are vanity, the sons of nobleman are a lie; in balances to mount up, they,
together are lighter than vanitly.

thereon.

pertains to God.



PSALM LXIII. 1 A Psalm of David, when he was, in the wilderness of Judah.
art my God; early-wil-I-seek thee: my soul, thirsts for thee; my flesh
longeth-ardently for thee; in a land of drought, and weary without waters.



is better than life: my lips shall celebrate thee.



with fat and fatness: and my mouth shall praise, with lips of shouting- joy.

night-watches.





that seek my soul for tumultuous-ruine: shall go, into the lower-puts of the
earth.





PSALM. LXIII. Sing this as the 18. Psalm.

my soul, for thee does thirstily-desire;
my flesh for thee does long-with-ardentnes;
in land of drought, and weary waterlesse.

so for to see thy power, and thy glory.
is:
my lips shall celebrate thee with praises.

I in thy name, will lift my palms on high.

my mouth eke, shall with shouting lips praise thee.

do in the watches on thee meditate.

and I have shouted in thy wings shadow.

thy right hand steedily-upholdeth me.

into the lower-parts of the earth shall go.

shall they be.
glory shall every-one that swears him by:
but stopped shall be, their mouth that speak a lie.
PSALM LXIV. Sing this as the 53. Psalm.
to thee:
preserve my life, from dread of the enemy.

from rage, of them that work iniquity.

have bent their arrow, even a bitter word.

shoot him and fear not, will they suddenly.

tell, to hide snares: they say, who shall them see?

They do accomplish a search curious:
Even the deep heart, and part of man within.

against them shot: their stroken-wounds have been.
when they caused have them-severally
by their own tongue upon themselves to fall:
they that them see, to flight-shall-get-them all.

and shall declare Gods operation;
and shall his deed consider-prudently.

also in him for safetie-hope he shall:
and glory shall, the upright hearted all.
PSALM LXIV. 1 To the master of the music, a psalm of David.




even a bitter word.

places at the perfect: suddenly will they shoot at him, and fear not.

themselves, an evil word; they tell, to hide snares: they say, who shall see
them?

each-man, and the deep heart.



when they have caused them-every-one to fall upon themselves by their own
tongue: they shall betake-themselves to flight, whosoever sees them.

man shall rejoice in Jehovah, and hope-for-safety in him: and glory-shall, all
the upright of heart.

PSALM LXV. Sing this as the 60. Psalm.

in Sion: and the vow shall be
paid unto thee.
al flesh therefore, shall come to thee.

our trespasses, thou them cov'rest.
he whom thou do make-
choice of and near unto thee take,
in thy courts to have-dwelling-place:
with good-things that in thine house be
ful-satisfied be shall we,
with holy-things of thy palace.

things-fearfull; O God our Saver:
the hope of ends of the earth through-out;
and of those farr-off by the sea.

and is with strength, girded-about.

the loud-noise of their waves, appease:
and peoples troublous-murmuring.

fear, for thy signs: thou make showt,
th'out goings of mourn and evening.

and plent'ously it moistenest,
thou do enrich it very much;
with Gods stream, where full waters are:
their corn thou ready do prepare,
when thou have it prepared such.

the furrows of it thou setlest:
with showers thou do it soften-still;
and thou the bud thereof do bless.

and thy paths fatnes do destill.
On pastures of the wilderness,
they do destill: and with gladness,
the hills they girded are about.

and valleys are with corn cov'red:
they sing, they also joyful-showt.
PSALM LXV. 1 To the master of the music a psalm, a song of David.
waits for thee; O God, in Sion: and to thee, shall the vow be paid.

Thou hear prayer: unto thee, all flesh shall come.

mercifully-cover them.

is he whom thou choosest and takest-neer, that he may dwell in thy courts: we
shall be satisfied with the good- things of thine house, with the holy- things
of thy palace.

things, in justice thou will answer us; O God of our salvation: the hope of
all the ends of the earth, and of those farr-off by sea.

is girded-about, with strength.



in the utmost-parts, for thy signs: the outgoings of morning and evening,
thou makest-shout.

with the stream of God, full of waters: thou preparest their corn, when so thou
have prepared it.





on the pastures of the wilderness: and the hills are girded-about, with gladness.

with sheep; and the valleys are covered with corn: they shout, they also sing.

PSALM LXVI. 1 To the master of the music, a song a psalm:
SHowt ye unto God, all the earth.

to his praise.

is every of thy works! through the greatness of thy strength, thine enemies
shall falsly-deny to thee.

to thy name, Selah.

he is fearful in his doing, toward the sonns of Adam.

land, they passed through the river on foot: there did we rejoice in him.

for ever; his eyes, espy among the nations: the rebellious, let them not
exalt themselves, Selah.









place.





ready beeves, with goat-bucks, Selah.



with my mouth: and he was extolled under my tongue.





be God: which has not turned-away, my prayer and his mercy, from me.

PSALM LXVI.
^O all the earth, showt ye to God.

^put glory, to his praise. And say
^to God, how fearful thy works be!
Through greatness of thy strength, thy foes
yeeld-fainedly to thee shall they.

psalm-sing they, to thy name, Selah.
he in his act
to Adams sonns, is reverent.

on foot they through the river went:
Even-there did we rejoice in him.
for aye:
his eyes, in nations spy: rebels,
let not exalt themselves, Selah.

the voice of his praise to be heard.

not given, our foot for to be stirrd.

tried us, as silver tried is.

have put upon our loins, straitnes.

on our head: we through fire did pass
through waters eke: and thou have brought
us out, to an abundant- place.

will come: will pay, my vows to thee.

spoke, when distress was upon me.

I unto thee will offring-pay,
with incense: I will ready-make
the bullocks, with goat-bucks, Selah.

O ye the fearers of God all:
what he has done unto my soul.
with my mouth did call:
And with my tongue, he was extolld.

unto painful-iniquitie,
the Lord he would not then have heard.

voice of my prayer attend did he.
be: which turned not back,
my prayer and his mercy, from me.
PSALM LXVII, 1 To the master of the music, on Neginoth; a psalm a song.


they may know in the earth thy way: thy salvation among all the heathens.



with righteousness: and the nations, in the earth, thou will guide them, Selah.







PSALM LXVII. Sing this as the 60. or as the 84. Psalm.

and he us bless: his face with us,
he clearly-make to-shine, Selah.

and thy healthful-salvation;
among the heathens al, know may.

confess thee shall, the peoples al.

for thou will judge most-righteously
the peoples: and wilt guide-safely,
the nations, in earth, Selah.

confess thee shall, the peoples al.

God even our God, bless us will he.

and all the earths ends, shall him fear.
PSALM LXVIII. 1 To the master of the music, a psalm a song, of David.


so drive thou them away: as wax is melted, at the face of fire: so let the
wicked perish, from the face of God.



to his name: make-an-hye-way, for him that rides in the deserts, in Jah his
name; and shew-gladnes before his face.

He is a father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows: even God, in
the mansion of his holiness.

that are-bound in chains: but the rebellious, dwell in a drie-land.





it was wearied, thou did confirm it.



to the great army.



pot-raunges: ye shall be as the wings of a dove, which is decked with silver;
and her feathers, with yelow gold.



is: an hilly-mountain, mount Bashan.

this is the mountain, God desires for his seat; yea Jehovah, will dwell in it
to perpetual-aye.

is with them, as in Sinai in the sanctuary.



be the Lord, which day by day lodeth us: the God, our salvation, Selah.

is a God of salvations: and to Jehovah the Lord, belong the issues of death.





it self, in blood: the tongue of thy dogs, in blood of thine enemies even of
every-of them.



the plaiers-on-instruments after: among them the damoisels,
beating-on-timbrels.

even the Lord, ye of the fountain of Israel.

with their ruler; the princes of Judah, with their assembly: the princes of
Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.





men; the congregation of mighty- bulls; with the calves of the peoples, and
him that submits himself with pieces of silver; he has scattered-abroad the
peoples, that delight in wars.



to the Lord, Selah.

him that rides in the heavens of heavens of antiquity: lo he will give his
voice, a voice of strength.

is upon Israel; and his strength, in the skies.

art thou O God, out of thy sanctuaries: the God of Israel he gives strength
and forces to the people; blessed be God.

PSALM LXVIII.

^asunder-scattred be:
^and they that haters of him are,
^away from his face flee.
them away:
^as is the wax melted,
^at face of fire: from face of God,
^so perish the wicked.
men joyful be;
show they forth gladsomnes,
before the face of God; and let
them joy with chearfulnes.
unto his name
sing-psalm: prepare the way,
for him that in the desert-parts
does ride, in his name, Jah:
And gladness show before his face.

and widows judge: even God, within
his holy mansion is,

brings forth these that are bound
in chains: but the rebellious,
dwell in a barren-ground.

when forth thou madest-way:
when in the desert-wildernes,
thou marchedst-on, Selah.

at face of God, destill:
Sinai it self, at face of God,
the God of Israel.

O God thou did out-shed:
thine heritage, thou did confirm,
when it was wearied.

thou ready-doost-prepare
in thy goodness, O God, for them
that poor-afflicted are.
himself will give the speech:
of those that-doe relate
the joyful-tidings-publikly,
unto the army great.

even flee-away shall they:
and she that in the house remains,
shall distribute the prey.

like doves wings shall ye been,
with silver decked, her feathers eke]
with gold of yelow-green.

with-dissipation,
the Kings in it; then snowy-white
shall it be in Salmon.
mighty, is
the mountayn of Bashan:
a mountayn of hills- many, is
the mountayn of Bashan.

this mountayn, for his seat
God does desire: yea dwell for aye
Jehovah will in it.
The second part.

thousands of Angels be:
the Lord with them, as at Sinai
within the sanctuary.

thou have for captive-led
captivity: and unto men
have gifts distributed:
have also the rebellious led;
to dwell there, O Jah God.
be the Lord, which day by day
does us (with blessings) lode:
even God, our saving-health, Selah.

our God is: and to GOD the Lord,
belong th'issues of death.

of his enimious-foes:
the hayrie scalp, of him that in
his guilty-sinns, on goes.

from Basan bring up thee:
I will thee bring again up from
the deep-gulfs of the sea.

in blood: out of thy foes;
tongue of thy dogs, in blood that out
of every of them flows.

the going-progresses
of my God, and my King which in
the Sanctuary is.

on instruments-that-plaid:
among them were the damoisels,
that on the timbrels-laid.

God thankfully-blesse ye:
even bless the Lord, ye of the Well
of Israel that be.

with Judahs assembly,
their Princes: Zebuluns Princes,
Princes of Naphtali.

for thy strength-valourous:
firm-strengthen thou o God, the thing
that thou have wrought for us.

Kings shall bring gifts to thee.

the crew of bulls-mightie;
with calves of folks, and him that does
with silver plates submitt:
the peoles he has scattered
that do in wars delight.

from out of Egypt- land:
to God, shall Ethiopia
stretch-hastily her hand.

sing, to the Lord, Selah.

the heavens of ancient-aie:
Lo he his voice gives, voice of strength.

on Israel is his majesty;
and in the skies his power.

the God of Israel, be
gives strength and forces to his folk;
God blessed ever be.
PSALM LXIX.

^ev'n to my soul.
^where no stay is: I water deeps enter,
^and overflow me does the streaming-floud.

^mine eyes fail: for my God waiting-attent.

than be hairs of mine head; mighty are they
that would suppress me, are my foes falsely,
then I restored, what I took not-away.

my guilty-faults cannot concealed be.

Lord GOD, of hosts, do hopefully-desire:
yea let them not ashamed be for me,
that thee, O God of Israel, require,

cover my face does, ignominious-shame.

an utter-stranger: and a forreinour
even unto mine-own mothers childeren.

and the reprochfull-taunts of him that thee
reprochfully-doe taunt, are falln on me.
spent:
and it was turned, to my much-opprobrie.

and, for a proverb unto them, was I.

and strong-wine drinkers, melodies did make.
is to thee,
Jehovah, in a time of acceptance;
O God in multitude of thy mercy:
answer thou me, in truth of thy salvation.

and let me not as-drowned sink-away:
Deliv'red let me from my haters be,
and out of water deeps.
not overflow me, nor gulf swallow me:
not let the pit, her mouth upon me shutt.
is thy kind-grace:
as thy great mercies, turn to me thy face.
The second part.

for on me trouble is, soon answer me.

because of my foes, ransom thou me free.

know: my distressers all, are in thy sight.

of heaviness: and looked for some-one
to moane-with-pitty, but not any came:
and looked for comforters, but I found none.
bitter-gall:
and vinegar, to slake my thirst withal.

and for full-recompence, a trap-to-fall.

and make their loins to shake continual.

and take them, let thine angers burning-fire.

within their tents, let there not any dwell.
him they persecute whom thou do smite:
and of thy woundeds sorrow they do tell.

and let them not come into thy justice.

and with the just, let them not written be.
that am afflicted-poore and grieving:
O God, let thy salvation lift-up me.
Then will I praise the name of God with song:
and magnify him with confession.

then young bull, that has horns and hoof does part.
men shall rejoice, when they it see:
seekers of God, live also shall your heart.

and he despises not, his prisoners.

that creeps in them.
build Iudahs cities eke: and dwell they shall
there, and it for inheritance shall have.

and dwell therein shall they that love his name.
PSALM LXIX. 1 To the master of the music, upon Shoshannim, a psalm of David.


the gulf, where no standing is: I am entered into the deeps of waters, and the
streaming-floud overfloweth me.

I attentively-waiting, for my God.

mee-than the hairs of mine head, they that hate me without cause: mighty are
they that would suppress me, mine enemies falsely: that which I took not away,
then I restored.











afflicted my soul: and it was, for repoches to me.

cloth: and I was, to them for a proverb.

made melodies.

is to thee, Jehovah, in time of acceptance; O God in multitude of thy mercy:
answer thou me, in the truth of thy salvation.





is good: according to the multitude of thy tender-mercies, turn-the-face-unto
me.

is on me, make-hast answer me.



are all my distressers.

some to moan me, but none came: and for comforters but I found none.











him whom thou have smitten: and they tell, of the sorrow of thy wounded-ones.









it, they shall rejoice: the seekers of God, and your heart shall live.





PSALM LXX. 1 To the master of the music; a psalm of David for to record.








art mine help and my deliverer; Jehovah delay not.

PSALM LXX. Sing this as the 75. or as the 32 Psalm.

Jehovah, to mine help make-hast.

ashamed be they and abasht:
be backward turned and blush do they
that in mine evil take delight.

their bashfull-shame for to requite.

all that thee seek: and let them say
that thy salvations lovers be,
God magnified be, always.

O God to me make speedy way:
mine help and my deliverer
thou art; O LORD, do not delay.
PSALM. LXXI.




art my rock, and my munition.



art mine exepectation: Lord Jehovah, my confidence from my childhood.

is my praise continually.

art my strong hope.

with thy praise; all the day, with thy glory.





there is none to reskue.



and consumed, that are-adversaries of my soul: let them be covered with
reproach and dishonor; that seek mine evil.







works.

this generation; thy power, to everyone that shall come.

which is unto on high: which have done great- things; O God, whom like thee?

and quicken me; and from the deeps of the earth, did return and bring me up.

and comfort me.

even thy faithfulness, my God: I will sing-psalm to thee with harp; O holy one
of Israel.



PSALM LXXI. Sing this as the 55. or as the 25. Psalm.

O let me not abashed be for ay.

incline to me thine ear, and save thou me.

for me, to enter in continually;
to save me thou did give commission:
for thou my rock, and my munition.

from palm, of th'evill and the levened.

thou art my confidence from my childhood.

thou, from my mothers bowels, tookest me:
of thee my praise always.
to many am: but thou, my hope mighty.

even all the day, with glorifying thee.

forsake me not, when my strength does decay.

consult in-one, that wait for my soul lay.

and take him: for there is none to reskue.

my God, unto my succor hasten thee.
also,
that adversaries are my soul unto:
Let with dishonor and with opprobrie
them cov'red be, that seek my misery.

and make-addition, to all thy praise.

thy saving-health: though numbers know not I.

thy justice only thine, will I record.

and I have showed thy marvels, until now.
be,
God let me not forsaken be of thee:
until thine arm unto this age I show,
thy power, to every one that shall ensew.
reaches high:
which do great-things; O God, who is like thee?

and evil: did return and quicken me;
from deeps of the earth, did turn and bring me thence.

And thou did turn-about and comfort me.

thy faithfulness, my God: sing Psalm I will
to thee with harp, O SAINT of Israel.

also my soul, which thou redemedst-free.
daily speak:
for basht for shamed are they, that mine ill seek.
PSALM LXXII. 1 For Solomon;
O God, give thy judgments to the king: and thy justice to the Kings son.

That he may judge thy people with justice: and thy poore-afflicted ones with
judgment.





to generation of generations.

grass: as the showers, the dispersed-moisture of the earth.

man flourish: and multitude of peace, until the moon be not.









is.





be Jehovah God, the God of Israel: which does marveilous-things himself-alone.

be the name of his glory, for ever: and let all the earth, be filled with his
glory; Amen, and Amen.



PSALM. LXXII. Sing this as the 69 or as the 45 Psalm.

thy justice to the Kings son give also.
That with justice thy people judge may he:
with judgment, them that thine afflicted be.

the hills shall also, with just-righteousnesse.

shall save the sons of them that needy be:
the oppressour-fraudulent he down-shal-bear.

through ages all. medow-mown;
like showrs that moisten the earth; shall he come down.

of peace, until the Moon shall be no more.

from river to the lands ends, have shall he.

and lick the dust up, shall his enemies.

they render shall: Shebaes and Sebaes Kings,
shall offer presents.
all Kings: and serve him shall, the nations all.

the afflicted, and him that has helper none.

shall spare: and save the souls of the needy.

and in his eyes, their blood shall precious be.
each shall him pay:
and pray for him still; bless him all the day.

there shall a parcel be of corn; whose crop
shall shake like Lebanon: and citizens
shall flourish, as the herb that the earth out sends.

his name shall have continuation:
All heathens bless him, blessed in him shall be.
be he:
which does himself alone things marveilous.

let also all the earth even filled been
with his glory; Amen, yea-and Amen.
The third Book.
PSALM LXXIII. Sing this as the 50. Psalm.
is:
even unto them that have in heart pureness.

my steps, had wel-nigh every-one slipped.

when I the peace of wicked- men espied.
there be:
and lusty is their firm-validity.
are not in turmoile of men-wretched:
and are not with the earthly-men plagued.

them as a garment violently arayeth.

they pass, th'imaginations of the heart.

oppression: they speak most-loftily.
a-talking:
also their tongue, throughout the earth is walking.

of water, is wrung for them to drink-up.

and is there knowledge in the God Most-high?
are: and in tranquillity
for ever; they increase in rich-ability.

and have my palms washed in innocence.

in mornings eke, is my rebukeful-blame.

lo, I wrong-falsly thy sons generation.
The second part.

but it a painful-thing was in mine eyes.

to their last-end did prudently-give-head.

do make them fall, to desolated-cases
brought to wondrous-wasted-plite
as in a moment! are they ended-quite
are they consumed with frights-that-trouble-make.
one does wake:
O Lord- my-staies, when as thou up arisest,
their image thou contemptuously-despisest.

within my reins, I also was pricked.
was brutish and unskilfull-quite:
I was with thee, even-as a beastly-wight.
remained:
by my right hand, thou have me firm-retained.

and after, wilt receive me to glory.

none in the earth delightfull-pleaseth me.

mine hearts Rock and my portion, God for ever.

shall perish: thou suppressest, every one
that does a whoring-goe from thee.
its good for me, to God for to draw-nigh:
I in the Lord GOD set my hopefull-station;
of all thy works, for to make declaration.
PSALM. LXXIII. 1 A psalm, of Asaph:
YEt-surely God. is good to Israel; to them that are pure in heart.



when I saw, the peace of the wicked.

there are no bands in their death; and justie is their strength.

are not in the molestation of sory-man: and with earthly-man, they are not
plagued.

as a garment.



of oppression: they speak from aloft.



cup, are wrung-out to them.



are the wicked: and in tranquillity ever; they increase wealthy-power.

in vain, have I cleansed mine heart: and washed my palms in innocence.

is in the mornings.

but it was a painfull-thing in mine eyes.



places: do make them fall, to desolations.

brought to wondrous-desolation as in a moment? are they at an end are they
consumed, with troublesome-frights?

one waketh: O Lord, when thou raisest up, thou will despise their image.

in my reins.

was brutish, and knew not: as the beasts, was I with thee.

was with thee: thou have holden me fast, by my right hand.

to glory.

any in earth.

is God for ever.



is good for me: I have set my hope for-safety in the Lord Jehovah; for to
tell, all thy works.

PSALM. LXXIV. 1 An instructing- psalm, of Asaph.
WHerefore O God, have thou cast us off to perpetuity; shall thine anger
smoke, against the sheep of thy pasture?

which thou have purchased, of old; the rod of thine inheritance, which thou
have redeemed: this mount Sion, wherein thou have dwelt.

things, in the sanctuary.

for signs.









any prophet more; nor (...) with us, that knows how long.



draw it out of the midst of thy bosom, make-a full-end.

is my king from antiquity: he works salvations in the midst of the earth.



for meat, to the people that-dwell-in dry deserts.



is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared, the light and the sun.















PSALM. LXXIV.
us off to perpetuity:
^against the sheep of thy pasture,
^smokes thy face-wrathfully?
which thou have-
^of old purchased: the rod of thine inheritance,
^ which thou redeemed have:
This Sion mount, wherein thou dwelst.

unto the desolations
of perpetuity:
the enemy in th'Holy-place
has all things wasted-sore.

do thy distressers rore:
Their signs have they set up for signs.

as he against th'infoulded wood
did axes lift on high.

the carved works of it:
with beetles and with clubby-mauls,
in pieces-down-they-bet.

in fire: the dewlling place
of thy name, down unto the earth
they did prophanely-rase.

of them at-once make-spoile:
they burnt have, all the synagogues
of God within the soil.
now behold:
there is not us among
a Prophet more; nor any one
that knows the time how long.

upbraid-reproachfully?
shall the enemy blaspheme thy name,
to perpetuity?

thine hand, even thy right hand?
it from mids of thy bosom draw
make thou a compleat-end.
is from antiquity
my King: he perfecteth
helpfull-salvations, within
the midst of the earth.

asunder-broken have:
the Dragons heads, in waters eke
in pieces thou have brast.
also brakest utterly
the heads of Livjathan:
did him for meat give, to the folk
in deserts that remain.

did dry up floods of might.
is the day, night eke is thine:
thou Sun preparst, and light.

have constituted-fast:
the summer and the winter- cold,
the same thou formed have.

reproachfully-doth-blame
Jehovah: and the foolish folk,
they do blaspheme thy name.

to the wild-company:
the company forget not of
thy poor perpetually.

for the earths darke-places
are full, of habitations
of wrongfull-violentnesse.

return abasht-with-shame:
but let the poore-afflicted and
the needy, praise thy name.

let the reprochfull-scorne
which from the fool comes, all the day,
in memory-be-born.

the loud tumultuous cry
of them that up against thee rise,
ascends continually.
PSALM LXXV. 1 To the Master of the music, Corrupt not: a psalm of Asaph a
song.
is thy name: they tell thy wondrous works.



is the earth and all the inhabitants thereof: I, have set-sure, the pillars
thereof, Selah.



nor speak, with a stiff neck.

comes promotion.

is the judge: he abaseth one, and exalts another.

is in the hand of Jehovah, and the wine is red, it is full of mixture; and he
powers out of the same: but the dregs thereof, wring-out and drink shall, all
the wicked of the earth.



man shall be advanced.

PSALM LXXV. This may be sung also as the 32. Psalm.

^we confess, and thy name is nic:
^thy wondrous-works, they do express.

^ then I, will judge most righteously.
^ is the earth and all they
^that dwell therein: set-sure do I,
^the pillars of the same, Selah.

so foolish: to the wicked eke,
lift not the horn.
your horn: nor with a stiff neck speak.
does promotion
from East, West; or from Desert come.

and he exalts othersome.
is in IAHS hand, whose wine
is red, full mixed; and he powers
thereout: but dregs of it, out-strein
drink shall, all wicked of the earth.
this show:
to Iakobs God, sing-psalm will I.

horns of the just shall be lift-high.
PSALM LXXVI. Sing this as the 68. Psalm.
is known: his name
is great in Israel.

in Sion he does dwell.

shield, sword, and war, Selah.
art thou:
more-then the mounts of prey.

into the spoil-resign'd;
they slept their sleep: of men of power
their hands eke none could find.

both carr and horse, slept has.

fore thee, when thou art wrath.

the earth feared, and still lay.

all meek of the earth, Selah.

confess shall unto thee:
the remnant of the wrathfull-heats
by thee shall girded be.

all that about him won:
a present let them bring to him
that is the fearfull-one.
To him that of the governors
the spirits gathers:
even unto him that fearful is
unto the Kings of the earth.
PSALM LXXVI. 1 To the master of the music on Neginoth: a psalm of Asaph a
song.
is known in Judah: his name is great, in Israel.





art thou: more-than the mountains of prey.





art fearful; and who shall stand before thee: ^hen thou art angry.







they that be round about him; let them bring a present, to the FEAR.

To him that gathers- as-grapes, the spirit of the Governors: that is
fearful, to the kings of the earth.

PSALM LXXVII. 1 To the master of the music to Ieduthun; a psalm of Asaph.
was to God and I cried-out: my voice was to God, and he gave ear unto me.

by night reached-out and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted,











is his word onded, to generation and generation?



does this make me-sick: the change, of the right hand of the most-high?





is in the sanctuary; who is so great a God, as God.

art the God that do a marveilous-work: thou have made-known thy strength
among the peoples.







was in the round-aier; Lightnings illuminated the world: the earth was
stirred, and quaked. was in the sea, and thy paths in the many waters: and thy
footsteps, were not known.

PSALM. LXXVII. This may be sung also as the 8. Psalm.
was and I loud-cried:
^my voice to God, and he gave-ear to me.

^my hand by night retcht-out and not ceased:
^my soul refused comforted to be.

and I with meditation-did pray:
and overwhelmed my spirit was, Selah.

I was amazed, and could nothing say.

the years of ancient-eternitie.

I with my heart had meditation;
my spirit also searched-diligently.

and add no more, to accept favorably?

is his word ended, to each age for aye?

Has he in wrath his mercies shutt, Selah?
is this it that makes me sick, said I:
the change, of the right hand of the most-high?

will sure thy marvels mind from anciencie.

and of thy practices discourse will I.

Who is, as God, so great a Potentate?
art the God, that workest wondrously:
Thou made thy strength, among peoples known to be:

the sonns of Ia'kob, and Joseph, Selah.

the waters did tremble-with-pain did they:
Also the deeps tumult'ous stirred were.

thine arrows also, they did walk-about.
was in th'aery-sphere;
lightnings the World illumined throughout:
The earth, was stirred and tremblingly-quaked.

thy path was and thy footsteps were not known.

by hand of Moses and of Aharon.
PSALM LXXVIII. This may be sung also as the 37. Psalm.

^to sayings of my mouth, your ear incline.

^will utter hidd things of antiquity.
things which we have heard,
^and have them known:
^and our forefathers unto us have shown.
^
^to th'after age, telling the lauds of JAH:
His power eke and his marvels which he did.

and put a law in Israel: which he bade
our fathers; to their sonns, known to be made.

might rise up, and unto their sonns forth show,

his precepts keep; and not Gods acts forget.
that they might not be, as their fathers,
a race that was rebellious and perverse:
a race that settled not their heart aright;
also with God, not faithful was their sp'rit.

they in the day of battle, back-turned.
in-use:
and in his law, to walk they did refuse.

and (which he had the^ showed,) his wo^drous-acts.

in land of Egypt, in the field of Tsoan.

made waters as an heap to stand also.

and all the night, with fiery lightsom-beam.

and as out of the great deeps, drink he gave.

and waters, he like rivers made descend.

in desert, to provoke the most supreme.
of-might:
requiring meat, for their souls- appetite.

to furnish in the wilderness a table?

and stream out flowed: can also he give bread?
flesh for his people can he ready-dresse?

and against Ja'kob kindled was a fire;
against Israel also, came-up wrathfull-ire.

and trusted not, in his salvation.

the doors of heaven, he also opened- free.

and gave unto them, of the heavens wheat.
Each-man did eat the bread of the Mighty:
he sent them meat, unto satietie.
The second part.

and south wind by his strength, he forward-drove.

and feth'red fowl, as the seas gravel-sand.

even round about places where he did dwell.

and their desire, he unto them did yield.

their meat yet in their mouth was.
came up against them, and their fatt- men slew:
and choise-yong-men of Israel, down-threw.

and for his wondrous-works believed not.

and did their years, with hasty-terrour end.

and turnd-again, and sought for God early.
should be:
and the most-high God, their redeemer-free.

and with their tongue, they unto him did lie.

nor in his covenant showed they faithfulness.

in mercy-covered iniquity,
and 'stroid them not: but often turnd-back his ire;
and did not all his wrathfull-heat up stire.
were, he to mind did call:
a wind that goes, turns not-at-all.

in desert: greivd him, in the wilderness?

and Isr'ls Holy-one, they limited.

when from the foe he them redeemed away.

and his works-wonderfull in field of Tsoan.

also their streams, that drink they could no more.

and frogs among them, which did them corrupt.
spoil:
and to the Locust, their laborious-toil.

and with the blasting-hail, their fig-trees-wild.

also their flocks, unto the lightnings-blast.

fierce-wrath and indignation, and distress:
by sending-forth the Messengers of ill.

their soul he from the death did not reprive:
and to the pest, their beasts he up-did-give.

in tents of Cham, the chiefest of their mights.
The third part.

and as a flock led them, in wilderness.

and those their enemies, he sea cov'red.

this mountain, which his right hand had obtained.
all;
and made them in line of possession fall*
And he did cause the tribes of Israel,
within their tabernacles for to dwell.

high God: and to his hests, they took no heed.

like to their fathers: turned, as warping bow.

and by their idols, stirrd his jealousy.
this, and he was exceeding-wroth:
and Israel, he veh'mently did loath.

the tent, that he had placed among men.

into distressers hand eke, his glory.

and with his heritage, his wrath surpast.

their Virgins, none with song-did-celebrate.

their widows also, did not weep- at-all.

as strong-man, after wine that showt-doth-make.

gave them eternal shame-opprobrious.

and tribe of Ephrajim, he did not choose.

the mountayn Sion, which he dearly-lov'd.

like the earth, which he founded t'eternitie.

and from the folds of sheep, he did him take.

Ja'kob to feed; and his own, Israel.

and by discretions of his hands, them ledd.
PSALM LXXVIII. 1 An instructing- psalm, of Asaph:
GIve ear my people, to my law: incline your ear, to the words of my mouth.









that should be born, might know: might rise up, and tell their sonns.



that prepared-not aright their heart; and whose spirit was not faithful, with
God.













out of the great deeps.







can he prepare, flesh for his people?











wind to passe-forth in the heavens: and brought on, a South- wind by his
strength.



it fall, in the midds of his camp: round-about his dwelling-places.



was yet in their mouth.



works.





was their Rock: and the most high God, their redeemer.



was not firmly prepared with him: neither were they faithful, in his
covenant. being compassionate, mercifully-covered iniquity, and corrupted not:
but multiplied to turn-away his anger; and did not stirr-up, all his
wrathfull-heat. were flesh: a wind that goes, and shalll not return.





nor the day, in which he had redeemed them from the distresser.



that they could not drink.









by the sending, of the messengers of evils.









which his right hand purchased.

^^^ls, they stirrd-him to jealousy.





















places: like the earth, which he founded for ever.

ewes-with-yong, brought he him: to seed Jaakob his people; and Israel, his
possession.

PSALM LXXIX. Sing this as the 59. Psalm.

the heathens are come in;
the palace of thine holiness
they have defil'd-unclean:
Jerusalem on wastful-heaps

the karkesses of thy servants,
meat, to the fowl of heaven:
Flesh of thy saints to the earths wild-beasts.

their blood, about Jerusalem;
and none that-layes-in-grave.

reproach become-are we:
a scoffing and a scorn, to them
that round-about us be.

to perpetuity:
burn shall like to the very fire,
thy fervent-jealousie?

which do not know thy fame:
on kingdoms eke, which do not call
on thy renowned-name.

his habitation
they also wondrously have brought
to desolation.

which have been heretofore:
have, us prevent let thy mercies;
for, low-brought are we sore.

even for thy names glory:
and ridd us free, for thy names sake
our sins purge-graciously.

among heathens let be known
before our eyes; the vengeance of
thy servants blood out-flowen.

O let it come before thee:
as thy great arm is, let the sonns
of death reserved be.

into their bosom, pay:
that their reproach, with which O Lord,
reproched thee have they.

confess will unto thee,
for ever: unto age and age,
thy praise tel-forth will we.
PSALM LXXIX. 1 A psalm, of Asaph;
O God, the heathens are come, into thine inheritance; they have defiled the
palace of thine holiness: they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.

for meat, to the fowl of the heavens: the flesh of thy gracious-saints, to the
wild-beast of the earth.

there was none to bury them.

that are round-about us.











is their God? known be among the heathens before our eyes; the vengeance, of
the blood of thy servants that is shed.







PSALM LXXX. 1 To the master of the music, on Shoshannim: Eduth, a Psalm of
Asaph.
















the-way before it: and rootedst-in the roots of it; and it filled the land.

with the shadow of it: and the boughs of it, were like the Cedars of God.









whom thou made strong for thy self. It is burned with fire, it is cut down:
at the rebuke of thy face, they perish. whom thou madest-strong for thy self.

PSALM. LXXX. Sing this as the 78. or as thee 55. Psalm.

O thou that Joseph as a flock do lead:
that sit on the Cherubs, clearly-shine.

and fore Manasseh; thy strength-valourous
styr-up: and come, for saving-health to us.

make shine; and we shall have deliverance.

will thou, against thy peoples meek-desire?

and make them drink, tears in a measure-great.

among themselves, mock also do our foes.

make shine; and we shall have deliverance.

drovest the heathens out, and plantedst it.
the way before it: and
made it take deep root, and it filled the land.

and boughs of it, were like Cedars of God.

and to the river, her yong-sucking-sprigs.

that al which pass the way by, have her torn.

wild-beasts eke of the field, make it their food.

out of the heavens: and visit this vine-tree.

and son, whom for thy self thou strengthened have.
it is, cutt-quite-away:
at the rebuke of thy face, perish they.

on son of man, whom thou made strong for thee.

quicken us, and on thy name call will we.

make shine, and we shall have deliverance.
PSALM LXXXI.

^to Ja'kobs God showt-triumphing.
^
^the pleasant harp, with psalterie.

in set-time, at day of our feast.
is an heast:
to Jakobs God, due-to-be-doon.

a witness; when as forth he faerd
from land of Aegipt: where I heard
a language, that I did not know.

his hands, did from the basket pass,

and I releasing-thee-inlarg'd:
I answ'red thee in secrecy
of thunder: proo^d thee, at water.
of Strife, Selah.

and I to thee will testify:
If hearken unto me will thou,
O Israel.
If that in thee
a forreyn God there shall not be:
nor thou unto a strange God bow.
am;
which thee ascending-up did guide
from land of Egypt: open-wide
thy mouth, and I will fill the same.

unto my voice: and Israel,
to me was not affected-wel.

in their hearts wrong-intention;
in their own counsels let them walk.

that Israel in my ways had gone.

soon: turned my hand their foes upon.

had feighnedly-to him-yielded:
and their time should for ever be.

be fed: and from the Rock, I would
with honey have sufficed thee.
PSALM LXXXI. 1 To the master of the music, upon Gittith, a psalm of Asaph.
joyfully, unto God our strength: showt- triumphantly, unto the God of Jaakob.





is a statute to Israel: a judgment- due, to the God of Jaakob.

where I heard a language, that I knew not.







If there shall not be in thee a forreyn God: neither thou bow-down thy self, to
a strange God.

am Jehovah, thy God; which brought thee up, out of the land of Egypt:
open-wide thy mouth, and I will fill it.





had been obedient to me: that Israel, had walked in my ways.







PSALM. LXXXII. Sing this as the 34. Psalm.

of God: does judge the gods amidd.

and accept faces, of wicked.

the afflicted and poor justify.

out of the wickeds hand release.

ought understand; but in darkness
they will walk on: though moved shall
of the earth be the foundations al.
are: and children
of the most-high God are ye al.

and as one of the princes, fall.

inherit shall, al nations the row.
PSALM LXXXII. 1 A psalm, of Asaph:
GOd, stands in the assembly of gods: he judges, in midds of the gods.









are gods: and ye al are sonns, of the most-high.





PSALM LXXXIII. Sing this as the 74. Psalm.
O God do not thou silence-keep:
cease-not-as-deaf, and be
not still o God.
make noyse-tumultuouslie:
thine haters eke, lift up the head.

against thy folk: against thine hidd,
they consultation-make.

that they no nation be:
that name of Israel may no more
be had in memory.
in heart:
strike covenant, thee against.

Moab and th'Agarens.

the Philistines, with those
that dwell in Tire.
with them is joyned-close:
they have been for an arm, unto
the sons of Lot, Selah.
unto Midjan do,
as unto Sisera:
As unto Iabin, at the brook
of Kishon.
which were abolisht: and became
doung for an earthly-floor.

as Oreb and as Zeb:
as Zebach and as Salmunnah,
all their authorized.

for our possession-take.

before the wind, them make.

the flame the mounts does fear.

and with thy storm soon-feare.

may seek thy name o Iah.

unto perpetuall-aye:
and shamed be and perish they.

thou thou whose name JEHOVAH: art
'bove all the earth most-high.
PSALM LXXXIII. 1 A song, a psalm of Asaph.




counsel: and consulted, against thine hidden-ones.

being a nation: that the name of Israel, may be remembered no more.

in heart together: against thee, they have stricken a covenant.







to Midian: as to Sisera, as to Iabin; at the brook of Kishon.

Which were abolished in En-dor: they becam dung for the earth.

even their nobles, as Oreb and as Zeeb: and as Zebach and as Salmunnah, all
their authorized- princes.

selves; the habitations of God.











is JEHOVAH only thou; art the most high, over all the earth.

PSALM LXXXIV. 1 To the master of the music upon Gittith; a psalm to the sons
of Korach.
are thy dwelling-places; O Jehovah of hosts!





are they that abide in thine house: still, they shall praise thee, Selah.

is the earthly-man, whose strength is in thee: they in whose heart, are the
highways.

that passing through the vale of Baca, put him for a wel-spring: also with
blessing, the rain covers.







is a day in thy courts, than a thousand: I have chosen, to sit-at
the-threshold, in the house of my God; rather than to remain, in the tents of
wickedness.

is a Sun, and shield: Jehovah will give, grace and glory: he will not withhold
good, from them that walk in perfection.

is the earthly-man, that trusts in thee.

PSALM LXXXIV.
^O LORD of hosts, how amiable
^ are places wherein thou do dwell!

^even for the courts of Jehovah:
^my heart and my flesh, shout do they,
^ to come the living God unto.
^
^and swallow nest, where she lays
^her young ones: thine altars, O IAH
^of hosts; my king, and-eke my God.

^ are blessed: they still, praise thee, Selah.
is the man, whose strength thou art:
they that high ways have, in their heart.
That passing-through the Baca vale,
do put him for a welling-stream:
with blessings eke, rain covers them.

to God in Sion, shall appear.

give-ear, o Ja'kobs God, Selah.

see thou o God: and look upon,
face of thine 'ointed-Messiah.

thy courts, than thousand elsewhere been:
I chosen have, me to depresse
at threshold, in house of my God;
rather-than for to have abode,
within the tents of wickedness.
is a Sun and shield:
both grace and glory, JAH will yield:
not any good withold will he,
from them that walk in perfectnes.

the earthly-man, that trusts in thee.
PSALM LXXXV. Sing this as the 8 or as the 77 Psalm.

thou turned have, Jakobs captivity.

thou cov'red have, even-all their sin, Selah.

Thou turned have from thy wraths fervent-ire.

and cease against us thine indignation.

Will thou to age and age draw-out thine ire?

thy folk may joy?
thy mercy: and thy health on us bestow.

for to his folk and saints, speak peace will he:
And let them not return to foolishnes.
is sure at hand:
that glory, may have dwelling in our land.

eke springs, faithfulness:
Justice from heavens has looked-down also.

and eke our land shall give her fruitfulness.

and he will put her steps the way into.
PSALM LXXXV. 1 To the master of the Music, a psalm to the sons of Korach.
THou have been favorable to thy land O Jehovah: thou have returned, the
captivity of Iaakob.



thou have turned from the fervenese of thine anger.





and revive us: that thy people may rejoice in thee?





is near to them that fear him: that glory, may dwell in our land.





PSALM LXXXVI. 1 A Prayer, of David:
BOw-down thine ear Jehovah answer me: for I am poor-afflicted and needy.

am merciful: thou my God, save thy servant; that trusts unto thee.





art good and mercifully-pardonest: and much of mercy to all that call upon
thee.





There is none like thee, among the Gods, O Lord; and none like thy works.



art thou, and do marvellous-things: thou, art God thy self alone.





is great toward me: and thou have delivered my soul, from the lowest hell.



art a God pitiful and gracious: long suffering, and much of mercy and truth.



PSALM LXXXVI.

^for I am poor-afflicted and needy.
am I:
^my God, thy servant save, that trusts in thee.

for, all the day, call unto thee do I.

for Lord, I lift my soul up unto thee.

of mercy much; to all that call on thee.

attent, unto the voice of my requests.

I call on thee; for thou will answer me.
is like thee:
o Lord; and like unto thy works are none.

and shall before thee Lord themselves down-bowt
and glorify thy name. art thou,
and marvels do: thou, God thy self alone.

o LORD: to ferare thy name, unite mine heart.

and will thy name for ever glorify.
has been:
and thou have rid my soul from lowest grave.

and seek my soul does crew of violent-men:
Also before them they propose not thee.

long suffering, much of mercy and of truth.
thy face, and to me gracious be:
Unto thy servant give thy strength; and save,
thine handmaids son.
and let mine haters see and shamed be:
that I, from thee LORD, help and comfort have.
PSALM LXXXVII. Sing this as the 89. Psalm.

is his foundation.

does love gates of Sion.

things-glorious, spoken be.

unto them that know me;
Lo Palestine and Tire with Cush:
this- man, he born was there.

each man is born in her:
and he, that is the Highest one
shall her establish-fast.

the peoples, count-wil cast:
this man, he born was there, Selah.
there the singers be
as also they that play on fluits:
my wel-springs all in thee.
PSALM. LXXXVII. 1 To the sons of Korach, a Psalm a song:
HIs foundation, among the mountains of holiness.



is of thee: O city of God, Selah.

man was born there.



man was born there, Selah.



PSALM. LXXXVIII. 1 A song a psalm, to the sons of Korach: to the master of the
music, on Machalath leannoth: an instructing- psalm, of Heman the Aezrachite.
by day I cry-out, and in the night before thee.





that has no strength.

in the grave; whom thou remembrest no more; and they, are cut-away from thine
hand.

places: in darknesses, in deep- places.

with all thy billows, thou afflictest me, Selah.

acquaintance thou have put-far-away, from me: have set me for abominations to
them: I am shut-up, and cannot get out.



work to the dead: or shall the deceased rise up, shall they confess thee,
Selah?



work be known, in the darkness: and thy justice, in the land of oblivion am
poor-afflicted, and breathing-out-the-ghost from my youth: I bear thine
affrightings, I am doubtfully-troubled.





acquaintance are in darkness.

PSALM LXXXVIII. Sing this as the 13. Psalm.
thou the God of my salvation:
before thee, day and night, I make-clamation.

bow thine ear.
my life, draws near to hell.

I am, as man that has ability no whit.
Even free, among the dead: as slain, in grave that lay;
whom thou do mind no more: because from thy hand, they
have quite been cut-away

in obscure-darknesses, in gulfy-places-deep.

and with thy billows all, upon me thou do lay-
affliction, Selah.
friends thou have put-far, from me: have me set
loathsome to them: shut-up, that out I cannot get.

thee do I call upon Jehovah, all the day:
my palms to thee display.
work-miraculous?
or shall they rise-again that are deceast from us?
shall they laud thee, Selah?
be told within the grave? or thy fidelity,
in forlorn-miserie?
work-marveilous be in the darkness known?
and thy justice, within land of oblivion?

my prayer also, shall even in the morn-early
prevent-thee-speedily.

thy countenance from me, why do thou hid-away?
am, and breathing-out the sp'rit,
even from my youth: I bear, thy fears-that-doe-affright,
I am in doubtful-plight.


against me altogether, gone round about they are.

my known- friends darkness are.
PSALM. LXXXIX.
unto eternity:
^to age and age, will with my mouth
^make known thy verity.
unto eternity:
^the heavens, thou firme-establish wilr
^in them thy verity.

stricken a covenant:
a ratifying-oath I gave
to David my servant.

unto eternall-aye:
thy throne I also will build-up,
to age and age, Selah.

thy wondrous- work confess:
within the assembly of the saints,
also thy faithfulness.

compared in the sky:
may to Jehovah likened be,
among sonns of the Mighty?

much terrible is he:
and to be feared, over all
that round about him be.

who like unto thee is,
O mighty Jah? and round-about
thee is thy faithfulness.

thou ruling bearest-sway:
when waves thereof do rise on high,
thou stilling-them do lay.
Proud-Rahab beaten-down thou have,
even-as a wounded-weight:
thine enemies thou scattred have,
with arm of thy strong-might.

does unto thee belong:
the world and plenty of the same;
thou have them founded-strong.
on right-side the South,
thou have created them:
the Tabor and the Hermon- hill
they showt shall in thy name.

their hand is powerfully-
corrobated, thy right hand
it is exalted high.

are the prepared-place:
mercifullnes and faithfull-truth,
do goe-before thy face.
are the folk, that know
the trompets sounding-shrill:
Jehovah, in thy faces light
they shall walk-forward-still.
renowned-name, they shall
be gladsom all the day:
and in thy justice-righteous,
exalted be shall they.
art of their fortitude
the beautifull-glorie:
and in thy favourable-grace,
our horn shall be lift-high.

Jehovah does pertain:
to Holy-one of Israel
eke, our King- sovereign.
The second part.

speak in a vision:
and saidest; I have help imposed,
upon a mighty-one:
a choise-one I out of the folk
exalted.
David my servant: 'ointed have
him with mine oil holy.

yea strength him shall mine arm.

nor son of wrong, him harm.

his strait-afflicting-foes:
and them that haters of him are,
with plague-I-smite will those.

shall be and my mercy:
and-also in my name, his horn
shall be exalted-high

the rivers set will I.

thou art, my God- mighty,
And rock of my salvation thou.

to be the first-begott: above
the Kings of the earth, supreme.

my mercifull-kindnes:
my covenant eke to him shall be
of constant faithfullnes.

as days of heavens, his throne.

not, in my judgments gone.

and not observe, my hests.

with stripes their crookednes.

from with him, my mercy:
neither against my faithfulness,
use-lving-fellacie.
which I have made,
I will not, it profane:
and that which is gone-out my lips,
I will not change the same.

if I to David lie.

his throne, as Sun before me.

unto eternal aic:
and as a witness in the sky,
that faithful is, Selah.
The third part.

art-wroth, with thine 'ointed.

thou have abolished:
thou have profaned, to the earth
his crown.
his hedges all: his fortresses
a ruin, put-thou-hast.

spoil-him-with-robberie:
he to his neighbors is-become,
a shamefull-opprobrie.

of his afflicting-foes:
and all his hateful enemies,
thou have rejoiced those.

rebated it thou have:
and in the battle, have thou not
established him fast.

and cast his throne to ground.

with shame have wrapt-him-round.

to perpetuity?
and burn shall as the very fire
thy wrathful fervencie?

I transitory am:
to what vain-state, thou did create
all children of Adam.

deliver shall-away
his soul, out of the powerfull-hand
of deaths estate, Selah?
be thy former mercies, Lord:
thou by thy verity,
to David swar'st?
thy servants opprobrie:
that I do in my bosom bear,
of all the folks mighty.

reproach-opprobriously:
wherewith the footsteps of thy Christ,
reproachfull-blame do they.
be;
Amen, Amen I say.
PSALM LXXXIX. 1 An instructing- psalm, of Aetham the Aezrachite.
for ever: to generation, will I make-known, thy faithfulness with my mouth.

for ever: the heavens, thou will establish thy faithfulness in them.





work Jehovah: also thy faithfulness, in the Church of the saints.



is danting-terrible, in the secret of the saints very-much: and fearful,
over all round-about him.

is like thee, mighty Iah? and thy faithfulness, round-about thee,



man: thou have scattered thine enemies, with the arm of thy strength.

are the heavens, thine also is the earth: the world and plenty thereof thou
have founded them.





are the prepared-place of thy throne: mercy and truth, goe-before thy face.

are the people, that know the showting-sound: Jehovah, in the light of thy
face they shall walk-on.



art the glory of their strength: in thy favourable-acceptation, our horn shall
be exalted.

is our shield: and of the holy-one of Israel our King.











shall be with him: and in my name, shall his horn be exalted.

hand in the rivers.



to be the firstborn: High, above the Kings of the earth.

shall be faithful to him.

















for ever: and a witness in the sky, faithful, Selah.









hand of his distressers: have rejoiced, all his enemies.









am: unto what vanity, thou have created all the sonns of Adam.



be those thy former mercies Lord: thou swarest to David, by thy faithfulness?

of all great peoples.



be Jehovah for ever; Amen, and Amen.

The fourth Book.
PSALM CX. Sing this as the 74. Psalm.

an habitation;
in every generation
and generation.

and world brought-forth by thee:
even from eternity thou art
God, to eternity.

turn miserable-man:
and thou do say, return-again
ye children of Adam.

are even-as yesterday
when it is past: and as a watch
that in the night does stay.
As with a flowing-current thou
do carry them away;
they as a sleep are: in the morn,
are as the changed hay.

and groweth-changeably:
it in the evening is cut down,
and fadeth-withering-dry.

consumed-utterly:
and in thy wrathfull-heat, we have
been troubled suddenly.

before thee thou do place:
our hidden-close iniquities
to clear-light of thy face.

our days all turn-away:
our years we have consumed-quite;
even-as a thought, were they.
those our years, in them
are threescore years and ten;
and if they be in valour-strong,
fourscore years in them been:
And their pride molestation is
and painfull-miserie:
for speedily it is cut-down,
and we away do fly.

the mighty-powerfullnes?
according also to thy fear,
thy fervent-wrathfullnes?

so skillful make us be:
that unto understanding-wise
apply the heart may we.
thy self again,
how long will thou deferr?
let it repent thee also, for
them that thy servants are.

us in the morn: that we,
in all our days, even cheerfully-
may showt and joyful be.

even-as the days have been
wherein thou have afflicted us:
the years, we ev I have seen.

appear: thy comlines,
unto their sons.
our LORD Gods pleasantnes:
and th'operation of our hands,
upon us stablish-sure;
yea th'operation of our hands-
establish-it-secure.
PSALM XC. 1 A prayer, of Moses the man of God.
LOrd, thou have been to us an habitation; in generation and generation.

art God.



are as yester day when it is past: and as a watch in the night.

as a sleep: in the morning, as the grass that is changed.





sins, to the light of thy face.



are threescore and ten year; and if they be in strengths, fourscore year; and
their pride is molestation and painful iniquity: for it is cut-down speedily,
and we fly away.



us to know: that we may apply the heart to wisdom.





wherein we have seen evil.





PSALM XCI.






shall be a bukler and a shield.

that flies by day.

that walks in the darkness: for the stinging-plague that wastes at noonday.

hand: unto thee, it shall not come-neer.



for thy mansion.

any evil: and the plague, shall not come-nigh thy tent.



their palms shall they bear thee up: least thou dash, thy foot against a
stone.





will I be in distress: I will release him, and will honor him.

PSALM. XCI. Sing this as the 78. Psalm.

shall lodge-himself, in shade of The Almighty.

my God, in him will I put-confidence.

from woeful pest.
under his plumes thou hopeful-shrowd shall thee:
his truth, a buckler and a shield shall be.

nor for the arrow, that by day makes-flight,
that in the darkness maketh-way:
for stinging-plague, that wastes at noonday.

at thy right hand: it shall not come-neer thee.

and thou shall see, the wicked- men's reward.

the highest, thou have made thy mansion,

neither the plague, come-neer thy tent at all.

in all thy ways, thy-keepers for to be.
And they shall bear thee up their hands upon:
least thou do dash thy foot against a stone.

the Lion-fierce and Dragon, down-shalt-tread.

because he knows my name, I Will set him high.

with him I: will him honor, and release.

and show him my salvation will I.
PSALM XCII. Sing this as the 8. or as the 77. Psalm.
ITs good, unto Jehovah to confess:
and to sing-psalm, to thy name O most-high.

and in the nights, thy constant-faithfulnes.
lute, and on the psalterie:
Upon the harp with meditation.

in acts of thy hands, I showt-cheerfullie.

thy purposes deep are, vehemently.
that brutish is, know does not he!
and fool-unconstant, understands not this.

that work iniquity: that they shall be
abolished unto perpetualnes.
art for ever high.

LORD, they shall perish: they shall scattred be,
all that do work painful-iniquity.

mine old age 'ointed with fresh oil.
shall view, on them that mine enviers be:
mine ears hear, of ill-men that rise against me.

as Lebanons Cedar, so grow shall he.

in courts of our God, flourishing shall been.


my Rock, and no injustice is in him.
PSALM. XCII. 1 A psalm a song, for the day of Sabbath.
IT is good, to confess to Jehovah: and to sing-psalm, to thy name O most high.











men spring-up as the grass; and all that work painful-iniquitie do flourish:
that they shall be abolished unto perpetuity.

art high, for ever Jehovah.

shall be anointed with fresh oil.





is righteous: my Rock, and no injurious-evil is in him.

PSALM XCIII.


is thy throne from then: thou art from eternity.



more wondrous-strong is, Jehovah in the high- place.



PSALM XCIII. Sing this as the 21. Psalm.

is clad with majesty:
Jehovah clothed is, has girt
himself with potencie:

it shall not moved be.
Thy throan is stablished of old:
thou from eternity.

o LORD; the floods their voice
have lifted-up: the floods they do
lift-up their dashing-noise.
that is on high,
more wondrous-strong is he:
than many waters voices, than
the strong sea billows be.

made vehemently sure:
LORD, holiness becomes thine house,
while length of days does dure.
PSALM XCIII.




shall the wicked* O Jehovah: how long, shall the wicked shew-gladnes?

word: shall they boast-themselves, all that work paynful-iniquitie?













are vanity.

is the man he whom thou chastenest O Jah: and teach him out of thy law.









had been an helpfulnes unto me: my soul had almost dwelt in silence.







PSALM XCIIII. Sing this as the 55. or as the 78. Psalm.

O God of vengeances shine-with-clearnes.

and render a reward, to men-haughty.

how long- while, shall the wicked gladsom been?
words lavishly:
boast shall they, all that work iniquity?

thine heritage afflicting they misuse.

the fatherless eke, murder them do they.
it: and
the God of J'akob, shall not understand.

and O ye fools, when will ye prudent be?

or he that formed the eye, shall he not see?

that knowledge unto earthly-man teaches?

Jehovah knows: that they are vanity.
is the man whom thou O Jah
do chasten: and him teach out of thy law.

till for the wicked, dug be a pit.

and will not his inheritance bereav.

and after it, all the upright in heart.

Who stand for me, against workers of sin?

my soul had almost dwelt in silentnes.

thy mercy O Jehovah, did me stay.

delight my soul then did thy consolations.

which frames molestation by decree?
man:
and guiltless blood, as wicked they do damn.

and my God, for the rock of my safety.
surely turn themselves upon,
their own vnrighteous-molestation:
and them suppress in their maliciousnes:
Jehovah our God, he will them suppress.
PSALM XCV.




is a great God: and a great King, above all Gods.

are the deep-places of the earth: and the strong-heights, of the mountains,
are his.

is for he made it: and the dry- land, his hands have formed.



is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and sheep of his hand: to
day, if ye shall hear his voice.

in Meribah, as in the day of Massah, in the wilderness.



that generation, and said, they are a people erring in heart: and they, know
not my ways.

PSALM XCV. Sing this as the 45. or as the 97. Psalm.

to Rock of our health, showt-triumphantly.

let us with psalms, to him triumpnant-sing.
is a great God-mightie:
a great King eke, above al Gods is he.
are the earths deep-secrecies:
the stro^g-heights of the mountains eke are his.

and the dry-land, for that, his hands did frame.

the LORD our maker, let us kneel before.
is; and the people we
of his pasture, and sheep of his hand be:
His voice if ye shall hear the same, to day.

as in the wilderness, in Massah day.

they proved me, also they saw my deed.
that race yrked:
and said, a folk they are in heart that stray:
and of my ways the knowledge have not they.

If ever they enter, into my Rest.
PSALM XCVI.




works.

is Jehovah and praised vehemently: fearful he is, above al Gods.

are vayn-idols: but Jehovah, made the heavens.

are before him: strength and beauteous-glorie, in his sanctuary.











is: then let all the trees of the wood, showt-joyfully.



PSALM XCVI. Sing this as the 45. Psalm.

O all the earth, sing to th'eternal-JAH.

preach his salvation, from day to day.

among peoples all, his wondrous-actions.
is he
greatly: fearful, above all gods he is.
be:
but of the heavens: Jehovah maker is.
are before his face:
strength and beauty, within his Holy-place.

give to Jehovah, glory strength also.

an offering take, and come his courts into.
place
to JAH: the whole earth, tremble at his face.

Jehovah reigns; also stablenes
the world shall have, it shall not moved be:
the peoples he will judge, with righteousness.

let sea and plenty thereof roar-with-noise.

let al trees of the wood then showt-with-mirth.

because he comes, for to judge the earth:
the world he judge will with just-right'ousnes;
the peoples also, with his faithfulness.
PSALM. XCVII. This may be sung also as the 37. Psalm.

^let th'ylands many, shew-forth-joyfulnes.
be:
^justice and judgment, his thrones stablenes.

and round-about his enemies flameth.

the earth, does see and painfully-trembleth.

like wax: at face, of Lord of the earth total.

and see his glory, do the peoples all.

that in vain-idols boast-them-gloriously:
O all ye Gods bow-down-him-worshiping.

and Judahs daughters show doe-gladsome-mirth:
because, Jehovah, of thy judgements-right.

art far above all Gods, advanst-in-hight.

souls of his gracious-saints he does beware;
he also them safely-deliver will,
out of the hand of those that wicked are.

and joy, for them that upright hearted be.

to the remembrance of his sanctity.
PSAM XCVII.


are round-about him: justice and judgment, are the stable-place of his throne.









thing; that gloriously-boast themselves in vain-idols; bow-down-your-selves to
him all ye Gods.



art high above all the earth: vehemently art thou exalted, above all Gods.



is sown for the just: and joy for the right of heart.



PSALM. XCVIII. 1 A psalm;
SIng-yee to Jehovah, a new song, for he has done marveilous- things: his
right- hand has saved him, and the arm of his holiness.

















PSALM XCVIII. Sing this as the 68. Psalm.

for marvels done has he:
his right hand has him saved, and
his arm of sanctity.

made known: unto the eyes
even of the nations, he has
revealed his justice.

of Israel he thinks on:
the ends all the earth have seen,
our Gods salvation.

shout ye triumphantly:
shout-chearfully, and joyful-shout:
and sing-melodiously.

melodiously-sing ye:
even with the harp and with the voice:
of singing-melodie.

the cornets sounding-voice:
before the king Jehovahs face,
shout-with-triumphant-noise.

World, and that therein dwell.

with joy together shrill.

to judge the earth, come is:
with justice he will judge the world;
and folks, with equities.
PSALM XCIX. Sing this as the 85 Psalm.

are wrathfully-stirred:
he sits on Cherubims, the earth
is troubleously-moved.

is 'bove all peoples high.

confess; it is holy.

thou, righteous-equities
have stablished; in Jacob have
done judgment and justice.

and bow your selves submisse,
even at the footstool of his feet;
because he holy is.

and Samuel, with them
that call on his name: called on Jah,
and he did answer them.
Even in the pillar of the clowd,
unto them speak did he:
they kept his witnesses, and (which
he gave them,) the decree.

a God that pardonest,
thou wast to them; upon their acts
though vengeance thou takedst.

and bow your selves submisse
at his mount holy: for holy
Jehovah our God is.
PSALM. XCIX.
on the Cherubims, the earth is moved.

is great in Sion: and high he is, above all the peoples.

is.



is.







is holy.

PSLM C.
^ is:

Its he that made us, and not we;
his folk, and sheep of his feeding.

his gates, his courtyards with praising:
confess to him, bless ye his name.
he good is:
his mercy ever is the same:
and his faith, unto all ages.
PSALM C. 1 A psalm for confession:
SHout ye-triumphantly to Jehovah, all the earth.



Know ye, that Jehovah he is God: he made us, and not we: his people, and sheep
of his pasture.



is good, his mercy is for ever: and his faith, unto generation, and generation.

PSALM. CI. 1 A Psalm, of David:
MErcy and judgment I will sing; to thee, Jehovah will I sing-psalm.



any word of Belial: I hate the doing of them that turn-aside; it shall not
cleave unto me.



suffer.







PSALM CI. Sing this as the 106. Psalm.

sing-psalm o JAH to thee.

when, will thou come to me?
I Will walk, in midst of my house,
in my hearts perfectness.

word of mischievousnesse:
I hate their fact that turn-aside;
it shall not cleave me to.

the evil, I will not know.

with-tongue-hurts secretly:
the haughty eyde, and large of heart;
him suffer cannot I.

that sit with me they may:
unto me minister-shall he,
that walks, in perfect way.

that does fraud: that speaks lies;
he shall not be established,
in presence of mine eyes.

the land suppress will I:
out of IAHS city to cut, all
that work iniquity.
PSALM CII. 1 A prayer, for the poor-afflicted when he shall be overwhelmed: and
shall powre-forth his meditation, before Jehovah.














against me, have sworn against me.





are, as a shadow declined: and I, am withered as grass,

























are through generation of generations.

time, thou have founded the earth: and the heavens, are the work of thine
hands.



art the same: and thy years, shall not be ended.



PSALM CII. Sing this as the 32. Psalm.

and let my cry come unto thee.

in day when trouble is on me:
let unto me thine ear be bent;
in day I call, soon answer me.
as the smoke my days are spent:
and as an hearth, my bones burnt be.

that I forget, to eat my bread.

my bone is to my flesh cleaved.

am, as an owl of wilderness.

on roof in solitariness.

they that rage at me, against me swear.

and mix my drinks with weeping-tear.

and thy hot-wrath: for thou have me
up-heaved, and cast down again.
be:
And withered as the grass am I.

for ever: and thy memory,
does unto age and age endure.

on Sion: for it is the time
to deal now with it graciously,
for come is the appointed-time.

delight in: and her dust pity.

and Kings of the earth all, thy glory.

he in his glory shall appear.

and not despise shall, their prayer.

for the after generation:
and people to be created,
shall praise the Ever-being-one.

the LORD from heavens the earth does see.

to loose them that deaths children be.

and his praise, in Jerusalem.

to serve the LORD, shall gather-them.

my strength: he shortened has my days.

my God, in midst of my days.
Thy years through age of ages are.

of the earth: the heavens also, are
thy handy operation.

and all they shall, with-age-decay
as a garment: as a vesture,
thou changest them and changed are-they.
art even the same: thy years
they also shall not ended be.

shall dwell; established before thee.
PSALM CIII. 1 A psalm of David;
MY soul, bless thou Jehovah: and all my inward-parts, the name of his
holiness.







things: thy youth is renewed, as an Eagles.





is pitiful and gracious: long suffering, and much of mercy.

(his anger) for ever.



is the height of the heavens, above the earth; so strong is his mercy, over
them that fear him.

so farr-hath-he-removed, our trespasses from us. his sonns: Jehovah has pity,
on them that fear him. are dust.

are as the grass: as a flower of the field, so flourishes he.

is not: and the place thereof, shall not know it any-more.

endures from eternity and unto eternity, upon them that fear him: and his
justice, to the childrens children.











PSALM CIII. Sing this as the 45. Psalm.

and all my inward-parts, his holy name.

and his rewards, forget none of the same.

rhat heals, all thy sick-infirmities.

crowns thee with mercy and with tender-ruth.

renewed as the Eagles, is thy youth.

and judgments, unto the oppressed all.

his acts, the sonns of Israel among.
is:
of mercy much, and of forbearance long.

neither will he his anger keep always.

nor us rewarded, as our actions-wrong.

to them that fear him, is his mercy strong.

our trespasses he far from us has cast.
has his sonns upon:
Jehovah pittieth them that him fear.

that we are dust, in record he does bear.
so are his days:
as flower of field, he flowrishing-displaies.

and place thereof knows not the same again.

from ever and for ever does remain,
upon them that his reverencers been:
his justice eke, to childrens children.

and that his preceps mind, them to practice.

his kingdom over all has soveragnties.

that mighty are of strength, that do his word;
Unto the voice of his word, hearkning-still.

his ministers, that do his pleasing-will.

in places all of his dominion:
O thou my soul, bless the Eternal-one.
PSALM. CIV.
^


heavens as a curtain out-stretching.

making the clouds his chariot;
That on wings of the wind walks.

his ministers, a fire flaming.

That it for ever may not move
neither for aye.
as with a robe did close-it-keep:
The waters stood the mounts above.

they hasted, at thy thunders sown.

to place for them thou firme-didst-lay.

not turn, the earth to overflow.

between the mountains, they do trac^.

wild-asses, quench their thirsting-dry.

from twixt the branches, voice they yield.

the earth is filled, with thy works-fruit.

and herbs, for use of man-earthly:
He brings-forth bread out of the ground.

makes face with oil chearfull-to-shine:
with bread, man's heart upholdeth-sound.

which he has planted, they are filled.

the Stork, the firr trees are her house.

the rocks, for Coneyes sheltring-shade.

the Sun, he knows his downfall.
The second part.

therein creep-forth the wood beasts all.

and seek their meat, from God- of-might.

and in their denns, they down-doe-lurk.

and to his labor, till ev'n-tide.

in wisdom have thou done, them all:
of thy riches the earth is full.

There are, wild beasts small with the great;
things-creeping which none number can.
and Livjathan,
whom thou have formd to play in it.

in due time; look-attentively.

op'nest thy hand, they are filld with good.

they troubled are: gather thou do
their spirit, they breath-out-the-ghost;
and to their dust they turn again.
and they
created are: the upper-view
of the earth, thou also do renew.

Joy let Jehovah in his deeds,

and it does tremble: he touches
the mounts, and smoke from them proceeds.

will while I am, to my God sing.

I, will rejoice in Jehovah.

out of the earth: and men-gracelesse
be they no more: Jehovah bless,
o thou my soul; Halelu-jah.
PSALM. CIV.
thy-self, with majesty and comly-honour.

himself, with light as with a garment; stretching-out the heavens, as a
curtain.





for ever and aye.



















that rejoice the heart of sory-ma^: making the face cheerful with oil: and
bread, that upholdeth the heart of sory-man.



are her house.









them-away: and couch-down, in their denns.





are creeping-things even innumerable; small wild-beasts, with great.



them, their food in his time.

it to them, they gather is: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.

the ghost; and return unto their dust.







am.



be they no more; my soul, bless thou Jehovah; Halelu-jah.

PSALM. CV. Sing this as the 75. or as the 100. Psalm.

make known among peoples his facts.

discourse of all his wondrous-acts.

joy let their heart, that seek for JAH.

seek-studiously his face always.

that he has done, remember ye:
his wondrous-operations,
and judgments that of his mouth be.

o sonns of I'akob his chosen.
Even he Jehovah our God is:
in all the earth his judgments been.

he mindfully-doth-think upon:
the word that he commanded, to
the thousand generation.

also his oath unto Isaak.

did unto Jakob stable-make:
A covenant of eternity
to Israel.
the land of Can'an give will I:
line of your heritage to be.

and strangers in it.
from nation to nation;
from one realm, to another folk.

but for their sake reproved Kings.

my Prophets, do no evil-things.

of bread he break did all the staff.

Joseph, that sold was for a slave.

his soul the iron entered.
that his word came:
Jehovahs saying, him tried.

the peoples ruler, him releast.

and ruler, of all he possessed.

and make his Elders understand.

and J'akob sojourned in Chams land.

and 'bove their foes he made them strong.

to do his servants crafty-wrong.
The second part.

and A'ron, him whom he did chose.

and wonders, in Chams land, propose.

and against his word rebelled not they.

and he their fish with death did slay.

in privy-chambers of their Kings.

and lice, in all their border brings.
to be:
fire in their land of flames-that-blast.

and tres throughout their border brast.

and caterpillars, numberless.

and did eat up their grounds increase.

even the first fruits of all their might.

and in their tribes, no feeble weight.

for fallen upon them had their dread.

to light the night, he did out-spread.

and with heavens bread sufficed them.

ran in dry-places like a stream.

his holy promise, mind did he.

his chosen-ones, with showting-glee.

the peoples labor possess did they.

and keep his laws; Halelu-jah.
PSALM CV.












is Jehovah our God: his judgments, are in all the earth.

that he commanded, to the thousand generation.



for a covenant of eternity.



(few) of number: very few, and strangers in it.

one kingdom, to another people.

any man to do them wrong: but reproved, kings for them.



























against his word.





to be hail: fire, of flames in their land.









was feeble.







like a river.





PSALM CVI.

^Jehovah thankfully,
^for he is good: for evermore
^ indureth his mercy.
^
^can all his praise display?
are that judgment keep:
^that justice does, always.

the acceptance
of thy people: and visit me,
with thy salvation.
and with
thy nations joyance
for to rejoice: to glorie-high
with thine inheritance.

erroneous-sinfulnes:
we have done wrong-iniquitie
we have done wickedness.

thy marvels wisely-mind:
remembered not the multitude
of those thy mercies-kind:
But, at the sea at the red sea,
was their rebellion-showen.

to make his power known.

and up the same was dryde:
and them as in the wilderness
he in the deeps did guide.

he did them freely-save:
and from the hand of the enemy,
he them redemption-gave.

none left was them among.

his glorious-prayse they sung.
The second part.

his doings they forgot:
for his advising-counsel, they
exspecting-wayted not.

and God in desert tempt.

their soul he leannes sent.

Jehovahs holy- man
they envyed.
and swallowd-up Dathan:
and on the congregation
of Abiram cov'red.

the flame burnt the wicked.

to th'idol bow did they.

of ox, that eats hay.

in Aegipt did great-acts.

by red sea, feareful-facts.

not Moses his chosen,
stood in the breach fore him: to turn
his wrath, from stroying them.

believed not his word.

heard not voice of the LORD.

he lift to them his hands.

and fan them in the lands.

ate offerings of the dead.

and plague among them spread.

and plague was causd to stay.

to age and age, for ay.

they angred-fervently:
that unto Moses, for their sake
befell-calamitie.

it with his lips ut'red.

they not abolished.

and did their doings learn.

were, for a snaring-grin.
The third part.

to Devils offered.

and of their daughters shed:
whom to Canaans idols, they
in-sacrifice-offred:
so that the land, with bloudy-gore
was impiously-stayned.
themselves defiled by
their operations:
they went a whoring also, by
their wonted-actions.

the anger of the LORD:
so that his own-inheritance
he lothsomly-abhorrd.

their haters them ruled.

under their hand humbled.

but they moovd-bitterly
by their counsel: and were brought-down
by their iniquity.

when as he heard their cry.

he kept-in-memorie:
and in his mercies multitude,
repented.
them to compassions: before,
all that them led-captive.

from heathens jointly-rayse,
for to confess thine holy name,
to glory, in thy praise.
be Jehovah, Isr'els God,
from aye and unto ay;
and let al people say, Amen;
O praise th'eternal-Jah.
PSAM CVI.
he is good: for his mercy, endures for ever.



are they that keep judgment: is he that does justice, in all time.







works; they remembered not, the multitude of thy mercies: but
turned-rebellious, at the sea at the red sea.



in the wilderness.









with lust, in the wilderness: and tempted God, in the desert.









idol.



things, in Egypt.

works, in the land of Cham: fearful- things, by the red sea.

them.

















it, with his lips.











them by their works: and whored, by their practices.









was on then; when he heard, their shril-cry.







be Jehovah, God of Israel, from eternity and unto eternity; and let all the
people say, Amen; Halelu-jah.

The fifth Book.
PSALM CVII. Sing this as the 18. Psalm.

for he is good: for ever his mercy.

whom he from foes hand has redeemd-away.

from east from west; from north and from the sea.

wandered: no dwelling city find-did they.
that them within
their soul, has saynting-overwhelmed bin.

he freely-tid them from their anguishes.

a dwelling city for to come unto.

his marvels eke, to sonns of man-earthly.

and hungry soul with good replenished.

in iron and affliction fast-tyde.

and did despise the Highest-ones counsel.

they stumbled-down, and none did yield releif.

he saved the^ from their sorrows.
from darkness and deaths shade: and broke, their bands.

his marvels to men's sonns.
he broke: and hewd-asunder iron bars.

and for their vices, have-affliction.

and to the gates of death, approach they nigh.

he saves them, out of their anguishes.

from their corruptions, delivers.

his marvels eke, to sonns of man: earthly.

and let the^ tell his works, with showting-song.
The second part.

that in the many waters labor do.

and in the deep, his wondrous-actions.

and it does lift the waves thereof on high.

their soul, it melts away in evil-woe.

and all their wsdom, is upswallowed-quight.

and he out-brings them, from their anguishes.

and then their waves alayed-are-quiet.

and he them leads, to haven of their will.

his marvels eke, to sonns of man-earthly.

and in the Elders sitting praise they him.

and springs of waters, to a thirstines.

for wickedness, of them that dwell therein.

and land of drought, to waters of plentiful.

and they a dwelling city do prepare.

which fruit of usual-revenue yields:

greatly: and he minisheth not their beast.

by close-restreint, by evil and sorrow.

and makes them err in waylesse wilderness.

and puts as a flock his families.

and stop her mouth, shall all iniquity.
is, and will these- things heedful-learn:
and they Jehovahs mercies, shall discern.
PSALM. CVII.
he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

it: whom he has redeemed, from the hand of the distresser.











works, to the sonns of Adam.



in affliction and iron.



their was no helper.





works, to the sonns of Adam,



works, to the sonns of Adam.



their labor, in the many waters.

acts, in the deep.





man: and al their wisdom, is swallowed-up.







works, to the sonns of Adam.













He powers contempt, on bounteous-princes: and makes them-err, in
deformed-wildernes without way.

his families as a flock.



is wise and will observe these- things: and they shall understand the mercies
of Jehovah.

PSALM CVIII.
it is prepared-stedfastly:
^I sing will and sing-psalm; yea-even with my glory.
at dawning-
^day, I will up-raise.

and in the nations I will thee praise-with-song.

are great above heavens: and thy truth unto
the skies.

and over all the earth, thy glorious-majestie.

thy lov'd-ones: save with thy right hand,
and answer me.

Shechem I shall divide, and measure Succoth dale.

Mannasseh mine; and Aephrajim strength
of mine head;
Jehudah, he shall be the giver of my law.

my shoe shall I
cast: over Palestina, shout-triumphantlie.

o who into Aedom, will me conducting-guide?
Wilt not thou God
that us off-cast: would in our hosts not go,
O God?

for lying-vanity is man's salvation.

do valiantnes: down our distressers tread
will he.
PSALM CVIII. 1 A song, a psalm of David.
is firmly-prepared: I will sing and sing-psalm; yea with my glory.

at the day-dawning.



is great above the heavens: and thy truth unto the skies.



with thy right hand and answer me.



shall be mine, Manasseh mine; and Aephrajim the strength of mine head;
Iehudah, shall be my lawgiver.



to the city of strong defense: who will conduct me, into Aedom?

Wilt not thou O God which had cast us away: and would not go-forth O God,
in our hosts?

is the salvation of earthly-man.



PSALM. CIX. To the master of the music, a Psalm of David:


with a tongue of falsehood.

with words of hatred have they compassed me about: and warred against me
without cause.

give my self to prayer.















children.

next-after, let his name be wiped-out.





him.



part; and as oil, into his bones.

wherewith he may cover himself: and for a girdle, where- with he may gird
himself continually.

be the work of mine adversaries, from Jehovah: and of them that speak evil
against my soul.

is thy mercy, deliver thou me.

am poor-afflicted and needy: and mine heart, is wounded within me.









is thine hand; thou Jehovah, have done it.



themselves with their abashing, as with a cloak.



him, from them that judge his soul.

PSALM CIX. Sing this as the 106. Psalm.


the mouth eke of deceitfulnes,
against me are opened:
they speak to me, with lying tongue.

with words of hate: and without cause
against me they do war.

for my love: but I pray.

they hatred on me lay.

the wicked-person: and
let th'adversary-Satan, at
his right hand ready-stand.

condemned go his ways:
and let his prayer be to sin.

his office, let another take.

his wife, a widow.
wander about waylesse,
and let them beg: and seek, out of
their desolate-places.

ensnare, all that is his:
and of his labor, let strangers
make spoilfull-robbery.

may forth-extend mercy:
and favor to his fatherless
to show let there be none.
set
unto perdition:
in the after generation,
his name out-wiped be.

fathers iniquity:
his mothers sin be not wip'd-out.

before the LORD: and he cut off,
from the earth their memory.

to do: but pursued
the afflicted and the needy man;
to slay, the heart-wounded.
The second part.

it come to him: and he
delighted not in blessing, and
far from him let it be.

his robe: and let it go
as waters into his in-part;
as oil, his bones into.

himself for to array:
and for a girdle, wherewith he
may gird himself always.

that adverse are to me:
and of them that against my soul
do speak maliciously.

do well, for thine-own name:
for good thy mercy is, rid me.

and I am needy: wounded eke
within me is mine heart.

so I away depart:
I tossed am as grasse-hopper.

through fasting: and my flesh for want
of fat is waxen-lean.

their head they shaken have.

me in thy mercy save.
is thine hand:
that thou LORD, do the same.
Curse they but bless thou: rise they up
and be abasht-with-shame;
and let thy servant joyful be.

with infamy: and with their shame,
as with a cloak, be clad.

my mouth vehemently:
and in the midst of many, will
I praise him thankfully.

the needy stand will he:
him for to save, from them that of
his soul the judgers be.
PSALM CX. 1 A psalm of David;
Jehovah assuredly-said, unto my Lord; Sit thou at my right hand: until I put
thine enemies, the footstool of thy feet.



shall be voluntaries, in the day of thy power; in the honourable-beauties of
holiness, of the womb of the early-morning; to thee, the dew of thy youth.

art a Priest for ever: according to the order of Melchisedek.







PSALM CX. Sing this as the 68. Psalm.
Jehovah said, unto my Lord;
thou at my right hand sit:
until I set thine enemies,
the footstool of thy feet.

will send out of Sion:
in midst of thine enemies,
have thou dominion.

in holy beauties be,
even of the womb of the early-morn,
dew of thy youth, to thee.

thou art a Priest for aye:
after the order that I of
Melchisedek did say.

Kings, in day of his wrath.

with corpses filled he has:
shall wound the head over much land.

within the way: therefore, his head
shall high-uplifted be.
PSALM. CXI. This may be sung also as the 45. Psalm.
^I Will confess Jehovah with the whole heart:
^in secret and assembly of th'upright.

^sought-out of all that in them do delight.

^and stand perpetually does his justice.

Jehovah gracious and pitiful.

He of his covenant ever is mindful.

giving to them, the heathens heritance.
are:
his precepts all, are of sure-faithfulnesse.
they are:
done, in assured truth and righteousness.

for ever he commanded his covenant:
Holy, and to be feared is his name.
is:
good prudency have all that do those-same:
his praise, abides to perpetualnes.
PSALM CXI. 1 Halelu-jah;
I will confess Jehovah, with all the heart: in the secret of the righteous,
and assembly.

are, the actions of Jehovah: sought-out, of all that delight in them.

is his work: and his justice stands to perpetuall-aye.

works: gracious, and pitiful is Jehovah.





are truth and judgment: faithful are, all his precepts.

they are for aie for ^ver: done, in truth, and righteousness.

is his name.

is the fear of Jehovah; good prudency, have all they that do them: his
praise, stands to perpetual-aye.

PSALM CXII. Halelu-iah.
is the man, that fears Jehovah: that delights vehemently in his
commandments.



shall be in his house: and his justice, stands to perpetual-aye.





man shall be, to everlasting memory.

is fixed, trusting in Jehovah.

is stablished, he will not fear: until he see, upon his distressers.





PSALM CXII. Sing this as the 111. Psalm.

that greatly does in his commands delight.

blessed shall be, the race of the upright.
are and wealthy-store:
his justice stands eke, for evermore.

gracious and pitiful and just he is.

he moderates in judgment his speeches.

the just shall be, to eternal memory.

his heart is fixed in Jehovah bold.
is stablished, he will not fear:
Until on his distressers he behold.

his justice stands even for evermore:
His horn with honor shall exalted be.

gnash with his teeth, and melt away shall he:
the wicked-mans desire, shall perish-quite.
PSALM CXIII. Sing this as the 84 or as the 60 Psalm.
O Servants of Jehovah praise:
praise ye Jehovahs name always.

from this time, to everlasting.

Jehovahs name it praised be.

above the heavens, is his glory.
is?
that does, to sit, on high-him-place.

in heavens, in the earth likewise.

from dung he does the poor up-bear.
him with the Noblemen:
with Noblemen of his people.

a joyful mother of children.
PSALM. CXIII. 1 Halehu-jah;
PRaise ye servants of Jehovah: praise ye, the name of Jehovah.



be, the name of Jehovah.

is high, above all nations: his glory, is above the heavens.

is like Jehovah our God? that lifts- himself-high, to sit.

himself-low to see: in the heavens and in the earth.



him with bounteous-Princes: with the bounteous-Princes of his people.



PSALM CXIV. Sing this as the 114. Psalm.

Jacobs house, from folk of speech-rude.

and Israel, his seignorie.

then river Jarden, back turned.

the hills, like to the flocks young-lambs.

o Jarden; that thou back turnedst?

ye hills, like to the flocks young-lambs?

before the face, of Jakobs God.

the flint; a waters fountain makes.
PSALM CXIV.








that thou turnedst-about backward?

that ye leaped like rains: ye hills, like younglings of the flock?



to a lake of waters: the flint, to a fountain of waters.

PSALM CXV.


is now, their God?

is in the heavens: whatsoever pleases him, he does.

are silver and gold: the work, of the hands of earthly-man.









is their help, and their shield.

is their help, and their shield.

is their help, and their shield.

us; he will bless, the house of Israel; he will bless, the house of Aaron.





shall you be, of Jehovah: which made, the heavens and earth.

are Jehovahs: and the earth, he has given to the sonns of Adam.

to silence.



PSALM CXV. Sing this as the 106. Psalm.

but unto thy name, be
the glory given; for thy mercy,
and for thy verity.
folk
say: where is now, their God?
is in heavens: he does,
what s'ever seems-him-good.
gods, silver and gold:
the work of men's hands be.

have eyes, and do not see.

have nose, and do not smell.

have hands, and do not feel:
They with their throat do make no sound.

that do them make: each-one that does,
his trust in them repose.

their help; and shield is he.

their help and shield is he.

their help, and shield he is.

he bounteously-will-blesse:
the family of Israel,
he bless will bounteously;
the family of Aharon,
bless will he bounteously.

the small, with greater ones.

to you, and to your sons.
shall you of Jehovah be:
which made the earth, and heaven.
are: and the earth,
he t'Adams sonns has given.

to silence, praise not JAH.

for aye; Halelu-jah.
PSALM CXVI. Sing this as the 74. Psalm.

my voice my prayers hear.

he bowed to me his ear.

th'afflicting-anguishes
of hell did also find me out:
I found grief and distress.

Oh LORD now ridd my soul.
is and just:
and our God merciful.

I was even low-supprest
and he did save me.
return unto thy rest,
Because Jehovah, bounteously-
rewarded has to thee.

thou have released-free;
mine eye from tears, my foot from fall.

in lands of them that living are,
will walk-continually.

I was in sore distress.

each man a liar is.
for his
rewards unto me all?

and on the LORDS name call.

I Will pay the LORD my vows.
is in Jehovahs eyes
death of his Saints-gracious.

thy servant sure am I;
I am the son of thy handmaid:
my bands thou did untye.

I unto thee will slay:
and call upon Jahovahs name.

in presence now of all his folk.

in midds of thee Jerusalem:
O Halelu-jah.
PSALM CXVI.








is and just: and our God is merciful.



bounteously-rewarded unto thee.







is a liar.

for all his bountifull-rewards unto me?





is the death, of his gracious-saints.

am thy servant: I am thy servant, the son of thine handmaid: thou have
unloosed, my bands.







PSALM CXVII.


endures for ever; Halelu-jah.

PSALM. CXVII. Sing this as the 108. Psalm.

al peoples.
and unto aye
Jehovah faithfulness endures;
Halelu-jah.
PSALM. CXVIII.
he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.



is for me, I will not fear, what earthly-man can do unto me.

is for me, with them that help me: and I, shall see on them that hate me.

It is better, to hope-for-safetie in Jehovah: than to trust, in earthly-man.

It is better, to hope-for-safetie in Jehovah: than to trust, in
bounteous-princes.









is my strength and song: and he has been to me, for a salvation.

is in the tents of the just: the right hand of Jehovah, does valiantnes.

is exalted: the right hand of Jehovah, does valiantnes.





that I may enter into them, may confess Jah.





which the builders refused: is become for head of the corner.

is marveilous in our eyes.

is the day, Jehovah made: let us be glad, and rejoice in it.



be he that comes, in the name of Jehovah: we bless you, out of the house of
Jehovah.

is Jehovah; and has given-light unto us: bind ye the feast- offerings with
cords: unto the horns, of the altar.

art my God and I will confess thee: my God, I will exalt thee.

he is good: for, his mercy endures for ever.

SALM. CXVIII. Sing this as the 24. Psalm.
he is good:
for his mercy for aye.
is:
let Israel now say.

that his mercy for ever.

that his mercy for ever.

with roumth, Jah answered me.

what man can do to me.
is for me, with them
that helpers of me be:
and on them that mine haters are,
I their reward shall see.
It better, in Jehovah, is
to hope-for-safetie:
than confidence for-to-repose
in any man-earthly.
Yea better in Jehovah it
to hope-for-safetie is:
than confidence-for-to-repose
in bountifull-princes.

in JAHS name cut off them.
They compast compast me: But I
in JAHS name cut off them.

as fire of thorns quenched:
because that in Jehovahs name
soon-cut them off I did.

Jehovah eke holp me.
Jah is my strength and song: and my
salvation was he.

in tents of just-man is:
the right hand of Jehovah, it
peformeth valiantnes.
The second part.

on-high-exalted is:
the right hand of Jehovah, it
performs valiantnes.

the things that Jah works.

but gave me not, to death.

of righteous-justice:
that I may enter into them,
may unto Jah confess.

the just- men shall enter.

thou gave me answer:
And thou have my salvation been.

contemptously-refuse: it is
become the corners head.
is
in our eyes marveilous.

be glad and joy let us.

LORD give prosperity.

o blessed let him be;
a blessing-we-doe-wish to you,
out of Jehovahs house.
is Jehovah, and he has
light-given unto us:
with cords, unto the altars horns
the feast-offrings bind ye.
art my God and thankfully-
will I confess to thee:
my God, and thee exalt will I.

for he is good: for, his mercy
continues for aye.
PSALM CXIX.
Aleph.
are they that are perfect in way: they that walk, in the law of Jehovah.

are they that keep his testimonies: they that seek him with all the heart.

that work not iniquity: but walk in his ways.











Beth.


sought thee: let me not wander from thy commandments.



art thou Jehovah; learn me thy statutes.









Gimel.
bounteously,
that live and so observe thy word may I.

the marveilous things that of thy law be.
am the earth upon:
hide not thou thy commandments me from.

to thy judgments in time continual.

that do from thy commandments goe-astray,

because thy testimonies kept have I.

thy servant, he does on thy statutes muse.
they have been
my solacing-delights: my counsel-men.
Daleth.

according to thy word, thou me revive.

I answer had: thy statutes teach thou me.

that in thy marvels, meditate I may.
tears for heavy-payn:
according to thy word, me rayse-agayn.

and thy law give thou to me graciously.

thy judgment I before me did propose.

let me not O Jehovah be abasht.

when thou shall largely mine heart amplify.
He
unto the end.









is given to the fear of thee.

are good.

Vau.










in the presence of Kings; and not be abashed.

Zain.


is my comfort in mine affliction: that thy saying quickens me.











Heth.












am a companion, to all that fear thee: and that observe, thy precepts.

Teth




was astray: but now, I observe thy saying.

art thou and do good; learn me thy statutes.



in thy law have delighted my self.

It is good for me that I was afflicted: that, I may learn thy statutes.

is better to me; than thousands of gold and silver.

Iod.




are justice: and with faithfulness, thou have afflicted me.



is my delights.

with falsehood they have depraved me: I, do meditate in thy precepts.

Caph.






are the days of thy servant? when will thou do judgment on my persecutors?

are not according to thy law.

are faithfulness: with falsehood do they persecute me, help thou me.



Lamed.


is to generation and generation: thou have stablished the earth and it shall
stand.

this day: for, they all, are thy servants.

had been my delights: then had I perished in mine affliction.



am thine, save thou me: for I have sought thy precepts.

is thy commandment vehemently.

Mem.
is my meditation.

by thy commandments: for, for ever it is with me.

are my meditation.









Nun.
is a lamp to my foot; and a light to my path.

it: to observe, the judgments of thy justice.



offerings of my mouth, favourably-accept thou oh Jehovah: and learn me thy
Judgments.

is in my palm continually: and thy law, I have not forgotten.



are the joy of mine heart. to the end.

Lamech.
vain-thoughts; and I love thy law.









is falsehood.

Like dross, thou makest-cease all the wicked of the earth: therefore I love
thy testimonies.

Ain.


for thy servant for good; let not the proud oppress me.





I am thy servant, give me understanding: that I may know, thy testimonies.

It is time for Jehovah to do: they have made-frustrate, thy law.



thing, I hold-righteous: I hate, every way of falsehood.

Mem.
are thy testimonies: therefore does my soul keep them.













Zade.
art thou Jehovah: and righteous, thy judgments.





is lined vehemently: and thy servant loves it.

am small and despised: thy precepts, I have not forgotten.

is a justice for ever: and thy law, is the truth.

are my delights.

is for ever: make me to understand that I may live.

Koph.






night-watches: to meditate, in thy saying.





art thou Jehovah: and all thy commandments are truth.

Resh.


according-to thy saying, quicken thou me.

is far from the wicked: because they seek not thy Statutes.

are many O Jehovah: according to thy judgments quicken thou me.

are my persecutors and my distressers: from thy testimonies, I have not
declined.

for that they observed not, thy saying.

is truth: and for ever, is every judgment of thy justice.

Schin.






times in a day, do I praise thee: for the judgments of thy justice.

is to them that love thy law: and to them is no stumbling block.





are before thee.

Tau.

me prudent make according to thy word.

deliver me, even as thy promise was.
of thee:
when as thy statutes thou have learned me.

for, justice all of thy commandments are.

because that I thy precepts chosen have.

and thy law, is my delectation.

and let thy judgments succor give to me.

for thy commandments in mind I keep.
PSALM. CXIX. This may be sung also as the 86. Psalm.
are they that perfect are in way:
^they that do walk, in law of Jehovah.

^they that for him with all the heart do seek.
that have not practiced
^iniquitie: but in his ways walked.

^to be observed with heed vehement.

for to observe thy precepts heedfully.

respect have, unto thy commandments all.

when I shall learn thy judgments of justice.

o thou forsake me not vehemently.
The second part.

according to thy word, heed for to take.

from thy commandments, wander let not me.

to-th'end-that, I might not against thee sin.
ever art:
thy statutes doctrine unto me impart.

the judgments al, that out of thy mouth are.

as above all abundance-of-riches.

thy pathwayes also I do contemplate.

I of thy words will not forgetful be.
The third part.
Bounteously-reward unto thy servant that I may live, and observe thy word.

things of thy law.

am, in the earth: hide not thou from me, thy commandments.









are my delights; the men of my counsel.

The fourth part.




works.











The fifth part.

that keep the same unto the end I may.

and with the whole heart, observe it heedfully.

for in the same I have my self pleased.

and not to covetous-gayn-thirstines.

and in thy ways alive-conserve thou me.

which is addicted to the fear of thee.

turn thou away: for good thy judgments are.

thou in thy justice do alive-me-save.
The sixth part.

thy saving-health, according to thy word.

for in thy word I trust-assuredly.

from my mouth: for, I wayt for thy judgments.

for ever and to perpetuity.

for thy precepts I studiously-seek out.

speak will I; and not blush-with-bashfulnes.

in thy commandments; which love do I.

which I do love; and muse on thy prescripts.
The seventh part.

for which to wayt-with-hope thou did me grant.
is my comfort in my misery:
that thy promise alive-preserveth me.

but from thy law declined have not I.

Jehovah; and my self I comforted.

for wicked men: that do thy law forsake.

in house of my peregrinations.

by night: thy law likewise observe I did.

have thy precepts observed-heedfully.
The eight part.

for to observe thy speeches heedfully.
mine heart I earnest-seek thy face:
according to thy word to me shew-grace.

thy testimonies I did turn unto.

to thy commandments heed for to take.

spoild me: thy law, forgotten have not I.

for the judgments of thy just-righteousnes.
am companion to all that fear thee:
and of thy precepts the observers be.

the earth is full; O learn me thy decrees.
The ninth part.

with thy servant; according to thy word.

for, I believe in thy commandments.

but now, I do observe what thou doest-say.
art thou, also good is done by thee:
thine ordinances teach thou unto me.

with all the heart thy precepts keep do I.

I, in thy law my self delightful-please.
It Is good for me, that I afflicted was;
that I may learn thy constituted-lawes.
is to me;
than thousands both of gold and silver be.
The tenth part.

instruct me, that I learn may thy commands.

for, for thy word I patient-hope have had.

and thou with faithfulness afflictest me.

even-as thy saying to thy servant was.

to me: for thy law my whole-solace is.

deprave me: on thy precepts muse do I.

they also that thy testimonies know.

in thy decrees: that I may not have shame.
The eleventh part.

thy word I hopefully-doe-wayt upon.
made by thee:
saying, when will thou comfort-give to me.

thy statutes are not from my memory.
are thy servants days? when to
my persecutors will thou judgment do?

which unto thy law not according be.
are: they do
me persecute with falsehood, help me thou.

but thy precepts, I do not them forsake.

and thy mouths testimony keep will I.
The twelfth part.

within the heavens abideth-stedfastly.

the earth thou stablishedst, and stand it shall.

because they all are servants unto thee.

then had I perished in my distress.

because by them thou have alive me kept.
own am I, vouchsafe thou me to save:
for I thy precepts carefully-sought have.

I in thy witnesses my thoughts-imploy.

vehement large is thy commandment.
The thirteenth part.
delightfull-doe I love thy Law!
it is my meditation all the day.

by thy commands: for it is aye with me.

because thy witnesses are my study.

because thy precepts I kept-heedfully.

restrained: that thy word observe I may.

for thou have given me information.

more than is honey to my mouths- repast.

therefore I hate each path of falsitie.
The fourteenth part.
is to my foot a candle-bright:
and to my path it is ashining-light.

to keep the judgments of thine equity.

quicken thou me according to thy word.

of my mouth: and thy judgments learn thou me.
is in my hand continually;
and- yet thy law forgotten have not I.
men a snare for me have laid:
but from thy precepts I have not estrai'd.

for they are of mine heart the joyfulnesse.

mine heart; for ever even unto the end.
The fifteenth part.
Vain cogitations them hate do I:
but thy law do I love- delightfully.
art my secret-place and my buklor;
thy word I hopefully have waited for.

that keep my Gods commandments I may.

and for my hope let me not be abasht.

thy statutes will delight continually.

from thy statutes for falsehood is their fraud.

like dross: therefore thy witnesses I love.

I also for thy judgments am afraid.
The sixteenth part.

O leave me not to them that me oppress.
my good:
let me not be oppressed by the proud.

and for the oracles of thy justice.

with thy servant; thy statutes learn thou me.
am thy servant, give-me-prudentnes:
that I may know thy faithfull-witnesses.
It Is for Jehovah time the work-to-take:
because thy law, of none effect they make.

above the gold, yea finest gold above.

hold-right: I hate, each way of falsity.
The seventeenth part.
are:
therefore my soul, keeps them with heedful-care.

gives-understanding to the simple-wight.

because, for thy commandments I longed.

in judgment toward those thy name that love.

and rule in me let none iniquity.

and of thy precepts I will keeper be.

and of thy statutes, teach me-the-doctrine.

because that they do not observe thy Law.
The eighteenth part.
art of just equity:
most-righteous, thy judgments also be.

commanded: also faith with veh'mentnes.

my adversarie-foes thy words forgot.
is refined veh'mently:
thy servant eke loves it delightfully.
am and basely-set-at naught:
thy precepts, are not past-out-of-my thought.
is eternally:
thy law is also faithfull-verity.

but thy command'ments, are my solaces.
is for aie:
make me to understand, that live I may.
The ninteenth part.
mine heart do cry:
answer thou me, thy statutes keep will I.

and I thy testimonies will observe.

I for thy word have waited-hopefully.
nightly watches did mine eyes:
in thine edict, my self to-exercise.

according to thy judgment quicken me.

far-off they are estranged from thy law,
art approached-nie:
and thy commandments all are verity.

that them for ever founded-sure have thou.
The twentieth part.

because that I have not forgot thy law.

according-to thy promise, quicken me.
is:
because they have not sought for thy decrees.

according to thy judgments quicken me.

I have not swarved, from thy witnesses.

for that thy saying they observed not.

according to thy mercy quicken me.
is faithfulness:
and each of thy just judgments, ever is.
The one and twentieth part:

but of thy word, in aw-stand does my heart.

as one that finds even an ample prey.

but I do love thy law delightfully.

for judgments of thy righteous-equity.
there is much peace:
and to them no offensive-scandall is.

Jehovah: and have thy command'ments done.

and I do love them very veh'mently.

for, every of my ways before thee is.
Two and twentieth part.






are justice.



is my delights.

PSALM CXX. Sing this as the 86. Psalm.

I cried out, and he did answer me.

from lying lips; from tongue of guilefulnesse.

advantage shall, the tongue of guilefulnesse?

with burning-coals of the Juniper-tree.

with tents of Kedar, have my dewlling place.


PSALM. CXX. 1 A song, of degrees;
Unto Jehovah, in my distressednesse: I cried, and he answered me.







with Meshek: dwell, with the tents of Kedar.

am for peace, and when I speak; they are, for war.

PSALM CXXI. Sing this as the 68. Psalm.

from whence shall come mine aid.
comes from with the LORD:
which heavens and earth has made.

nor slumber, that thee keeps.

He slumbreth not, nor sleeps.
is: the LORD
thy shade, at thy hand right.

neither the Moon by night.

thy soul he keeps always.

keeps: henceforth and for aye.
PSALM CXXI. 1 A song of degrees;
I Lift up mine eyes, unto the mountains; from whence shall come mine help.

comes, from with Jehovah: which made, heavens and earth.





is thy keeper: Jehovah thy shadow, upon thy right hand.







PSALM CXXII. 1 A song of degrees, of David;
I Rejoiced in them that said unto me; we will go into the house of Jehovah.





to the testimony of Israel: to confess, unto the name of Jehovah.







be in thee.



PSALM CXXII. Sing this as the 108 Psalm.

we enter will into the house of Jehovah.

abiding, O Jerusalem
thy gates within.
is as a city, edified;
that is within it self jointly-tyed.

the Tribes of Jah, the witness of
Israel unto:
That to Jehovahs name, they may confess.
there judgment thrones are set: the thrones of David's house.

Jerusalems peace: safety-have
they that love thee.


peace in thee be.

seek good for thee.
PSALM. CXXIII. 1 A Song of degrees;
Unto thee lift I up mine eyes; O thou that first in the heavens.

are unto the hand of their Masters; as the eyes of a maiden, unto the hand of
her Mistress: so our eyes, unto Jehovah our God; until he be gracious unto us,



with the scorning of those that are-at ease; the contempt, of the proud.

PSLM CXXIII. Sing this as the 15. Psalm.

I lift mine eyes to thee.

hand of their masters be;
as maids eyes to her mistress hand:
so are out eyes, unto
Jehovah our God; until he
do grace one us bestow.

unto us gracious be:
because even filled with contempt
exceedingly are we.

with the deriding-flout
of those that are at quiet-ease:
with contempt of the proud.
PSALM. CXXIV. Sing this as the 8. Psalm.

let Israel now say.
the Lord had been, when men against us rose.

when kindled was their anger against us.

over our soul, then passed had the stream.


us for a prey, unto the teeth of them.

from out of the intangling-fowlers snare.

shall be:
that of the heavens and earth is the maker.
PSALM. CXXIV. 1 A song of degrees; of David:
EXcept Jehovah, that he had been for us; now let Israel say.









be Jehovah: who has not given us for a prey, unto their teeth.



is in the name of Jehovah; the maker, of heavens and earth.

PSALM CXXV. Sing this as the 108. Psalm.
shall as mount Sion be
which is not moved; but remains perpetually.

mounts compass it: so his folk JAH
compasses them;
From this time and for aye.
the rod of wickedness, upon the just- men's lot:
lest that the just
unto any iniquity
their hands out thrust.

to their crooked- ways, they that aside depart,
the Lord them will
lead with workers of wickedness:
peace, on Israel.
PSALM CXXV. 1 A Song of degrees:
THey that trust in Jehovah; shall be as mount Sion which is not moved, but
remains for ever

are round about: and Jehovah is round about his people, from this time, and
for ever.





is their crookednesses, Jehovah will lead them with the workers of
painfull-iniquity: peace shall be upon Israel.

PSAM CXXVI. 1 A song of degrees:
When Jehovah returned the captivity of Sion: we were like them that dream.









joyfull-showting, bearing his sheaves.

PSALM CXXVI. Sing this as the 50. Psalm.

we were like the^ that dream.
our mouth with laughter and our tongue with song:
among the heathens then this speech did pass;
The LORD with these- men has done very great things.

we joyful are.
in South, so turn thou our captivity.

heavily,
bearing the sowing seed: with joyful singing
he coming comes, his sheaves upon him bringing.
PSALM. CXXVII. 1 A song of degrees, for Solomon:
IF Jehovah build not the houses in vain do the builders thereof labor
therein: if Jehovah keep not the city, in vain does the keeper wake.

It is vain for you to rise-up early, to sit up late; to eat the bread of
sorrows; so he will give his beloved sleep.

are an heritage of Jehovah: the fruit of the womb, a wage.

man: so are sonns of the youth.

is the man, that has filled his quiver with them: they shall not be abashed;
when they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.

SALM. CXXVII. Sing this as the 68. Psalm.

her builders toil in vain;
Unless the LORD the city keep,
the keeper wakes in vain.

to sit up late to feed
on bread of sorrows: so will he
give sleep to his loved.
are the LORDS heritance;
fruit of the womb his wage.

are sonns of youthfull-age.
is the man, that has
his quiver filled with those.
They shall not blush, when in the gate
they spoke shall with the foes.
PSALM. CXXVIII. Sing this as the 108. Psalm.

that walks, in his ways.
when thou shall eat:
A happy thou, and good unto
thee be shall it.

thy children, shall be like the plants of the Olive Tree,
about thy board.

that fears the LORD.

good of Jerusalem, all days thy life through.

thy childrens children: peace, that shall
on Israel be.
PSALM. CXXVIII. 1 A song of degrees:
O Happy is every one the fears Jehovah: that walks, in his ways.

shall it be unto thee.

shall be as a fruitful vine, by the sides of thine house: thy sons, as
Olive plants round-about thy table.







PSAM CXXIX. Sing this as the 77. Psalm.

Say now may Israel.
they often afflicted me: yet, they to strong
were not for me.
upon my back: they made their furrow long.

the wickeds cord.
all that hate Sion: and be back turned.

which ere one pulls it off, is withered.

nor he his arms that bindeth-sheaves.
that are the passengers-by, do not say:
the blessing of Jehovah be on you;
we bless you, in the name of Jehovah.
PSALM CXXIX. 1 A song, of degrees:
OFten have they distressed me from my youth: may Israel now say.









one pulls it off, is withered.



PSALM. CXXX. 1 A song of degrees:
OUt of the deeps, do I call unto thee Jehovah.





is forgivnes: that thou may be feared.



more than watchmen for the morning, watchmen for the morning:

there is mercy; and with him is much redemption.

PSALM CXXX. Sing this as the 13. Psalm.


unto voice of my suits-that-doe-for-grace-request.

O Lord, who shall subsist?
is: that thou may feared be.

I also for his word, have hopefully-forborn.
waits for the Lord: more-than watchmen for morn.
that watchmen for the morn.

for with Jehovah there is bountifull-mercie;
and with him plentiful redemption there is.

perverse-iniquities.
PSALM. CXXXI. 1 A song of degrees, of David:
Jehovah, mine heart is not haughty, neither are mine eyes lofty: neither walk
I in great- matters, and too marveilous for me.

child, with his mother, as a weaned- child with me is my soul.



PSALM CXXXI. Sing this as the 15. Psalm.

mine eyes not lofty be:
not walk I in great- matters, and
too marveilous for me.

my soul: as weaned-child,
with his mother; with me my soul
is as a weaned-child.

Jehovah hopefully:
from this time-present and henceforth
unto eternity.
PSALM. CXXXII. 1 A song, of degrees:
Jehovah, remember unto David: all his affliction.







places, for the Mighty-one of Iaakob.

was in Aephrathath: we found it in the fields of the wood.

places: we will bow-down our selves at the footstool of his feet.



ioyfully-showt.







it, for his seat.

is my rest even to perpetuity: here will I sit, for I have desired it.



Joyfully.

PSALM CXXXII. Sing this as the 75. Psalm.

all his carefull-affliction.

Uowd unto Ja'kobs Mighty-one.

or clime, on pallet of my beds.

or slumber unto mine eye lids.

dwellings, for Jakobs mighty- God.
was:
we found it, in the fields of wood.

to his feets stool, bow-down will we.

thou, and th'Ark of thy potencie.

and thy Saints joyfully-shout they.

thine Ointeds face, turn not away.

the truth; from it turn will not he:
upon thy throne I will up-rear
the fruit that of thy womb shall be.
it;
and witness, that them teach shall I:
also their sonns, even they shall sit;
upon thy throne perpetually.

has it desired, for his seat.
is for ever my repose:
I Will dwell here, for I covet it.

her poor, with bread I Will satisfy.

her Saints, shall shout most-joyfully.

a Lamp, for mine Anointed, trimm.

but flourish shall his crown, on him.
PSALM CXXXIII. Sing this as the 34. Psalm.
it is and sweet:
for brethren even to dwell at one!
It Is like the good oil on the head;
which did goe-down the beard upon,
the beard of A'ron: which down went
on collar of his vestiment.
It Is like the dew of mount Hermon;
even like the dew that does descend,
upon the mountains of Sion:
because Jehovah does command
that there the blessing still shall be;
even life, unto eternity.
PSALM CXXXIII. 1 A song of degrees, of David:
BEhold how good and how pleasant it is: for brethren to dwell even together!

head; which went-down, upon the beard, the beard of Aaron: which went-down,
upon the collar of his garments.



PSALM CXXXIV. 1 A song, of degres:
BEhold, bless ye Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah: that stand in the house
of Jehovah, in the nights.

in the sanctuary: and bless, Jehovah.



PSALM. CXXXIV. Sing this as the 21. Psalm.

all ye the LORDS servants:
that in the LORDS house stand, by nights.

within the holy-place:
and bless the LORD do ye.

bless, out of Sion, thee.
PSALM. CXXXV. 1 Halelu-jah;
PRaise ye the name of Jehovah: praise him, O ye servants of Jehovah.



is good: sing-psalm to his name, for it is pleasant.

himself Iaakob: Israel, for his peculiar-treasure.

is great: and our God, is above all gods.













for a possession: a possession, to Israel his people.

is for ever: Jehovah, thy memory is to generation and generation.



are silver and gold: the work, of the hands of earthly-man.











be Jehovah, out of Sion: which dwells in Jerusalem; Halelujah.

PSALM CXXXV. Sing this as the 108. Psalm.

O praise him ye that of Jehovah servants be.

stand, of Jehovah; in the courts,
of our Gods house.
he good is:
sing-psalm unto his name, because it pleasant is.

Ja'kob to him: Israel, his tresure
precious.
is: also
our Lord above all gods.
what him does please:
in heavens and earth: in seas and in
all deep-places.

makes lightnings with the rain: out of his treasury,
the wind he brings.

in their firstlings.
strange, Aegipt in mids of thee:
on Phar'oh and on al his servants, send did he.

great nations; and killed Kings
that were mighty.

and Ca'nans kingdoms all.
their land he gave:
to his folk Israel, in possession
to have.
is unto eternity:
Jehovah, unto age and age, thy memory.

judge; and repent, for his servants,
Jehovah will.

they silver are and gold: men's handy actions.

and do not speak: eyes have they, and
do not perceive.



bless ye the LORD: bless ye the LORD,
O A'rons house.

ye that the LORD do fear.
be blessed- always:
which dwells in Jerusalem;
Hallelu-jah.
PSALM CXXXVI.

^for he is good: for, his mercy
^ continues for ever.

^because, his bountifull-mercie
^ continues for ever.

^because, his mercifull-kindnes
^ continues for ever.

^things-wondrous great: for, his mercy
^ continues for ever.

did make the heavens: for his mercy
continues for ever.

than waters are: for his mercy
continues for ever.
be:
because his bountiful-mercie
continues for ever.

by day: for his benigne-mercie
continues for ever.

by night: for his benigne-mercie
continues for ever.

smote Egypt: for his bounteous grace
continues for ever.

from mids of them: for, his mercy
continues for ever.

because his bountiful-mercie
continues for ever.

in parts: because, his kind-mercie
continues for ever.

amids it: for, his bounteous-grace
continues for ever.

in the red Sea: for his mercy
continues for ever.

did lead his folk: for, his kindness
continues for ever.

did smite: for, his benigne-mercie
continues for ever.

for his mercie-beneficent
continues of ever.

for his benign-affection
continues for ever.
land the King:
because his bounteousnes-benigne
continues for ever.

their land: for his benign-mercie
continues for ever.

possession: for his mercy
continues for ever.

because his mercie-gracious
continues for ever.

because his merciful kindness
continues for ever.

because his merciful-kindnes
continues for ever.

because, his bountifull-mercie
continues for ever.
PSALM CXXXVI.
he is good: for, his mercy endures for ever.

gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

endures for ever.

things himself alone: for, his mercy endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

endures for ever.

PSALM CXXXVII. Sing this as the 32. Psalm.

yea wept: when we did mind, Sion.
that amidds it be:
our harps, we hanged, them upon.

that had us captive led-along;
and mirth, they that us heaps did lay:
Sing unto us some Sions song.

within a forreyn- peoples land?

forget: forget let my right hand.

If I do not in mind thee bear:
if I Jerusalem do not,
above my chiefest joy, prefer.

day of Jerusalem: who said,
raze raze, to her-foundations.

o blessed he that thy reward
pays thee, which thou rewardedst us.

against the Rock thy babes does crush.
PSALM CXXXVII.














shall he be that repayeth unto thee thy reward, which thou have rewarded unto
us.

shall he be, that takes and dasheth-in-peeces thy babes, against the Rock.

PSALM. CXXXVIII. 1 A psalm, of David;
I Will confess the with all my heart; before the gods, will I sing-psalm unto
thee.



that I cried, then thou answeredst me: thou have made me courageous, in my
soul with strength.



is, the glory of Jehovah.

is high, yet he sees the lowly: and the haughty, he knows a far off.

is for ever; slack no^ the works of thine hands.

PSALM CXXXVIII. Sing this as the 75 Psalm.

before the gods, to thee sing-psalme.

I Will bow-down; and confess thy name,
for thy mercy and veritee:
for thou, thy word have magnified
'bove all thy name.
then, in the day wherein I cried.
With strength in my soul, thou have me
courageous made.
all kings of the earth confess shall thee:
words of thy mouth, when hear shall they,

for great Jehovahs glorrie is.
being,
yet him that lowly is he sees;
And he the proud, from far does know

thou do revive me: send do thou
thy hand, against my foes wrathfulnes;
and thy right hand does me deliver.

Jehovah, thy mercy for ever:
let not thy hand-workes flackned be.
PSALM CXXXIX. Sing this as the 119. Psalm.


thou do discreetly-vnderstand from far,
my cogitation-familiar.

and al my ways do customably-scann.

lo thou Jehovah know it every whit.

upon me also do thy hand impose.
This knowledge is too marveilous for me:
it is high, to reach I shall not able be.

and whither, shall I flee thy presence fro?
art there.
or make my bed in bell, lo thou art there.
if I take:
in the utmost of the sea, my dwelling make.

and thy right hand, will take-fast-hold on me.
if, but darkness shall me shroud, I say:
then is the night, about me light som-day.

gives-light as day: alike are dark and light.

within thy mothers womb.
for fearfully, made wondrously I am:
wondrous thy works; my soul well knows the same.
The second part.

when as I made was in a secret-place;
when I have ounningly-embroidred been,
the nether-places of the earth within.
lump, thine eyes did look;
and al of them were written in thy book:
even in the days that they receiv'd-their-fram,
and when there was not any of the same.

thy thoughts: how are their sums increast abroad?

I do awake, and still I am with thee.

and men of bloods, from me depart-away.

lift-up do unto vanity thy foes.

and grieve for them that thy resisters be?

they are unto me, as my very-foes.

prove me, and do my cogitations know.
be in me:
and lead me, in way of eternity.
PSALM CXXXIX. 1 To the master of the music, David's Psalm:
Jehovah thou have serched me, and known.

familiar-thought, a far off.



is not yet in my tongue: lo Jehovah, thou know it all.



attain to it.



art there: and if I make-my-bed in hell, lo thou art there.

part of the sea.



if I say, but surely the darkness shall shroud me: then the night, is a light
about me.

is the darkness, so is the light.



are thy works; and my soul, knows it vehemently.

places of the earth.

substance, thine eyes did see; and in thy book, all of them were written: in
the days they were formed, and when not one of them was. am with thee.





not I grieved, for those that rise up against thee?



be in me: and lead me, in the way of eternity.

PSALM CXL. 1 To the master of the music, a Psalm of David:


things in heart: every day, they gather wars.

is under their lips, Selah.





art my God: hear O Jehovah, the voice of my supplications-for-grace.



least they exalt themselves, Selah.





ill-tongued man, shall not be established in the earth: a man of
violent-wrong, evil shall hunt him to a suddain-overthrow.



PSALM CXL. Sing this as the 111. or as the 69. Psalm.

from than of violence, preserve thou me.
things in heart do think-upon:
daily, they unto wars assembled be.

Asaps poison, is under their lips, Selah.
man:
from man of violence, preserve thou me:
which for to thrust my feet, do think-upon.

and cords; a net they fast-beside the way
have spread; they grins have set for me, Selah.

LORD hear the voice wherewith I grace request.

in day of arms, my head thou coveredst.
least they
be lofty, further not his craft, Selah.

the mischief of their lips them cover shall.

into the fire them he will make to fall;
into deep pits, that they rise not again.
ill-tongu'd man, shall not in earth remain:
A man of wrongfull-violence, evil
shall hunt him to his suddain-misery.

the judgment do; the doom of the needy.

the righteous shall dwell, before thy face.
PSALM. CXLI. Sing this as the 39. Psalm.

make have thou unto me:
O give thou care unto my voice,
when I call unto thee.

before thee incense-wise:
and the uplifting of my hands,
as th'ev'ning sacrifice.

door of my lips, observe.
that evil is,
make not my heart to swerve:
pretenses to pretend, in sin;
with men that do practice
iniquity; let also me
not eat of their dainties.
man smite me, it shall be
a mercifull-kindnes,
and let him reprehend me; but
their oil of preciousnesse,
let it not be unto my head
breaking-distraction:
for yet even in their evils, is
my supplication.

have thrown been underfeet:
my sayings also they shall hear,
for they are pleasing-sweet.
when one cuts and cleaves on earth:
our bones dispersed be,
at mouth of hell. are
Iehovih Lord to thee:
O power not out my soul, for I
for safety-hope in thee.

which they have laid for me:
and grins, of them that work unright.

into his net: whiles overpasse
I altogether shall.
PSALM CXLI. 1 A Psalm, of David:
Jehovah I call-upon thee, make-hast unto me; give-ear to my voice, when I call
unto thee.

as incense before thee; the lifting-up of my palms, as the evening oblation.





man smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me; the head oil, let
it not break mine head: for yet my prayer also, in their evils.



when one cuteth and cleaves on the earth; our bones are scattered, at the
mouth of hell.

are unto thee, Iehovih Lord: in thee I hope-for-safety; power not out my soul.

which have laid for me: and the grins, of them that work painfull-iniquity.



PSALM. CXLII. 1 An instructing- psalm of David: a prayer when he was in the
cave.
WIth my voice, unto Jehovah did I cry: with my voice, unto Jehovah did I
supplicate-for-grace.





I did look on the right hand and see; and no man acknowledged me: refuge is
perished from me; no-man seeks for my soul.

art my hope-for-safety; my portion, in the land of the living.



bounteously-reward unto me.

PSALM CXLII. Sing the as the 77. Psalm.

did with my voice, make-supplication
unto the LORD,
I powered out before him: show did I
before him, my troublous-adversity.

then knew thou my path: they in the way
that I did walk, a snare for me did lay.

and there was stone that would acknowledge me:
Refuge is perished from me: not any
seeks for my soul. art
o LORD, said I, my safest-hope; my part
in land of living.
attend, for I am low-brought veh'mently:
Free me from my pursuers; for they be
stronger than I.
from prison-close, thy name for to confess:
the just- men shall about-inviron me;
for, to me thou reward wilt bounteously.
PSALM. CXLIII. 1 A Psalm, of David:
Jehovah hear my prayer; give-ear to my supplications-for-grace; in thy
faithfulness answer me, in thy justice.



for ever.





I spread-out my hands unto thee: my soul, as a weary land, thirsts for
thee, Selah.







art my God: thy good spirit; shall lead me, in the land of righteousness.



am thy servant.

PSALM CXLIII. Sing this as the 7. Psalm.

my suits-fo^-graciousnesse:
me answer in thy faithful-truth,
in thy just-rigteousnesse.

thou, with thy servitour:
for none that lives, justifide
shall be thy face before.

smites-down my life on clay:
he makes me sit in places dark,
even as the dead for aie.

in me perplexedly:
in mids of me, my heart it is
amazed-wondrously.

I meditation-use
on al thy work: on th'action
of thy hands, do I muse.

my soul, does thirst for thee,
even as the weary land, Selah.

My spirit-fayleth: keep not thou
thy face from me secret;
for then shall I be like to those
that do goe-down the pit.

for in thee do I trust:
O cause me to have knowledge of,
the way that walk I must;
For unto thee, I lift my soul.

free from mine enemies; I flie-for-covert
unto thee.

my God art: thy good Spirit,
it shall conduct me, in the land
of equitie-upright.

even for thine own names sake:
thou in thy justice forth my soul
out of distress wilt take.

my foes: and al of them
destroy that do afflict my soul;
for, I thy servant am.
PSALM CLXIV. Sing this as the 1. Psalm.

which learns my hands the fight:
my fingers, war.
and my strong-place-of-flight;
my tower and my deliverer
for me: my shield, and he
in whom I hope; that does subject
my people under me.

of him do knowledge-take:
the son of wretched-man, that thou
of him account dost-make?

unto light-vanitie:
his days, they as a shadow are
that passing-hence-doth-flie.

the mountayns touch, and they
shall smoke.
and scatter them away:
thine arrows send, and them disturb.

release me and deliver me
out of waters many:
Out of the hand of strangers sonns.

and their right hand, a right hand is
of lying-fallacie.

to thee: with psalterie
and with tenstringed-instrument,
to thee sing-psalm will I.

that does release David
his servant from the evil sword.

out of the hand of stangers sonns:
whose mouth speaks vanity;
and their right hand a right hand is
of lying fallacy.

their youth great-waxen are:
our daughters, as the corner-stones,
polisht like Pallace-faire.

of every sort of meats:
our cattle bringing thousands forth,
ten-thousands, in our streets.

no breaking-in and none
out-going; and within our streets,
no exclamation.
shall the people be,
whose state is such as this!
O blessed shall the people be,
whose God Jehovah is.
PSALM CXLIV. 1 A psalm of David;
BLessed be Jehovah, my Rock; which learneth my hands to to the battle: my
fingers, to the war.





his-daies, are as a shadow that passeth-away.





place: release me and deliver me, from the many waters; from the hand of the
sonns of the stranger.

is a right hand of falsehood.

and ten-stringed- instrument, I will sing-psalmes to thee.



is a right hand of falsehood.

stones; cut after the similitude of a palace.





is the people, whose state is such: O blessed is the people, whose God is
Jehovah.

PSAM CXLV. Sing this as the 60. Psalm.

and bless thy name, everlasting
and unto perpetuity.

and praise thy name, t'eternal-aye
and unto perpetuity.
is
vehemently: and his greatness
of it no searching-out can be.

each to other, thine actions:
and they shall show thy worlks-mightie.

of glory of thy majesty:
and thy words marveilous that are.

of thine acts-fearfull: thy greatness,
I also will the same declare.

the memory they shall express:
thy justice also shout they shall.

long suffering, and great in mercy.
is Jehovah unto all:
And his commiserations
are over all his actions

and thy saints-gracious bless thee.

speak also of thy powerfulnes.

his powerfull-operations:
his kingdoms, comely gloriousnes.

thy kingdom is: thy soveraigntie
is also throughout all ages.

and rightneth-up, the crooked all.

their meat in due time thou give.

desire of every living thing.

and is in all his works bounteous.

all that in truth him call unto.

and hear their outcry, and save them.

his lovers: but the wicked, he
abolish will them all away.

let all flesh bless his holy name
also, for ever and for aye.
PSALM. CLXV. 1 An hymn, of David;
I Will extol thee, my God O King: and bless thy name, for ever and aye.



is Jehovah and praised vehemently: and of his greatness, there is no search.





acts they shall speak of: and thy greatness, it will I declare.



is Jehovah: long suffering, and great in mercy.

is Jehovah unto all: and his tender-mercies, are over all his works.







is a kingdom of all eternities: and thy dominion, in every generation and
generation.







is Jehovah, in all his ways: and merciful, in all his works.

is Jehovah to all that call upon him: to all that call upon him in truth.







PSALM. CXLVI. 1 Halelu-jah;
MY soul, praise thou Jehovah.

am.





is he, in whose help, the God of Jaakob is: whose hope, is in Jehovah his God.

is: which keeps truth for ever.









PSALM CXLVI. Sing this as the 97. Psalm.

Jehovah celebrate.
will celebrate Jehovah my life the row,
I while I am, Psalm to my God will sing.

in man's son, with whom no salvation is.

in that day, perish do his purposes.

whose hope does in Jehovah his God stay.
In him which heavens and earth, and sea has made,
and all in them: which keeps truth for aye.

he gives bread to them that hungry be:
them that are bound Jehovah does unloose.

Jehovah rightneth them that crooked are:
Jehovah loves them that righteous be.

th'orphan and widow upright-set does he:
But he the wickeds way does overthrow.

thy God o Sion, generation the row
and generation; Halelu-jah.
PSALM CXLVII. Sing this as the 111. or as the 45. Psalm.
it is good to sing:
for it is pleasant; praise becommeth-well.

gathreth in one, th outcasts of Israel.

also their painfull-griefs, bind-up does he.
duly-counts:
he by their names, does call them every-one.
is our Lord, and he in might surmounts:
his understanding, numbered is of none.

he does the wicked to the earth debase.

even with the harp unto our God psalms-sing.

prepares rain: makes mountains grass to spring.
that does give unto the beast his food:
ev^n (when they cry,) unto the Ravens brood.

in legs of man no pleasure-taketh he.

in them that for his mercy hopers be.

o Sion, do thy God with-praise-applaud.

in mids of thee thy children bless does he.
Within thy border peace he does procure:
with fat of wheat, he satisfies thee.

his word it very swiftly runneth-on.

like ashes he does scatter-manifold.

who is he that can stand before his cold?

his wind he causes, and the waters flow.

has manifested: unto Israel,
his constitutions and his judgments.

and- therefore known these judgments have not they:
O glorifie-with-praise th'eternal-Iah.
PSALM CXLVII.
it is good, to sing-psalms to our God: for it is pleasant; praise is comely.





by names.

is our Lord, and much in able-might: of his understanding, there is no number.







That gives to the beast his food: to the young ravens, which cry.









in thy border peace: he satisfies thee, with the fat of wheat.

upon earth: his word runs very swiftly.



can stand, before his cold?





PSALM CLVIII. Halelu-jah;






be about the heavens.

















even his alone: his glorious-majestie, is above earth and heavens.



PSALM CLXVIII. Sing this as the 104. Psalm.
PRaise Jah; Jah praise do ye
from heavens: him praise, in places-high.

all his hosts praise-him-gloriously.

all Stars of light, praise him do ye.

and waters that above heavens be.

for he bade, and create where they.

gave statutes, which pass not away.

ye Dragons and all places-deep.
Ye Fire and Hayl, Snow Vapor, and
Wind stormy, that his word does- ^eep.
O ye the mountains and Hills all:
Trees fruitful and all Cedars- high:
O ye wild beasts and cattle all:
ye creeping things, and fowls that fly.
Ye Kings of the earth, and all Peoples;
Princes, and Judges of the earth all.
Ye Yong-men also and Damsels:
ye old-men with the children-small.

for his name even alonely his,
is high-advanst: his glorious-fame,
above the earth and heavens is.

exalted has; the praise which they
all his saints have, sonns of Israel,
a people near him; Praise ye Jah.
PSALM. CXLIX. Sing this as the 34. Psalm.

his praise, in Church of holy-ones

glad in their King be Sions sons.

with harp and timbrel, t'him sing-psalm.

the meek with health, will beautify.

shall on their beds shout-joyfully.

a sword two edged, in their hand.

reproofs, among the nations.

their Nobles eke, in iron bonds.

this honor all his saints unto.
HALELU-JAH.
PSALM CXLIX. 1 Halelu-jah;
SIng ye to Jehovah a new song: his praise, in the Church of gracious-saints.







joyfully, upon their beds.





is to al his gracious-sants; Halelu-jah.

PSALM CL. Sing this as the 97. Psalm.

Praise him, in firmament of his strongnes.

praise him, in multitude of his greatness.

praise him, with Harp and the psalterion.

praise him, with Uirginals and Organon.

praise him, with Cymbals that loud-sounding-play.

O glorifie-with-praise th'eternal-Jah.
PSALM CL. 1 Halalu-jah;
PRaise ye God in his sanctity praise him, in the firmament of his strength.











The end of the Book of Psalms.
Of David's Life and Acts.
DAvid the son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, of the lineage of Abraham, in
the 1. Chron. 2. Mat. 1.1.17.
fourteenth generation, was borne in Bethlehem (a town in the tribe of Judah,
in the land of Canaan,) about 2917. years after the creation of the world; in
the days when Samuel the Prophet, was Judge of Israel. He was the 1 Chronicles.
2.15.
seventh and youngest of all Jesses sons, of least esteem among them, and set
to keep his fathers 1. Sam. 16.11.
sheep. In the three and twentieth year of his life, he was by Samuel the
Prophet, privately in Bethlehem, anointed 1. Sam. 16.13
King over Israel, in the midst of his brethren; and the spirit of the Lord
came upon him, from that day forward. He was verse. 12.
ruddie, of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to: a verse. 18.
cunning plaier on the Harp; a mighty valiant man of war, and prudent in
speech, and a cornely person, and the Lord was with him. Who also gave him
these testimonies and promises; Act. 13.22.
I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall
fulfill all my will. 1. Psalm. 89.19.
I have laid help, on one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the
people: with whom verse. 21.
my hand shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him; I will verse.
23. etc.
beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. In my name
shall his horn be exalted; I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand
in the rivers; I will make him my first born, higher then the Kings of the
earth. My mercy will I keep for him for ever, and my covenant shall stand fast
with him; his seed will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days
of heaven, etc.

After David's anointing in Bethlehem, he went again and feed his 1. Sam. 16.19
fathers sheep: but the spirit of God wrought mightily in him. He killed 1.
Sam. 17.
Goliath, the Philistian giant, from whose face verse. 24.
all the men of Israel fled away for fear: David overcame him (in the name of
the Lord of hosts) with a sling and with a stone. He was a cunning musician;
and 1. Sam. 16.23.
playing on his harp with his hand, he refreshed K. Saul, who was vexed with an
evil spirit from the Lord. He was employed in wars against the Philistians:
and 1. Sam. 18.5.
whithersoever Saul sent him, he behaved himself wisely and prospered, and was
accepted in the eyes of all the people; so that the women of Israel sang of
him, verse. 7.
Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. But that praise,
verse. 8.9.
procured him envy from Saul, ever after, and he sought to slay him, but verse.
16.
all Israel loved him. And though he after took to wife, Michal, Saul's
daughter; yet 1. Sam. 19. etc.
Saul continued his hatred against his son in law; and first secretly, then
openly, sought his life: so that David was feign to flee and hide himself, in
the land of Israel, and in strange countries, to the Ps. 120.
great affliction of his soul.

When Saul was dead, and David 1. Sam. 26.19.
thirty years of age; the men of Judah 2. Sam. 5.4.
anointed him King the second time, in Hebron, over the house of Judah.
Ishbosheth Saul's son, resisted him: but David waxed stronger and stronger.
Then 2. Sam. 2.4.
all Israel anointed him King over them; and he reigned in Jerusalem. So the
time of all his reign, was 1. Chron. 11.1.3.
forty years. In Hebron he reigned over Judah, seven years and six months:
and in Jerusalem he reigned 33 years, over all Israel and Judah. During which
space, the Lord still exercised him with many 2. Sam. 5.4.5.
wars abroad, and troubles at home; as by the defiling of his daughter 1.
Chron. 14. and 18. and 19.
Thamar, the killing of his son Amnon, the treason and death of his son
Absalon; the rebellion of Sheba; and other like sorrows which God, 2. Sam. 13.^
etc.
for his sins, chastised him with; so many and so great, that the 2. Sam.
12.10.
pangs of death compassed 2. Sam. 22.5.6.
him about, the floods of Belial, (the ungodly men) made him afraid: the cords
of hell compassed him, the snares of death prevented him; his Psalm. 55.4.5.
heart was sore pained within him, and the terrors of death fell upon him;
fearfulnes and trembling came upon him, and horror overwhelmed him. His Psalm.
31.11.
life was spent with grief, his years with sighing, his strength failed, and
his bones were consumed.

But always in his fears, Psalm. 56.3 4.
he trusted in God, and was not afraid what flesh could do unto him; in his
distress 2. Sam. 22.7.
he called upon the Lord, and cried to his God: who heard his voice out of his
Temple, and drew him out of verse. 17.18. etc.
many waters, from his strong enemy, and from them that hated him: and brought
him forth into a large place, and delivered him, because he delighted in him.
He gave him the verse. 36. etc.
shield of his salvation, and girded him with strength to battle; and gave him
the necks of his enemies, that he destroyed those that hated him. Therefore he
gave thanks unto the Lord verse. 50.
among the nations, and sang praises unto his name; Psalm. 57.8.
awaking up his glory, awaking up his Psalterie and Harp, awaking himself
early, to praise the Lord among the peoples, and to sing unto him among the
nations: so he sang of his Psalm. 59.16.
power, he sang loud of his mercy, in the morning; that God had been his
defense and refuge, in the day of his distress.

And thereof, this book of Psalms, (most whereof David made,) is a glorious
testimony: wherein by manifold psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, he set
forth the praises of God, his own faith in his word, exercise and delight in
his Law: with narrations of Gods former and present mercies, and prophesies of
future graces, to be fulfilled in Christ, whom he being a Prophet, Act. 2.30.
knew that he should be the fruit of his loins concerning the flesh, and
should sit upon his throne: whose incarnation, afflictions, death,
resurrection, ascension, and eternal glorious kingdom and priesthood, he sang
by the spirit; with such heavenly melody, as may not only delight, but draw
into admiration every understanding heart, and comfort the afflicted soul,
with such consolation as David himself was comforted of the Lord.

And these his Psalms, have ever since, by the Church of Israel, by Mat.
21.16.42.
Christ and his Apostles, and by the Saints in all ages, been received and
honored as the oracles of God; cited for confirmation of true religion, and
sung in the public assemblies, as in Gods Tabernacle and Temple, where they
sang praise unto the Lord, with the Romans 4.6. and 11.9.
words of David, and with the instruments which 2. Chron. 29.30.
he had made, over their 2. Chron. 7.6.
burnt-offrings and sacrifices.

Now because many things, 2. Chr. 29.25.27.28.
both for phrase and matter, are difficult to such as are not acquainted with
David's language; I have (out of my slender store) annexed a few brief notes,
comparing the Scriptures, and conferring the best Expositors, especially the
ancient Greek and Chaldee versions: whereby if any help of understanding may
arise; the praise be to God, the comfort to his people.

FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE BOOK OF PSALMS.
Annotations, Psalm I.
THe book of Psalms:] so our Lord himself intitleth it, Luke 20.42. but the
Hebrew title Tehililum, signifies Hymns or Praises. According to the Greek,
it is called the Psalter.

V. 1. O blessed] or O happy, or Welfares the man. A joyful acclamation for
the man's welfare and felicities, as going-right-forward, and so having good
success. Contrary hereunto is Woe, or Alas: Eccs. 10.16.17. Luke 6 20.24. This
word Ashrei in the Hebrew, is always applied to men; and so differs from an
other word, Baruc, blessed, which is ascribed both to God and men; Psalm.
115.15.18. the contrary whereto is, cursed, Psalm. 37.22. does not walk] or,
has not walked. But the time past, and time to come, are in the Hebrew often
used for to express continued actions: Walking signifies one conversation,
both touching faith and works, Psalm. 119.1. Genesis 5.24. compared with Heb.
11.5.6. 2 Petr. 2.10. Iud. 11. To walk in the counsel of any, is either to do
as they advise and suggest, as did Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 22.3.4.5. or by imitation
to do like others before, as did Israel, Mich. 6.16. But in every respect, the
counsel of the wicked should be far from us, Job 21.16. and 22.18. Wicked]
that is, ungodly: so our English word means, being made of the old Danish
wgudelig: or we may call them according to the original, Restles, turbulent,
unjust, ungracious. The Hebrew rashaugh, signifies restlesnes, and is opposed
to quietness; Job 34.29. Such men are without peace in themselves, and seek to
disturb and molest others, Proverb. 4.16. likened therefore to the raging sea,
Isa. 57.20.21. And because for their evil deeds they are often brought forth to
judgment, and condemned: therefore is this name given to condemned persons;
Psalm. 109.7. Job 27.7. And as to make just, or justify, is to acquit or
absolve in judgment; Psalm. 82.3. so, to make or pronounce wicked, is to
condemn; Psalm. 37.33. and 94.21. Deuteronomy. 25.1. Way] track, or trod. This word
also signifies any religion, doctrins, manners, actions, administration, or
course of life. Psalm. 5.9. and 25.4. and 86.11. Act. 18.25.26. and 22.4. 2
Petr. 2.2.15.21. sinners] or misdoers; erroneous, enormous. Though there is no
man just on earth, that does good and sins not: Eccl. 7.22. yet such are
usually called sinners, as be given, to vice, and have the course of their life
evil; Genesis 13.13. 1 Samuel 15.18. Psalm. 26.9. and 104.36. Mat. 26.45. Luke 7.37.
John. 9.16.31. In this respect, they that are born of God, are said, not to
sin, 1. John. 3.9. and Solomon opposes the sinner to the good man, Eccle. 9.2.
See the note on Psalm. 4.5. nor sit in the seat] or, and has not sitten, etc.
To sit is to abide, continue, dwell; Psalm. 2.4. and 101.6.7. and 132.14. or to
company, and have familiarity with any, Psalm. 26.4.5 And the original moshab
here Englished seat, is diversely used, as, for a seat or chayr to sit on, 1 Samuel 20.25. Job 29.7. (which notes authority;) sometime, an habitation or
dwelling; Psalm. 107.4.7. and 132.13 sometime an assise, session, or assembly;
Psalm. 137.32. And so may it here be taken, for the assembly of the scornful.
The scornful.] Proud-rhetoricall-mockers: Losels. The word imports pride;
as, the Lord scorneth tho scorners, Prove. 3.34. that is, resists the proud;
Iam 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. It implies also eloquence, often used in mocks. Job 16.20.

Verse. 2. Has his delight] or his pleasure is* law] or doctrine. See the note
on Psalm. 19.8. Iehovah] or the Lord; as the Greek, and the new Testament
usually expresses ^t. The opening of this name, see on Psalm. 83.19.
doth-meditate] or shall meditate: that is, usually meditateth. This word
imports, study and exercise of the mind, which often bursteth out into
volte. It is used for musing in the mind or heart, Pro. 24, 2. Isa. 33, 18. for
muttering with the mouth, that which the heart minds, Psalm. 2, 1. and 37, 30.
Pro. 8, 7. Isa. 59, 3. but with a low imperfect voice: Isa. 8, 19. day and
night] or, by day, and by night, that is, continually.

Verse. 3. Brooks] or, becks, riverets: in Hebrew called Plagim, that is
divisions or partitions; being little streams, derived either from a great
river, as Psalm. 46, 5. or from a well or fountain, as Prove. 5, 16. or from any
other head, Job 29, 6. In hot countries they use to plant gardens, near
welsprings of water; from which the husbandman deriveth many little becks or
riverets, to run on the roots of the trees set in a row, whereby they are
moistened and made fruit full. See Ezekiel. 31, 3, 4. Eccl. 2, 6. According to
this, Christ is called the fountain of the gardens, that is, of the Churches.
Cant. 4, 15. Also in Ierem. 17, 8. the godly man is likened to a tree planted
by waters, which thrusts out his roots by the river, and feels not when the
heat comes, and cares not for the year of drought, nor cease from making
(or yiedling) fruit. in his time] that is, in due time or season; so Psalm. 104,
27. and 145, 15. Levit. 26, 4. whatsoever he shall doe] or all that it shall
make; or yield: meaning the tree, the resemblance of the man. For a tree is
said to make fruit, when it bears or yeildeth it. Ier. 17.8. So in Mat 3, 8,
10. where men are trees, and their works fruits, which they make or yield.
Shall prosper] or thrive: and so be of good use. And this is in a tree, when
the fruit is for meat; and the leaf, for medicine; as Ezekiel. 47, 12. The just
man's fruit, is the fruit of the tree of life. Prove, 11, 30.

V. 4. drives it away] or tosseth away. Compare Job 21, 18. Psalm. 35, 5. Hos.
13, 3. The word, it, is added for vehemence sake, and may be omitted in our
English, as it is sometime in the Hebrew, 2 Chronicles. 28, 3, compared with 2 King.
16, 3. yet such manner of speeches the Greek also in the new Testament uses,
Reve. 7, 2, 9.

Verse. 5. stand-up] or rise up: consist: stand-sure: opposed to bending or
falling down, Psalm. 18, 39. and 20, 9. God is he that rises up to judgment,
Psalm. 76, 10. and men do stand or fall therein, when they are justified or
condemned. See Mat. 12, 41. Reve. 6, 16. and sinners:] to weet, shall not stand
up. The former denial, not, is again to be understood: as in Psalm. 9, 19.

V. 6. knoweth] of acknowledges. This word also imports regard and care of;
as, the just man knows, (that is, regards his beasts life: Prover. 12, 10.
so Job 9, 21. 1 These. 5, 12. Also to approve, or allow; as Psalm. 101, 4. Romans
7, 15. 1 John. 3, 2. And as Gods knowledge of his, implies their election; 2 Timothy 2, 19. so his not knowing of the wicked, implies their re^ection: Mat.
25, 12. and 7, 23. shall perish.] or, be done-away, decay, be lost. To this way
of the wicked, which perishes; is opposed the good way, which is everlasting:
wherein David desired God to lead him. Psalm. 139, 24.

Annotations, Psalm II.
V. 1. VVHy] or, For what? David was the writer of this Psalm, and begins
with marveiling at the rage and folly of the Jews and Gentiles, in persecuting
Christ and his Church; Act. 4, 35. etc. Tumultuously rage:] or, hurtle
together, convene with rage and uproar, mutinously. This word is also used in
Daniels case, Dan. 6, 6, 11. and after in Psalm. 64, 3. The Greek ephruaxan,
whereby the Holy Ghost translateth it Act. 4, 25. denotes rage, pride, and
fiercenes, as of horses that neigh and rush into the battle. peoples] or
nations, under these names, are comprehended the Jews with the Gentiles, Act
4, 27, 28. meditate vanity.] mutter a vain or empty thing, which shall have no
effect. And here the Hebrew changes the time (as it does very often other
where,) will-meditate, noting by such phrase a continuace of the action, as
they that did still or usally meditate vain things. But the Holy Ghost in Act.
4.25. keeps like time here, as before: whose example I follow, according to
the propriety of our tongue. So after in this Psalm, and many other. The Hebrew
text it self sometime does the like: as Isa. 37, 33. compared with 2 King. 19
33. See the note on Psalm 18.7.

Verse. 2. Set themselves] or present themselves, will stand up; noting a settled
purpose in the heart, with a standing up in person, to act the same. 1 Chro.
11, 14. princes] rulers, or privy counselors, subtle, prudent, and employed
in making decrees; Prove. 8.15. next therefore in place to Kings, and joined
with them, as here, so in Judge. 5, 3. Hab. 1, 10. Pro. 31, 4. plot] conspire;
or, are founded, that is, have their foundation, plott or groundwork laid; as
Exo. 9, 18. Isa. 44, 28. and this by assembling and consulting, and is
therefore interpreted, gathered-together: Act. 4, 26. Christ] or Anointed: in
Hebrew, Mashiach or Messiah, which word, though it be general for the ancient
Kings, and Priests, and Prophets that were anointed with oil: ( Psalm. 89, 21.
and 105, 15. Isa. 45, 1. Number. 3, 3. 1 King. 19, 16.) yet is it principally the
name of the Son of God our savior, Dan. 9, 25, 26. who was known in Israel by
the name Messiah; Ioh. 1, 41. and 4, 25. and among Greeks, by the name Christ;
of whom we that believe in his name, are also called Christians, Act. 11, 26.
because we have an Anointing from him that is holy, 1 Ioh. 2, 20, 27. himself
being first anointed with the Spirit, and with the oil of gladness above his
fellows; Luk 4, 18. Ps. 45, 8. Of him is this Psalm interpreted by his
Apostles, saying; Of a truth, Lord against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou
anointedst, gathered were both Herod and Pontius Pilat, with the nations and
peoples of Israel, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel had
fore-determined to be done, Act. 4, 27, 28.

Verse. 3. their bands,] These were signs of subjection, Iere. 27, 2, 3, 6, 7.
And thus the Kings and nations speak, refusing to serve Christ, though his yoke
be easy. Matt. 11, 29, 39. Ier. 5.5. The Hebrew phrase mo, imports their
bands, and his; speaking of the Father and the Son jointly, and of the Son in
special: but he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which
sent him: John. 5, 23. So in the verse following, the Lord mocketh at them and
at him; meaning them all jointly, and each severally. The like manner of speech
see Isa. 53, 8. and 44, 15. Lam. 4.10. Psalm. 5.12. and 11, 7. and 49, 14. and
59, 9. Job 22, 19. Exo. 15, 15. Deuteronomy. 32, 23.32, 35, 37. cords] or ropes; thick
twisted bands: signs also of subjection and restraint, Job 39, 13. Ezekiel. 4, 8.
and sometime of love; Hose. 11, 4.

Verse. 4. The Lord] in Hebrew Adonai; which in this form is the peculiar title
of God; having the form plural, and vowels of Jehovah: mystically signifying
my stays, or my Sustainers, my Pillars. And where in one place Adonai is used:
an other speaking of the same thing has sometime Jehovah: See Ps. 57, 10, with
Psalm. 108, 4. It comes of Aeden, a base or Pillar which sustaineth any thing.
Our English word, O Lord, has much like force, being contracted of the old
Saxon Laford, or Hlassord; which comes of Laef, to sustein, refresh, cherish.
mocketh] will-mock, deride. This implies both their folly, their punishment
for it, and how God will leave them helples in their misery. Psalm. 59, 9. Prove.
1.26, 28.

Verse. 5. anger] ire, outward in the face, grame, grimnes, or feircenes of
countenance. The original aph signifies both the Nose by which one breaths.
Psalm. 115, 6. and Anger which appears in the snuffing or breathing of the
nose; as Saul is said to breath out threatenings and slaughter; Act. 9, 1. The
circumstances of the text, will show which of the two is meant: though sometime
it is doubtful; as Psalm. 138, 7. wrath] servent ire, inflamed-displeasure.
This word Charon, notes burning or inflammation of choler, sometime of grief;
Genesis 4, 5. Ion. 4, 10. sometime of other affections; Nehe. 3, 20.
suddenly-trouble] or vex, apall, fright; make them to start. It notes hastines
of fear and trouble; opposed to firm staiednes.

Verse. 6. And I] The word And, is here a sign of indignation stirred; as was
in the Apostle, when he said; And fittest thou to judge me, etc. Act. 23, 3. or
and, may be used here for but; as in Genesis 42, 10, Isa. 10, 20. and often other
where. have anointed] or powred-out, that is ordained, authorized; pouring out
the oil of the spirit, the oil of gladness, as is noted on verse 2. Of this word
Nasac that signifies to shed, or pour-out, Nasick is used for a governor, or
one in authority. Ps. 83, 12. Ios. 13, 21. Mich. 5.5. Dan. 11, 8. According
hereto, the wisdom of God says Prove. 8, 23. I was anointed (or authorized)
from everlasting. In David Christ's figure, this was outwardly performed, when
he was anointed King, with oil, 1 Samuel 16, 1, 13. and 2. Sam. 2, 4, and 5.3.
upon Sion] or over Tsijon: the name of an high mountain in Jerusalem, on top
whereof was a strong fort; which the heathen Jebusites kept by force from
Israel, till David's days; Ios. 15.63. 2 Samuel 5, 6, 7. but he took it from
them, fortified it, and called it David's city; 1 Chronicles. 11.4, 5, 7. Near unto
this was mount Morijah, whereupon Solomon built the temple, 2 Chronicles. 3.1.
Hereupon Jerusalem was called the holy city. Nehem. 1.1, 18. Isa. 52.1. and
48.2. Mat. 4.5. with Luke 4.9. and Sion is named the Lords holy mountain, Joel.
3.17. which he loved, Psalm. 78, 68. from which the law should come forth, Isa.
2, 3. and where he would dwell for ever, Psalm. 132.13, 14. Therefore was it a
figure of Christ's Church, Heb. 12.22. Rev. 14.1. Isa. 60.14. mountain of my
holiness, or my mount of holiness, that is, my holy mount, as the Greek
turns it. So the Temple of Gods holiness, Psalm. 79.1. and people of his
holiness, Isa. 63, 18. And in speech to Daniel, Jerusalem is called, the city
of his holiness, that is, his holy city, by him so esteemed and regarded; Dan.
9.24. Such Hebrew phrases, because they are more forcible, the Apostles often
used in the Greek, to ennure the Gentiles with them: as Christ is called the
Son of Gods love, that is, his beloved son, Col. 1, 13. our Lord Jesus Christ
of glory, that is, our glorious Lord, Iam. 2.1. and many the like.

Verse. 7. I will-tell,] telling, is often used for preaching, declaring,
showing: as Psalm. 22.23. with Heb. 2.12. Exodus 9.16. with Romans 9.17. So hereby
Christ notes his prophetical office. the decree] Here the Hebrew el, seems
to be used for eth: as el haderech, 2 Chronicles. 6.27. to the same that eth
haderech, 1 King. 8.36. we may also read it thus, I will tell of thy decree; el
being many times used for of; as Genesis 20.2. Job 42.7. 2 King. 19.32. Ier.
51.60. So the Greek pros (answering to the Hebrew el,) is used for of, or
concerning, Heb. 1.7. and 4.13. decree] prescript-law or statute. The Hebrew
Chok, usually denotes the rules, decrees, and ordinances about Gods worship;
as the decree of the Passover, Exo. 12, 24.43. the decree of dressing the
lamps, Exo. 27.21 of the Priests office and garments, Exo. 29, 9. of their
washing, Exodus 30, 21, of the sacrifices, Lev. 3, 17, and 6, 18, 22, and many
other things about Gods service. So may it here be taken, that Christ preaches
the decree or rule of serving God, fulfilled of us by faith and obedience to
his gospel, when these legal ordinances had an end, John. 4.21, etc. thou art
my son] Though holy men be called the Sons of God, Deuteronomy. 14. 1 Ioh. 3.1. and
likewise Angels, Job 1.6. and 38.7. yet is this title natural and peculiar to
our Lord Jesus, the only begotten of the Father; whereupon the Apostle says,
to which of the Angels, said he this at any time? Heb. 1.5. The word art, is
supplied by the Apostle, Act. 13, 33. the like is sometime in the Hebrew text
it self; as True was the word, 1 King. 10.6. which in 2 Chronicles. 9.5. is True the
word: so, Thou leading out, 1 Chronicles. 11.2. Thou wast leading out, 2 Samuel 5.2.
Also in the Greek of the new Testament, Summer near, Mat. 24.32. Summer is
near, Luke 21.30. I, this day] or to day begat thee. The word this, is often
omitted in the Hebrew; as Deuteronomy. 4, 4.8, 39, and 5.1, 3, and 26.17, 18. and
often is expressed as Deuteronomy. 2.25, 30, and 4.20, and 26, 16, and 27, 9. Of this
point, thus speaks the Apostle: Touching the promise made to the Fathers, God
has fulfilled it unto us their children, in that he raised up Jesus, as it is
written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son, I to day begat thee, Act. 13, 32,
33. See also Romans 1, 4.

Verse. 8. For thine inheritance] or, to be thine inheritance. This notes the
subjection of the nations, to the son of God; as the manner of speech
imports; Isa. 14, 2. Zeph. 2, 9, Levit. 25, 46. Hereupon Christ is called
heir, that is, Lord of all: Heb. 1, 2. for thy firm-possession] or, to be thy
tenement: to have and to hold. The word for, or some such like, is here to be
understood; and sometims the Hebrew expresses it: as the house, 1 King. 7.51,
in stead of for the house, 2 Chronicles. 5, 1. Servants, 1 Chronicles. 18.6. in stead of
for servants; 2 Samuel 8, 6. and sundry the like.

Verse. 9. Roughly rule them] or bruise, crush them. The word signifies to
intreat-evill, or rigorously: and this is meant of Christ's enemies. potter] or
former of the clay: this signifies their utter destruction; for a potters
vessel, broken, cannot be made whole again. Ier. 9, 11, Isa. 30, 14.

Verse. 10. Be prudent] be skillful, or, behave yourselves skilfully, prudently,
wisely be nurturned] or restrained, chastised, disciplined.

Verse. 11. Be glad] This word signifies open and manifest joy, exultation, or
outward glee. Gladness and trembling are here joined together; as fear and joy,
Mat. 28, 8.

12 Kiss the son] Kyssing, was used in sign of love and of obdience, Genes.
41, 40. 1. Sam. 10, 1. it was used also in religion and divine worship, 1.
King. 19.18, Hos. 13, 2, Job 31, 27. All these are due to Christ: but Judas
betrayed the son of man with a kiss. Luke 22, 48. perish in the way] or, from
the way. To perish or be lost in the way, imports sudden destruction, whiles
they are doing their actions: to perish from the way, is to wander or loose the
right way, and not know whither to go. So Deuteronomy. 32, 28, perishing in (or from)
counsels, is to be void of counsel, and knowing what to deliberate. when his
anger shall] or for his anger will burn: or, his angry-countenance. suddainly]
or, very soon: or, a very little: this manner of speech sometime means a short
time, speedily, Psalm. 81, 15, Isa. 26, 20. 2. Chr. 12, 7, sometime, a little
deal; as Isa. 1, 9, The Greek here turns it soon or suddenly. See also Psalm.
8, 6. that hope-for-safetie] or, that shroud; that rely-confidently, that
betake themselves for refuge and safety unto him. For, he is made the author of
eternal salvation, to all that obey him. Hebr. 5, 9.

Annotations, Psalm III.
Verse. 1. A Psalm] called in Hebrew mizmor, which has the signification of
pruning or cutting-off superfluous twigs: and is applied to songs made of short
sentences or verses: where many superfluous words are cut away. There be three
kind of songs mentioned in this book; 1. Mizmor, in Greek Psalmos, a psalm: 2,
Tehillah, in Greek hymnos, a hymn or Praise: 3. and Shir, in Greek Ode, a song
or Lay. All these three the Apostle mentions together, where he wills us
to speak to our selves with Psalms and hymns and songs spiritual. Ephesians. 5,
39. of David] or to David: and so after in this book usually. But the Hebrew
speech uses these indifferently; as lasderoth, 2 Kings 11, 15, and hasderoth
2. Chron. 23.14. lammaghnaloth and hammahgnaloth, Psalm. 120, 1, and 121, 1. So,
the sword of Jehovah, Iere. 47, 6, the prophet of Jehovah, 1. King. 22, 7. 2
King. 3.11. and many the like. So in the Greek; Disciples to thee, Mark. 2, 18,
and disciples of thee, Matthew. 9, 14, are one and the same. from the face] or
presence; or for fear of; So the woman fled from the face of the serpent,
Revel. 12, 14. Of David's slight, it is thus written: Then David said to all his
servants that were with him in Jerusalem: Rise up and let us flee, for we shall
not escape else from the face of Abshalom, make speed to depart, least he come
suddenly and take us, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge
of the sword. So the King departed, and all his household after him. 2. Sam. 15,
14, 16.

Verse. 2. how many are] or how multiplied are. For, the conspiracy was great,
and the people multiplied still with Abshalom: 2. Sam. 15, 12.

Verse. 3. Many saying] or How many do say? of my soul] that is, of me; of my
life; concerning me, or, to my soul. no salvation] or, no manner salvation; no
health help or deliverance at all. The Hebrew has a letter more then ordinary,
to increase the signification. The like is in many other places; as Psalm. 44,
27, and 92, 16, and 94, 17, and 36, 8, and 125, 3. Job 5, 16. God] in Hebrew
Aelohim, which is the first name whereby the creator of all, is called in
scripture, Genesis 1, 1. And it is in the plural number, to signify the mystery
of the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead; and therefore is joined commonly
with other words of the singular number, and sometime of the plural,
indifferently; as, Aelohim he went, 1. Chron. 17, 21, and Aelohim they-went 2 Samuel 7, 23. See Psalm. 58, 12. It is sometime used (though more seldom) in the
form singular, Aeloah; Psalm. 58, 32, etc. And it may be derived either from
Ael, which signifies Mighty; and so by increase of the word, the signification
is increased, Most mighty, or the Almighty: or from Alah, to adjure; because of
the covenant, oath* and exsecration, wherewith we are bound unto God; according
to that in Deuteronomy, 29.12.14.19. Nehem. 10.29. Eccle 8.2. This honorable name is
also given to Angels Psalm. 8.6. and to Magistrates Psalm. 82.1.6. because God
has communicated with them his word. John. 10.34.35. Selah] This Hebrew word
signifies Elevation, or lifting up; whether of the mind, to mark; or of the
voice to strain it; or of both. And for the matter, it seems to import 1. an
asseveration of a thing so to be; 2. and an Admiration thereat. For the manner,
it is a note of singing high: and therefore is used only in psalms and songs,
and always at the end of verses, excepting some few places, Psalm. 55, 20. and
57.4. Hab. 3.3.9. where it is set in the midds. The Chaldee paraphrast, and
some other Hebrews have turned it, For ever. The Greek version, makes it a
musical notion, Diapsalma.

Verse. 4. a shield about me] or for me: that is, a protector, a defender. So
Genesis 15.1. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Psalm. 84.12. glory] or honor, which in the Hebrew has
the signification of weightines or gravity; which the Apostle seems to
respect, mentioning the eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4 17. David here
calls God his glory, who had advanced him to kingly dignity; such as our
Savior calls glory; Mat. 6.29. the lifter up] or exalter of my head: that
is, give me victory, honor, and triumph. So Psalm. 27.6. and 110.7.

Verse. 5. he answred:] or heard: but to answer is to certify by some means,
that he hears; as by help or deliverance from danger, Psalm. 22.22. Isa.
41.17. (so to answer by fire, 1 King. 18.24.) therefore it imports more then
bare hearing; Isa. 30.19. and 58.9.

Verse. 6. I lay down, etc.] This speech denotes safety, and security from
danger and dread of evil. Levit. 26.6. Job 11.19. Psalm. 4.9. Ezekiel. 34 25. Prove.
3.24.

Verse. 7. do set] to weet themselves in leager, or in battel-ray; or set their
engines. So Esa. 22.7.

Verse. 8. on the cheekbone] a sign also of reproach* Job. 16.10.

Verse. 9. To Jehovah the salvation] to weet, is, or belongs: or, Of Jehovah
is salvation, help, or deliverance. So Prove. 21, 31. Ion. 2, 29. Also Rev. 7,
10. and 19.1. The salvation to our God. Like speeches are, Holiness to Jehovah,
Exodus 28, 36. To Jehovah the war: 1 Samuel 17, 47. To Jehovah the earth, Psalm.
24, 1. and many the like. thy blessing] This word, when it is spoken of God
toward men, (as in this plac^) signifies is plentiful bestowing of good
things, earthly or heavently. Genesis 24.35. Deuteronomy. 28 2.3.4. etc. Ephe. 1.3. Gal.
3.8. When it is spoken of men toward God, it betokens praise or
thanksgiving, by word or deed. Deuteronomy. 8, 10. Psalm. 103, 1, 2. Luke 1, 64 and 2,
28. And that which in Math. 26, 26. is called blessing: in Luke 22, 19. is
called thanksgiving. When it is spoken of men toward men, it signifies
sometime salutation, as Genesis 47.7. 1 Samuel 13.10. sometime a gift, or a
benevolence, as 1 Samuel 25.27. 2 Cor. 9.5. 2 King. 5.15. sometime a pronouncing
(by way of prayer or prophecy) of good things in the name of God; as Genesis 14,
19, 20. Number. 6, 23, 24. In this signification, the less is blessed of the
greater. Heb. 7, 7.

Annotations, Psalm IV.
Verse. 1. TO the master, of the musick] or, To the overseer; to him that
excels: The original word Menatseach signifies one that urges the
continuance of any thing unto the end; or, the going forward with a work till
it be overcome. 2. Chro. 2.7.1^. and 34.12.13. Ezra. 3.8.9. And in musik, there
were Levites appointed for several duties, and some lenatseach to plie, or to
set forward, and be over the rest, 1 Chronicles. 15.21. and these were such as
excelled in the art of singing and playing on instruments, to whom sundry
Psalms are entitled, that by their care and direction, they might be sung
excellently unto the end. There were in Israel, some Levites singers, that
attended thereunto; and had no other charge. 1. Chron. 9.33. on Neginoth] that
is, stringed instruments of musik, played on with the hand. See the note on
Psalm. 33.3.

Verse. 2. when I call] or, in my calling; whiles I cry: so after, in verse. 4.
God of my justice] that is, my just God; author of my justice, and avenger of
my just cause. in distresse] or, in streightnes, thou have widened or enlarged
for me. prayer:] appeal, interpellation, or intercession, whereby we refer the
cause of our selves or others to tho judgment of God, calling upon him,
appealing to him for right, praying against condemnation, or the like. For the
Hebrew word Tephislah, comes of Pillel, to judge or determine causes for which
appeals are made, 1 Samuel 2.25. and Pelilim, are Judges or Arbiters; Exo. 21.22.
whereupon, to pray, is in Hebrew hithpallel, as it were to appeal or present
himself and his cause unto the Judge: or to judge ones self.

Verse. 3. Sonns of men] Hereby is meant, Great men, the Hebrew being Ish, which
is the name of man, in respect of his power and dignity: as appears after in
Psalm. 49.3. shall my glory be to ignominy] or, will ye turn my honor, to
defamation, slander, and calumny. God had promised David the honor of the
kingdom, which Saul with his nobles, sought to defame, and calumniate, and so
turn it to shame and reproach. will ye seek a lie?] or, ye seek a lie, or,
deceivable-falshood. Ye seek that which shall not come to pass. The Hebrew
Cazab (here used) is such a lie, as deceives men's exspectation. Job 40.28.
Psalm. 89.36. Psa. 58.11. 2. King. 4.16.

Verse. 4. marveilously-separated:] or selected in wondrous sort; exempted as
with some sign of excellency; culled out. So God marveilously severed tho
Israelites from the Egyptians: Exo. 8, 22. and 9, 4. and 11.7. See also Psalm.
17.1. Exo. 33.16. a gracious-saint] or, pious, holy, merciful-one: meaning,
himself. The Hebrew Chasid, (which the N. Testament in Greek calls hosois,
that is pious or holy; Act. 13.35.) signifies one that has obtained mercy,
goodness, piety, grace and benignity from the Lord; and is again (after Gods
example) pious, kind, gracious and merciful to others: Nehem. 13, 14. See Psalm.
136.1. to him] that is, his gracious saint; as the Greek explaineth it: or,
referring it to the former, he has separated to himself, a gracious man.

Verse. 5. Be stirred] or Be commoved; which may be understood, Be angry, Be
grieved, or tremble. The original word Ragaz notes any sturring or moving; Job
9.6. as, to be moved or tremble with fear; Psalm. 18.8. Deuteronomy. 2.25. Isa. 14.9.
to be moved with grief; 2 Samuel 18, 33. to be stirred with Anger; Prove. 29, 9. 2
King. 19, 27, 28. Ezekiel. 16, 43. This later the Greek here follows, saying Be
angry and sin not, and the Apostle has the same words Ephesians. 4.26. sin not] or
misdoe not. This word signifies to miss of the way or mark: as in Judge. 20,
16. men could sling stones at an hairs breadth, and not sin; that is, not
miss: and Prove. 19, 2. he that is hasty with his foot, sins; that is,
misseth or swarveth. In religion; Gods law is our way and mark; from which when
we swarve, we sin. Therefore sin is defined to be Transgression of law, or
unlawfulnes. 1 Ioh. 3, 4. say in your heart] that is, mind seriously what you
do, and what the end will be. Consider with your selves: The like phrase is
Psalm. 14, 1. and 35, 25. Mat. 24, 48. Romans 10, 6. Rev. 18, 7. be still] or
silent, tamed, stay, pawse; as 1 Samuel 14, 9. Ios. 10, 12, 13. By this word, is
often meant in scripture a modest quietness of the mind, the troubled affections
being allayed. See Psalm. 131, 2. and 37, 7. and 62, 2. Lam. 3.26.

Verse 6. Sacrifice] The word signifies Killing or Slaughtering; as beasts were
killed for offerings to God: figuring man's mortification, or dying to sin.
Psalm. 51.19. sacrifices of Iustice] such Moses speaks of Deuteronomy. 33, 19. and
David afterward Psalm. 51.21. meaning sacrifices just and right, and in faith,
according to the intendment of Gods law. Contrary to those which the prophet
reproves, Mal. 1.14. so sacrifices of triumph, or joy, Psalm. 27, 6. are Joyful
sacrifices, offered with gladness. And the way of justice, Mat. 21.32. for, a
just, or right way. trust:] or, be confident, have steadfast hope, secure and
firm confidence; and it is opposed to feeblenes of mind, fear and doubt. Isa
12.2. Prove. 28.1.

Verse. 7. Many do say] Heb. are saying: which may be turned do say; as in
Mat. 22.23. hoi legontes, saying; is in Mark. 12.18. hortines legousi, which
say. who will cause us to see] that is, to enjoy, or have the fruition of good:
Psalm. 50.23. And this is the form of a wish; as David desired and said, who
will give me drink of the water, etc. 1. Chron. 11.17. and, who will give me
wings as a dove; Psalm. 55.7. and many the like. the light of thy face] that is;
thy light some cheerful face, or looks: meaning Gods favor, grace, and the
blessings of knowledge, comfort, joy etc. that flow therefrom. This is in
Christ, who is both the Light, and the Face, or presence of God, Luke 2.32.
Exo. 33.14. and the Angel of his face, Isa. 63.9. According to this phrase,
Solomon says; In the light of the Kings face is life; and his favor, is as a
cloud of the later rain. Prove. 16.15. See also Psalm. 44.4. and 31.17.21. and
67.2. Job 29.3.

Verse. 8. have given joy] or shall give; or put joy: so giving is used for
putting oftentimes. Ps. 8.2. and 40.4. and 33.7. and 69.12. and 89 20. and
39.6. and 119.110. more then of the time] or from of the time. An Hebrew
phrase, where the sign of comparison is wanting; as Genesis 38.26. Psalm. 19.11.
and 130 6. The like is also in the Greek tongue: as Luke 15.7. and 18.4. And of
joy in harvest when corn is increased, see Isa. 9.3. Joel. 1.11.12.

Verse. 9. together] that is, I will lie down and sleep both together; not being
disquieted with fear or care: see Psalm. 3.6. or together I and others with me;
or, I my self wholly and alone. See the note on Psalm. 33.15. alone] The Hebrew
phrase is, in lonedom; or, in solitarines. And may be referred (by the
distinction,) to the Lord, who alone seateth his in safety: or, to that which
follows, thou will seat me alone in safety; herein looking to Moses
Blessing, Deuteronomy. 33.28. where Israel dwells safely, alone; and so in Number.
23.9. Ier. 49.41. Thus it is a blessing to be alone from enemies: otherwise to
be alone from friends, is a note of affliction; as Psalm. 102.8. Lam. 1.1. wilt
seat me] that is cause me to sit, dwell, or remain. in confidence] or, to
confidence, or trustfulnes; with hope: that is, confidently or trustfully;
which by consequence means, securely, safely. And this was a blessing
promised in the law, Levit. 26.5. Deuteronomy. 12.10.

Annotations, Psalm. V.
Verse. 1. NEchiloth] These (by the name) seem to be wind instruments, as
fluits, trumpets, cornets, etc. as Neginoth are stringed instruments, Psalm.
4.1. For Chalil is a Pipe, Isa. 5.12.

Verse. 2. understand] or intentively mark, consider.

Verse. 3. Attend] or Incline, namely, thine ear, as is expressed Psalm. 10.17.
Prove. 2.2. but often the word ear is omitted, as here, so Psalm. 61.2. and
66.19. and 86.6. and 142.7. etc. will I pray] or I do pray; meaning, still,
and usually.

Verse. 4. at morning] or, in the morning: which has the name in the original
tongue, of inquiring, looking, and seeking-early; and is therefore used for
every first opportune or fit time, both to pray for, and to receive blessings.
Psalm. 88.14. and 92.3. and 90.14. and 143.8. Here also the word at or in is to
be supplied; as Beith, a house, 2. Chron. 26.21. for bebeith, in a house; 2.
King. 15.5. and many the like. orderly-addresse] prepare, propound, dispose, or
settle in order; meaning either, his person, as Job. 33.5. or his speeches; as
Job 32.14. look-out] or espy; as he that keeps watch and ward, exspecting what
God will answer, as is explained, in Habak. 2.1. This notes diligence, hope,
and patience: So, Mic. 7.7.

Verse. 5. a God] or, a Mighty-one: in Hebrew Ael, the name of God, denoting his
might or puissance: which therefore the Greek sometime translateth Ischuros,
Mighty; Psalm. 7.12. sometimes Mighty-God, Isa. 9.6. but most commonly, God:
which the holy Ghost allows, Mat. 27.46. and 1.23. delighting wickednes] or,
that take pleasure in wickedness. By, wickedness, and evil, may here be meant
also (by figure of speech,) wicked and evil persons. See Psalm. 36.12. sojourn]
or, be a guest with thee, or have h^s^itage: meaning that an evil man should
have no intertainment, to be harbored as a guest, much less to have any
abiding, or settled habitation with God. Here the word with, is to be supplied;
as in the like Hebrew phrase. Psalm. 94.20. Genesis 30.20. So in Exodus 9.16. that
I-might show thee; for, show in thee; as the Apostle cites it, Romans 9.17. the
like is in Psalm. 42.5.

Verse. 6. Vain glorious fooles] or, mad-boasting-fools: called Holelim, of
halal, to extol, praise, glorify: which when it is of ones self, and
immoderate, is dotage, folly, and madness. Hence is the word used, for mad,
wood, or raving with folly, Eccles. 2.2.12. and 7.9. and 10.13. Isa. 44.25. So
after in Psalm. 75.5. and 102.9. and 73.3. that work] so the holy Ghost
translateth it, Act. 13.41. from Hab. 1.5. The Hebrew word signifying a
willing-working-out, perfecting, polishing, and practicing: as Psalm. 7.14.
paynful-iniquity] or, sorrowful sin, vain unlawfulnes. The original word Aven,
which has the signification of pain or sorrow; is of large use, denoting all
sinful and unjust affections, actions, or indevours, which cause pain or sorrow,
or be painfully don, and is applied sometime in special to idolatry, joined
with Ieraphim, or images. 1 Samuel 15.22. And Beth-el, that is, Gods house, is
caled of the Prophets Bethaven, an Idols house, or place of iniquity. Hos.
4.15. and 10.5. because Jeroboam had there set up false worship; 1. King.
12.29. And in Isa. 66.3. he that blesses Aven, or an Idol, is turned in Greek,
a blasphemer. Thus Poghnalei-aven, be such as work, practice, or commit
idolatry, superstition, or other sin and iniquity, whereof comes sorrow, grief,
misery, and at last confusion; how ever such evil workers, do polish and trim
their actions; for they shall be rejected that work unlawfulnes (hoi
ergazomenoi ten ahomian) Mat. 7.23. or are workers of iniquity, (hoi ergatai
tes adikias,) Luke 13.27. as this Hebrew phrase is by the Evangelists
interpreted, The phrase is taken from Job, chap. 31.3. and 34.8.22.

Verse. 7. Thou will bring to perdition] or wilt do quite away: wilt fordoe, or
make perish. man of bloods,] that is, bloody man, or murderer; when blood is
used in the plural number, it usually notes murder or manslaughter, and the
guilt following it: as Genesis 4.11. the voice of thy brothers bloods cries; 1.
Chron. 22.8. thou have shed many bloods: so after in Psalm. 9.13. and 106.38.
and 51.16. Sometime it signifies natural uncleannes, as we are born in sin, or
sin deserving death; Ezekiel. 16.6.9. I saw thee polluted in thy own bloods; etc.
Hereto we may compare the Apostles speech, John. 1.13. which are born not of
bloods, etc. A man of bloods, is one that is defiled therewith, or given thereto:
2. Sam. 16.7. Psalm. 26.9. and 55.24. and 59.3. and 139.19. See the like phrase,
opened, Psalm. 140.12. and of deceit] that is, man of deceit, (as is expressed
Psalm. 43.1.) meaning the deceitful man, faytor, or impostor. So noting hereby
the secret sinner, as by the former speech, the open and violent. Deceit, dole,
or guile, called in Hebrew Mirmah, is named of Ramah to heave or cast, or shoot
with bow. And as warpen bows, do cast and shoot awry, and deceive the archer;
Psalm. 78.57. so Impostors, or men of guile, do first, as it were, lift up a
man with vayn hope, that being disappointed he may have the more heavy
overthrow. See 1 Chronicles. 12.17. Genesis 29.25. So in an other phrase, to lift up
the soul, signifies, to deceive with vain hope. Ier. 37.9.

Verse. 8. mercy] or kindness, benignity. She the note on Psalm. 136.1. thy
house,] or bower, edifice: named in the Hebrew of building, beith: in Greek, of
dwelling, oikos: in English, of tuition, and custody, a house; of the Almain
huis, which is of hu, to defend. By house, here is meant Gods tabernacle caled
his house, 1. Chron. 9.23. Mark. 2.26. for the temple was not built in David's
days. will do-worship] or bow-down my self; in sign of honor. toward the
pallace] for the worshippers entered not into the Sanctuary it self, but into
the courtyard; and at the door, offered their gifts. Psalm. 116.19. Levit. 1.3.
Heb. 9.6. A palace, (Heical) is the name of Kings houses, Psalm. 45.9.16. Prove.
30.28. attributed to the places where Gods majesty was said to dwell; as the
tabernacle, 1. Sam. 1.9. and 3.3. the temple, 1. King. 6.17. and heaven it
self; Psalm. 11.4. Mic. 1.2.

Verse. 9. lead me] or quietly conduct, guide, govern me. in thy justice;] that
is, in the religion and conversation set forth in thy law, called the paths of
justice, Psalm. 23.3. or, for thy justice sake. inviers] or spials, observers;
that leer and prye, for evil. So Psalm. 27.11.

Verse. 10. no certainty] no certain stable thing, no firm-truth; which one may
trust unto. his mouth:] that is, the mouth of any of them. inward part]
properly, that which is nearest unto them: this the Greek translateth, heart.
And these in-parts, are put for the thoughts, affections, purposes in them: as
Psalm. 49.12. woeful-evils] hawoth the original signifies woes, sorrows,
heavy-anoyances mischeivous and baleful-evils, miseries and woeful events: so
named of hoi or hovah which signifies woe, ovai: Ezekiel. 7.26. they make-smooth]
or make-flattering; and consequently, deceitful, as the Greek translateth,
which the Apostle follows, Romans 3.13.

Verse. 11. Condemn-them as guilty] Asham, is a guilt, sin or trespass; Levit.
5.19. whereof the word here used, is to make-guilty, or damn of trespass; and
so the Greek here has it, Judge or damn. And because destruction and
desolation abides such as are damned for crime; therefore is this word used
also for desolating, abolishing, destroying; Ezekiel. 6.6. Joel. 1.18. And so may
it be here meant, punish, or make them desolate O God. So Psalm. 34 22.23. and
68.22. and 69.6. with the multitude] or for the multitude, the many.
trespasses] or seditious-iniquities: defections, done purposely, and
disloyally, and are therefore heinous and criminal. The Greek often translateth
it, Unlawfulness or transgression of law, which the Apostle follows Romans 4.7.
from Psalm. 32.1. It is more then sin, as may be gathered by Genesis 31.36. Exo.
34.7. and Job 34.37. he adds trespass to his sin. drive them away] or drive
him; that is each of them. A like phrase as was before Psalm. 2.3. So after in
verse. 12. upon them, and him. turned-rebellious] or turned-bitter, and so are
very distastful unto thee, by reason or their disobedience and stubbornness:
and consequently do provoke to bitterness, and wrath; do exasperate. The
Hebrew word Marah has properly the signification of changing and of bitterness;
applied to apostasy, rebellion and disobedience. Deuteronomy. 1.26. and 21.20. Ios.
1.18.

Verse. 12. for ever] or to eternity. showt] or shrill-out, sing joyfully; for
so commonly the Hebrew Ranan signifies: and is therefore by the holy Ghost
interpreted, to be merry or joyful; Romans 15.10. from Deuteronomy. 32.43. and Gal.
4.27. from Isai. 54.1. yet sometime this word is to showt-shrill, or cry-aloud
for sorrow; as Psalm. 142.7. A loud shril, noise or shwting, was used in
thanksgivings, and prayers. Levit. 9.24. 1. King. 8.28. Psalm. 17.1. and 118.15.
and 126.2. and 33.1. and thou shall cover] or, for thou will cover, protect, or
cast a covering over them: and this is answerable to their hope or
seeking-covert in God, before mentioned: and signifies a safe protection from
al hurt or evil; as Exodus 33.22. Psalm. 140.8. be-glad] or leap for joy, exsult.
The word signifies outward gladness in gesture and countenance: So also does
the Greek answerable hereto: that where one Evangelist writes, Rejoice and be
glad; Mat. 5.12. another says; Rejoice and leap. Luke 6.23.

Verse. 13. bukler] a piked-sheild, called tsinnah, of the sharp-pikednes: as an
other kind of Scutchion is called Magen, Psalm. 3.4 of fensing or protecting.
favourable-acceptation] or good will; gracious-liking or acceptance. So the
Hebrew Ratson means; derived of a word which by the Apostle, signifies to
accept. Heb. 12.6. from Prove. 3.12. and to be well pleased or delighted. Mat.
12.18. from Isa. 42.1. So the year (Ratson) of acceptance is the acceptable
year: Luke 4.19. from Isa. 61.2. and the time of acceptance, is the acceptable
time, 2. Cor. 6.2. from Isa. 49.8. It is also interpreted will or pleasure;
Hebr. 10.7. from Psalm. 40.9.

Annotations, Psalm VI.
Verse. 1. Upon the eight;] or after the eight: meaning the eight tune, which
was grave, as that which we call the base. So David fetching home Gods ark,
appointed some Levites with harps upon the eigth, for the honor and service of
God. 1. Chron. 15.21.

Verse. 2. wrathful-heat] or choler: fervent-mood. This word notes the inward
affection; as the former does the outward appearance. David prays not simply
against correction, (for, as many as God loves, he does rebuke and chastise
Rev. 3.19.) but would have his nurture with moderation, least it broke him in
pieces: as Jeremy likewise prays, Ier. 10.24. So after, in Psalm. 38.2.

Verse. 3. heal me:] recure me. Though this may have reference to bodily
sickness; Psalm. 107.18.20. yet is it also applied to soul-sicknes; and curing of
it; as Psalm. 41.5. heal thou my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

Verse. 4. how long?] or til when? An imperfect speech, through trouble of mind;
which may thus be supplied: how long will thou cease, or, defer to help? or,
how long will thou afflict me? So Psalm. 90.13.

Verse 5. release] loosen, or deliver my soul; or me; meaning from death; as is
expressed, Psalm. 116.8.

Verse. 6. for in the death etc.] This doctrine, King Hezekiah explayneth thus;
for hell shall not confess thee, death shall not praise thee, they that go
down the pit, shall not hope for thy truth: the living, the living, he shall
confess thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make-knowne
thy truth. Isa. 38.18.19. So after, in Psalm. 115.17.18. hel] or the grave;
deadly-hed, the place or state of the dead. See the note on Psalm. 16.10.
confesse] or, give thanks, celebrate, divulge or freely publish with praise and
commendation. This same word is also used for consessing of sins; Psalm. 32.5.

Verse. 7. I saint.] or am over-yawed with my sighing: the like speech Baruch
uses, Ier. 45.3. The original word Iagahu, signifies yawing, toil, turmoil
and sore labor, of body or mind; and consequently, fainting, through wearines:
and is opposed to rest or quietness: Lam. 5.5. every night] or, the whole night.
I water] that is, bathe, or dissolve into water; or I melt my bedsted. These
are excessive figurative speeches, to express the greatness of his sorrow. In
the Hebrew they are also in the future time, I shall melt; I shall make swim;
that is, I usually melt and bathe; noting the continuance of his affliction.

Verse. 8. mine eye] This may be taken for the whole face or visage; as in Number.
11.7. the eye is used for the color or appearance. gnawen] The Hebrew
Ghnashash is to gnaw and fret, and so to make deformed and ugly, and to
confume. Hereof Ghnash is a moth-worm, Psalm. 39.12. that fretteth garments. A
like speech Job uses, mine eye is dimmed with indignation, Job 17.7. but
gnawen, here is a word more vehement. So after in Psalm. 31.10.11. with
indignation] for grief that I take being provoked by the enemies.

Verse. 11. let be abasht] or, shall be abasht; The Hebrew Bosh, signifies to
be abasht, wax pale and wann; as when the color fades and withers; and
notes both disappointment of ones exspectation, Job. 6.20. and confusion or
destruction. Ier. 48.1.20. let them return] or, recoyl: a sign also of
discomfiture and shame, so Psalm. 56.10. in a moment] or in a minute: that is, a
short space, or suddenly.

Annotations, Psalm VII.
Verse. 1. SHigajon] An-artificial-song of David: or, David's delight. The word
properly signifies Aberration, or Ignoration; and is here, and in Hab. 3.1.
only used in the title of Songs: which seem to be made of sundry variable and
wandering verses, which being composed by art, cause the more delight. The
Hebrew word (Shagah) whereof this is derived, is used for delight, or
wandring-in-pleasure. Prove. 5.19.20. According to which we may name this song,
David's delight, or solace. Or, in the other signification, David's error; as
setting forth the sum of his cares, which made him almost to go astray. upon
the words] or concerning the words; or matters, affairs. Word, is both in
Hebrew and Greek, often used for a thing or matter. Exodus 18.16. Deuteronomy. 17.1.1
King. 14.13. Luke 1.65. of Cush] This may be meant of K. Saul himself, who was
of Kish, and of Iemini, 1 Samuel 9.1. called closely Cush; that is an Ethiopian,
or Blackmoore, for his black and il conditions, his heart not being changed, as
the Blackmoore changes not his skin, Ier. 13.22. Or else, it might be one of
Saul's retinue, whose name indeed was Cush: but we find no mention of him
elsewhere.

Verse. 3. least he tear in peeces] or, That he ravin not, or make-a-prey. Lion]
called here in Hebrew Arjeh, that is, a plucker, Renter, or Tearer: and
elsewhere, Laby, that is Hearty and courageous; Psalm. 57.5, and Kphir, that is
Lurking, or Couchant, Psalm. 91.13. the reason of these names is showed; Psalm.
17.12. The renting-Lion, (Arjeh) as greedy to tear; and the lurking-Lion
(Kphir) as biding in covert places. Other names are also given to this kind, as
Shachal, of ramping, or fierce nature; Psalm. 19.13. and Lajish, of subduing his
prey, Prove. 30.30. my soul] that is, me, or my life. breaking] this may be
referred to the Lion, breaking asunder, or renting his prey: the word also is
used for breaking of yokes of affliction, that is, saving, reskuing, redeeming,
or delivering; as Psalm. 136.24. Lam. 5.8. The Greek so turns it here, there
being none redeeming nor saving. Thus the denial none set after in the Hebrew,
serves for both words; (as after in Psalm. 19.9.) And it is the propriety of
this tongue sometime to want, sometime to abound with words; as in 1 King.
10.21. there be two denials; when in 2 Chronicles. 9.20. there is but one, in the
same narration.

Verse. 4. Done this] which Cush accuses me of. He speaks of some common
slander. injurious-evill in my palms.] that is bad dishonest dealings in
secret: the palm or hollow of the hand, being a place where filthiness may be
hidden: the hand also is put for the actions. So Ion. 3.8. Psalm. 109.27. and
78.42.

Verse. 5. That had peace with me] my friend and conferate. Such treachery David
much blometh in his foes, that in time of peace, made war. Psalm. 41.10. and
55.13.15.21. yea I] Hebrew, and I; which may be resolved, yea, or when I
released my distresser; which may have reference to his sparing of Saul, and
delivering him from death, 1 Samuel 24.6, 7, 8.11, 12. and 26.9.10.11. etc.
without cause] or without-effect, and fruit: in vain.

Verse. 6. My life] in Hebrew, lives: so usually called, for the many faculties
and operations that are in life; the many years, degrees, estates thereof. The
Apostles in Greek retain the singular number life: Act. 2.28. from Psalm. 16.11.
1 Pet. 3.10. from Psalm. 34.13. My glory] or honor; meaning either his
honorable estate, renown, and posterity; as Hos. 9.11. Job 19 9. or his soul,
as Genesis 49.6. in the dust] that is, in base estate, and ignominy, as Psalm.
113.7. Job 16.5. or, the dust of death, the grave, as Psalm. 22.16. Isa. 26.19.

Verse. 7. In the rages] or because of the outrages, surpassing-indignations; so
called, of the passing out of the heat and choler. wake-up] or raise up, to
weet thy self, and come unto me; for judgment thou have cammanded: or
appointed. It may also be read, raise up to me, the judgment which thou have
commanded: so the Chaldee paraphrast here supplieth the word, which: the Hebrew
it self sometime does the like, as 1 King. 9.8. this house is high; 2 Chronicles.
7.21. this house which is high.

Verse. 8. For it] for the same congregations sake, which comes about thee
expecting jugdement. to the high-place] or to the height: that is, the throne
of Judgment, for throns were set high, 1 King. 10.19. This word height, is also
used for heaven, Psalm. 93.4. and there Gods throne is, Psalm. 11.4.

Verse. 9. Iudge] Two words are here used in Hebrew for judging; 1 Dan, and 2
Shaphat; the first is more special to give doom or sentence in controversies;
the latter more general, for judging or doing right in all causes. The
Apostles express these two by one Greek word krino, judge; as Hebr. 10.30.
from Deuteronomy. 32.36. and Romans 3.4. from Psalm. 51.6. my justice] the justice and
equity of of my cause, in respect of my persecutors. So Psalm. 18.21-15.
Elsewhere he appears to Gods justice, Psalm. 35.24. my perfection or integrity]
the sincerity of my ways, and simplicity of my heart. See Psalm. 26.1. in me]
or unto me, to weet reward thou.

Verse. 10 For thou triest] or, he tries. God who is possessor of the reins,
Psalm. 139.13. does also try them, as metal in the fire. The heart, may
signify the cogitations, and the reins the affection. So Psalm. 26.2.2 Ier.
11.20, and 20.12. Revel. 2.23.

Verse. 12. Angerly-threatneth] or detesteth, disdaineth in wrath, namely the
wicked, and menaceth their destruction.

Verse. 14. He works for the hot-persecutors] or polisheth, to weet, to shoot
at them that servently persecute. The Hebrew dalak which signifies burning,
Ezekiel. 24.10. is applied to hot persecution: so Psalm. 10.2. Genesis 31.35. Lam.
4.19.

Verse. 15. He shall be in travell] or, continually -- travelleth, that is, takes
great pains to accomplish iniquity, as a woman with child to be delivered.
molestation] or moyle, misery. The Hebrew ghnamal signifies toylsom-labour and
molestation, both which a man indureth himself, Psalm, 25.18. and 73.5. and
which he causes another to endure: Psalm. 94.20. and 55.11. And thus it is here
meant, as the 17. verse shows. bring forth a lye] or, falsehood: meaning
either calumny and slander of others, (which in verse 17. seems to be called
violent-wrong;) or a deceit of himself, frustrating his own expectation. This
similitude of the Conception, travel and birth of sin, is memorable; mentioned
also in Job 15.35. Isa. 59.4. Iam. 1.15. much like an other simily, of
ploughing, sowing, and reaping iniquity, Job 4.8.

Verse. 16. Is fallen,] to weet, unto his own perdition, as Prove. 26.27. Eccles.
10.8. or, to lurk there for the perdition of others; See Psalm. 10.10. the
corrupting-ditch he wrought] or, pit-of-corruption which he made. The original
Shachath, signifies corruption, Psalm. 16.10. and is applied to any pit or
ditch where one perishes and corrupts. Psalm. 57.7. and 94 13. and sometime
the word pit, is plainly added, as in Psalm, 55.24. the pit of corruption.

Verse. 17. His crown] the scalp, or heads top; meaning also, abundantly, and
apparently in the view of all. See Esth. 9.25. Violent wrong] The word Chamas
signifies injury done by force; violation of right and justice.

Verse. 18. Sing-psalm-to] or, praise-with-psalm: and this imports a song
artificially and skilfully composed. See Psalm. 3.1.

Annotations, Psalm VIII.
Verse. 1. GIttith] or the Gittith: which title is also given to the 81. and 84.
Psalms. Gath in the Hebrew is a winepresse, Isa. 63.2. It is also the name of a
city of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 17.4. A city also of the Levites was called
Gath-rimmon, Ios. 21.25. whereupon Obed-edom the son of Iuduthun, a Levite and
singer in Israel, was called a Gittite. 2 Samuel 6.10. So by Gittith here may be
meant, either such instruments as were used by the posterity of Obed-edom the
Gittite; or, that these Psalms were made upon occasion of transporting God's ark from the house of that Obed-edom, the history whereof is in 2 Samuel 6.6.10,
11, 12, etc. or, that these Psalms were to be sung for praise of God, at the
Vintage, when grapes were pressed. And according to this, the Greek translateth
it the winepresses. Or it may be the name of some musical instrument; and so
the Chaldee paraphrast takes it.

Verse. 2 Our Lord] or our sustainers: see the note on Psalm. 2.4.
wondrous-excellent] or wondrous-ample, illustrious and magnificent. The
original word signifies ample, or large and excellent withal; clear and
splendent in glory: The Greek turns it wonderful. name] this word is often
used for renown or glory, Genesis 6.4. Eccles. 3. Philip. 2.9. as on the contrary,
vile persons are called men without name; Job 30.8. Gods name is also used for
his kingdom and gospel; Mat. 19.29. compared with Luke. 18.29. Mar. 10.29. And
this Psalm treats of the spreading of Christ's kingdom and gospel, as after
is manifested. have given] that is, put, or set: as, I-have given, Isa. 42.1.
is by the Evangelist in Greek I-will-put. Mat. 12.18. It may also import a
setting-sure or stablishing; as thou have given thy people, 1 Chronicles. 17.22.
that is, thou have stablished thy people; 2 Samuel 7.24. Here also is a
grammatical change in the Hebrew: to give, for thou have given.
glorious-majesty] venerable or praiseworthy-glory. The word Hodh, is general
for any laudable-grace or virtue for which one is celebrated, reverenced, and
commended. above] or over, or upon the heavens. This phrase is used of God,
Number. 27.20. where he wills Moses to give of his glorious-majesty upon Joshua;
and may have use in the mystical applying of this Psalm to Christ's kingdom,
as Mat. 21.16. teaches us: heavens being also often used in scripture, for the
Church of Christ, Isa. 65.17. and 66.22. Rev. 21.1.

Verse. 3. Have sounded] that is, firmly-decreed, and appointed, and
consequently fitted and perfected: as the Greed katertiso (which the Apostle
uses,) signifies; Mat. 21.16. So in Esth. 1.8. the King had sounded, that is,
decreed, appointed. See also before, Psalm. 2.2. strength] that is,
strong-prase; for so this word seems often to be used; as Psalm. 29.1. and
96.7. and 118.14. therefore the Greek, which the Apostle follows, Mat. 21.16.
translateth it Praise. This word strength or firmness, may be taken for
kingdom firmly strengthened; as in this place, so in Psalm. 110.2. and 86.16 and
89.11. to make cease] that is, put to silence; or do-away, abolish and destroy.
So after in Psalm. 119.119. and 89.45. and 46.10. self-avenger] or, him that
avengeth himself: the proud and mighty which will not suffer his honor or gain
to be diminshed. So Psalm. 44.17. This was fulfilled, when children crying
Hosanna to welcome Christ; the chief Priests and Scribes disdained, and sought
to destroy him: but he stopped their mouths, by alleging this Scripture: Mat.
21.15, 16. Mark 11.18. Gods people are taught though they suffer wrong, not to
avenge themselves, but to give place unto wrath. Romans 12.19.

Verse. 5. What is sory-man] to weet, thus think I with my self: what is man,
etc. Here man is called Enosh, (the name of Adams nephew, Genesis 4.26.) which
signifies doleful, sorry, sorrowful, wretched, and sick incurably. And this
name is given to all men, to put them in mind of their misery and mortality: as
Psalm. 9.21 let the heathens know, that they be Enosh. son of Adam] or of
earthly-man. As before men are called Enosh, for their doleful estate by sin:
so are they called Adam, and sons of Adam, that is, earthly; to put them in
mind of their original, and end; which were made of Adamah the earth, even of
the dust; and to dust shall again return. Genesis 2.7. and 3.19. Adam was the name
both of man and woman; Genesis 5.2. and is also the name of all their children;
Psalm. 22.7, and 36, 7, and 39, 6. and in many other places. See the note on
Psalm. 49, 3. visit him] that is, have care of, providest for, and look to
him. The original word thus largely signifies; and is used indifferently for
visiting with favor, as Psalm. 56, 10. or with displeasure, as Psalm 59.6. Here
it is meant for good; for Gods providence is singular toward man; and his
visitation preserves our spirit, Job 10, 12. Compare also herewith; Psalm. 144,
3, Job 7.17, 18.

Verse. 6. For thou madest-him lesser] or, And thou madest-him-lack, or, Though
thou made him to want a little of the Gods. a little] The original word
signifies either a little while; Psalm. 37.10. or a little deal; Psalm. 37.26.
1 Samuel 14, 29. The Greek brachu^t: (which the Apostle uses) also signifies
both. Act. 5.34. Ioh. 6.7. how be it, by his applying this to Christ, he
seems to mean a little or short time. Heb. 2.7, 9. than the Gods] or than God:
but by Elohim, Gods; here is meant the Angels, as the Apostle expounds it,
according both to the Greek version, and Chaldee paraphrase. And those heavenly
spirits, are for their office and service called Angels, that is, messengers:
but for their honorable dignity they are called Gods, here, and in Psalm. 97,
7, and the Sons of God, Job 1, 6, and 38, 7. The Princes of the earth, are
named Gods, Psalm. 82, 6. how much more may the Angels be called so, that are
Chief Princes; Dan 10, 13. and crownedst him, etc.] This may be understood of
man as he was first made, in Gods image, and the Lord of the world, Genesis 1, 26.
but since the transgression, it is peculiar to Christ and Christian men that
have their dignity restored by Christ. Unto him the Apostle applies this
Psalm, thus: we see Jesus crowned with glory and honor, which was a little
made-lesser than the Angels, through the suffering of death; that by the grace
of God, he might taste death for all, Heb. 29. comely-honour] The Hebrew hadar,
denotes all honorable comeliness, honest, grave, adorned decency.

Verse. 7. All, did thou set] in the first creation, God gave man rule over
fish, fowl, beasts, and all that moves on the earth, Genesis 1.26. but after, for
his sake and sin, the earth was cursed; and he enjoyed it with sorrow; Genesis
3.17. But the Son of man who is heir of all things, Heb. 1, 2. restores our
loss, and will cause the remnant of the people, even whosoever overcommeth; to
inherit all things, Zach 8, 12. Rev. 21.7. though unto man living here in
sorrows, we yet see not all things subdued, Heb. 2, 8.

Verse. 8. Sheep and Oxen] or flocks and herds. The flock comprehending both
sheep and goats, Levit. 1, 10.

Verse. 9. The fowle] that is, fowls or birds: one is used for many or all: so
the Hebrew often speaks of other things; as Ship, for ships: 1 King. 10, 22.
with Chron. 9, 21. spear for spears: 2 King. 11, 10. with 2 Chronicles. 23, 9. So
Psalm. 20, 8, and 34, 8. of the heavens] that is of the air; for all this
Outspread or firmament spread over the face of the earth, God called Heaven:
Genesis 1, 8. the place also above where the Sun and Stars are, is called heavens,
Genesis 1, 17. and the highest place where the Angels dwell, (and God himself is
said to sit in,) is likewise called heaven: Mat. 6, 9, and 24, 36. and by the
Apostle named the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12, 2. So other scriptures mention the
birds of heaven, Mat. 13, 32. the winds of heaven, Dan. 7, 2, the clouds of
heaven, Dan. 7, 13. the dew of heaven, Dan. 4, 12, etc. The Hebrew name
Shanajim, has the form of the duall number: but the Evangelists express it
indifferently by the singular or plural; as where one says, your reward is
great in the heavens; Mat. 5, 12, another says, it is much in heaven: Luke
6.23.

Annotations, Psalm IX.
Verse. 1. Upon Muth labben] This, if it be referred to the music, seems to
be a kind of tune like that we call the Counter-tenour. Otherwise it may be
read, For the death Labben: but who he was, is very uncertain. It seems to
me, as the former Psalm, was of the propagation of Christ's kingdom: so this
is, of the destruction of Antichrists.

Verse. 2. marveilous-works] or wonderfull-things: marvels: miracles. The
original word signifies things high and hidden, such as man's power cannot
perform, nor reason reach unto: and therefore are admired.

Verse. 4. When my enemies turned, etc.] This may be taken for a sum of his
praise for deliverances past: or, in faith for like to come; and may be read,
when my foes turn back: they shall stumble and perish. from thy face] from
before thee; because of thy presence, that is, for fear of thee; and shut out
from thy face or presence. So after Psalm. 68, 2, 3, 9. So the Apostle speaks
of the wickeds perdition, from the face of the Lord. 2 These. 1, 9.

Verse. 5. Done my judgement] that is, given sentence, and executed, according
to the right of my cause: see Psalm. 7, 9 sitting on the throne] or
sit-thee-downe on the throne; the seat of judgment, or tribunal. This notes,
both kingly authority, Psalm. 132.11, 12. and the acting or executing of the
same. 2 Chronicles. 18, 18. Isa. 6, 1. Dan. 7, 9. Rev. 20.11. judge of] or O judge,
or judging justice.

Verse. 6. Have rebuked] or chidden, with rough and severe words: but this, when
God does it, commonly imports confusion; as being to his enemies; and
therefore joined with the curse: Psalm. 119, 21, and 68, 32, and 76, 7, and 18,
16. Zech. 3.2. So else where he says, at the rebuke of thy face they perish,
Psalm. 80, 17. wiped-out] or, wiped-away as with the hand. And this wiping out
the name, notes an utter abolishing witn great wrath, Deuteronomy. 9.14, and 29, 20.
Psalm. 109.13. for ever and aie] or for ever and yet: or to eternity and
perpetuity. The Hebrew Ghned, yet is added to eternity, or ever, to increase
the durance of it, and to note all eternities. Psalm. 10 16, and 21, 5, and 104,
5, and 145, 1, 2 taken from Moses, Exodus 15.18.

Verse. 7. The desolation,] which the enemies made in spoiling our land; or the,
desolate places which the enemy builded for himself; as in Job 3.14. great men
are said to build themselves desolate-places. of the enemy] So the Greek
turns it we may also read it, O enemy, the desolations are quite ended (which
thou made;) or are they ended? to perpetuity] or, to continual aie, to
victory: that is, so as it continues for ever. Ever or Eternity has the name
Ghnolam in Hebrew of being hid, and so, unknown: perpetuity, Netsach, is so
named of prevailing and getting victory by perpetual durance. Hereupon that
speech of the Prophet, He has swallowed up death to perpetuity, or
victorious-aie, Isa. 25.8. is translated by the Apostle, Death is swallowed up
to victory, that is, for ever: as the same word in Amos 8.7. and Lam. 5.20. is
also turned into Greek, by the LXXII. interpreters. Pulled up,] a similitude
taken from trees, applied here to the pulling down of cities: so planting and
pulling up of a people, are set one against another. Ier. 24.6. and 42.10. and
45.4. of them] twice respected, for vehemence: meaning, all and every of them:
or, with themselves, their memory is gone.

Verse. 8. Will judge] or, give doom unto. Two several words for judging, are
here used, as before. Psalm. 7.9. with righteousnesses] that is, with all manner
righteousnesses, and equity: or, most righteously, most equally. See the like
speech after, Psalm. 98.9. and 96.13. and often otherwhere.

Verse. 10. An high-refuge] in Hebrew Misgab, which is, an exaltation, that is,
an high-place, tower, or fort to resist the enemy, Ier. 48.1. wherein men are
protected, and escape their foes invasion, Deuteronomy. 2.36. for the oppressed] or,
the beaten down, the poor is so called, as being pounded or stamped by the
adversary. So Psalm. 10.18. and 74.21. at times] or in seasons, that is,
seasonably, at all times when they be in distress. So Psalm. 10.1.

Verse. 11. That know] or that acknowledge thy name: such are Gods people, Esa.
52.6. and shall by him be delivered and advanced. Psalm. 91.14.

Verse. 12. Dwells in Sion] or sits in Sion. Sitting is often used for
dwelling, as is noted, Psalm. 1.1. The word in is many times omitted in Hebrew;
but necessarily to be understood, as the text it self often shows; as beth,
house, for bebeth, in the house, 2 King. 14.14. compared with 2 Chronicles. 25.24.
and 2 Chronicles. 26.21. with 2 King. 15.5. and 2 Chronicles. 34.30. with 2 King. 23.2
his practices.] or wonted works. The original word signifies actions done
naturally, or purposely and studiously: designs, guise, manners, gests or
exercises enterprised advisedly, prosecuted studiously, usually or natural
disposition and inclination; as Prove. 20.11. 1 Samuel 25.3.

Verse. 13. He that seeks out] or requires bloods, that is God, who
follows, finds out, punishes and avengeth bloodshed or murder; according
to the law, Genesis 9.5, 6. meek-afflicted] The original here has a double
reading, Ghnanajim, that is, afflicted, poor: and Ghnanavim, meek, modest,
lowly; for affliction often causes meeknes. Therefore also Ghnani, that is
afflicted; is translated praus, Meek. Mat. 21.5. from Zach. 9.9.

Verse. 14 From my haters] that is, which comes upon me, from them.
lifting-up] or O lifter up, (exalter) of me. gates of death] This notes
present peril and fear of death as being now near at the very door or gate
thereof; Genesis 4.7 Judge. 5.8. It notes also, power, strength, and jurisdiction
which death has; (even reigning, as the Apostle says Romans 1.14.) because
Magistrates sat, and judgments were executed at the gates of cities; Deuteronomy.
22.15. Job 31.21. Amos. 5.10.15. So in other Scriptutes the gates of death and
of hell, denote their peril, strength and horror; Psalm. 107, 18. Isa. 38.10.
Mat. 16.18. Job 38.17.

Verse. 15. Gates of the daughter of Sion] these are opposed to the former gates
of death; and mean, the public places where Gods people came together, at Sion
gates, where God sat, verse. 12. and which he loved most, Psalm. 87.2. The
daughter of Sion signifies the the Church or Congregation there gathered; (as
also the Chaldee paraphrase here shows:) for every chief city, was counted
as a mother; 2 Samuel 20.19. (whereupon the Apostle calls Jerusalem, the mother
of us all, Gal. 4.26) the villages that were near and pertained unto such
cities, are called daughters, Ios. 15.45. 2 Chronicles. 13.19. Psalm. 48.12. and the
inhabitants there seated, or assemblies of people resorting thither are
likewise named daughters, as being bred, born, nourished there, and subject
thereto. Such speeches are often in the scripture, as daughter of Jerusalem,
Lam. 2.19. daughter of Sion, Matt. 21.5. from Zach. 9.9. daughter of my people;
Ier. 4.11. daughter of Tyrus, Psalm. 45.13. daughter of Babel, Psalm. 137.8. and
the like.

Verse. 17. judgment he has done] or, by the judgment that he has executed.
his palms] the wickeds own hands; called the palms or hollowes, for the secret
manner of working. So Psalm. 7.4. Meditation, Selah] meaning that this is a
matter of deep meditation, worthy to be well minded, and spoken or sung with
earnest consideration always. Some retain the Hebrew word, Higgajon, Selah;
for that it may import a kind of Song or tune, (as the Greek turns it,) being
found in this form, only here, and in Psalm. 92.4.

Verse. 18. into the hel] into hell it self: for the word into is in effect twice
put in the Hebrew, for more vehemency.

Verse. 19. needy-onely] two names are here given to the poor; Aebjon, needy and
desirous, which imports want of things needful, to be supplied by
liberality. Psalm. 132.15. and 112.9. Ghnaniii, poor-afflicted, which need help
and deliverance from vexation: as before verse. 13. yet this precise difference,
is not always observed in scripture. perish for ay] that is, shall never
perish. Here the word not, set in tho beginning, serves for a denial of all that follows; shall not be forgotten, shall not perish, of be lost. Contrary
to this, is the wickeds-hope expectation, which shall perish. Prove. 10.28. Job.
8.13. and 11 20. be strong] or, strengthen, confirm, and harden himself: and so
prevail. This is fitly opposed both to the name and nature of man, which is
infirm, sorrowful, and mortal.

Verse. 21. Put a fear in them] or strike a terror in them. The original moroh
(used in this place only,) seems to be put for Mora: which is Fear, or
Terror, Psalm. 76.12. these two Hebrew Letters being often put one for another;
as Amon, Ier. 52.15. for Hamon, 2 King. 25.11. Shina, 2. King. 25.29. for
Shinnah, Ier. 52.33. Or according to the Letters it may come of Horah to teach;
and signify a law or doctrine. sorry-men] in Hebrew Aenosh, the proper name of
Adams nephew, Genesis 4.26. signifying Sorrowful; and is after commonly given to
every man for his doleful state and mortality, Psalm. 8.5. and here
collectively is the name of mankind.

Annotations, Psalm X.
THis Psalm, is in the Greek version, a continuance and part of the former 9.
Whereupon the count of the Psalms following does in the Greek books, and such
as follow them, differ from the Hebrew: the 11. Psalm being reckned for the 10.
the 12. for the 11. and so forward. Yet to make up the number of 150. Psalms*
they divide the 147. into two. Likewise the 114. and 115. Psalms they make
one; and the 116. they part in two.

Verse 1. Wherefore do thou stand] or, will thou stand? This form of
expostulation, implies an earnest prayer, Lord stand not far off. For
questions may be resolved into plain affirmations or denyals: as where one
Evangelist says, why diseasest thou the master? Mark. 5.35. another says
Disease not the master. Luk 8.49. do thou hide] to weet thine eyes; as Esa.
1.15. or, thine ear, as Lam. 3.56. or thy self. times in distress] that is,
when we are in distress. So Psalm. 9.10. Times, may specially note troublous
times. See Psalm. 31.16.

Verse. 2. he hotly-pursueth] or, burn-doth the poor, does broil in afflictions;
is hotly-persecuted. See Psalm. 7.14. The Apostle uses like speech, for
exceeding grief; 2. Cor. 11.19. who is offended and burn not? crafty-purposes]
or, devises, policies, stratagemes. The word noting sometime good purposes, and
sometime evil. See also Psalm. 26.10.

Verse. 3. praise does the wicked] to weet, himself, or his fortune; for that he
has what his soul desires. And the soul of the wicked, desires: Prove. 21.10.
the covetous] or gain-thirstie, he blesses, to weet, himself, and his fortune.
The covetous, the scraper together, or Gather-good, has his name, of a word
which sometime signifies to pierce or, wound, Joel 2.8. And fitly is the
gain-thirstie so called, both for the hurt he does to others, whose life often he
would take away, Prove. 1.19. and for that he wounds himself with his greedy
cark: the holy Ghost testifying that such as lust after gain, do pierce
themselves through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy 6.10. he despiteth] or
comtemptuously provokes; with evil words or carriage, and so incenseth, or
stirs him to wrath. So verse. 13.

Verse. 4. such is the loftines of his nose] or, according to the height of his
countenance, or, of his anger. The nose and casting up of it, signifies a
proud, scornful, and sometimes an angry countenance, For as the highness of the
heart Psalm. 131.1. and of the spirit, Prove. 16.18. notes inward pride: so the
loftines of the eyes, Psalm. 101.5. and here of the nose; notes outward pride,
and disdainful behavior. The Hebrew has one word, for the nose, and for
anger, (as is observed Psalm. 2.5.) the Greek here says, according to the
multitude of his anger; meaning that, whereby he persecuteth the poor. he
seeks not] nothing regards, or cares, to weet, for God, or his will. in
all his crafty purposes.] or, be all his presumptuous-cogitations; meaning that
he does not once think of God, whiles so he purposes against the poor: or he
presumes in heart, and fain would so persuade himself, that there is no God.
He studieth Atheism: as Psalm. 14, 1.

Verse. 5. His ways do, etc.] or, bring-forth do his ways; a similitude from
bringing forth children with pain, which being effected, causes joy, John. 16,
21. Therefore here, (as in Job 20, 21.) it is used for good success and (as
the Chaldee explayneth it,) prosperity. Or referring it to the poor whom he
persecuteth; we may read, his ways make sorrowful, or are grievous: the Greek
says, are polluted. in all time] or, in every time: that is, always,
continually. So Ps. 34, 2. and 62, 9. and 106, 3. so the Apostle in Greek
says, praying in all time; that is, always; Ephesians. 6.18. like phrase is, in all
day, that is, daily, Psalm. 145, 2. above his sight] or out of his presence,
from before him. he puffeth] that is, defieth and sets them at naught;
dominiers over them (as the Greek translateth it;) as if he could overthrow
them with his breath. Or he puffs, blows; and consequently sets them on
fire, and consumes them: as, scornful men puff, (that is, inflame, or as the
Greek says, burn,) the city, Prove. 29.8. So Ezekiel. 21.31.

Verse. 6, I shall not be in evil:] or, that am not in evil; that is, I who am
not now in evil, shall never be, meaning by evil, trouble; or affliction; as
the Israelites saw themselves in evil, Exo. 5.19. or, perhaps, by evil, he
means sin and malicousnes, (as when Aaron said, the people were in evil,
Exo. 32.22.) and then he boasts here of his innocence; for which he promises
to himself, a settled estate.

Verse. 7. of cursing] or, of execration, or adjuration. The Hebrew Alah
signifies an oath with execration, or cursing; Number. 1.21. for cursing was
added to an oath, for to confirm it the more, Neh. 10.26. Deuteronomy. 29.12.21.
therefore one and the same thing is called both an oath, and a curse, Genesis
24.8.41. This here, the Apostle calls in Greek Ara, Cursing, Romans 3.14.
deceits and fraud] or, impostures and inward-guile; that is, outward deceitful
shows and promises, and privy guile lurking in the heart.

Verse. 8. in the wayting-place of the villages] or, the ambush of the court
yards: both which have their name in Hebrew of the grass that grows in them:
as it were grasse-yards. And because such places commonly are rich men's
possessions, therefore (it seems) the Greek translateth in the waiting place
with the rich.

V. 10. He croucheth] or, And he crusheth, to weet, himself; least he should be
espied. See this spoken of the Lion, Job 39.2. that fall may into his strong
paws a troup] or, and he falls with his strong-pawes on the troup of poor.
Strong pawes] or Strong members; Here wants a word to be supplied; as often
in this and other tongues: as a full; for a full cup, Psalm. 73.10. a new; for
anew sword: 2. Sam. 21.16. cold; for cold water. Mat. 10.42. This want,
sometime the scripture it self supplieth, in repeating histories; as, he set in
Aram, 1 Chronicles. 18.6. for he set garrisons in Aram, 2 Samuel 8.6. the first of the
feast, Mat. 26.17. for the first day of the feast: Mark. 14.12. So after, Psalm.
22.13. and 27.4. troup-of-poor.] or, the weak, the poor: called here by a name,
that notes their power, wealth, and faculty, to be dimmed or decayed, or, a
company of obscure persons. This word is no where found, but thrice in this
psalm, in the 8. verse before; in this, and again in the 14.

Verse. 11. he will not see] or, not at all respect. The like profane speeches
of the wicked, are set down, Psalm. 94.7. Ezekiel. 8.12. and 9.9. Isa. 29.15.

V. 12. lift up thy hand] that is, show openly the power for help of thy
people, and confusion of thy foes; lifting up the hand, is applied to the
publishing and manifesting of the Gospel, Isa. 49.22. sometime, for sign of
help, Ezekiel. 20.5. sometime for hurt, 2. Sam. 18.28; and sometime, for sign of
an oath; as Psalm. 106.26. Deuteronomy. 32.40 In this later sense the Chaldee
paraphrast takes it here; Confirm the oath of thy hand.

Verse. 14. to give it into thine hand;] that is, to take the matter into thy
hand, to manage it: or, to give with thy hand, that is, liberally to recompense
the evil that is done, unto thee etc.] or upon thee the poor leaves, to weet,
his cause, or himself. To leave, is to committ unto ones fidelity, Genesis 39.6.
Esa. 10.3. Job 36, 14. See also 1 Timothy 1.12.

Verse. 15. Break the arm:] the arm notes strength, means, power, and help,
Ezekiel. 30.21.25. Isa. 33.2. Dan. 11.6.22. also, violence, Job 35.9. In respect
of all these, the arms of wicked men shallbe broken. Psalm. 37.17. till thou
find none.] In Ier. 50.20. the sins of Gods people, being sought for, are
not found, because of his mercy in pardoning them: but here of the wicked, they
are not found, because of his judgment in consuming them: as he says in Ezekiel.
23.48. thus will I cause wickedness to cease out of the land.

V. 16. heathens out of his land.] the land of Canaan, whose peoples the Lord
drove out; Ps. 44.3. and of which he said, the land is mine: Lev. 25.23. It may
also be understood of the wicked Israelites, which in conditions were like the
heathens, and born of them, Ezekiel. 16.3. such were also called heathens, Ps.
2.1. as appears by Act. 4.27.

Verse. 17. thou preparest-firm] to weet, by thy spirit, which helps the
infirmities of men that know not what to pray as they ought. Romans 8.26. Or we
may read it prayer-wise, prepare thou their heart, apply, etc. for prayers are
often made in faith, as if they were already done; as, where one says, it has
pleased thee to bless, 1 Chronicles. 17.27. another says, let it please thee to
bless, 2 Samuel 7.29.

Verse. 18. that he add not] he, that is, the wicked man spoken of before, verse.
15. unless, we refer it to that which follows, the man of the earth. to
daunt with terror] or, to break-with fear; to dismay, or terrify. The word is
indifferent, applied sometime to God. Psalm. 89, 8. sometime to wicked men, Psalm.
37.35. The Apostle following the Greek version, says, be not troubled, 1 Pet.
3.14. for, be not daunted-with-fear, Esa. 8.12. but more fully the word is
opened, by Paul, saying, in nothing be terrified (or daunted) of your
adversaries, Philip. 1.28. pturomenor. sory-man, out of the earth] or sory-men,
(Aenosh,) as Psalm. 9.21. This may be referred to the fatherless and oppressed,
whom the wicked would daunt and skare out of the earth, or land. Or, changing
the order of the words; thus, that man of the earth, (that is, earthly man,)
dee no more terrify, the meek*

Annotations, Psalm XI.
Verse. 1. A Psalm of David:] this word Psalm wanting in the Hebrew, is supplied
in the Greek. So in Psalm. 14. and 25. and 26. and 27. and many other. See the
note on Psalm. 10.10. flee] or flitt. In the Hebrew there is a double reading,
Flee-thou, and Flee-yee; meaning David in special, and his retinew with him.
to your mount] or, from your mount: but the Greek and Chaldee supplieth the
word to. In mounts, rocks, and caves, David hidd himself from Saul's
persecution. 1. Sam. 23.14. and 24.3.4. as a bird] This notes his danger, who
was hunted as a partrich on the mountains, 1. Sam. 26.20. and his fear; as in
Isa. 16.2. Hereupon is that proverb; As a bird fleeing from her nest: so is a
man, fleeing from his place. Prove. 27.8.

Verse. 3. For the foundations] or the things-set-up. The original word
Shathoth, signifies things-orderly-set and disposed: and may be applied to
many things; as in buildings, to the foundation; in hunting, unto nets or
snares; in the common wealth, unto constitutions or positive-lawes, in wars,
unto engines, or leaguers, as Psalm. 3.7. in the mind of man, unto purposes,
plots, deliberations; in religion, unto faith, which is the foundation, and
beginning of the hypostasis; or the hypostasis (that is the subsistence and
expectation) of things hoped for. Hebr. 3.14. and 11.1. According to all, or
most of these, may this sentence be applied; either to the plotts, purposes,
snares, set for David's ruin, but pulled down by the Lord: or to Saul's estate
and kingdom which seemed settled, but by the Lord was overthrown; or, to
David's estate and faith, which the enemies boasted to be come to naught. The
Greek version of the Lxx. translateth thus, for the things-that thou
hast-perfected, they have destroyed. are cast-down] or, shall be broken-down,
destroyed.

Verse. 4. palace of his holynes] or his holy palace: or Temple, which here
may be taken for very heaven: as also in Hab. 2.20. for the holy places made
with hands, were antitypes (or answerable similitudes) of the true sanctuary,
Heb. 9.24.

Verse. 5. prove the just] or try them; by the persecution of the wicked, as
well as by other afflictions. Psalm. 66.10.11.12. his soul] that is, Gods soul
does hate. This is attributed to God, after the manner of men; as he is also
said to have eyes, hands, ears, etc. So Levit. 26.11. my soul shall not loath
you.

Verse. 6. snares] hereby is often meant in scripture, strange sudden and
inevitable judgments. Job 22.10. and 18.9.10. Isa. 8.14. and 24.17.18. fire
and brimstones] such was the wrath that fell on Sodom and the cities by it,
Genesis 19, 24. and was threatened unto Gog, Ezekiel. 38.22. and figureth the
vengeance of eternal fire. Jude 7. Rev. 20.10 wind of burning-stormes] or, of
blasting-tempests, that is, a horrible-blasting whirlewind. David felt such
from his persecutors, Psalm. 119.53. and here they feel such from God, for
persecuting him. Jeremy applies this word, to the burning-storm of hunger,
Lam. 5.10. but it is properly a hideous burning tempest, rushing out of the
darksom cloud; such as the Evangelist calls anemos tuphonicos, a
smouldry-burning wind, named in Greek Euroclydon, Act. 27, 14, the portion of
their cup] that is, the due measure of their punishment. See Psalm. 75, 9 and
16.5.

Verse. 7 loves justices] that is, all manner justice; both to punish the evil,
and preserve the good, both just causes and persons. his face] or their faces;
in mystery of the holy Trinity; as often in the scripture. See Psalm. 149, 2.
The Hebrew here may be Englished, the face (the aspects) of them, or of him:
See the note on Psalm. 2.3. will view the righteous] usually-vieweth the right.
And this notes the manifesting of Gods care, and favor, toward the
righteous, both cause and person.

Annotations, Psalm. XII.
Verse. 2. SAve] or help. This word it largely used, for all manner saving,
helping, delivering, preserving, etc. as to help, or defend from injury, Exodus
2.17. 2. King. 6.26.27. to deliver from all adversities; Psalm. 34.7. as from
sickness, Matt. 9.21. Mark. 6.56. from drowning, Mat. 8 25. from shipwreck, Act.
27.31. from hands of enemies, Psalm. 18.4. Jude 5. from sin, Mat 1.21. from
death, Mat. 27.40. from wrath, Romans 5.9. and infinite the like. And is not
only a helping in trouble, but a riddance out of it; as one Evangelist says,
let us see if Elias will come and save him; Matt. 27.49. an other says; if
Elias will come and take him down. Mark. 15.36. the faithful are diminished] or
faiths, fidelities are ceased. The orginal word is used, both for true and
faithful persons 2 Samuel 20, 19. and for truths or fidelities, Isa. 26.2.

Verse. 3. false-vanity] or vain falshod. This word (Shav) notes out vanity
both of words; and deeds, Exodus 20.7. Ier. 2.30. and often that which is also
false, Exo. 23.1. as that which Moses in Exo. 20 16. calls witness of
falsehood, (Sheker,) relating it, he calls false-vanitie, (Shav) Deuteronomy. 5.20.
with his next friend] or his neighbor, his friend with whom he is associate.
Sometime this word is used for a special friend, 2 Samuel 13.3. Psalm. 35.14.
Prove. 17.17. but often generally for a neighbor, or next; as the new testament
translateth it in Greek, Mat. 19.19. from Levit. 19.18. And who is our
neighbor, our Lord teaches us, Luke 10.29.36. with lip of flatteries] that
is, smoth deceitful speeches: a lip being sometime put for a speech or language,
Genesis 11.1. Of such deceivers, that had taught their tongues to speak lies,
Jeremy also complayneth, Chap. 9.4.5. a heart and a heart] that is a double
heart, and deceitful. So, stone and stone, Ephah and Ephah, Deuteronomy. 23.13.14.
means double and deceitful weights and measures. The men of Zabulun are
commended for that they were not thus of a heart and a heart. 1. Chron. 12.33.

Verse. 5. our lips are with us] or, are ours: that is, we have skill, power, and
liberty to speak; who shall control us?

Verse. 6 set in salvation] that is, deliver out of all misery, and safely
settle in health, and prosperous estate. he shall have breathing] or, he
(meaning God) will give breathing, or respiration to him, that is, to every
poor man, (as after in verse 8.) or, he will breath-out, that is speak plainly
to him. The Greek, changing the person, translateth parrhesiasomai, that is, I
wil-speak plainly with him. So it notes the bold assured comfort which God by
promise gives to the afflicted: whose faithful word is therefore commended in
the verse following. This word sometime is used for plain and confident
breathing out, or uttering of the truth. Habak. 2.3. Prove. 12.17. Or we may
understand it of the wicked; thus, I will set in salvation him whom he puffs
at: that is, whom the wicked boldly defieth; (as this word was used before,
Psalm. 10.5.) or, whom he has ensnared.

Verse. 7. The sayings] or, the words, promises. tried] examined, fined, as in
fire. The like praise of Gods pure word, is in Psalm. 18.31. and 119.140. Prove.
30.5. a subliming furnace of earth] This furnace, called Ghnalil, a
sublimatorie, of subliming or causing to ascend upward, is the best and
choicest vessel for trying and subliming of metal; called therefore in Greek
Dokimion, a Trial. And the Apostle has the like word for a Trial of says,
better then gold. 1 Pet. 1.7. seven times] or seven fold: that is, many times,
fully and sufficiently. Seven is a perfect number used for many. 1 Samuel 2.5.
Prove. 24.16. and 26.25.

Verse. 8. preserve him] that is, every one of them: so before in the end of the
6. verse: and often in the scripture, like sudden change of number may be
observed. It may also be read prayer wise, keep them, Preserve him. from this
generation] that is, from the men of this generation: As when Christ said,
Whereto shall I liken this generation; Mat. 11.16. he meant, Whereto shall I
liken the men of this generation? Luke 7 31. The like may be seen in Mat.
12.42. compared with Luke 11.31. The original word Dor, that is, generation,
race, or age, has the signification of durance, or durable dwelling and
abiding, Psalm. 84.11. and so notes the whole age or time that a man dureth in
this world, Eccles. 1.4. and so consequently for a multitude of men that live
together in any age: as here, and Deuteronomy. 1.35. and in many other places.

Verse. 9. vilenes] or, Vile-luxuriousnes, riotize. The word zulluth here used,
is derived from zolel, that is, a rioter, glutton, or luxurious-person; Deuteronomy.
21.20. Prove. 23.21. and consequently one vile, contemptible, and naught-worth;
opposed unto the precious, Ier. 15.19. And here vileness or riotize, may either
be meant of the vice it self; or of vicious doctrine, opposed to Gods precious
word, before spoken of verse. 7. or a vile and riotous person, may so be called,
for more vehemence sake, as Pride, for the proud man, Psalm. 36.12. See the
annotation there.

Annotation, Psalm. XIII.
Verse. 1. HIde thy face] that is, withdraw thy favorable countenance and
comfort. This is contrary to the lifting up of the light of Gods face, Psalm.
4.7. and imports trouble and grife; and is caused by sin, and is the cause of
many adversities and discomforts: Deuteronomy. 31.17.18. Isa. 59.2. Ezekiel. 39.23, 24,
29. therefore this prophet does often complain hereof, and pray against it,
Psalm. 33.8, and 104.29, and 88.15, and 69.18, and 102.3. and 143.7, and 27.9.

Verse. 3. Set counsels] that is, consult and devise, with my self, how to
escape.

Verse. 4. Lighten my eyes] that is, make them see clear, and consequently, make
me joyful; for, the light of the eyes, rejoices the heart, Prove. 15.30. The
eyes are said to be enlightened, when penury, sorrow, sickness, or other
affliction whereby they were dolled, is done away; and the senses by some
means refreshed, 1 Samuel 14.27, 29. Esr. 9.8. also when ignorance is by Gods
word and spirit done out of the mind. Psalm. 19.9 Ephesians. 1.18. See also Psalm.
38.11. Least I sleep] or, that I-sleep not the death: that is, least I die. For
death is often called sleep, in the scripture; Psalm. 76.6. Job 3.1* 3, and
14.12. Act. 7.60, and 13.36. the sleep of eternity, Ier. 51.39.

Verse. 6. But I,] or, And I; as for me; bounteously-rewarded] The original
word Gamal signifies to give one thing for an other; as prosperity, after one
has been in adversity, etc. And though it be sometime used for rewarding evil
for good, Psalm. 7.5. or evil for evil, Psalm. 137.8. yet from God to his
people, it commonly signifies a bountiful rewarding of good things, in stead
of evil, which we rather deserve. So Psalm. 116.7, and 119.17, and 142.8, and
103 2, 10.

Annotations, Psalm. XIV.
Verse. 1 THe foole] Nabal (which has the signification of fading, dying, or
falling away as does a leaf or flower, Isa. 40.8. 1 Pet. 1.24.) is a title
given to the foolish man, as having lost the juice and sap of wisdom, reason,
honesty, godliness; being fallen from grace, ungrateful, and without the life
of God; as a dead karkase. (which of this word is called Nebalah, Levit.
11.40.) and therefore ignoble, and of vile esteem: opposed to the noble man,
Isa. 32.5. The Apostle in Greek turns it imprudent or without understanding;
Romans 10.19. from Deuteronomy. 32.21. says in his heart] that is, minds, and
persuades himself in secret. So Psalm. 10.4. and 53.2. they have corrupted]
marred, to weet, themselves; Therefore the Greek says, they are corrupted This
word is used for corruption both of religion and manners, by idolatry and other
vices, Exodus 32.7. Deuteronomy. 31.29. Genesis 6.12. And that which he spoke before as of
one man, he now applies to all mankind. made abominable] or made loathsome, to
weet, their action, or themselves, as the Greek says, they are abominable: or
become loathsome. So in 1 King. 21.26, practise] meaning their evil actions,
therefore in Psalm 53.2. it is ghnavel, evil; which here, is ghnalilah, action.

Verse. 3. Al is] or The all that is, the whole universal multitude is
departed; All in general, and every one in particular, as is expressed, Psalm.
53, 4. become unprofitable] or fit for no use; so the Apostle expresses it in
Greek; the word here used, being rare, and taken from Job 15.16. and betokens
a thing lothsom, stinking, and so unfit for use.

Verse. 4. Do they not know?] meaning, doubtless they know; and cannot plead
ignorance. A question has often the force of an earnest asseveration. eat my
people] that is, the poor; as is added for explanation, in Exodus 22.25. for
Gods people commonly are the poorer sort, Iam. 2.5, 6. Luke 6.20. and such are
eaten or devoured of the wicked, Psalm. 79.7. who eat their flesh, and flay off
their skin, and chop them in pieces as flesh for the cauldron, Mic. 3.3. as
they eat bread] the word as seems here to be understood; or without it, we
may read, they eat bread; that is, are secure, and without remorse, do give
themselves to eating and drinking. So eating of bread, is used for banqueting;
Exodus 18.12.

Verse. 5. There dread they a dread] that is, they are sore a dread; or fear a
great fear, as Luk 2.9. So, has sinned a sin, Lam. 1.8. that is, has
grievously sinned. And by there, he means the suddainnes of it, as also in
Psalm. 36.13 or, there, that is, in their heart and conscience. because God is]
this may be taken as a cause of their foresaid fear; as Saul was afraid of
David, 1 Samuel 18.14, 15. or it is an opposition to their dread; but God is in
the just generation, and therefore they dread not, but are defended from the
siege of their enemies; as Psalm. 53.6.

Ver. 6. Ye would make abashed] that is, ye reproach it, and would confound,
frustrate, and bring it to nothing. So abashing and shame, is often used, for
frustration of ones purpose and hope, Psalm. 6.11. because Iehovah] or, but
Jehovah is his shelter, and hope, therefore he shall not be abashed, Psalm.
25.3. Contrariwise, the wicked shall be abashed, because God refuses them, Psalm.
53.6.

Verse. 7. Who will give] or, O that some would give! it is a form of wishing,
often used in the scripture; as Psalm. 55.7. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Job 6.8. out of Sion]
this is meant of Christ the salvation of God to Israel, who was expected out of
Sion; as it is written; the redeemer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn
away impieties from Iaakob, Romans 11.26. returns the captivity] that is,
brings again those that were led captives: according to the promise, Deuteronomy.
30.3. and this was performed by Christ, Luke 4.18. Ephe. 4.8. Captivity, or
Leading-away; is here used, for the people led-away; as another word of like
signification is so used, Ezekiel. 11.24, 25. So Ps. 126. Iaakob, Israel] that is,
Gods people, the posterity of Iaakob, who also was called Israel: (So Aaron is
put for his posterity, the Aaronites, 1 Chronicles. 12.27. and 27.12 and David for
his children, 1 Chronicles. 4.31.) Iaakob is a name that notes infirmity; for he
strove for the first birthright, but obtained it not, when he took his brother
by the heel in the womb; and thereupon was called Iaakob, Gen, 25.22, 26. But
Israel is a name of power and principality; for after he had wrastled with the
Angel, behaved himself princely, wept, prayed, and prevailed, his name was
changed from Iaakob to Israel; as a prince or prevailer with God. 32.24, 26,
28. Hos. 12.3, 4, Therefore is the name Israel, given to all Gods people; even
the Gentiles also that have Iaakobs faith; Gal. 6.16. as long before, Iether,
who by nature was an Ismaelite, 1 Chronicles. 7.17. was for his faith and religion,
called an Israelite, 2 Samuel, 17.25. It may also be observed, how in this word
Israel are contained the first letters of the names of Abraham and Sarah his
wife, of Isaak and Rebekah his wife, of Iaakob and of both his wives Leah and
Rachel: all which persons (except Rachel,) were also buried together in one
cave, Genesis 49.29, 31.

Annotations, Psalm XV.
Verse. 1. IN thy tent] or pavilion: called in Hebrew Ohel, of spreading over.
God caused an habitation to be made in the wilderness, wherein he dwelt among
men: Exodus 26. Psalm. 78.60. that mansion, made often curtains, he called
Mishcan, an Habitacle, or Tabernacle; Exodus 26.1. Psalm. 26.8. over which, other
curtains were made, and cast for a covering, called Ohel, a Tent or covering.
Exo. 26.7. Hereupon the whole place is called, sometime Ohel, a tent, sometime
Miscan a tabernacle. To this tent, all Gods people were to come for his public
worship, Levit. 17.4, 5. Deuteronomy, 12.5, 6. It was a movable place; and so differed
from a house or settled habitation; 2 Samuel 7.1, 6. 1 Chronicles. 17.5. yet for the
use, it is sometime called a house, as is noted on Psalm. 5.^. mountain] the
mount Sion; whereof see, Psalm. 2.6.

Verse. 2. Walks perfect] that is, leads his life perfect, entire, simple,
sincere, and unblemished. It notes the integrity that is before God, in heart
and spirit; according to the covenant, walk before me, and be perfect, Genesis
17.1. and thou shall be perfect with Jehovah thy God; Deuteronomy. 18.13. Mat. 5, 48.
Therefore this perfectness must first be in the heart, Psalm. 119.80. then in
the ways, Psalm. 18.33. and 119.1. worketh] or effects justice: this is
wrought by faith, Heb. 11.33. and such a man is acceptacle to God Act. 10.35.

Verse. 3. Slandereth not] or defameth not, backhiteth not. This word Ragall
(from whence Regel, a foot, is derived) properly notes a going to and fro,
prying and spying, and carrying tales and rumors; and is used for defaming, or
calumniating by craft and guile, 2 Samuel, 19.27. and here generally for all
busy, crafty, deceitful, or malicious abuse of the tongue: which the Greek
expresses by using fraud or dole; edolose. takes not up a reproach] or lays
not on; or bears not a reproach. This imports both the first raising, and
the after receiving and reporting of a reproachful tale. Exodus 23, 1. Levit.
19, 16. The like phrase is used sometime for bearing or suffering reproach,
Psalm. 69, 8. Ezekiel. 36, 15. that sense is not amiss here; bears not reproach
upon his neighbor; that is, suffers not his neighbor to be reproached: as
elsewhere he says, bear not sin upon thy neighbor; or suffer him not to sin,
Levit. 19 17.

Verse. 4. In whose eyes an abject] or In his eyes, a reprobate is contemned.
The order also may be changed thus, in whose eyes the contemptible (or vile
person, as Dan. 11.21.) is rejected. See examples of such carriage, 2 King, 3,
14. Esth. 3, 2. Luke 23, 9. swears to his hurt,] or to his evil; his
hinderance; or to afflict himself, Which may be understood of oaths to men,
turning to his own loss and damage, which yet he keeps; or of oaths to God,
vowing to afflict himself, by abstinence. The Hebrew word which signifies
evil, is often used for affliction; as in Ruth 1, 21. the Almighty has done
evil unto me* that is, has afflicted me. Otherwise if we understand it of
doing evil to another, the meaning is, swears to doe-evill, but does not
recompense it; that is, performs it not: for the word change, here used,
sometime signifies recompense, as Job. 15, 31. Compare this place with the law
for swearing to do evil, or good, Levit. 5, 4. The Greek translateth swears
to his neighbor: for rangh, evil; reading reangh, a neigbour: this sense is
good. And rangh, though not usual, may be taken for a neighbor, here, and in
Prove. 6.24.

Verse. 5. Silver] that is, money or coin; usually made of silver. to biting
usury] or with biting, that is, usury, fitly so called, because it hiteth and
consumes the borower and his substance. be moved] or shaken, removed. And
commonly it implies in it, some evil to the thing moved; Psalm. 38, 17, and
94, 18, and 13, 5, and 60, 4. and often in the Psalms; therefore they just have
this privilege of God, never to be moved. Psalm. 55, 23. Prove. 10, 30, and 12,
3.

Annotations, Psalm. XVI.
Verse. 1. MIchtam of David:] David's jewel; or notable song. Cethem is
fine-glistring-gold; Psalm. 45, 10. of that this Michtam may be derived, for a
golden jewel: and so note the excellency of this Psam. The like title is
before the 56, 57, 58.59. and 60. Psalms. Preserve me O God] Christ speaks
this Psalm, by David his figure, as we are taught in the new Testament, Act.
2.25, 31, and 13, 35. and here is handled his mediatorship, death, resurrection
and ascension.

Verse. 2. Thou have said] he speaks this to himself; Thou O my soul say:
so the Chaldee paraphrase explaineth it: and the Greek to make it plainer,
changes the person, translating, I have said. Or, it may be spoken to the
house or church of Christ. my good not unto thee] understand, extends not, or
pertains not to thee; or, is not for thee; which the Greek expounds thus,
of my goods thou have no need. For, if man be just, what gives he to God: or
what receives he at his hand; Job 35.7

Verse. 3. To the saints] to weet, my good extends: as elsewhere Christ says,
for their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also may be sanctified, through
the truth, Ioh. 17.19. are in earth] Such is the meaning of the Hebrew phrase,
in earth they: the relative being put of the verb; which sometime the Hebrew it
self explaineth: as, he not the King of Israel, 1 King. 22.33. for it was not
the King. 2 Chronicles. 18.32. so, he overseer, 2 King. 25.19. for, was overseer;
Ier. 52.25. and sundry tho like. excellent] or noble, glorious, wonderful: an
honorable title given to Christians. See Psalm. 8.2. all my delight in them]
or, in whom all my pleasure is. Hebrew Chephtsi-bam, that is, my pleasure in
them; so in Isa. 62.4 the church is called Chephtsi-bah; that is, my pleasure
in her.

Verse. 4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied] or, are multiplied. This is meant
of Idolaters, who hastily endow, that is, offer sacrifice to another God, and
so increase their griefs; which may be understood of afflictions, or of
grievous Idols: for the Hebrew ghnatsabim, sorrows, is often used for Idols, as
in Psalm. 115.4. and so the Chaldee paraphrast takes it here. Accordingly the
sense may be this, They whose grievous-Idols are multiplied, they that endow
another God: I will not power out their oblations, that is, I will not partake
with them, or be a mediator for them. endow an other] or hasten to an other. A
similitude from dowries given in marriages, meaning gifts and oblations hastily
brought for divine worship. powre-out-oblations] or shed-offerings; effusions
properly, put by figure of speech for effused or powered out liquor, commonly
called drink offerings, which were wont to be powred-out upon the sacrifices;
and by Gods law were to be of wine or Shecar, Number. 15.5, 7, 10, and 28, 7. but
among idolaters were of blood. take-up their names] or, bear their names; that
is, not mention or speak of them; according to the law, Exodus 23.13. Ias. 23.7.

Verse. 5. Of my part] or, of my partage; that is, of the inheritance parted,
shared, and dealt unto me. So the Greek turns it, of mine inheritance. The
word is generally used for lands, oities, goods, spoils, etc. that are shared
out. And this here has reference to the law of the Priests, which had in part
among the people, for that the Lord was their part and inheritance, Number. 18.20.
The Lord is his peoples part or share, Ier. 10.16, and 51.19. and again, his
people are called his part, Deuteronomy. 32.9. my cup] that is, measure and portion,
of joys or afflictions, Psalm. 23 5, and 11.6. my lot] this also is used for an
inheritance obtained by lot, Ios. 18.11. Judge. 1.3. The Apostle calls Christ's
church by this name, 1 Pet. 5.3.

Verse. 6. The lines] or cords, such were used in measuring of lands or
heritages, Psalm. 105.11, and 78.55. 2 Samuel 8.2. and figuratively a line is put
for the portion measured, Ios. 17.5.14. is fair for me] or, which is fair
unto me; that is, which pleases me well.

Verse. 7. Counseled me] given me counsel by his word and spirit, touching my
sufferings, and the glory that shall follow 1 Pet. 1.11. Luke 24.25, 26. God is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in work, Isa. 28.29.

Verse. 8. I have proposed,] equally-set, or levelled; the Greek (which the
Apostle follows) says, I beheld-before, Act. 2.25. he is at my right hand]
The word is, is supplied Act. 2.25. For God be at the right hand, is powerfully
to assist and comfort: as on the contrary, for Satan to be there, is greatly to
resist and annoy, Psalm. 109.6. Zech. 3.1. I shall not be moved] or, that I be
not moved, Act. 2.25.

Verse. 9. My glory] This by the Apostle is applied to the tongue, Act. 2.26.
which is the instrument wherewith we glorify God. See Psalm. 30.13, and 57.9.
Genesis 49.6. dwell in confidence] or, abide with hope, that is, boldly, safely,
and securely: meaning that his flesh (his body) should abide (or rest in the
grave, with sure hope of rising again from death, the third day.

Verse. 10. My soul] The Hebrew Nephesh, and Greek Psuchee, which we call Soul;
has the name of breathing or respiring; and is therefore sometime used for the
breath; Job 41.12. it is the vital spirit that all quick things move by,
therefore beasts, birds, fish and creeping things, are called in scripture,
living souls, Genesis 1.20.24. And this soul is sometime called the blood, Genesis
9.4. because it is in the blood of all quick things, Levit. 17.11. It is often
put for the life of creatures; as keep his soul, Job 2.6. that is, spare his
life: a righteous man regards the soul of his beast, Prove. 12.10. that is
the life: so to seek the soul, is to seek ones life, to take it away: Psalm. 54
5. Mat 2.20. It is also many times used for ones self; as Job justified his
soul; that is; himself, Job 32.2. take heed to your souls, that is, to your
selves, Deuteronomy. 4.15. so Genesis 19.20. Luke 12.19. And thus it is put for the
person, or whole man; as, give me the souls, that is, the persons; Genesis 14.21.
so an hungry soul, Psalm. 107.9. a full soul, Prove. 27.7. a weary soul. Prove.
25, 25. eight souls, 1 Pet. 3, 20. seventie five souls, Act. 7.14. and many the
like. It is used also for the lust, will, or desire, as Psalm. 41.3. Exodus 15.9.
for the affections of the heart, Psalm. 25, 1. for the body of man that has
life and sense, Psalm. 105, 18. and 35, 13. and finally, it is sometime a dead
body or corpse, Number. 5, 2. and 9.10. and 19.11.13. though this be figurative and
very unproper, for at ones death, the soul goes out, Genesis 35, 18. The word
being thus largely used, is to be weighed according to the matter and
circumstances of each text. For this here in the Psalm, compare it with the
like in other places, Psalm. 30, 4. and 116, 8. and 89, 49. and 88, 4. and
94.17. Christ gave his soul for the ransom of the world, and powered it out unto
death. Isa. 53, 12. Mat. 20, 28. John. 10.11, 15.17. and 15.13. to hell] or in
hell; in deathes-estate, or deadly-hed. This word hell, properly signifies
deep, whether it be high or low: and though by custom it is usually taken for
the place of Devils and damned wights; yet the word is more large: and as
heaven is not only the dwelling place of God and his saints, but generally all
places above us, where the stars, the clouds, the winds, the birds. etc. are,
as is showed, Psalm. 8, 9. so hell is all places beneath. Wherefore it may in
this large sense, serve to express the Hebrew word Sheol here used: which
Sheol is a deep place, Job. 11, 8. Prove. 9, 18. and said in scripture, to be
beneath, Psalm. 86, 13. Deuteronomy. 32.22. Isa. 14.9. as heaven is above: and it, with
the Greek word haides; is opposed to heaven Psalm. 139, 8. Amos 9, 2. Mat. 11,
23. It comes of Shaal, to Crave, ask, or require; because it requires all men
to come unto it, and is never satisfied, Psalm. 89, 49. Prove. 30.15, 16. and
27.20. It is a place or state, which all men, even the best, come unto: for
Jaakob made account to go thither, Genesis 37, 35. and Job desired to be there,
Job 14.13. (for he knew it should be his house, Job 17.13.) and our Lord Christ
was there, as this Psalm, with Act. 2.31. shows; and Solomon tells that all
go thither, Eccles. 9, 10. It is usually joined with grave, pit, corruption,
destruction, and the like words pertaining to death, with which Sheol or
haides, is joined as a companion thereof, Rev. 1.18. and 6.8. Dathan and
Abiram, when the earth swallowed them up, are said to go down quick into
Sheol, Number. 16.30, 32, 33. Jonas in the whales belly, was in the belly of
Sheol, Ion. 2.3. and other holy men that were delivered from great miseries and
perils of death, are said to be delivered from Sheol or hell, Psa. 86.13. and
30, 4. and 18, 6. and 116.3. and those that are dead, are gone to Sheol, Ezech.
32.21, 27. And as death is said figuratively, to have gates; Psalm. 9, 14. so
Sheol, haides, hell, has gates, Isa. 38, 10. Mat. 16.18. and a soul, Isa. 5,
14. and a hand, Psalm. 49, 16. and 89, 49. and a mouth, Psalm. 141, 7. and a
sting, which by Christ is done away; 1 Cor. 15, 55. so that as He was not left
to Sheol, but rose from death (from the heart of the earth, Mat. 12, 40.) the
third day: so all the saints shall likewise be delivered from Sheol, or haides,
Psalm. 49.16. Hos. 13.14. and it with death shall be abolished. Rev. 20.14. So by
the Hebrew word Sheol, the Greek haides, and our English hell, we are to
understand the place, estate, or depth of death; deadly-hed. And these words,
thou will not leave my soul to hell; teach us Christ's resurrection; as if he
should say, thou will not leave me to the power of death or grave, to be
consumed, but wilt raise me up from the dead; as the words following, and the
Apostles explanation do manifest. Act. 2.24, 31. and 13.34, 35. thou will not
give] not grant, permit, or suffer. An Hebrew phrase often used; as I gave thee
not to touch her, Genesis 20.6. God gave thee not to hurt me, Genesis 31.7. he will
not give you to go, Exodus 3, 19. So Psalm 55.23. and 66.9. and 118.18. and
many the like. to see corruption] that is, to feel corruption, or, to corrupt,
to rot. As to see death, is to die; Psalm. 89.49. Luke 2.26. John. 8.51.52. so,
to see evil, Psalm. 90.15. and to see good, Psalm. 34.13. is to feel and enjoy
it. So, to see the grave. Psalm. 49.10 corruption] the Hebrew Shachath properly
signifies corruption or rottennes, and is so to be taken here, as the Apostle
urges the force of the word, Act. 13.36.37. David saw corruption, but he whom
God raised up, saw not corruption. Yet often the word is used for a pit, or
ditch, wherein karkesses do corrupt. See the note on Psalm 7.16.

Verse. 11. Thou will make me know] or, have made me know; (as Act. 2.28.28.)
that is, give me experience of; wisest me. the way of life] or journey of
lives; the way or course to life from death, and to continue in life eternal;
the Apostle says, ways of life. Act. 2.28. before thy face] or, with thy
face: that is, in thy presence I shall have fulness of joys. The Greek, which
the Apostle follows, Act. 2.28. says, Thou will fill me with joy, with thy
face. The Hebrew eth penei and liphner; with, or before the face, are both one,
and sometime put one for an other: as 1 King. 12.6. with 2 Chronicles. 10.6. Gods
face or presence, as it is our greatest joy in this life, Exodus 33.14.15.16. so
shall it be in the next. Psalm 17.15. Wherefore the wicked shall then be
punished, from his presence. 2 These. 1.9. pleasures] or pleasantnesses (that
is, pleasant-ioyes) at thy right hand; the place of honor, delights, and joys
eternal. Mat. 25.33.34.46.

Annotations, Psalm XVII.
V. 1. IVstice] that is, my justice, as the Greek explaineth it: my just cause
and complaint. shrill-crie] or showting, that is, loud complaint: See Ps. 5.12.
without lips] or, not with lips of deceit: that is, which prayer is unfeigned;
not uttered; with guile.

Verse. 2. come forth] or proceed, that is, let my judgment be clearly
pronounced and executed. Therefore in Hos. 6.5. he adds the similitude of the
light or sun. righteousnesses] or equities: that is, all righteous causes and
persons; or my most righteous cause.

Verse. 3. have tried) or, examined me; to weet, as metal in the fire; So Psalm.
66.10. have not found] or shall not-at all find: to weet, any dross, or
deceit. shall not transgress.] or, transgresses not, that is, I purposed not
to transgress with my mouth, by murmuring against thy fiery trial of me, or,
that which I purposed, my mouth transgresses not, but my thoughts and words
agree.

Verse. 4. For the works] or concerning the works of men: Adam is here used for
all earthly men, have observed] or taken-heed of; to weet, least they should
hurt me; or, that I should not walk in them: as the next verse shows;
otherweise sometime, to observe ways, is to walk in them. Psalm. 18.22. the
break-through] that is, the robber or thief; as this word is expounded in
Greek; Mat. 21.13. from Ier. 7.11. one that breaks bounds or limits, houses,
hedges, laws, etc. So Ezekiel. 18.10.

Verse. 5. Sustain] Hold-up, or contain, this is spoken prayer wise to God, as
the next verse manifests: The Greek turns it, Make-perfect. It may also be
read, Sustaining or To sustain; and so have reference to the former verse, I
observed the robbers paths; not to walk in them, but to sustain (or
sustaining, holding-fast) my steps in thy paths. The Herbrew Tamoch may be
Englished Sustain thou; as Zachor is, remember thou, Exodus 20.8. Shamor,
observe thou, Deuteronomy. 5.12. my steps] or, my steppings-forward; my
right-forth-steps. So Psalm. 37.31. and 40.3. beaten paths] or round-paths;
properly the word signifies paths beaten with wagon wheels; here used
generally for straight, direct, and beaten ways. So Psalm. 23.3. and 65.12. and
140.6.

Verse. 7. marveilously seperate] or make marveilous; that is in wondrous and
excellent sort show me thy mercies, which are common unto all, let them now
peculiarly be bestowed on me. See Psalm. 4.4. The Greek says, Make-marveilous.
When Christ comes, he will be made marveilous in them that believe. 2 These.
1.10. hope for safetie] or, trust, to weet, in thee, as the Greek explaineth
it; or in thy right hand; as is after expressed. God is savior of all men,
specially of them that believe. 1 Timothy 4, 10. with thy right hand] this seems
to have reference to the first, o savior (or thou which savest) with thy right
hand; as Psalm. 138.7. and 60.7. It may also be referred to the second, them
that hope in thy right hand, or to the last, them that raise up themselves
against thy right hand: And thus the Greek turns it.

Verse. 8. the black] that is, the sight in the midds of the eye, wherein
appears the resemblance of a little man; and thereupon seems to be called
in Hebrew, Ishon, of Ish, which is, a man. And as that part is blackish; so
this word is also used for other black things, as the blacknes of the night,
Prove. 7.9. and blacknes of darkness, Prove. 20.20. of the apple] so we call that
which the Hebrew here calls has; and Zach. 2.8. babath, that is, the babie
or little image appearing in the eye, as before is noted. The word has, also
signifies a daugther, whereto the Greek coree does agree. By this is meant the
tender care of God for his people: and David here uses both words, for more
vehemency; whereas elsewhere one of them only is used; Ishon, the black; in
Deuteronomy. 32, 10. Prove. 7.2 babath and bath, the apple, in Zachar. 2.8. Lam. 2.18
hide thou me] Hebr. thou shalth de; or keep me secret. It is the property of
the Hebrew tongue, often to set down a prayer in this form, especially in the
end of a sentence, as noting some assurance to have the request fulfilled. So
in Psalm. 54, 3. and 59, 2. and 64.2. Job 6.23. and 21.3 and 40.5. See also the
note on Psalm. 10, 17.

Verse. 9. From faces] or because of the wicked. See Psalm. 3.1. enemies in soul]
or, for the soul: meaning deadly enemies, that seek the soul or life. See Psalm.
35.4.

Verse 10. They-have-closed-up] to weet their face or body; (much like that
speech in Job 15, 27. he has covered his face with his fatnes,) or their fat
they close-up; meaning that they pamper and harden themselves. in pride] that
is, prowdly, or haughtily.

Verse. 11. In our steps] or, in our going, that is, wheresoever we go, they
trace our footing, they compass me and us: the Hebrew has both these
readings; meaning David, with his company. they set to weet, upon us. bending
down] to weet, themselves, that they be not espied: as Psalm. 10.10. or to
bend-down, to weet us; to overthrow us. or to set down their nets and snares.

Verse. 12. His likenes] that is, the likeness or hiew of every one of them: or,
he may mean some one principal, as Saul.

Verse. 13. prevent his face] that is, first come to help me; and suddenly and
unlookt for, come upon him; and disappoint him. with thy sword] that is, thy
judgment and vengeance; for all means of destruction, are the Lords sword;
Isa. 66.16. and 27.1. Ier. 47.6. Zeph. 2, 12. or understand, which wicked man
is thy sword: as Asshur is called the rod of his wrath. Isa. 10.5. and so in
the verse following: from mortal men which are thy hand: or with thy hand, that
is, thy judgment or plague; for so Gods hand often signifies. Exodus 7.4. Act.
13.11.

Verse. 14. of the transitory world] that is, worldlings; as they of the city,
are citizens, Psalm. 7.2, 16. The word Cheled, is used also for the short time
of man's age and durance, Psalm. 39, 6. and 89.48. Here and in Psalm. 49, 2. it is
the world, named of the transitorines; for the fashion of this world passes
away; 1 Cor. 7, 31. in this life] according to Abraham's speech, son remember
that thou in thy life time, receivest thy good things. Luke 16, 25. Of the
wickeds prosperity here, See Job 21, 7, 8. etc. the sonns] to weet, of those
worldlings; meaning that both they and their chlidren have their fill; or,
satisfied are they with sonns: as in Job 21, 11. they send forth their children
like a flock. their overplus,] the residue of their store; or their
excellency. For this word Iether is used sometime for overplus in quantity;
Exodus 23, 11. 1 King. 11.41. sometime it nototh also the excellency or
dignity, Genesis 49.3.

Verse. 15. View thy face] that is, enjoy thy comfortable favor; as Psalm. 4, 7.
and 16.11. or shall see and know thee plainly and perfectly, as 1 Cor. 13.12. 2
Cor. 3, 18. 1 John. 3, 2. when I awake,] to weet, out of the dust of the earth,
from the sleep of death; as Dan. 12, 2. Isa. 26, 19. with thy image] to weet, I
shall be satisfied with it: so meaning, by image of Gods glory, or, with thy
image, that is, having it upon me: for as we have born the image of the earthly
man: so shall we bear, the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. Compare
herewith Psalm. 73.20.

Annotations, Psalm XVIII.
Verse. 1. THe servant of Iehovah] So he intitleth himself here, and in Psalm.
36, 1. for his service in administering the kingdom. This song is also written
in 2 Samuel 22. with some little change of a few words, which shall be observed.
hand of Saul.] which notes the power of the King, above that which is noted by
tle palm of other enemies: yet for this word, hand, in 2 Samuel 22, 1. is used,
palm.

Verse. 2. I wil-dearly-love] or, I-love-heartily, entirely, with my inmost
bowels. The original word is in this place fot entire love; but otherwhere is
often used for tender mercy, or bowels of compassion. Psalm. 25.6. and 102.14.
and 103.13. This verse is added here, more then in 1 Samuel 22.

Verse. 3. fortress] or munition, a place or hold to flee unto, when one is
hunted and chased. See Psalm. 31.3. rock] Two names of a Rock are in this verse;
the first Selangh, a firm stony rock or cliff; the later, Tsur; a strong or
sharp rock; and is often the title of God himself, and turned in Greek Theos,
that is God: as in the 32. and 47. verses of this Psalm, Deuteronomy. 32.4.18.30.31.
Psalm. 71.3. and in many other places 32.4.18.30.31. Psalm. 71.3. and in many
other places. horn of my salvation] that is; the horn that saves me. A horn,
signifies power and glory, Psalm. 92.11. Amos 6.13. Hab. 3.4. therefore horns
are used to signifies Kings, Dan. 8.21. Rev. 17.12. And Christ is called, the
horn of salvation. Luke 1.69. high-defense] or tower, refuge. See Psalm. 9.10.
In 2 Samuel 22.3. there is added more, and my refuge, my savior, from violent
wrong thou savest me.

Verse. 4. Praysed] that is, glorious, excellent, prayse-worthy; and
accordingly, for his mercies, usually praised of his peole. So Psalm. 48.2.

Verse. 5. The pangs] pains, throws, sorrows; as of a woman in childbirth; (so
the original word signifies, Hos. 13.13. Isa. 13.8. and 667.) or The bands,
the cords: (as the word also signifies, Job 36.8. Prove. 5.22) For this word,
in 2 Samuel 22.5. an other is used, that signifies breaches; which also is
applied to the breaking forth of children at the birth. Hos. 13.13. Isa. 37.3.
and to the billows of the sea, Psalm. 42.8. streams] or brooks, bourns. The
original word Nachal is used as our English bourn, both for a brook or stream
running in a valley; and for the valley it self. 1 King. 17.3.4. Waters do
often figure out afflictions; Psalm. 69.2 3. bourns or streams of waters, mean
vehement and violent afflictions, Psalm. 124.4. Ier. 47.2. Belial] or
ungodlynes. The Hebreu Belijaghnal (which the Apostle in Greek calls Belial,
2 Cor. 6.15.) is used to denote extreme mischief and wickedness, or most impious
and mischeivous persons, called sons of Belial, Deuteronomy. 13.13. daughters of
Belial, 1 Samuel 1.16. men of Belial, 1 Samuel 25.25. and sometime Belial it self,
as in Nahum. 1.15. Belial shall no more pass through thee; and 2 Samuel 23.6.
Belial shall be every one as thorns thrust away: and Job 34.18. Will thou say to
a King, Belial? It is also applied to special sins, and sinners, as a witness
of Belial, Prove. 19 28. a counselor of Belial, Nahum. 1.15. Also to
mischievous thoughts, words or things; Deuteronomy. 15.9. Psalm. 41.9. and 101.3. The
Apostle opposes Belial to Christ, 2 Cor. 6:15. and it seems to be put for
the Devil or Satan, as the Syrirak and Arabik translations there explain Paul's
term:) or for Antichrist; for so Belial is opposed to Christ and his kingdom, 2 Samuel 23, 6. By interpretation, Belial signifies an Unthrift, or Without yoke;
lawless; as Antichrists named the lawless man, 2. These. 2, 8. and in this
Psalm, the Greek translateth streams of lawlesnes, or iniquity: which the
Chaldee paraphrast calls the company of the unrighteous. frighted me] skared,
or vexed with terror. This word is used of Saul's vexation by an evil spirit: 1 Samuel 16.14, 15.

Verse. 6. snares of death,] deadly snares; engines set for my death; a
similitude taken from sowlers snares, Eccles. 9, 12. So Prove. 13, 14. and 14,
27. Prevented me] that is, were ready to take hold on me, suddenly, and
unawares.

Verse. 7. distress upon me] or to me, that is, in that my distress; or While
it was upon me. So Psalm. 96.13. he heard] The Hebrew properly is, will hear;
but the time to come, is often put for the time past; therefore in 2 Samuel 22,
7. it is plainly written, and he heard, so after in the 12 verse he will set;
which in Samuel is written and he set: again in the 14 verse, thondred; for
which in Samuel is written, will thonder; the like may be observed of the
Hebrew phrase, in the 16.39.41. and 44. verses of this Psalm, compared with the
same in 2 Samuel 22. So often in other scriptures, which the Hebrew text it self
sometime shows, as hikkuhu, they smote him, 2. Chron. 22, 6. for which in 2
King. 8, 29. is written jakkuhu. See also the note Ps. 2, 1. entred] or came
into; this word is omitted in 2. Sam. 22, 7. supplied; as oftentimes there
wants words, which are to be understood. So verse 29. and Ps. 69, 11.

Verse. 8. foundations of the mounts] that is, the roots and bottoms of the
mountains. By these, and the words following, under the similitude of a sore
tempestuous weather, Gods judgments against the wicked, are excellently set
forth. Compare herewith, Psalm. 82.5. and Deuteronomy. 32.22. where the foundations of
the mountains are set on fire. For mountains, in 2. Sam. 22.8. is written
heavens: either for that the mountains reaching high, seem to be the
foundation, and as they are called in Job 26.11. the pillars of heaven; or in a
mystical sense, as the shaking of heaven and earth, signifies the changing of
civil polities and of religions. Heb. 12.16.27. he was wroth] or kindled to
him was his anger; or burn did his nose: for in the Hebrew, another word is
sometimes added, which signfieth anger or nose. Deuteronomy. 6.15. Exodus 32.11. See the
note on Psalm. 2.5. and the note here following.

Verse. 9. in his anger] or, in his nose: the like speech is in Isa. 65.5. these
are a smoke in my anger; or, for these a smoke is in my nose: and it notes
sore indignation; for Smoke is a sign of vehement anger, Psalm. 74.1. and 80.5.
Deuteronomy. 29.20. This narration here, may be compared with the giving of the law,
Exodus 19.18. etc. where was smoke, fire, earthquake, thonder, lightning, and
the like. For these with the speeches following of clouds, winds, tempests,
thonderbolts, hayl, etc. do lively describe Gods majesty, appearing in his
works, and for punishment of his enemies, as Exodus 9.23.24. Josh. 10.11. Judge.
5.20. 1 Samuel 2.10. and 7.10. and 12.17. Rev. 16.18.21. did eat] that is,
consume. See Psalm. 50.3.

Verse. 10. he bowed the heavens] this was for the help of David, and
discomfiture of his enemies: therefore the Prophet prays for the like again.
Psalm. 144.5.6. Isa. 64.1.2. gloomy darknes] myrk and thick darkness; or, a
dark-clowd: as 2 Chronicles. 6.1. Job 22.13. such as was on mount Sinai, when God
came down on it, Deuteronomy. 4.11. and 5.22. a sign of terror, as the Apostle
shows, Heb. 12.18. So Psalm. 97.2.

Verse. 11. on a Cherub] a Cherub, and the plural number Cherubim or Cherubines;
is a name given to the Angels, Genesis 3.25. and to the golden winged images which
were in the tabernacle and temple, Exodus 25.18.19.20. 1 King. 6.23.24.25.29.32.
The living creatures also which Ezekiel saw in vision, Ezekiel. 1.5. are called
Cherubines, Ezekiel. 10.1.15. Likewise the king of Tire, is called an anointed and
a covering Cherub; Ezekiel. 28.14.16. The Hebrew name, has affinity with Rechub a
Charret, used in Psalm. 104.3. almost in like senses as Cherub is here; and the
Cherubines are called a Charret, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. and Gods Angels are his
Charrets, Psalm. 68.18. and they seem to be meant in this place, for as the
Angels are said to slye, Dan. 9.21. so the Cherubines had wings. Exodus 25.20.
and are of the Apostle called Cherubines of glory, Heb. 9.5. In Psalm 80.2. God
is said to sit on the Cherubines, as here to ride: and a Cherub, may be put for
many or all the Cherubims; as charets for charets, Psalm. 68.18. See the note on
Psalm. 8.9. flew-swiftly] or glansed; a similitude taken from Aegles and like
swift fowls that fly with a swinge. Deuteronomy. 28.49. Ier. 48.40. For this, in 2 Samuel ^2.11, is written jera, that is, he was seen: which here with little
difference of one letter, is jede, that is, he flew swiftly. So in Psalm. 104.3.
God is said to walk upon the wings of the wind.

Verse. 12. his pavilion] or covert; booth, tabernacle. darkness of waters] that
is, dark, black waters. In 2 Samuel 22.12. this is thus set down: and he set
darkness round about him, for booths: blacknes of waters, etc. the skyes] that
is, the heavens, named in Hebrew Shechakim, of their thin fine and subtle
substance.

Verse. 13. hail and coales] that is, there was or, there came hail, to weet,
from his brightness: as in 2 Samuel 22.13. it is written, From the brightness,
before him, there-burned coals of fire. Hayl, and fire, are instruments of
Gods war and punishments. Job 38.22.23. Josh. 10.11. Rev. 16.21. Zach. 12.6.
Ezekiel. 10.2.

Verse. 14. thondred] this also is a sign of Gods anger, 1 Samuel 2.10. and 7.10.
Isa. 29.6. and of his power and glory. Psalm. 29.3. and 77.19. Job 26.14. and
37.4.5. and 40.4. gave his voyce] a common phrase for all loud and high speech,
cry, noise, thondring, etc. Psalm. 46.7. and 68.34. and 77.18. and 104.12. Ier.
2.15. Number. 14.1. 2 Chronicles. 24.9. Hab. 3.10. hayl, and c^a^ts of fire] that is,
fiery vapor, lightnings, etc. This sentence is omitted, in 2 Samuel 22.14.

Verse. 15. his arrowes] the instruments of his wrath and judgments; for God
has arrows of pestilence, Psalm. 91.5. of famine, Ezekiel. 5.16. and other
arrows to wound the hearts of his enemies, Psalm 45.6. and 64.8. or to afflict
his children, Psalm. 38.3. Job 6.4. Here and in Psalm. 144.6. by arrows may be
meant thunderboltes, or the haylstones fore mentioned; as the haylstones that
fell, Ios. 10.11. are called arrows, Hab. 3.11. he hurled] or, he shot; as the
word signifies, Genesis 49.23. it may also be turned, he multiplied. This is
omitted in 2 Samuel 22.15. terribly stroke them down] discomfited, troubled, and
felled them down with dread, noise, and tumult. This word is used in the
examples of his wrath, Exodus 14.24. Josh. 10.10. Judge. 4.15. 1 Samuel 7.10. Deuteronomy.
7.23.

Verse. 16. channels of waters] that is, of the sea, 2 Samuel 22.16. channels
signify violent currents, or forcible streams, running-rivers. So Psalm. 42.2.
and 126.4. foundations of the world] that is* the deep waters and main seas,
whereon the world is founded, Psalm. 24.2. wind of thine anger] or, of thy nose;
as before, verse. 9. meaning a blast, storm, or whirlwind, which God in anger
sent forth. This manner of speech is taken from Job 4.9.

Verse. 17. drew me out, etc.] this has reference to Moses case, who was drawn
out of the water, and thereupon called Mosheh; Exodus 2.10. that word Mashah, is
used here by David; and no where else in scripture. Waters signify troubles, as
is noted verse. 5. and sometime multitudes of peoples, Rev. 17.15. so the
Chaldee turns it here, he delivered me from many peoples.

Verse. 19. cloudy calamitie] The Hebrew Aeid, is a fog, vapor, or
mystie-cloud; Genesis 2.6. Job 36.27. by figure, it is put for calamity, or
misery of man. Deuteronomy. 32.35. As elsewhere, the clowdy and dark day: Ezekiel. 34.12.

Verse. 22. from my God.] meaning, by swarving, or turning away from him.

Verse. 23. not torn-away from me.] in 2 Samuel 22.23. it is, turned not away from
it; that is, from any of his statutes.

Verse. 24. from my iniquity] that is, from the iniquity (or crooked sin,) that
I am prone to fall into. The Hebrew word signifies that which is unright,
unequal, crooked or perverse; opposed to that which is right: and is fitly
applied to sin; and so translated by the Apostle, Romans 4.8. from Ps. 32.2. In
this estate we all are born, Psalm. 51.7. so it notes the viciositie or
crookednes of nature, and original sin; which the Apostle called the sin
dwelling in him; Romans 7.17. and he that was first born, first applied this word
to himself, Genesis 4.13. It is figuratively used often times for punishment due to
sin. whereof see, Psalm. 31.11.

Verse. 25. pureness of my hands] in 2 Samuel 22.25. my pureness.

Verse. 26. gracious] or merciful, pious, godly. See Psalm. 4.4. man] or
mighty-one: called Geber, of his strength, valor, and superiority: for which
in 2 Samuel 22.26. is put Gibbor, that is, Strong, or a champion: a mighty man:
Psalm 19.6. and 45.4. with the froward, thou will show thy self wry.] A like
speech is used in Moses, Levit. 26.27.28. if ye walk stubbornly against me; I
will walk stubbornly in against you: But here David uses two words, whereof
the first, froward or crooked, is always spoken of doing evil and wrong; the
later word wry, not so, but is a similitude taken from wrastlers, and notes a
writhing of ones self against an adversary.

Verse. 28. the lofty eyes.] in 2 Samuel 22.28. it is thus set down: and thine
eyes are upon the lofty, that thou may bring them low.

Verse. 29. have lighted my candle] or, do lighten my lamp: that is, give me
comfort, joy, prosperity after troubles; as on the contrary, the wickeds candle
shall be put out. Job 18.6 and 21.17. Prove. 13.9. and 24.20. and 20.20. In 2 Samuel 22.29. this word lighted, is left out to be understood, as before in the
7. verse. Sometime the eye is called the candle of the body; Mat. 6.22. and
Solomon says, that a man's mind, (or soul) is the candle of the Lord, Prove.
20.27. sometime ones child, succeding him in gouvernment, is his candle, Psalm.
132.17. 1 King. 11.36. and 15.4. Number. 21.30. All these in David, were lighted;
and Christ his son according to the flesh, is the candle of the new Jerusalem,
Rev. 21.23. the true light, which lights every man that comes into the
world. Ioh. 1.9. brightned my darkness.] that is, turned my grief and
affliction, into joy and comfort. Job 29.3. Esth. 8.16. Luke 1.79.

Verse. 30. broken through an host] Hebr. shall break, or run through an host,
or troup. This, and the leaping over a wall which follows, may be understod,
both of escaping danger himself, and of quelling his soes, and winning their
walled cities; and both these, speedily.

Verse. 32. who is a rock] that is, a mighty savior and defender. The Greek
here for rock has, a God; and in 2 Samuel 22.32. a Creator. And this has
reference to the words of Anna; there is no rock like our God. 1 Samuel 2.2.

Verse. 33. that girdeth me] that is, prepares and strengthens me: therefore
in 2 Samuel 22.33. it is written, my strength; elsewhere he speaks of being
girded with joy, Psalm. 30.12. valour] or power, force, prowess. And his word
is used, both for valor, activitie, and courage of body and mind; also for a
power or army of men, Psalm. 33.16. and 136.15. and also for wealth gotten by
industry, whereby men are able to do much. Psalm. 49.7.11. and 62.11. and giveth]
that is makes or disposes my way to be perfect; that is, without impediment.
For gives, in 2 Samuel 22. is, looseneth; which also freeth from let.

Verse. 34. He matcheth my feet as hindes] that is, makes me swift to run like
the Hindes; and so to escape danger, and stand safe upon my high places; which
usually denote, security, honor and prosperity. Deuteronomy. 32.13. and 33.29. Isa.
58.14. The like speech Habakuk has in the end of his song. Hab. 3.19.

Verse. 35 bow of brasse] or of steel; and this is observed to be stronger then
iron. Job 20.24.

Verse. 36. thy right hand has upheld me] or, firmly stayed (and strengthened)
me. This sentence is added here, more then 2 Samuel 22.36. thy meeknes] or
modesty, lenity, humility, whereby thou abasest thy self to regard me, and
deal meekly with me; even gently chastising and nurturing me. Wherefore the
Greek turns it thus, thy chastisement has reclified me.

Verse. 37. have widened my passage] or enlarged my pase; that is, given me
roomth to walk-steedily and safe. Contrary to that which is said of the wicked,
that his strong (or violent) passages are straightened; (or made narrow) Job
18.7.

Verse. 38. overtook them] and consequently, quelled, or cut them off; as is
expressed 2 Samuel 22.39.

Verse. 39. I wounded them] or struck through, embrued-with blood. This verse
in 2 Samuel 22.39. is read thus. And I consumed them, and they rose not: but fell,
under my feet.

Verse. 41. the neck of mine enemies] that is, put them to flight, and subdued
them: 2 Chronicles. 29.6. Genesis 49.8. And this respects Gods promise, Exodus 23.27.

Verse. 42. They cried out] For this, in 2 Samuel 22.42. is, They looked.

Verse. 43. power them out] or empty them; that is, tumbled them down, to be
trodden as dirt; I spread them abroad; as in 2 Samuel 22. this verse is written,
And I did beat them small, as the dust of the earth: as the clay of the streets
I pounded them, I spred-them-abroad.

Verse. 44. of the people] in 2 Samuel 22. it is, the contentions of my people,
have kept me for the head, etc. and hereby Christ's headship over the church of
Gentiles is signified; and the contradiction of his own people the Jew. s. Romans
10.20.21. See after, in verse. 50.

Verse. 45. At the hearing of the ear] that is, speedily, so son as they hear:
without further a do; or, By the hearing of the ear, that is, with diligent
harkening and attendance. sonns of the stranger,] of the aliant, or of aliant,
or of alienation; that is, aliens, outlanders, strangers from the common wealth
of Israel, they and their progenitors. So Psalm. 144.7. Isa. 62.8. falsly-deny]
or dissemble. In the Greek, they lie: meaning that they feighnedly submit
themselves for fear, or other sinister respect, against their wills. And this
agrees with the last promise of Moses; Deuteronomy 33.29. they enemies shall
falsly-deny to thee. The original word is used both for denying, Genesis 18, 15.
and for lying, or falsifying; 1 King. 13.18. See after, Psalm. 59.13. and 66.3.

Verse. 46. fade-away] or fall, to weet, as leaves, of trees that wither.

Verse. 48. that gives vengeance to me] that is, gives me power to be avenged
of my foes: or gives vengeances for me; that is, avengeth and punishes for my
sake. Whereupon he is called the God of vengeances, Psalm. 94.1. So to give
vengeance, is to execute it. Number. 31.3. subdueth] brings into good order and
subjection, therefore in 2 Samuel, 22. it is said, subjecteth, or brings down.
And sometime this word signifies a subduing by overthrew and destruction; as 2 Chronicles. 22.10. she subdued: for which in 2 King. 11.1. is written she brought to
perdition: or destroyed.

Verse. 50. I will confess thee] that is, give thee public and solemn praise
and thanks. This verse is applied Romans 15.9. to the calling of the Gentiles unto
the faith of Christ, and praise unto God therefore. By which we are taught,
that of Christ and his kingdom, this Psalm is cheisly intended.

Verse. 51. He makes great] or magnifieth; He is the magnifyer of the
salvations; that is, of the full salvation and deliverance. In stead of Magdil,
that is, magnifyer: in 2 Samuel 22.51. there is Migdol, which is so written, as
by the vowels signifies a tower of salvations; and by the consonants a
magnifier. his anointed] or his Messiah; his Christ: as before in Psalm. 2 2.
David and his seed] this may be referred, both to the first David and his
posterity, on whom God shows great mercy: and also to our Lord Christ; who is
called by the Prophets, David; Ezekiel. 34.23.24. Hose. 3.5. and his seed, are his
disciples, the children which God has given him: Hebr. 2.13. or himself is the
seed here mentioned, Act. 13.23. Romans 1.3. as he also is called Abraham's seed:
Gal. 3.16.

Annotations, Psalm XIX.
Verse. 2. THe out-spred-firmament] the whole core of heaven, with the aier,
which though it be soft and liquid, and spread over the earth, yet is it fast
and firm: and therefore called of us, according to the common Greek version, a
firmament: the holy Ghost expresses it by an other term, Mid-heaven: Rev.
8.13. and 14.6. and 19, 17. This Out-spred-firmament, or expansion, God made
amidds the waters for a separation, and named it Heavens, Genesis 1.6, 8. which of
David is said to be stretched out as a courtain* or tent. Psalm. 104.2. and
elsewhere is said to be firm: as molten glass. Job 37.18. So under this name
Firmament, be comprised the orbs of the heavens, and the aier, and the whole
spacious roomth above the earth.

Verse. 3. Day unto day] one day unto and after another. uttereth] or welleth
out; as a fountain, continually and plenteously. manifest] or sheweth-livelie.

Verse. 4. not, heard is their voice] that is, whose voice is not heard, or
understood, meaning that they are no mute or obscure speeches, whereby the
heavens preach to the world, but manifest to all, as the next verse shows,
and plainly confirms, Romans 1.19 20. and the Greek version here leads us to
understand this sentence, together with the Apostles allegation, Romans 10.18.
and the like Hebraismes are usual, as Job 3.3. Let the day perish, I was born
in it, that is, wherein I was born* and hearing is often ^ut for understanding,
Gen 11.7. 2 King. 18.26. Compare also herewith that Hebrew phrase in Ier. 38.5.
Or we may read it thus: There is no speech, nor words: not, heard is their
voice: that is, the heavens make no speech, or sermon, nor utter any readable
words: no nor any voice (or sound) at all of theirs is heard: but their line is
gone forth, etc. Or, taking word for peoples that speak them,) there is no
speech, nor words, where the voice of the heavens is not heard.

Verse. 5. their line] or, their rule, their delineation: that is, a mean to
teach the rude and simple: as Esa. 28.10. or by line is meant a building,
frame, or edifice, which is made by line and rule. Zach. 1.16. Job 38.5. The
Greek translateth it, their sound; which word the Apostle also uses, Romans
10.18. where the speaks of the preaching of the gospel, by which the Church
is taught and edified. their speakings] or, their words: but this is used
sometime generally for signification any manner of way: as Prove. 6.13. he
speaks (that is, signifies) with his feet. And taking him before to have
showed how the heavens have no speeches, words, nor voice; this here may be
meant of their significations, by the wonderful frame, course, order, etc.
that all men may see in them. he has put a tent] God has put (or set) in the
heavens a tabernacle, that is a slitting habitation: for that the sun never
stays in one place. The Sun, is in Hebrew called Shemesh, that is, a
minister, or servant; which very name should have kept the nations from
worshipping and serving it, which God has distributed to all people under the
whole heaven; as Deuteronomy. 4.19.

Verse. 6. as a bridegroom] the Sun when he rises, is gloriously adorned with
beautiful rays; and seems most cheerful; which two things are set forth by
similitude of a bridegrom. Isa. 61.10. and 62.5. to run a race] a long-way,
journey, or course. The swift course of the Sun, is joyful performed, as when
a champion runs for a game.

Verse. 8. The law] or Doctrinall: an orderly-manner of instruction: an
Institution, or Disposition; called in Hebrew Torah, which implies both
doctrine, and an orderly-disposition of the same; therefore, where one Prophet
relating David's words, says, the law of man; 2 Samuel 7.19. another says, the
orderly-estate (or course) of man. 1 Chronicles. 17.17. The holy Ghost in Greek
calls it, Nomos, a law: Hebr. 8.10. from Ierem. 31.33. This name is most
commonly ascribed, to the precepts given by Moses, at Mount Sinai, Leut. 33.4.
Mal. 4.4. John. 1.17. and 7.19. it is also largely used for all his writings.
For the history of Genesis, is called Law; Galat 4.21. from Genesis 16. And though
sometime the Law be destinguished from the Psalms and Prophets, Luke 16.16. and
24.44. yet the other Prophets books are called Law; 1 Cor. 14.21. from Isa
28.11. the Psalms are also thus named, John. 10.24. and 15.25. from Psalm.
82.6. and 35.19. Yea one Psalm, is called a law, Psalm. 78.1. and the many
branches of Moses doctrine; as the law of the sin-offring, etc. Levit. 6.25.
and generally it is used for any doctrine; as the law of works: the law of
faith, etc. Romans 3.27. returning the soul] or, restoring the life. To return
the soul, is sometime to deliver it from evils, Psalm. 35.17. Job 33.30.
sometime to refresh it as with food, that keeps in life, Lam. 1.11.19. to
refresh it with rest, comfort, and the like, Ruth. 4.15. Psalm. 23.3. Proverb.
25.13. All which may be found it the law of God. the testimony] God calls the
two tables of his law, the Testimony; Exodus 25.16.21. and 31.18. and the Ark
wherein they were kept, had thereupon the like name, Number. 17.4. Exodus 25.22.
and so the tabernacle wherein the ark was, Exodus 38.21. Rev. 15.5. Gods law
has this title because of the testification, contestation, and earnest charge
which he, and his Prophets, gave concerning it; as Psalm 81.9. 2 King. 17.15.
Nehem. 9.29.30. Deuteronomy. 31.28. and 32.4. and as a record, it testifies what is
Gods will and covenant, John. 5.39. And as the law so the gospel, (yea Christ
himself) is called a testimony. 1 Corinthians. 2.1. 2 These. 1.1^ 1 Timothy 2.6.
faithfull] this word means also, sure plagues, certain, firm and constant as
faithful plagues, Deuteronomy. 28.59. are sure and durable: a faithful house, 2 Samuel
^ 16. is settled, firm, and stable, etc. Gods word has like commendations.
Psalm. 93.5. and 111.7. the simple] or silly. The original pethi, means one
thi^ is easily persuaded, or intised; credulous, and light of belief; according
to the proverb; Pethi, the simple believes every thing: Proverb. 14.15.
Consequently, i^ is used for Unskillful: and applied sometime to evil foolish
persons, Proverb. 9 6 and 22.3. sometime to the good and simple, as Psalm.
116.6. The Greek often translateth it, a babe; and so Christ calls such, Mat.
11, 25. This verse, and the two next following, which treat of Gods law; are in
Hebrew, written every of them with ten words, according to the number of the
ten commandments; which are called ten words. Exo. 34, 28.

Verse. 9 The precepts] or, Commissions, Charges. This word is by David only,
applied to Gods commandments; called of him Pikkudim, of Pakad, to Vis^^; as
if we should say Visitations; or precepts, the trangressions whereof God has
threatened to visit, or punish; as Exodus 20, 5. and 32, 34. Or of hiphkid, to
commend, or commit unto ones charge* and custody: because these are committed
unto men, carefully to be observed, as it is written, Thou have commanded thy
precepts, to be kept vehemently; Psalm 119, 4. the commandement] that is, the
commandments: one put for all; as judgment, 2 King. 25, 6. for judgments;
Ierem. 52, 9. and many the like

Verse. 10. The fear] or reverence, that is, the religion and workship
prescribed of God; as in Matthew. 15, 9. that is, called Worship; which in Isa.
29, 13. is named Fear; and this is said to be clean from all filthiness, because
he requires to be worshipped in spirit and truth, and with pure hands. Ioh.
4.24. 1 Timothy 2, 8. Or as God himself is called Fear; Psalm 76.12. so his law
may also here be called Fear, for that it was given with fearful majesty; and
works in men the fear and reverence of God. Exodus 20.18.19 20. Deuteronomy.
5.24.-29. standing] or abiding, continuing-firm, yet and perpetually.
judgements] Such laws as were annexed to the ten commendements, for punishing
the offenders; have this title prefixed; as Exodus 21.1. These are the
judgments which thou shall set before them: etc. And as decrees or statutes,
are often put for the ordinances of Gods worship; (as is noted on Psalm 2, 7.)
instead whereof David here seems to use the former word fear: so judgments
are laws and rites for humane duties. These two Moses often joyneth together,
saying: hearken o Israel to the statutes and to the judgments; etc. Deuteronomy. 4
1.5.8.14.45. and 5.1.31, and 6.1.20. and 7.11. and 8.11, etc. just together]
that is, all of them together, and each of them apart, is just; or, justified.

Verse. 11 fine gold] or solid-gold called Paz, which has the name of strength,
fastnes, or solidity: such gold was rare and precious, Isa. 13.12. Lam. 4.2.
The Arabians now call gold, Phes. It was very fine, therefore when one Prophet
calls it gold Muphaz, 2 Kin. 10, 8. another calls it tahor that is, sine,
or clean gold. 2 Chro. 9.17. liquour of the honey-combs] or, liquid-honey of
the combs. Each of these words is used by Solomon for the dropping-honey-comb.
Proverb. 5.3. and 16.24. and both are here joined for more vehemency.

Verse. 12. clearly-admonished] The word signifies illustrating, making-bright
or shining, Dan. 12, 3. and so by warning or information to make the soul clear
and circum^pect. Exodus 18.20. 2 King. 6.10. Eccles. 4.13. Ezekiel 3.17.18.19 20.
much reward] or much end, that is, great profit, or reward; as the Greek
translateth it. The Hebrew Ghnekeb, signifying the heel, or footsole; is used
figuratively for the end of a thing, (as the head, for the beginning, Psalm 119,
160) and so for the success, event, and recompense that follows thereupon.
As another word, acharith, which signifies End, is used also for reward, Prove.
23.18. and 1 Pet. 1.9.

Verse. 13. Unadvised errours] or Ignorant faults. Vnweeting and inconsiderate
sins. The law for which is given, Levit. 4.2. etc. who does understand] or, who
can discern? meaning no man can. So. Psalm 77.5. I spoke not, for, I could not
speak. See the annotation there. cleanse thou me] or, make me innocent, free,
guiltless, empty. The word is also used for exempting, or absolving free from
punishment due to sin. Exodus 20.6. and 34.7.

V. 15. be to favorable acceptation] that is, be acceptable, or wel-pleasing,
or as before they shall be acceptable For the Hebrew will bear either
interpretation. Therefore also in the Greek, these two phrases are used as one,
He shall be, Mark. 10.44. and Let him be, Matthew. 20.27. Of the word
acceptance, see the note on Psalm 5.13. my redeemer] or deliverer; the Hebrew
Goel, is interpreted in the Greek by both these; Romans 11, 26. from Isa. 59.20.
Act. 7.35. The word is of large use, for redeeming of things sold or mortgaged,
Levit. 25. but applied to redemption or deliverance from danger, Ps. 69.19.
from violence, Ps. 72.14. from corruption, Psalm. 103.4. from the enemies hand,
Psa. 106 10. from death. Hos. 13.14. and from all evil, Genesis 48.16. And in
special, one that challenges or redeemeth any person, or thing that was
before alienated, and restores it to the first estate, by right of kindred, is
called by this name, 1 King. 16.11. Ruth 3.9.12.13. and 4.1.3. etc. Therefore
is this title given to God, and Christ, who is our redeemer, and allied unto
us, as concerning the flesh. Isa. 43.14. and 44 6. and 47.4. 1 These. 1.10. Heb.
2.14.15.

Annotations, Psalm XX.
Verse. 2. Answer thee] thee o King: whom after he calls Messiah, or
Anointed; verse. 7. And this sentence is set down in Iaakobs words, Genesis 35.3.
as after he mentions the God of Iaakob. And the whole Psalm, is a prophecy
of Christ's sufferings, and his deliverances out of them, for which the Church
with him triumphs. set thee on high] in a high-refuge, and so defend and keep
thee safe: see Psalm. 9.10. As Gods name, even his only is advanced-high, Psalm.
148.13. so is it also a strong tower, which the righteous runs unto, and is
set-on-high: Pro. 18 10.

Verse. 3. from the sanctuarie] or Sanctity; Thus the tabernacle was called,
Levit. 16, 2. and the temple, 1 King. 8.10. as being the place of holiness, for
the presence of God there.

Verse. 4. remember all thy oblations] This has respect to the law; which
appointed part of the oblation, (or meat offering) to be burnt on the altar
unto God, with oil and incense for a memorial, Lev. 2.2. The Hebrew Minchah;
is generally a gift or present carried to any, Ps. 45.13. and 72.13. Genesis 32.13.
and in special, a gift or oblation presented to God, Genesis 4.3.4.5. Psalm. 96.8.
Most specially, the oblation of corn or flowr, called the meat offering, Levit.
2. Number. 29. The Apostle in Greek turns it Presphora, an oblation, Heb.
10.5.3.10. from Psalm. 40, 7. burnt-offering] which according to the original
world Ghnolah signifies, an Ascension; because this kind of sacrifice, was
wholly given up to God in fire. Levit. 1.3-9.13. Therefore in Greek it is
translated holocautoma, that is, a whole-brent-offering. turn-to ashes] that
is, consume to ashes, with heavenly fire. For so God approved and accepted the
sacrifies of his people, Levit. 9.24. 1 King. 18, 28.

Verse. 5. fulfill all thy counsell] or accomplish it: Counsel is as empty, if
it be not effected and accomplished: and the performance, is as the filling
thereof. So to fill or accomplish petitions, in the verse following: to fulfill
joy; John. 3, 29. and 15.11. to fulfill words, is to confirm them, 1 King.
1.14. and to perform or effect them. 1 King. 2.27.

Verse. 6. we will shout] or, that we may shout, or shrill. For these two
phrases are used indifferently: See the note on Psalm. 43.4. thy salvation]
which thou 1 King) have received; or, which thou ( o God) have given. set up
the banner] or display the flag or ensign, which was for triumph and victory,
to honor God; and to terrify the enemies. Song. 6.3.6.

Verse. 7. his anointed] or Messiah: that is, his King: verse. 10. Psalm 2.6. with
powers, the salvation] that is, with full-power (or puissance,) even with the
salvation of his right hand. For Gods right hand is of wondrous-excellent
force, and does valiantly. Exodus 15.6. Psalm. 118.16. and 89, 14.

Verse. 8. These] that is, Some mention charets, and some horses. Charret is
used so charrets; as also in Psalm. 68.18. so, bird, for birds: Psalm. 8.9.
Angel, for Angels. Psalm 34.8. make mention of the name] that is, make it to be
known and to be remembered with honor. Psalm. 45.18. Isa. 49.1. 2 Samuel 18.18.

Verse. 9. stand-upright] or, set our selves sure to continue yet. So after in
Ps. 146.9* and 147.6.

Verse. 10. the King, he answer us] By the King here seems to be meant Christ,
of whom this whole Psalm is composed: as also the Chaldee paraphrast understood
it, and therefore explained this verse thus; O Word of God redeem us; o mighty
King receive our prayer in the day of our invocation. But the Lxx. not keeping
the distinction, turn it in Greek thus, Lord save the King; and hear us in the
day that we call upon thee.

Annotations, Psalm XXI.
Verse. 2. IN thy strength] or, for thy strength; thy kingdom, strong help and
deliverance. This Psalm, as the former, gratulateth the victory and salvation
of Christ; and is by the Chaldee paraphrast applied to the reign of King
Messiah. shall rejoyce] or rejoices continually.

Verse. 4. a crown] a sign of glorious victory: and of the kingdom.

Verse. 5. length of dayes] that is, a long continued life time. Isa. 53.10. Job
12.12. So Psalm 23.6. and 93.5. and 91.16. On the contrary short of days, is
short lived. Job 14.1. ever and aye] to eternal and perpetual ay. Christ being
raised from death, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him; Romans
6.9. But behold he is alive for evermore, Amen. Rev. 1.18. and ever lives, to
make intercession for them that come to God, by him. Heb. 7.25.

Verse. 7. have set him blessings] that is, made him to abound with all manner
blessings him-self: and, to be an example of, or, to impart blessings unto
others. So to Abram it was said, he thou a blessing; Genesis 12.2. the like
promise is to his children, Ezekiel. 34.26. Isa. 19.20. with thy face] or before
thy face, in thy presence, as Psalm. 16.11.

Verse. 9. shall find all thy enemies] to weet, to punish them; as the like
phrase imports, Isa. 10.10. or, shall find for all, that is, shall be enough
for all thy foes, that is, sufficiently able to overcome them: so finding is
used for sufficiency. Number. 11.22. Judge. 21.14.

Verse. 10. wilt set them] or put them all and every one: as is noted on Psalm.
2.3. So also after in verse. 11. and 13. an oven of fire] a fiery furnace;
meaning in great affliction. Lam. 5.10. the time of thy face] that is of thine
anger as the Chaldee paraphrast explayneth it: for the face shows forth
pleasure or displeasure; favor or wrath: so face is used for anger, Psalm.
34.17. Levit. 20.6. Genesis 32.20. Lam. 4.16. Ier. 3.12. swallow them] that is,
destroy or abolish them: so Psalm. 35.25. and 52.6. and 55.10.

Verse. 11. Their fruit] that is, their children, called the fruit of the body,
and womb: Psalm. 127.3. and 132.11. Deuteronomy. 28.4. or, their labor and that which
comes thereof; as Prove. 31.16.31. their seed] that is, children, or posterity.
Psalm. 22.24.31. and 37.25. Genesis 17.7.10.

Verse. 12. shall not be able] to weet, to stablish (as the Greek explaineth;)
or, to effect it. After this word can, or able; there often wants a word to
be understood: see Psalm. 101.5.

Verse. 13. a But] to shoot at; Hebr. a shoulder; because the earth is heaped up
like shoulders, make ready,] or fit, namely, thine arrows, against their faces.

Annotations, Psalm XXII.
Verse. 1. THe Hind of the morning] meaning Christ, who as a Hind was by Jews
and Gentiles, the dogs, verse. 17. hunted and wurroughed, in the morning: Ioh.
18.28. and also rose from death the third day early in the morning; Ioh. 20 1.
when God had made his feet like Hinds feet, and set him on his high places:
Psalm 18.34. Compare with this, Song. 2.9.17. and 8.14. where Christ is also
likened to a young Heart. And in Psalm. 49.15. the resurrection is called, the
morning; for then the true light of comfort and salvation shall appear. A Hind
called in Hebrew Ajjeleth; has the name of prowess, or fortitude, (as in the
20. verse of this psalm Aejaluth is fortitude;) and so it may be understood for
the strength (or fortitude) of the morning; that is, the help and power of God
to raise up Christ from the dead; which may be the meaning of the Greek
translation, for the morning help. Some of the Jews have interpreted it, the
morning starr; which (although the word be no where else found in scripture, for
a starr;) agrees also to our Lord Christ, who is entitled, the bright morning
starr. Rev. 22.16. Others, applying this title to the musik, retain the Hebrew
words still; Ajjeleth hasshachar.

Verse. 2. My God, my God, etc.] Christ speaks his Psalm to God his father.
The Hebrew is Aeli, Aeli, lammah ghnazabtani: which words our Lord uttered on
the cross, Mat. 27.46. (save for the later, he used the Syriak, sabachtani, of
the same signification. At which the profane Jews mocked, saying, that he
called for Elias, Mat. 27.47.49. Wherefore have thou forsaken me] or, why
leavest thou me? They are the words of faith, striving in tentation; and do
imply both a hope of, and a prayer for deliverance; as it is noted on Psalm
10.1. See the like also, in Psalm 42.10. and 43.2. my roaring.] this argues
great grief of heart, uttered with loud complaint: So Psalm. 38.9. and 32.3. Job
3.24. And Christ, in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers, with strong
crying and tears, to him that was able to save him from death; Hebr 5.7.

Verse. 3. no silence to me] or, but I have no silence: and consequently, no
rest, ease, or comfort. So Job 30.20.27.

Verse. 4. sitting] or, sit; that is, abidest still one and the same, as
Psalm 9.8. and 55.20. and 102.13. or sit, to weet, still; as Ruth 3.18.
that is, risest not up to help me: or sit, that is, inhabitest, as Psalm.
9.12. and 132.15. the prayses] that is, art he to whom Israel sings all
praises for deliverances: and of whom Israel glories in all time of need. So
Moses said to Israel, He is thy praise; Deuteronomy. 10.21. and Ier. 17.14.

Verse. 7. a worm] that is, weak, (as the Chaldee explaineth it;) wretched and
trodden under foot. So Job 25.6. Isa. 41.14.

Verse. 8. make-a mow] make-an-opening with the lip; which may be taken both for
mowing or thrusting out of the lip; and for licentious-opening thereof, to
speak reproach wag the head] a sign also of scorn. Isa. 37.22. Math. 27.39.
Job 16.4 Psalm. 44.15. Lam. 2.15.

Verse. 9. He confidently-turned] or Rolled; that is, trusted; as in the new
testament this phrase is explained. Math. 27.43. where they mock at Christ. The
Hebrew applies, this word Roll or turn, figuratively, to a confident
committing of ones self, ways, or actions unto another; as here, so in Ps.
37.5. Prove. 16.3. and Gol, properly, is R^ll thou; but put for he rolled, or
trusted; as the like phrase, make the heart of this people fat, etc. Isa. 6.10.
is thus resolved, this peoples heart is waxed fat, etc. Math. 13.15. or it is
the indefinite, to turn, for he turned; as in Esth. 9.16. to stand, is used for
they stood.

Verse. 11. been cast from the womb] that is, from my infancy committed to thy
care and custody. So elsewhere he says, the Lord has called me from the womb,
etc. Isa. 49.1. Contrariwise the wicked are estranged from the womb; Psalm. 58.4.

Verse. 13. bulloks] that is, strong and lusty persons; such as were the high
priests, scribes, etc. that set against Christ. mighty-bulls of Basan] which
was a fertile country, good to feed cattle, Number. 32.4. and such as there fed,
were fat and strong, Deuteronomy. 32.14. Ezekiel. 39.18. The Jews were the bulls of
Basan, as the Prophets foretold Deuteronomy. 32 15. Amos 4.1. Hos. 4.16. and the
history shows, Math. 27. Here, the word bulls is to be supplied unto the word
mighty, as also in Psalm. 50.13. and 68.31. See the note on Psalm. 10.10.

Verse. 1^. wide-opened] or gaped; and this also is a sign of reproach and
contempt. Job 16.10. Lam. 3.46. and 2.16.

Verse. 15. dispart themselves] or, are sundred, that is, out of joint. as wax]
that is, tender, and melting through faintnes and fear, Psalm. 68.3. and 97.5.
Like this is Jobs complaint, God has softened my heart: Job 23.16. So the word
following, molten, notes fear and discouragement. Josh. 7.5. and 14.8. Deuteronomy.
20.8.

Verse 16. cleaveth] or, is made cleave to my jaws; which phrase means
inability to speak, Ps. 137.6. Job 29.10. Ezekiel. 3.25. and sometime, extremity of
thirst, Lam. 4.4. and so may have reference here to that thirst which our
savior felt. Ioh 19.28. have brought-me-down] or set and bounded me, in the
dust of death, meaning death it self, or the grave which turns men to dust,
Genesis 3.19. the Chaldee turns it, the house of the grave. See Psalm. 7.6.

Verse. 17. dogs] that is base, and vile persons; of rancorous and spiteful
disposition. Job 30.1. Prove. 26.11. Rev. 22.15. Mat. 7.6. Phil. 3.2. Psalm.
59.7.15. These were the high priests and rulers of Israel; of whom it is said,
that Pilate knew well that for envy they had delivered Jesus. Mat. 27.18 they
Lion-like-pierced] The original has a double reading, Caari, like a Lion; and
Caru, they dug, or piersed. This latter, the Greek follows. This was
fulfilled in the nayling of our Lord to the cross, by his feet and hands. Mat.
27.35. Ioh. 20.25.

Verse. 18. did view me] or see in me, namely, their desire or lust, or the
affliction upon me, they saw with delight. See the like phrase Psalm. 54.9. and
59.11. and 118.7.

Verse. 19. for my coat] or, my vesture: The soldiers when they had crucified
Jesus, took his garments, (and made four parts, to every soldier a part,) and
his coat; and the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
Therefore they said one to another, Let us not divide it, but cast lot for it,
whose it shall be: that the scripture might be fulfilled, etc. Ioh. 19.23.24.

Verse. 21. my alonely-soul] which is one alone, solitary, and desolate. So
after in Psalm. 35.17. and 25.16. and 68.7. hand of the dog] the power of the
devil; the prince of this world, who then came to Christ, but had naught in
him. Ioh. 14.30. or, dog is put for dogs, meaning the malicious Jews spoken of
before, verse. 17.

Verse. 22. mouth of the Lion] so the Devil is named, 1 Pet. 5.8. horns of
Vnicors] the Devils, Angels, principalities, powers, wordly governors, princes
of the darkness of this world, etc. Ephesians. 6.12. The Unicorn is so fierce and
wild, that he will not be tamed, Job 39.12.13. etc. and his strength and pride
is in his horn. See Psalm. 92.11. Number. 23.22. Deuteronomy. 33.17. Isa. 34.7. thou have
answered] for, answer thou me; a speech of faith, inserted in his prayer;
therefore next follows thanksgiving: Answering is here used for safe
delivering, upon pr^yer.

Verse. 23. to my brethren] the disciples and believers of Christ: for he that
sanctifies, and we which are sanctified, are all of one; for which cause, he
is not ashamed to call us brethren. Heb. 2.11.12. Ioh. 20.17. the Church] or
Convocation, Assembly, Congregation.

Verse. 26. Of thee, my prayse] or From with thee, shall be my praise; it shall
begin and continue of thee, thou art the cause and ground thereof. the great
church] either that assembly where Christ after his resurrection personally
appeared to more then five hundred brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. or the great
church of the Gentiles, with whom Christ is spiritually present. Mat. 28.19.20.
So after, in Psalm. 40.10.11.

Verse. 27. and be satisfied] It was a curse of the law, that men should eat and
not be satisfied; Levit. 26.26. Mic. 6.14. but it is a blessing of the gospel,
that the meek and needy, shall eat and have enough; Psalm. 132.15. God fills
the hungry with good things, and sends away the rich empty, Luke 1.53. The meek
means the regenerate, who are mortified with Christ, and their fierce nature
made meek and humble. your hear^ shall live] he turns his speech to the meek,
and seekers of God; who should eat of Christ's flesh, that was given for the
life of the world, and thereby live for ever; Ioh. 6.51. The living of the
heart; imports also the chearing, comfort and solace of the same; Genesis 45.27.
the contrary whereof, is in the dying of the heart. 1 Samuel 25.37. See also the
like promise, Psalm. 69.33.

Verse. 28. All the ends etc.] that is, the dwellers in the utmost parts and
ends of the world. A prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, by the preaching
of the gospel. Romans 16.26. Ephesians. 2.1.2. etc. families of the heathens] or,
kindreds of the nations; whereof see Genesis 10.5.18.20.31.32.

Verse. 29. ruler, among the heathens] to reign over them by his word and
spirit, and so to be God, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. Romans
3 29.30.

Verse. 30. All the fat ones] that is the rich and mighty personages, fat, with
plenty. Deuteronomy. 31.20. For, Kings and Queens, and men of authority and wealth,
are also called to the participation of Christ's grace in his Church. Isa.
60.3.5.10. Rev. 21.24. 1 Timothy 2.1.2. Sometime fatnes is used to note out Gods
spiritual blessings. Psalm. 36.9. and 63.6. and 65.12. and 92.15. Prove. 28.25.
all that go down to the dust] that is, the poor base and wretched people,
which for their misery and affliction, are said to go down and sit in the
dust; as Psalm. 113.7. Isa. 47.1. and 29.4. Job 30.29. Lam. 3.29. that quickneth
not] or cannot quicken; that is, the poor wretched man, that does not (or
cannot, as Psalm. 77.5. keep alive his soul; that cannot nourish himself, he
shall eat. (So to keep alive, is to nourish; Isa. 7.21.) or, he that revived,
that is cheered not, nor refreshed his soul with comfort; as before verse 27.
or, he that cannot keep alive his soul, that is, not save it from wrath and
eternal death, by his own works, he shall live by faith in Christ. So this
phrase to keep the soul alive, is used Ezekiel. 18.27.

Verse. 31. A seed] The posterity of those godly, forementioned: for God chooses
the seed with the parents. Deuteronomy. 10.15. and 30.6.19. Psalm. 69.37. and 102.29.
Isa. 43.5. and 44.3. Or the seed of Christ, the children which God gives him;
as Isa. 53.10. Heb. 2.13. or a seed, that is a small remnant: as Romans 9.29. for
a generation] a race of Gods children; as Psalm. 73.15. and 24.6. or, to
generation, that is, for ever, through all ages.

Verse. 32. his justice] the justice of God, which is by faith in Christ. Psalm.
71.15.16.24. Romans 10.3.4. people that shall be born,] hereafter to come: or, a
people born, that is regenerate Ps. 87.4.5. Ioh. 1.13. 1 Pet 1.23. So, a people
created; Psalm. 102.19. that he has doon] has performed or accomplished that
justice, and all things appertaining to it.

Annotations, Psalm XXIII.
Verse. 1. Feeds me] or, is my feeder, my Pastor, or Hierd. The word
comprehends all duties of a good Hierd, as together feeding, guiding,
governing and defending his stock. Therefore Kings also have this title, and
are said to seed their people, Psalm 78 71.72. 2 Samuel 5.2. Hereupon it is
attributed to God, and to Christ, feeding his Church, as the shepherd of their
souls. Psalm. 80.2. Ezekiel. 34.12.14.15. Isa. 40.11. Ioh. 10.11. 1 Pet. 2 25.

Verse. 2. of budding-grasse] pleasant pastures and lees, where green and tender
herbs do spring. he makes me] or, wil-make me he-down; to weet, for rest from
heat. This also is another duty of a good Hieder; as, I will feed my flock, and
I will make them lye-down, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 34.15. and, Show me, O thou
whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make he-down at noon.
Song. 1.6. easily-leadeth] or comfortably-guideth me; it notes a soft and
gentle leading, with sustaining of infirmity. as Genesis 33.14. Esa. 40.11.
Therefore the Greek turns it, he nourishes me. So Psalm. 31.4. by waters] or
unto waters of rest; that is, most quiet (or calm) waters; and such as give
rest, and refreshing. All these things Christ performs to his flock, as it is
written, They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
sun light on them, nor any heat; for the Lamb which is in the mids of the
throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them to the lively fountains of waters.
Rev. 7.16.17.

Verse. 3. returns my soul] or, will return or restore it; and consequently,
give it rest. See Psalm. 19.8.

V. 4. shade of death] that is, dark and dreadful shadow; and in a manner, the
very state of death. This speech denotes imminent danger, Ier. 2.6. sore
affliction, Psalm. 44.20, and 170.10, 14. fear and terror, Job 24.17. and
dreadful darkness, Job 10.21, 22. whereto spiritually is opposed, the light and
comfort of the gospel and grace of Christ, Mat. 4.16. Luke 1.79. wilt be with
me] or, art with me: and this implies his good, safety and protection. As when
God said, I will be with thee, Genesis 31.3. Jaakob understood it thus, I will do
thee good; Genesis 32.9. for Gods presence, is a sigular favor, and our
preeminence. Exodus 33.15, 16. thy rod] with such shepherds use to guide and
rule their flocks, Lev. 27.32. and with such the Lord is said to rule his
people, Ezekiel. 20.37. Wherefore the Prophet prays, feed thy people with thy
rod, Mic. 7.14. The rod is also for chastening and punishment, Psalm. 89.33. And
for the rebellious, God has a rod of iron and indignation. Psalm. 2.9. Lam.
3.1. Of Christ's rods or staves wherewith he feeds his flock, see Zach. 11.7,
etc.

Verse. 5. Thou furnishest] or wilt furnish; and make ready a table. This and
the things following, note the abundant supply of all good things, for
necessity and for delight, as at a sumptuous banquet, Prove. 9.2, etc. So by
Christ, the good shepherd, his sheep find pasture, have life, and have it in
abundance. Ioh. 10.9, 10. in presence] or before them: which causes the
enemies that see, to grieve: as Psalm. 112.10. make fat] that is, plenteously
moistnest and supplest with oil or balsam. In those countries they used to
welcome and cheer their guests, with pouring out precious sweet oiles or balsam
upon their heads. Luke 7.46. Ioh. 12.3. It signifies joy, Eccles. 9.8 Isa.
61.3. is abundant] to weet, with liquor; (as the word imports,) for to drink
my fill.

Verse. 6. Converse] or quietly repose my self, and dwell, as the Greek
translateth it. to length of dayes] that is, a long life time, or for ever. See
Psalm 21.5. and 93.5.

Annotations, Psalm XXIV.
Verse. 1. THe earth is Iehovahs;] or To Jehovah pertains the earth. Of him, and
by him, and for him are all things, yet in special he has chosen Jaakobs
posterity for his people, verse six. Thus David makes use of Moses doctrine,
who said, Lo, to Jehovah thy God, pertain the heavens, and the heavens of
heavens: the earth and all that therein is: notwithstanding, Jehovah set his
delight in thy fathers to love them, and did choose their seed after them, even
you above all peoples, as appears this day, Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. See also an
other use of this doctrine, in 1 Cor. 10.26, 28. where the Apostle proves,
that every creature in the earth may be used of Christians for food or
otherwise, because all is the Lords, and in Christ ours. plenty] or fullness;
that is all contained therein. So, the plenty of the sea, Isa. 42.10. the
plenty of the city, Amos 6.8. and sundry the like. that sit] that is, dwell or
inhabit; as it is noted on Psalm. 1. Phe like manner of speaking the holy Ghost
uses also in Greek, Luke 21.35. on all them that sit on the face of the whole
earth. So Psalm. 69.36. and often other where.

Verse. 2. Upon the seas:] or above them. The earth is said to be founded (or
fast settled) upon the seas, the heaps of waters, were called seas, Genesis 1.10.
because the waters, which naturally would stand above the high mountains, Psalm.
104.6. are by the word of God gathered together, and thrust under the earth,
that the dry land might appear, and be inhabited, Exodus 20.4. Genesis 1.9. And
these which may seem a most weak and flitting foundation, yet are firm-bases,
and mighty foundations, Psalm. 104.5. Mic. 6, 2. to magnify Gods power, who as
he brought light out of darkness, so setleth he the solid earth on the liquid
waters; yea, hangs the earth upon nothing, Job 26.7.

Verse. 4. The clean of palmes] He whose palms (or hands, as the Greek turns
is) are clean, or free of evil, So Job 17.9. This notes good works, as
pureness of heart, means holy faith and affections. Act. 15.9. not lifted up
his soul] or, my soul. The Hebrew has two readings, by the letters in the
line; his soul; and in the margin, my soul; as if this were spoken in the
person of God, and of him; which then may be understood of swearing. For this
form of words, is used in the 3. Commandment, Exodus 20. Thou shall not lift up
(or take up) the name of Jehovah thy God to false-vanity. But for Name, here is
put Soul. And God is said to swear by his soul; that is, by himself, or his
life, I^r. 51, 14. Amos 6.8. It was also the wont in Israel, to take an oath
thus, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives; 1 Samuel 20.3. 2 King 2.2, 4,
6. Also concerning a man's own soul, in swearing, this form was used, I call God
for a record against my soul. 2 Corinthians. 1, 23. Otherwise, if this be not
understood of vain swearing; the meaning is, he has affects not, or
regards not vanity; for so the lifting up of the soul, also signifies; see
Psalm. 25, 1. to deceit] or, deceitfully.

Verse. 5. He shall receive] or shall take up, or bear away a blessing. justice]
or righteousness; whereof see Phil. 3, 9. Psalm. 69, 28. Hereby also may be meant
a benefit, the fruit or reward of righteousness. The Greek turns it mercy, or
alms: and by justice, mercies, and benefits are sometimes meant. Judge. 5.11.
Psalm. 112.9. Dan. 4.24.

Verse. 6. of Iaakob] understand, this is the generation of Iaakob; or, this is
Iaakob; these are true Israelites, whom God will acknowledge for his. Ioh. 1,
47. Romans 9, 6. Jaakob when he wrastled with an Angel, saw God face to face, and
called the place Peniel, that is, Gods face, or presence: there he wept and
prayed, and bare away a blessing: Genesis 32.24, 26, 29.30. Hos. 12.4. That
history has use here.

Verse. 7. Lift up ye gates, etc.] This may first have reference to the gates
and doors of the temple, into which the Ark (the glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4,
21.) should enter: on which Ark. between the Cherubims, God was said to dwell;
1 Samuel 4.4. 1 King. 8, 1. etc. Secondly, it may be referred to Christian men,
which are the true temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.17. at the door of whose hearts he
knocks to have entrance, Rev. 3.20. doors of eternity] that is strong;
durable, everlasting doors: which being referred to the doors of Solomon's
temple, note the perpetual abiding of Gods Ark therein; as ^ King. 9.3. Psalm.
132.13, 14. Whereas before the Ark was removed from place to place. 1 Chronicles.
17.5. Or being applied to Christians, it notes the eternal durance of the
Church. that enter may] or, and enter shall the King of glory; that is, the
glorious King; So Christ is called the Lord of glory. 1 Cor. 2.8. Iam. 2.1. and
the opening of the doors before him, signifies his entrance into and
administration of the Kingdom: as Isa. 15, 1.

Verse. 10. Jehovah of hosts] or, as the Hebrew is, Jehovah Tsebaoth: for so the
word is used by the Apostles untranslated in the Greek, Sabbath. Rom, 9.29.
Iam. 5.4. It signifies hosts, or armies, standing ready in martial order, and
in battle ray: and comprehends all creatures in heaven and in earth, which
are pressed to do the will of God. Genesis 2, 1. 1 King. 22, 19. Exodus 12.41.

Annotations, Psalm XXV.
Verse. 1. OF David] This Psalm is composed after the order of the Hebrew
letters or Alphabet: which care, denotes the weight and excellency of the
matter in it. The same is to be observed of some other Psalms; as the 34. and
37. and 111. and 112. and 119. and 145. Lift I up my soul] This signifies an
earnest desire, with delight; and expectation, or hope to have what he would.
For to lift up the soul, is to desire; Ier. 22.27. and 44.14. and a like phrase
in Ezekiel. 24, 25. implies both desire and delight: and in Deuteronomy. 24.15. the
poor man is said to lift up his soul, unto his hire or wages, hoping by it to
have his life sustained. In this place, every of these has use; and so in
Psalm. 86, 4

Verse. 2. not be abashed] that is, not disappointed of my hope, nor, vanquished
by my foes. See Psalm 6.11. show gladnes] insult, or triumph for joy: as having
got the victory. 2 Chronicles 20.27.

Verse. 3. yea all] or, Yea any: for, whosoever believes in God, shall not be
ashamed. Romans 10.10. earnestly-exspect] or patiently-hope. they shall be] or
prayer-wise, let them be. Vnfaithfully-trangresse] that deal disloyally,
contrary to duty, promise, and trust reposed in them. So elsewhere he prays,
that no grace be showed to such. Psalm. 59.6. in vayn,] or without cause and
without fruit. Psalm. 7.5.

Verse. 4. Thy wayes] that is, thy true faith and religion; as Act. 18.25.26.
and thy guidance of me therein. So Moses prayed; Exodus 33.13. learn me thy
paths,] inure me with thy paths, or journeys, voyages. Learning implies, ure
and exercise, and informing by customable practice.

Verse. 5. Make me to tread] or to go; guide-my way in thy truth, that is, in
thy word: for that is the truth, Ioh. 17.17.3 Ioh. 3. So after, verse. 9.

Verse. 6. tender-mercies] or bowels of compassion: See Psalm. 18.2. This word
notes the inward affections; as the next, kind-mercies, imply the actions, or
effects of love. from eternitie] or, from ever. This in humane affairs sometime
means but of old, or a long while; Genesis 6.4. Isa. 42.14. But here, and
elsewhere* it notes the eternity of Gods love which was firm unto his, before
the world was, 2 Timothy 1.9. Ephe. 1.4. so showed throughout all generations; and
is in like sort for ever, or to eternity Psalm 100.5. because our firm
happiness, shall have no end; Dan. 12.3. 1 Pet. 1.4. And these both are
conjoined, Psalm. 103.17.

Verse. 7. Sins of my youth] The imagination of man's heart, is evil from his
youth, Genesis 8.21. and of all man's life, youth commonly is most vayn: Eccles.
11.9.10. for which God often punishes men in their age, so making them (as Job
says) to inherit the iniquities of their youth, Job 13.26. Ier. 3.25.

Verse. 8. Will he teach] or inform-with-the law; for of this word, the Law is
derived; Psalm. 19.8. sinners in the way] that is, such as sin and miss the
right way, God will teach and reduce them; thus the Greek interprets it. Or,
those that are sinners, he will teach and inform in the way, that is right; or
in his way; as verse. 9.

Verse. 9. to tread in judgment] to walk judiciously, and as is right and fit.

Verse. 10. his covenant] his testamental-bond, or league, called in Hebrew
Brith, which has the signification of brotherly or friendly parting, and of
explaining the condition; of agreement. For at the making of solemn covenants,
beast; were killed and parted asunder, and the covenant makers went between the
parts, Genesis 15.9.10.17. Ier. 34.18. Hereupon is the phrase of cutting a
covenant, Psalm 50.5. and 83.6. and 89.4. The Apostles in Greek call it
diathekee, a testament, a testamental-covenant, or disposing of things. Heb.
8.8. from Ier. 31.31. And there be two principal covenants, or testaments; the
first, that which God made with our fathers, when he brought them out of
Egypt; the sum whereof, was contained in the ten commandments written by
the finger of God. Deuteronomy. 4.13. Exodus 34.28. 1 King. 8.21. and the other laws
written by Moses in a book, called the book of the covenant, 2 King. 23.2.
Exodus 24.4.7. The second covenant, is that new testamental-bond, which God has
made with us in Christ; established upon better promises, and confirmed by the
blood and death of Christ the testator, as the first was by the blood and death
of beasts. Luke 22.20. Heb. 8.6.8. and 9.16.17.18, etc.

Verse. 11. even mercifully-pardon] or, therefore thou will mercifully-forgive.
This David takes from Moses, who first used this word, in a case of great
offense, Exodus 54.9. and it betokens to spare or pardon upon pacification, of
grace and mercy; and is interpreted by the Apostle in Greek, to be merciful,
propicious, or appeased, Heb. 8.12. from Ier. 31.34. Often used in the law, for
forgivenes upon oblation or intercession made by the Priest. Lev.
4.20.26.31.35. and 5.10.13.16.18. etc.

Verse. 12. Who the man] or, What manner of man shall he be? The Hebrew phrase
is, Who this the man: which also may be resolved, Whosoever is the man, he
shall chuse] that is, which he shall love and like; or, which he loves. So
chosen, Isa. 42.1. is translated in Greek, beloved, Mat. 12.18.

Verse. 13. Lodge in good] that is, continue in good estate, ease and
prosperity. So lodging, is for continuance, Job 17.2. Prove. 19.23. the land]
meaning Canaan, the land promised for a possession to Abraham and his seed,
Genesis 15.7. and 12.7. called therefore, the land of promise, Heb. 11.9. and
elsewhere, the holy land, Zach. 2.12. the Lords land. Psalm. 10.16. the land of
Immanuel, that is, of Christ, Isa. 8.8. a land slowing with milk and honey, and
the pleasantest of all lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. the seat of Gods ancient Church, and
figure of his kingdom.

Verse. 14. The secret] or, The mystery of the Lord; meaning that his secret
favor is toward them, and his secret counsel, and mysterry of the says is
revealed unto them. For so this word notes, is when Job says, Gods secret was
upon his tabernacle, meaning his favor and providence, Job 29.4. and Gods
secret is his counsel, Job 15.8. Ier. 23.18, 22. and the hid things of Christ
are often called a mystery, Romans 16.25. 1 Cor. 2.7. and 4.1. 1 Timothy 3.9, 16.
Ephe. 3.3, 4, 9. Collos. 1.26, 27. So Prove. 3.32.

Verse. 16. Turn the face] or Turn, look. Have respect unto me. This was a
blessing promised in the law, Levit. 26.9. I will turn the face unto you, and
make you increase. Contrary to this, is the hiding of Gods face, Psalm. 69.17,
18. solitarie] alone or desolate; see Psalm. 22.21.

Verse. 17. Are inlarged] or do enlarge themselves: do make wide-roomth. He
shows his heart to be penned in with straights and destressing sorrows,
which largly spread themselves over all. vexations] or anguishes, necessities,
tribulations which press and wring.

Verse. 18. See my affliction] This phrase is taken from, Deuteronomy. 26.7. he saw our
affliction. And it here means, a seeing and regarding with passion, and so, a
redress and help, Genesis 29.22. Exodus 3.7, 8. Psalm. 31.8, and 119, 153. and
106.44. Sometime it means otherwise, as in the next verse, See my enemies.
forgive] or lift up, take away. This word which properly signifies to take up
or bear, is applied to forgivennesse of sins; Romans 4.7. from Psalm. 32.1. and
the phrase has reference to Christ, who bare and took away the sins of the
world, Ioh. 1.29. for when it is applied to a man himself, hearing his own sin,
it means guilt and punishment, Number. 5.31.

Verse. 19. Of violent-wrong] that is, most violent, or wrongful hatred.

Verse. 22. His distresses] or their distresses; for Israel being put for the
whole people, may have with it a word singular or plural; which the Hebrew
text also often shows; as all Edom was, 2 Samuel 8.14. or all Edom were, 1 Chronicles. 18.13. The like is in 2 King. 23.30, with 2 Chronicles. 36.1. He took, or
They took, speaking of the people

Annotations, Psalm. XXVI.
Verse. 1. IN my perfection] or, integrity, simplicity: and that is, when a man
means not, nor weeteth of any evil, 2 Samuel 15.11. Such a walker, walks
confidently, and blessed shall be his children after him, Prove. 10.9, and 20.7.

Verse. 2. Try my reines] examine as in the fire, my inmost affections. Thus Job
also offered himself to trial, Job 31.6.

Verse 3. I walk] to weet continually, (as the form of this word imports) or
converse.

Verse. 4 Men of false-vanitie] that is, vain mortall-men; or false persons Job
11.11. So Jeremy says, he sat not in the secret-assembly of mockers, Ier.
15.17. the bidden] that is, hypocrites, dissemblers, secret-evill doers. I
enter not] or come not, that is, I have no company, or conversation. So the
word is also used, Ios. 23.7.

Verse. 5. Church of evil doers] the malignant church, or congregation.

Verse. 6. my palms with cleannes] or, hands in innocence. He has respect to
the washing which God appointed for such as came to his altar, Exodus 40.32.
Hereupon we are willed to lift up pure hands when we pray unto God, 1 Timothy 2.8.
See also Isa. 1.15.16.

Verse. 7. To cause to hear] that is, to sound forth, or proclaim so as may be
heard. So Psalm. 66.8 and 106.2. And in 1 Chronicles. 15.16. David appointed Levites
with instruments, to cause to hear, or to resound, lifting up the voice with
joy.

Verse. 8. mansion] or habitation. This name is given to the tabernacle which
Moses made, and God dwelt in: 1 Samuel 2.29.32. and afterward, to Solomon's
temple: 2 Chronicles. 36.15. And heaven it self, is also thus called, Deuteronomy. 26.15.
where there are many mansions. Ioh. 14.2. of the habitation] or the habitacle:
the tabernacle. The tent which Moses made, was thus called, Exodus 26.1.6. and
Solomon's house. 2 Chronicles. 29.6. In Exodus 40.34.35. it is showed, how Gods glory
filled that tabernacle, when he first took possession of it; whereupon it is
here called, the habitacle of his glory, or honor: and elsewhere, the habitacle
of the Lord, Levit. 17.4. and of his name: Psalm. 74, 7.

Verse. 9. Gather not my soul] Gathering is used for taking-away, as Ier. 16.5.
Isa. 4.1. and so for death, Isa. 57.1. 1 Samuel 15.6. Ezekiel. 34.29. and sometime
is expressed, to whom they are gathered; as, to their fathers; to their people;
to the grave, 2 King. 22.20. Number. 20.24.26, and what is gathered, the soul, as
here; or the ghost, the spirit, as Psalm. 104.29. So David here desires that
God would not take-away his life among sinners, that is, with such as for their
crimes deserve to die: as 1 King. 1.21. Contrariwise, gathering, is sometime
used for gracious receiving, or succouring: as Psalm. 27.10. men of bloods]
blood-guilty persons. See Psalm* 5.7.

Verse. 10. a mischievous purpose] craftily-devised-evil. See Psalm. 10.2.
Sometime this word is generally used for any abominable evil. Levit. 18.17. and
19.29. and 20.14. full of bribes] and consequently, of injustice; for bribes
cause justice to be perverted, Deuteronomy. 16.19. Contrariwise, Gods right hand, is
full of justice. Psalm. 48.11.

Verse. 12. in righteousnes] or, in a right, even and plain place, as the word
signifies, Deuteronomy. 3.10. Ier. 21.13. the Apostle expresses the word by
righteousness, Heb. 1.8. from Psalm 45, 7. it is opposed to crookednes, Isa 40.4.
See also Psalm. 27.11. in the Churches] or Congregations, assemblies,
Church-meetings; called in Greek ecclesiais; and so in the new testament; 1 Cor
14.34. See also Psalm. 68.27.

Annotations, Psalm. XXVII.
Verse. 1. MY light] that is, my comfort, joy, etc. So God and Christ are often
called the light, or illumination of his people. Mic. 7.8. Isa. 16.19.20. and
10.17. Luke 1.^9. and 2.32 Rev. 21.23. Ioh. 1.4. and 8.12. the strength] or
strong-sort, fortification, see Psalm. 28 8.

Verse 2. made-battell] or came-neer against me; to weet, in sight. So this word
is used for battle, Psalm. 55.19.22. my enemies to me] a vehement manner of
speech; (as 2 Samuel 22.2. my deliverer to me.) noting against whom in special
their hatred was bent.

Verse. 3. if warr] that is, warriers; or, an army; as the word is used, Josh.
8.11. See also Psalm 76.4.

Verse. 4. One thing] or One-request, or boon; as is expressed 1 King. 2.20. 1 Samuel 2.20. For such want of words to be supplied, see the note on Psalm. 10.10.
that I may sit] or me to sit; that is, dwell, or abide. to view the
pleasantnes] to see the pleasantnes or amenitie, of Jehovah; and consequently
to enjoy it. The tabernacle had the figure and pattern of heavenly things in
Christ; Heb. 8.5. which David in spirit here desires to contemplate. The
Hebrew phrase, is, view in the pleasantnes; and after in the 13 verse, see in
the goodness; which signifies to have the fruition, use, and enjoying of
pleasure and goodness: Eccles. 2.1. And as to seek in Jehovah, 2 Chronicles. 34.26.
is to seek Jehovah. 2. King. 22.18. so to see in the good, is to see the good,
and enjoy it. So in Psalm. 106.5. and 128.5. and 50.23. to inquire] or
seek-early, that is, diligently.

Verse. 5. will keep privily] or hide me, that is, keep me safe as in the most
holy of his sanctuary, into which none might enter Levit. 16.2. called
therefore, Gods hidden place, Ezekiel. 7.22. and his Saints, are his hidden ones.
Psalm. 83.4.

Verse. 6. And now] which may be meant properly, at this time; or, sacrifices of
showting] or of triumph, of ioyful-sounding, alarm, and ringing. This has
respect to the law, which appointed over the sacrifices, trumpets to be
sounded, Number. 10.10. whose chiefest, most loud, joyful, and triumphant sound
was called Trughmah, Triumph, alarm, or ^ubilation: Number. 10.5, 6, 7. So to
other instruments, this triumphant noise is adjoined, Psalm. 33, 3. and it
applied sometime to man's voice or showting: Ios. 6.5. 1 Samuel 4.5. Ezra. 3.11.
See also Psalm. 89.16. and 47.6. and 81.2. and 100.1.

Verse. 8. seek ye my face] an unperfect speech, which we may supply and explain
thus, ( thou said) seek ye my face: and this thy commandment, my heart
minded and spoke of, to thee in my tentations; and I made it a ground of my
action, and request following. See a much like defect of a word, in 1 King.
20.34. To seek the face, is of desire to see, hear, and know; 1 King. 10.24.
and to pray and ask counsel in doubts, distresses, etc. 2 Samuel 21.1. Hos.
5.15. So Psalm. 105.4.

Verse. 10. Though my father, etc. should] see the like, in Isa. 49.15. Or, For
my father, etc. have forsaken me: but Jehovah will gather me; that is, receive,
and take me to him. So the word gathering is also used, Judge. 19.15. Ios. 20.4.
Mat. 23.37. He means, that God would be a father unto him.

Verse. 12. to the soul] that is, to the will, lust, or desire. So Soul is for
will; Psalm. 41.3, and 105.22 Ezekiel. 16.27. and for lust, Psalm. 78.18. that
breatheth] or pusseth out. See Psalm. 10.5.

Verse. 13. Except I had beleeved] and unperfect speech; where we may
understand; I should have fainted; or They had overthrown me; if I had not
believed, etc. land of the living] that is, where men live in this world; and
in special, the land of Canaan; the seat of Gods Church. Ezekiel 26.20. So Psalm.
52, 7. and 116, 9. and 142, 6. Job 28.13. For by death, men are said to be cut
out of the land of the living. Isa. 53, 8. and 38, 11. Ier. 11.19.

Verse. 14. be confirmed] be comfortable, hold fast; (as the Greek has,) be
manly; or, quit thee as a man, which word the Apostle uses, 1 Cor. 16, 13.
These are words of encouragement, against remisnes, fear, faintnes of heart, or
other infirmities: as Deuteronomy. 31 6.7, Ios. 10, 25. 1 Chronicles. 22, 13. Dan. 10, 19.
let thy heart wax-strong] so also the Greek turns it for, we may read it, he
will strengthen thy heart. So after in Psalm. 31.25.

Annotations, Psalm XXVIII.
Verse. 1. CEase not etc.] that is, cease not to speak unto, and answer me, be
not silent as turned-away from me; so the like phrase means, Job 13.13 Ier
38.27. or, cease not to speak for me as the phrase also imports. 1 Samuel 7.8.
and so by the Rock forementioned, he may mean Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. who is our
advocate with the Father, 1 Ioh. 2.1.

Verse. 2. oracle of thy holines] thy holy oracle: The inmost, and most holy
place of the temple, was thus named, 1 King. 6.5.16.19.20 called the holy of
holyes, 1 King. 8, 6. The Hebrew Doir, has the signification of Speaking; for
from the most holy place, God spoke to his people, Number. 7, 89. The Apostle
seems to express it, by that which is within the vaiel. Hebr. 6, 19

Verse. 3. Draw me not] to weet, unto death, that is, destroy me not. So drawing
is used, Ezekiel. 32, 20. Job 21, 33. and 24.20. an example wherereof see in
Sisera. Iud. 4.7.

Verse. 4. the evil of their practises] This has reference to the curse
denounced against sinners, Deuteronomy. 28.20.

Verse. 5. not discreetly-attend] or, consider; so, as to discern and understand
them. The like sin is blamed, Isa. 5.12. break them down] or, destroy: opposed
to buildng up, or edifying; and applied figuratively to men; so Ier. 1, 10. and
42.10. 2 Cor. 13.10. build] that is, conserve, exalt, prosper them, See the
like phrase, Job 22.23. Mal. 3, 15. Ier. 12.16.

Verse. 8. strength to them] or, to him, as Psalm. 2.3. meaning, his people, (as
the Greek expresses,) and his anointed king: both which follow. the
strong-fort] or fortification. The former word strength is in Hebrew Ghouz; and
this strong-fort, Maghnoz; by addition of a letter, adding to the force of the
signification. And this is often used for a fortification, or strong-defensed
place. Dan. 11.10. Judge. 6.26. of the salvations of his anointed] or of the
deliverances (the victories) of his anointed; that is, of me, his anointed
King. This sentence may also be turned thus: and the strong-fort of salvations,
his Anointed (Christ is: meaning that the Christ of God, is the saving strength
of his people. The last word He, is often put for Is; sometime in the Hebrew
text it self, as is noted in Psalm. 16, 3.

Verse. 9. inheritance] that is, people or church. Deuteronomy. 4.20. and 32.9. Psalm.
33.12. and 94.5. 1 Petr. 5.3. Sometimes it is the land where they dwelt, Psalm.
79.1. advance them] or bear them up, relieve them. The word is used for
advancing to honor. Eslh. 3.1. and 9.3. and for bearing up, supporting,
helping, as 1 King. 9.11. Esr. 1.4. and 8.36.

Annotations, Psalm XXIX.
Verse. 1. SOnns of the mighties] that is, ye mighty men, or potentates. So
Psalm. 89.7. strength] or strong praise. See Psalm. 8, 3. and 1 Timothy 6.16.

Verse. 2 honor of the sanctuarie] that is, the honorable Sanctuary, (as the
Greek explaineth it, in his holy court) or, with honor of sanctity; that is,
with holy honor. So Psalm. 96.9. 1 Chronicles. 16.29. This phrase is sometime used
of Gods holy majesty, 2 Chronicles. 20.21.

Verse. 3. The voice] that is, the thonder, as Exodus 20.18. called Gods voice.
Exodus 9.28 29. Yet voices and thondrings, are sometimes distinct, as Rev. 4, 5.
and 8, 5 and 11, 19. and 16.18. This word voice, is generally used for all
noise or sound; 2 King. 7.6. 1 Cor. 14.10. upon the waters] which are above the
firmament, Genesis 1.7. where the thonder is heard. Or above the waters, that is,
a louder voice then the roaring of the waters; whereof see Ezekiel. 1, 24. and
43.2. Rev. 1, 15. and 14 2. and 19.6. Gods voice shakes heavens and earth,
Heb. 12.26. Jehovah upon] that is, thendereth upon; or his voice is above many
waters.

Verse. 5. Cedars of Lebanon] The Cedar, is a tree tall, strong, and durable;
and for the drines of it, the timber rotteth not. They are called Cedars of
God, Psalm. 80.11. and by him planted, Psalm. 104, 16. Lebanon is a mountain in
Canaan, high, pleasant, and fruitful, full of Cedars, and other trees, the
glory of that mount. 2 Chronicles. 2, 8. Song. 3, 9. and 5.15, Isa. 60, 13. Hos.
14.6, 7, 8. It is called Lebanon of whitenes, for the snow that lies on it,
Ier, 18.14. To this mount, and to the goodly trees thereon, great kindgdoms and
personages are compared, Ezekiel. 31, 3. and 17, 3. Ier. 22.23. Judge. 9.15. 2
King. 14.9. And the just man's estate in special; Psalm. 92, 14.

Verse. 6. Shiryon] this is, mount Hermon, called of the Sidonians, Shirion, and
of the Amorites Shenir; Deuteronomy. 3, 9. and by another name Sion (not Tsijon spoken
of in Psalm. 2, 6.) Deuteronomy. 4, 48. for this Shirjon, or Hermon, lay without the
river Jarden, where Ogh reigned, Ios. 22.1.5. 1 Chronicles. 5, 23. Here also grew
goodly trees, and many wild beasts kept in it. Ezekiel. 27.5. Song. 4, 8. Of
Hermon see more in Psa. 89, 13. and 133.3. and 42.7. a young Vnicorn] a fierce
untamed beast; see Psalm. 22.22. The Hebrew phrase is, son of the Unicorns; the
like is also Psalm. 114.4. All young creatures, and things that come of, or
belong to another, are in Hebrew called sonns; so the sonns of the cole, are
sparks, Job 5.7. the sonns of the quiver, are arrows, Lam. 3.13. the son of
the morn, is the morning starr, Isa. 14.12. the sonns of Sion, are the Citizens
there. Psalm. 149.2. the sonns of the wedding chamber, are the bridegroomes
friends, Mat 9.15. and many the like,

Verse. 7. striketh] or cutteth flames; as the flashes of lightning with the
thonder.

Verse. 8. makes tremble] or quake, or paineth the wilderness, that is, the wild
beasts there, which being frighted by Gods voice or thonder, do travel and
bring forth their young with pain and trembling. Kadesh] called also Paran and
Zin, a desert through which the Israelites passed from Egypt to Canaan, Number.
13.27. and 33.36. and had the name of the city Kadesh by which it lay, Number.
20.1.16. The beasts of this wilderness were cruel. Deuteronomy. 8.15. and 32.10.

Verse. 9. the hindes] though of all other creatures they bring forth with great
trouble, bowing themselves, bruising their young, and casting out their sorrows,
Job 39.4.6. makes bare] by driving the beasts with the thonder into their
denns; or, by beating off the leaves and fruits of the trees. So the figtree is
said to be made bare, Joel 1.7. every one] so the Greek turns it: or it may
be read, every whit, or all of it, meaning of his people verse. 11. which says
glory to God; or all of it, that is of his glory, he says (that is, God
declares) in his temple.

Verse. 10. at the floud] meaning Noah's flood; Genesis 6. and 7. for to that only,
both the Hebrew and Greek word is applied. And here the Chaldee paraphraseth
thus; The Lord at the generation of the flood, sat on the seat of judgment,
to take vengeance on them: he sat also upon the seat of mercies, and delivered
Noah, and reigns over his sonns, for ever and ever.

Verse. 11. with peace] or in peace; which word betokens integrity,
perfection, a making whole and absolute; opposed both to war and sword, Psalm.
120.7. Mat. 10.34. and to division, confusion, and tumultuous disorder, Luke
12.51. 1 Cor. 14.33. It denotes all prosperity, safety, and welfare of soul
and body, and specially that spoken of Ephesians. 2.14.15. where Christ is our
peace, which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of the partition
wall, etc. to make of twain, one new man in himself, so making peace.

Annotations, Psalm XXX.
Verse. 1. DEdication] or initiation; which is, when a new thing is first
employed and put to that use for which it was made. It is applied to houses, as
here, and Deuteronomy. 20.5. to altars, as Number. 7.84, 88. to walls, as Nehem. 12.27.
to images, as Dan. 3.2. and to men; and then it means instruction, or
trayning-up; as Prove. 22.6. Genesis 14.14.

Verse. 2. have drawn-up me] as out of a pit of waters; for this word is used
for drawing of waters, Exodus 2.16.17. waters, signifying troubles. at me] or
over me, for my ruin. Or, my enemies to me, that is, my utter enemies; as
Psalm. 27.2.

Verse. 3. healest me] that is, helpedst me out of trouble: so Psalm. 41.5. and
60 4. Hos. 7.1. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. my soul from hell] me, or my life from the
peril and state of death. So Psalm. 86.13. Jonas meant the same when he said,
thou have brought out my life from the pit. Jonas 2.6. Of hell, see Psalm.
16.10. them that goe-down] that is, which die; that I should not be among them;
the Hebrew also has another reading, that I should not go down the pit. The
meaning is the same.

Verse. 5. to the remembrance] or for it; that is, that his holiness may be had
in remembrance: as Isa. 26.17. So Psalm. 97.12.

Verse. 6. a moment] or little while. For Gods anger toward his, and their
affliction, is short and momentany; as Isa. 54.7.8. 2 Cor. 4.17. life] or
lives; meaning a blessing and the continuance of it: as Psalm. 133.3. and 21.5.
Life is here opposed to a moment. So years of life, mean many good years,
Prove. ^, 2. lodgeth] that is, abides: or he (meaning God) causes weeping to
lodge, as if it should be an abiding guest. So an other Prophet says, At
even-tide lo there is trouble, but before the morning it is gone. Isa. 17.14.

Verse. 7. in my safe quietnes] or tranquillity. Gods children have so great
infirmities, that in prosperity they are to secure; (as David shows here, and
Job, in chap. 29.18, 19, 20.) and in adversity they are to fearful; as David
elsewhere does confess: Psalm. 31, 23. and 116.11.

Verse. 8. setled] or made-stand; that is, reared up; constituted and stablished
sure. So this phrase imports, Psalm. 107, 25. and 31, 9. to my mountain] that
is, mount Sion, where David's house or court was: or, figuratively, he means
his kingdom: as Isa. 2, 2. Dan. 2.35, 44. See Psalm. 65, 7.

Verse. 10. what profit] what gain (or use) will there be in my blood; which
here may mean his violent death, as in Psalm. 72, 14. unto corruption] the
grave, or place where the body rotteth. See Psalm. 16, 10. shall dust] that is,
my body when it is turned to dust. See the like in Psalm. 6.6. and 88, 11. and
115.17. Isa. 38.18.

Verse. 12. to a dance] which is a sign of joy: Ier. 31.4.13. therefore the
Greek turns it here, joy. The contrary is in Lam. 5, 15. where their dance is
turned into mourning. loosed my sack] or, done-off my sackcloth; which was wont
to be worn in time of sorrow. Esth. 4, 1. Ion. 3, 6. Psalm. 35.13.

Verse. 13. my glorie] so the Greek puts to the word my; by glory, meaning
the tongue or soul: see Psalm. 16, 9. silenced] or made silent; which is, when
men are cut off by death, as Psalm. 31.18.

Annotations, Psalm XXXI.
Verse. 3. A House of fortresses] a place of defenses, a most safe hold. David
being often forced to take such forts for his safety; did not make them, but
God his strength: see 1 Samuel 22.4. and 23.14.19. and 24.1.23. 2 Samuel 5.7.9.

Verse. 6. commit my spirit] or commend, depose, of trust to be kept. Such words
our Lord Christ uttered on the cross to his father, Luke 23.46.

Verse. 7. Vanities of vain-falshood] that is, most vain, false, and lying
vanities. The word vanity (Hebel) here used, besides vain worldly things,
against which Solomon writes, Eccles 1. etc. means in special, Idolatry;
for Idols are often called vanities, as being light, vile, and things of
naught. Deuteronomy. 32.21. 1 King. 16.26. 2 King. 17.15. Ier. 2.5. and 8.19. and
10.15. and 14.22. etc. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own
mercy. Jonas 2, 8.

Verse. 8. have known my soul] that is, acknowledged, cared for; and (as the
Greek translateth) save it. See Psalm. 1.6.

Verse. 9. not shut me up] or closed me; that is, not given me into their power:
so Psalm. 78.48.50.62. Deuteronomy. 23.15. and 32.30.

Verse. 10. gnawen] that is, fretted, and consumed as with worms. see Psalm. 6.8.

Verse. 11. decayed,] or weakened, so as one stumbleth and falls down through
weakness: Psalm. 27.2. So Psalm. 109, 24. and 105.37. with my iniquity] that is,
punishment due for iniquity; so the word often is used, as Genesis 19.15. 2 King.
7.9. So, whordom: for the punishment of whordom, Number. 14.33.

Verse. 12. known-acquaintance] that is, such as I knew, respected, and
favored; and to whom I made known my mind, estate, etc. my familiars.

Verse. 13. out of heart] that is, out of mind, or memory; for the remembrance
of the dead is forgotten, Eccles. 9.5. therefore the grave, is the land of
forgetfulness; Psalm. 88.13. vessel of perdition] that is, a lost or broken
vessel, or instrument. So Paul mentions vessels of perdition, Romans 9.22. Or,
a vessel perishing, that is, ready to perish and be lost; as a perishing
sheep, Psalm. 119.176.

Verse. 14. the infamy of many] or the diffamation (the ill report) of
mighty-men. The like complaint Jeremie makes in his troubles; Ier. 20, 10.
fearfulnes from every side] or terror round about. In Hebrew, Magor missabib,
which name Jeremy gave to Pashur the priest; signifying that he should be a
terror to himself, and to all his friends. Ier. 20, 3.4. This phrase Jeremy
often uses; Ier. 6, 25. and 46.5. and 49.29. Lam. 2.22. when they plot.] or
whiles they consult: see Psalm. 2, 2.

Verse. 16. my times] Hereby he means, that his many and sundry events,
troubles, deliverances, prosperities, adversities, life and death, (for all
things have their appointed time, Eccles. 3.1, 2.) were in the hand and
disposition of God. Though times here (as days in Psalm. 119.84.) may chiefly
be meant of his troubles: as Psalm. 9.10. and 10.1. So in 1 Chronicles. 29, 30.
mention is made of the times that went over David, and over Israel, and over
all the kingdoms of the lands.

Verse. 17. Make thy face to shine] that is, cause thy favorable countenance to
appear. This is taken from the blessing prescribed Number. 6, 25. and is often
used in requests for grace. See Psalm. 4.7. and 67, 2. and 80, 4.8.20. and
119.135.

Verse. 18. silenced] that is, through shame and fear be confounded, tamed,
quieted, and made still. The word is sometime used for cut off, or destroyed;
and so may here be taken. So Psalm. 49, 13.21. to hell] understand, thrust down
to hell, or, to the grave.

Verse. 19. an hard-word] or durable-speech; a reproach which lasts long to a
man's infamy. The Hebrew Ghnathak, signifies durance, hardness, and antiquity or
eld, Psalm. 6.8. and respects both antique things long ago, 1 Chronicles. 4.22.
and things lasting or durable for time to come, Prove. 8.18. Isa. 23.18. And in
speeches, it is put for an old-said-saw, taken up and applied to ones reproach,
and so during long: and generally, for any hard or stout speech; 1 Samuel 2.3.
Psalm. 94, 4. and 75, 6.

Verse. 21. Thou keep them secret] or, hidest them in the hiding place of thy
presence: where thou always look unto them, in secret favor, which the
world knows not of. rough-prides] or knots, knobs, rough-troubles. The Hebrew
Racas signifies Knitting, or binding with knots, Exodus 28, 28. and 39.21. from
which a word is derived, in Isa. 40, 4. signifying knotty, knobby, or rough
places, opposed to smooth or plain. Here David uses it figuratively, for
rough affections, or actions of men, meaning their pride, conspiracies, or
molestations; as the Greek translateth, from the trouble of men. lay them up]
or hide them. Hereupon Gods people are called, his stored, or hidden-ones.
Psalm. 83.4. the strife of tongues] plea, or contradiction, as the Greek turns
it: and the Apostle Jude, verse. 11.

Verse. 22. made marveilous his mercy] or marveilously-severed it; as Psalm. 4.4.
showed his mercy in marveilous and hidden manner. As contrariwise God threatened
to make marveilous the plagues of sinners: Deuteronomy. 28.59. of strong-defense] or
of siege: that is, a fortified, defensed city; as 2 Chronicles. 8.5. or a beseiged
city, as 2 King. 24.10 The Hebrew Matsor signifies both a sort, or skonce, and
a siege, or leguer: Deuteronomy. 20.20. and 28.53.

Verse. 23. my hastening-away] namely, through amazement or fear; as the word
commonly intends; Deuteronomy. 20.3. Psalm. 48.6. 2 Samuel 4.4. And that David hastened
him away for fear; is recorded 1 Samuel 23.26. So Psalm. 116.11. cut down] Jonas
in his affliction respected this speech of David, and changing a letter, for
Nigrazti, says, Nigrashti, I am driven away from before thy face, etc. Jonas,
2.4.

Verse. 24. the faithfull] or, keeps fidelities, as Isa. 26.2. The original
word signifies, either faithfull-persons, or truths, fidelities; as Psalm.
12.2. The Greek here has, truths. pays abundantly] or, to abundance, with
surplusage. that does haughtines] This sense the Greek gives. The Hebrew may
also thus be Englished, he (that is, God) does haughtines, that is, high
magnificent acts. For the original word Gaavah sometime notes Gods high
magnificence, Psalm. 68.35. sometime man's haughty-pride, Psalm. 10.2.

Verse. 25. wax-strong] or he will strengthen. See Psalm. 27.14. hopefully wayt]
or persevere with hope and patience. The word jachal, implies both a patient
wayting' Genesis 8.10. and a hope or trusting, as the holy Ghost expounds it,
Mat. 12.21. from Isa. 42.4.

Annotations, Psalm XXXII.
Verse. 1. AN instructing-psalm] or, A psalm- that makes prudent: that
causeth-understanding, As in the 8. verse of this psalm, he says, I will make
thee prudent, or instruct thee. This title is set before sundry other psalms.
whose sin is covered] meaning, by the Lord, Psalm. 85.3. not by a man himself,
who must not cover, but acknowledge sin; Psalm. 32.5. otherwise, he shall not
prosper. Prove. 28.13. Now God covers sin, when he imputes it not, as the
verse following shows: and as this is man's happiness, so for God not to cover
it, is woe and misery. Nehem. 4.5.

Verse. 2. not impute] not think, count, or reckon. And this is an effect of his
grace in Christ; as it is written, God was Christ, and reconciled the world to
himself, not imputing their sins unto them: 2 Cor. 5.19. And hereunto the
Apostle applies this Psalm thus; David says, blessedness is the man's unto whom
God imputes justnes without work: saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
shall not impute sin, Romans 4.6.7.8.

Verse. 3. Because I ceased-speaking] or, when I kept-silence, forbearing to
confess my sins; as after, verse. 5. Like doctrine Elihu teaches, Job
33.19.-22.

Verse. 4. moisture] the chief sap, or radical moisture, which is an aerie and
oly substance dispread through the body; whereby the life is fostered; and
which being spent, death insueth. This word is used only here, and in Number.
11.8. where it is applied to the best moisture, or cream of oil.

Verse. 5. confesse] Confessing of sins, is when one freely manifests them,
accusing himself, and praising Gods mercy, which he expects in faith; see
Ios. 7.19. against me my trespasses) or, concerning my trespasses; but both the
Greek version plainly has, against me; and elsewhere the Hebrew ghnalei (here
used) seems to be put for ghnalai: as Psalm. 108.10. compared with Psalm.
60.10. the iniquity of my sin] that is, the guilt and punishment of it; as Psalm
31.11. And thus he that confesses and forsakes sin, shall have mercy, Prove.
28.13. for if we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive
us them, 1 Ioh. 1, 9. See also Job 33.27.28.

Verse. 6. the time of finding] or, time to find: which may be meant of the time
when afflictions shall find, that is, shall come upon him; as Psalm. 116.3.4. or
the time when God may be found, as Isa. 55.6. and that time is, when he is
sought with the whole heart. Deuteronomy. 4.29. Ier. 29.13. 2. Chron. 15.15. floud] or
inundation. As waters signify afflictions, Psalm. 69.2. so a flood of waters,
denotes great troubles and persecutions. Dan. 9.26. and 11.22. Nahum. 1.8.
Isa. 59.19. Rev. 12.15.16.

Verse. 7. showting long; of deliverance] or, of evasion; that is, thou will
give me occcasion by deliverance of me, to sing many songs of praise unto thee.

Verse. 8. mine eye shall be upon thee] or, mine eye I will set upon thee; that
is, I will have care of, and look well unto thee; as Ier. 40.4. Ezra. 5.5.
Deuteronomy. 11.12. Psalm. 34.16. (So the Chaldee explaineth it, I will counsel thee,
and set mine eye upon thee for good.) Or thus, I will give-counsell, unto thee
with mine eye; that is, with my care and pro^^dence. Thus Christ counseled
Peter with his eye, Luke 22.61. So the eye is said to mock; Prove. 30, 17.

Verse. 9. like a horse, etc.] that is, be not fools, and brutish, so as ye must
be ruled by force and rigor, not by reason. For unto the horse belongs a whip,
unto the ass a bridle; and a rod, to the fools back. Prove. 26.3. month must be
stopped] or, jaw is to be tied, Hebr. to stop; for, to be stopped: active for
passive; as after Psalm. 36.3. which come not near] that is, which will not
obey, or do thee service, unless they be forced and ruled by the bridle;
according to the saying of the Apostle, behold we put bitts into the horses
mouths, that they should obey us. Iam. 3.3.

Verse. 10. Many paines] or, Great smarts, or sores are for the wicked: so
Solomon says, Affliction follows sinners, etc. Prove. 13.21. and 19.29. and
24.20.

Annotations, Psalm. XXXIII.
Verse. 1. BEcometh] the word denotes a fair and comely grace, for which a
thing is to be liked and desired. So Psalm. 93.5. and 147.1. The Apostle
expresses it in Greek, by fair or beautiful. Romans 10.15. from Esa. 52 7.

Verse. 2. with harp] or, with sittern; in Hebrew Kinnor; a musical instrument
invented by Jubal, Genesis 4.21. used for mirth and joy, Psalm. 137.1.2. Esa. 24.8.
Genesis 31.27. and therefore is called the pleasant harp, Psalm. 81.3. opposed unto
mourning, Job 30.31. in skill on this instrument, David excelled, 1 Samuel
16.16.23. and with this and other, they used in Israel to celebrate the Lord
with gladness, 1 Chronicles. 13.8. and 15.16.28. and 25.1. Nehem. 12.27. So
spiritually in the new Testament, Rev. 14.2 with Psalteric] or Luit, or Viole:
In Hebrew Nebel, an instrument so called of the form which as seems was with
a round hollow bulk, much like a bottell: (for Nebel is also a bottell, or
pitcher, 1 Samuel 10.3 Lam. 4.2.) and of this the Greeks and Latins had their
instruments named Nable, Naulon, Nabhum. The Greek here calls it psalterion.
ten stringed-instrument] this differed from the psalterie, Psalm. 92.4.
therefore the word with is here supplied.

Verse. 3. a new song] A thing is said to be new which is always fresh, renewed
upon new occasions, and so permanent; as Job says, my glory was new with me.
So Love is both an old and a new commandment, 1 Ioh. 2.7.8. Or these new
songs, (mentioned here, and Psalm. 40.4. and 96.1. and 98.1. and 144 9. Isa.
42.10.) may have reference to the stats of things under the gospel, where there
is a new covenant, Hebr. 8.8.13. new heavens, and new earth, Rev. 21.1. a new
man, Ephesians. 2.15. and 4.24. a new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.2. and all things new; 2
Cor. 5.17. Rev. 21.5. See also Rev. 5.9. and 14.3. do-well playing, etc.] that
is, make good musik, or melody. So 1 Samuel 16.17.18. Esa. 23.16. And this
melody we are now willed to make to the Lord in our hearts, Ephesians. 5.19. The
Hebrew Nagan, whereof comes Negmoth, Psalm. 4, 1.) properly is to play with
the hand upon an instrument; 1 Samuel 19, 9.

Verse. 4. in faith] that is, faithful, true, and constant. Fot so this word is
often used, as Exodus 17.12. Moses hands were with says; that is, stedy, firm,
constant.

Verse. 5. the earth is full] the like is said, Psalm. 119.64. For God does good
unto all, both just and unjunst, Mat. 5.45. and saves man and beast. Psalm.
36.7.

Verse. 6. the host of them] that is the many creatures in them: as Angels, sun,
moon, stars, etc. Psalm. 148.1.2.3.5. Genesis 2, 1. So mention is made of the
powers or hosts of heaven, Mat. 24.29. Spirit] or breath; thus Jehovah, his
Word, and his Spirit are noted to be the maker of the world; as in Genesis 1.

Verse. 7. gives the deeps] that is, puts, or disposes the deep waters,
into treasuries, or in cellars and secret store houses, hidden from the the eye
of man; called elsewhere the secret room of the deep, Job 38.16. So God is said
to have treasuries or storehouses of wind, Psalm. 135.7. of snow and hail, Job
38.22. of darkness, Isa. 45.3. and the like.

Verse. 9. it stood] that is, existed firm and stable, and so continued. So
Psalm. 119.91.

Verse. 10. dissipateth] or maketh-frustrate; undoeth, abrogateth; a word
opposed to ratifying, confirming, stablishing. Isa. 8, 10. and 19.3, brings
to nought] annihilateth, and breaks.

Verse. 11. shall stand] that is, continue, and have effect; whatsoever men
purpose to the contrary. See Isa. 14.24.27. and 46.10. Prove. 19.21.

Verse. 12. is God] to weet, by special covenant, and favor, though all the
earth be his Genesis 17.7. Exodus 19, 5. and this is by the new covenent, Heb.
8.10. So Psalm. 144.15.

Verse. 15. altogether] or; alone. The Hebrew jachad sometime signifies alone
without others; Job 34.29. Ezr. 4.3. (and so the Greek interpreters took it
here, translating it kata monas, alone, or by himself:) sometime it signifies,
wholly, or every whit; Job 10.8. sometime, together; or in one; Psalm. 2.2. All
these agree well here; for God only and wholly forms every man's heart, and
spirit, Zac. 12.1. whereupon he is called the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9. and
the God of the spirits of all flesh, Number. 16.22.

Verse. 16. of a power] that is, of an army; so called because there are
strong, valiant and active men. Psalm. 136.15.

Verse. 17. A horse is falshood] that is, a false and deceitful help, cannot
save a man, but fails those that trust in him. Zach. 10.5. Psalm. 76.6. The
horse is here used for all warlike furniture; this being above other creatures
strong, fierce, and courageous, Job 39.22-28. and therefore is prepared for the
day of battle, but salvation is of the Lord, Prove. 21.31.

Verse. 18. The eye of Iehovah] that is, his care, and providence, for good, as
the next verse shows, and as Psalm. 32.8. zach. 12.4. 1 Pet. 3.12. Sometime
the Lords eye is on men for evil. Amos 9.4.8.

Annotation, Psalm. XXXIV.
Verse. 1. HIs behaviour] or his sense, reason; properly the taste; as in verse.
9. Job 6.6. and often otherwhere: which is used both for ones inward sense or
reason, and outward gesture, and demeanure, because by it, a man is discerned
and judged to be wise, or foolish; as meats are discerned by the taste. David
when he was afraid of the King of Gath, changed his behavior before them, and
feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabled on the doors of the gate,
and let his spittle fall down upon his beard. 1 Samuel 21.12.13. Abimelech] whose
proper name was Achish King of Gath, a city of the Philistims. 1 Samuel 21.10.
And as every King of Egypt, was called Pharaoh, Genesis 41.1. Exodus 5.1. 1 King.
11.18. so every King of the Philistims was called Abimelech, that is,
Father-king. Genesis 20.2. and 26.1. had driven] or expelled. For Achish said to
his servants, which had taken and brought David to him, Lo ye see the man is
beside himself, wherefore have ye brought him to me? have I need of mad men?
etc. So David departed thence. 1 Samuel 21.14.15. and 22.1. Upon that he made
this pasalme.

Verse. 2. in all time] or in every season. See Psalm 10.5. This Psalm is also
composed according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet: as is observed on Psalm.
25.1.

Verse. 3. shall glorie] or joyfully-boast. For so the Apostle expounds this
word, which properly signifies to praise ones self: 1 Cor. 1.31. from Ier.
9.23.24. So in Psalm. 52.3. and 97.7. and 105.3 and 106.5.

Verse. 4. Magnify] or Make great, to weet, by praising. So Deuteronomy. 32.3. Give ye
greatness unto our God.

Verse. 6. They looked] to weet, the meek, mentioned before verse 3. or
generally, they that look and flow unto him. flowed] ran as a river; the like
similitude is Isa. 2.2. and 60.5. Ier. 31.12. and 51.44. be not ashamed] or,
shall not be ashamed; which word in the original signifies digging; as Psalm
35.7. applied to shame, which causes men to seek to hide themselves; as is
lively described, Rev. 6.15.16.

Verse. 8. The Angel] that is, the Angels, for he speaks of an host: And often
in the Hebrew, one is put for a multitude; as the inhabitant, for, the
inhabitants; 2 Samuel 5.6. with 1 Chronicles. 11.4. So, frog, for frogs; Psalm 78.45.
tree, for trees; quayl, for quayls. Psalm. 105.33.40. See the note on Psalm. 8.9.
pitcheth-a-camp] a similitude taken from wars; as Psam 27.3. So Jaakob, when
the Angels of God met him, said, this is Gods camp, or host. Genesis 32.1.2.
Likewise about Elishah, the mountain was full of horses and charets of fire. 2
King. 6.17. See also Psalm 91.11.12.

Verse. 9. Taste and see] that is, make trial, and you shall find that God is
good, sweet, and delectable; and you will the more desire him. Thus the Apostle
applies these words, saying, as new born babes desire ye the sincere milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby; if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
good. 1 Pet. 2.2.3.

Verse. 11. Lions] Lurking-lions (whereof see Psalm 7.3.) which are lusty,
strong-toothed, fierce, roaring, ravenous; as appears by Psalm 58.7. and
104.21. Mic. 5.8. Ezekiel. 19.3.5.6.7. Job 39.1.2. And hereby may be meant, the
rich and mighty of the world, whom God often brings to misery; and so the
Greek, for Lions, puts here the rich. Titants, and strong men are sometime
called Lions. Ier. 2.15. 1 Chronicles. 11.22. Nahum 2.13. See Luke 1.53. are
impoverished] or suffer-penurie. See Job 4.10.11. Prove. 10.3.

Verse. 13. that willeth] that is, fain would have, and delights. days to see
good] that is, to enjoy good many days; which the Apostle (following the Lxx.)
expresses thus, to see good days. 1 Pet. 3.10. that is, days of prosperity,
pleasure, comfort.

Verse 1^. Keep thy tongue] to weet, by restraining and making it cease from
evil; as the Apostle teaches. 1 Pet 3 10.

Verse. 16. their outtrie:] or their deprecation, their prayer-for-need; as the
Greek, which the Apostle follows, expresses it.

Verse. 17. The face] that is, open anger. Lev. 17.10. See Psalm, 21.10.

Verse. 18. They cryed] that is, as the Greek says, The just cried.

Verse. 19. the broken of heart] them that have their hearts broken, and their
spirits contrite, or humble; for their sins. See the like speeches, Psalm
51.19. and 147.3. Isa. 57.15. and 61.1. Ier. 23.9. Luke 4.18.

Verse. 20. the evils] that is, griefs and afflictions; as Deuteronomy. 31.17. Psalm
27.5 and 88.4. Mat. 6.34. the word also may import sin; and vices; as Psalm.
28.3. and 94.23. So after in verse 22.

Verse. 22. work-the death] or do-him-dye, kill him: because he shall not be
delivered therefrom, as the just man is, verse 20. condemned-as-guilty] and
consequently perish, See Psalm. 5.11.

Verse. 23. all that hope] that is, any one of them. So all, is used for any;
Psalm 147.20.

Annotations, Psalm XXXV.
Verse. 1 PLead] This properly is to contend or debate a matter with many words;
as the next word, war, or fight is with deeds. But Gods pleading oft-times is
in action; as he pleaded David's cause against Nabal, when he slew him: 1 Samuel
25.39. And as here David prays, so God elsewhere promises, to plead with
those that plead with his people: Isa. 49.25. warr] which in the original
tongue has the name of cutting, biting, or devouring; for wars devour and
consume many. So the sword is said to have a mouth, that is, an edge, Job 1.15.
Heb 11.34. and to eat, that is, to kill and consume, 2 Samuel 11.25.

Verse. 3. draw-out] or, as the Hebrew phrase is, empty; that is, unshead: the
like is of the sword; Exodus 15.9. Levit. 26.33. sword] or close-weapon, as the
name signifies. This interpretation seems best, because of the Hebrew pause,
which joyneth this word with the former spear: thus also these two weapons of
offense, are answerable to the former two of defense, the shield and buckler;
and of this Hebrew name Segor, the Greek Sagaris, (and perhaps the Latin
Securis,) seems to be borrowed, for a sword or axe. And in Job 28.15. this
word is used for a close-treasure, or stored-gold; as here for a close weapon.
Otherwise we may read according to the Greek, and other versions, close thou,
or stop; to weet, the way or passage.

Verse. 4. that seek my soul] that is, my life, to take it away: for so this
phrase commonly means, as Psalm. 38.13. and 54.5. and 70.3. Exodus 4.19. Mat.
2.20. and sometime is so explained, as Psalm. 63.10. 1 King. 19.10. they seek my
soul to take it away. Yet sometime this phrase intends, seeking the soul for
ones good; as Psalm. 142.5. turned backward] a token of fear, shame, and
discomfiture; as Psalm 129.5. and 40.15. and 70.3. and 9.4. Isa 42.17. Ier.
46.5.

Verse. 6. Darkness, etc.] that is, most dark and slipperie: meaning, fearful,
dangerous, troublesome, etc. Nahum. 1.8. Psalm 88.7. and 107.9. Prove. 4.19. So
elsewhere it is said, their way shall be unto them as slippernesses in the
darkness; they shall be driven and fall therein. Ier. 23.12.

Verse. 7. the corruption, etc.] that is, their corrupting pernicious net, or
their insnaring corruption; or understanding the word, in, we may read, they
hidd their net for me in a pit, or, in a corrupting-ditch; as Psalm. 7.16. have
digged] to weet, a pit to sal in: so Job 6, 27. Or, have diligently-searched,
and lait wayt. So digging is used for seeking; Job 3, 21. and 39, 32.

Verse. 8. tumultuous-ruine] calamity, wasting, or desolation, that is, with
noise and sound as of waters, Isa. 17, 12, 13. So Psalm. 63.10. Prove. 1.27.

Verse. 10. my bones] that is, my strong and solid members delivered out of
danger: meaning that with all his strength he would praise God. So the bones
are said to rejoice, Psalm. 51, 10. the loins to bless, Job 31.20. the
spoiler] or robber; that by open violence takes away. Compare Job 5.15.

Verse. 11. of cruel wrong] that is, cruel, violent, or, (as the Greek says,)
unjust witnesses. So Exodus 23.1. Deuteronomy. 19.16.

Verse. 12. the bereaving of] that is, to deprive, bereave, or rob me, of my
soul, or life; or, to bereave my soul of comfort. The word properly signifies
the bereaving, or loss of children.

Verse. 13. sack] used to be worn in sign of sorrow. Psalm 69.12. Genesis 37.34.
Mat. 11.21. Rev. 11.3. Here we are to understand the word, was, or gave, as is
expressed, Psalm 69.12. even as the word afflicted, here expressed, is there
understood, Psalm. 69.11. with fasting] an other sign and cause of sorrow:
wherefore mourning and fasting are used for the same, Mat. 9.15. with Mark.
2.19. returned upon my bosom] or, into my bosom. The meaning may be, I prayed
often for them, secretly, and with hearty loving affection. For, the returning
of the prayer seems to mean, the often minding and repeating of it; the
bosom, signifies secrecy, Prove. 21.14. and 17.23. Psalm. 89.51. and inward
affection, Number. 11.12. Ioh. 1.18. Or we may read it thus, Let my prayer return
into my bosom: that is, I wished no worse to them than to my self; let me
receive of God, such good as I prayed for them. See Psalm. 79.12.

Verse. 14. sad] or black, to weet, in black and mournful attire, and with sad
and heavy countenance, as the Greek here translateth it, Scuthropazon, which
word the new Testament also uses, Mat. 6.16. Luke 24.17. So after in Psalm
38.7. and 42.10. and 43.2. bewayleth his mother] mourns at her funeral. In
this case the affefections are most strong. Therefore the Priests were
permitted to mourn for such. Levit. 21.1.2.3.

Verse. 15. my halting] that is, my calamity and infirmity; whereby I seemed
ready to fall. So in Psalm. 38.18. Ier. 20.10. the smiters] that smote me with
the tongue, as Ier. 18.18. and as here follows, they rent, etc. The Lxx. in
Greek turn it Scourges; alluding (as I think) to the scourge of the tongue, as
Job 5.21. and another Greek version, has plectay, smiters. It may also be
read, the smitten, that is, abjects, vile persons, Job 30.8. (as the Chaldee
expresses it, the wicked;) or understand smitten on their feet, as 2 Samuel 4.4.
that is, lame, so feigning themselves smitten in spirit, as Isa. 66.2. that is,
grieved in outward show. they rent] to weet, me with reproaches; as Mat. 7.6.
or rent their garments, counterfeyting sorrow for me, Job 2.12.

Verse. 16. hypocrites] or, close-dissemblers, which outwardly cover and cloak
their wickedness, wherewith inwardly they are defiled, Mat. 23.27.28. or, which
have their hearts covered. Job 36.13. The Greek also from whence our English
word, hypocrisy, is borrowed,) signifies an under-judgement, that is,
dissimulation. scoffers] or of scoffs; that is, men that make scoffs: as in
Psalm 36.12. pride, is for proud persons. for a cake of bread] that is, for
good cheer, for their bellyes: or, at their belly cheer, at bankets. So
Solomon speaks of some that will transgress for a piece of bread, Prove.
28.21. The original word Maghnog, is a cake, 1 king. 17.12. and as bread is
used for all food, Psalm. 136.25. so a cake seems to be used for all juncates,
or dainty meat; as in Hos. 7. Ephraim is likened to a cake; and their enemies,
to banketters, that greedily eat them up: verse, 8.9. So here David matcheth
his adversaries, with hypocritical and scoffing parasites; whose God was their
belly; as Phil. 3, 19. Or, we may figuratively take this word, for a mock,
test, or meriment, and so read it, with hypocritical jesting scoffers: and this
the Greek favors, saying, they mocked me with mockage. gnashing] or,
they-gnashed: Hebr. to gnash: but a word thus indefinite, following another
with person, is it self of the same, by propriety of the Hebrew tongue. So
Psalm. 49, 15. their teeth] the teeth of them, and him, that is, of every of
them. See Psalm. 2.3.

Verse. 17. return] or, reduce, restore, stay my soul, or life: so Job 33.30.
alonely] or solitary, desolate soul: See Psalm. 22, 21-23.

Verse. 18. a mighty people] or, a strong, to weet, in number; that is, a great
multitude. The word Ghnatsum, as it is mighty in strength, Psalm 135, 10. Prove.
30.26. so is it many in number: Psalm. 40.6.13. and 105.24. and 137.17.

Verse 19. enemies with falsitie] that is, for a false cause; or (as the Greek
explaineth it,) unjustly. wink] make secret signs by the winking of the eye,
which argues both privy and scornful gesture; therefore this always* is a
sign of evil, Prove. 10.10. and 6.13. not peace] that is, not peaceably, or
friendly, which yet some hypocrites do, Psalm. 28, 3 or, not speak to come to
any sound composition, or peaceable end, which one may trust unto. But God
speaks peace to his people. Psalm 85.9. words of deceits] deceitful words,
or things.

Verse. 21. has seen] or, sees, to weet, the evil of David; or, that which we
desired. In speeches of evil cases, often the Hebrew uses silence. So after,
in Psalm. 54.9. and 59.11. and 118.7.

Verse. 23. to my judgement] that is, to judge and avenge me of mine enemies: so
after, to my plea, is, to plead my cause, as verse 1.

Verse. 25. aha, our soul] that is, aha, we have our desire. Soul, is sometime
put for desire. Psalm. 41.3.

Verse. 26. clothed with bashfulnes] meaning their confusion on every side, when
nothing but their shame appears, and so continues. So Psalm 109.29. and
132.18. Job 8.22. that magnify] to weet, their mouths, as is expressed, Obad.
1.12. Ezekiel. 35.13. that is, speak great things and boastfully, as the Greek
explaineth. So after, in Psalm. 38.17. and 55.13. delight my justice] whom my
justice and innocence pleases, or delights; and the defense thereof.

Annotations, Psalm XXXVI.
Verse. 2. THe trespass of the wicked] or Trespass says to the wicked; that
is, persuades, imboldneth, hardneth him. assuredly-saith] or, it is an
assured-saying; a faithful affirmation. This word is peculiar to the oracles
of God, which are sure, and faithful, (as the Apostle sometime mentions
faithful sayings, 1 Timothy 1.15. and 3.1. and 4.9.) In the new Testament it is
interpreted, said, Mat. 22.44. from Psalm. 110.1. And David by the spirit here
testifies that the wicked man's trespass is such, as assuredly says (or a
voucheth) even in his heart and conscience, that he dreadeth not God. in the
inmost of my heart] in the midds, or within my heart: meaning that he certainly
knew it; and was much affected with it.

Verse. 3. to find] that is, to perform, or accomplish; as to find the will, is
to perform or do the same, Isa. 58.13. So in Romans 7.18. Or, to find, that is to
obtain and get; as Genesis 6.8. Mat. 11.29. Romans 4.1. Or, to find, that is, to
invent, or devise new mischiefs; as the Apostle speaks of inventers (or
finders-out) of evil things. Romans 1.30. which he ought to hate] or, which is
to be hated, is odious; So, to keep, Psalm 119.4. that is, to be kept: to stop;
Psalm. 32.9. for, to be stopped; to do, Esth. 6.6. for, is to be done. So Psalm.
49.15. Ios. 2.5. See also the verb active, expounded passively, by the Apostles
authority, Psalm. 51.6.

Verse. 5. he sets himself] namely, to stand or walk continually in a way not
good; as Isa. 65.2. or, he standeth-still; as Exodus 14.13.

Verse. 6. in the heavens] elsewhere it is said, unto the heavens, Psalm. 57.11.
so here, in, may be used for unto: sometime it is, above the heavens, as Psalm.
108.5.

Verse. 7. mountains of God] that is, high, mighty or excellent mountains. The
Hebrew uses to note excellent things, by adding the name of God; as Cedars of
God, Psalm 80.11. Mount of God, Ps. 68.16. river of God, Ps. 65.10. wrastlings
of God, Genesis 30.5. harps of God, Rev. 15.2. and sundry the like.

Verse. 8. How precious] that is, honorable, and much to be esteemed; sometime
the word signyfieth bright and glorious, Job 31.26. Zach. 14.6. which also
agrees well here. and the sonns] or, when, or, therefore the sonns. shadow of
thy wings] that is, thy protection, so Psalm 63.8. and 91.4. called sometime,
the secret of Gods wings. Psalm. 61.5.

Verse. 10. Well of life] that is, an ever springing fountain; from whom life
and all graces spring and flow. So God is called the well of living waters,
Ier. 2.13. and 17.13. Song. 4.15. we see light] or enjoy light; that is,
knowledge, comfort, joy, etc. See Job 29.3. Isa. 9.2. Iam 1.17. Psalm. 27.1.

Verse. 11. Extend thy mercy] or draw it; meaning, exercise and show it; as Ps.
109.12. also prolong, or continue it; as Psalm. 85.6. Eccles. 2.3.

Verse 12. foot of pride] or of haughtines, that is, of the proud man: the thing
being put for the person in whom it is. As deceit, for a deceitful man; Prove.
12.27. Poverty, for poor people; 2 King. 24.14. habitation, for inhabitants; 2 Samuel 9.12. Circumcision; for the circumcised; Romans 2.26. Helpings, governings;
for, helpers, governors, 1 Cor. 12.28. and many the like. See also Psalm. 5.5.
and 12.9. and 55.21. and 109.4. and 78.31.

Verse. 13. There] to weet, in the very enterprise, while they labored to
remove me.

Annotations, Psalm XXXVII.
THis is the third Psalm penned Alphabet-wise; there being two verses allowed
to every letter, except four, in verse 7.20.29.34. See Psalm. 25.1.

Verse. 1. Fret not] or, Inflame not, burn not thy self, with anger, or grief.
So after, verse 7. and 8. Prove. 24 19. envy not] or, have not envious-zeale,
or emulation. This word is general for all hot and fervent zeal whether good
or evil; emulation, jealousy, envy, and the like. Psalm. 106.16. and 69.10.

Verse. 3. Dwell in the land] This may be taken either for a commandment, to
dwell in the land of Canaan which God had given them to possess, Number. 33.53.
though troubles and wants should arise therein; as did the Patriarchs by faith:
Genesis 37.1. and 26.3.12. Heb. 11.9. Or, for a promise, dwell, that is, thou
shall dwell, that is, abide long, as after in verse 27. So, see; for thou shall
see, Psalm. 128, 5, 6. Seek me, and live, Amos 5.4. that is, ye shall live. feed
on faith;] to weet, which shall grow out of the land, Psalm. 85.12. that is, of
the fruits which the land truly and faithfully brings forth. Or, as a
promise, thou shall feed on faith, on the faithful constant increase; and thus
the Greek explaineth it, thou shall be fed with the riches thereof, meaning, of
the land, Or feed on faith, that is, nourish thy self and live by it; for, the
just man lives, by his faith, Habak. 2.4. and walks by it, not by sight, 2
Cor. 5.7. Or, feed in faith; that is, thou shall be fed faithfully and
assuredly. Contrary hereunto, is to feed on the wind; Hos. 12.1 and on ashes,
Isa. 44.20.

Verse. 4. Delight thy selfe] or, thou shall delight, or solace thee: so verse
11. and Job 22.26.

Verse. 5. Turn-confidently] Commit-of trust: in Hebrew, Roll: see Psalm. 22.9. So
Prove. 16.3. Roll (or Commit) thy works unto Jehovah. will-doe] that which thou
desire: or, will execute, to weet, thy judgment; as the next verse shows,
and as elsewhere is expressed, Mic. 7.9.

Verse. 6. As the light] to weet, of the morning, or sun: (for so light sometime
signifies, Nehem. 8.3. Job 31.26.) that is, clearly, manifestly. So Hos. 6.5.
Compare also Job 11.17.

Verse. 7. Be silent] or be still, stay and tarry silently. See Psalm. 4.5. The
Greek says, be subject. wait-still-patiently] or, pain-thy self; that is, Set
thy self with earnestness and patience to wait for.

Verse. 8. Surcease] or, Slake, Let go. A word contrary to holding-fast,
applied here to the slaking or abating of anger; so Judge. 8.3. also to do] or
which is but to do; or at least to do evil.

Verse. 9. Inherit] or possess. So Isa. 57.13. He that trusts in me (says
the Lord) shall inherit the land, and possess my holy mountain.

Verse. 11. And the meek] or, But the meek. From hence our Lord said, Blessed
are the meek, for they shall inherit the land, Mat. 5.5.

Verse. 13. His day] that is, his dismal day; the time appointed for his
affliction and destruction, 1 Samuel 26.10. Ezekiel. 21.25, 29. Day is often used
for the time of punishment, as, The posterity shall be astonished at his day; Job
18.20 Woe unto them, for their day is come, Ier. 50.27. So the day of Madian,
Isa. 9.4. the day of Jezreel, Hos. 1.11. the day of Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.7.

Verse. 14. Drawn] Hebrew, opened, or loosed, meaning out of the sheath. A like
phrase is, the emptying of the sword, Psalm. 35.3.

Verse. 16. The little of a just man] or, a little (a small portion) to the
just. See Prove. 15.16, and 16, 8. plenteous-mammon] The Hebrew, hamon,
signifies multitude, plenty, or store of riches, or any other thing. Here the
Greek translateth it, riches. From this Hebrew word, riches, are called,
mammon, Luke 16.9, 11, 13. many wicked] or great, (mighty) wicked.

Verse. 17. Arms] that is, power, help, etc. See Psalm. 10.15.

Verse. 18. Knoweth] that is, acknowledges and regards; as Psalm. 1.6. the
dayes] that is, the events, good or evil estates, calamities, that at any time
befall them, as verse 13. Psalm. 116 2. and 119.84. See also Psalm. 31.16. shall be
for ever] meaning, that thy and their seed after them should inherit the land,
as Exodus 12.13. Ios. 14.9. 1 Chronicles. 28*8. Prove. 13.22. Isa. 60.21. and then
come to their immortal inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4.

Verse. 20. The precious-fat] that which is precious in the rams, the best, and
that was the fat, which all was the Lords, and might not therefore be eaten by
any man, but was burned upon the altar, and so consumed away in smoke, Levit.
3.15, 16, 17. So, the precious fruit of the earth, Iam. 5.7. The Hebrew Carim,
elsewhere used for fields or pastures, Psalm. 65.14. is here fat pastured ramms
or muttons: so Deuteronomy. 32.14. Isa. 34.6. Amos 6.4. with the smoak] which
vanishes in the air; therefore the Greek says, as the smoke: so Psalm. 102.4.

Verse. 21. repayeth not] shall not, or will not pay again. It may intend both
his inhability, that he cannot, and his unconscionablenes, that he will not
pay. Borrowing in the law is noted for a curse; as lending, for a blessing,
Deuteronomy. 28.12.44. for the borrower is a servant to the lender, Prove. 22.7.
sheweth-grace] or does graciously, that is, is liberal and bountiful. So the
Apostle calls liberality, grace, 1 Cor. 16 3. 2 Cor. 8.4.19.

Verse. 22. His blessed-ones] or, they-that are blessed of him; that is, of God.

Verse. 23 Steps of the man] the ways of such a man as is before spoken of; or
as after follows, whose way God delights: called here, Geber, a
valiant-man. stablished] or firmly-directed and perfected. The word notes the
ordering, perfecting and fast-stablishing of any thing. and his way] or thus,
to weet, whose way he delights (or affects.) so, Gedeon and his house;
Judge. 8.27. for Gedeon, to weet, (or that is to say) his house.

Verse. 24. Shall fall] to weet, into sin, by occasion, or infirmity, Gal. 6.1.
or into affliction and trouble, Mic. 7.8. For, the just man falls seven
times, and rises again, Prove. 24.16. upholdeth his hand] and consequently,
raises him up. A like phrase is of strengthening the hand, Isa. 8.11. 1 Samuel
23.16.

26 His seed] that is, his children or posterity; are in the blessing; or, are
appointed to the blessing, as the heirs thereof, Genesis 28.4. 1 Pet. 3.9. and
have still abundance, though they give to others: For, the blessing of the
Lord, makes rich, Prove. 10.21 And, there is that scatters, and is more
increased, Prove. 11.24.

Verse. 27 Dwell for ever] that is, thou shall dwell; as verse 3. The like
promise is in Ier. 7.5-7.

Verse. 28. Is cut-off] a like judgment is in Job 18.19. He shall have neither
son nor nephew among his people, nor any posterity in his dwellings. See also
Psalm. 21 11. and 109.13. and the contrary, Psalm. 102.29.

Verse. 30. Will meditate] usually meditateth, that is, resoundeth, utters: as
Psalm. 35.28.

Verse. 31 In his heart] so God commanded, Deuteronomy. 6 6. and there has he promised
to write his law, Heb. 8.10. See also Psalm. 40.9. Isa. 51.7. it shall not
stagger] understand, his foot shall not stagger, or, faulter. Job 12.5. Or, any
one of his steps (or feet) shall not stagger, or slide.

Verse. 33 Condemn-him for wicked] make (or pronounce) him wicked, that is,
condemn him. Opposed to justifying, so Psalm. 94.21. Job 9.20.

Verse 35 Danting-terrible] sorely dismaying others with his terror. See Psalm.
10.18. spreading-bare] making-bare, that is, thrusting forth and showing
himself. green] that is, fresh, and flourishing, as Dan. 4.1. It is not meant
for color only, but for (...) and vigor. So Psalm. 52.10.
self-growing-lawrel] a tree that grows in his natural place, which commonly
sprout and thrive bitter then such as are removed to another soil.

Verse. 37 The after-end] or, the last, or, the posterity. This word is
sometimes used for the end, as Deuteronomy. 11.12, and 32.20, 29. Ier. 29.11. sometime
for posterity of children left behind, as Psalm. 109.13. Dan. 11.4. And thus it
may be understood here, specially in the verse following.

Annotations, Psalm. XXXVIII.
Verse. 1. FOr to record] or to cause-remembrance, for commemoration; to weet,
of David's troubles, as Psalm. 132.1. and of Gods mercies, deliverances, and
praises for the same; as Isa. 63.7. The like title is of the 70. Psalm. David
appointed before the Arc, singers of the Levits for to record ( or
commemorate) and to confess, and to praise Jehovah the God of Israel. 1 Chro.
16.4.

Verse. 2 Neither] Hebrew, and: where the word not is again to be repeated, as
is noted Psalm. 9.19. and as is expressed, Psalm. 6.2. where the like prayer is
made.

Verse. 3 Thy arrows] so Job says, the arrows of the Almighty are in me, the
venom whereof, drinks up my spirit, Job 6.4. Arrows are sicknesses, or
plagues of body or mind, Psalm. 18.15, and 91.5.

Verse. 4. No soundnesse] or, there is nothing sound or whole: so Isa. 1.6.
angry-threat] or, detestation, indignation. See Psalm. 7.12.

Verse. 6. My stripes] or skars: properly, such sore marks, bunches, wounds, or
stripes, as wherein the blood, and humors are gathered and do appear after
beating; named in English, wailes. foolishnes] The Hebrew, Ivveleth, means,
rash and unadvised folly, through want of prudencie. Therefore though commonly
in Greek it is turned imprudencie, yet sometime it is called unadvised-rashnes,
Pro. 14.17. and Aevill, the Fool, is named rash or heady: Prove. 10.14. And by
foolishnes is meant usually viciousnes or sin, and is so expressed by the
Greeks, Prove. 13.16. and 15, 2. and 26.11. and our savior numbreth foolishnes,
among other evils that defile a man. Mark. 7.22.

Verse. 7. sad] mournfully See Psalm. 35, 14.

Verse. 8. my flanks] or loins. parching] or, burning, rosting: so elsewhere he
complains of the burning of his bones, Psalm. 102.4. and so the Chaldee
Paraphrast here takes this word; which may also be translated Vile-matter:
meaning a vile or loathsome disease, full of burning pain. The Greek turns it,
mockings.

Verse. 9. the groaning:] or rumbling, roaring noise.

Verse. 11. panteth] throbbeth, heateth-about, through trouble and
distemperature. able-strength] force and ability that is in the heart and
bowels; as elsewhere he says, my heart forsakes me, Psalm. 40.13. are not with
me] that is, I have no use of them; I cannot see. Psalm. 40.13. Through faintnes
ofttimes the eyesight fails, 1 Samuel 14, 28, 29. Psalm. 13.4.

Verse. 12. my plague] or, stroke, touch, hurt. The Hebrew uses touching, for
striking, or hurting any manner of way. Psalm. 105.15.

Verse. 13. seek my soule] to kill me. See Psalm. 35.4.

Verse. 15. no reprehensions] no arguments, or convictions.

Verse. 16. thou will answer] or, that thou make-answer; that is, hear and
deliver me. Psalm. 3 5.

Verse. 17. I said, least] or I say, (I think,) it is to be feared, least, etc.
An imperfect speech, through passion. my foot is moved] that is, slip. This is
always in the evil part, when ones state is changed to worse: Deuteronomy. 32, 35.
Psalm. 66.9. and 94, 18. and 121.3. A like phrase is of moving of the hand,
Levit. 25, 35. magnify] vaunt themselves. see Psalm. 35.26.

Verse. 18. to halting] to show my infirmity in my trials and afflictions; as
Iaakob halted after his wrestling with God. Genesis 32, 31. See Psalm. 35, 15. In
the Greek, I am ready for scourges, that is, to suffer correction and
punishment for my sins.

V. 19. am carefull] or, will show care, taking thought as for fear of some
evil or danger to come. So the original word imports, Josh. 22, 24. 1 Samuel
9.5. and 10.2. Isa. 57.11.

Verse. 20. are alive] or living, that is, lively, lusty, cheerful, hail, and
sound. are mighty] or strengthened, compacted, by power, riches, number, etc.
See Psalm. 35, 18. falsly] or in falsitie, that is, for a false untrue and
unjust cause. Psalm. 35, 19.

V. 21. my adversaries] or, are adverse to me, opposite, to let and hinder me.
The Hebrew Satan is hereupon applied to the Devil, who is an adversary to
hinder all goodness. Zach. 3.1. Mark. 1.13. Rev. 12, 9. So after, Psalm. 71, 13.
and 109, 4, 6, 20, 29.

Annotations, Psalm XXXIX.
Verse. 1. TO Ieduthun] or, for him: and it may be meant not only for his
person, but for his posterity, as Aaron is put for the Aaronites. 1 Chro. 12,
27. This Ieduthun and his sons, were singers in Israel with the harp: he
prophesied; for the confessing and giving praise to Jehovah. 1 Chronicles. 25.3. So
Psalm. 77.1.

Verse. 2. take heed] or, beware, keep, observe. The like speech is used, 1
King. 2.4. from sinning] that is, that I sin not, or miss not. If any man sin
not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the body. Iam. 3.2. a
bridle] or mousell: the Greek turns it a ward; by this the untamednes of the
tongue is noted, which must by force and watchfullnes be restrained. See Iam.
3.3-8.

Verse. 3. with stillnes] or silentnes, tamed-subjection: as the word often
signifies, Psalm. 4 5. Wherefore the Greek here turns it, I was humbled. my
pain was troubled] my sore was exulcerate; renewed (as the Greek says,) and
increased.

Verse. 4. Fire burned] with this speech of David, we may compare that of
Jeremy; And I said I will not mention on him, nor speak any more in his name:
but it was in my heart as a burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary
with forbearing, and could no longer, Ier. 20.9.

Verse. 5. How soon ceassing] how temporary, frail, brittle, and short-lived:
or how defective I am; as the Greek says, what I lack, to weet, of the end of
my days. What is the term and period of my life.

Verse. 6. Of hand-bredths] that is, thou have exactly measured them out, and
they are but short; a hand-bredth is a short measure; the breadth of four
fingers. my wordly-time] my lifetime: my temporary age. The Hebrew Cheled, is
the world, Psalm. 17.14. used here for man's lifetime in this world. So Psalm.
89.48. Job. 11.17. surely] or, but, only. all vanity] or a mere vapor; all
manner vanity, and nothing else. Whatsoever vanity is in the world, may all be
seen in man. The Hebrew Hebel is a soon-vanishing-vapour, as the breath of ones
mouth. To this the Apostle has reference, saying, what is your life? it is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away,
Iam. 4.14. every earthly-man] or, all mankind: Hebrew, all Adam. Adam called
his second son, Hebel, that is, vanity: Genesis 4.2. and here David says, that
all Adam, (every man,) is Hebel, vanity. Solomon in Ecclesiastes declares
this at large. See also Psalm. 62.10. though setled] or standing steadfast; and
in good estate.

Verse. 7 Walks in an image] or in a shadow; that is, obscurely, changes
daily, leads an imaginary life, rather than a life it self, and so soon
passes hence; He flees as a shadow, and abides not, Job 14.2. So Paul
says, the fashion (or hiew) of this world, goes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. make a
stur] or a tumult, disquieting themselves, and one another. he heapeth] that
is, any one heapeth up, to weet, goods; and knows not who shall enjoy them, See
Eccles. 2.18, 19.

Verse. 9. Put me not] or expose, make me not to be the reproach of the fool, of
Nabal; whereof see Psalm. 14.1.

Verse. 10. I am dumb] or tongue-tied. This is a profession of his patient
sufferance of things laid upon him by God: And so did David carry himself, 2 Samuel 16.10. and Aaron, Levit. 10.3.

Verse. 11. The striking] or buffeting, this notes the greatness and often
reiteration of his trouble.

Verse. 12. Make melt] that is, consume-away. as a moth] to weet, as a
moth-worm consumes, or perishes, which is suddenly, as Job 4.19. they are
destroyed before the moth. Or, as the moth consumnth garments, so thou with thy
rebukes consumest them, as Hos. 5.12. Job. 13.23. Isa. 50.9, and 51.8. that
which is to be desired of his] or his desirable; meaning, his beauteous grace,
best strength, dignity, and every whit of him, that is, amiable, to be desired,
or liked.

Verse. 13. Unto my tears] which cry unto God, (as blood is said to cry, Genesis
4.10.) or, which are joined with earnest prayers, as Heb. 5.7. a stranger with
thee] This is taken from the law, Levit. 25.23. The land is mine; ye are but
strangers and sojourners with me. The like acknowledgement is also in 1 Chronicles.
29.15. Hence says the Apostle, They confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth; and they that say such things, declare plainly, that
they seek a country, to weet, an heavenly, Heb. 11.13, 14, 16.

Verse. 14. Stay] or Leave-off, to weet, thine anger, or affliction; or,
Look-away, shut the eye; as this word sometime signifies, Isa. 6.10. and let
me refresh] or, that I may recover-strength. This speech is taken from Job
10.20, 21.

Annotations, Psalm XL.
Verse. 1. David's Psalm] or, a Psam of David, but David's name is here set first*
which elsewhere commonly is last: or, a psalm concerning David; that is, Christ,
who is called David, in the Prophets; Hos. 3.5. Ier. 30.9. Ezekiel. 34.23. and
37.24. Of him this Psalm entreats, as the Apostle teaches, Heb. 105.6. etc.

Verse. 2. Wayting] or, exspecting; the doubling of this word, notes
earnestnes, constancy, patience, bended] to weet, his ear, as is expressed,
Psalm. 17.6.

Verse. 3. pit of sounding calamitie] or, dungeon of tumultuous-desolation,
which ecchoed and resounded with dreadful noises: denoting hereby the greatness
of Christ's fears and afflictions. mire of mudd] that is muddy (or durty) mire,
or clay; signifying, fast-cleaving afflictions. So Psalm. 69.3. set up] or
stablished, set fast my feet on a rock, that is, on firm ground, opposed to the
former mudd.

Verse. 5. respects not] or turns not the face; which implies liking, or
inclination of the mind and affections. Job 36.21. the proud] or stout, that in
confidence of their strength carry themselves insolently. turn-aside to a lye]
swarve (or revolt) to deceivable falsehood: meaning, heretics, and idolaters.

Verse. 6. thy thoughts] thy good-meanings, or purposes. none can count in
order] or, they cannot be orderly-counted or propounded. Here the word is used
for ordering of speech, as in Job 32.14. Sometime it is used for matching, or
comparing: so the Greek turns it here, in thy thoughts there is not any that
can be likened to thee. would I] or, if I would declare. mightily-increast] or,
strong, to weet, in number; many: so after in verse 13. see Psalm. 35.18.
above-telling] that is, more than I or any can tell: or, more than can be told.

Verse. 7. thou would not] or delightedst not; Christ was to cause the
sacrifice and oblation to cease; Dan. 9.27. therefore speaks he thus to God
his father, Heb. 10.5. mine ears] or, ears to me: see Psalm. 3.1. digged-open]
or piersed: that is, thou have made me obedient to thy voice; (contrary to
which is the stopping of the ear, Psalm. 58.5.) or mine ears thou have bored, as
thy servant for ever, according to the law, Exodus 21.6. The Greek interpreters,
to make the sense playner, say, but a body have thou fitted to me; meaning that
his body was ordained and fitted to be a sacrifice for the sins of the world,
when the other legal sacrifices were refused as unprofitable. And thus the
Apostle allegeth the words, following the Greek, Heb. 10.5.10. burnt-offring]
sacrifice that goes all up in fire; see Psalm. 20.4. sin-offring] or,
expiation, oblation for sin, as the Apostle calls it. Heb. 10. The word Sin,
is often in the law, put for the sin-offring, Levit. 4.24. etc. Exodus 29.14. So
the Apostle says, Him that knew no sin, he made sin that is, a sin-offring)
for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Verse 8. Lo I come] or, am come, to weet, into the world, Heb. 10.5. and
particularly, to Jerusalem to give my self a sacrifice for sin. See Mark.
10.32.33.34. the roll or volume of the book; that is, a book or scroll of paper
or parchment rolled up. The like phrase is used Ier. 36.2. etc. Ezekiel. 2.9. etc.
The Hebrew Sepher, book, is used generally for any writings, evidences, bills,
court-rols, etc. Deuteronomy. 24.1. 2 King. 5.5.6. Ier. 32.11. and the books in Israel
were written in long scrols, and folden, or wrapped up. Hence is that phrase,
the heavens shall be folden up like a book. Isa. 34.4. Rev. 6.14. it is
written] So Christ says, The son of man goes as it is written of him, Mat.
26.24. and Moses wrote of me, Ioh. 5.46. See also Luke 24.44.46. Act. 13.29.

Verse. 9. thy acceptable-will] by the which will, we are sanctified, even by
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once. Heb. 10.10. See also Ioh. 6.38.
Luke 22.42.

Verse. 10. I have preached-the-glad-tidings of] or, I have evangelized justice;
of this word, the Evangelie, or Gospel, has the name, the Greek signifying
Good-tidings and the English also to like effect, made of the Saxon God-spell;
that is a good speech. And the justice here meant is thus set forth by the
Apostle; Now is the justice of God made manifest without the law, having witness
of the law and of the Prophets; namely, the justice of God, by the says of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all, that believe, etc. Romans 3.21.22. the great
Church] or, assembly, congregation. So Psalm 22.23. close not up] restrain not,
as in a prison, that words should not be uttered. Ier. 32.2.3.

Verse. 11. I said] that is, mentioned, and spoke of; as 2 Samuel 6.22. to the
great church] the word, to, is referred to Gods mercy and truth, extended to
the church. The Greek refers it, to concealed, and translateth, from the
great church. And the Hebrew elsewhere usually so speaks. Psalm. 69.6. and
78.4. and 139.15

Verse. 13. iniquities] this word, as the former evils, is sometime used for
sin, sometime for the punishment of sin. See Psalm. 31.11.

Verse. 14. Vouchsafe] or, Let it please thee.

Verse. 15. to make an end of it] to consume, or destroy it. Compare this
conclusion, with the 70. Psalm.

Verse. 16. made desolate] or, wondrously-wasted, unto amazednes and
astonishment. So after in Psalm. 46.9. and 69.26. and 73.19. and 79.7. for, a
reward of their abashing] or, an end of their shame, that they would bring upon
me. End is used for reward, as Psalm. 19.12. or, For because of their shame. The
Hebrew word sometime signifies, because. Isa. 5.23, Genesis 22.18. Deuteronomy. 7.12.

Verse. 18. delay not] prolong not the time till the last; and consequently,
fail not. The word is, so to tarry, or linger, as to disappoint one of his
exspectation; as Habak. 2.3. Though it tarry, wait thou; for it shall surely
come, and shall not delay; that is, not fail. And thus may we understand other
like scriptures, as Deuteronomy. 7.10. God will not delay, (that is, not fail) to
reward him that hates him. Deuteronomy. 23.21. when thou vowest a vow to the Lord,
thou shall not delay (that is, not fail) to pay it. So Exodus 22.29. and sundry
the like.

Annotations, Psalm XLI.
Verse. 2. THat prudently attendeth] or, skilfully carries himself; it implies
both a skillful minding, or judging, and a carriage according, in word and deed
the poor-weakling] The Hebrew, Dal, has the signification of drawing-out, or
emptying; and is applied to the weak, lean, sickly, whose flesh and health is
spent; Genesis 41.19. 2 Samuel 13.4. and to the poor, whose wealth is wasted, Psalm.
72.13. and 113.7. opposed to the rich, Exodus 30.15. And as the poor are thus
called weak, thin, or lean; so rich and great men, are called thick, or fat.
Ps. 78.31. The poor-weakling treated of here, was David, and his son Christ, as
appears by the 10. verse, compared with Ioh. 13.18.

Verse. 3. preserve him alive] conserve his life and health, as Deuteronomy. 20.16. or
restore him to health from sickness, as Hezekiah is said to live, when he
recovered his health; Isa. 38.9.21. give thou him not] he turns his speech to
the Lord: and so again in the next verse. to the soul] that is, to the lust, or
will, as Luke 23.25. see Psalm. 27.12. The Greek says, into the hands.

Verse. 4. languishing-sorow] or, of sickness, feeblenes. thou have turned] or,
have changed. It may be understood either of making his bed easy, that is,
comfortable, in his sickness: or, of changing his estate from lying sick, to
sitting up in health.

Verse. 5. heal my soul] that is, heal me who now am sick: or, heal my soul, of
sins, infirmities, etc. so God healed the people, when he pardoned their
uncleannes, 2 Chronicles. 30.20. and heals the broken hearted, Psalm. 147.3. And
that which the Prophet speaks of healing of the people; the Evangelist
expounds, of forgiving them their sins, Isa. 6.10. Mark. 4.12 Mat. 13.15.

Verse. 7. abroad] or, in the street.

Verse. 9. A mischievous thing] or, Some devilish matter; Hebr. a word of
Belial: See word, for thing, in Psalm. 7.1. and Belial, in Psalm. 18.5. And both
joined as here, in Psalm. 101.3. Deuteronomy. 15.9. It may be understood, of some
odious sin and wicked vice; or, of some greevous punishment for the same. is
fastned] or, is powered into him. The original word signifies both, and may
denote the greatness and fast cleaving of his sin; and likewise of his
punishment: for plagues are said to be powered out, Rev. 16.1. etc. shall no
more rise] or, shall not add to rise.

Verse. 10. the man of my peace] that is, my familiar friend, which was at peace
with me; as Judas, Christ's own disciple. greatly lifted up] or, magnified the
heel, or the foot-sole: that is, has insolently and contumeliously abused me,
seeking my overthrow. And this Christ applied to himself, Ioh. 13.18, He that
eats bread with me, has lift up the heel against me.

Verse. 12. showt triumphantly] This word notes any loud sound, with voice, or
trompet; as Josh. 6.5.20. Number. 10.7. sometime a sorowfull-crying-out, as Ier.
20.16. but commonly joyful showting, as here, and after, Psalm. 81.2. and 47.2.
and 66.1.

Verse. 13. And I,] or, As for me.

Verse. 14. Amen] or, So be it. But the Hebrew word Amen is used in the Greek,
English, and all other languages, to betoken unity of says and spirit: and it
implies both a wishing of the thing so to be, and a persuasion in faith, that
so it shall be; when it is added in the end of blessings, prayers, or
imprecations, Number. 5, 22. Deuteronomy. 27.15. etc. Mat. 6.13. 1 Cor. 14.16. It is used
also in the beginning of speeches, and then it is an earnest asseveration, as
Ioh. 6.26. Amen Amen, that is, Verily, Verily. For so elsewhere, when one
Evangelist says Amen; Mat. 24.47. another, (speaking of the same thing) says
Verily, or truly, Luke 12.44. Sometime it is the title of God himself, Isa.
65.16. and of Christ, Rev. 3.14. because of his faithfulness and truth in
performing all promises.

The second book.
Annotations, Psalm. XLII.
THe second book] to weet, of Psalms. For though they be all complied in one
volume, (as were also the small Prophets) which thereupon is called, The book
of the Psalms, Act. 1.20. (as, The book of the Prophets, Act. 7.42.) yet in the
Hebrew there are 5. books; the first reaches to the end of the 41 Psalm
foregoing; which is concluded with Amen and Amen. The second, to the 72. Psalm,
concluded also with Amen Amen, and the end of David's prayers. The third
reaches to the 89. Psalm, concluded likewise with Amen and Amen. The fourth
unto the 106. Psalm, whose conclusion is Amen, Halelujah. The fifth, unto the
150. Psalm, ended with Halelujah.

Verse. 1. Korah] This was the Levite that rose up, and rebelled against Moses
and Aaron; for which God destroyed him and his family, and all that took part
with him, Number. 16. Howbeit, there were of his sonns, that dyed not, Numb.
26.11. departing (as it seems) from their fathers tents, as all were
counseled, Number. 16 24, 26. Of his race came Samuel the Prophet, and Heman his
nephew was a singer, 1 Chronicles. 6.33. To these sonns of Korah, this and sundry
other Psalms are commended; which for the most part, are songs of comfort,
against afflictions and sorrows.

Verse. 2. As the Hind,] or the Heart, a beast thirsty by nature, and whose
thirst is increased when she is hunted. The Hind, the female is here meant, as
the word annexed, she-brayeth, and the Greek article, he elaphos, manifest. And
in females the passions are stronger then in males. desirously-brayeth] in
Greek, desires; This word is used but here, and in Joel, 1.20. o Lord, the
beasts of the field bray also unto thee.

Verse. 3. thirsteth] that is, earnestly desires; So Psalm. 63.2. Of thirst for
Gods grace and spirit, see Isa. 55.1. Ioh. 7.37. Rev. 22.17. the living God] so
called here, because he is the well of living, (that is, of continual
springing) waters, Ier. 17.13. abundantly refreshing those that come to him.
Or, living, is opposed to the dead, that is, false Gods, Psalm. 106.28. 1 These.
1.9. ye turned from idols to serve the living and true God. Or living, that is,
lively, powrfull, effectual; as Psalm. 38.20. Heb. 10.31. before the face of
God] that is, before his ark, or tabernacle wherein he dwelt among men. So,
that which in 1 Chronicles. 13.10 is before God; in 2 Samuel 6.7. is, with the ark of
God. And there all men were bound to appear (or be seen) before God three times
a year. Exodus 23.17. and 34.23.24. And here the word before, or unto, is to be
understood, as often in the Hebrew; which sometime is supplied, as may be seen
by comparing 2 Samuel 10.2. with 1 Chronicles. 19.2. and 1 King. 22.29. with 2 Chronicles.
18.28.

Verse. 4. to me bread] that is, my bread, my food. So, bread of tears, Psalm.
80.6. they say] my foes, as verse 11. or while it is said. all the day] or,
every day; as the Greek turns it.

Verse. 5. These things] my absence from Gods face, verse. 32 and my adversaries
reproach, verse 4. power out upon me] or shed within me, or by my self. This
notes exceeding sorrow or fainting; like that in Job 30.16. And now my soul
powers out it self upon me, and the days of affliction have took hold on me.
So 1 Samuel 1.15. Lam. 2.12. throng] a multitude preasing to go before God.
keeping festivitie] or, with a multitude dancing; or keeping a feast. For at
their solemn assemblies, they kept feasts, Exodus 23.14. with dancing, eating,
drinking, and joy. Exodus 32.5.6.19. Judge. 21.19.21. Deuteronomy. 16.14.15.

Verse. 6. Why bowest thou down:] to weet, with sorrow; and therefore the Greek
turns it, why art thou sorrowful? For Sorrow, or Care in a man's heart, boweth
it down: but a good word, rejoices it. Prove. 12.25. the salvations]
understand, and, or for the salvations, that is, the full salvation, or
perfect-deliverance. of his face] that is, which his face, favor, and gracious
presence gives unto me. The Greek reads thus; the salvation of my face, and
my God: transplacing in Hebrew letters, as in the last verse.

Verse. 7. for that, I remember] and cannot come before thee: as, verse 3. or,
therefore I will mind thee, seeing I have no way else to comfort me in my
absence from thee. the land of Iorden] which lay eastward from Jerusalem where
Gods sanctuary was. and Chermonim] that is, the inhabitants, or the mountains
of Hermon, which was a hye mount in the North parts of the land, called also
mount Shirjon: see Psalm. 29 6. the little mount] so is the Greek: others make it
a proper name, Mount Mitsar. He may mean the southern mountains, that were
small in respect of Hermon. Mount being put for mounts; as charret, for
charrets: Psalm. 20.8.

Verse. 8. Deep unto deep calleth] that is, one Affliction, or tentation
follows and occasioneth another, without intermission of trouble. A deep,
abisme, or Gulff, is a place of many waters, signifying, great afflictions.
Ezekiel. 26.19 Ion. 2.5. breaking-billowes] such are most dangerous to drown.
Billows have their name of breaking, as the next word waves, of wallowing, or
tumbling: both signify afflictions. So Ps. 88.8. Ion. 2.3.

Verse. 9. command his mercy] that is, appoint, or send it with power and
authority. a phrase taken from the law, and often used for more vehemency: or
because God by his Angels procures good to his people. Deuteronomy. 28.8. Levit.
25.21. 2 Samuel 17.14. So after, in Psalm. 44.5. and 133.3. and 71.3. and 68.29.
and 7.7. and 91.11. his song] that is, cause and matter for me to sing him
praise. So God is said, to give songs in the night, Job 35.10. See also Isa.
30.29. a prayer] to weet, I shall make a prayer. And some psalms are entitled
prayers, as Psalm. 17.1. and 90.1. and 102.1* and 142.1. Habak. 3.1.

Verse. 10. sad] mournfully. See Psalm. 35.14.

Verse. 11. with a murdring-weapon] Retsach, murder, seems here to be a sword,
or weapon of murdring; (as a proud person, Psalm. 36.12.) meaning that his
adversaries words did sorely afflict and grieve him, as if a dagger had been
thrust into his bones. For, reproachful words, are piersing like swords: Psalm.
57.5. and 59.8.

Verse. 12. salvations of my face] that is, he which gives me full, manifest,
and apparent salvation, or present deliverance. See before, verse 6.

Annotations, Psalm XLIII.
Verse. 1. IVdge me] This means an examination of the cause, giving sentence,
and executing of it, by delivering the oppressed: so Judging, is used for
delivering, 2 Samuel 18.19.31. Judge. 3.10. Pleading also ones plea is of like
meaning: see Psalm 35.1.

Verse. 2. my strength] or my strong-fort, as Psalm. 28.8. for which in Psalm
42.10. he uses the word Rock.

Verse. 3. dwelling-places] meaning the holy tabernacle, or sanctuary, which
had several rooms, holy, and most holy, parted by veiles; as also the Apostle
observes, Heb. 9.2.3.6.7. or, the high place at Gibeon where the tabernacle
was, and in Jerusalem where the Ark was: 2 Chronicles. 1.3.4. for in both those
places God dwelt, and was worshipped. But the first seems most proper, because
of Ps. 142.5. See also, Psalm. 46.5 and 84.2.

Verse. 4. And I will come] or, That I may come; for so the Hebrew phrase may
often be resolved; and the new Testament uses both indifferently in the Greek;
as Luke. 6.37. and ye shall not be judged; for which, in Mat. 7.1. it is, that
ye be not judged. the joy of my gladnes] that is, author of my gladsome joy,
meaning inward joy, outwardly showing it self in gladsome gesture.

Verse. 5. why bowest, etc.] This verse is the same with Psalm. 42.12.

Annotations, Psalm. XLIV.
Verse. 3. DIspossesse] or disinherit, See examples hereof in the Amorites, Number.
21.32. and the other kings of Canaan, Ios. 12. seven nations greater and
mightier than Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.1. plantedst them] to weet, our fathers, the
Israelites, as Exodus 15.17. a figure taken from the planting of vines: whereof
see Psalm. 80.9. etc. the peoples] that dwelt before in Canaan. So Psalm. 106.34.
did propagate] or send forth, make spread, as the vine sendeth-out, or
dispreadeth the branches, Psalm. 80.12. Ezekiel. 17.6.

Verse. 4. the light of thy face] thy favorable countenance in Christ: See the
note on Psalm. 4.7. and 89.16.

Verse. 5. thou art he] that is, Thou art the same my King, (as the Greek
expresses it:) this notes Gods unchangeablenes. See Psalm 102.28. command]
procure by thy commandment. See Psalm. 42.9. salvations of Iaakob] that is, the
full salvation, (the absolute deliverance) of thy weak people, the posterity
of Iaakob. See Ps. 14.7.

Verse. 6. push-with-the horn] a speech taken from Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.17. and
means, a vanquishing, or subduing. 1 King. 22.11. Dan. 8.4. tread-down] or
tread-underfoot, which signifies both a subduing, or destroying, 2 Chronicles.
22.7. and a contempt, or setting of them at naught, Prove. 17.7. and so the
Greek here translateth it, we shall set at naught. So after in Psalm. 60.14. and
108.14.

Verse 9. In God, we praysed] to weet, his actions, salvations, etc. See alike
phrase in Psalm. 56.5.11. and Psalm. 71.6. Or understand, we praised ourselves,
that is, gloryed, triumphed. And thus the Greek, In God we shall be praised.

Verse. 12. sheep for meat] or, of meat, that is, to be eaten. So after, verse
23. sheep of slaugther, that is, to be slain. fannest] or dispersest,
strowest-abroad, as the fan that winnoweth. Ier. 4.11. and 51.2. So after in
Psalm. 106 27.

Verse. 13. for no wealth] that is, for a vile price, without gayn. God is said
to sell his people, when he delivers them into their enemies hands, as out of
his own possession. So Deuteronomy. 32.30. increasest not] or gaynest not by the
prices of them; take no other people in there stead: or increasest, that is,
heightenest not their price.

Verse. 15. a parable] a byword, or proverb. This is often used for grave,
wise, and princely sentences; as Ps. 49.5. here in the ill part for a byword,
reproach, and fable: so Psalm. 69.12. Job 17.6. And thus is fulfilled that which
was threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.37. 1 King. 9:7. Ier. 24.9. nodding of the head] that
is, a mockage. Psalm. 22.8.

Verse. 17. taunter] or blasphemer. Number. 15.30.

Verse. 20. of Dragons] or, of whale-fishes. For the Hebrew word is common both
for land and water-dragons, or whales. So Psalm. 148.7. And hereby is meant the
place of desolation and affliction, as the Greek here translateth it; See Mal.
1.3. Isa. 34.13. Ier. 9.11. and 10.22. Job 30.29. with the shade] or, in the
shade: See Psalm 23.4.

Verse. 21. spread out our palms, etc.] that is, have prayed unto: for in
prayer, they spread out the palms of their hands, as to receive a blessing from
God. 1 King. 8.12. Exodus 9.29. Psalm. 143.6.

Verse. 23. But for thee] or, For, for thy sake, that is, so far we be from
following strange Gods, as that for thy sake we are killed daily. And this also
is a comfort in affliction, see Romans 8.36.

Verse. 24. Stir up] to weet, thy self.

Verse. 26. to the dust] this notes a base and abject state, Psalm 113.7. like
this is the soul cleaving to the dust, Psalm. 119.25. and putting the mouth in
the dust. Lam. 3.29.

Verse. 27. an helpfulnes] that is, a full help. The Hebrew has a letter more
than ordinary, to increase the signification. So Psalm 63.8. and 94 17. See the
note on Psalm. 3.3.

Annotations, Psalm XLVI.
Verse. 1. SHoshannim] that is, Six-stringed-instruments: for so by comparison
with other titles, it seems here to be meant of musical instruments: as
Shaltshim, be three stringd instruments. 1 Samuel 18.6. Elsewhere it signifies
Six-leaved-flowres; that is, Lilies; as Song. 2.6. which may also be minded
here. The Hebrew word is derived of Shesh, that is, Six. Like title is in Psalm.
69.1. and 80.1. of the welbeloved-virgins] Kings daughters, and other honorable
damsels attending upon, and coming with the Queen; the friends of the
bridegroom and bride: verse. 10.15. who should sing this marriage song in praise
of them. Therefore this Hymn sets forth Christ in his glory, and his spowse
the Church in her beauty. For Christ is the Bridegroom, and Jerusalem the
Bride, John. 3.29. Rev. 21.9.10. all true Christians are Virgins, for their
spiritual chastity. Rev. 14.1.4. following and loving the Lamb, for the sweet
odor of his name, or Gospel, Song. 1.2. and are beloved of him, and have this
new song of praise, put into their mouths. Of him is this psalm as the Apostle
expounds it, Heb. 1.8.

Verse. 2. has boyled] or frieth, boyleth, as in a frying pan; that is, has
studied and prepared by fervent meditation. A similitude taken from the Mincah,
or meat offering in the law, which was dressed in the drying pan, Levit. 7.9.
and there boiled in oil, being made of fine slowr unlevened, mingled with oil.
Levit. 2.5. and after was presented to the Lord by the priest, verse 8. etc.
Here the matter of this Psalm is as the Mincah, or oblation, which with the
oil, the grace of the spirit^, was boiled and prepared in the prophets heart;
and now presented. So the Psalm 141. is likeweise compared to the Mincah, or
oblation presented at evening. Psalm 141.2. This word it not elsewhere read in
the scripture. a good word] an excellent, sweet and pleasant matter. A word is
used often for a thing, or matter, Psalm 41.9. here it is for the whole
argument of this psalm. I do say] or, I am a saying, that which fervently
boyleth in me. For of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. my works
to the King] or, my poems of the King; that is, of Christ, concerning him, and
dedicated to him is this Psalm, or Dittie. my tongue, the pen] understand, it
is as the pen: or prayer-wise, be it as the pen. of a speedy writer] or, of a
swift (a ready) Scribe. So Esra was called not only for writing, but also for
interpreting the law, Ezr. 7.6. Scribes were both Scriveners, or Notaries, 2
King. 12.10. and 22.3. and expositors of the Law, or Counselors. Mat. 23.2. 1 Chronicles. 27.32.

Verse. 3. Thou art much-fairer] The Hebrew word is of double former, to note
out double, that is, very excellent beauty. This fairnes is not of body only,
but of mind, in wisdom, holiness, etc. as in Ezekiel. 28.7. there is mentioned
beauty of wisdom. Here the Psalmist begins his speech to Christ, and of his
praises: which also the Chaldee paraphrast explaineth thus, Thou art fair in
soul and body, O King Messiah. See the description of Christ's spiritual beauty
in Song. 5.10.-16. grace is powered out in thy lips] that is, thou speak
gracious words abundantly. Christ's lips, were like lilies dropping-down pure
myrrh, Song. 5.13. all that heard him speak, wondered at the words of grace that
proceeded out of his mouth. Luke 4.22. therefore] to the end that thou
should power out thy gracious words to men: or because God has blessed thee.

Verse. 4. Gird thy sword] that is, make ready to the fight. Exodus 32.27. 1 Samuel
25.13. Song. 3.8. The spiritual sword, is the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17.
Therefore Christ's sword properly comes out of his mouth. Rev. 1.16. and with
the breath of his lips, shall he slay the wicked. Isa. 11.4. upon the thigh]
understand, thy thigh. The Hebrew often omitteth words of this sort, easy to be
understood: so the Greek in the new tostament, as mending the nets, Mark. 1.19.
for, mending their nets, Mat. 4.21. to put away, Mark. 10.4. for, to put her
away; Mat. 19.7. and many the like. O mighty one] or Champion: Heb. Gibbor, one
of the titles of Christ, Isa. 9.6. thy glorious-Majestie] this shows of what
manner sword he speaks, called glory and comlines, or magnificence, because
of the powerful effects. Of these words see Psalm. 8.2.6.

Verse. 5. prosper ride] that is, ride prosprously. See the like phrase Psalm.
51.4. on word of truth] which is the Gospel of our salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. the
white Horse whereon Christ rides. Rev. 19.11. or, because of truth; for the
truths sake. The Hebrew al debar, is often used for because. Psalm 79.9. Genesis
43.18. Deuteronomy. 22.24. and so the Greek version has it here. of meeknes] so
Christ came riding meek, Mat. 21.5. and his word, is both to be taught, and to
be received with meeknes. 2 Timothy 2.25. Iam. 1.21. and of justice] or, meeknes
of justice, that is, justice meekly administered, but the Greek supplieth the
word, and. shall teach thee] or, let it teach thee fearful-things. In the Greek
it is, thy right hand will guide thee marveilously.

Verse.6. Thy arrowes] that is, thy words whereby thou convincest and beatest
down sin and sinners. So the rider on the white Horse* has a bow, when he
goes to conquer, Rev 6.2. arrows, are words, Psalm. 64.4. or judgments, Deuteronomy.
32.23. in the heart,] understand, they pierse the heart of the kings enemies.
And this notes the efficacy of these words, or judgments, as elsewhere he
says, I will send all my plagues upon thy heart, Exodus 9.14. also their inward
operation which is mighty, dividing asunder the soul and the spirit, discerning
the intents of the heart, casting down imaginations, and bringing into
captivity every thought. Heb. 4.12. 2 Cor, 10.4.5.

Verse. 7. Thy throne O God] Here Christ our King is magnified as God, above the
Angels, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 1.8. But unto the son he says, thy
throne O God is for ever, etc. Hereby also is meant the perpetuity of Christ's
kingdom. So 1 Chronicles. 22.10. 2 Samuel 7.16. a scepter of righteousnes] or, a rod,
(a mace) of equity; plain and righteous in administration. has anointed thee]
of this Hebrew Mashach, has anointed, our Lord is called Mashiach, or Messiah,
and in Greek Christ, that is, Anointed; See Psalm 2.2. oil of joy] the holy
Ghost, which joyeth the heart. Luke 4.18. 1 These. 1.6. above thy fellowes] that
is, above all Christians who are thy fellows, consorts, and partners in the
anointing, 1 John. 2 20.27. who are also made Kings and priests, Rev. 5.10. and
with whom thou have taken part of flesh and blood; Heb. 2.14.

Verse. 9. Myrrh] named of the Hebrew word Mor, and is the gum or liquor of a
tree, in taste bitter, in smell odoriferous: therefore it was used in the
precious ointment of the high priest, and tabernacle. Exodus 30.21. and in other
sweet perfumes. Esth. 2.12. Prove. 7.17. See Song. 4.14. and 5.1.13. Aloes] of
the Hebrew name Ahaloth, a sweet wood wherewith perfumes were also made. Number.
21.7. Song. 4.14. The Arabians call it tsandal. Cassia] or cassies, also of the
Hebrew Ketsioth: elsewhere it is not found in scripture. It seems to be the
barks or skins of that sweet shrub Casia, mentioned by Pliny, lib. 12. cap.
20. all thy garments] that is, they be of them; or smell of them; or, are
anointed with them. out of the yvorie pallaces] or palaces of Elephants tooth;
meaning that either the King comes out of them, or the garments were taken
out of such palaces or coffers. Kings palaces were sometime made of yvorie, or
tooth. 1 King. 22.39. more than they that make thee joyfull] or, than theirs
that make thee glad: that is, thy garments are more odoriferous, then the
garments of thy fellows, fore mentioned verse 8. for though the spouse, or
Church, has the favor of her odors, better than all spaces, and the smell of
her garments, as the odor of Lebanon, she being perfumed with myrrh and
incense, and all spices of the merchant, Song. 4.10.11. and 3.6. yet Christ
himself is more odoriferous, even wholly delectable, for God has not given him
the spirit by measure. Song. 1.2. and 5.16. John. 3.34. And the Saints are said
to make Christ joyful, for all his delight is in them, Psalm. 16.3. Song. 7.6.

Verse. 10. among thy precious-ones] that is, with thy honorable women; or, in
thy preciousnesses, that is, are in thy precious honorable ornaments, or
palaces. set is the Queen] or, the maried-Queen, (the wife) is placed at thy
right hand, that is, in the most honorable place. 1 King. 2.19. The word
Shegal is used here, and Nehem. 2.6. Dan. 5.23. for the Kings wife, or
bedfellow. in fine-gold] that is, as the Greek explaineth it, cloth of fine (or
glistering) gold, called Cethem; a special name for the most pure and splendent
gold. Job 28.16.19. and 31.24. Song. 5.11. Dan. 10.5. Hereof is Mictam, Psalm
16.1. of Ophir] that is, out of the land of Ophir; who was the son of Iektan,
the son of Shem, the son of Noach. Genesis 10.29. who dwelt in a part of India,
and of him the country was called Ophir: from thence was much Cethem, or
fine-gold brought to Judea, and other coasts, as appears 1 King. 9.28. and
10.11. and 22.48. 1 Chronicles. 29.4. The gold it self was called by his name Ophir:
Job 22.24.

Verse. 11. Hear O daughter.] He speaks to the Queen forementioned, figuring
the church, or heavenly Jerusalem, the Lambs wife. Rev. 21.9.10. etc. And so
the Chaldee paraphraseth, Hear O congregation of Israel, the law of his mouth,
and see his mavelous works, etc. and thy fathers house] as man and wife must
leave their parents, to cleave each to other, Genesis 2.24. and 31.14. so must we
leave all, to cleave unto Christ. Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26.

Verse. 12. will covet thy beauty] will delight himself in thy fairnes, (thy
sanctity;) set forth in Song, 1.14. and 2.14. and 4.1. etc. So, the King is
tied in the rafters: Song, 7.5. and bow down] or, therefore worship thou him.

Verse. 13. the daughter of Tyrus] that is, the people, or Common wealth of
Tire; as daughter of Sion, Psalm 9.15. Tire, or Tyrus (in Hebrew Tsor, which
signifies a Rock, or Fortress;) was a strong city appertaining to the tribe
of Aser, Ios. 19.29. but possessed still by the heathens; whose King Hiram
became friend to David, 2 Samuel 5.11. and to Solomon his son; 1 King. 5.1.2.
etc. yet afterward Tyrus remembered not the brotherly covenant, Amos. 1.9. but
rejoiced at the desolation of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 26.2. banded it self, with other
enemies, against Israel, Psalm 83.8. and was wasted of Nebuchadnezar King of
Babel, by Gods judgment, 70. years; Isa. 23.15. Ezekiel. 26.7. It continued
under idols till the Machabees times, and then had still Hercules for their
chief God; 2 Match. 4.18.19. This one city Tire, is here named instead of other
nations, because it was the chief city of traffic, in the world; being an isle
in the sea, whose merchandise and magnificence the prophet largely describes,
Ezekiel. 27. her merchants were Princes; her chapmen the nobles of the world, Isa.
23.8. she heaped up silver as dust, and gold as the mire of the streets; Zach.
9.3. Of the subjection here prophesied, which they should yield unto the
Church, we may see it fulfilled in the new Testament, where many that dwelt
about Tire and Sidon flocked after Christ, Mark. 3 8. and he resorted into
their bordors, Mark. 7.24. and by their readiness, he upbraided the
backwardnes of the Jews, Matt. 11.20, 21. and afterward in the Apostles days
there was a church of zealous Christians in that city; Act. 21.3, 4.5, etc. See
also Psalm. 87.4. earnestly beseeke thy face] shall instantly pray (or sue) unto
thee O Queen. The original word naturally signifies, to make sick, or sorry;
and being joined with the word face, (which often is used for anger,) it means,
to abate the anger, by importunate prayer, and by humble suit to prevail. So
after, Psalm. 119.58. rich of the people] the wealhty among them; meaning, of
the Tyrtans, which were a wealthy nation: and generally, other peoples. See
Isa. 60.1, 3, 5, 11, and 49.23. Rev. 21.24, 26, where the riches and honor of
the Gentiles, are brought to the church.

Verse. 14. Glorious within] or honorable inward, in the heart adorned with
faith, hope, love, etc. or in the inner man: as Ephe. 3.16. purled-works] or
grounds, bosses, closures of gold, such as precious stones are set in, Exodus
28.11.14. Compare also herewith, Ezekiel. 16.13.

Verse. 15 In embroideries] with broidered (or needle-wrought) garments. Hereby
is meant, the variety of graces, and embroidery of the spirit. So Ezekiel. 16 10.

Verse. 17. Instead of thy fathers] Here the Hebrew is of the masculine gender:
so these words are spoken to the King. Though sometime the masculine is used in
speech of women, as Number. 27.7. So, lahem, 1 King. 22.17. lahem, 2 Chronicles. 18.16.
shall be thy sons] thy children shall succeed; meaning either all Christians,
that by the immortal feed of the word are begotten to Christ, and his Church,
he being the father, this the mother of us all Isa. 9.6. Gal. 4.26. or in
special, the Apostles may be intended. See, Heb. 2.13. shall put them] shall
place, constitute, or appoint them for Princes: As all Christians are called
Kings, Rev. 1.6, and 5.10. Or in special, by the Fathers may be meant the 12
Patriarchs, by the Sons, the 12 Apostles succeeding them: as the heavenly
Jerusalem has at the 12 gates, the names of the 12 tribes; and in the
foundations of the wall, the names of the lambs 12 Apostles, Rev. 21.12.14.
which Apostles were sent into all the nations of the world, Mat. 28.19. to go
and bring forth fruit, and their fruit to remain. Ioh. 15.16. Like this is the
promise made for Sarah, that Kings of people should come of her, Genesis 17.16.

Verse. 18. I will make memory] will mention, and make to be remembered. The
inditer of this Psalm speaks this to Christ, and of his eternal kingdom and
glory. shall confess thee] shall celebrate, or praise thee. The Hebrew Iehodu,
of it, Iehudah had his name, Genesis 29.35. from which name his blessing was
derived, thou art Judah, thy brethren (Iodu) shall confess thee. Genesis 49.8.
This hero is sitly applied to Christ, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. 5 5.
and ay] or, and to perpetuity.

Annotations, Psalm XLVI.
Verse. 1. ON Alamoth] This seems to be some musical instrument, or tune, 1
Chro. 15.20 We may call it Virginals, or Virgin-tunes, having high and shrill
voices or notes: for Alamoth signifies also Virgins, Cant. 1.2. The original
word Alam, signifies Hid: whereupon the Greek translateth it here, k^uphioon,
hidden^^nes, or hid-things.

Verse. 2. We shall find] to weet, an help; or in distresses that we shall
find; as in Psalm 116.3. distress and sorrow I did find; that is, did feel, or
fall into. And thus the Greek says here, in tribulations that have found us
vehemently. Or we may translate it, he is found, that is, God is present, at
hand; as in Genesis 19, 15. thy daughters which are found; that is, which are
present.

Verse. 3. though the earth] or, when the earth change, to weet, her place. By
the changing of the earth, and removing of the mounts, are often meant, the
alteration of states, and polities. Hag. 2.22.23. Revel. 6.14. Ierem. 51.25.
heart of the seas] that is, the midst, or deepest bottoms of them. The like
phrase is in Exodus 15.8. Ion. 2, 3. Prove. 23.34.

Verse. 4 be muddy] or cast up mud, that is, rage, or be troubled, as the Greek
translateth it. Waters, are peoples, Revel. 17.15, Ierem. 47.2. and their
restless stir, is likened to the seas that cast up mire and dyrt, and some
out their own shame. Isai. 57.23. Jude 13. for the haughtines] the proud
swelling rage, and surges.

Verse. 5. A river, the streams thereof,] or, There is a flood, whose riverets,
or streams. In the earthly Jerusalem this may be meant of the river Kidron, 2 Samuel 15.23. Ioh. 18, 1. and the streams or lesser rivers of Gihon and Shiloah,
2 Chronicles. 32.4.30. Isa. 8.6. In the heavenly Jerusalem, there is a pure river of
the water of life, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb. Revel.
22, 1. Ezekiel. 47.1. etc. See also Joel 3.18. Genesis 2.10. Psalm. 65, 10. the city
of God] that is, Jerusalem; called also the city of the great King, Psalm. 48.3.
of Jehovah, Isa 60, 14. the holy city. Isa. 52.1. Mat. 4.5. the holy] meaning
the holy-place. Sion, or the sanctuary there. dwelling places] or habitacles;
see Psalm. 43.3. Isa. 4, 5.

Verse. 6. at the looking forth of the morning] that is, as the Greek explaineth
it, very early, when the morning peereth or, shows the face. The like phrase
is in Exodus 14.27. Judge. 19, 26. and so, of the looking forth of the evening,
Genesis 24.63. Deuteronomy. 23, 11.

Verse. 7. gave his voice] that is, spoke aloud, or thundered; see Psalm. 18, 14
or, gave with his voice: but the word with, or in, seems to be superfluous in
the Hebrew, as elsewhere Ier. 12, 8. Psalm. 68.34. So to seek in Jehovah. 2 Chronicles. 34, 26. is to seek Jehovah. 2 King. 22, 18. melted] that is, was
dismayed with fear. So Psalm 75.4. and 107.26. Exodus 15.15. Amos 9.5.13. Ios.
2.9.

Verse. 11. Surcease] or Leave off, see Psalm. 37.8.

Verse. 10. charrets] or round-shields; as both the Greek, and Chaldee
paraphrast here takes it: but elsewhere it is not so found: but for wagons or
carts very often.

Annotation, Psalm. XLVII.
Verse. 2. CLap the palm] at the palms, the hands: a sign of joyful
approbation; used at others times, so at the coronation of Kings. 2 King,
11.12. So after, Psalm. 98, 8. voice of shrilling] that is, a shrill voice; and
joyjull. See the notes on Psalm. 5.12. and 41.12.

Verse. 4. He has subdued] or, will subdue, So in the next verse, He will
choose: but the time to come is often used for the time past or continued. And
here it seems to be spoken of the subduing of the Canaanites: and the future
subduing of nations to Christ, by preaching of the gospel. Of subduing, see
Psalm. 18, 48.

Verse. 5. our inheritance] the land of Canaan; Psalm. 78, 55. and that immortal
undefiled heritage reserved in heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1, 4. high-excellencie] or
glorious-highnes: meaning, the kingdom, priesthood, temple, etc. whereby
Iaakobs posterity excelled, Ezekiel. 24.21. Amos 6, 8. and 8, 7. Nahum. 2.2. and
all the heavenly promises given to the Church in Christ.

Verse. 6. God is gone up] as when the Ark went up from Kirjath-jearim to
Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 6.15. 1 Chro. 13.8. and 15.28. when the Ark was carried by
Solomon into the Temple, 2 Chro. 5. when Christ ascended with triumph into
heaven; Luke 24.51.52. and with like glory shall he come again, 1 These. 4.16.
Act. 1.9.11.

V. 7. an instructing-psalm, Maschil; the title of Psalm. 32. and many others;
here used in like sense for a psalm to give instruction: or as in Psalm 14, 2.
for a prudent understanding person; in this sense, sing psalm every one that is
prudent: or as the Greek explaineth it, sing prudently, skilfully, and with
understanding.

Verse. 9. throne of his holynes] his holy throne. See Psalm 9.5. Rev, 4, 2.

Verse. 10. The bounteous-Princes] or, The voluntaries, Nobles; A name given to
the liberal and free hearted, Isa. 32.5.9. Exo. 35.21.29. and to princes, or
Nobles; Number. 21.18. Psalm. 113.8. and 1.18.8. Job 12.21. So here the Greek has
Princes. are Gods] or, to God (belong the shields of the earth: He is the great
conqueror and protector of all: Genesis 15.1. Shields also are Magistrates, and
governors, that protect the common weals, Hos. 4.1^. Psalm. 89.19. So the Greek
here has the strongmen of the earth.

Annotations, Psalm XLVIII.
Verse 3. Fair in situation] or, beautiful of coast, or climate: situate in a
fair climate or region. the sides of the north] the place where the temple was
builded So Isa. 14.13. of the great King] that is, of God; who dwelt in this
city. verse. 9. Zach. 8, 3. Hereupon Christ said,] swear not by Jerusalem, for
it is the city of the great King, Mat. 5.35.

Verse. 4. lofty-pallaces] or, high bowres, or steeples. So verse. 14. and Psalm.
122.7.

Verse. 5. the Kings] we may referr this either to the Kings of Moab and Ammon,
in the days of Iosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. or to Sanacherib and his captains in the
days of Ezekiah, 2 King. 18, 19. or to the Philistian Princes: 2 Samuel 5. were
assembled] or came together, to weet, by agreement, at an appointed time and
place: so the original word imports.

Verse. 7. that travelleth with child] or, that brings forth. And this pain is
great, and sudden, and inevitable. See Mic. 4.9. 1 These. 5.3.

Verse. 8. an east wind] which is strong and boystrous; also dry and parching:
Isa. 27.8. Ier. 18.17. Exodus 14 21. and 10.13. Genesis 41.7. Ezekiel. 19.12. Ion.
4.8. Hereupon the Greek translateth it, violent wind. of Tarshish] or, of the
Occean sea. Tarshish was the name of the son of Iavan, the son of Iapheth, the
son of Noah, Genesis 10.4. of whom Tarsus (mentioned in Act. 21.34.) the chief
city of Cilicia in Syria, had the name. From thence they went by shipping into
far countries, Africa, India, Ophir. etc. 1 King. 22.48. and 10.22. Hereupon
that Sea was called Tarshish; and generally the name is applied to every Ocean,
or main sea.

Verse. 10. we have quietly-minded] or, in silence-thought upon; and
consequently, waited for.

Verse. 12. daughters of Iudah] the lesser cities of that tribe, which were as
daughters to the mother city Jerusalem: as the lesser cities of the Ammonites,
were daughters to Rabbah, Ier. 49.3. So Ekron with her daughters, Ios. 15.45.
and many the like. So Psalm. 97.8.

Verse. 13. tell the towers] number, count them; These things seem to intend not
only a taking notice, but also a care and fortification of Jerusalem, against
all enemies. See Isa. 33.18.

Verse. 14. Set your heart] mind earnestly, set your affections on, etc. Psalm.
62.11. the fort] or strongs-frontier, skonce, rampart, made for strength and
safeguard of the city. 1 King. 21 23. 2 Samuel 20, 15, So Psalm. 122.7.
distinctly-view] or, lift up, meaning the eyes to behold; or rear up the banks
or buildings The Hebrew Pasgu, is here only used: of it is Pisgah the name of
an hill, or mount, Number. 21, 20 and 23.14. Deuteronomy. 3.17 and 34, 1. The Greek
translateth here, distinguish, or distribute: following the Chaldee Passeg
which is to distribute or divide.

Verse. 15. ever and aye] ever and yet, to eternity and perpetuity. will guide
us] or lead us, to weet, as a flock of sheep, Psalm. 78.52.72. therefore the
Greek turns it, poimanei, he will feed, or rule as a shepherd. untill-death]
in Greek, for ever.

Annotations, Psalm XLIX.
Verse. 2. THe transitorie-world] see Psalm. 17.14.

Verse. 3. base-man] in Hebrew Adam, who was so called of Adamah, the earth,
whereupon this title is given to the baser sort of people. The Greek therefore
translateth it here, earth-borne. So the Apostle says, the first man of the
earth, earthly; 1 Cor. 15.47. noble-man] in Hebrew Ish, which is the name of
man in respect of heat, valor, noblenes and dignity, whereby man is, and
excels; and in opposition to the former word Adam, it means the great or
nobler sort of people.

Verse. 4. wisdoms] that is, excellent and manifold wisdom; so after,
prudencies, for every excellent prudence, and of sundry sorts. So Solomon
calls the chief and most excellent wisdom, wisdoms, Prove. 1.20. and 9.1.

Verse. 5. a parable] or a proverb: in Hebrew Mashal, which denotes rule,
superiority or excellency; because such speeches prevail much in the minds
of men, and are in esteem. The new Testament in Greek translateth it, a
parable, Mat. 13.35. from Psalm. 78.2. of the Latin, we name it a Proverb; in
old English, or Saxon, it was called a big-spell. Sometime it is used in the
evil part, for a byword. Psalm. 44.15. and 69.12. mine hidden-matter] my
dark-question, or grave-doctrine, my riddle. The Hebrew Chida, riddle, has the
name of sharpnes; as proceeding from a sharp wit, and needing the like to
expound it. See Judge. 14.12.18. Numb. 12.8. 1 King. 10.1. Prove. 1.6. The holy
Ghost expresses it in Greek by hidden things. Mat. 13.35. from Psalm 78.2.

Verse. 6. Why should I fear] This is the hidden doctrine, or riddle, which the
Prophet propounds, as in his own name, and therefore also called it a
parable. By fear, he means, dismay, or discouragement. See verse 17. the
iniquity] that is, punishment, or death; which is the wages of sin; see Psalm.
31.11. and by foot- steps, or foot-soles, he means his ways or works. Or, he
may call death the punishment of his heels, or feet, because the serpent
bruiseth Christ and his people, but in the heel, Genesis 3.15. the sting of death
being done away, and it made a passage into life and glory. 1 Cor. 15.55, 57.

Verse. 7. their wealthy-power] their riches; which are thus called, because
they are gotten by power given of God. Deuteronomy. 8.18. with labor and industry:
and to the rich, their goods are their strong-citie. Prove. 10.15. therefore
here they are said to trust in them: contrary to 1 Timothy 6.17. Job 31.24. Mark.
10.^4. glory] at praise themselves, vaunt; contrary to Ier. 9.23.

Verse. 8. not redeeming redeeme] that is, shall in no wise, or not at all
redeem.

Verse. 9. So precious shalbe] or, And dear (costly is: and consequently rare
and gezon; hard to obtain. as Dan. 2.11. 1 Samuel 3.1. of their soul] that is, of
their life. So Exodus 21.30. cease for ever] that is, it shall never be
accomplished. So ceasing is used for the not doing of a thing. Deuteronomy. 23.22.
Zach. 11.12.

Verse. 10. That he may live] this is referred to the end of the 8. verse, not
give his ransom: and so live. And, is here for That; see Psalm. 43.4.

Verse. 11. unconstant-fool and brutish] these two names are often joined
together, as Psalm. 92.7. and 94.8. the one noting ficklenes and mutability,
called Cesil, which is both the name of a fool, and of a star that causes
change of weather and tempests: (whereupon Solomon speaks of the restlesnes
of this kind of folly, Eccles. 7.27. and of the tumultuousnes, and light
behavior of such fools, as having their eyes wandering unto the ends of the
earth, Prove. 9.13. and 17.24.) the other, noting want of discretion, as
bruit-beasts led with sensuality, and carried with ardent furious affections. 2
Pet. 2.12. Jude 10. See Psalm. 73.22.

Verse. 12. Their inward-thought] or, their meaning; purpose. This word
signifies the nearest, and most secret thought, or purpose: the heart. See
Psalm. 5.10. and 55.5. and 64.7. their houses forever] to weet, shall continue;
by houses, meaning their children or posterity, as Psalm. 115.12. which they
that want, are said to be barren of house. Psalm. 113.9. they proclaim their
names, on lands] or, they call lands, (their lands, as the Greek explaineth it)
by their own names. As, the land of Canaaan, of Mitsraim, (that is, Egypt,) of
Asshur, etc. So Absalom called his pillat by his own name, 2 Samuel 18.18. Cain,
his city, by his sonns name, Genesis 4.17. thus thinking to make their memory
everlasting. Or, they proclaim their names (seeking to be famous) throughout
the lands, or countries.

Verse. 13. But earthly-man] or, And Adam: and this may be minded both for the
first man Adam, who continued not in his dignity; and so for all his children.
in honour] being as honor, price, dignity or estimation. not lodge a night]
or, not continue. The word though it properly signifies a nights-lodging, or
abiding, Genesis 21.11. Exodus 23.18. yet is used also for longer continuance,
Psalm. 25.13. and 55.8. Zach. 5.4. are silenced] that is, are cut off, the, or
perish. The Hebrew word signifies silence, or stilries; not only in speech,
but in motion: as the Sun was still, of silent, when it moved not, Ios.
10.12.13. and people destroyed, are said to be silenced, Isa. 15.1. and the
grave, or death, is called silence, Psalm. 115.17. and things without life, are
in the Hebrew phrase, dum, or silent. Habak. 2.19. Exodus 15.16.

Verse. 14. unconstant-folly to them] that is, is their folly: or a
constant-hope to them, that is, is their confidence. The original word has
contrary significations: unconstant-folly; Eccl. 7 27. and constant-hope, Psalm.
78.7. Job 31.24. both ways it may here be taken: confident-hope, in their own
conceit, but indeed, folly. The Greek turns it, a scandal (or
stumbling block) to them. and their posteritie] or, yet those after them, their
successors. their mouth] that is, their words, doctrine, counsel, precepts.
The mouth is figuratively used for whatsoever comes out of the same; as word,
or commandment. 1 Samuel 12.15. Job 39.30. Number. 9.20. Deuteronomy. 1.26. Mat. 18.16.
Luke 19.22.

Verse. 13. they are put] or laid: or, they put, that is, men put them. An
Hebrew phrase, as Luke 12.20. they shall fetch away thy soul, that is, it
shall be fetched away. The like is often used. Psalm. 105 28. and 141.6. The
Hebrew text it self, sometime explaineth this; as, they had anointed David, 2 Samuel 5.17. that is, David was anointed. 1 Chronicles. 14.8 in hell] into a ditch: to
the lowest grave, or state of death, called Sheol. See the note on Psalm. 16.10.
or death shall feed them] as a shepherd shall feed and rule them, as Psalm.
78.72. or death shall feed on them, to devour them, as Ier. 50.19. at the
morning] the last day of judgment, for then all that sheep in the dust of the
earth shall awake and rise, and the new day of eternal life shall begin. their
form] their figure, shape, or image; with all their beauty and proportion: or
their rock, that is, their strength, or (as the Greek says) their help, that
wherein they trust. The Hebrew Tsur, is usually a rock; here it seems to be
all one with Tsurah, a form, or figure: and this is confirmed by the writing,
for though by the vowels and reading it is Tsur; yet by the letters it is Tsir;
which is, an image; Isa. 45.16. wear away in hell] or wax old in the grave:
understanding the word in, which is expressed in the Greek: or without it,
thus, Hell (the grave) shall wear away (shall consume) their form. The Hebrew
lehalloth being indefinite, to wear-out with age: is here of like signification
as that which went before, shall have rule. The like Hebraisme is in Ier. 14.5.
Zach. 12.10. and 3.4. See also Psalm, 65.11. from his dwelling-place] that is,
every of them, coming from, (or being thrust out of) his dwelling, or home: as
the Greek says, they are thrust from their glory.

V. 16. from the hand of hell] that is, from the power of the grave, death, and
damnation. So of all the faithful, he says, I will redeem them from the hand
of hell. Hos. 13 14. but so can no man redeem himself, Psalm. 89.49. Hand is put
for power, as Psalm. 22.21. And this is meant of the resurrection, and
redemption of body and soul from damnation by Christ. for he will receive me]
or, when he shall receive, or take me; meaning, up into heaven, where God
himself is: 1 These. 4.14. Ioh. 14.3. This manner of speech is used in Genesis
5.24. Henoch was no more, for God received him.

Verse. 17. Fear thou not] that is, be not dismayed, or overcome with fear. The
Hebrew phrase usually, when it counsels or prays against a thing, means
the height and full measure of it. So, Fear not, Genesis 50.19. and Grieve not,
Genesis 45, 5. that is, be not overcome with grief. So, lead us not into tentation
Mat. 6, 13. that is, let us not be overcome with tentation, 1 Cor. 10.13.
Therefore that which one Evangelist writes, Fear not, Mat. 28.5. another
writes, be not astonished, Mark. 16.6. noting, the excess of fear.

Verse. 18. take any thing] Heb. take of all; that is, ought of all that he
has. For we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain that we can carry
nothing out. 1 Timothy 6.7. Job 1, 21.

Verse. 19. Though in his life] that is, whiles he lives. So Psalm. 63.5. and
104.33. and 146.2. he blesses his soul] that is, himself: as it is written,
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink
and take thy pastime. Luke 12.19. will confess thee] will commend, laud, and
celebrate thee. do good to thy self] that is, make much of, cherishest,
pamperest thy self. So good is used for worldly pleasure and emoluments. Psalm.
4.7.

Verse. 20. It shall come] to weet, the soul forespoken of: or the person; or
Thou shall come. to the generation of his fathers] that is, to his wicked
predecessors that are dead and gone: as the godly also at their death are
gathered to their fathers and people, Judge. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 32.50. or, to the
habitation of his fathers; their house, or lodge: for so Dor is used for an
habitation. Isa. 38.12. to continual-ay they shall not see] or, which for ever
shall not see the light: to weet, the light of the living here on earth, as
Psalm. 56.14. Job 33.28.30. nor the light of joy in the world to come; being
cast out into the utter darkness. Mat. 8.12.

Verse. 12. understands not,] or discerns not, wanting prudence. A
repetition of the 13. verse, with a little change, of jalin, lodges; into
jabin, understands.

Annotations, Psalm L.
Verse. 1. A Psalm of Asaph] that is, made by him: or to Asaph, that is,
committed unto him to sing. For Asaph was a Seer, or Prophet, which made Psalms
as did David, 2 Chronicles. 29, 30. Also he and his sonns, were singers in Israel. 1 Chronicles. 25.2. The God of Gods] that is, God of all Angels, Judges, and Rulers of
the world: or The mighty-God, the God Jehovah. Three titles of God here used
together, Ael, Aelohim, Jehovah. So in Josh. 22.22. the going-in] that is, the
West, where the Sun sets, or (after the Hebrew phrase) goes in, as at the
rising, it is said to goe-out, or come forth. Genesis 19.23.

Verse. 2. out of Sion] the state of the church under the Gospel. Heb. 12.18.22.
Psalm. 2.6. therefore in this Psalm, the legal sacrifices appointed at mount
Sinai, are reproved, and the worship of God in spirit and truth, commended. the
wholl perfection] or, the Universality of beauty: that is, which is wholly and
perfectly beautiful. See the like praise of Sion, Psalm. 48.3. Lam. 2.15.
shineth-clearly] as the sun shines in his strength: that is, appears in
glorious majesty. This also is a sign of favor; Job 10, 3. Psalm. 80.2. So God
shined from mount Paran. Deuteronomy. 33.3.

Verse. 3 Our God come] a prayer to hasten his coming, as in Rev. 22, 20. or, as
the former, our God will come. fire shall eat] that is consume, devour. So God
is called an eating fire. Deuteronomy. 4, 24. that is, as the Apostle expounds it, a
consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. and the sight of his glory on mount Sinai, was like
eating (consuming) fire, Exodus 24.17. and fire out of his mouth eats, Psalm.
18.9. a storm be moved] a tempest raised: which makes fire, the more fierce
and forceable. And these things signify Christ's judgments against
hipocriticall, carnal worshipers; see Mal. 3.1.2.3 Mat. 3.12.

Verse. 4. call to the heavens, etc.] that heaven and earth may bear record; as
in Deuteronomy. 31.28. and 32.1. Isa. 1.2.

Verse. 5. have stricken my covenant] or have cut, that is, made covenant with
me with sacrifices. For at holy covenants the sacrifices were cut asunder, and
they went between the parts. Genesis 15.10.13.18. Ier. 34.18. See Psalm. 25.10.
See also a covenant between God and his people with sacrifice, Exodus 24.4.-8.

Verse. 6. And the heavens] hereby may be meant the heavenly Angels; as in Ioh
15.15. or the meteors in the aier, thonder, lightning, etc. Exodus 19.16.18. See
also Psalm 97.6. and 89.6 he is judge] himself in his own person; and not by
his servants only, as before time. Heb. 1.1.2. 2 Timothy 4.1.

Verse. 7. testify to thee] that is, give thee contestations, admonitions,
charges, etc. to cause the more obedience, as Nehem. 9.29. 2 King. 17.15 Exodus
19.21.23. or, testify against thee, (as this phrase sometime signifies, Deuteronomy.
4.26. and 31.28.) that is, convince thee of disobedience; Both these are done
in this Psalm, verse. 14.15.18.19. etc.

Verse. 8. for thy sacrifices] so elswere he says, I speak not to your
fathers, etc. concerning sacrifices, Ier. 7.22. are before me,] so the Greek
explaineth it; and so Israel used to weary God with outward offerings; Isa.
1.11.14. Mic. 6.6.7. Amos 4.4.5.

Verse. 9. goat-bucks] the he goats; such, with bullocks, were principal in
the sacrifices. Number. 7.17.23. etc. Psalm. 66.15.

Verse. 11. store-of beasts] all sorts of beasts that range about. So Psalm.
10.14.

Verse. 14. a confession] a thank-offering. There was an oblation in the law,
thus called, Levit. 7.12.15. mentioned also in Psalm. 116.17. and 107.22. which
the Apostle opens, exhorting to offer the sacrifice of praise continually to
God, that is, the fruit of the lips, confessing to his name. Heb. 13.15. See
also Psa. 95.2. vow to the most high,] that is, to God; Genesis 14.18. so he that
in Luk, 6.35. is the Most high; in Mat. 5.45. is, our Father which is in
heaven. To him vows were made with prayers, Genesis 28.20, Psalm. 61.6. and paid
with thanksgiving; Psalm. 65.2. and 66.13.14. and by law their payment was
required, Deuteronomy. 23.23. Eccles. 5.5. Psalm. 76.12. and there were s^crifices for
vows, Levit. 7.16.

Verse. 16. what have thou to do] the Hebrew phrase is, what to thee? the Greek,
wherefore do thou?

Verse. 17. nurture] or restraint, chastisement; which is the way of life. Prove.
6.23. and 12.1: behind thee] or after thee. See a like speech Nehem. 9.26.

Verse. 18. and thou runnest] or readily consentest, take pleasure. And, may
be omitted in our English; it serves to increase the readiness and earnestnes
of the affections. He that partaketh with a thief, hates his soul. Prove. 29.24.

Verse. 19. thou sendest out] that is, usest and appliest it. thy tongue,
joyneth] or, with thy tongue, thou joynest, (forgest) framest, compactest.

Verse. 20. ill-report] or infamy, offensive scandalous speech; (as the Greek
turns it, scandal:) a word not found but in this place.

Verse. 21. I was surely] Hebrew, I being, had been, or was. set in order] to
weet, thy faults; as the Greek explaineth it, I will set thy sins before thy
face.

Verse. 22. no res kuer,] or no deliverer. A similitude taken from Lions, which
catch and tear their prey; from whose jaws none can reskue. See the like in
Hos. 5.14.

Verse. 23. disposes his way] composeth, and orders it, according to these
directions* or, he that puts this way, before him. to see, the salvation]
that is, to enjoy it, or, I will show it him. In Hebrew the word in redoundeth.
See Psalm* 27.4. So Psalm 91.16. and 85.8.

Annotations, Psalm. LI.
Verse. 2. HE had entred] or, had gone in, that is, had lain with; as the phrase
imports, Genesis 6.4. and is expressed 2 Samuel 11.4. Bathshebangh] the daughter
of Eliam, 2 Samuel 11.3. called also Bathshuangh daughter of Ammiel, 1 Chronicles.
3.5. She was wife to Captain Vrijah the Hittite, and whiles her husband was at
the leaguer of Rabbah, David lay with her: and she being with child, he first
sought to cover his fault, by sending for Vrijah home, that he might be
esteemed the father: which not succeeding, he sent him back with privy letters
to Joab the General, for to procure his death. Which being done, David married
his wife Bathshebah, so thinking to cloak his sin. But God was displeased, and
sent Nathan to reprove David; whereupon he repented, and made this Psalm, for
an example unto, and comfort of sinners. See the history at large, 2 Samuel 11.
and 12.

Verse. 4. much wash me] or, Multiply wash me, that is, thoroughly wash me,
again and again. He applies the washings used in the law, ( Levit. 11.25.32.
Exodus 19.10) Number. 19.19. to the spiritual washing from sin, in the blood of
Christ. Rev. 7.14. 1 John. 1.7. So after verse. 9. and Ier. 4.14. The Hebrew
Hereb (or Harheh] multiply, is used for Much, as 2 King. 10.18. where it is
opposed to little. And that which in one place is written harbeh, multiply: in
another is la-rob, and rabbah, much: as 1 King. 10.10. with 2 Chronicles. 9.9. 2 Samuel 8.8. with 1 Chronicles. 18.8.

Verse. 5. I know] or acknowledge. So Isa. 59.12. Ier. 3, 13.

Verse. 6. Against thee] or, Unto thee only. This is either because he concealed
his sin from men, but could not from God, 2 Samuel 12.12. or, that only God
could remitt the punishment of his sin. Isa. 43.25. So Psalm. 41.5. I have
sinned] and so am deprived of the glory of God: as Romans 3.23. that which is
evil, etc.] which displeases thee. This has reference to 2 Samuel 12.9. and
11.27. that thou maist] that is, thou have suffered me to fall into sin, that
thou may be just, (or justified,) in whatsoever thou have spoken for the
salvation of thy servant, or punishment of my sin. 2 Samuel 12.10. For the
unjustice of man, commends the justice of God, Rom, 3.4.5. or, it may have
reference to the formor words, I know and acknowledge) my sin, that thou may
be just. when thou speakest] or in thy speaking; i^ in thy words; as Romans 3.4.
so after, in thy judging. may be pure] or clear, sincere, unreprovable: and
consequently may win the victory in judgment; whereupon the Apostle
(according to the Greek version) says, may overcome, Romans 3.4. The Hebrew
Zacah, also in the Siriak tongue, is used for overcoming.

Verse 7. in iniquitie] the perverseness or viciositie of nature, commonly called
original, and by the Apostle inhabiting sin, Romans 7.17. whereby al men are
carnal, sold under sin: Ioh. 3.6. Romans 7.14. This, David makes the fountain
of all his actual sins. painfully-brought-forth] born-with-sorow, The Hebrew
signifies, the painful travel of child birth, Isa. 26.17.18. and 51.2. Psalm.
29.9. conceived] or was-warm: in heat; as Genesis 30.38.39.41.

Verse. 8. the inward-parts] or the covered-parts, the heart roots, where wisdom
is seated of God: Job 38.36. named in Hebrew of covering, plaistering, or
pargeting. the secret] or; the closed-place: which being referred to the
person, means the heart, which God renews, Ezekiel. 36.26. and wherein he
writes his laws, Heb. 8.10. And thus the Chaldee expounds it, the
close-place of the heart; which the Apostle calls, the hid man of the heart,
1 Pet. 3.4. or, if it be referred to the thing, it means the secrets of
wisdom, Job 11.6. the wisdom of God in a mystery, the hid wisdom, manifest by
the gospel, 1 Cor. 2.7. And thus the Greek applies it, saying, the unmanifest
and hid things of wisdom, thou have manifest to me. have made] or wilt make me
know; thus he rises by faith out of his sin, being taught wisdom of God.

Verse. 9. Thou will purge-me from-sin] or prayer wise, Purge thou me from sin;
or make me sinlesse. Expiate or purify-my-sin. Prayers are often made in this
manner; as with assurance that they shall be performed. See the note on Psalm.
17.8. eizop] or hissop, of the Hebrew Ezob, and Greek hissopos; an herb or
rice, growing out of the wall, 1 King. 4.33. appointed in the law, for to
sprinkle and cleanse with, Exodus 12, 22. Number. 19.6.18. Levit. 14.4.6.49 Hebr.
9, 19. and the sprinkling with it, was the last part of the purification of the
Unclean: here used to signify the full clensing from sin by the blood of
Christ. Hebr. 9.13.14. whether it were that herb which we now call eizop, or
no; is uncertain. wash me] another legal rite for purifying the unclean, Levit.
14.8. and 15.5.8.13.22. figuring our sanctification. Heb. 10.22. Tit. 3.5. Isa.
4.4.

Verse. 10. to hear joy] the joyful tidings of the forgivenes of my sins.
bones that thou have crushed] or brayed; nothing hereby the greatness of his
grief and affliction. Job 2.2.5. and 30.17. and 33.19.21. Psalm. 38.4.

Verse. 11. Hide thy face] that is, regard not my sins to visit them on me. See
the contrary, Psalm. 90.5. and 109.14.15. Ier. 16.17.

Verse. 12. firm spirit] a spirit ready prepared, steadfast, and certain. The
like is applied to the heart, Psalm. 112.7. and 57.8.

Verse. 13. from thy face] or from thy presence: This was an effect of Gods
utmost anger against sinners. 2 King. 24.20. Ier. 7.15. and 52.3. Genesis 4.16.
thy spirit of holynes] thy holy Ghost.

Verse. 14. the joy of thy salvation] the joy which proceeds from thy
salvation, and deliverance of me from sin. a free spirit] a voluntary,
freewilling spirit, or a princely, ruling spirit, as the Greek turns it. See
this word, Psalm 47.10. by a free, or princely spirit, he means, a spirit not
in bondage to sin: called elsewhere, the spirit of adoption. Romans 8, 15, 16.
whereby a man is made willing to obey the Lord; as Exo. 35, 21.

Verse. 16. from blouds] that is, from the guilt of my murder, in shedding the
blood of Vrijah: or, from my native corruption. See the note on Psalm. 5, 7.
shall shout] or shril, sing joyfully, and proclaim thy justice; such as Paul
speaks of Phil. 3, 9.

Verse. 17. shall open my lips] shall give me occasion to speak freely and
boldly. This phrase is used, Job 11, 5. and 32, 20.

Verse. 18. and I would give it] or, for else I would give it: as the Greek
turns it, if thou would sacrifice, I had given it.

Verse. 19. The sacrifices of God] that is, which please God. So the works of
God, John. 6.28. heart broken] to weet, with sorrow for sin. So Isa. 61.1. Luke
4, 18. Compare with this, Romans 12, 1. also Isa. 57.15. and 66, 2.

Verse. 20. Doe-wel] or Doe-good; deal-bouteously: it comprehends all things
needful for profit or pleasure. unto Sion] the Church, and place of publik
worship. See Psalm. 2.6. walls of Ierusalem] or, of Ierushalaim; as the Hebrew
writes it in the dual form, as it were, the double Jerusalem, to weet, the
higher and the lower; from, which the Apostle gathers an allegory, Gal.
4.25.26 This city was first called Salem, that is Peace; where Melchisedek was
King, Genesis 14.18. Hebr. 7.2. It was named also Iebus, Judge. 19, 10. of one
Iebusi son of Canaan, Genesis 10, 16. and was possessed by his seed, the
Iebusites, who held there in the fort of Sion, till David wann it from them, 1 Chronicles. 11.4.5.7. Here also was the mount Morijah, whereon Solomon built the
Temple. 2 Chronicles. 3.1. where Abraham offered his son Isaak: Genesis 22, 2. And
because there Gods providence was seen, he named the place Iehovah-jireh: Genesis
22, 14. which Iireh, put to the former name Salem, makes it Jerusalem: where
Peace is seen, and as the city was enlarged by taking in mount Iireh, or
Morijah, so is the name: yet sometime (though very rare,) it is called by the
first name Salem; as Psalm. 76.3. This city, God chose to be the place of his
publik worship, and there to dwell, 2 Chronicles. 7.12. Psalm 132.13.14. and
honorable things are spoken of this city, Psalm 87, 3. and of the walis
thereof, which in the Jerusalem from above, are of Jasper stone, with 12.
foundations, garnished with all manner precious stones, and having the names of
the Lambs 12. Apostles, Reve. 21.10.14 18.19. etc. the walls are called
Salvation, and the gates Praise, and they are ever in Gods sight; Isa. 60.18.
and* 9, 16. For the building up of these, does David here pray.

Verse. 21. Then shall thou accept] when the place is builded which thou have
chosen, For he forbad his people, to offer in every place, Levit. 17.5.8.9.
Deuteronomy. 12, 11, 13. and promised to accept their sacrifices on his holy mountain,
Ezekiel. 20, 40. Therefore Israel was in great affliction and reproach, when the
walls of Jerusalem were unbuilded, Nehem. 1, 3. and the peoples negligence in
building Gods house was sharply blamed. Hag. 1.2.4.8.9. and 2, 15. etc. of
justice] that is, sacrifices offered in faith. and according to the will of God.
See Psalm. 4.6. the whole-oblation] the Calil: a kind of oblation that was
wholly and every whit given up in fire unto God: and differed from the Ghnolah,
or Burnt-offring, which was only of beasts or birds, Livit. 1. whereas the
Calil was also of flour, called the Meat-offring, but burned altogether, which
the common Meat-offrings were not. Lev. 6.20.22.24. It was also of beasts. 1 Samuel 7, 9.

Annotations, Psalm LII.
Verse 2. DOeg, a servant of King Saul, and master of his herdmen. 1 Samuel 21.7.
the Adomite] that is, an Aedomite, or Idumean, as the Greek here translateth:
or a man of Adamah, a city in the tribe of Naphtali, Josh. 19, 36. of
Achimelech, David fleeing from Saul's tyranny, came for comfort to the house of
God in Nob, where Achimelech the priest administered. He gave unto David and his
company, the show bread to eat: armed him with the sword of Goliath the
Philistian, and asked counsel of the Lord for him. Doeg saw this, and told
King Saul: and after (when no other man would,) himself at the Kings
commandment, ran upon Achimelech and the Priests, and killed 85. persons; and
Nob the city of the Priests, he smote with the edge of the sword, both man,
woman, child, and beast. But Abjather Achimelechs son escaped unto David, and
told him: who thereupon made this Psalm. See 1 Samuel 21. and 22. Mat. 12 3.4. o
mighty-man] or Potentate, Doeg is thus named, for his chief place over K. Saul's
herdmen, 1 Samuel 12.7. and his killing of so Many Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel
22.18.19. in which mischievous prowess he vaunted himself.

Verse. 4. thinketh] or understand, why thinks thy tongue? that is, utters
the evils thought of, and praemediated. doing-deceyt] that is, as a rasour,
which in stead of cutting the hayr, cutteth the throat. Or it may be referred
to the man, o doer of deceyt, as the Greek says, thou have done deceyt.

Verse. 5. justice] that is, truth, or faithfulness.

Verse. 6. words of swallowing] or of devouring, of perniciousnes; that is,
pernicious words which cause destrution.

Verse. 7. destroy] or pull thee down: a similitude taken from buildings pulled
down: Levit. 14.45. applied here to man's overthow. So Job 19, 10. pull-thee
away] or take thee hence, as a coal of fire is taken with the tongs Isa. 30,
4. pluck thee] as the stakes are plucked up when the tent is removed. This is
applied to expulsion out of ones settled place; and is opposed to stablishing.
Deuter. 28.63. Prove. 2.22. and 15.25. root thee up] as a tree plucked up by the
roots: Jude. 12. So Job 31.12 land of the living] that is, this world. See
Psalm 27.13.

Verse. 9. the man] the mighty-man. It has reference to verse. 3. he was strong]
or, would be strong, and prevail; as Psalm. 9, 20. or, strengthened, and hardened
himself. his woefull-evill] or, in that he has, that is, his substance: the
Greek says, in his vanity.

Verse. 10. green olive] always fresh and flourishing. See Psalm. 37.35. Ier.
11, 16. aye] continually: see Psalm. 9.6.

Annotations, Psalm LIII.
Verse. 1. MAchalath] this seems to be a kind of instrument, much like
Nechiloth, Psalm. 5.1. It may also be enterpreted Sickness, or Infirmity. So in
the title of Psalm 88. an instructing-psalm] mas kill: see Psalm 32, 1. This
psalm is the same in effect, and almost in words with the 14. Psalm, some few
things changed. See the notes there.

Verse. 2. with injurious-evill] so the Greek says, with iniquities they are
made abominable. Or we may read, they have done abominable iniquity.

Verse. 4. every one is gone-back] Hebr. All he, that is, Each one, or whosoever
he be: in particular. In Psalm. 14, 3. he speaks generally, all is departed.

Verse. 6. where no dread was,] that is, no cause of dread. God gives to the
wicked, a trembling heart, Deuteronomy. 28.65. and a sound of fear is in their ears,
Job 15, 21. yea the sound of a leaf, chaseth them, and they flee when none
pursues. Levit. 26, 36. Prove. 28, 1. of him that besieges thee] or, that
pitcheth camp against thee: speaking to the godly man. The Greek tunneth it, of
men-lpeasers. had made them abashed] or, shall make abashed, (for it is a
promise, but set down as already performed, for the more assurance,) or, shall
put to confusion, to weet, them, or their counsel; as they would have
confounded thine. See Psalm. 14.6.

Verse. 7. who will give] a wish; O that there were given, etc. See the notes on
Psalm. 14.7. salvations) that is, full salvation, health, or deliverance.

Annotations, Psalm LIVE.
Verse. 2. ZIphims] or Zipheans, the inhabitants of Ziph, a city in the tribe
of Judah, Ios. 15, 24. by which there was a wilderness and wood, wherein David
hid himself when he fled from Keilah for fear of K. Saul: and was bewrayed by
these Ziphims unto the King once, and the second time; whereupon he made this
Psalm. See the history, 1 Samuel 23.14 15, 19. etc. and 26, 1, 2.

Verse. 5. strangers] the Ziphims, estranged from God, and alienated from his
people. Psalm. 58, 4. Isa. 1.4. So wicked men are called heathens, Psalm. 59 6.
In Psalm. 86, 14. this is repeated by David: but for Zarim, strangers, there he
calls them Zedim, proud. daunting-tyrants] terrible-dismayers, as Saul and
his retinue whose terror daunted many. See Psalm. 10, 18. seek my soul] my
life, to take it away: see the note on Psalm. 35 4.

Verse. 6. with them that uphold] or, among the upholders, the valiant-soldiers
that helped David in his battles: as 1 Chronicles. 12.1. etc. a like manner of
speech is Judge. 11, 35. thou art among them that trouble me.

Verse. 7. return the evill] to weet, which they intend against me. For the
righteous escapes out of trouble, and the wicked shall come in his stead.
Prove. 11, 8. suppress them] restrain them, or cut them off. Compare Psalm. 143,
12.

Verse. 8. With voluntarines] or, In freenes; that is, freely, liberally, of a
willing mind. Such sacrifices the law mentions, Levit. 7, 16.

Verse. 9. eye has seen] to weet, the work, or reward of God on mine enemies:
mentioned before in verse. 7. and as is expressed in Psalm. 91, 8. but often this
word is concealed, as Psalm. 35, 21. and 92, 12. or has viewed them with
delight; see Psalm 22, 18.

Annotations, Psalm LV.
Verse. 3. I Mourn] as one cast down with sorrow, making a doleful noise.
meditation] or, discoursing-talk, prayer, complaint. The Hebrew Siach,
signifies, any large discourse or exercise of the mind, or mouth; by busy
musing, talking, praying, commoning with ones self, or others.

Verse. 4. they bring] they make-move, or turn upon me inquitie; both by unjust
imputation of evil; and inflicting of punishment. For the word is used both for
iniquity and the punishment thereof; as is noted Psalm. 5.6. spitefully-hate
me] or, bear me a privy grudge, with a purpose to avenge; as the word
signifies, Genesis 27.41. and 50.15.

Verse. 5. is pained] or, trembleth-with pain. The word usually, means such
pain as a woman feels in her travel.

Verse. 6. horrour] or, amazed-quaking; when the senses are smitten with
astonishment. Therefore the Greek turns it, darkness.

Verse. 7. who will give] a wish, O that I had, or, O that some would give. See
Psalm. 14.7. wing as a dove] which being a fearful bird, flies fast to deserts
and rocks to hide it self, Ier. 49.28. wing, is put for wings: as fowl, for
fowls: Psalm. 8.9. that I might-fly] or, I would fly, and dwell, to weet,
somewhere, where I can find safety: but no place is named, to note the more
uncertainty.

Verse. 8. in the wildernes] the place whither the woman (the Church) also
flies in her persecution. Rev. 12.6.14.

Verse. 9. hasten safe escaping, etc.] or, I would speed my evasion, hasten my
deliverance. So David hastened his flight from Absalom; 2 Samuel 15.14. etc. from
wind of driving-forward] that is, from the driving (stormy) wind, that bears
all things away before it: meaning the storm of persecution: which forced him
to fly. The Greek turns it, from pusillanimitie, (or feeblenes-of spirit:)
intimating his inly fears driving him to this flight.

Verse. 10. Swallow] that is, destroy. It has respect to Dathan and Abirams
death; who with there company were swallowed alive into the earth, Number. 16.32.
as after in the the 16. verse here is explained. divide their tongue] for,
their tongues, that is, their language, counsels, plotts, etc. as at Babel
tongues were consounded; Genesis 11.7. So the tongues of Absaloms counselors
(that persecuted David) were divided. 2 Samuel 17.1-5-14.

Verse. 11. they compass it] to weet, violent-wrong and strife before
mentioned* which were as walls about the town: or they, that is, those wicked
persons.

Verse. 13. For, not an enemy] or, Because, it was no enemy that reproached me:
the Greek turns it thus, For, if an enemy reproached me, I could suffer it,
etc. for I could bear] Hebr. and I could bear it: and, being in stead of for,
or else, or otherwise; as in Psalm. 60.13. and 51.18. magnified] that is, spoke
great and boastfull words; see before Psalm. 35.26.

Verse. 14. But thou] Hebr. And thou; and, is often used for but; as Genesis 42.10.
Isa. 10.20. So in Greek, Romans 1.13. and often in the Psalms. esteemed off as
myself] or, according to mine order, or estimation: that is, my very equal, my
peer; of as much regard and worth as myself. The Greek turns it,
like-minded: a word which the Apostle uses, Phil. 2.20. my guide] or, my Duke,
my Chieftain, or master. So the Hebrew Alluph, is used generally for a Duke, or
Chief governor; Genesis 36.15. etc. and so the Greek turns it here. It is also
used in special, for a Chief-friend: Prove. 16.28. and 17.9. Mic. 7.5. which
sense is good in this place. Achitophel may be the man here aimed at, who was
one of David's princes, and friends, even his chief councellor, and became a
traitor. 2 Samuel 15.12.31. and 16.23. my known-acquaintance] or, my familiar,
whom I acquainted with my counsels, purposes, etc. as Psalm. 31.12.

Verse. 15. made-sweet secret-counsell] that is sweetly communicated our secret
affairs, each to other: or the mystery of godliness; whereof see Psalm. 25.14.
These were fulfilled between David and Achitophel, Christ and Judas the
traitor. with the societie] or in the concourse, company, frequencie; that is,
the multitude that hurtle, and run-together frequenting the publik assemblies.
And this was done with outward have and hurtling together, and with concordant
minds: wherefore the Greek here turns it unanimitie or concord. This word is
after used for a company, or concourse, Psalm. 64.3. and has the name of
tumultuous-running together, Psalm. 2, 1.

Verse. 16. Let death seize] or death shall seize; exact his due as a creditor
on his debtor. upon them] and, on him; as the Hebrew form notes, that is, on
every of them. to hell] to the place and state of death: Psalm. 16.10. as the
conspirators with Korah, went down quick into hell, Number. 16.30.33. in their
dwelling-place] or, in their sojourning-place; for this life is a pilgrimage;
where men are but guests. in their inmost-part] or, within them: in the midds
of them: meaning their heart.

Verse. 18. and at noon] These three times in the day, they used to pray in
Israel; as David here practiced, and Daniel afterward, Dan. 6.10. and at the
sixth hour, which was their noontide) Peter went to prayer, Act. 10.9.
meditate] or pray: see the note on verse 3. and Psalm. 77.4.

Verse. 19. from the battle against me] from the neer-fight (the conflict) with
me: the Greek says, from them that draw near to me, meaning his foes; as Psalm.
27.2. with many] or in many, were they with me. This is doubtful whether it be
meant of foes, or friends. If of foes, it may be resolved thus, for with many,
(with a great multitude) they were fighters with me. If of friends; it may be
understood of Gods Angels, that in a great-number were with him, pitching camp
for his aid, Psalm. 34.8. as Elishah said, many more are with us, than with them,
2 King. 6.16.17.

Verse. 20. even he that sitteth] that is, the eternal, that abides one and
the same, in counsel, power, etc. no changes] or alterations from evil to good,
and are not bettered. Thus the Chaldee paraphrast takes it. It may also be
meant, no alterations of their good estate; that is, no adversities, as Job
10.17.

Verse. 21. He sent forth his hand] that is, laid violent hands: as Nehem.
13.21. his peaceable-friends] or, them that were at peace with him.

Verse. 22. drawn-swords] that is, wounding, deadly. A like similitude Solomon
uses Prove. 12.18. There is that speaks words like the prickings of a sword.
See also Psalm. 57.5

Verse. 23. thy careful-burden] or thy gift, that is, whatsoever thou art
careful to have given thee, in all thy wants and need: or, whatsoever he
gives thee, to exercise thy faith and patience, by adversities. The Greek well
turns it, thy care: which phrase the Apostle uses 1 Pet. 5.7. Cast all your
care upon him, etc. Compare also herewith, Mat. 6.25. Luke 12.22. Psalm. 37.5.
sustain thee] or foster, and nourish thee, with food and all other necessaries.
The word though it be general, yet is often used for nourishing, Genesis 45.11.
and 47.12. 1 King. 18.4. So the Greek also turns it here. not give] that is,
not suffer, as Psalm. 16.10.

Verse. 24. men of bloods, etc.] that is, bloody men: as Psalm, 5.7. not live-
half] Hebr. not halfen their days; that is, not come to half the days of
their life: but be cut off by untimely death. So Job 15.32.

Annotations, Psalm LVI.
Verse. 1. COncerning the dumb dove] or, after the Hebrew phrase, the dove of
dumbnes, thus David speaks of himself, as of a dove subject to vexation among
the ravenous kites, the Philistims, which were far dis-joyned from Gods people
in faith; though near in habitation: as the Greek translate it, the people far
off from the saints. Or, Aelem, interpreted, dumbnes, may also be turned, a
Congregation, as in Psalm. 58.2. and so the meaning is, the dove of the
congregation of them that be far off, that is, of the Philistims. Michtam] a
Jewel, or golden Psalm: see Psalm. 16.1. took him in Gath.] David fleeing from
Saul to Achish King of Gath, and being there known: changed his behavior, and
fained himself foolish, and was so dismissed, 1 Samuel 21.10. etc. whereupon he
made the 34 psalm. After that, he fled again to K. Achish, and dwelt there with
him, he and and his company. 1 Samuel 27.1.2.3. etc.

Verse. 2. would shallow me up]; or breaths after me, to take and devour me.
The word Shaaph, is used for sooping in of drink; Job 5.5. also, of the wind,
or breath; Ier. 2. 24. and 14.6. and so for breathing after any thing to come
thereto. Job 7.2. Eccles. 1.5. So after in Psalm. 57.4. and 119.131. o most hye]
o high God, as the Chaldee explaineth it. The Greek says, from the height: we
may also translate it, in height, that is, highly, (prowdly,) they war against
me. But Marom, Height, is sometime Gods attribute, as Mic. 6.6. Psalm. 92.9.

Verse. 4. In the day] or, what day: that is, whenever I shall be afraid.

Verse. 5. what flesh can do] or, question-wise, what can flesh do unto me? by
flesh meaning, corrupt and weak man, as is expressed, verse. 12. The like title
is given to men, in Psalm. 78.39. Genesis 6.3. Isa 40.6.

Verse, 6. they greevously-wrest] they painfully-form, and frame my words (or my
matters:) perverting them, and giving them another figure or fashion. So the
Hebrew word is used for fashioning: Job 10.8. It signifies also, grieving,
Isa. 63.9.

Verse. 7. They draw together] or, gather, that is, convene and combine
together: or, gather wars, as is expressed, Psalm. 140.3. So Psalm. 59.4. my
steps] or my heels, or footsoles; after the manner of that old serpent. Genesis
3.15.

Verse. 8. cast down] or make descend, to weet, to the pit of corruption, as
Psalm. 55.24. or nether parts of the earth, as Ezekiel. 32.18.

Verse. 9. my wandring] my flitting to and fro: as from Saul's presence to Gath,
1 Samuel 21.10. from thence to the cave of Adullam, 1 Samuel 22.1. from thence to
Mispeh in Moab, verse. 3. then to the forest of Hareth in Judah. verse. 5. then
to Keilah, 1 Samuel 23.5. thence to the wilderness of Ziph, verse 14. thence to
the wilderness of Maon, verse 25. then to Engedi, 1 Samuel 24.1.2. and so from
place to place, as a partrich on the mountains: in all which David acknowledged
Gods care and providence toward him. in thy bottel] that is, reserve them
diligently. Bottels were used to put in milk and wine, Judge. 4.19. 1 Samuel
16.20. In the Hebrew there is an allusion to the former word wandering, called
Nod: a bottel being also in that tongue called Nod: having difference in
writting but none in sound; are they not in thy register?] or, in thy book and
reckning? meaning, doubtless they are. A question is often used for an earnest
affirmation or denial. As, when one Evangelist says, Do ye not err? Mark.
12.24. an other says, ye do err. Mat. 22.29.

Verse. 10 that God will be for me] or, with me; or, that God is mine: as the
Greek says, thou art my God.

Verse. 13. Thy vows are upon me] that is, I have thank-offrings ready,
wherewith to pay my vows which I made unto thee. A like phrase is in Prove.
7.14. Upon me are peace-offrings. See also how vows were paid with peace, or
thank offerings, Levit. 7.15.16. Psalm. 66.13. Or, they are upon me; that is, I
am hound to pay them. confessions] that is, sacrifices of confession, or
thanks: which were distinguished from vows, Lev. 7.12.15.16.

Verse. 14. have thou not also] meaning, surely thou have: as before in verse. 9.
and Psalm. 116.9. from sliding] or, from driving, from thrust; that is, from
sliding by the thrust of my enemies. to walk on] or converse: it notes a
continual and pleasing carriage of ones self acceptable to God: therefore the
Greek expresses it by well-pleasing; and the Apostle follows the like, in
Heb. 11 5. from Genesis 5.24. The meaning also of the phrase here is, that I may
walk: as that which one Prophet says, lashabeth, to dwell; 1 Chronicles. 17.4.
another says, leshihti, that I may dwell. 2 Samuel 7.5. the light of the living]
or, light of life: meaning the, vital, or lively light which men here on earth
do enjoy: and therefore in Job 33.28.30. this is opposed to the pit or grave;
and in Psalm. 116.9 it is called, the land of the living: whereof see Psalm.
27.13. This also respects the better light of life, mentioned by our Savior.
Ioh. 8.12.

Annotations, Psalm. LVII.
Verse. 1. COrrupt not] or, Bring-not to corruption, or perdition. This word
sometime imports corruption of faith and manners, by sin; as is noted on Psa.
14.1. sometime, perdition, or utter destruction, the punishment of sin; Psalm.
78.38.45. Genesis 6.13. and 9.11.15. it is a more vehement word than killing;
Ezekiel. 9.6.8. This word is also in the title of the 58.59. and 75. Psalms.
Michtam] a golden song. See Psalm. 16.1. from face] or, for fear of Saul. See
Psalm. 3.1. into the cave] Saul sought David in the wilderness of Engedi, upon
the roks, among the wild goats: and being there in a cave, David cut off the
lap of Saul's coat, and would not kill him. Which when Saul after perceived, his
heart relented for David's kindness, and he wept, acknowledging his fault. And
taking an oath of David that he should not destroy his feed; he ceased his
persecuting for a time. 1 Samuel 24. David, in that dissresse, made this Psalm.

Verse. 2. evils passeth] that is, every evil; or, the whol-heap of evils,
passes.

Verse. 3. perfectly acomplisheth] or performs, to weet, his grace, or his
promise; or my affairs, bringing them to a full end and stay. So Psalm. 138.8. A
like speech the Apostle uses, Philip. 1.6.

Verse. 4. He will send] or usually sends; to weet, his hand, as Psalm. 144.7.
or, his Angel, as Dan. 3.27. or, his mercy and truth, as after here follows.
swallow me] or, breaths after me. See Psalm. 56.2.

Verse. 5. Lions] called here Lebaim, hearty, stout, couragious-Lions; of Leb,
that is, heart, courage. As there be sundry sorts of Lions, so have they sundry
names; see Psalm. 7.3. Lions are mentioned in the scriptures, for the stoutnes
of their heart, 2 Samuel 17.10. boldness. Prove. 28.1. and grimnes of their
countenance, 1 Chronicles. 12.8. Saul and his courtiers are here Lions to David; as
were the Kings of Asshur and Babel after unto Israel, Ier. 50.17. the Roman
Emperor to Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17. and all wicked rulers, over the poor people,
Prove. 28.15. inflamers] boutefeus, meaning, fiery fierce, and raging persons,
that flamed with wrath and envy, and inflamed others. Of such, David did
complain to Saul, 1 Samuel 24.10. spears] Hebr. the spear; as charret, for
charrets, Psalm. 68.18. So Agur speaks of a generation whose teeth are swords,
and their jaws, knives, to eat up the afflicted out of the earth. Prove. 30.14.
See also Psalm. 55.22. and 59.8.

Verse. 9. Raise-up] or Stir up, to weet, thy self: or Awake. A word of
exciting; Judge. 5.12. Compare this with Psalm. 108.2.3. etc. my glorie] my
tongue, or soul. See Psalm. 16.9. and 30.13. at the day-dawning] I will rouse up
my self with my instruments. Or, I will raise up the day dawning, that is, I
will prevent the early morning, and be up before it; and so stir it up. A
figurative speech.

Verse. 11. That thy mercy] or, For, thy mercy is great, etc. Compare Psalm 36.6.

Annotations, Psalm LVIII.
Verse. 1. COrrupt not] Bring not to perdition, etc. See Psalm. 57.1. and 16.1.

V. 2. O assembly] O band, Company, or Congregation. The Hebrew Aelem, which
has the signification of binding as in a sheaf or bundle; seems here to be a
company that are combined, and confederate; or, it may be taken for the binding
of the tongue; that is, dumbnes; (as before in Psalm. 56.1.) and be read thus:
Of a truth, do ye speak dumb justice? or, mutenes of justice? As blaming them
for speaking and boasting of justice; when indeed justice was dumb, and opened
not her mouth; but they gave most unjust sentence. righteousnesses] or
equities: that is, righteous, plain, and equal things. Judges are called Gods;
Psalm. 82.6. and therefore should imitate God, who says, I do speak justice,
and declare righteousnesses. Isa. 45.19.

Verse. 3. ye weigh] or, ye balasse (of the Hebrew Palas,) ye peise. A
simulitude taken from the weighing of things which should be in even peise and
proportion; Prove. 16.11. so justice should weigh all words and works in
equity, and reward them accordingly: but these weighed out wrong for right.

Verse. 4. from the womb] that is, even from their mothers womb, the wicked are
estranged, (do alienate themselves) from God, justice, and virtue. This notes
man's natural corruption.

Verse. 5. Hot-poyson they have] or, Hot-wrath is to them. The Hebrew Chamath
signifies both poison, and rage, or fury; each of them being hot. The Greek
here turns it rage: the similitude of a serpent, rather gives it to be
poison; as Psalm. 140.3. Romans 3.13. Deuteronomy. 32.24. Though both are fitly applied
to the wicked, who like serpents in fury spit out their venim, and malice.
like-as] or, according to the likeness. It makes an exact comparison, as no
whit inferior to the serpent, which was the instrument to poison mankind. Genesis
3. serpent] or snake, called in Hebrew Nachash, of expertnes, for it was more
subtle than any beast of the field. Genesis 3.1. deaf asp] or, cockatrice; or the
serpent Python; called in Hebrew Pethen, which name notes (by the contrary)
the unperswadednes which this Psalm shows to be naturally in that beast. And
so the wicked have the title of Apeitheis, unperswaded, or Disobedient. Tit.
1.16. Ephesians. 2.2. stoppeth] Hebr. will stop, that is, usually stops his ear,
with his tail (as humane writers report) whiles the other he lays on the
ground; or is naturally deaf of it.

Verse. 6. the voice of charmers] which with words use to charm serpents, that
they can neither bite nor sting: as may be gathered both by this place, and by
Eccles. 10.11. Ier. 8.17. And these Charmers have their name in Hebrew of
whispering, or, soft, sweet and eloquent speaking Ps. 41.8. Is. 3.3. of him
that inchanteth] or that conjureth; conjoineth associateth. Inchanters have
this title here, and in Deuteronomy. 18.11. either, because by sorcerie they associate
serpents, making them tame and familiar, that they hurt not: or because such
persons use to bind and tie bands or things about the body, to heal or hurt by
sorcerie: or because, by their conjuring art, they have society and followship
with Devils. And that these evil arts are not here approved, the law shows,
Deuteronomy. 18. Only similitudes are taken from them, as elsewhere from the thief,
Rev. 16.15. the unrighteous Judge, Luke. 18.1.2.6.7. the unjust steward, Luke.
16. etc. of him that is made-wise] of the wised, that is, the learned, expert,
the cunning mage.

Verse. 8. refused as waters] that is, (as the Greek explaineth,) set at naught;
nothing esteemed; as waters that pass away and are not regarded. bend he his
arrowes] or, his arrow, (for the Hebrew has a double reading;) that is, every
of his arrows. And this may be meant of the wicked man, whose arrows bent at
the just, shall be broken: or of God, who shoots at the wicked, and cutteth
them off. be they as cut off] or, let them be as if they were cutt-off, or,
even as strawes: meaning it of the wickeds arrows: or if of their own persons,
let them be even cut off; as the Greek says, until they be weakened.

Verse. 9. snail that melteth] or, snail of melting; that is, a consuming snail,
which creeping out of the shell, casts her moistures, and so wastes to death.
Also with salt, a snail melts into water. let him goe-away] or, walk:
meaning, let him die. So where one Prophet says, to go with thy fathers; 1 Chronicles. 17.11. another says for it, sleep, that is, die. 2 Samuel 7.12. the
untimely birth] or sallen-birth, meaning, fallen before due time. So Job 3.19.
Ecces. 6.3.5.

Verse. 10. Ere that they shall perceive] or, Before men- shall understand, He
speaks to the wicked, of their sudden destruction. The meaning seems to be
this: Ere men shall perceive (or seel,) the pricking of your thorns, which are
thorns of the Bramble; God will as with a whirlwind destroy every of them. The
Bramble, or briar (mentioned also in Jorhams parable, Judge. 9.14.15.) has
strong and sharp thorns fit to resemble the evil counsels and deeds of the
wicked. The Hebrew Sir is used both for a thorn, and a pot, wherefore some here
translate pots; yet yiedling the same sense. The Greek turns it thorns. as
alive] or even quick, which notes subdain destruction; as Psalm. 55.16. let
them go down to hell alive: or their lively vigor, which made them fear no
destruction, as Psalm. 38.20. my enemies are alive, are mighty. This word is
sometime used for raw flesh, 1 Samuel 2.15. which some that translate the former
word pots, retain also here. even in wrath] or as with burning-anger. We may
also understand the word thorn, thus: as well the living thorn, (that is, fresh
and green,) as the thorn of burning, that is, the burnt, or sear thorn: because
on the bramble, some of the thorns are parched and dry, when others are young
and green. he will tempestuously whirl it away] God will take away, (or skare
away) it, that is, every thorn, as with a whirlwind, or tempest. For, as with a
whirlwind that passes, the wicked is no more. Prove. 10.25.

Verse. 11. his feet in bloud] This notes both the greatness of the slaughter:
and comfortable use which the just shall make hereof. Compare Psalm. 68.24. Isa.
63.3. Rev. 14.20.

Verse. 12. earthly-man] Hebr. Adam; put here for men in general: as son, for
sonns, 2 King. 21.6. with 2 Chronicles. 33.6. See also Psalm. 8.9. fruit] that is, a
comfortable reward; after their labors and troubles: As Heb. 12.11. Iam. 3.18.
God, that judge] or Gods judging. A mystery of the holy Trinity; used sundry
times in the scripture, as Gods caused me to wander, Genesis 20.13. he is holy
Gods, Ios. 24.19. he is living Gods, Ier. 10.10, though most commonly it is
otherwise. See the note on Psalm. 3.3.

Annotations, Psalm LIX.
Verse. 1. COrrupt not] or bring not to perdition. See Psalm. 57.1. Michtam] a
notable song: see Psalm. 16.1. to kill him] or, to do him dye. Saul having cast
his spear at David, and missed him; sent messengers after unto David's house,
for to keep (or watch) him, and to kill him. But his wife Michal (Saul's
daughter,) bewrayed the matter, let David down at a window, and so he escaped.
1 Samuel 19.10.11.12. Hereupon he made this Psalm.

Verse. 2. set me on high] set me aloft, where I may be safe, that my foes reach
not to me.

Verse. 4. not for my trespasse] to weet, against them: as elsewhere David
professes: 1 Samuel 24.10.12.

Verse. 5. without iniquitie] to weet, of me, or on my part, understanding it of
sin, as in the former verse: or without punishment (understanding it of the
enemies) they run. etc. Iniquity is often used for punishment: see Psalm.
69.28. or, without iniquity, (without blame in their own conceit: as in Ier.
50.7. their enemies said, we offend not, because thy have sinned, etc. to meet
me] meaning, for good, that is, to assist me. For sometime, meeting, is to
oppose and resist; Psalm. 35.3.

Verse. 6. to visit] namely, with punishment, as Exodus 20.5. See otherwise, in
Ps. 8.5. the heathens] that is, the wicked, mine enemies; called here heathens,
as elsewhere strangers; Psalm. 54.5. unfaithfully-work] or, disloyally-commit.
See this word, Psalm. 25.3.

Verse. 7. They return at evening] The enemies like hungry dogs, come at
evening, secretly to surprise and devour me. So wicked persecutors, are likened
to dogs; Psalm. 22.17. or it may be a prophecy of their extreme poverty, that
when others go to rest, they go about howling for meat. make noise as a dog]
barking, grinning, howling: as a dog for his meat; as after verse 15.16.
therefore the Greek turns it, they are hungry.

Verse. 8. utter] or well-out, as from a fountain; belch, or babble; as Prove.
15.2.28. This similitude is explained Ier. 6.7. As the fountain casts out her
waters, so she casts out her malice. swords, etc.] that is, they speak sharp
devouring words. See Psalm. 57.5.

Verse. 10. His strength] understand, O God that art his strength: And it may be
meant of himself, though he speak as of another; 1 because in the Hebrew there
is sometime a sudden change of the person, as Dan. 9.4. thou keep covenant
toward them which love him, that is, which love thee. Deuteronomy. 5.10. that love
me, and keep his commandments; for, my commands; Mic. 1.2. Hear ye people all
they, for all ye. 2. because in the last verse of this Psalm, it is repeated,
My strength. 3 also in this place, the Greek turns it, my strength. 4 because
in the next verse it is written in the Hebrew text letters, his mercy, but by
the vowels and margin, read, my mercy; which gives occasion to suppose the
like meaning here. Howbeit the sense is good if we understand it of the enemy,
Saul, thus. O God that art is strength, and have given him the kingdom, and
this power. For even wicked rulers have no power, except it be given them from
above; John. 19.11. And David much respected Saul, as Gods Anointed. 1 Samuel.
26.11. 2 Samuel. 1.14. I take-heed] or, will, I keep, observe: that is, wayt
upon thee: or keep thanks and praises for thee; as verse 18.

Verse. 11. God of my mercy] or, of his mercy, (as is observed on the former
verse:) or, my God of mercy; that is, my merciful God. prevent me] to weet,
with mercy, or blessings, as Psalm. 21.4. let me see] to weet, vengeance. Psalm.
54.9.

Verse 12. people forget] to weet, their sin, and punishment for the same. Dead
men are forgotten, Psalm 31.13. Eccles. 9.5. so their punishment whiles they
live, is the more memorable. make them wander] to weet, as vagabounds. The word
has reference to Cains judgment, who was not killed, but marked for a
vagabound: Genes. 4.14.15. Some punishments are less tolerable than death it
self. Rev. 9.6.

Verse. 13. The sin of their mouth, etc.] This sentence is difficult; for, 1. it
may have reference to the former, that my people forget not their sins and
punishments, but may tell of them: or, 2. it may respect themselves; let them
tell (or confess) their own sins and punishments, as did Cain, Judas, etc.
Genesis 4.13.14. Mat. 27.4. Or, 3. it may show the cause of their judgments, For
the sin of their mouth, etc. when they shall] or, and let them be taken. and of
cursing] or, for the curse, (the execration,) which may be understood of the
sin, according to Psalm 10.7. or, of the punishment thereof, as Deuteronomy. 30.7. of
false denayal] of their lying, or of their leanness: The original signifies
either; and may also be meant of sin, or the punishment thereof. let them tell]
or, they shall tell: speaking of his people, or of the wicked themselves.

Verse. 14. Consume] to weet, them: as Loose, Matthew. 21.2. for, loose him: Mark.
11.2.

Verse. 15. And they shall return] or, let them return, etc. a prophecy of, or
prayer for their punishment, answerable to their sin: as before verse 7.

Verse. 16. They, shall wander] or, make themselves wander, scatter themselves
abroad. The Hebrew has a double reading, to include both these: so 2 Samuel
15.20. See a like punishment of the wicked, Job 15.23. shall howl] or, shall
tarry all night, to weet, hungry and unsatisfied. The Hebrew signifies either
of these: but the Greek chooses the former, they shall murmur; howling for
hunger.

Verse. 17. sing thy strength] that is, praise with song, thy strength who can
defeat my foes, and protect me.

Annotations, Psalm LX.
Verse. 1. SHushan] that is, the six-stringed instrument, (or Lilie.) see Psalm.
45.1. Eduth] that is, the testimony; which here either belongs to the
music, now unknown to us: or means, the Psalm to be a testimony of David's
faith and thankfulness: or to be sung by the priests before the Ark of God in
the sanctuary; which Ark, and Tables of the covenant in it, was called the
Testimony. Exodus 40.5.20. Michtam] a golden song; see Psalm. 16.1.

Verse. 2. Aram] that is, the Aramites, or Syrians: the posterity of Aram, the
son of Shem, the son of Noah; Genesis 10.22. Mesopotamia] a country so commonly
called of the Greek, Act. 7.2. in Hebru: Naharajim, that is, of (or between)
the two rivers; meaning Tygris and Euphrates, between which this land lay.
Zobah] a country near the other, called of Greek writters Syria Saphena. Aedom
in the valley of salt] that is, the Aedomites, or, Idumeans in the salt valley;
a place in that country, whereof mention is also made 2 King. 14.7. twelve
thousand] in the history 2 Samuel 8.13. this victory is ascribed to David; in 1 Chronicles. 18.12. it is ascribed to Abishai, Joabs brother; and there also the
number is eighteen thousand. It seems that captain Abishai first set on them,
and slew 6000. after him followed Ioab and slew 12000. more, here mentioned. And
to David is this victory attributed, because he was King.

Verse. 3. cast us away] This complaint seems to have reference unto that
miserable state wherein Israel was, 1 Samuel 13.19, etc. and 31.7.

Verse. 4. the land quake] that is, change the state thereof; as Hag. 2.7.
compared with Heb. 12.26.27.28. also Ezekiel. 31.16. rive it] as at earthquakes,
rifts and chinks appear, this word is not elsewhere used in scripture. heale]
that is, repair: see the like phrase. 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

Verse. 5. astonishing-horrour] or reeling, giddines, meaning, they were drunken
with afflictions, which caused horror; as drunkenness with wine causes
giddines. This word is also used, Isa. 51.17.20.21.22.

Verse. 6. a banner] or ensign. This word is applied to the flag or ensign of
the gospel; Isa. 11.12. and 49 22. and 62.10. here, to David and his victory.
to be high-displayed] or, to use for a banner; which has the name of
lifting-high. the certain-truth] of thy promises.

Verse. 7. answer me] or us, me and my people. The Hebrew has both readings.

Verse. 8. shall divide] this means a full possession, after conquest. Ios.
1.6. and 13.7. Shechem] a city in the tribe of Ephraim, not far from Samaria,
Genesis 33.18. Ios. 20.7. Succoth] a city in the tribe of Gad, beyond the river
Jorden. Ios. 13.27.

Verse. 9. Gilead] and Manasseth: These were the utmost borders of the land of
Canaan without Jorden: which howsoever for a time they resisted David, and
clave to Ishbosheth, Saul's son: 2 Samuel 2.8.9, etc. yet were by Gods promise to
be subjected unto David. strength of my head] that is, my horns wherewith I
shall smite the people together, according to that promised blessing. Deuteronomy.
33.17. or, by head, may be meant headship, kingdom, or principality. lawgiver]
or statute-maker: a title of authority; therefore the Greek translateth here,
King. This also accords to the promise, made to Judah; Genesis 49.10. 1 Chronicles.
5.2.

Verse 10. Moab] the land, or, people of the Moabites, near to the land of
Israel; these were the posterity of Lot, Abraham's nephew; begotten by Lot in
his drunkenness, of his own daughters; Genesis 19.33.-36.37. they had now forsaken
the true God, and worshipped Baal-pehor and Chemosh: Number. 25.1.3. and 21.29.
were enemies to Israel, Number. 22. Judge. 3.12 and subdued by David; 2 Samuel 8.2.
washing pot] that is used for base services; as a vessel to wash my feet in.
over Aedom shall I cast my shoe] that is, I shall walk through, possess, and
tread down the land of Aedom (or Idumea,) whose inhabitants were Aedomites, the
posterity of Aedom, that is, Esau the elder brother of Jaakob, who profanely
selling his birthright for a mease of red pottage, (called in Hebrew Adom,) had
is name therefore Aedom, to the perpetual shame of him and his seed; Genesis
25.30. and 36.8.9. Heb. 12.16. as Iaakob, by faith obtained the glorious name
of Israel; see Psalm. 14.7. Palestina showt thou,] for this in Psalm 108.10. it
is said, over Palestina I will showt. So here it seems to be spoken in
mockage; intimating, that howsoever the Philistims dominered and triumphed for
a while, (as appears Judge. 10.7. and 13.1. 1 Samuel 4.10. and 31.1.) yet should
they by David be subdued; as came to pass, 2 Samuel 8.1. Therefore the Greek
turns it, the aliens are subject to me. Palestina (called in Hebrew
Pelesheth,) was a part of the land of Canaan, westward by the sea; inhabited by
the Philistims which came of the Casluhims, nephews of Mizraim the son of
Cham, the son of Noah; Genesis 10.14. These with the Caphtorims first inhabited
Caphtor, and from thence came to Palestina; Amos 9.7. where they drove out the
Avims, (the ancient inhabitants of the land) and dwelt in their stead, Deuteronomy.
1.23. And this seems to be the reason, why usually the Philistims are called
in Greek Allophyloi, Aliens, (of an other tribe, or nation;) because they were
not the first natural inhabitants.

Verse. 11. Who will lead] it is a kind of wish, as Psalm. 14.7. yet implying
also some difficulty, as the next verse here shows. of strong defense] that
is, defensed, or fortified: see Psalm. 31.22. This may be meant generally of all
strong cities that resisted David: or specially, of Rabbah the chief city of
the Ammonites: whereof see 2 Samuel 12.26.29, etc.

V. 13. from distresse] or from the distresser, the adversary. for vain] Heb.
and vain: but and, is often used for because, or for: as 2 Samuel 22.28. with Ps.
18.28. so Isa. 64.5.

Verse. 14. do valiantnes[ or valor, that is, valiant acts: according to the
prophecy Number. 24.19. or, make a power, that is, gather an army; as the phrase
is used, 1 Samuel 14.48. and in Ezekiel. 28.4. it is used, for gathering of wealth.
See the note on Ps. 18.35. will tread-down] in Greek, will set at naught, or
contemn.

Annotations, Psalm LXI.
Verse. 1. Upon Neginath] or with neginath, that is, the playing on the strings
of the instrument: meaning that this psalm was to be sung with music of
stringed instruments. See Psalm. 4.1.

Verse. 3. end of the land] the utmost border of the land of Canaan, where David
sometime was driven to abide. 2 Samuel 17.24. or, end of the earth. is
overwhelmed] or, covered over, to weet, with grief; (as the Greek explaineth
it,) whereby it faints; oppressed with sorrow. So Psalm. 102.1. and 77.4. and
107.5. and 142.4. lead thou] or, thou will lead: a speech of faith, from former
deliverances, as the next verse shows. higher then I.] which I cannot get up
on, unless thou lead me.

V. 4. a safe-hope] or, shrowding-place: where he hoped for, and had sound safe
shelter.

Verse. 5. I will sojourn] or, shall abide. See Ps. 15.1. in the secret] or, the
hiding place; called elsewhere the shadow of his wings. Psalm. 36.8. and 63.8.
See Ps. 91.1.-4.

Verse. 6. my vowes] that is, my prayers made with vows; as the saints used,
Genesis 28.20. Judge. 11.30.31. Hereupon, prayer is called in Greek Proseuche, of
pouring out vows to God. inheritance to them] or, given me the inheritance of
them; that is, such a blessing as usually thou bestowest on such as fear thee.

Verse. 7. Thou will add] or, prayerwise, add thou, etc. so the rest. daves unto
dayes] or, upon days; that is, a long life. of the King] meaning himself, and
specially Christ, who was to be his son after the flesh. See Psalm. 72. and
89.21 30.37.38.

Verse. 8. He shall sit] to weet, on the throne, that is, reign: or sit, that
is, dwell, or abide; as Psalm. 140.14. prepare] or, appoint, as his due and
ready portion. The Hebr. is Man, a name whereby that prepared meat was called,
which God gave his people from heaven. Psalm. 78.24.

Verse. 9. day by day] or, day and day; that is, daily. The Hebrew usual phrase
is, dayday; so Psalm. 68.20. Genesis 39.10. Isa. 58.2. Exodus 16.5. sometime, day and
day, as Hest. 3.4. 2 Cor. 4.16. So two two, Mark. 6.7. sor, two and two.

Annotations, Psalm LXII.
Verse. 1. OVer Ieduthun] that is, over Ieduthuns posterity, who was a singer in
Israel. 1. Chron. 25.3. or, to Ieduthun: See also Psalm. 39.1.

Verse. 2. Yet-surely] or, Only. It is an earnest affirmation, against some
contrary tentation or speech: and excludes also other things. So verse 3.5.6.7
10. keeps silence] or is silent, or still; that is, quiet, submisse, and (as
the Greek explaineth it) subject; the rebellious affections being tamed and
subdued. See also Psalm. 4.5.

Verse. 3. moved much] or, moved with a great moving. Persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but I perish not, as 2 Cor. 4.9. for God gives the issue
with the tentation. 1 Cor. 10.13.

Verse. 4. indeavour-mischief] this word is not found elsewhere in the scripture.
It denotes both a purpose in mind, and a thrusting forward in act of any
mischievous deed. ye shall be killed] or, will ye be murdered? violently-
killed. Some Hebrew copies varying a point or vowel, give it an active
signification, will ye murder? This the Greek follows; but the former sense
here sits best. a fense] wall, or mure: an other word then the former.
shooved at,] or thrust, namely, for to fall; as is expressed Psalm 118.13.
Hereby is meant a great and sudden ruin; as Isa. 30.13. Ezekiel. 13.13.14.

Verse. 5. from his high-dignitie] or excellency, whereunto he was exalted of
God. David speaks this of himself, (therefore the Greek has, mine honor;)
and blames them here for oppugning his dignity, as he did before in Psalm
4.3. they delight] or, readily-like of, and accept of a deceivable-lye. each of
them blesseth] Hebr. they bless: but his mouth, leads us to mind it of all
in general, and every one in particular. Compare Psalm. 5.10. Blessing is used
for fair words, and sometimes, flattery, Romans 16.18.

Verse. 6. my expectation] that is, my salvation expected, and hoped for: as
verse 2.

Verse. 9. in all time] that is, always. See Psalm 34.2. power out your heart]
that is, the desires of your heart; your prayers, with tears. A similitude
taken from pouring out of waters, as is expressed, Lam. 2.19. power out thy
heart like water before the face of the Lord. This was practiced in Israel,
when they drew water (from their heart) and powered it out (by their eyes)
before the Lord. 1 Samuel 7.6. A like phrase is of pouring out the soul, Psalm.
42.5. 1 Samuel 1.15.

Verse. 10. noble-man] hereby is meant men of all degrees, high and low. See the
note on Psam 49.3. in balances to mount up] or, to ascend: meaning that all
men together, if they be put in one balance, and vanity in an other, they
will mount up, that is, be lighter, than vanity it self. And the word hebel,
vanity, here used, denotes a vain light thing, as the breath of ones mouth,
or bubble on the water.

Verse. 11. in oppression] that is, in goods gotten by oppression, extorsion, or
fraudulent injury; this word imports guileful-wrong; as the next, more open
violent robbery. See also Isa. 30 12. become-not vayn;] that is, foolish and
vile in respect of others; and deceiving your selves. For to make-vain, is to
deceive, Ier. 23.16. and to wax-vain, is to be vile and come to nothing. Job
27.12. Ier. 2.5. Romans 1.21. powerful-wealth] riches; see Psalm 49.7. set not
the heart] that is, do not affect it, or carefully-regard it, but use this
world, as though you used it not, 1 Cor. 7.31. So, to set the heart, is to
regard, or, care for a thing. 1 Samuel 4.20. and 9.20. 2 Samuel 18.3. Exodus 7.23.
Prove. 22 17.

Verse. 12. Once] Hebrew One, meaning one time, as Exodus 30.10. and as is
expressed, Ios. 6.3. So twice, or two times. Though it may also be interpreted
one thing, two things, (as achath, is one thing, Psalm 27.4.) The Greek here
says, Once spoke God, these two things have I heard.

Verse. 13. to man] that is, to every-one; as this phrase is opened, Mat. 16.27.
Romans 2.6. Rev. 22.12. to his work] whether it be good or evil. See the like in
Prove. 24.12. Ier. 32.19. Job 34.11. Ezekiel. 7.27. 2 Cor. 5.10. Ephesians. 6.8. Col.
3.25. 1 Pet. 1.17.

Annotations, Psalm LXIII.
Verse. 1. Wilderness of Iudah] the forest of Hareth, 1 Samuel 22.5. or, the
wilderness of Ziph, 1 Samuel 23.14. both which were in the tribe of Judah.

Verse. 2. early] this notes care and diligence, Job 8.5. Hos. 5.15, Psalm.
78.34. Prove. 1.28. Luke 21.38. longeth-ardently] this word (which is here only
found) seems to denote an earnest, or hot appetite for meat; as the former
thirst is for drink. land of drought] that is, dry land, for so the wilds, or
deserts, were usually waterlesse. Psalm. 107.33.35. Exodus 17.1. Number. 20.1.2. Ier
2.6. weary] and consequently thirsty, which is caused by wearines. So Psalm.
143.6.

Verse. 3. the sanstuarie] or the sanctity, the holy place, so called for the
more revence, and because holiness became that house, Psalm. 93.5. for to see]
this may be meant of his present desire to behold it as in time past: or as a
continued speech of his passed comfort, when I did behold thy strength. thy
strength and thy glorie] both these were seen in the Ark of the testimony,
whence Gods oracles were uttered; Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89. called therefore the
ark of Gods strength, Psalm. 132.8. and also his glory, 1 Samuel 4 21.22. See
also Psalm. 78.61. and 105.4.

Verse. 4. land] commend, or glorify thee.

Verse. 5. So will I bless thee] to weet, when thou restorest me again unto thy
sanctuary: therefore also it may be taken for a prayer, So let me bless thee.
in my life] that is, whiles I live, here on earth. So Psalm. 49.19. and 104.33.
and 146.2. lift up my palmes] that is, pray: which was with this gesture of
holding up the palms of the hands toward heaven, as looking to receive a
blessing. So Job 11.13. Lam. 2.19. and 3 41. Psalm. 141.2. It is called also the
lifting up of the hands, Psalm. 28.2. and spreading out of the palms. Psalm.
44.21. and 88.10.

Verse. 6. fat] or sewet, and fatnes. Both words in the original signify
fatnes, and hereby is meant satietie of pleassres; so Ier. 31.14. Psalm. 36.9.

Verse. 7. when I remember] or If I remember, that is, so often as. The Hebrew im,
if, is here used for when; as also 1 Samuel 15.17. So in Greek, can, if, Mat.
6.22. is hotan, when, Luke 11.34. watches] or custodies, observations, which
were in the night, as is expressed, Psalm. 90.4. See the note there.

Verse. 8 helpfulnes] that is, a full help; as Psalm. 44 27.

Verse. 9. cleaves after thee] this notes love, constancy, and humility: and
union in the spirit: for as man and wife cleaving together, are one flesh, Genesis
2.24. so he that cleaves to the Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. And this
union comes of the Lord, who says by the Prophet, as the girdle cleaves to
the lomes of a man, so have I tied to me the whole house of Israel, that they
might be my people; Ier. 13.11.

Verse. 10. for tumultuous-ruine] that is, to bring my soul unto destruction, or
ruin. See this word Psalm. 35.8.

Verse. 11. They shall make him run-out] or, They (the enemies) shall power out
him, meaning, some principal, as Saul, or every of his foes: or He (every one
that seeks my soul) shall be made run out, that is, his blood shall be shed: as
waters, Psalm. 79.3. A like phrase is used, Ier. 18.21. Ezekiel. 35.5. hands] that
is, the edge, or force of the sword: as Job 5.20. Ier. 18.21. portion of foxes]
that is, left unburied, for foxes and other wild beasts to prey upon and
devour. So Saul's blood flowed out by the sword, and his company slain on mount
Gilboa, lay for a prey to the beasts, 1 Samuel 31. So Christ's enemies slain with
the sword, are eaten of ravenous fowls, Rev. 19.21.

Verse, 12. But the King] that is, I who am King by Gods anointing, 1 Samuel
16.12.13. and Christ the son of David. swears by him] that is, by God; by
swearing, meaning, Gods whole worship, whereof swearing was a part, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Isa. 45.23. and 65.16. Ier. 4 2.

Annotations, Psalm LXIV.
Verse. 2. PRayer] or meditation: see Psalm. 55.3. the Greek says, when I pray
unto thee.

Verse. 3. the secret] or secrecy, mystery, that is, Council, or assembly of
evil doers; that is, the malignant church; as the holy church, is called the
secrecy (or mystery) of the righteous, Psalm. 111.1.

Verse. 4. bent their arrow] that is, laid their arrow ready on their bended
bow. The like phrase was in Psalm. 58.8. See also Psalm. 11.2. bitter word] or
bitter thing; as the Greek explaineth it. So after in verse 6. an evil word,
or thing. See the note on Psalm 7.1.

Verse. 6. they tell, to hide] or, of hiding: that is, impart their counsel one
to another, how to hide snares. they accomplish an exquisite search] or, a
search searched-out, that is, a curious diligent search. The Greek translateth,
they are consumed searching out searches; in meaning that they spend both their
time and themselves, in searching out evils against the just. It may also be
read, we are consumed by the search searched out, meaning that in their
judgment, we cannot escape their snares. even the inmost] Hebr, and the
inmost; that is, whatsoever any man's wit and deep heart can find out: or, So
deep (is) the inward-part and heart of man.

Verse. 8. have been] or assuredly shall be: the time past being used for more
certainty; as in Isa. 9.6. And by have been, is meant the sure event and
accomplishment of Gods judgments on them; with the continuance of the same. As
the Hebrew word of being, signifies to come to pass, or have event, 1 Samuel
4.1. Job 37.6. and to continue to be, Dan. 1.21.

Verse. 9. they have caused them-every-one] Hebr. caused him: which being spoken
of many, as in this place, means them all severally, to one man. to fall,
etc.] or to stumble-down: signifying that Gods strokes should have effect to
overthrow them, by their own devises. betake themselves to flight] or shall
wander-about in their flight, which notes great fear and unstayednes, (which
the Greek therefore turns are troubled,) and is meant of the wicked, their
favorites.

Annotations, Psalm LXV.
Verse. 2. PRaise, silent wayteth] or, is silent, that is, submisly, and quietly
exspecteth thee: see Psalm 62, 2. or, Unto thee there is silence, and praise:
that is, silence looking to receive mercies, and praise for them being
received. The Greek says, praise becomes thee. The Hebrew also may imply the
same: though it be more significant.

Verse. 3. Thou hearest] or, O thou that hear; or he that hears; see after
in verse all flesh] that is, all sorts of men: as Genesis 6.12, Psalm. 145.21. Act.
2.17. This is a pr^phesie of all nations converted unto Christ.

Verse. 4. words of iniquities] or of perversities; that is, perverse things, or
words, unrighteous deeds. Words, are often put for things; as Psalm. 7.1.
mercifully-cover] or expiate, propitiate, purge away; and so cover, and
forgive. Of the Hebrew Caphar, which signifies to cover; the Cover of the Ark,
was called Caporeth, Exodus 25.17. in Greek hilasterion, that is, the
propitiatory, or mercy-seat; Heb. 9, 5. which name Paul gives to Christ, Romans
3.25; who is the true propitiation for our sins: 1 John. 2, 2.

Verse. 5. takest-neer] or causes to approach, to weet, unto thy self; the
Greek says, take unto thee. thy courts] or, court-yards, the open-places of
the tabernacle and temple. There was an inner court and an outward, 1 King.
7.12. one for the priests, another for the people, called the great court, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. 2 King. 21.5. good-things] so the Greek explaineth it well: the
Hebrew speaking of the good-thing, in general comprehending the whole store of
pleasures and commodities; as Deuteronomy. 6.11. Genesis 45.23. The like here follows;
holy, for all holy-things. And among good things, understand the principal,
the gift of the holy Ghost: as that which in Mat. 7.11. is good things; in Luke
11, 13. is called the holy Ghost.

Verse. 6. Fearful things, etc.] God out of his tabernacle, gave, oracles and
answers to his people, Number. 7.89. and from heaven he answered to their prayers,
against their adversaries; Psalm. 3.5. he answered always things reverent and
fearful. those far off by sea] whereby is meant, not only those upon the
sea, whose hope God is, Psalm. 107.23.28. etc. but those also that dwell far
asunder disjoined by the sea, as in slands, which wait for his law. Isa. 42.4.

Verse. 7. O he that stablisheth] or, which sets fast: it is a continued
speech to God, as the words before and after manifest, but the person changed
for more passion; like that in Job 18, 4. O he that tearest his soul, for O
thou that tearest thy soul. See the note on Psalm. 59, 10. mountains] hereby is
often meant, kingdoms, polities, and commonweals. Ier. 51.25. See Psalm. 30, 8.

Verse. 8. of the seas] waters signify peoples, Rev. 17.15. and seas, are the
huge armies of peoples, Ier. 51.42. All such, as well as the natural seas, God
asswageth, See also Psalm. 46.7.

Verse. 9 And they] or, when they fear. utmost-parts] or borders, to weet, of
the earth: as is expressed Isa. 41.5. the outgoings of morning, etc.] This may
be meant, both of the successive course of day and night; and of them that go
out at morning and evening, which be, men to their labor, and beasts for their
prey; as is showed, Psalm. 104.20.-23. and of people, inhabiting the East and
west parts of the world;

Verse. 10. plenteously-moystenest it] This sense the Greek yields: the Hebrew
also may be turned, when thou have made it to desire rain: or, and give it
the desire thereof. These things are spoken first of the land of Canaan, which
God visited and blessed continually, as Moses tells, Deu. 11.12. and
spiritually are meant of Christ's Church: Ezekiel. 36.8.9. etc. very-much] or, with
multitude, to weet, of riches (or good things.) the stream] or, brook, riveret.
See Psalm. 1, 3. and 46.5. of God] that is, with heavenly sweet and wholesome
streams of waters; not as Egypt, watered with man's labor, but drinking
waters of the rain of heaven. Deuteronomy. 11.10.11. The stream of God, may here be
taken for an excellent stream; as mountains of God, Psalm. 36.7. and the word
with is to be supplied. Compare herewith Joel. 3.18. Reve. 22.1. where a
fountain, and pure river of water of life, come forth from the Lords house and
throne. their corn] theirs, that dwell in thy land, and house: after that thou
have thus prepared the land, and watered it; thou, make it fruitful.

Verse. 11. setlest the furrowes] or, the clods, that is, with rain thou causest
the clods to lie close to cover the seed. The Hebrew words being indefinite, to
settle, etc, have like signification with the former. See Psalm. 49.15. and
77.2. and 103.20. make it soft] or meltest, resolvest; make it moist, with
drops-of-rain; that fall many. See Ps. 72.6. the bud] or branch, that which
springs up, out of the earth. This name is given to Christ himself. Isa. 4.2.
Zech. 3 8. and 6.12.

Verse. 12. year of thy goodnes] that is, thy good year: which thou honor
with singular blessings. So God commanding the sabbath year, promised, to
bless the sixth year, that it should bring forth fruit for three years, Levit.
25.20.21. But the good year, is that acceptable year of the Lord, which Christ
preached, Isa. 61.2. Luke 4.12. thy paths drop] the clouds which are Gods
charret, Ps. 104.3. in which water is bound, Job 26.8. and from which rain is
dropped, to cause the earth to fructify 1 Job 36, 28. and 38, 26, 27. And
paths here, are properly such tracks, as are made by charrets wheels.

Verse. 13. of the wildernes] where there is no man; Job 38, 26. that grass may
grow for beasts. Psalm. 104, 14. Though sometime shepherds there feed their
flocks; as Exodus 3, 1. girded with gladnes] rejoicing for the store of grass
that grow on them on every side. Things are figuratively said to be glad, when
they attain unto, and abide in their natural perfection: so light is said to
rejoice, when it shines clear, and continually; Prove. 13.9.

Verse. 14. the pastures] or fields, are clothed, that is, covered, abundantly
stored with flocks of sheep. For fields, the Greek puts ramms of the sheep:
the Hebrew Carim, signifies both. Isa. 30, 23. and 34.6. but the grammatical
construction, and coherence, here shows it rather to be fields or pastures.

Annotations, Psalm. LXVI.
Verse. 1. SHout] to weet, with a joyful, or, triumphant noise: see Psalm.
41.12. all the earth] or all the land; that is, the inhabitants thereof. So
verse. 4. and Psalm. 98.4. and 100.1. and often in the scripture.

Verse. 2. put glory,] in Greek, give glory to his praise; that is, make his
praise glorious, and honorable. A like phrase is in Ios. 7.19. put glory, to
Jehovah, that is, give him glory.

Verse. 3. fearful is every etc.] or fearful art thou in thy works. One word
singular, and another plural, means exactly, all and every one: as Psalm 57,
2. and 62.5. falsly-deny] or, lie, that is feghnedly submitt. See Psalm. 18.45.

Verse 4. Let all] or, All shall.

Verse. 5. in his doing] or, in practice, Gr. in counsels. See Psalm. 9, 12.

Verse. 6. sea to drie-land] the red sea God turned to drie-land by a strong
east wind, dividing the waters, that Israel might go through it; Exodus
14.21.22. through the river,] Jorden, when the banks thereof were full, was
dried; the waters stood still on an heap, till all the people went through it.
Ios. 3.13.14.-17. did we rejoyce] he teaches them to apply their fathers
deliverances to themselves; for all things forewritten, are for our learning
and use, Romans 15, 4. A like speech another Prophet uses; he found him in
Bethel, and there he spoke with us, Hos. 12, 4.

Verse. 7 espie] that is, watchfully view in the nations; that is, (as Solomon
expounds it) in every place, both the evil (persons) and the good, Prove. 15,
3. the rebellious] or, the off-fallen, froward, and refractarie persons; which
exasperate, and provoke the Lord to bitterness; as the Greek here translateth.
exalt] or, be exalted, (puffed up) in themselves.

Verse. 8. peoples] tribes of Israel: called also peoples. Act. 4, 26. make to
be heard] or, cause (men) to hear; sound forth, audibly: see Psalm. 26.7.

Verse. 9. That puts our soul life] that is, first gives, then preserves
life, and finally restores our dead souls unto life. Saving from dangers of
death, Psalm. 30, 4. quickening them that were dead in sins. Ephesians. 2.1. given
our foot to be moved] that is, suffered out estate to be changed, to our ruin.
So Psalm. 38, 17. and 121.3. See Psalm. 15.5.

Verse. 10. as silver is tried] Hebr. as to try silver: and this means, sore
afflictions; as at large is showed, Ezekiel. 22, 19, 20, 21, 22. wherefore when
God mentions lesser trials, he says, Lo I have tried thee, but not as
silver. Isa. 48.10. Hereby also is meant. a purifying from dross and
corruption by afflictions. See Mal. 3, 3. Zac. 13, 9. 1 Pet. 1, 7.

Verse. 11. streightnes,] or afflictions, as the Greek also turns it, but
hereby a streight-chaine or wringing-girt may be meant; such as burdens are
tied with to beasts backs.

Verse. 12. upon our head] to use us as beasts for to carry them: it means
servile subjection. See the like in Isa. 51, 23. we came into five and into
waters] that is, passed through afflictions of sundry sorts; Psalm. 32.6. Ezekiel.
15.6.7. Also in Number. ^1.23. those things are said to come into, or pass
through) fire which would abide the same, without being consumed; as metals.
That sense has also use here, as after is showed an abundant-place.] or, a
moist, a-wel-watered-land: where we may drink our fill. The Greek calls it a
refreshing, which well fitteth with the comforts of the gospel, as Act. 3.19.

Verse. 14. opened] that is, uttered, or promised, distinctly and seriously; as
the Greek says; distinguished: for the mouth being opened in vows, signifies
that they may not be called back. Judge. 11.35.36. distress upon me] or in my
distress. so Psalm. 18, 7. and 59, 17.

Verse. 15. marrowed ramms] that is, fat and lusty. The word ramms is in Hebrew
set after the word incense: which may therefore be read, the incense (or
perfume) of ramms; meaning the fat which was burned on the altar. And so it may
intend peace offerings, as before he mentioned burnt-offerings. See Levit.
3.9.10.11. compared with Levit, 1.10.-13. make ready] or offer, as the Greek
interprets it. The Hebrew word to make, or do, is used for dressing, or
making ready of meat, or sacrifices, Genesis 18.8. Judge. 6.19. Exodus 10.25. and
29, 36. Levit. 16.24. and 22.23. beeves,] the Hebrew bakar is the Beef
generally; one for many, as in Psalm. 8, 9. These were the principal
sacrifices, Levit. 1.2.10.

Verse. 17. under my tongue] that is, with my tongue: or it may be meant of the
heart and inward parts, which are under the tongue.

Verse. 18. If I had seen in my heart] that is, had regarded with it: so to see,
is to behold with a corrupt affection Job 31, 26. Thus God cannot see evil,
Habak. 1.13. would not have heard.] for, God hears not sinners: John. 9, 31.
nor hypocrites, Job 17.8.9. Prove. 15.29.

Annotations, Psalm LXVII.
Verse. 2. FAce to shine] or, to be light, that is, cheerful and favorable.
See Psalm 47. and 31.17.

Verse. 3. That they may know], meaning men, indefinitely: or, that thy way may
be known. Gods way is generally his administration in the world: specially his
gospel. Act. 18.25.26. as his salvation, is Christ, Luke 2.30.

Verse. 4. shall confesse] or. let them confess: and so after.

Verse. 7. The earth] or land of Canaan, the seat of Gods Church: whose
fruitful increase God promised in the Law. Levit. 25.19. and 26.4. and the
prophets apply it to the spiritual graces of the gospel. Ezekiel. 34.27. zech.
8.12. Isa. 45.8. and our land or earth, is our hearts regenerate, to bear
fruits to the Lord. Mat. 13.19.-23.

Annotation, Psalm LXVIII.
Verse. 2. LEt God arise] or, stand up. By God, here is meant Christ our Lord;
for of him in this psalm interpreted by the Apostle. Ephesians 4.8, 9 10 This
entrance is taken from Moses, Number. 10.35. where when the host of Israel rose up
from mount Sinai to journey toward Canaan, the Ark of the covenant of the Lord
went before them three days journey, to search out a resting place for them.
And when the Ark went forward, Moses said, Rise up Jehovah, and let thine
enemies be scattered, etc. where Moses respected not only the Ark (the figure
of Christ:) but the promise of God, Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep
thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place which I have prepared; beware
of him, and hear his voice, etc. for my name is in him, etc. Exodus 23.20.21.
This was the Angel of the covenant; Mal. 3, 1. the Angel of Gods face, or
presence, which saved the people, Esa. 63.9. even Christ, whom they tempted in
the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.9. in whom God was, 2 Cor. 5.19. and who himself is
God over all, blessed for ever, Amen, Romans 9.5. David applies these things to
his own time and action of bringing home the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 13. and prophesies
also of things to come: as Act. 2.30.31.

Verse. 4. let them joy] to weet, inwardly, with delight (as the Greek
explaineth it:) as the former word signifies, outward joyful carriage, and
exsultation.

Verse. 5. make-an-highway] or, exalt: but that this is meant of a way, or
causy; first the Hebrew word, Sollu, naturally bears, as Isa. 62.10. and
57.14. secondly. the Greek version hodopotesate, make-away, confirms it;
thirdly, the scope of this place shows it; compared with Isa. 40.3. where the
Voice in the wilderness cries to prepare the way of the Lord Christ. Mat. 3.2.
deserts] places where things are mixed and confused, as the word Ghnaraboth,
properly signifies; So Ghnarabah is a desert or wilderness, Isa. 40.2. and
there is a declaration of this place, that valleys should be exalted, mountains
debased, crooked things made straight; and rough-places, smooth. Isa. 40.3.
Luke 3.5. The Greek version here, epidusmoon, means also the same; for though
the word be ambiguous, and signifies the west-parts; yet is it often used for
the deserts, or plains of the wilderness. Number. 33.48.50. and 36.13. Deuteronomy. 1.1.
Josh. 5.10. 2 Samuel 4.7. in Iah his name] or, by Iah his name, to weet, sing and
praise him. Iah, is the proper name of God in respect of being, or existence,
for he is of himself, Exodus 3.14. gives to all life, and breath, and all
things, and in him, we live, and move, and have our being; Act. 17.25.28. It is
the same in effect with Jehovah; but more seldom used; of which see Psalm. 83.19.

Verse. 6. a jugde] that is, a defense, and avenger of their wrongs. See Exodus
22.22.23.24. Isa. 1.17. Iam. 1.27. mansion of his holines] or, his holy
mansion, whereof see Psalm. 26.8.

Verse. 7. the solitarie] them which are alone, or desolate: meaning without
children, in house] that is, gives them children. See Psalm. 113.9. in chaines]
or, in conveniences, that is, in convenient and commodious sort; or, into sit
(and commodious) places. The Greek says, in fortitude. dry-land] or,
barren-ground, named in the original of the bleaknes, or whitenes, as whereon
nothing grows. Sinai it self] or, this Sinai, to weet, quaked, when God came
down upon it to give his law: see Exodus 19.16.18. Hebr. 12.18. These words
David borrowed from Deborahs song, Judge. 5.4.5. Sinai is a mountain in Arabia,
Gal. 4.25. in the wilderness through which Israel passed, Exodus 19.1. It was
called also Horeb. See Psalm. 106.19.

Verse. 10. rain of liberalities] that is, a liberal, plentiful, free and
bountiful rain, proceeding of Gods free grace. So elsewhere is mentioned, the
rain of blessing; Ezekiel. 34.26. Spiritually, this means the doctrine of the
Gospel; Deuteronomy. 32.2. Isa. 45.8. Hos. 14.6.7. and 6.3. Heb. 6.7. See Psalm. 65.10.
shake-out] or shed and sprinkle abroad as with the waving of the hand, the
Greek turns it, separate. God divides the spowts for the rain. Job
38.25.26.28. and 37.6. when it, etc.] Hebr. and wearied, that is, dry, fainting
for want of water: as Psalm. 63.2.

Verse. 11. Thy company] the host of Israel, seated in Canaan. The Hebrew word
Chajah, signifying Life, is used for all living creatures, commonly beasts, and
among them wild beasts, in which most life appears, Genesis 1.24.25, etc. also
for fishes, Psalm. 104.25. Applied to men, it means, a Company, or society,
either good, as in this place, or evil, as after in verse 31. It is used for an
host of men* as 2 Samuel 23.13. in stead whereof, in 1 Chronicles. 11.15. is written
Machaneh, a Camp, or Leaguer. The Greek here turns it Zoa, Living-wights:
which word is used in Rev. 4.6. and 5.8.9, where mystical speech is of Christ's
Church. prepare] to weet, thine inheritance, (or, fruitful blessings therein,)
for the poor, (or afflicted;) that is, the Church. This every man was to
acknowledge, when he brought the first fruits unto God, See Deuteronomy. 26.5.6.-9.10.

Verse. 12. will give the speech] or, gave the word; but it may be taken for a
prophecy. And by giving the speech (or word,) is meant, either the ministering
of matter and speech unto them; or the confirming and performing of that which
they have spoken. So Paul desired the prayers of the Churches, that speech
might be given him, Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3: of those that publish glad-tidings]
or, (applying it to Christ's time) of the Evangelists, of the souls that preach
the Gospel: or, carry good news. Such are in armies, they that carry tidings of
victory, as 2 Samuel 18.19. Such in Christ's army, are the preachers of the
gospel, Romans 10.15. The original word here mebassroth, is of the feminine
gender, usually understood therefore of women, such as sung songs of victory,
as Exodus 15.20. 1 Samuel 18.6 7. but the scripture no where calls such, the
publishers of glad-tidings: we may therefore understand it of men; for 1. as
Solomon called himself Koheleth, that is, a Preacher, (in the feminine gender,)
or a preaching-soul, Eccles. 1.1. so may any Evangelist in like sort be called
Mebassereth. Also, 2. the Greek version makes it the masculine, the Lord will
give the word (to is euaggelizomenois) to the men that euangelize. And, 3. in
Isa. 46.9. such are spoken to in this sort and form, as did preach good tidings
to Sion and Jerusalem; which seems to be principally meant of the Apostles.
4. The Chaldee paraphrast also applies it to men, though past, as to Moses and
Aaron. to the great armie] meaning the Church; of whose warfare, see Isa. 40.2.
Rev. 19.14. 2 Cor. 10.4. or if we refer it to the Evangelists, there is a great
host of them: or to the tidings that they tell; it is, of much war. The
Chaldee referrs it to Moses and Aaron that euangelized Gods word to the great
hosts of Israel. shall flee] this is meant of Christ's enemies, as in verse. 2.
though here is another word, signifying a wandering flight, seeking where to
hide them; as Rev. 6.15. So five Kings fled from Joshua, and hid them in a
cave; Ios. 10.16. See also Josh. 11.1.4.5.8. she that remaineth] Hebr. the
mansion (or habitation,) that is, the woman, or women, who go not out to war,
but keep at home, as Judge 5.24. Tit. 2.5. divide the spoile] this is a
blessing, Isa. 53.12. done after victory, Judge. 5.30. Luke 11.22. and with
joy, Isa. 9.3. For spoils are used to denote riches, Prove. 1.13. and 31.11.
and 16.19.

Verse. 14. between the pot- raunges] or, between the two-banks, or rewes, to
weet, of stones, made to hang pots and kettels on, in the camp or leaguer:
places where skullions lie, and so are black; meaning hereby affliction and
misery; as on the contrary by the doves silver wings, is meant prosperity. Or
we may understand it of the two bounds and limits, of the enemies, where they
are continually assailed, or endangered. And this the Greek seems to favor,
turning it, [ana meson toon cleroon] amidds (or between) the inheritances; even
as they also translate the two bardens, or limits, between which Isachar
couched, Genesis 49.14. which tribe had the Philistians at one end, and Ammonites
on the other, that vexed them. with yelow gold] understand again, decked with
yelow (or greenish) gold; that is, of a golden color, and green, as the
original word imports, Levit. 13.49. and 14.37.

Verse. 15. the Almighty] or Alsufficient; that is, God; named in Hebrew
Shaddai, of his power and sufficiency to go through with all things; and for
wasting and destroying his enemies, as at the drowning of the world. To this
the Prophets have reference, saying, that shod, (destruction,) shall come from
Shaddai, (the Almighty.) Isa. 13.6. Joel 1.15. scattreth] or spreadeth-abroad,
having discomfited the kings, his enemies, in that his inheritance, verse.
10.11. So spreading, is used for scattering, Zach. 2.6. it shall be snow-white]
or thou shall be snowy, speaking to the Church; or of it. Whitenes denotes,
victory, joy, glory: Rev. 2.17. and 3.5. Luke 9, 19. and whitenes as snow, is
a resemblance of purifying from sin. Psalm. 51.9. Isa. 1.18. Tsalmon] a mount of
Samaria, in the tribe of Ephraim near the city Sichem, as appears, Judge.
9.47.48. situate in the heart of the country. Tsalmon signifies shady, or
dark, and so it seems this mount was, with caves, glinns, and trees that grew
thereon: but with snow upon it, was made lightsom. So to be snow-white in
Tsalmon, is to have light in darkness, joy in tribulation.

Verse. 16. A mount of God] that is, high, and full of divine blessings; for
Basan was a fat and fruitful mountain. See Psalm 22.13. and 36.7. an hilly
mount] or, a mount of hilloks, or knobbs; having many tops. This seems to be
a comparison; Basan is a goodly large mountain; but this Sion does excel it;
for here God dwells with his Angels, etc.

Verse. 17. leap ye] insult ye proudly; or lay ye wait for. The original
Ratsad, is no where found in Hebrew, but here only. In Arabik, it signifies
to epsy, and he in wait, for the hurt of others: which agrees well with the
argument here. for his seat] to dwell in it. The Lord chose Sion, and desired
it for his seat: this shall be my rest for ever. Psalm. 132.13.14. So, the Lamb,
Christ, is on mount Sion* Rev. 14.1.

Verse. 18. Gods charret] which he uses for his own service, for defense of his
Church, and destruction of his foes: see Psalm. 18.11. Charret is put for
charrets, (as ship. 1 King. 10.22. for ships, 2 Chronicles. 9.21.) or to note out
the joint service of all the Angels, as of one. twise-ten-thousand] or
double-miriads, that is, innumerable: in the Greek, ten-thousand-fold: meaning,
innumerable. Angels] The Hebrew Shinan, translated Angels, is not elsewhere
found in scripture. It seems to come of Shanah to second; as being second, or
next to God; the cheef Princes, Dan. 10.13. as those in place next Kings, are
called the second unto them, 2 Chronicles. 28.7. Esth. 10.3. If we referr it to the
number, we may turn it, redoubled, or manifold. If to the charrets, and derive
it of, Shanan, to sharpen, it may note a kind of charrets with sharp hooks,
used in wars as many humane writers record, 2 Maccab. 13.2. Statius, lib. 10.
Thebaid* Macrobius, etc. How ever the word be doubtful, the meaning seems to
be of Angels; which the Greek here translate cheerfull-ones, as of the Hebrew
Shaan, to be in tranquillity, and joy: and the Apostle seems to have
reference to this place, where he mentions mount Sion, the celestial
Jerusalem, and the company of ten-thousands of Angels, which now we are come
unto in Christ. Hebr. 12.22. And Angels have appeared like fiery charrets, 2
King. 6.17. with them] or in them. as in Sinai] as God was in Sinai, with
ten-thousands of holy ones, when he gave the fiery law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. so is he in
Sion, with ten thousands of Angels; Hebr. 12.22. Here the words, as in, seem
necessarily to be supplied; or the word Lord, as, the Lord of Sinai; with like
meaning as before.

Verse 19. Thou art ascended, etc.] Thou (Lord Jesus) art gone up, to the
highest heaven, having first descended to the lowest earth; So the Apostle
teaches us to understand this place, Ephesians. 4.8.9. to on high; or, to the
high-place: see Psalm. 7.8. led-captive] or, captived, a captivity, that is, a
company of captaves; a prey, of people taken in war. See the like phrase, 2 Chronicles. 28.5.11. Judge, 5.12. Number. 21.1. Deuteronomy. 21.10. So provertie, is used for a
company of poor people. 2 King. 24.14* Christ's enemies. Satan, sin, death,
hell, etc. were by him subdued, Colos. 2.15. his elect captived by Satan, were
by him redeemed: of whom also this may be meant, as Psalm. 126.1.4. have taken
gifts unto] that is, have given, (and distributed) gifts among men. At Hebrew
phrase often used, as Take me a sword, 1 King. 3.24. that is, give, or bring it
me. Take her me to wife, Judge. 14.2. Take me an offering, Exodus 25.2. Take me a
little water, 1 King. 17.10. that is, Give. Rightly therefore does the Apostle
turn this in Greek, given, Ephesians. 4.8. and the next words ba-Adam, is unto men,
as Paul explaineth it, or among men, as Ier. 49.15. And the gifts, are the
Ministers of the gospel, given for the good of the Church, Ephesians. 4.11.12, and
also the rebellious] or disobedient, to weet, thou have led captive. They that
continue rebellious are subdued to destruction, Psalm 2.9. Isa. 11.4. others by
conversion, as Saul, breathing (...) threatenings and slaughter, was by Christ
subdued, Act. 9. And after spoke of himself and others, we our selves were in
times past unwise, disobedient, etc. but when the bountifulnes and love of God
our Savior toward man appeared, he saved us etc. Tit. 3.3.4.5 to dwell]
understand, in Gods mount, as verse 17. or, with Iah God, meaning it of the
captives. Or, that thou O Iah God, may dwell, to weet, in men's hearts by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. or in the Church; which by those thy gifts (the ministers)
is builded as a spiritual house for God to dwell in. 1 Cor. 3.9.10.16. 1 Pet.
2.5. So God dwelt among the Israelites, Number. 5.3. and 35.34.

Verse. 20. day by day] or daily: see Psalm. 61.9. lodeth us] to weet, with his
blessings, or gifts, verse 19. or with afflictions, wherewith the saints are
burdened, and yet bless him for his comforts in them. 2 Cor. 5.4. and 1.3.4.^
and 6.4.-6.

Verse. 21. Our God, etc.] or God to us, is a God for salvations, that is, all
manne^ health, help, and deliverance; that fully-saveth. Iehovih] so the name
of God i^ written usually, when Adonai, Lord, next follows it; as here and
Psalm. 109.21. o^ goes before it, as Genesis 15.2. having the vowels of Aelohim
God, and so is by the Jewe^ pronounced; as othertimes having the vowels of
Adonai, it is so pronounced* Lord. So, for Adonai, Iehovih, 2 Samuel 7.18. is
written Jehovah Aelohim, 1 Chronicles. 17.16. See Psalm. 83.19. yssues,] or passages,
that is, ways and means, of death, or to death: meaning, that he has many
ways to bring his enemis to death, and to deliver his people out of it. For,
he has the keys of death; Rev. 1.18. he kills, and gives life, wounds
and heals, and none can deliver out of his hand. Deuteronomy. 32.39. So, yssues of
life, Prove. 4.23.

Verse. 22. hairie scalp] Hebr. the crown (or scalp) of hair: meaning, open and
inevitable judgment on the chiefest and most fie^ce enemies. guiltinesses]
guilty-sinns: impieties. So Psalm. 69 6.

Verse. 23, I will bring again] or, will return, reduce, to weet, thee my
people; as I brought thee from the peril of Ogh in Bashan, Number. 21.23.35. and
of Pharaoh at the red sea, Exodus 14.22.23.28.29. Former deliverances are often
by the Prophets applied to the times and works of Christ. See Isa.
11.1.11.15.16. and 51.10.11. gulfs] or deeps, bottoms: see Psalm. 69.3.

Verse. 24. That thy foot may embrew] that is, he embrewed: or, That thou may
embrew thy foot. It is the same word, which before in verse 22. is Englished
wound, and signifies, to make gore bloody; and is hereby consequence put for
embrewing, or dipping in gore blood; as the Greek turns it, That thy foot may
be dipped. And this notes a great slaughter of the enemies: as the dipping of
the foot in oil, Deuteronomy. 33.24. means, abundance thereof. in blood of thine
enemies] or, which flows from thine enemies from him: that is, from each of
them, or from the greatest of them, Antichrist: or of the same blood. Compare
herewith; the slaughter of Christ's enemies, Rev. 19.17.18.-21.

Verse. 25. They have seen] that is, Men have seen, (not naming any special
persons) thy goings, or ways, and administration. in the] that is, which art
in the sanctuary, or, into the sanctuary referring it to David's carrying of the
Ark into the holy Tent. 1 Chronicles. 13.6.8. and 15.28.

Verse. 26. beating-on-timbrels] or on tabers; to weet, with the hand: so in the
triumph at the red sea, Marie the sister of Aaron, and all the women after her
with timbrels and pipes, sung praise to God. Exodus 15.20.21. So at the
slaughter of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 18.6.7. and at the slaughter of the
Ammonites, Judge. 11.34. A timbrel (or taber) is in Hebrew named Toph; of the
like sound that it makes when it is stricken.

Verse. 27. In the churches] or congregations: see Psalm 26.12. ye of the
fountain] that come out of Israel, as out of a well, or fountain: as the phrase
taken from Deuteronomy. 33.28. Esaias has also one much like it, Isa. 48.1. It
seems to be meant of the people: though it may also be referred to Christ;
bless the Lord, who is of the fountain of Israel. For, of the Israelites,
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed forever, Amen.
Romans 9 5.

Verse. 28. There] in the churches, be little Benjamin the tribe, or posterity
of Benjamin, who was himself little, that is, youngest of all Isreal's children;
and his tribe little, that is, few in number, being almost all destroyed for
the sin of Gibea, Judge. 20 44. etc. their ruler] the Prince of that tribe, The
Greek version says, in a trance; taking the Hebrew Rodem, to be of radam,
though it be not found elsewhere in this form: yet rare words but once used, are
sundry times found in this, and other Psalms. These things applied to Christ's
times, and after, are very mystical. Benjamin the least, is here put first: so
in the Heavenly Jerusalem, the first foundation is a Jasper. Rev. 21.19. which
was the last precious stone in Aarons Breast Plate, on which Benjamins name was
graven, Exodus 28.20.10.21. In this tribe Paul excelled as a Prince of God,
though one of the last Apostles. 1 Cor. 15.8.9.10. who was converted in a
trance, or, ecstasie, Actor. 9.3.4. etc. and in ecstasies he and other
Apostles saw the mysteries of Christ's kingdom, Act. 10.10.11. etc. 2 Cor.
12.1.2.3.4. their assemblie] in Greek, their governors; the Hebrew word
Regamah, but once used, causes this ambiguitie: for coming of Ragam, to throw
an heap of stones, Levit. 24.14. may either be taken for an heap, or assembly;
or for a stone, that is, a ruler; as elsewhere a stone signifies. Genesis 49.24.
Of this tribe of Judah, were the Apostle James and other our Lords brethren.
Gal. 1.19. Act. 1.14. Zebulun, Naphtali] these tribes were situate in the
furthest parts of Canaan, as Judah and Benjamin were in the first and cheifest
parts: meaning by these few, all other tribes, gathered to praise God. In these
costs Christ called to Apostleship, Simon Peter, Andrew, etc. fishers of Galile.

Verse 29. commanded thy strength] that is, powerfully appointed it, (speaking
to the church.) See the like phrase Psalm. 133.3. and 44.5. By strength also,
Kingdom is often meant.

Verse. 30. For thy pallace] or temple, which was after David's days to be
built; in the heavenly Jerusalem, the Lord, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it.
Rev. 21.22. bring a present] or, lead-along a gift: that is, gifts, or
presents. So Psalm. 76.12. which presents, are sometimes of the persons of men.
See Isa. 18.7. and 66.20. Romans 15.16. and 12.1.

Verse. 31. Rebuke] that is, Destroy: see Psalm. 9.6. company of spear men] or of
archers; the rowt (or crew) of the cane; that is, such as use canes or reeds,
whereof spears, or arrows were made. Of this word company, see before, verse
11. It may also be read, the wild-beasts of the reeds; meaning, the salvage
wicked people. mighty bulls] the high Priests, and great personages; see Psalm.
22.13. that submitteth] that is, the hypocrite which feigneth subjection; (as
the former were professed enemies), or till he (that is, every one) submitt; as
Deuteronomy. 33.29. The word signifies such submission, as when one casts down
himself at the feet, as to be trodden on: so Prove. 6.3. he has scattred] this
is spoken to the Church of God. The Greek turns it as the former) Scatter
thou.

Verse. 32. Princely-ambassadours] Hebr. Chashmannim, a word not used but here:
The Greek says Presbeis, Ambassadors. Aegipt] in Hebrew called Mitsrajim; the
name of the son of Cham, the son of Noah, Genesis 10.6. who called the country
where he and his posterity dwelt, by his own name. In Greek, and in the new
Testament, it is always called Aegipt. Aethiopia] in Hebrew Cush, another son
of Cham, brother to Misrarim and Canaan: Genesis 10.6. the country where he and
his children dwelt, is called by his name Cush, in Greek Aethiopia; The people,
we call black-Moors. hastily-stretch] Hebr. make run: noting the readiness of
that nation to offer gifts and sacrifices, and to receive the gospel. See Act.
8.27. etc.

Verse. 34. of heavens of antiquitie] that is, the most ancient and highest
heavens, which were since the world began: noting hereby Gods powerful
majesty, and help to his Church; as Deuteronomy. 33.26. will give] or gives usually
his voice; that is, speaks alowd, or thundreth: see the note on Psalm. 46.7. and
29.3. Some Apostles were called Sonns of thunder, Mark. 3.17. and Christ's
powerful voice, raises the dead. John. 5.25.

Verse. 35. Give the strength] that is, strong-praise, and the glory of the
kingdom. See Psalm. 8.3.

Verse. 36. sanctuaries] the holy and most holy places of the tabernacle; and
heaven it self: see Psalm. 43.3. the people] that is, as the Greek explaineth,
his people. So the soul, Psalm. 6.92. for my soul: see Psalm. 45.4. Blessed be
God] Hereupon God was called in Israel, the Blessed one: as Mark. 14.61. Art
thou Christ the son of the Blessed; that is, the son of God, Mat. 26.63.

Annotations, Psalm LXIX.
Verse. 1. SHoshannim] that is, six-stringed instruments: or Lilies, See Psalm.
45.1.

Verse. 2. Save me, etc.] David in his troubles being a figure of Christ,
prays for deliverance from tentations and persecutions, under the similitudes
of waters, mud, mire, pit, deeps, streams, etc. and that this Psalm had
accomplishment in Christ, the Evangelists show; Mat. 27.48. Ioh. 19.29. that
the use hereof is for us, the Apostle shows, Romans 15.3.4. that we through
patience, and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. the soul] to weet, of
me; as the Greek explaineth it: that is, are ready to drown and choke me; so
John. 2.5. see also Psalm. 45.4.

Verse. 3. mud of the gulf] or, of the deep, that is, the deep, or gulffy mud,
in the bottoms of the sea; as Psalm 68.23. John. 2.4. another sign of great
calamity, as also in Psalm 88.7. wherefore Babylon that held captive Gods
people, is called a Gulf, or Deep: Isa. 44.27. no standing] no stay, or ground:
but I sink more and more.

Verse. 4. is burnt] that is, parched dried; or (as the Greek explaineth it)
hoarse. eyes fayl] or, are consumed, to weet, with tears, and earnest
exspectation, as Lam. 2.11. and 4.17. This was a curse of the law, Levit.
26.16. Deuteronomy. 28.65. but Christ became a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. So after,
Psalm. 119.82.

Verse. 5. took not away] or which I robbed not, took not by force and rapine.
This though it may be taken for all unjust criminations, whereof David and
Christ were innocent: yet in special it was verified in Christ, who being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.
notwithstanding for witnessing himself to be the son of God, he was put to
death by the Jews, Ioh. 19.7.

Verse. 6. my foolishnes] that is, my sin: see the note on Psalm. 38.6. In David
were sins properly; in Christ, by imputation: for God made him sin for us,
which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Or this may be meant of false imputation, O God
thou know my foolishnes, if any such be, as my foes charge me with. So Psalm.
7.4.5.

Verse. 7. abashed for me] for my sake, to weet, if I be not delivered. So of
Christ, his disciples hoped that he should be the savior of Israel; but when
he was killed, they began to doubt and fear, Satan winnowing their says, to
make them ashamed; but Christ prayed for their confirmation. Luke 24.20.21 and
22.31.32. So great are Christ's afflictions, that blessed is he that is not
offended in him. Mat. 11.6. Iehovih] or, God: it has the vowels of Aelohim.
See Psalm. 68.21.

Verse. 8. bear reproach] that is, are reproached: contrary hereunto is, to bear
grace and savor; that is, to be favored and well liked. Esth. 2.15.17.
Compare herewith Psalm. 44.23.16.

Verse. 9. forreignour] to weet, in their estimation and carriage toward me.
This also was the case of Job, and others, Job 19.13. Genesis 31.15. and of Christ
the Jews said, they knew not whence he was, Ioh. 9.29. and his brethren
believed not in him. Ioh. 7.5.

Verse. 10. Zeal of thine house] or jealousy, indignation, for the polluting
of thine house, and studious fervent care to have it conserved holy. See this
performed by Christ, when he whipped buyers and sellers out of the temple,
John. 2.15.16.17. eaten me up] devoured, or consumed. For love and jealousy,
are a fire and vehement flame: Song. 8.6. See also Psalm. 119.139. are fallen on
me] that is, I have taken them on me, and willingly bear them; as the Apostle
gathers from these words, that Christ pleased not himself, (that is, sought
not his own pleasure or profit,) but for his fathers sake and his brethrens did
bear all things: and this is an example for us to do the like. See Romans
15.1.2.3.4.

Verse. 11. afflicted my soul] the word afflicted, is here supplied from, Psalm.
35.15. for often there is want of a word to be understood, which the Hebrew
text sometime shows: as 2 Chronicles. 10.11.14. I, with scorpions; for which, in 1
King. 12.11.14. is written, I will chastise you with scorpions. See the like in
the notes on Ps. 18.7.29. and 2.7. it was for] or, it was turned to reproaches,
that is, to much reproach, and opprobry. So John's fasting, turned to his
reproach, they said he had a devil, Luke 7.33.

Verse. 12. And I made] or, when I gave, that is, made, or put on. So giving is
for putting, Psalm. 8.2.

Verse. 13. That sit in the gate] that is, great men in the public assemblies.
The rulers of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 25.7. Ruth 4.1, 2. etc. spake] or talked and
meditated: communed how to work me evil, Luke 22.2, 4. Strong-drink] Hebrew
Sheker, which is all manner strong, drink which will make drunken, as, ale,
beer, wine, fider, methaglin, etc. The Greek here turns it wine. melodies] or
songs, sung with instruments of music, of me. So Job also complains, Ioh.
30.9.

Verse. 14. And I] that is, And (or but) as for me.

Verse. 14. Time of acceptation] that is, an acceptable time: as the Apostle
interprets this phrase, 2 Cor. 6.2. from Isa. 49.8. In truth of thy
salvation] that is, for thy laving truths sake, or, faithful salvation.

Verse. 16. Shut her mouth,] so that I cannot get out of misery: as Dathan,
Abiram, etc. went down alive into the pit, and the earth covered over them,
that no hope was left of their return. Number. 16.33. But Christ in all troubles
had comfort, even in the grave, his flesh rested in hope, Psalm. 16.9, 10.

Verse. 17. Turn the face] or respect, regard me, with savor. See Psalm. 25.16.

Verse. 20. Dishonor,] or, ignominy, slander, calumny: see Psalm. 4.3.

Verse. 21. Ful-of-heavines] or, sick, sorrowful: of this word in Hebrew man
has his name, Aenosh: see Psalm. 8.5. to mone] to pity, and solace me; or, to
show compassion, so Job 42.11. found none] in Christ's greatest need, all his
disciples forsook him and fled, Mat. 26.56. and all his acquaintance stood afar
off, Luke 23.49.

Verse. 22. Gal] in Hebrew Rosh, an herb bitter as wormwood; with which it is
often joined; Deuteronomy. 29.18. Amos 6.12. Lam. 3.19. It grows in corn fields,
Hos. 10.4. the water, or juice hereof, signifies bitter affliction, Ier. 9.15.
These things were also actually done to Christ, whom the Jews refreshed with
gal and vinegar, Mat. 27.34. Ioh. 19.28, 29, 30.

Verse. 23. And for recompences] that is, and for a full recompense of that
which they did to me, (let their table be) a trap unto them. Or, and for
peaces; that is, and the things which they expect peace and welfare by, let
become a trap unto them. But the first sense agrees with the Apostles
interpretation, Romans 11.9. These are David's implications against the Jews, and
prophesies of their rejection, as the Apostle shows; and by their table, we
are to understand all means of comfort and refreshing, both of body and soul,
which turn to the ruin of the wicked, even an odor of death unto death, 2
Cor. 2.15, 16.

Verse. 24 That they see not] so the Apostle explaineth the Hebrew phrase, from
seeing: Romans 11.19 The like in Isa. 44.18. And hereby is meant the eyes of
their understanding, that seeing they see and perceive not, because a veil is
over their hearts, Ioh. 12.39, 40. Act. 28.26 27. 2 Cor. 3.14.15. make their
loins to shake] bow down their backs, says the Apostle, Romans 11.10. and this
means bondage and misery, as appears by the contrary blessing of going
upright, which God once vouched safe unto that people, Levit, 26.13.

Verse. 26. Their castle] or their tower, palace, habitation, fair and orderly
builded, Genesis 25.16. Number. 31.10. Cant. 8.9. This which David speaks of all
Christ's enemies, Peter applies to Judas that betrayed him, Let his habitation
be desert, Act. 1.20. but Christ threatens the like to them all, Mat. 23.38.
Castle here is for Castles, or palaces: as charret, for charrets, Ps: 68.18.

Verse. 27. Whom thou have smitten] Christ, the shepherd, who was smitten of
God, and wounded for our sins. Isa. 53.4, 5. Mat 26.31. they tell, of the
sorrow] that is, tell one another; vantingly, of the sorrow, (smart, or pain)
of thy wounded, thy servants who are wounded for thy sake; or they preach
hereof: see the like phrase' Psalm. 2.7. or they tell, to the sorrow; that is,
add unto, and increase it; as the Greek turns it.

Verse. 28. Give thou iniquity, etc.] that is, Add sin unto their sin, give
them over to a reprobate mind, which was Gods heavy judgment first on the
Gentiles, Romans 1.24.28. afterward on the Jews, who fulfilled their sins, when
wrath came on them to the utmost, 1 These. 2.16. Romans 11.8. Mat. 23.32. Or, by
iniquity, may be understood, punishment for it, as Psalm. 31.11. not come into
thy justice] that is, not believe thy gospel, and so come to the justice of
God, which is, by faith, as the scriptures show, Romans 10.3. etc. Phil. 3.9.
Ioh. 12.39.40.

Verse. 29. Book of the living] or, book of life, wherein the just that live by
faith are written; that is, let them be cut off from, being any longer counted
thy people, or registered in the writing of the house of Israel, as Ezekiel. 13 9.
Romans 11.20. Philip. 3.2, 3. Psalm. 87.6.

Verse. 30. Lift me up] or set me on a high place; that is, safely defend me.

Verse. 32. Better to] that is, more pleasing and acceptable. a young bull] so
the Greek explaineth the Hebrew phrase, a bull, a bullock, that is, a bull
which is but young, or a bullock. So in Judge. 6.25. where the order is changed,
take the bullock of the bull: that is, the young bull, or bullock. Some
understand it here of two, better than bull, or bullock. that has horns]
Hebrew, horneth, that is, brings forth, or bears horns, and parts the hoof:
for such were fittest for sacrifice: but confession and thanks are more
pleasing to God; specially Christ's obedience, see Ps. 50.13, 14, 15. and 40.7.

Verse. 33. The seekers] or, ye seekers of God, to weet, shall see it, and your
heart shall live; ye shall have inward life, joy, and consolation, See Psalm.
22.27.

Verse. 34. His prisoners] such as are persecuted, and bound in prisons for his
truth: Thus Paul calls himself, the prisoner of Christ, Ephe. 3.1.

Verse. 36. Save Sion] that is, his church, figured out by Sion, and Judah, see
Psalm. 2.6. and this building of Judas cities, is by preaching the Gospel, 1
Cor. 3.9.10. a figure of this work; was done by Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.9, 12,
13. and Isaiah prophesies the like, Isa. 44.26.

Annotations, Psalm. LXX.
Verse. 1. TO record] or, to cause remembrance: see Psalm. 38.1.

Verse. 2. To deliver] or, to rid me free; understand, make have, or, vouchsafe,
as Psalm. 40.14. for this Psalm, is the same in substance, and almost in words,
with the end of that psalm: see the annotations there.

Verse. 3. That seek my soul] to make an end of it, as Psalm. 40.15.

Verse. 4. Turn-back] desolate, or wasted, as Psalm. 40.16.

Annotations, Psalm LXXI.
Verse 2. DEliver] or make me to escape safe.

Verse. 3. Of habitation] or, of mansion: a rock whereto I may fly and there
dwell safe. God is often called a Rock, Psalm. 18.3. and a mansion (or
habitation) to his people, Psalm. 90.1. The Greek here makes it plain thus, Be
to me for a God protector. have commanded] to weet, thine Angels, as Psalm.
91.11. or, haste effectually appointed. See Psalm. 44.5.

Verse. 4. Evil-doer] or injurious, wrong-doer. the levened] that is, the
malicious: for maliciousnes and wikednesse is likened to leven, 1 Cor. 5.8. The
Hebrew Chomets, properly signifies that which is levened, or sour, Exodus
12.39. here used for the malicious, or violent cruel man, as the Greek turns
it, the injurious: or Chomets, may be used for Chomes, the violent.

Verse. 5. Iehovih] or God: for it has the vowels of Aelohim: so after, verse
16. See Psalm. 68.21.

Verse. 6. Tookest me] or did rid me, to woet, from danger: Compare this with
Psalm. 22.10.11. of thee] or in thee: but, in, is often used for of, as Psalm.
63.7. and 87 3. see the note there.

Verse. 7. A wonder to many] or, a monster to the mighty: a sign whom the many
(or mighty) do gaze upon; speak of, and show to others, and wonder at. A
wonder, and a sign, are sometimes used as one: 2 Chronicles. 32.24. with 2 King
20.8, 9. So, Christ and his disciples were as signs and wonders in Israel,
Isa. 8.18. Heb. 2.13. Jehoshuah and his fellows, were monstrous persons, Zach.
3.2. the Apostles, a gazing stock to the world, 1 Cor. 4.9. hope] or refuge; a
place where one hops for safety.

Verse. 8. With thy glory] or glory of thee, that is, with glorifying thee;
honoring, beautifying, and commending thy majesty.

Verse. 10 Speak of] or say of me, that God has forsaken me, verse. 11. or, they
speak against me. observe] that is, lay-wait for: it is meant here, for evil:
as is the observing of the steps, Psalm. 56.7. but often this phrase is used for
good, to keep, regard, and preserve the soul, or life, 97.10, and 121.7. Prove.
22.5.

Verse. 14. Add unto all thy praise] that is; increase it; I will praise thee
more then I have done: or, more then others do: as 2 Chronicles. 10.11. I will add
unto your yoke, that is, increase it.

Verse. 15. Though I know not] or, for I know not the numbers, to weet, of them;
Gods justice and salvation is innumerable ways administered: which are to be
celebrated, but cannot be reckned, Psalm. 40.6.

Verse. 16. I will enter,] to weet, into this work of praising God, in his
power, not mine own: or; I will enter, that is, begin with his powerful works,
to praise them: or I will enter, that is, go in hand, or go forward with my
business, through his power.

Verse. 18. Unto old age] or, whiles old age is upon me: as ver. 9. So elsewhere
God faith, that he had born Israel from the womb and birth, and would bear
them still unto old age and the hoare hairs, Isa. 46.3.4. thine arme] that is,
strength, help, salvation, So Psalm. 77.16. Isa. 51.5, and 53.1. Deuteronomy. 33.27.
this generation] the men of this age. The word this (or present) is understood
by that which follows. See also, Psalm. 45.4.

Verse. 19. And thy justice o God, which is, to on high] that is, which reaches
up to heaven, viz. I will show it. The Greek understands it. We may also
translate, For thy justice is unto the high place, that is, to heaven,
incomprehensible: as Psalm. 36.6, 7. And, may be instead of For, as Psalm. 60.13.
and the High place, is by the Chaldee expounded the high heavens, so Psalm.
93.4. Mat. 21.9.

Verse. 20. Did make me see] or us see: shewedst-me, and us: for the Hebrew
has a double reading, meaning David in special, and other Gods people with
him: so after it is read in the margin, quicken me, bring me up, (as also the
Greek has it,) but written in the line, quicken us, bring us up. By making
see, is also meant experience and feeling: as Psalm. 49 10. and evill] or evils,
that is, calamities. did return] that is, did again quicken; or, wilt again
quicken me. So after. But the Greek turns it in the time past. deeps] abysses
of the earth: gulfs of affliction and death, elsewhere called the lowest parts,
Psalm. 88.7. such Christ in his humanity, sorrows, and death, went down unto,
and returned, Ephesians. 4.9. Romans 10.7.

Verse. 21. My greatnesse] or magnificence, majesty, honor. For Christ after
afflictions, entered into his glory, Luke 24.26. 1 Pet. 1.11. Phil. 2.8, 9. and
the godly must suffer with him, that they may also be glorified with him, Romans
8.17.

Verse. 22. Psaltery] or late: see Psalm. 33.2. even thy faith] or, for thy
faithful truth. holy one] or saint of Israel: God is so called, both for that
he is holiness it self, and sanctifies his people, Levit. 20.8.26. and again
is sanctified, that is, holily praised and honored of them, Isa. 8.13. So
Psalm. 78.41. and 89.19.

Verse. 24. Talk of] or, meditate, that is, speaks advisedly and after due
meditation, See Psalm. 1.2. for they] or, when they are abashed, that is,
destroyed: see Psalm. 6.11.

Annotations, Psalm LXXII.
Verse. 1. FOr Solomon] the Greek adds, a psalm of David for Solomon: and the
last verse shows it to be made by David, and it concerns Christ and his
kingdom, figured by Solomon, Cant. 3.11. and therefore called by his name, as
elsewhere he is called David: Hos. 3.5 Such also is the title of the 127.
Psalm. Kings son] to whom the right of the kingdom belongs by birth and
inheritance. So Christ was King David's son, and born King of the Jews. Mark.
11.10. Mat. 2.2, and 22.42. to him the Father gave all judgment, Ioh. 5.22.

Verse. 2. That he may] or, Let him judge, that is, govern thy people in
justice, that is, justly: wherefore he is named Melchi-zedek, that is, King of
justice, Heb. 7.2. of whom it was prophesied, behold a King shall reign in
justice, Isa. 32.1.

Verse. 3. The mountains shall bring-forth] or shall bear, to weet, as their
fruit; for so this phrase imports, Job 40.15. This, and the rest that follow,
may also be read prayer wise, let the mountains bear, etc. peace,] that is,
prosperity, plenty of fruits, which should be enjoyed with peace; as all
Solomon's days, Israel dwelt without fear, every man under his vine and
figtree, 1 King. 4.25. And under Christ, the work and effect of justice, is
peace, quietness, and assurance for ever, Is. 32.17. Romans 5.1. the mountains
drop-down new wine, and the hills flow with milk, Joel 3.18. Amos 9.13. hills,
with justice,] that is, the hills also shall bear peace, with justice: both,
peace and justice; as these two are said to kiss each other, Psalm. 85.11. and
Christ is King both of justice and peace, Heb. 7.2. his kingdom is justice,
peace, and joy, Romans 14, 17. it may also be read, for justice.

Verse. 4. The fraudulent-oppressor] whom the Greek here calls sycophant;
which word is used for injurying, by forged cavillation, Luke 19.8, and 3.14
see before Psalm. 62.11.

Verse. 5. They shall fear] men shall reverence, that is, worship, and serve
thee. So fear is used for worship, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9. with the sun] or
before the sun, as is after expressed, verse. 17. and as the Hebrew ghnim, with,
is elsewhere used for before, Esth. 7.8. and before the sun and moon, means
continually, so long as they shine on the earth, which is so long as the world
indureth, Genesis 8.22. Psalm. 89.37, 38. The Chaldee interprets it, with the
rising of the sun, and in the light of the moon, that is, at morning and
evening; day and night: as the twelve tribes are said so instantly to serve,
Act. 26.7.

Verse. 6. The mowen-grasse] the meadow, which being mowen in the beginning of
summer, craveth rain that it may grow again. The original word signifies also
a shorn-fleece of wool; which sense some keep here, and refer it to the
deaw that fell on Gedions-fleece, when the land was dry, and again on the
land, when the fleece was dry; Judge. 6.37.-40. Solomon and Christ are here said
to come down as rain, in respect of the doctrine and administration of judgment
by them. So Moses said, My doctrine shall drop as the rain, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.2.
and Job said, they waited for me as for the rain, etc. Job 29.23. and the Lord
shall come unto us as the rain, etc. Hos. 6.3. the despersed-moisture]
understand, which are the moisture, that is, which showrs do moisten the
earth. Zarziph, the Hebrew word used only in this place, has the
signification of dispersing moisture, or water, as is by showers, God having
divided spouts for the rain, whereby it is strowed abroad upon the earth. Job
38.25. Wherefore the former word showers, implies rain that falls with
manifold (or millions of) drops, as Psalm. 65.11.

Verse. 7. Multitude of peace] to weet, shall be, or, shall flourish: and this
Shalom, peace, may respect the name of Shelomoh, or Solomon, which signifies
peaceable, as was promised to David, Behold a son is born to thee, which shall be
a man of rest, for I will give him rest from all his enemies round about;
therefore his name is Solomon, and I will send (Salom) peace and quietness upon
Israel in his days. 1 Chronicles. 22.9. moon be not] or be taken away, as the Greek
explaineth it: that is, till the worlds end: as before, verse. 5.

Verse. 8. from sea to sea] from the salt sea, (the lake of Sodom, Gen 14.3.) to
the main sea. See Number. 34.5.-6. etc. where the limits of the land are
described. from the river] the great river Euphrates, Genesis 15.18. Deu. 11.24.
In Solomon this was accomplished, when he reigned over all kingdoms, from the
river, to the land of the Philistims, and to the border of Egypt, 1 King.
4.21. in Christ, when all nations were brought into his subjection by the
gospel, as Mat. 28.18.19. Act. 1.8. Col. 1.5.6. Rev. 11.15.

Verse. 9. in dry-places] or, in deserts; which the Greek explaineth the
Aeathiopians. The Hebrew Tsijim, signifies here, and Psalm. 74.14. people that
dwell in dry desert places: sometime it is used for wild beasts that haunt such
deserts, as Isa. 34.14. and 13.21. Ier. 50.39. lick the dust] like a serpent,
as is expressed in Mic. 7.16. noting hereby great fear and subjection;
testified by bowing down their faces to the ground; as is the manner in the
Eastern countries. In Isa. 49.23. a like promise is made to the Church of
Christ.

V. 10. of Tharshish] or, of the Ocean; that dwell by the main sea. See the
note on Psalm. 48.8. Sheba and Seba] that is, of Aethiopia and Arabia, far
southern countries, inhabited by the posterity of Sheba and Seba, the nephew
and son of Cush, the son of Cham, the son of Noah, Genesis 10.7. The Queen of
Sheba (or of the South) came from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and gave him much gold, sweet odours, and precious stones: 1
King. 10.1.-10. Mat. 12.42.

Verse. 12. to whom no helper] or, him that has no helper. See the like by Job,
Job 29.12.

V. 14. precious shall their blood be] that is, their death; meaning, that he
regards their life, and will not easily suffer them to be killed; for that it
is precious and dear unto him: as on the contrary Paul said, his life was not
dear unto himself, when he was willing and ready to loose it for Christ's cause,
Act. 20.24. See Psalm. 116.15.

Verse. 15. he shall give] meaning man in general, or each one, brought in
subjection; as the Greek says, to him shall be given; meaning to Solomon. gold
of Sheba] the Greek says, of Arabia: see verse. 10. all the day] or daily.

Verse. 16. There shall be a parcel, etc.] where a handful of corn shall be
sown, on the top of the mounts (the most barren places) there shall be such
increase that the fruit shall shake and make a noise like the trees of Lebanon
shake] or stir with noise; rustle. Lebanon] that is, trees of Lebanon; as the
earth, for, the inhabitants of the earth. Psalm 66.1. of this mount, see the
note on Psalm. 29.5. they of the city,] that is, the citizens; as, they of the
world, are worldlings, Ps. 17.14. ye of the heavens Psalm. 148.1. are, the
inhabitants there. Compare herewith Esa. 20.7.6.

Verse. 17. continued] to weet, as a son continues his fathers name: for the
original ^innon or ^anin) comes of Nin, which is a Son: the Greek also turns
it, his name continues: and Christ's name is continued in us that believe in
him, called Christians, Act. 11.26. and his children. Heb. 2.13.14, before the
sun] that is, so long as it indureth, as verse 5. So Psalm. 120.29. they shall
blesse] to weet, men of all nations shall count and speak of their blessedness
in him. So Genesis 22, 18. call him blessed] or, happy, shall beautify him.

Verse. 19. name of his glory] that is, his glorious (or honorable) name. So
Lord of glory, Iam. 2.1. for, glorious Lord. filled with his glorie] that is,
with the manifestation of his glorious works, and praising him for the same.
See the like speeches, Number. 14 21. Isa. 6.3. Revel. 18.1. Ezekiel. 43, 2. Amen] So
be it. This second book of Psalms is concluded with twice Amen, as was the
former, see Psalm. 41.14.

Verse. 20. Ended] or Complete are: meaning, that this Psalm was the last of
David's prayers or hymns, (as the Greek translateth it;) howsoever it is not
set last in order, as neither other be. Or, that his matter touching Christ's
kingdom, is the last thing whereof David prophesied, and for which he prayed:
as 1 Pet. 1.10.11. Iesse] or Iishai, as the Hebrew sounds it; and sometime.
Ishai, 1 Chro. 2.12.13. which name signifies strength and manhood; as David,
amiable.

The third book.
Annotations, Psalm LXXIII.
THe third book,] to weet, of Psalms. See the note on Psalm. 42.

V. 1. of Asaph] or, to Asaph: who was both a Prophet, and a singer: see Ps.
50.1. The like title is of the 10 Psalms following. These are for the most
part, complaints and meditations of the troubles of Gods people.

Verse. 2 almost] or, a very little lacked but my feet had swarved: so after,
well nigh; or, almost nothing lacked but my stepps had been shed: noting hereby
his great danger to have falln through his own infirmity, had not faith in God
sustained him. swarved] or turned, declined. This, and the next word slipped,
have a double reading in the Hebrew; by the vowels, they had swarved, they had
slipped: by the consonants, it had swarved, it had slipped, meaning, each of
his feet, and every of his steps, to his utter ruin. slipped-out] or been
powered out, to weet, as water; and so I had been lost

Verse. 3. invied] or was jealous, had invious zeal. See Psalm. 37.1.

Verse. 4 bands] or knoits, that is pains, sores, diseases, etc. in their death]
or till their death; meaning that they live long in pleasure, and dye at ease;
as is explained Job 21.13. They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they
go down to the grave. but lusty] or, and fat is their fortitude; (their firm
strength of body:) as Job says, one dies in his full strength, being in all
ease and prosperity; his breasts are full of milk, and his bones run full of
marrow. Job 21.23.24.

Verse. 5. molestation of sory-man] that is, such turmoyl as other miserable men
endure. See the like phrase in 2 Samuel 7.14. Aenosh and Adam are here the names
of all wretched mankind See Psalm. 8.5.

Verse. 6. compasses, etc.] or, is a chain to them, and to him, that is, every
of them: as a collar that is hanged for an ornament about the neck. And of this
word Anak, to hang a chain, that giant Anak had his name, whose children were
called Anakims, men great of stature, proud, and cruel. See Number. 13.23.34. Ios.
15 13.14. a garment] a set, habit, or ornament, finely fitted to the body, such
was the harlots habit, Prove. 7.10.

Verse. 7. eyes standeth] that is, Each eye stands, or starteth-out of the
hole for fatnes. So in Job 15.27. he has covered his face with his fatnes.
they pass the imaginations, etc.] that is, they exceed in prosperity above
that the could imagne, or think: or, they surpass in wickedness above that
which man's heart can think; according to tha which here follows; and as in
Ier. 5.28. it is said, they are waxen fat and shining; they do pass the words
(or deeds) of the wicked.

Verse. 8. They do corrupt] or Consume, dissolve, or, make dissolute, by their
wicked speeches, and by their oppression of men. It may be understood of
corrupting or making rotten with sin, themselves, or others; or consuming, and
wasting with oppression. with maliciousnes] or in evil, that is, maliciously;
or malignantly. from aloft] that is, loftily. Or of the Most-high; that is, of
God: as in the next verse.

Verse. 9. against heavens] that is, against God and his saints, whom they
blaspheme, as it is written, he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God,
to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven: Reve.
13.6. So elsewhere heavens are used for God, Dan. 4.23. Luke 15.18.

Verse. 10. his people] Gods own people are by this afflicted. Therefore the
Greek says, my people; the Psalmist speaking of his brethren, as after of
himself, verse. 13. hither] to these thoughts and tentations, which follow in
the next verses. a full] the word cup, or basen, is here, to be understood; as
strong, for strong-pawes. Psalm, 10.9. See the note there. By waters of a full
cup, are meant abundance of tears, which they must drink; that is, of
afflictions, and tentations, which they suffer; as in Psalm. 80.6. wrung-out to
them] or drunk, (sucked up) by them; as in Psalm. 75.9.

Verse. 12. in tranquillity, or quiet, safe, wealthy, at ease. Compare
herewith Ier. 12.1.2. wealthy-power] ability by riches; see Psalm. 49.7.

Verse. 13. cleansed] that is, labored to cleanse and purge, by faith and
continual sanctification, Act. 15.9. 1 John. 3.3. otherwise, who can say, I
have made mine heart clean? Prove. 20.9. innocencie] or cleannes: see Psalm.
26.6. and 24.4.

Verse. 14. am plagued] or touched with afflictions, punished, which the wicked
are not, verse. 5. my rebuke] or blame, to weet, I bear: the chastisement for my
sins. in the mornings] that is, every morning, or early: the like phrase is,
Psalm. 101.8. Job 7.18. Lam. 3.23. Isa. 33.2.

Verse. 15. I will tell thus] that is, if these tentations prevail against me:
so that I should tell and declare for truth these my carnal thoughts. Telling
is often used for publishing and preaching to others: See Psalm. 2.7.
unfaithfully-wrong] or faithlesly* transgress against the generation of thy
sonns, (O God:) that is, of thy people, called the sonns of God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. 1
John. 3.1.

Verse. 18. prudently-attend to] or, consider their latter-end. A like speech
Moses uses, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

Verse. 19. wondrous-desolation] such as astonisheth the beholders. Such sudden
strange desolation God brought on Babylon of old. Ier. 51.37.41. and will
again, Rev. 18.10.17.

Verse. 20. As a dream] to weet, so they are, or, so vanishes their
prosperity; which when one awaketh, is gone; as is plainly set forth in Isa.
29.7.8. So elsewhere it is said, he shall flee away as a dream, and not be
found, and shall pass away as a vision of the night, the eye which saw him,
shall do so no more, etc. Job 20.8.9. thou raysest up] to weet, thy self, that
is, risest up to punish them, as Psalm. 35.23. or, raysest up, to weet, them, at
the last day of judgment. So the Chaldee paraphrast turns it, saying, in the
day of the great judgment they shall rise up out of the house of the grave, in
wrath thou will despise their image. The Greek says, in thy city thou will
despise their image: the Hebrew word baghnir being ambiguous. In this sense
compare herewith, Eccles. 8.10. despise their image] or, their shadow, that is,
destroy their tansitorie estate; for, man walks in an image, Psalm 39.7. Or,
referring it to the last judgment; their image may mean their corrupt sinful
state, Genesis 5.3. and the despising of it, is their utter rejection; for then
they shall rise to shame and contempt eternal. Dan. 12.2.

Verse. 21. was levened] or levened it self, that is, was vexed, grieved,
swelled; was sour as leven, with my fretting grief and anger. I was pricked]
or, sharpened (pricked) my self; that is, felt sharp pains, to weet, with my
fretting thoughts and desires.

Verse. 22. brutish] that is, foolish, sensual, like a brute beast, not having
the understanding of a man in me: as is explained Prove. 30.2. See also Psalm
49.15. as the beasts] that is, as one of them, or a great beast; Hebr.
Behemoth; which is used for the vast Elephant, Job 40.10. The Greek here
turns it Bestial: or, brutish.

Verse. 24. to glory] or with glory; that is, glorously, honorably. See 1 Timothy
3.16. Phil. 3.21. Heb. 2.10. 1 Pet. 5.1.4.

Verse. 25. whom have I] or who is for me, but thee to trust in, or call upon.
delight not] or take no pleasure, in any person, or thing.

Verse. 26. the Rock] that is, the strength and hope: the Greek says, the God
of my heart.

Verse. 27. gone far;] that is, the wicked who are here said to be far from
God; and in Psalm. 119, 150. are far from his law, and therefore salvation is
far from them, Psalm. 119.155. as here they perish: whereas the righteous are
a people near God, Psalm. 148.14. that goes a whoring, from thee] that is,
goes after idols, departing from the true God, as Hos. 1, 2. for idolatry, or
breach of Gods covenant, is often called whoredom, or fornication. Ier.
3.9.20. Ezekiel. 23.3.5.7. etc. Psalm. 106.39.

Verse. 28. to draw nigh] so both the Greek and Chaldee do explain the Hebrew
phrase, the drawing-neer of God: and thus it is also used in Isa. 58.2. and is
done by the faith of the Gospel, Heb. 7 19. Iehovih] or God: see Psalm. 68.21.
to tell] that I may tell, or declare; as the Greek explaineth it.

Annotations, Psalm LXXIV.
Verse. 1. OF Asaph] or, to Asaph; see, Psalm. 50, 1. If Asaph (who lived in
David's days) made this psalm; it was a prophecy of troubles to come. If some
other prophet made it when calamities were on Israel; then was it committed to
Asaphs posterity, the singers, called by their fathers name; as Aarons
posterity are called Aaron. 1 Chronicles. 12, 27. thine anger smoke] or, thy nose
smoke, that is, burn: as was threatened Deuteronomy. 29.20. A manifestation of sore
displeasure: see Psalm. 18.9. and 10.5. sheep] or flock, that is, us thy people,
as Psalm. 79.13. The flock comprehends sheep and goats, Levit. 1.10.

Verse. 2. purchased of old] or, bought of yore, when thou broughtest them out
of Egypt, Exodus 15.16. or understand, that thou have purchased it, have
redeemed, etc. the rod of thine inheritance] that is, Israel, Ier. 10.16.
called elsewhere the line of Gods inheritance, Deu. 32.9. which he measured out
for himself, as land is meted with a rod, or line. It may also be read the
scepter, or the tribe of thine inheritance, as Isa. 63.17. for the Hebrew
Shebet, which properly is a rod, or staff, is sometime a scepter, Psalm. 45, 7.
sometime a tribe, Psalm. 78, 67.

Verse. 3. Lift up thy feet] or, thy hammers, that is, thy strokes, to stamp,
or beat down the enemy unto perpetual desolations. Thus the feet are used to
tread down with, Isa. 26, 6. and so the Greek takes it here, changing the
metaphor, and translating it, thy hands, which are also instruments to strike
down with. Or lift up thy feet, that is, Come quickly to see the perpetual
desolations which the enemy has made. has done evill] that is, broken,
robbed, burned, wasted all things. As did Nebuchadnezar in the temple, 2 King.
24.13. and 25.9.13.14. etc.

Verse. 4 thy synagogues,] or assemblies, either the courts and places about the
temple, where the people assembled; or the other synagogues in Ieusalem (which
they say were above 400.) as after in verse 8. he speaks of all the synagogues
in the land; places where prayers and lectures of the law were used: Act.
16.13. and 15.21. The assembly of Christians is called also by this name,
synagogue, Iam. 2.2. their signes] or banners, which are signs of victory, or
of idolatry. See after verse. 9.

Verse. 5. He was knowen] He, that is, A man, or every one of the enemies was
known, that is, renowned, or famous, as having done some notable act. as he
lifted on high] or, as he that brings aloft: that is, as a man brings the axe
aloft over his head, to fell down the thick wood with might and main. They cut
down the wood of the temple, as men do trees in a forest. thicket of the
wood] that is, the thick wood, or trees, whose boughs are wrapped one in an
other: or, (if we understand it of the woodworke in the temple,) the infoulded
graven wood: which he that did most egerly on down, was most renowed.

Verse. 6. And now] or, And then, at the same time. So Psalm. 27.6. carved-works]
gravings, or (as the Hebrew phrase is) openings: used for graven, or carved
works, or (as the Hebrew phrase is) openings: used for graven or carved works.
Exodus 28.11. The Greek here turns it doors; which also have their name of
opening.

Verse. 7. thy sanctuaries] the temple, (which had diverse holy places) was
burned by Nebuzar-adan, 2 King. 25.9. to the earth] to weet, burning, or rasing
down to the ground.

Verse. 8. Let us make spoil] or, we will oppress, prey upon them. Of this
Hebrew root, the Dove has her name in that tongue, as being subject to the
prey and spoil of Hawks, etc. wherefore in verse 19. he calls the Church a
turtle-dove.

verse. 9. our signes] the testimonies of Gods presence and favor;
extraordinary, or ordinary, as the sacrifices, etc. Dan. 11.31. So
Circumcision, the Passover, the Sabbath, etc. were for signs to Israel; Genesis
17.11. Exodus 12.13. and 31.13. any Prophet] that could see and foretell by the
spirit, an end of these troubles. A Prophet (Nabi) is one that from the inward
counsel of God, utters oracles. In old time he was called a Seer, 1 Samuel 9.9.
Amos. 7.12. how long] to weet, this affliction shall endure. The like speech is
in Psalm. 6.4.

Verse. 11. draw it, etc. this word, or some such, seems here to be
understood, as often in the Hebrew: see Ps. 69.11. The drawing the hand out of
the bosom, denotes a performance of the work without slacknes; as we may see
by the contrary, Prove. 26.15. ful-end] by consuming our enemies, and
accomplishing our deliverance.

Verse. 13. of the dragons] or whales, meaning the noble men of Egypt, who
pursuing the Israelites were drowned in the red sea. Exodus 14.28. For great
persons are likened to Dragons, or whale fishes: as Ezekiel. 29.3.

Verse. 14. the heads] that is, the head, as the Greek translateth it, called
heads for the excellency and principality. of Liviathan] or of the Whale,
meaning, Pharaoh King of Egypt, who was drowned with his Princes, Psalm.
136.15. Liviathan is the name of the great whalefish, or sea Dragon; so called
of the fast joining together of his scales; as he is described Job 40.20. and
41.6. etc. and is used to resemble great tyrants; here, and in Isa. 27.3. in
dry deserts] that is, to the wild beasts of the wilderness, which might devour
the Egyptians after they were drowned, and cast up on the shore, Exodus 14.30.
The beasts may be called a people, as Conies, Pismires, Locusts, etc. are
called peoples, and nations, Prove. 30.25.26. Joel. 1.6. See also the note on
Psalm 72.9. unless by these dwellers, in dry places, we understand the
Israelites in the wilderness; to whom the spoil of the Egyptians was as meat;
as elsewhere they said of the Canaanites, they are bread for us. Number. 14.9.

Verse. 15. did cleave the fountain] bringing a well and stream of water to thy
people out of the rocks, Exodus 17.6. Number. 20.11. Isa. 48.21. Psalm. 105.41.
rivers of strength] that is, strong, rough, or vehement rivers, as the waters
of Jorden were dried up, that Israel might go through, Ios. 3.15.-17. The
Chaldee paraphrast adds also the rivers, Arnon and Iabok; whereof see Number
21.14. Deuteronomy. 2.32.

Verse. 16. the light] The Hebrew Maor, is properly a lightsome-body, as is the
Sun, moon, stars, etc. Genesis 1.14.15. and here may be meant of the Moon; for
the Sun next follows. For these God is elsewhere also celebrated. Psalm.
136.7.8.9.

Verse. 19. soul of thy turtle-dovel that is, the life of thy Church called a
turtle-dove, for their danger to be preyed upon by the wicked, as before, verse
8. being of themselves weak, mournful, and timorous; also for their faith and
loialtie toward God, and innocence of life. In these respects are doves
mentioned, Hos. 11.11. Ezekiel. 7.16. Isa. 38.14. and 59.11. Song. 4.1. and 6.8.
Mat. 10.16. wild-company] or wild-beasts, as the Greek translateth it, meaning
the cruel people like wild beasts, as the Chaldee explaineth it. The same word
straightway follows for the Church, or lively-flock of Christ. See the note on
Psalm. 68.11.31.

Verse. 20. the covenant] which thou did make with our fathers, (as the
Chaldee explaineth it:) it may be meant of the covenant with Abraham and his
seed, as is expressed, Psalm. 105.8.9.10. or, which was made with Noah, that the
world should no more be drowned, as once it was, when it was full of cruelty.
Genesis 6.13.17.18. and 8.21.22. which covenant the Prophets apply to the Church
after. Isa. 54.9. the darknesses] that is, dark-places, as in Psalm. 88.7. and
143.3. he means, that the base obscure places were full of violence, even
folds, or, habitations of cruelty; no cottage being free from the rapine of the
enemies. Dark places, may be put for base, or mean; as in Prove. 22.29. dark, or
obscure persons, are the base sort. The Greek here also translateth it dark
persons, meaning, the vile graceless enemies.

Verse. 22. plead thy plea] defend thine own cause: see Psalm. 35.1. from the
fool] understand, which thou suffrest from the fool, or impious, Nabal, which
word was also before verse 18. whereof see Psalm. 14.1.

Verse. 23. ascendeth] that is, comes up unto thee, it is so great; as Iona.
1.2. or, it increases: as the battle is said to ascend, when it increased, 1
King. 22.35.

Annotations, Psalm. LXXV.
Verse. 1. COrrupt not] see Psalm. 57.1. of Asaph.] or to Asaph: see Psalm. 50.1.

Verse. 2. and near is] to weet, near in our mouths and hearts to celebrate it.
Thus Gods word is said to be near, Romans 10.8. and, thou art near in their
mouth, Ier. 12.2. In this sense the Greek also explaineth it, and we will call
on thy name. they tell] that is, I and others with me: so the Greek says, I
will tell.

Verse. 3. receive the appointment] or, take the appointed-thing, (or time;)
that is, the office appointed and promised. They seem to be the words of the
Psalmist (as appears more plainly by verse 10. and 11.) in person of Christ;
to whom the kingdom of Israel was appointed in due time: whom David was a
figure of, in taking and administering the kingdom when it was distracted with
troubles. See 2 Samuel 3.17.19. and 5.1.2.3. righteousnesses] that is,
most-righteously.

Verse. 4. dissolved] or melted, that is, faint, with troubles, fears, etc. as
Ios. 2.9. set-sure] or, will fitly fasten, artificially stablish, as by line
and measure: that they fall not. Pillars] the mountains; which may also mean
governors; for great personages, are likened to Pillars, Gal. 2.9.

Verse. 5. the horn] the sign of power and glory, Ps. 112.9. and 89.18.25. Luke
1.69. In 1 Chronicles. 25.5. mention is made of prophesies to lift up the horn.

Verse. 6. to on high] that is, aloft: or, against the High God. with a stiff
neck] like untamed oxen shaking off the yoke of obedience Or, speak not a hard
thing (as Psalm. 31.19.) with a neck stretched out, that is, arrogantly; or with
one neck, that is, with joint force: as heart, in Psalm. 83.6. is for one heart.

Verse. 7. the desert,) that is, the South, or North: for deserts were on both
ends of the land of Canaan. promotion] or exaltation: or, as the Greek
translateth, desert of the mountains; that is, the mountainy desert; meaning,
that preferment or deliverance, comes not from any of the nations round about.
The Hebrew Harim is ambiguous, signifying both exaltation, and mountains.

Verse. 8, abaseth one] Hebr. this man. another] Hebr. this man. It may also be
read, He (this God) abaseth, and he advances.

Verse. 9. a cup] to measure out afflictions; as Psalm. 11.6. a similitude often
used: see Hab. 2.16. Ezekiel. 23.31.32. Ier. 25.28. wine] that is, wrath, or
indignation, as is expressed. Ier. 25.15. Job. 21.20. Rev. 14.10. red] or
thick, troubled, muddy. noting fierce indignation. The Greek turns it,
acratou mere, meaning strong wine, not allayed. So in Rev. 14.10. where mere,
or pure wine, means great afflictions. The Greek there is taken from this
Psalm. of mixture] that is, of liquour mixed; ready to be drunk: as wisdom is
said to have mixed her wine; Prove. 9.2. that is, tempered it ready. So Rev.
14.10. he powers out] to weet, unto his own people, afflicting them, as is
expressed. Ier. 25.17.18.28.29. the dreggs] the most greevous afflictions; as
Isa. 51.17.22. wrong-out] or suck up, that is, feel, and be affected with it.
So Ezekiel. 23.34. Isa. 51.17.

Verse. 10. will shew] to weet, this work of God; his mercy, and judgment.
horns of the wicked] their power, dominion, and pride, whereby they afflict and
scatter Gods people, Ier. 48.52. Lam. 2.3. Zach. 1.2.1 Revel. 17.12.13. as by
horns of the just man, is meant his power, dominion, glory, Psalm. 132.17. and
92.11. and 148.14. 1 Samuel 2.10.

Annotations, Psalm LXXVI.
Verse. 1. ON Neginoth] or, with stringed instruments: see Psalm. 4.1. of Asaph]
or, to Asaph: see Psalm. 50.1.

Verse. 3. Shalem] or Salem, the city of Melchisedek, Genesis 14.18. afterward
called Jerusalem: whereof see the note on Psalm. 51.20. The Greek translateth
it, in Peace; which is the interpretation of the name Salem, at the Apostle
shows, Heb. 7, 2. The Chaldee paraphrase says, Jerusalem. his tabernacle] or
tent, pavilion, which is both a mean dwelling, and a moveable, Levit. 23.42.43.
Heb. 11.9.10. For both Moses Tabernacle and Solomon's Temple, were mean cottages
in respect of Gods glory. 1 King. 8.27.

Verse. 4. burning-arrowes] or firie-darts (as the Apostle calls the
tentations of that wicked one, Ephesians. 6.16.) The Hebrew Rishphei is properly
burning-coales, Song. 8.6. figuratively here, the glistring-brasse-headed
arrows, elsewhere the fiery thunderbolts, Psalm. 78.48. and burning-plague,
Deuteronomy. 32.24. Habak. 3.5. likened to arrows, Psalm. 91.5. Here it may lead us to
mind this Psalm to celebrate the victories against Satan, figured by the
vanguishing of the Assyrians and other enemies, 2 King. 19.35. and the warr]
that is, the army of warriers; the battel-ray. See Psalm 27.3. And thus Shalem,
or Peace, is maintained, by breaking all warlike instruments: as Isai. 2.4.

Verse. 5. Bright] made-light, that is, Glorious: speaking to God, as verse 7.
wondrous-excellent] magnificent, see Psalm. 8.2. mounts of prey] the mountains
of the Lions and Leopards, Song. 4.8. meaning, the kingdoms of this world,
which make prey and spoil one of another, like wild beast, Dan. 7, 4.5.6.7.
whom the Lamb on mount Sion, excels in power and glory, Revel. 14.1. and
17.14. Or from the mounts of prey, that is, when thou come from conquering
the enemies, which lie in the mountains to make prey of thy people.

Verse. 6. mighty of heart] or stout, stubborn hearted; a title of the wicked,
that are far from justice, Isa. 46.12. called here in Greek, unwise in heart.
their sleep] their eternal sleep, Ier. 51.39.57. the sleep of death, Psalm.
13.4. So in the next verse. none of] Hebr. all (or any) have not found; that
is, none found. So 1 John. 3.15. every manslayer has not, that is, none has
life. See also Psalm. 143.2. men of power] able men, for strength, courage, and
riches (in which last sense the Greek takes it here,) these did not resist, or
could not; as Psalm. 77.5.

Verse. 7. thy rebuke] that is, punishment, destruction: see Psalm 9.6. charret]
that is, princes and captains riding on charrets and horses, on which they were
wont of old to sight. Judge. 4.3. 1 King. 22.31.34. These all by Gods rebuke
have been slain, as in the camp of Asshur, 2 King. 19, 35. and the host of
Antichrist. Revel. 19.18.-21.

Verse. 8. when thou art angry] Hebr. from then (that is, from the time of)
thine anger: after thine anger is once kindled.

Verse. 11. shall confess thee] that is, shall turn to thy praise, when thy
people are delivered from the rage of their foes. the remnant] or, the
remainder, that is, thy people which remain and perish not in the rages of the
wicked. thou will gird] to weet, with joyfulnes, that they shall sing praise to
thee: as the Greek explaineth it, shall keep a feast to thee. As in Joel. 1.13.
Gird ye, there is understood with sorrow, or sackcloth: so here seems to be
understood) joy, or gladness, wherewith persons (or things) are said to be
girded, Psalm. 30.12. and 65, 13. or thou will gird with strength, as Psalm.
18.40. Or if we refer it to the hot rage of the wicked, the residue thereof
thou will gird, that is, bind, or restrain; from attempting further evil.

Verse. 12. Vow ye] men in danger, or delivered from it, were wont to make vows
unto God; Genesis 28.20. Iona. 1.16. Psalm. 66.13.14. round about him] a
description of his people, as the twelve tribes pitched round about the
Tabernacle, Number. 2.2. and the 24. Elders were round about Gods throne, Rev.
4.4. to the Fear] that is, the most Fearful God; called Fear, or Terror, for
more reverence and excellency, unto whom all fear is due, as Isa. 8.12.13.
Mal. 1.6. So Jaakob called God, the Fear of his father Isaak. Genesis 31.53. And
this was performed, when after Asshurs overthrow, many brought offerings to the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 32.21.23.

Verse. 13. To him that gathereth] so the Greek, to him that takes away: or we
may read, He gathers, (or Cutteth off as in vintage;;) a similitude from
grape-gatherers which cut off the clusters of the vines; aplied here to the
cutting off the lives of men. The like is in Rev. 14.18.19.20. also in Judge.
20.45. Governours] or Princes, Captains, that lead and go before the people.
So Gods Angel destroyed all the valiant men, and Princes, and Captains in the
camp of the King of Asshur. 2 Chronicles 32.21.

Annotations, Psalm LXXVII.
Verse. 1. TO Ieduthun] or, for him: see Psalm. 39.1. and 62.1.

Verse. 2. he gave ear] so the Greek explaineth the Hebrew phrase, to give ear:
see the like, Psalm. 65.11.

Verse. 3. reached out] or slowed, was powered out, that is, was streatched out
in prayer: (a vehement figurative speech, like that of pouring out the heart,
Psalm. 62.9.) or was wet with continual wiping of mine eyes; or, by hand, may be
meant plague, or sore (as in Job 23.2.) which continually ran.

Verse. 4. meditated] or prayed. See Psalm. 55, 3.18. overwhelmed] or covered it
self, that is, swowned, or fainted with sorrow. So Psalm. 142.4. and 143.4. and
107.5. Lam. 2.12.

Verse. 5. the watches] or the wards, custodies, (that is, as the Chaldee
explaineth it, the lidds) of mine eyes; so that I can not sleep.
striken-amazed] beaten with terror, as with a hammer, or, as the Greek says,
troubled. So Dan. 2.1.3. Genesis 41.8. could not speak] so the Hebrew phrase spoke
not, is sometime to be interpreted: as, who shall judge, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. for
which in 1 King. 3.9. is written, who can (or, is able to) judge, So Psalm.
78.20.

Verse. 6. of ancient times] or, of eternities, that is, of ages past. This he
did according to the commandment, Deuteronomy. 32.7. for former histories are written
for our learning. Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10.11.

Verse. 7 my melodie] or musical-play, to weet, how I had before time played and
sung songs of praise for thy benefits; (see Psalm. 33.2.3.) or, I remembered my
music, and took my instrument, and thus I sung.

Verse. 11. does this make me sick, does it grieve and weaken me, that the
right hand (the administration of God is changed, and be keeps not one
constant course in his works? The prophet seems to check himself for his
infirmity. Or, (taking it not for a question) it makes me sick; or, this is
my infirmity. the change] or, that changed is; for so the Hebrew phrase, to
change, may be resolved.

Verse. 12. will record] will remember for my self, and mention to others: the
Hebrew implies both these, by a double reading. miracle] that is, miracles or
wondrous-works (as the Greek explaineth it,) all, and every of them, done of
old. So after in verse 15.

Verse. 13. discourse] or meditate, entreat of, both in mind and talk.

Verse. 14. in the sanctuary] or in sanctity; in the holy place, as the Greek
turns it: meaning, it is most holy, and secret, hidden from the eyes of the
world: as holy things were hidden in the sanctuary, especially, the Ark and
Cherubims where God sat. So as it was not lawful for people, or priests to see
them. Number. 46.7.15.20. Levit. 16.2. Compare also herewith, Psalm 73.16.17: a
God] or, a mighty one, a Potentate. Hebr. Ael. So in the next verse. as God] in
Greek, as our God.

Verse. 15. marvellous-work] that is, works: wonders. This is taken from Exodus
15.11.

Verse. 16. with arm] that is, with power: an arm stretched out, as Exodus 6.6.
in Greek, with thine arm. of Iaakob] that is, the tribes of Israel, born of
him. of Ioseph] this may be meant (as the Chaldee paraphrast takes it) of all
the Israelites whom Joseph nourished. Genesis 45.10.11. and 50.21. called
therefore his sonns: or in special, of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasses, the
sonns of Joseph, noted from the rest, for more honor. Compare also herewith,
Psalm. 80.2.3.

Verse. 17. The waters] of the red sea. Exodus 14.21. Psalm 114.3. trembled] or
were-payned, as a woman in travail. So Psalm. 29.8. and 97.4.

Verse. 18. streamed] or gushed with a tempest. These things were when the Lord
looked unto the host of the Egyptians out of the siry and cloudy pillar, and
so feared and hindered them with stormy tempests that their charret wheels fell
off, etc. Exodus 14.24.25. And thus, Israel was baptized in the clowd, and in
the sea, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. thine arrowes] or stones (as this word also signifies
Lam. 3.16.) meaning hailstones. See Psalm. 18.15. Ios. 10.11.

Verse. 19. in the round-aier] in the sphere, or globe. The aier is so called of
the round form, which it (with all the heavens) has. Of the thunder in the
aier, see Job 37.2.-5. Psalm. 29.

Verse 20. Thy way] wherein thou wentest, and leddest thy people; confounding
thy foes. Exodus 14.19.20.22. Nehem. 9.11. So elsewhere, his way is in the
whirlwind; Nahum. 1.3. were not knowen] to weet, before that time; nor after,
for the waters returned to their force, and drowned the Egyptians. Exodus
14.27. So his other ways are past finding out, Romans 11.33. that men must walk
by faith, not by sight. 2 Cor. 5.7.

Verse. 21. lead thy people] through the sea, and after, through the wilderness
toward Canaan; Moses being their King, and Aaron their Priest. The memory of
which mercy is often celebrated. Deuteronomy. 8.2.-5.15. and 32.10. Ier. 2.2.6. Amos
2.10. Mic. 6.4. Psalm. 136.16. Act. 7.35.36.

Annotations, Psalm LXXVIII.
Verse. 1. MY law] or my doctrine; for of it the Law has the name in Hebrew;
see Psalm. 19.8. Christ speaks in this Psalm, to his people, as the next verse
shows. So Isa. 51.4.

Verse. 2. in parable] that is, in (or with) parables; as the holy Ghost
expounds it. Mat. 13.34.35. All these things spoke Jesus to the multitude in
parables, etc. that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
saying, I will open my mouth in parables, etc. Here the narration, and applying
of ancient histories, are called Parables, because all the things came unto our
fathers as types, and were written to admonish us. 1 Cor. 10.11. What a parable
means; see Psalm. 49.5. will utter] or, well-out, as from a spring or
fountain, hidd-things] so the holy Ghost expounds it in Greek, Mat. 13.35.
the Hebrew word signifying sharp, or obscure speeches, or riddles: see Psalm. 49
5. of antiquitie] or from old: that is, ancient things, since the foundation of
the world. Mat. 13.35.

Verse. 5. stablished] or reared-up. a testimonie] or witness, meaning the
Covenant: see Psalm. 19.8. in Iaakob] among the Israelites, the children of
Iaakob. to then sonns] all their posterity, as Deuteronomy. 4, 9. teach them thy
sonns, and thy somis sonns. So Deuteronomy. 6.6.21.

Verse. 8. perverse] or froward, stubborn. So Israel is noted to be, Exodus 32.9.
Deuteronomy. 31.27.

Verse. 9. Aephraim] the ten tribes of Israel, of which Ephraim was chief,
though they were valiant warriors, yet for their sins, fell before their
enemies. 1 King. 17. Hos. 10, 11, 14. Some understand it of that slaughter of
Ephraims sonns, mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 7.21, 22, 23. which was while their father
lived in Egypt.

Verse. 10. refused to walk] as 2 King. 17.14.15. they would not obey, but
hardened their necks, etc. and refused his statutes, and his covenant, which he
made with their fathers, etc.

Verse. 12. a miracle] that is, miracles, marvels, as in verse 2. parable, is
for parables. of Tsoan] or of Tanis, as the Greek and Chaldee calls it. It
was a chief city in Egypt, and the kings Court, or palace; and a place of
great antiquity, Isa. 30 34. Number. 13.23. So after, verse 43.

Verse. 13. cleft the sea] the red sea; where the Israelites were baptized,
Exodus 14. 1 Cor. 10.2.

Verse. 14. a clowd] to shadow them from the sun; and to guide them in their
journeyes: a figure of Gods protection over his Church, and guidance of the
same. Exodus 13.21. and 40.38. Number. 9.17-22. Nehem. 9.19. Isa. 4.5.

Verse. 15. the Rocks] once at Horeb, Exodus 17.6. and again at Cadesh, Number.
20.1.11. The Rock was spiritually Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. great deeps] that is,
the great deep, as the Greek turns it: the phrase is taken from Genesis 7.11.
though here deeps is put for deep; for the more vehemency. Or we may turn it,
as in deeps very much, to weet, drink.

Verse. 17. to provoke-bitterly] by rebellion, exasperating and causing wrath
and bitterness; as both the Hebrve and Greek words signify. Psalm. 5, 11. Heb. 3,
16.

Verse. 18. for their soul] that is, their last, their appetite: see Psalm. 27,
12.

Verse. 20. bread] that is generally, food, Psalm. 136, 25. and in special,
flesh, as after is explained, and the Hebrew, lechem, sometime signifies,
Levit. 3.11. Number. 28.2. Of this their lusting, see Number. 11.4, etc. can he
prepare] The word, can, is again to be repeated from the former sentence. See
also the note on Psalm. 77, 5.

Verse. 21. ascended] that is, burned: for fire mounteth upward: so verse 31.

Verse. 24. Manna] or as in Hebrew, Man, a small round thing like Coriander seed,
colored like Bdelium, (that is, like wax, and clear, but white;) hard, to be
ground in mils, or pounded; of it cakes were made, whose taste was like the best
fresh oil, and like wafers made with honey: when the dew fell on the host by
night, the Manna fell with it, when the dew was ascended, the Manna appeared
like the hoar frost on the earth; then the people gathered it, for when the
heat of the sun came, it was melted. It was a meat which they knew not, nor
their fathers: when they saw it, they said, It is Manna (that is, a ready meat,
or, What is this?) for they will not what it was: and Moses said, This is the
bread which the Lord has given you to eat. Number. 11, 7, 8, 9. Exodus 16, 14, 15,
31. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Of this they had to eat forty years in the wilderness, till they
came into Canaan. Exodus 16, 35. Ios. 5, 12. It was a figure of Christ, and his
spiritual graces, John. 6, 31, 32, 33. Rev. 2, 17.

Verse. 25. man did eat] or Every one did eat. bread of the Mighties] that is,
of the Angels, (as the Chaldee and Greek explaineth) it,) which are mighty in
strength, Psalm. 103, 20. and Manna is called their bread, either because by
their ministry God sent it; or because it came from heaven the habitation of
Angels, as the Chaldee paraphraseth: or because it was excellent, so as the
Angels (if they needed any food) might eat it. So the tongue of Angels, 1 Cor.
13, 1. is the most sweet and excellent tongue. meat] The Hebrew tsedah,
properly signifies venison, that is, meat caught with hunting: but generally
is used for all food. So Psalm. 132, 15. to satietie] or yenough: for every man
had an Omer full that is, the tenth part of an Ephah, or Busshel) of Manna for a
day. Exodus 16, 16, 36. and of flesh, they had store, till it came out at their
nosthrills, and was loathsome unto them, Number. 11, 19, 20.

Verse. 26. brought on] led, or drove forward; as Number. 11, 3^. Then there went
forth a wind from the Lord, and brought quails from the sea, etc.

Verse. 27. flesh as dust] that is, quails in great abundance; so that he that
gathered least, gathered ten Homers full, (that is, an hundred Ephahs. or
Bushels:) for one Homer contained ten Ephahs, Number. 11, 32. Ezekiel. 45, 11.

Verse. 28. made it fall] the flesh, the quails, being fat and heavy foul, and
by the most south-east wind made more heavy, fell upon the camp, a days journey
on each side, round about the host, and they were about two cubits above the
earth. Number. 11.31. his camp] the Lords, because he dwelt among them, Number. 5.3.
called elsewhere the hosts of the Lord, Exodus 12.41. or his, that is, Isreal's:
so verse 63.64.

Verse. 30. They were not estranged] that is, (as the Greek explaineth it they
were not deprived, their desired meat was not taken away from them: as it is
written, the flesh was yet between their teeth, it was not yet cut off: that
is, taken from them, (as Joel. 1.5.) and the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against the people. Number. 11.33. Or it may be understood, of their affections
and lust not yet changed.

Verse. 31. ascended] that is, burned; as verse 21. This is meant of the plague
wherewith God smot the people, Number. 11.33.34. fatt] that is, the chief, and
strongest; as Judge. 3.29. So weak, poor, or base men, are called lean, or thin,
Psalm. 41.2. Fat, (or fatnesses,) is here figuratively put for fat persons. See
the notes on Psalm. 36.12. and 106.15. choice yong-men] yong-men are called
chosen, because they are selected for wars and other serviceable affairs;
when ancient men are let rest. Number. 1.3.8. and 8.24.25.26. Exodus 24.5.

Verse. 33. hasty-terrour] or, a suddain-plague; as was threatened. Levit. 26.16.

Verse. 36. flatteringly-assured] or deceived, that is, went about to deceive,
by persuading flattering words.

Verse. 37. firmly-prepared] aright-setled, ready, and stable, as is the heart
of the godly, Psalm. 112.7. and 57.8.

Verse. 38. mercifully-covered] made expiation, and forgave; so Psalm. 65.4. and
79 9. corrupted] that is, destroyed utterly: so Deuteronomy. 4 31. multiplied to turn]
that is, much and often turned away his anger.

Verse. 39. flesh] that is, weak, and corrupt. see Psalm. 56.5. a wind] man's life
is a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away. Iam.
4.14.

Verse. 40. How often!] ten times (as the Lord said, Number. 14 22.) this people
tempted him, and obeyed not his voice. 1. At the red sea, for fear of the
Egyptians; Exodus 14.11.12. 2. At Marah, where they wanted drink; Exodus
15.23.24. 3. In the wilderness of Sin, where they wanted meat; Exodus 16.2. 4. In
keeping Manna till the morrow, which God had forbidden, Exodus 16.20. 5. In
going out for Manna, on the Sabbath day; Exodus 16.27.28. 6. At Rephidim,
murmuring for lack of water, Exodus 17.1.2.3. 7. At Horeb, where they make the
golden calf. Exodus 32. 8. In Taberah, murmuring for tediousnes of their way,
Number. 11.1. 9. At Kibroth hattaavah, where they lusted for flesh; Number. 11.4. 10.
In Paran, where they refuse the land of Canaan, being discouraged by their
spies, Number. 14.1* 2. etc. And after this they sinned seven times; as 1. In
pressing to go to sight, when God forbad them, Number. 14 44.45. 2. In the
rebellion of Kotah, Dathan, and Abiram. Number. 16.41. etc. 3. In the murmuring
for the death of Korah, and his company, Number. 16.41. etc. 4. At Meribah,
murmuring for lack of water, Number. 20.2.3. etc. 5. For grief of their way,
murmuring, and loathing Manna, Number. 21.4.5. etc. 6. At Shittim, committing
whordom with the daughters of Moab; 7. And in the same place, coupling
themselves to Baal-peor, and eating the sacrifices of the dead. Number. 25.1.2.3.
etc.

Verse. 41. returned and tempted] that is, eftsoons, again and again tempted;
contrary to the law, Deuteronomy. 6.16. limitted] prescribed limitts, bounds, or
marks; as before verse 20.

Verse. 44. to blood] The first of the ten plagues, wherewith God smote the
Egyptians, which had drowned his children in their rivers. Exodus 7.19.20.21.
and 1.22. whereto agrees the third vial of wrath powered out on Antichrists
kingdom; spiritually called Egypt, Rev. 16.4.6, and 11.8.

Verse. 45. a mixed-swarm] a mixture, sundry sorts of flies, vermin, or hurtful
beasts: by the Greek, they were flies. It was the fourth plague of Egypt.
Exodus 8.24. the frog] that is, froggs, (as afterward caterpillar, locust, for
locusts, etc.) The second plague of Egypt Exodus 8.6. figures of unclean
spirits, which gather the Kings of the world to the battle of the great day of
God. Rev. 16.13.14. corrupted] that is, marred and destroyed.

Verse. 46. their fruit] all that grows out of the earth. caterpillar] a worm
that consumes and spoileth grass and fruits. Joel. 1.4. Locust] or
grassehopper, (which have their name of their multitude, for they fly many
together. Prove. 30.27. Nahum. 3.15. Judge. 6.5.) Locusts in those countries fly
in the air, multitudes together; and wheresoever they fall, they devout every
green thing. This was the eight plague of Egypt, whereby all herbs and fruits
were consumed, Exodus 10.14.15. Figures of Antichrists ministers, Rev. 9.3.4.
etc.

Verse. 47. blasting-haylstone] a word no where found but in this place. The
seventh plague of Egypt was grievous hail mixed with fire, that killed men,
beasts, herbs, and trees, Exodus 9.24.25. So in Rev. 16.21. hayl of talent
weight, falls on blasphemers.

Verse 48. he shut up] that is, gave: see Psalm. 31.9. so verse 50. lightnings]
or, the flying-fire-coles: thunderbolts: see this word Psalm. 76.4. The Greek
here turns it, fire.

Verse. 49. messengers] or, Angels of evils; or as the Greek says, evil Angels:
such indeed God uses to punish men by; Job. 1.12.16, etc. but hereby may be
meant Moses and Aaron, whom the Lord sent to denounce these plagues before they
came, and by their hand brought them on Egypt. Exodus 7.1.2.19. and
8.1.2.5.16.21. and 9.14.15. etc.

Verse 50 He weighed] to weet, making his punishments proportionable to their
sins and obstinacy: for as men increase sin, so does God judgment. Levit.
26.21.23.24.27.28. wild-beast] that is, beasts, which have their name of
livelynes, (as is noted Psalm. 68.11.) therefore some turn it here, life; but he
Greek plainly says, cattle. The fifth plague of Egypt, was the pest, or
morayn, of all beasts and cattle, Exodus 9.3.

Verse. 51. the first born] the tenth and last plague, was the death of all the
firstlings of Egypt, in the night that Israel kept the passover, and departed
the land; Exodus 12.27.29.30. The first born usually ministered to God: but God
smote al such idolatrous ministers in Egypt, and upon their Gods also, he did
execution. Number. 33.4. but spared the first born of Israel, by the blood of the
Lamb, and after chose the tribe of Levi, to minister in their stead. Number.
3.40.41.45. and 8.16.-19. beginning of strengths] or chiefest of painful
mights; so the eldest child is named: Genesis 49.3. Deuteronomy. 21.17. Therefore were
they to be given to the Lord. tents of Cham] the dwellings of th Egyptians,
which were the posterity of Cham, the son of Noah; Genesis 10.6. See the note on
Psalm. 68.32.

Verse 52. his people passe-forth] the Israelites took their journeys from
Rameses, Exodus 12 37. See Psalm. 77.21.

Verse. 54. border of his holines] his holy border, meaning the land of Canaan,
sanctified to be the possesion of his people, and limited in all the borders of
it, as Number. 34.2.3.-12. or, border of his sanctuary. this mountain] that is,
mountany country, Canaan, called a land of mountains and valleys, Deuteronomy. 11,
11. So Exodus 15.17. Or in special, he may mean, mount Sion: whereof after, in
verse 68.

Verse. 55. the heathens] the seven mighty nations of Canaan, where Joshuah and
Israel killed one thirty kings. Deuteronomy. 7, 1. Ios. 12, 7.-24. made them fall in
the line] that is, made their country fall out by line and measure, to be the
inheritance of Israel. Ios. 15. and 16. and 17: chapters. tribes] the
posterity, of the 12. sonns of Israel, called tribes, after the Roman name,
where at first, the whole multitude was divided into three parts, called
thereof tribes: but the Hebrew name signifies, Staves, or rodds, as growing
out of one stock, or tree: and these were twelve, Number. 13.3.5.-16.

Verse. 56. And they tempted] The Israelites notwithstanding all former mercies,
tempted God, and sinned in Canaan their possession, as is manifested in the
book of Judges.

Verse. 57. like their fathers] whose karkesses fell in the wilderness. For of
six hundred thousand men that came out of Egypt, not any one came into Canaan,
save Caleb and Joshua. Exodus 38, 26. Number. 14, 29, 30. and 26, 64, 65. a warping
bow] or bow of deceit, that shoots awry, and so deceives. So Hos. 7.16.

Verse. 58. high-places] Temples, Chapels, and consecrated places on mountains,
where the nations used to sacrifice, and Israel imitated them. Number. 33.52 Deuteronomy.
12, 2. 1 King. 11, 17. and 12, 31, 32. and 14, 23. to jealousie] to jealous
anger, for which, a man will not spare in the day of vengeance, nor can bear
the sight of any ransom, Prove. 6.34, 35. unto this God is moved by idolatry,
which is spiritual fornication. Exodus 20, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 31, 16, 17. and 32, 21.

Verse. 59 abhorred] or refused, with lothsomnes and contempt. So after, verse
67.

Verse. 60. the dwelling-place] the tabernacle set in Shilo, 1 Samuel 1.3. There
God dwelt among men, Exodus 29, 44, 45, 46.

Verse. 61. his strength] the Ark of his covenant, (called the Ark of his
strength, Psalm 132.8.) this was captived by the Philistims, 1 Samuel 4, 11.
beatueous-glorie] or fairnes; magnificence; meaning the Ark forementioned, as
Phineas wise said, the glory is departed from Israel; for the Ark of God is
taken. 1 Samuel 4.20, 22.

Verse 62. shut up] that is, delivered his people to the sword of the
Philistims, who killed thirty thousand Israelites, 1 Samuel 4, 10.

Verse. 63. The fire] that is, Gods wrath, by the sword of the Philistims, as
verse 21. were not praysed] himnes, and songs, as was the wont at their
espowsals and marriages: that is, they were not married.

Verse. 64. Their Priests] Hophni and Phineas, 1 Samuel 4.11. The Hebrew is
singularly, His Priests, and so before and after, his cholse young men, etc.
meaning Isreal's; who is spoken of, as of one man. But the scripture uses these
phrases indifferently, as All Aedom was servants, 2 Samuel 8.14. for which in 1 Chronicles. 18.13. is written, All Aedom were servants. Of this name Priests; see
Psalm. 99.6. wept not] that is, lamented not at their funeral; for Phineas wife
her self died in travel, 1 Samuel 4, 19, 20.

Verse. 65. awaked] stirred up himself to punish the Philistims, whereas before
he seemed to sleep; as Psalm 44 24. after wine] or, by reason of wine: that is,
when he has drunk wine, which cheareth and incourageth the heart; so did God
behave himself.

Verse. 66. behind] that is, in the hinder secret parts; for so God smote the
Philistims with piles, or hemoroids, for abusing his Ark; 1 Samuel 5, 1, 6, 9,
12. eternal reproach] by this punishment, and the monuments thereof, for the
Philistims were forced to make similitudes of their hemoroids, and secret
parts, of gold, and send with the Ark home to Israel, as an oblation for their
sin. 1 Samuel 6.4.5.11.15.17.

Verse. 67. he refused] or abhorred, despised; as verse 59. the tent of Ioseph]
that is, the tribe of Ephraim the son of Joseph, where the Tabernacle and Ark
had remained many years in Shiloh: God returned not the Ark thither, but to
Bethshemesh and Kirjath-jearim, cities of Judah. 1 Samuel 6.12. and 7.1.2.
Wherefore Shiloh is used after for an example of judgment, Ier. 7.12.^4. and
26.6.9, Or this may be meant of the ten tribes of Israel, (of whom Ephraim of
Joseph was chief) which were cast off for idolatry, and captived by the
Assyrians. 2 King. 17.

Verse. 69. builded his sanctuary] the glorious Temple, by Solomon, Son of
David, 1 King. 6.1.2.3. etc. like high-places] kings palaces, or towers. The
Greek and Chaldee turns it Unicorns, whose horns are high, Psalm. 92.11. For
Ramim, high places, they read, Remim, Unicorns.

Verse. 70. from the fold of sheep] that is, from base estate. For David keeping
his fathers sheep, was by Samuel anointed King over Israel. 1 Samuel 16.11.13. 2 Samuel 7.8. So Amos 7.14.15.

Verse. 71. to feed Iaakob] so the Greek well explaineth the Hebrew phrase, to
feed in Iaakob; where, in, is to be omitted in English, as the like phrase
shows, 1 Samuel 16.11. and 17.34. and the Hebrew it self often omitteth it, as
2 Samuel 5.2. and 7.7. So here in the former verse, he chose in David, that is,
he chose David. Kings are said to feed their people; because their office is
like to the good shepherds, in guiding and governing. See Psalm. 23.1. And
Pastors, are Princes, Ier. 6, 3. and 12.10.

Verse. 72. Prudencies of his palms] that is, with most prudent and discreet
administration managed he them; figuring Christ herein, who is called David,
and the great and good Pastor of his flock, Ezekiel. 34.23 Ioh. 10, 11. Hebr.
13.20.

Annotations, Psalm LXXIX.
Verse. 1. OF Asaph] or to him: see Psalm. 50.1. thine inheritance] or
possession; the Land of Canaan, invaded by the Gentiles. Exodus 15.17. 2 Samuel
20.19. Ier. 50.10.11. Lam. 1.10. heaps] that is, ruins, Mic. 1.6. and 3.12.

Verse. 2. karkesse] for karkesses; as after, beast, for beasts: and prisoner,
verse. 11. for prisoners. see Psalm. 34.8.

Verse. 3. none to bury] which is a thing most dishonorable. Eccles. 6.3.
Compare herewith Rev. 11.2.9.

Verse. 5. jealousy] that is, hot wrath burn, as Psalm. 89.47. So Ezekiel. 36.5.
elsewhere, it is said to smoke, Deuteronomy. 29.19. this fire is the flame of Iah, Song
8.6.

Verse. 6. which call not, etc.] a note of prophanenes, Psalm. 14, 4. This
sentence Jeremie uses, Ier. 10.25.

V. 8. former iniquities] iniquities of former times (or persons) done; by us,
or our fathers, as Psalm. 25.7. Lam. 5.7. both are joined together, Lev. 26.40.
Former, and iniquities, differ in gender, yet many times such are coupled, the
sense being regarded more then strict form of words; which the Hebrew text
sometime manifests; as tabo, 2 Samuel 8.5. for which in 1 Chronicles. 18.5. is)
jabo, lahen, 2 Chronicles. 18.16. lahem, 1 King. 22.17. So again in this Psalm,
verse 10. brought low] or weakened, emptied, impoverished. See this word, Psalm.
41.2. and 116.6.

Verse. 10. known be] to weet, the vengeance; let it be open and manifest. Here
again the words differ in gender, (as was noted before, verse 8.) wherefore
some turn it, let him (that is, God) be known, by the vengeance, etc. Compare
herewith Deuteronomy. 32.42.43. Ier. 51.36.37.

Verse. 11. the sighing] or the groaning, mournfull-cry: so Psalm. 102.21.
reserve] or, make to remain, that is, keep alive from destruction; which if God
had not done, they had been as Gomorrah, Isa. 1.9. And this God promised to do;
Ezekiel. 6.7.8. and 12.16. sonns of death] that is, persons appointed to die, or
worthy of death; as 1 Samuel 20.31. Deuteronomy. 25.2. So Psalm. 102.21. and, Son of
perdition, 2 These. 2.3.

Verse. 12. seven fold] that is, fully and abundantly. See Psalm. 12.7. into
their bosome] that is, largely, and that it may affect, and cleave unto them;
so Isa. 65.7. Ier. 32.18. see also Luke 6.38.

Annotations, Psalm LXXX.
Verse. 1. SHoshannim] that is, six-stringed-instruments, or Lilies: see Psalm.
45.1. Eduth] that is, a testimony, or Ornament. An excellent testimonial, of
the faith of Gods people in afflictions. See also Psalm. 60.1.

Verse. 2. feedest Israel] O God, pastor of the Israelites. See Psalm. 23.1.
Ioseph] the posterity of Joseph, and with them, the other tribes. Joseph is
named as principal, the first birthright being taken from Ruben, and given to
him. 1 Chronicles. 5.1.2. So Psalm. 77.16.21. on the Cherubims] which were upon the
Ark of the covenant, in the sanctuary; from whence God gave oracles to his
people, when they sought unto him. Exodus 25.22. Number, 7.89. 1 Samuel 4.4. 2 Samuel
6.2. 2 King. 19.15. Of these Cherubs, see the note on Psalm. 18.11.
shine-bright] that is, show thy glory, and thy favor to us, as Psalm, 50.2.
and Job 10.3. where Shining, is savor. This is taken from Deuteronomy. 33.2. So after
in Psalm. 94.1.

Verse. 3. Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh] that is, the tribes, or posterity of
these three Patriaches: which were all joined together in one quarter, on the
west side of Gods tabernacle; and when it removed, they went next after it;
Number. 2.17.18, 20.22. and 10.21.22.23.24. After the captivity of Babylon also,
the remnants of these tribes, dwelled in Jerusalem, for which they were thanked
by the people, 1 Chronicles. 9.3. Nehem. 11.2. a salvation] or full salvation, and
deliverance. By adding a letter, the signification is increased; as in Psalm.
3.3.

Verse. 4. return us] or restore us, to weet, from sorrow, to joy; from
captivity, to liberty, etc. Psalm. 126.1. and 23.3. face to shnie] or, to be
light, that is, cheerful, comfortable. See Psalm. 4 7. and 31.17. and 67.2.
Dan. 9.17. and we shall] or, that we may be saved: as Psalm. 43.4. so verse. 8.
and 20.

Verse. 5. smoke] be very angry, against the prayer; that is, not hear, but
shut it out; as Habak 1.2. Lam. 3.8. See smoke, for anger, Psalm. 74.1.

Verse. 6. bread of tears] bread steept in tears, as the Chaldee says; or tears
in stead of bread, as Psalm. 42.4. meaning great afflictions, a great-measure]
The Hebrew Shalish, is the name of a measure, so called of three, as containing
a third part of the greatest measure, four times as big, as the usual cup to
drink in.

Verse. 7. a strife] contention, or contradiction; that our neighbors contend
and speak against us, or strive who shall vanquish and possess us. among
themselves] for their pleasure; or, mock at them, (as Psalm. 2.4. that is, at
thy people, as verse. 6. that is, at us, as the Greek translateth it. This may
be the meaning, though, us, went before; for the Hebrew sometime changes
person, though it mean the same; as Deuteronomy. 5.10. that love me, and keep his
(that is, my) commandments. See also Psalm. 59.10. and 65.7. and 115.9.

Verse. 8. and we shall] or, that we may be saved; This verse is the same with
the 4. save that there was, only God; here is added, God of hosts; and in
verse 20. where it is the third time repeated, is added; Jehovah God of hosts:
thus increasing faith and earnestnes in their prayers.

Verse 9. remoredst a Vine] that is, a Church, the common wealth of Israel; as
it is written, the Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah, are his pleasant plant. Isa 5.7. Ier. 2.21. And removing, or
translating, is the word so often used in Number. 3 3. where all the journeyes of
Israel are rehearsed. the heathens] the seven nations of Canaan. See Psalm.
78.55.

Verse. 10. preparedst] or made ready: so this word is translated in Greek,
Mat. 3.3. from Isa. 40.3. and Mat. 11.10. from Mal. 3.1. where the word, way,
is expressed, and here also the Greek says, thou madest-way; properly it
signifies, to take away all impediments, that the plain way may appear.
rootedst in] that is, made to take deep root.

Verse. 11. Cedars of God] that is, the great and goodly Cedars, as Psalm. 36.7.
or, Cedars planted of God, as Psalm. 104.16.

Verse. 12. the river] Euphrates; see the notes on Psalm. 72.8.

Verse. 13. the hedges] the fenses, whereupon the spoil of it follows, as Isa.
5.5. So after Psalm. 89.41.42.

Verse. 14. bore] beastly tiranus, like swine, as the Assyrians, Babylonians,
etc. which wasted the land of Canaan. 2 King. 17.6. and 25.1.2. etc.
store-of-beasts] as Psalm. 50.11. So the law theatned, I will send wild beasts
upun you, which shall spoil you, etc. Levit. 26.22. But here, beasts, are
wicked people.

Verse. 16. the stock] or vine- yard; the base, or place which bears up the
vine branches. and the son] or branch: understand again, visit him, or look
upon him. By the son, may be meant Christ, as the Chaldee paraphrast plainly
says, the King Messiah: (called in verse 18. the son of man, and so here also
in the Greek version: who is the true Vine; his Father, the husbandman; his
disciples, the branches; Ioh. 15.1.5. who takes part with the afflictions of
his people, was himself called out of Egypt, Mat. 2.15. and when his servants
are vexed, it is done unto him. Act. 9.4. Otherwise, by the son, may be
understood a young vine, or branch, as elsewhere, boughs are called daughter;
Genesis 49.22. And so by the son, be meant Israel, as Exodus 4.22. the Lords plant,
Isa. 5.7.

Verse. 18. man of thy right hand] whom thou love, honor, and powerfully
helpest. So Jaakob called the son whom he loved, Ben^amin, that is, the Son of
the right hand. Genesis 35.18. Hereby also is meant Christ; called the son of Gods
love, Col. 1.13. and the Church his body, translated into his kingdom.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXI.
Verse. 1. GIttith] see, the note on Psalm 8.1.

Verse. 3. Take up] to weet in your mouths, or lift up your voice with psalm,
or song. So in Isa. 42.2. to lift up, is meant the voice. give] that is, bring
the timbrell, etc. of these instruments, see Psalm. 68.26. and 33.2.

Verse. 4. Blow the trumpet] or, the Cornet; (whereof see Psalm. 98.6.) this was
done, both to proclaim the solemnity unto men, and to be a memorial for them
before God. Levit. 23.4. Number. 10.10. for in their publik worship, the
Israelites used trompets with other musical instruments, 2 Chorn. 5.12.13. and
29.27. the new-moon] when as a solemn feast, with special worship was
appointed of God, Number. 28.11.14. and at these times (as on the Sabbaths) they
used to assemble to worship, and hear Gods word, 2 King, 4.23. Ezekiel. 46.3. Isa.
66.23. these feasts were a shadow of things to come, but the body is in Christ,
Colos. 2.16.17. the appointed-time] or, the solemnity, solemn feast, which was
thrice in the year, 1. at the Passover, 2. at Pentecost, and 3. at the feast of
Tabernacles, Deuteronomy. 16.16. of which last, some understand this festivity,
Ceseli, as having the name of covering in boothes; others, of the covering,
that is, the change of the moon, when it is hid by the sun. feast] or dance;
see Psalm. 42.5. This may be meant of all feasts: or in special of the feast of
blowing trompets, in the first day of the seventh month, Lev. 23.24. or of the
passover, as after, verse. 6.

Verse. 5. a judgment] that is, a rite, or ordinance, made by God; and a duty
to be performed to him. So judgment, is for duty, Deuteronomy. 18.3.

Verse. 6. in Ioseph] among the posterity of Joseph, and the other tribes of
Israel. Joseph is named, as principal having the birthright. 1 Chronicles. 5.1.2.
So Psalm. 80.2. from the land] so the Greek turns it; the Hebrew ghnal, being
here for meghnal; the same, that men, from: as 2 Chronicles. 33.8. with 2 King.
21.8. Zach. 4.3. At their going out of Egypt, the feast of the Passover was
appointed, Exodus 12. after, in the wilderness, the other feasts. Levit. 23. or
we may read it, against the land, viz. to destroy it, and the first born. Exodus
11, 4.5. I heard a language] Hebr. a lip, used for the speech, or language, as
Genesis 11, 1.

Verse. 7. from the burden] that is, burdens, wherewith they were vexed in
Egypt, making bricks, building cities, etc. Exodus 1.11. and 5.4.5.7.8. basket]
or pot; such vessels as wherein they carried straw, mortar, brick, etc.

Verse. 8 Thou caledst] Israel having left Egypt, Pharaoh with his host pursued
them, and they were sore afraid, and cried to the Lord, Exodus 14.10.15. secret
place of thunder] out of the black clowd, wherewith God guided and protected
Israel, but with thunder, rain, etc. dismayed the Egyptians; Exodus
14.19.20.24.25. See also Psalm. 77.18.19. of Meribah] that is, of Strife, so
named, because Israel there strove with Moses, and almost stoned him. Exodus
17.1 2.3.4.-7. There God proved them, to know what was in their heart, whether
they would keep his commandments or no, Deuteronomy. 8.2. Exodus 15.25. and there they
proved God, Psalm. 95.9.

Verse. 9. testify] or protest, take to witness, namely, the heavens and earth,
etc. as Deuteronomy. 31.28. and 32.1.46. and 30, 19. and deeply charge thee. Compare
herewith, Exodus 19.3, 4, 5. etc. and 20.22, 23. Ier. 11.7, 8.

Verse. 11. open wide] that is, speak, and ask freely. This sentence our Savior
opens thus, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you; ask what ye will,
and it shall be done to you, Ioh. 15.7. and the Apostle thus, whatsoever we ask
of God, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, etc. 1 Ioh. 3.22.

Verse. 12. not wel-affected] had no will, or good inclination; which they
showed presently after the giving of the law, by making themselves Gods of
gold, and by their continual rebellions afterward. Exodus 32, 1.-31.

Verse. 13. perverse-intendement] or, stubborn-opinion, writhing, and obstinate
intention, which they looked after in their erroneous heart. This word is taken
from Deuteronomy. 29.19. and after often objected to them by Jeremie; Ier. 3.17. and
7.24. and 9.14. and 11.8. And this is noted for a judgment of God, when he
suffers people to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16.

Verse. 16. falsly-denied] or seighnedly-submitted. see Psalm. 18, 45. and 66, 3.
their time] if this be referred to the enemies, it is meant, their time of
distress; as Psalm. 10, 1. and 31, 16. So, time is used, Ier. 27, 7. Isa. 13,
22. if to Gods people, it means their continued settled state.

Verse. 17. fed him] that is, his people, verse 14. fat of wheat] the principal,
or flowr of corn. so Deuteronomy. 32.14. Psalm. 147.14. out of the rock] out of which
God had made his people suck honey and oil. Deuteronomy. 32, 13. Spiritually, the Rock
is Christ, 1 Cor. 10, 4. the honey is the gracious words that flow from him;
sweetness to the soul, and health to the bones; Prove. 16, 24. Psalm. 19, 11.
Song. 4, 11.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXII.
Verse. 1. THe assembly of God] that is, the assise (or session) of Magistrates;
whose office is the ordinance of God, Romans 13.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 16.18. and who are to
execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord, who is with them in the
cause and judgment. 2 Chronicles. 19, 6. Deuteronomy. 1, 17. in midds of the Gods] that
is, among the judges, or Magistrates, (verse 6.) who in the law are also
called, Exodus 22.8, 9, 28. because the word of God was given to them, Ioh.
10.34.35.

Verse. 2. How long, etc.] Thus God by his Prophet judges and reproves the
Gods, or ^udges, for unrighteous judgment. accept the faces] respect the
persons, lift up, admire, honor, or favor the faces; a thing forbidden both
concerning rich and poor, Deuteronomy. 1, 17. and 16, 19. Levit. 19, 15. Prove. 18, 5.
Lam. 2, 1.-9.

Verse. 3. Judge ye] that is, defend, deliver; see Psalm. 43, 1. Isa. 1, 17.
justifie] that is, do justice, as 2 Samuel 15, 4. and acquitt, or, absolve him,
his cause being right. Deuteronomy. 25, 1. Ier. 22, 3,

Verse. 5. They know not] The judges are ignorant of their duty, Mic. 3, 1. Ier.
10, 21. Prove. 29.7. they will walk on] that is, continue wilfully ignorant, and
sinful in perverting justice, Mic. 3, 9. To walk in darkness, is to live in
sin. 1 Ioh. 1.6. Ephesians. 4.17.18. and 5, 8. moved shalbe] to weet, therefore
moved, or though moved be all the foundations; though all laws and orders be
violated, all estates disturbed, and strongest helps come to ruin. Isa. 24.18,
19.

Verse. 6. sonns of the most high]) the Chaldee paraphraseth, as the Angels of
the high God. And Magistrates should be as Angels for wisdom: 2 Samuel 14, 20.

Verse. 7. as earthly-men] as Adam; that is, as any other mortal man: so after,
as one of the Princes, that is, of the other princes of the world: for this
Psalm was spoken to the Magistrates of Israel: for whatsoever the law says,
it says it to them that are under the law, Romans 3, 19.

Verse. 8. inherit] that is, have sovereignty and dominion. So this word
means. Lev. 25.45, 46. Ier. 49.2. And Christ is called, heir, (that is, Lord)
of all. Hebr. 1, 2.

Annotations, Psalm. LXXXIII.
Verse. 2. KEep not silence, etc.] Hebr. let not silence (or stilnes) be to
thee: that is, sit not still, but stir up thy self, to help, and avenge us on
our enemies. So silence is used for sitting still, Judge. 18.9.

V. 3. lift up the head] insolently, and boldly, vaunting themselves, and
warring against us. So Judge. 8.28. on the contrary, Gods people shall lift up
their heads, that is, be of good comfort and courage, when their redemption
draws near, Luke. 21, 28.

Verse. 4. thine hidden ones] that is, as the Greek explaineth it, thy saints;
which are hidden of God in his tabernacle in the day of evil, from the strife
of tongues; Psalm 27, 5. and 31, 21. whose life is hidd with Christ in God,
Colos. 3, 3.

Verse. 5. from being] or, that they be no more a nation; Moab, and others
consult thus against Israel; after, the like is against Moab, and effected,
Ier. 48, 2.

Verse. 6. in heart together] this notes, their earnestnes, craftines, and
joint consent in evil.

Verse. 7. The tents] that is, armies with their Kings and captains. Judge.
7.13, 14. 2 King. 7.7, 10. Ier. 6, 3. Hab. 3, 7. Aedom] the Aedomites, or
Idumeanes, which were the sonns of Esau, named Aedom: the brother of Israel:
see the note on Psalm. 60.10. the Ismaelites] children of Ismael, the son of
Abraham, who was (with the bondwoman Hazar his mother,) cast out of his fathers
house for persecuting his brother Isaak; in whose evil ways his children here
walk. Genesis 16.1, 15. and 21.9, 10.14. Gal. 4.22, 29, 30. Moab,] the Moabites,
the posterity of Lot; see Psalm. 60, 10. the Hagarens] the Chaldee paraphrast
calls them Hungarians. They were the posterity of Ietur, Maphish, and other
like children of Ismael, son of Hagar, of whom came twelve princes of their
nations, Genesis 25.12, 15, 16. some of which were called by their fathers name,
Ismaelites, (as before,) some by their granmothers name, Hagarens, and dwelt in
Arabia, eastward from Gilead, near to the Israelites. 1 Chorn. 5.10, 19. The
word Hagarims, signifies fugitives, or strangers, (as the Greek turns them
paroikous, 1 Chronicles. 5, 10.) they were after called Saracens, which in the
Arabik tongue is, thieves.

Verse. 8. Gebal] that is, the Gebalites, or Gibleans, that dwelt in the
Province or City Gebal or Gabala) in Phoenicia near Sidon, whence Solomon had
Masons, or stone-hewers; 1 King. 5.18. Ezekiel. 27.9. Ammon] the Ammonites, that
came of Lot, as did the Moabites, Genesis 19, 37, 38. These nations which were
nearest allied unto Israel, and whom God would not suffer the Israelites to
molest, when they came out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 2.4, 5, 9, 19. combine here
together against Israel to cast them out of Gods inheritance, so evil did they
reward them, as K. Jehoshaphat complained, 2 Chronicles. 20.10, 11, 12. Amalek] the
Amalekites, which were of Eliphaz the son of Esau, the brother of Israel, Genesis
36.12, 16. they dwelt in the south country near Canaan, Number. 13, 30. were the
first that fought against Israel, Exodus 17, 8. etc. for which God would have
had their remembrance put out from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18.19. and K.
Saul was sent to perform it, but did it not fully, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3, 9. and
28.18. and was himself slain by an Amalekite. 2 Samuel 1.8.9.10 the Philistines]
or Palestina, see th note on Psalm. 60.10. Tyrus] the Tyrians, which remembered
not the brotherly covenant that had been between them and Israel, Amos 1.9. Sec
the note on Psalm. 45, 13.

Verse. 9. Asshur] the Assyrians, the posterity of Shem the son of Noah, Genesis
10, 22. This nation was the rod of Gods wrath against Israel, who in the end
captived ten tribes, Isa. 10.5, 6. 2 King. 15, 29. and 18, 9.11.13. etc. an
arm] that is, an help (as the Greek says,) and a strength to Lots sonns, the
Moabites and Ammonites. Thus were here ten peoples, confoederates against God,
and his people.

Verse. 10. as to Midian] the Midianites, the posterity of Abraham, by his
concubine Keturah, 1 Chronicles. 1, 32. who being turned Idolaters; drew Israel to
sin in the wilderness, for which Moses revenged the Israelites of them, by the
slaughter of all their males, and their five Kings, and a wonderful great
spoil, Number. 31.1.7.8.16.32. etc. but after that, recovering, and oppressing
Israel in their own land, were by Gedeon and 300 men, vanquished, when they lay
in the valley, like grasshoppers in multitude, Judge. 6.1. and 7.7.12, 22. etc.
and to this victory has the Psalmist here reference. as to Sisera] the Captain
in the host of Iabin, King of the Canaanites; he had nine hundred charrets of
iron, and vexed Israel sore, but by Deborah a prophetess, and Barak a captain
of Naphthali, the Lord destroyed Sisera, with all his host and charrets, there
was not a man left: and Sisera slying, was killed by Iael, Hebers wife; who
drove a nail into the temples of his head. Judge. 4.2.3.-21. Iabin] the King of
Canaan, who upon the death of his captain Sisera, forementioned; was subdued
and destroyed before the Israelites, Judge. 4.23.24. at the brook] or, in the
bourn, that is, the valley of Kishon; the Hebrew, Nachal (as our English,
bourn,) signifies both a valley, and a river running in it. Kishon was a river
at the foot of mount Carmel, by it, Sisera and the Kings of Canaan fought, and
were vanquished; and the bourn Kishon swept them away, Judge. 4.13. and 5.19.21.
Endor] a city by Kishon, near unto Taanach and Megiddo where the Canaanites
perished, Josh. 17.11. Judge. 5.19. doung for the earth] that is, lay rotting
above ground, unburied, as is explained, Ier. 8 2. and 16.4.

Verse. 12. Put them] or him; that is, every one of their nobles, and all
jointly. See the note on Psalm. 2.3. Oreb and Zeeb] two Princes of the
Madianites, whom Gedeon slew, Judge. 7.25. Zebach and Salmunnah] two Kings of
the Madianites, whom Gedeon also pursued, and killed, Judge. 8.12.21.
authorized] or, anointed] that is, Princes, as the Greek expresses. See the
note on Psalm. 2.6.

Verse. 14. as a rowling-thing] or wheel; but here is meant a light thing, as
chaff, or straw, that rolleth or turns round before the whirlwind, as the
next words show, and a like speech in Isa, 17.13. plainly manifest. Elsewhere
the word signifies also a wheel, Isa. 28.28. and the sphare, or round orb of
the aier; Psalm. 77.19.

Verse. 15. fear] or burn up. See the like similitudes Deuteronomy. 32.22.

Verse. 17. with shame] or dishonor, contempt: the Hebrew word properly
signifies lightness; as the contrary honor, is so called of weightines; Psalm.
3.4. that they may seek] or, and let them seek; it may be meant of the enemies
forementioned, forced to seek and call on God, as Psalm. 18.42. or indefinitely,
that men may seek. So after in verse. 19.

Verse. 19. Iehovah] This is the chiefest name of the Eternal and most blessed
God, so called of his Essence, Being, or Existence, which is simply one, Deuteronomy.
6.4. The force of this name the holy Ghost opens by, He that is, that was,
and that will be, or, is to come, Rev. 1.4.8. and 4.8. and 11.17. and 16.5. and
the form of the Hebrew name, implies so much, Ie, being a sign of the time to
come, Ieheveh, he will be: ho, of the time present, Hoveh, he that Is; and vah,
of the time past, Havah, he was. It imports that God Is, and has his being
of himself from before all worlds, Isa. 44.6. that he gives being or existence
unto all things, and in him all are and consist, Act. 17.25. that he gives
being, unto his word, effecting whatsoever he has spoken, whether promises,
Exodus 6.3. Isa. 45.2.3. or threatenings, Ezekiel. 5.17. and 7.27. It is in effect
the same that Ehjeh, I will be, or I am, as God calls himself, Exodus 3.14. Of
this the Gentiles named the greatest God, Jove, and Iu-piter, that is, Iah,
father, (of the shorter name Iah, mentioned Psalm. 68.5.) and Varro the
learnedest of the Romans, thought Jove to be the God of the Jews, August. l.
1. de consens. evan. chap. 22. Hereof also in Greek writers he is called Iao,
Diodor. Sicul. l. 2. c. 5. Clem. Alex. strom. l. 5. Macrob. l. 1. Saturnal. c.
18. But in the Greek tongue the name Jehovah cannot rightly be pronounced; and
for it the Greek Bibles have Lord, which the new testament follows, as Mark.
12.29. from Deuteronomy. 6.4. and elsewhere usually; and the Hebrew text sometime
puts Adonai, Lord, or Aelohim, God, for Jehovah, as Psalm. 57.10. compared
with Psalm. 108.4. 2 Chronicles. 25.24. with 2 King. 14.14. When Adonai, Lord, is
joined with it, it is written Iehovih, as Psalm. 68.21. then the Jews read it
Aelohim, God; as at other times they read it, Adonai, Lord; and pronounce not
Jehovah at all at this day; though in ancient days it appears to be
otherwise. The Greek history of Baruch, seems to use in stead of it,
Aionios, that is, the Eternal, or Everlasting. Bar. 4.10, 14 20, 22, 24.35. and
5.2. only thou] or, only thine, that is, which only have Jehovah for thy
name; for the true God, has only being; and Idols are nothing in the world, 1
Cor. 8.4. and Angels, and Magistrates are called, Aelohim, Gods, Psalm. 8. and
82. but Jehovah is peculiar to very God alone. And this is that name (I
suppose) which the author of the book of Wisdom, calls incommunicable, Wisd.
14.21. Yet this is the name of Christ, called Jehovah, our justice, Ierem.
23.6. for Gods name is in him, Exodus 23.21. and he is very God, and eternal
life, 1 John. 5.20.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXIV.
Verse. 1. GIttith,] see Psalm 8.1.

Verse. 2. dwelling places] or habitacles, see the note on Psalm. 43.3.

Verse. 3. for the courts] that I may come into them: for the Priests only went
into the Temple; the people stood in the courtyards, which were two. 2 King.
21.5. See Psalm. 65.5. shout] to weet, for desire to come unto God.

Verse. 4. the sparrow] or bird the Hebrew tsippor is generally any bird. Psalm.
11.1. Genesis 7.14. specially the sparrow; when other birds are named, as here,
and Ps. 102.8. for such haunt men's houses. swallow] or free-bird, called in
Hebrew, dror, or liberty, which this bird seems to have above others, flying
boldly, and nestling about houses: so Prove. 26.2. The Greek and Chaldee take it
here for the Turtle dove; which has in Hebrew another name, Psalm. 74.19.
thine altars] to weet, are the places where the birds nestle near unto them, in
houses, or trees, which sometime were by Gods tabernacle, Ios. 24.26. or
understand as before, (I long for) thine altars.

Verse. 6. the high-wayes] or causeyes; namely, which lead to thy house: that
is, they which affect heartily, long after, and delight to go up to thy house.
Spiritually, these ways, or paths, are made by preaching of the gospel; Isa.
40.3. and 35.8. and 11.16.

Verse. 7. They that passing] or, of them that pass. of Baca] that is, of
mulberie trees; which use to grow in dry places. The Greek says, vale of
tears. Both mean, that through wants and afflictions we must come into the
kingdom of God. This valley was near into Jerusalem, as may be gathered by 2 Samuel 5.22.23. Ios. 15.8. put him] or set him, that is, God; making him by faith
a well of life unto them: for he is the fountain of living waters, Ier. 2.13.
Or, set it, that is, the valley, making it a fountain, by digging wells
therein. And this may be an allusion to that Well dug by the Princes and
Captains of Israel, Number. 21 16.18. also with blessings, etc.] that is,
bountifully, and abundantly, the rain shall cover them. Rain figureth out the
doctrine of the gospel; Deuteronomy. 32, 2. Isa. 45.8. Joel. 2.23. Revel. 11, 6. the
rain of blessings is a bountiful abundant rain, Ezekiel. 34.26. (as to sow with
blessings, 2 Cor. 9, 6. is to sow abundantly, or liberally: and blessing, is
liberality, 2 Cor. 9.5. Prove. 11.25.) So God would cause a bountiful rain of
grace and comfort, to cover them that go up to his house in Jerusalem; as
elsewhere he is said to refresh his inheritance, with the rain of liberalities
strowed upon it, Psalm. 68.10. whereas on the contrary, who so will not go up
to Jerusalem, to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, upon them shall come no
rain, Zach. 14.17. The Greek turns this sentence thus, the Lawgiver (or
Teacher) shall give blessings; the original Morch being ambiguous, sometime
signifying a Teacher, Job 36 22. sometime rain, Joel. 2.23 Isa. 30.20. so that
from the Hebrew it may also be interpreted, with blessings: the teacher shall
cover them; the meaning much like the former, the Teacher being God, or Christ,
in whom we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians.
1.3. Some understand, bracoth, blessings, to be here as brecoth, pools, dug
and filled with rain. Both mean one thing.

Verse. 8. from power to power] that is, increasing their power (or strength)
daily more and more; as the Apostle says, we are changed into Gods image, from
glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3, 18. and Gods justice is revealed from faith to faith,
Romans 1, 17. our faith and glory increasing more and more. Prove. 4.18. Or from
army to army, (from troup to troup) respecting the troops of Israel, which
went, all the males, thrice every year, to appear before the Lord, Exodus 23,
14.-17. The Hebrew Chajil, power, is used sometime for an army of men, Psalm.
33.16. and sometime for riches Psalm 49.7. which also may be implied here. he
shall appear] or, till he, that is, every one of them appears, according to the
law, Exodus ^4.23. Zach. 14 16.

Verse. 10. of thine Anointed] or Messiah; our Lord Christ, in whom God
respects us: or David, his figure, and father in the flesh, called also Gods
anointed, 2 Samuel 23, 1.

Verse. 11. than a thousand] to weet, in any other place. sit at the threshold]
that is; be in the lowest room, and basest estate: as the Greek says, be cast
down, (or an abject). And by Gods house, may be meant his tabernacle; as Luke
11.51. with Mat. 23.35. to remain] or abide my whole life long.

Verse. 12. is a Sun] or will be a Sun, that is, a light, Isa. 60.19. Reve.
21.23. understanding hereby, all blessings and comforts by Christ, the Sun of
righteousness. Mal. 4.2.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXV.
Verse. 1. TO the sonns] or, of them. See Psalm. 42.1.

Verse. 2. have been favorable to] or, have favourably-accepted, been
wel-pleased; to weet, in times past. This also respects the promise, Levit.
26.42. captivity] that is, the company of captives, or prisoners; as Psalm.
68.19. See also Psalm. 14 7.

Verse. 4. gathered-away] that is, withdrawn, ceased, or assuaged; as the Greek
interprets it. So in Joel. 2.10 the stars gather-away, (that is, withdraw)
their shining.

Verse. 5. Turn us] to our former estate. cause to cease] or dissipate; as Psalm.
33.10.

Verse. 6. will thou draw] that is, continue: see Psalm. 36.11.

Verse. 7. wilt not thou turn and revive] that is, again revive us. See Psalm.
71.20. The Greek says, O God, thou turning wilt revive us. For, halo, they
read ha-ael: the letters transplaced.

Verse. 8. Show us] or Let us see, that is, enjoy. So Psalm. 50.23.

Verse. 9. the God] or, the Almighty: Ael. and let them not] or, that they turn
not to folly: that is, to sin: see Psalm. 125.3. The Greek says, and to them
that turn the heart to him.

Verse. 10. that glory may dwell] or, glory shall dwell; meaning, that glory of
God, which we are destitute of by sin, Romans 3.23. shall be restored by grace in
Christ, and God will dwell among men, and communicate with them his glory,
Revel 21.3.11. Isa. 60.1. and they are changed into the same image, from glory
to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Or, by glory is meant,
Christ, the salvation of God, who dwelt in our land; when the Word was made
flesh, and men saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1.14.

V. 11. are mett] that is, come together, which before seemed asunder; and they
have mutual societies; (so meeting imports, Prove. 22.2. Isa. 34.14.) The
truth of Gods promises, are in Christ fulfilled. Luke. 1.68.69. etc. Act.
13.32.33. have kissed] as friends use when they meet, Exodus 4.27 and 18.7. a
sign of concord, love, and joy. So Christ is king of justice, and of peace,
Hebr. 7.2. and the work of justice by him, is peace, Isa. 32.17. for, being
justified by faith, men have peace toward God. Romans 5.1. Luke. 2.14

Verse. 12. Faithfulness springeth] or Truth buddeth out of the earth (or land;)
that is, the land brings forth faithful increase, answerable to Gods
blessings upon it. The land figuring the minds of men Heb. 6.6.7.8. which by
faith apprehend Gods mercy in Christ. from heaven] the justice of God through
faith, not our own justice which is of the law. Philip. 3.9.

Verse. 13. the good] or good things; that is, the good gift of the holy Ghost,
to santify his people, as Luke 11.13. compared with Mat. 7.11. See also the
note on Ps. 65.5. our land] our earthly nature sanctified, brings forth good
fruits in Christ. Mat. 13.23 See Psalm. 67.7.

Verse. 14. Justice shall goe] or, He will cause justice to go before him. will
put her footsteps] or, will set (her,) in the way of his footsteps: which
seems to mean a settled course of walking in virtue. Or, when he shall put his
footsteps unto the way.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXVI.
Verse. 1. A Prayer] the like title is of Psalm 17. To Christ may this Psalm
fitly be applied.

Verse. 2. mercifull] or, a gracious-saint; pious, holy. See Psalm. 4.4. This
title God takes to himself, Ier. 3.12.

Verse. 4. Lift I up] see the note on Psalm. 25.1.

Verse. 5. mercifully-pardonest] or art propicious, a forgiver. See Psalm. 25.11.

Verse. 8. Among the Gods] Though there be that are called Gods, whether in
heaven or in earth, (as there be many Gods, and many Lords;) yet unto us there
is but one God, etc. 1 Cor. 8.5.6. all the Gods of the peoples, are idols,
Psalm. 96.5. and none] to weet, cain do works like thine; or, no works are like
thy works. Psalm. 136.4.

Verse. 11. Unite my heart] apply and knit it to thy fear only, and that with
simplicity.

Verse. 13. hel] or grave; the state of death: see Psalm. 16.10.

Verse. 14. the proud,] Compare this with Psalm. 54.5.

Verse. 15. pitifull] or, full of truth, mercy, and tender love. When Gods name
was proclaimed before Moses, this title with other, was in it, Exodus 34.5.6.
long suffring] Hebr. long of nosthrils, that is, of anger; long ere thou be
angry. The nose, and anger, have one name in Hebrew, see Psalm. 2.5.

Verse. 16. son of thine handmaid] that is, born thy servant, of godly parents
that were thy servitors. Of Christ this also was true, the son of Marie the
virgin, the handmaid of the Lord. Luke 1.48. See the like speech, Psalm. 116.16.

Verse. 17. Do with me a sign] or Show it me: that is, So deal with me, in my
deliverance and preservation, that I may have my self, and may be to others a
sign, for good. Korah and his company were for a sign to the Israelites, Number.
16.38. and 26.10. Jonas, a sign to the Ninevites, and Christ to the Jews. Luke
11.30.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXVII.
Verse. 1 HIs foundation] or, The foundation thereof, Gods groundwork of the
Temple which was built upon the mountains Morijah, and Sion. 2 Chro. 3.1. Psalm.
2.6. Some refer it to the Psalm, the foundation (or argument) whereof, is of
the Church of Christ.

Verse. 2. gates of Sion] the publik assemblies of his people: see the note on
Psalm. 9.15. The law was to come out of Sion, Mich. 4.2. and the scepter of
Christ's kingdom; Psalm. 110.2.

V 3. spoken is] that is, are particularly spoken; all, and every of them, [of
the city of God] that is, Jerusalem: so called also Psalm. 46.5. and 48.2. a
figure of the Church. What honorable things are spoken of this city, see Isa.
54. and 60. and 62. and 65. Reve. 21. and 22. chapters. The Hebrew phrase, in
thee, is rightly turned according to the Greek, of thee, or concerning thee:
which many times has such signification, as Psalm. 63.7. and 71.6. and 119.46.
1 Samuel 19.4; so also in the Greek, as Romans 11.2.

Verse. 4. Rahab] that is, as the Chaldee paraphrast says, the Egyptians. So
Egypt is called Rahab, in Psalm. 89.11. Isa. 51.9. either for the strength and
pride of Egypt, (which the word Rahab, signifies;) or of some chief city so
named; as elsewhere Tsoan; Psalm. 78.12. The calling of Egypt to the fellowship
of the Church, is also prophesied, Isa. 19.19.21.25. Babel] the Babylonians,
see Psalm. 137.1. their chief city was Babel. Of a Christian Church there,
mention is made, 1 Petr. 5.13. to them] or, among them that know me; to weet,
my familiars. Palestina] the Philistims: see Psalm. 60.10. Tyrus] the Tyrians:
see Psalm. 45.13. Of them were Christian disciples, Act. 21.3.4. Cush] the
Aethiopians, as the Greek translateth; see Psalm. 68.32. this-man] that is, (as
the Greek says,) these-men; meaning, all before mentioned. So the Hebrew often
often speaks of a whole nation, as of one man. See Psalm. 25.22. and 130.8.
was born there] in the city of God, aforesaid. There, of immortal seed by the
word of God, are men born anew, 1 Petr. 1.2.3. Iam. 1.18. A thing to come, is
here set down as already done: so in Isa. 9.6.

Verse. 5. man and man,] so the Greek also expresses the Hebraisme. Hereby
seems to be meant every man, successively, as Hest. 1.8. For Jerusalem is the
mother of us all, Gal. 4.26, (So day and day, is every day; Hest. 3.4. Psalm.
61.9.) Or, man and man, is many men, of this, and that nation, of each state
and degree. stablish her] that the gates of hell shall not prevail against her,
Mat 16.18. Therefore this city lies foursquare settled in all changes. Reve.
21.16. Ezekiel. 48.16.-20.

Verse. 6. writing the peoples] in the writing of the house of Israel, that is,
the Church, Ezekiel. 13.9. Isa. 4.3.

Verse. 7. And singers] or, And singing are, etc. This may have reference to the
solemn worship of God, used in the Church of Israel; where singers and players
on instruments, had in charge continually to land the Lord, etc. 1 Chronicles. 9.33.
and 25.1.2. etc. and dances were used at their holy feasts, to honor him with,
Judge. 21.19.21. So Christ the Lamb, has harpers with him on mount Sion, that
sing, as it were, a new song before the throne, Revel. 14.1.2.3. Or, it may
respect that which follows, all my springs in thee (or of thee) are singing
(that is, do sing) as also dance, (or, as they that dance,) that is, show
joyfulnes. players on fluits] or, dancers, for so this word may also be taken
for dancing, (to weet, at the sound of the fluit or pipe;) as Judge. 21.21.
Compare herewith Isa. 30.29. The Greek here turns it, rejoycers. my
welsprings] or fountains; (streams of water, as Psalm. 104.10.) that is, all
gifts and graces: which the scripture notes by lively fountains of waters,
wherewith they are refreshed that serve God in his temple, day and night,
Revel. 7.15.17. and welsprings of salvation, Isa. 12.3. And as Christ is called
a fountain, so is his Church, Song. 4 15.12. in thee] for now, unto
principalities and powers in heavenly-places, is known, by the Church, the
manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Petr. 1.12. Or we may read it, as before
in the 3. verse, of thee all my springs, do sing, etc.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXVIII.
Verse. 1. MAchalath] a kind of wind-instrument, or, by interpretation,
Infirmity. See Psalm. 53.1. leannoth] or, to sing-by-turns, which is, when one
part answers an other in singing; it may also be interpreted to afflict (or
humble). This Psalm is the most doleful of all the Bible; full of complaints
even to the end. Heman the Aezrachite] so the next Psalm is entitled of Aethan
the Aezrachite: there were two of this name, Heman, and Aethan; sons of Zerah,
the son of Judah the Patriarch, 1 Chronicles. 2.4.6. men renowned for their wisdom,
1 King. 4.31. also Heman, and Aethan, Singers, and Musicians of the posterity
of Levi the Patriach, 1 Chronicles. 15.17.19. and 16.42. Heman being son of Joel the
son of Samuel the Prophet, 1 Samuel 6.33. himself being also a Seer, or Prophet,
in K. David's days; 1 Chronicles. 25.5. And of the kingdom promised to David, does
Aethan entreat, Psalm. 89.4. etc. Christ's afflictions and kingdom, are in these
Psalms foretold: he was the true David, Hos. 3.5.

Verse. 4. draws neer] or touches hell, or the grave. So, to touch (or come
near to) the gates of death, Psalm. 107.18.

Verse. 5. a man] Hebr. geber, that is, a strong man, but without ability or
power to help myself; as the Greek says, helpless.

Verse. 6. free] that is, acquitted, or discharged from the troubles and
affairs of this life: for in death, the prisoners rest together, and the
servant is free from his master. Job 3.18, 19. or free, that is, sequestered,
apart from others, as K. Azariah being leprous dwelt in an house of freedom,
that is, alone, apart from other men, 2 King. 15.5. from thine hand] that is,
from thy care, help, guidance, etc. as K. Azariah before said, was cut off from
the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 26.21. or by thine hand; and so understand,
from the land of the living, as Isa 53.8.

Verse. 7. pit of the lowest places] the nethermost pit, as the Greek says;
which the Chaldee paraphraseth thus, in captivity, which is like to the nether
pit. darknesses] or, dark places: so Psalm. 143, 3. deep-places] or glufs: see
Psalm. 69 3.

Verse. 8. stayeth] or, is imposed, and lies hard. billowes] breaking-waves of
the sea, see Psalm. 42.8.

Verse. 9. set me abominations] that is, made me most abominable (or loathsome,)
to every of them. can not get out] so Lam. 3.7. Job 19.8. Of this phrase see
the note on Psalm. 77.5.

Verse. 10. languisheth] or pineth away; the Chaldee says, droppeth tears.
Compare herewith, Levit. 26.16.

Verse. 11. the deceased] Hebr. Rephaim, dead men, are so called, as being
incurable or, unrecoverable to life; so Isa. 14.9. and 26.14.19. Prove. 2.18.
and 9.18. and 21.16. See also Psalm. 6.6.

Verse. 12. perdition] Hebr. Abaddon, the grave where bodies perish, and seem to
be lost. So Job 28.22. and 26.6.

Verse. 13. darknes] that is, the place and state of the dead; called the land
of darkness, and shadow of death, Job 10.21.22. So Eccl. 6.4. Note here the
sundry titles given to the state of death. land of oblivion] where dead men
are, (as is before noted:) which also are forgotten, out of mind, Psalm. 31.13.
Eccl. 8.10. and 9.5.

Verse. 16. breathing out the ghost] that is, ready to dye, exspiring: through
continual miseries. The Greek says, in labors from my youth. from the youth]
or, for the shaking-off; that is, the affliction, am doubtfully-troubled] or
distracted, for fear least evils do befall me.

Verse. 17. dismay] suppress, or cut me off. The Hebrew word is larger then
usual, to increase the signification. The Greek turns it, trouble.

Verse. 19. my known acquaintance are in darknes] that is, withdra, and hide
them from my sight; and (as Job complains.) are strangers unto me; See Job
19.13.14. Or as the Greek refers it to the former, and my known-friends (to
weet, thou have put far) from calamity; or, for the calamity, that is, upon
me. Or, as the Chaldee paraphraseth, and to my known friends, dark I am in
their sight.

Annotations, Psalm LXXXIX.
Verse. 1. OF Aethan] see the note on Psalm. 88.1.

Verse. 3. I said] to weet, by thy spirit: therefore the Greek changes the
person, and translateth, thou (Lord) saydest. built up] that is, conserved,
propagated, increased continually. in them] or with them, that so long as the
heavens endure, thy faithfulness shall continue; as verse. 30.37.18. Psalm. 72.5.
and 119.89. or by heavens may spiritually be meant the Church, called often
heaven, and the kingdom of heaven, Isa. 66.22. Rev. 4.1.2. and 12.1. and 15.1.
Mat. 3.2. and 13.24.31. and the planting of the Church, is called the planting
of the heavens, Isa. 51.16.

Verse. 4. my chosen] mine elect people. Therefore the Greek changes the
number; my chosen ones. David] the figure and father of Christ according to the
flesh; who also is called David, Ezekiel. 34.23. Ier. 30.9. Hos. 3.5. of him is
this, and other psalms chiefly to be understood. Act. 2.30. and 13.36. etc.

Verse. 5. thy seed] Christ and Christians, the children of Christ the son of
David. Heb. 2.13. Reve. 22.16. thy throne] the kingdom of Christ, unto whom God
gave the throne of his father David, to reign over the house of Iaakoh for
ever, Luk 1.32.33.69. Jerusalem is this throne, Ierem. 3.17. which is
continually builded of God, Psalm 147.2.

Verse. 6. the heavens] the heavenly creatures, Angels, and godly men; Luk,
2.13.14. Phil. 3.20. Reve. 7.9.10.11.12. See also Psalm. 50.6. in the Church]
or, in the congregation, to weet, shall be confessed, or celebrated.

Verse. 7. sons of the mighties] or, of the Gods; that is, Princes of the world.
See Psalm. 29, 1. and 82.1.6. The Greek says, sons of God, whereby also Angels
may be meant, as Job 1, 6. and so the Chaldee here paraphraseth.

Verse. 8. daunting-terrible] in Greek, glorified. See Psalm. 10.18. the secret]
or mystery, or (as the Greek turns it council: meaning the Church, or
congregation, where the secrets or mysteries of Gods Kingdom are manifested.
Mat. 13.11. Romans 16.25. 1 Cor. 4.1. Ephesians. 3, 4. This word is sundry times used
for a Council, or Congregation, Psalm. 111, 1. Ezekiel. 13, 9. Ierem. 6.11. and
15.17. or it may here be understood of the company of Angels, as 1 Kin. 22, 19.
very-much] to weet, terrible, or referring it to the later, in the great
secret-councel. over all] or, above all; see Ps. 76.12.

Verse. 11. Rahab] in Greek, the proud; hereby may be meant the Egyptians, as
Ps. 87.4. or, the proud sea, as Job 26.12. both were subdued, when Israel came
out of Egypt, Exodus 14. and 15. See Isa. 51.9. The raging sea, and swelling
waters, do also signify wicked enemies of God and his people, Isa. 57.20. Jude
13. Psalm. 124.4.5. thine] or, to thee the earth, to weet, belongs; See Psalm.
24.1.2.

Verse. 13. The North] which God has stretched out over the empty-place; Job
26.7. the right side] that is, the south (as the Chaldee paraphrast
explaineth;) so called because a man standing with his face to the east, (as
they were wont when they prayed,) the south is on his right hand. So the East
is called Kedem, before; and the West, achor, that is, behind; Job 23.8. Isa.
9.12. It seems this turned to superstition and idolatry that men prayed
toward the east; therefore God so ordered his tabernacle and temple, that all
worshipped there with their faces to the west, Eze. 8.16. Exodus 27. Number. 3.
Tabor] a goodly mountain in Galilee, Ios. 19, 22. Judge. 4 6.12. Hermon] an
other fair mountain, eastward, without Jorden, called also Shirion, See Psalm.
42.7. and 29, 6. by these are meant the east and west parts, answerable to the
former North and South: as the Chaldee paraphrast says, Chermon, that is, in
the east.

Verse. 15. the prepared-place] establishment, or base, on which the throne is
settled; so the word sometime signifies, Esra. 3.3. Psalm. 104.5. So Psalm. 97.2.
goe-before] or come-before, prevent; as pressed and ready at hand.

Verse. 16. the shouting-sound] or the alarm, the shrill clanging-sound of the
trompet, which was blown at the wars, journies, assemblies, solemn feasts,
and over the sacrifices of Israel; Ps. 81.4. and 27.6. Number. 10.3.9.10. Joel.
2.1.15. or the shouting, the jubilation, to weet, of the King that is among his
people, as Number. 23.21. who by the sound of his word, as of a turmpet, warns,
informs, and guides his people. Isa. 58.1. Ezekiel. 33.3.-7.8. Hos. 8.1. Ierem.
6.17. 2 Chronicles. 13.12.15. Zach. 9.14. Reve. 1.10. and 4.1. light of thy face]
the favor of God shining in the gospel and light of the knowledge of the glory
of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, John. 12.35. 2 Cor. 4.6. See also the note
on Psalm. 4.7. and 44.4.

Verse. 18 the glory] or beauty, by whom they conquer, and triumph over their
enemies. our horn] a sign of honor, strength, Kingdom, glory and salvation,
Psalm. 112 9. and 92.11. and 148.14. 1 Chronicles. 25.5. Luke 1.69. So after, verse
25.

Verse. 19. of Iehovah] or to him, to weet, pertains. our shield] that is, our
protection, or protector, meaning, David and Christ. see Psalm. 47.10.

Verse. 20. in a vision] by the spirit of prophecy; Isa. 1.1. Lam. 2.9. to thy
gracious saints] that is, Saints, (for so the Greek changes the number,)
meaning the prophets, Samuel, and Nathan; the one of which anointed David, the
other foretold of the perpetuity of his Kingdom; 1 Samuel 16. 2 Samuel 7.4.5. etc.
upon a mighty-one] or a Worthy, a Champion, meaning David, who holy Gods people
in fighting the battles of the Lord. 1 Samuel 18.13.14.50. But chiefly these
things are meant of Christ. chosen] and consequently beloved, as Mat. 12.18.
from Isa. 42.1.

Verse. 21. oil of mine holynes] that is, mine holy oil, powered on David by
Samuel; on Christ, by the holy Ghost. 1 Samuel 16.1.13. Luke 4, 18.21. John. 3,
34.

Verse. 23. The enemy shall not exact] or, not seize, as a creditor does on the
debtor. Satan and death prevailed not against Christ, though he became surety
for our debts. John. 14, 30. 1 Cor. 15.26. Heb. 2, 14. See this word Psalm.
55.16. son of injurious-evill] that is, the injurious, wicked person: this
promise is in 2 Samuel 7, 10. applied in this phrase to all Gods people. A son of
evil, is one addicted and given over to it; Deuteronomy. 13.13. So sons of death,
Psalm. 79.11. son of perdition, 2 These. 2, 3.

Verse. 26. set his hand] that is, give him power and dominion over them that
dwell by the sea and rivers; whereof see the notes on Psalm. 72.

Verse. 27. my father] so God promised, I will be his father, and he shall be my
son; 2 Samuel 7, 14. The Apostle applies this to Christ, and proves hereby that
he is greater than the Angels, Heb. 1, 4, 5.

Verse. 28. first born] or, first-begotten; that is, the principal, as is after
explained. For the first born had three prerogatives, a double portion of
goods, Deuteronomy. 21.17. the government, or chiefly, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. and the
priesthood, Number. 8, 14.15.16.17. Mal. 2.5.6.7. and 3, 3, See the note on Psalm.
78, 51. This honor is peculiar to Christ, who is said to be the first born of
every creature, and the first born of the dead, that in all things he might
have the preeminence, Colos. 2.15.18. to be worshipped therefore of all the
Angels of God, Hebr. 1.6. and prince of the Kings of the earth. Revel. 1 5.

Verse. 30. his seed] Christians born of God, are called Christ's seed and
children. Isa. 53.10. Heb. 2.13. and Christ is called the Everlasting Father,
Isa. 9.6. his throne] that is, kingdom; which shall be perpetual, 2 Samuel 7.13.
Heb. 1.8. Dan. 2.44. and 7, 14. The accomplishment of these promises cannot be
found in Solomon, whose seed and throne was overthrowen, Ier. 22.30. Ezekiel.
21.25.26.27.

Verse. 31. If his sonns, etc. This explaineth the promise, If he sin, etc. 2 Samuel 7.14.15. for being understood of Christ, he properly sinned not, 1 Pet. 2,
22. but was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. and the sins of his sons, or people,
are counted his, for God laid on him the iniquity of us all. Isa. 53.6.

Verse. 33. with the rod] the rod of men, 2 Samuel 7.14. that is, with moderate
correction, and for their profit, that they may be partakers of my holiness.
Heb. 12, 6, 10.

Verse. 34. not make frustrate] not break off, or cease, (as Psalm. 85.5. that
is, not utterly take: for the mountains shall sooner remove, Isa. 54, 10. and
no afflictions can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, Romans 8.35.-39. See the fulfilling of this touching David, in 1 King.
11.6, 12, 13.36.39.

Verse. 36. Once] or One-time: see Ps. 62.12. by my holines] by myself who am
the holy God, Genesis 22.16. Isa. 5.16. Because he has no greater to swear by,
God swears by himself; and willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of
promise the stablenes of his counsel, binds himself by an oath. Heb.
6.13.17.18. if I lye] that is, surely I will not lie: for so the Hebrew phrase
is sometime explained; as Mark. 8.12. if a sign be given to this generation,
for which in Mat. 16.4. is written, a sign shall not be given. So, if they
shall enter into my rest, Psalm 95, 11. Hebr. 3.11. which the Apostle opens
thus, he swear that they should not enter. Heb. 3.18. An oath usually implies
an imprecation, which for the most part is concealed. See 1 Samuel 14.44. 1 King.
20.10.

Verse. 37. as the sun] that is, perpetual, and glorious, (as the Chaldee
explaineth it, shall shine as the sun,) See Psalm. 72.5.

Verse. 38. it shall be stablished] or, which is stable, referring it, (as does
the Greek,) to the Moon, which although it sometime waxes, and sometime waneth,
and seems to be gone; yet is continually renewed, and so stable: a fit
exsemblance of the throne, or Church of Christ, which has not always one face
or appearance in the world; though it be perpetual. and a witnesse] the moon
and perpetuity of it, with the successive course of night and day, is made a
witness of Gods faithfulness in his covenant, Ier. 33 20.11. Christ also himself
is called a faithful witness, Rev. 1.5. Isa. 55 4. and faithful, means,
steadfast, as 2 Samuel 7.16. compare with 1 Chronicles. 17.14. and that lies not;
Prove. 14.5.

Verse. 39. But thou] or, And thou, a word of grief and indignation, as Psalm.
2.6. Aethan complains of the miseries of the Church, whereby all the former
promises, seem to be frustrated.

Verse. 40. his crown] or diadem, profaned, by casting to the ground. Nezer, a
separation, is figuratively used for a crown or garland, such as Kings wore, 2 Samuel 1.10. and high priests, Exodus 29.6. as being a sign of their separation
from others in respect of some dignity, or holiness: and thereof the Nazarites
had their name, Number. 6.2.5.7. So Psalm. 132.18.

Verse. 42. rob] or rifle him, meaning Christ in his members: for that which is
done to any of them, is done unto him. Act. 9.4. Mat. 25.40.45.

Verse. 45. his brightnes] or purity, that is, the splendent glory and dignity
of the Kingdom, defiled and profaned by the enemies.

Verse. 46. days of his youth] of his strength and vigor; hastening old age
and misery upon him. Hos. 7.9. See the contrary, Psalm. 103.5. Job. 33.25.

V. 48. how transitorie] or of what worldly-time, of what short durance: see
Ps. 39.6. the Greek turns it, what my substance is. Compare herewith, Job
10.9.10, etc.

Verse. 49. see death] that is, dye. So Luke 2, 26. Psalm. 16 10. the hand of
hell] the power of the grave, or, of death. see Psalm. 49.16.10.

Verse. 51. of all great peoples] or, of all the many (the multitudes of)
peoples.

Verse. 52. the footsteps] or, foot soles; that is, the ways, life, actions,
and sufferings. Psalm. 56, 7. and 49.6. This referred to Christ, respects the
oracle, Genesis 3.15. that the serpent should bruise the foot sole of the woman's
seed. Referred to Christians, which follow his footsteps, in suffering and
dying with him, that we may be glorified with him, 1 Petr. 2, 21. Romans 8, 17.)
it notes the scandal of the cross of Christ, to the Jews a stumbling block,
and to the Greeks, foolishnes 1 Cor. 1.23. 1 Petr. 4.13.14.

Verse. 53. Blessed be.] These be words of faith and joy, as finding an issue
out of the tentation: and rejoicing in the midds of tribulation; as Romans
7.24.25. 2 Cor. 1.8.4, etc. and Amen.] Thus is the third book of the psalms
also concluded. See the notes on Psalm. 41.14. and 72.19.

The fourth book.
Annotations, Psalm XC.
Verse 1. THe man of God] that is; the Prophet; as Deuteronomy. 33.1. For a Prophet, a
Seer, and a man of God, were all one; 1 Samuel 9.6.8.9.10.11. The Chaldee
paraphrast shows it here, saying, A prayer that Moses the prophet of the Lord
prayed, when the people of the house of Israel had sinned in the wilderness. an
habitation] or mansion, in our travailes in this terrible wiildernes. Exodus
33.14. Deuteronomy. 8.15. and 33.27.

Verse. 2. were born] this and the next word, brought forth, are similitudes
taken from procreation of children, to signify the creation of the world. Like
speeches are in Job 38, 28, 29. of the rayn, deaw, ice, and frost.

Verse. 3. unto contrition] till he be contrite, or broken; that is, even to
death, as the Chaldee explaineth it. return] the body to the earth, Psalm.
146.4. and the spirit to God, Eccles. 12.7.

Verse. 4. a watch] a ward, or custody; which is about three hours space: for
the Jews divided the day into twelve hours, John. 11.9. and so the night:
which they subdivided into four watches, Mat. 14.25. named the evening,
midnight, cock-crowing, and dawning: Mark. 13.35. Luke 12.38.39. Mat. 24.43.
See also Exodus 14.24. 1 Samuel 11.11.

Verse. 6. is changed] or changes, to weet, the estate thereof; that is,
sprowteth, or grows, as the Chaldee explaineth it. And so the Hebrew (which
generally signifies a change, passage, or shifting,) is sometime used for the
better, to sprowt, Job 14.7. So to change the strength, Isa. 40.31. is to
renew, or increase it.

Verse. 8 our hidden sinns] or, sins of our youth, as the Chaldee here takes
it. The Hebrew word will bear both; so also the sense: for we have both secret
sins, Psalm. 19.13. and sins of our youth, Psalm. 25.7. which God often
punishes us for, Job 20.11. to the light of thy face] that is, knowing,
remembering, manifesting, and punishing them. Ier. 16.17. Psalm. 109.14.15. For
the Lord lightneth things that are hidd in darkness, and makes the counsels of
the hearts manifest, 1 Cor. 4 5. he is of pure eyes and cannot see evil, Habak.
1.13. therefore David prays, hide thy face from my sins, Psalm. 51.11.

Verse. 9. do turn away] or, turn-the face, decline; as the day drawing to an
end. Ier. 6:4. as a thought] or, as a word, a sound that passes out of the
mouth, as Job 37, 2. as a tale that is told; for man's life is a breath, or
vapor; Psalm. 39, 6. Iam. 4, 14. Moses bewayleth the decaying of the people in
the wilderness: for they came out of Egypt, six hundred thousand men, Exodus 12,
37. and not one feeble among them, Psalm 105, 37. and being mustred at mount
Sina: from 20. years old and above, they were 603550. men, besides the tribe of
Levy; Number. 1, 46, 47. but for their sin, at Kadesh, God swear their karkesses
should fall in the wilderness; Number. 14.28, 29. which came so to pass. For being
mustred about 38. years after, there was of all that army, not left a man
alive, save Caleb and Joshua. Number. 26, 63, 64, 65.

Verse. 10. if they] (the years) be in strength; that is, most strong and valid:
or, if by reason of great-strength. their pride] or prowess, that is, the
excellency, or lustihead of those years, the bravest of them, is but misery.
painful-iniquitie] pain and misery, the punishment of sin. Iniquity is often
put for the punishment of it, Ps. 32.5.

Verse. 11. and according to thy fear, etc.] or, as thy fear; that is, who
knows (or acknowledges) thy wrath, so as thy fear teaches men to do?
meaning by fear, either Gods law, as Psalm. 19, 10. or his fearful judgments
upon sinners, which should strike a fear into men's hearts. Deuteronomy. 13, 11. Psalm.
119, 120. Ion. 1, 16. or, as thy fear; that is, so as to fear thee for thy
wrath, and by it to depart from evil, as Prove. 16.6. 2 Cor. 5.10.11. or, even
according to thy fear, so is thy wrath.

Verse. 12. may apply] or, may bring, may make-come. to wisdom,] or, may get a
heart of wisdom, that is, a wise heart; and so may bring it to thee, when we
shall come to judgment.

Verse. 13. how long?] will thou afflict us? as the Chaldee paraphraseth: or,
will thou deferr to help us? see Psalm. 6.4. repent thee] to weet, of the evil
intended or inflicted upon thy servants, as Deuteronomy. 32.36. Joel. 2.13. Ion. 3.10.
Ier. 18.8.

Verse. 14. In the morning] that is, early; after the dark night of afflictions;
see Psalm. 5.4. and 30.6.

Verse. 15. the years, etc.] that is, as we have been many days and years
afflicted: so let us have many years of comfort.

Verse. 16. thy comely honour] or magnificence, in releasing us from trouble, and
refreshing us with mercy.

Verse. 17. the pleasantnes] or, beauty; that is, the accomplishment of thy
covenant and promise to our fathers, let now be seen upon us. So the staff,
beauty (or pleasantnes) in the Lords hand, signified his covenant with them,
Zach. 11.7.10. or generally, it means Gods aminable grace and favor. see
Psalm. 27.4. stablish] or direct, firm and sure. For the Lord works all our
actions for us, Isa. 26.12. and without him, we can do nothing, John. 15.5.

Annotations, Psalm XCI.
Verse. 1. SHall lodge] or, that lodges: abides.

Verse. 2. I will say] or, do say, namely, to that man for his further comfort
and assurance; as verse 3. etc. or, in his name; putting myself for an example.
The Greek for more plainnes changes the person thus, He shall say to the Lord
thou art mine helper, etc. of Iehovah] or, to him, that he is my safe hope, (or
my shelter.)

Verse. 3. of the fowler,] as Psalm 124.7. or hunter; meaning the devil that
has the power of death and seeks to destroy. Heb. 2.14. 1 Pet. 5.8. the
woefull-pestilence] Hebr. the pest of woefull-evils, that is, the most woeful,
noisome and contagious pest.

Verse. 5. the dread of the night] the dreadfull-evill, that terrifieth in the
night. Prove. 3.25. Song. 3.8.

Verse. 6. the stinging-plague] the murrain (or pest) that suddenly pricketh
and destroys. Deuteronomy. 32.24. The Apostle in Greek calls it a sting, or prick,
1 Cor. 15.55. from Hos. 13.14. as there the Lxx. turned it. at noon-day] that
is, openly: so Ier. 15.8.

Verse. 8, shall thou behold] or, regard, consider, as the Greek turns it.

Verse. 9. Because thou Iehovah] an unperfect speech, as in verse 2. understand,
Because thou say, thou Jehovah art, etc. or, because thou have put Iehovab
who is my covert: even the most high have thou put for thy mansion, or
dewlling place.

Verse. 10. befall unto thee] or occasionally-be-sent, be thrust upon thee, or
caused to come unto thee: so Prove. 12.21.

Verse. 12. upon their palms] or, their hands; as the Greek turns it: This
scripture the Devil alleged when he tempted Christ, to throw down himself
headlong: Mat. 4.6. Luke 4, 10, 11. but some of these words, are there omitted.
least thou dash] or, that thou dash (or hurt) not. The Angels are all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be
heirs of salvation. Hebr. 1, 14. See also Psalm. 34.8.

Verse. 13. the fierce-Lion] or Libbard, in Hebrew Shachal. Of Lions there be
diverse kinds; see Psalm. 7.3, asp] or Cockatrice, basilisk, as the Greek here
turns it: see Psalm. 58.5. under these names, are meant all other things
dangerous or adverse to the life of man, which by faith are overcome; as Mark.
16.17.18. Heb. 11.33.34.

Verse. 14. he cleaves to me] or, is fastened, that is, affected to me, in
faith, hope, delight, etc. God cleaves in love to his people, Deuteronomy. 7, 7. so
they also unto him; The Greek here turns it, he hoped in me. Elsewhere it is
commonly used for fast-love and pleasure. Genesis 34 8. Isa. 38, 17. Deuteronomy. 21.11.
set him on high] to weet, in a safe defensed place, as the word imports:
therefore the Greek says, I will protect him. see the note on Psalm. 20 2.

Verse. 15. honor him] give him honor, or glory: Elsewhere his people are said
to honor, or, glorify him, Psalm. 50.15. See 1 Samuel 2.30.

Verse. 16. satisfy] or, give him his fill. So Abraham, Isaak, David, Job, etc.
are said to be full, or satisfied with days, Genesis 25.8. and 35.29. 1 Chronicles.
23.1. Job 42.17. make him to see] that is, to enjoy; or show him: see Psalm.
50.23.

Annotations, Psalm XCII.
Verse. 1. OF Sabbath] that is, of Cessation, or Resting, to weet, from our own
works, wills, ways, and words, Exodus 20.10. Isa. 58.13. Heb. 4, 10. which day
was the seventh from the creation, wherein God rested from all his work, and
blessed, and sanctified it, and commanded it to be kept holy unto him, Genesis
2.2.3. Exodus 20.8. which was a token of his mercy unto, and sanctification of
his people, Nehem. 9.14. Exodus 31.13, 14. This day was sanctified by an holy
convocation, or assembly of the people; Levit. 23.3. offering of sacrifices,
Number. 28.9.10. singing of Psalms, as this title shows, 2 Chronicles. 29.26, 27.
reading and expounding the scriptures, Act. 13.15. and 15.21 praying, Act. 16,
13. disputing, conferirng, meditating of Gods word and works; Act. 17, 2. and
18.4. and doing works of mercy to them that were in need. Mat. 12 2.-7.8.11.12.

Verse. 3. in the nights] see Psalm 134, 1.

Verse. 4. with meditation] or meditated-song: or upon Higgajon with the harp.
The word signifies meditation, as Psalm 9.17. Here some think it to be the
name of an instruments, or, a solemn sound: the Greek turns it a song.

Verse. 5. with thy work] which is all done well and perfectly; Genesis 1.31. and
2.2.3. Deuteronomy. 32, 4.

Verse. 10. shall be scattred] or, shall dispart themselves; The Chaldee
paraphrast says, shall be separated from the congregation, of the just.

Verse. 11. shall be exalted] or, thou will exalt, as the Unicorns, therewith to
smite mine enemies; as Deuteronomy. 33, 17. The horn signifies kingdom, and strength,
and glory. See Psalm. 75.5.11. Psalm. 22.22. mine old age] so also the Greek
translateth it: or, when I am old. After which seems to be understood, shall be
anointed, (or, as before, shall be exalted) with oil. Oftentimes words are not
expressed, which are understood: as is observed on Psalm. 69:11. and 18.7.29.
Others, for mine old age, do turn it, shall be anointed. fresh] or, green oil.

Verse. 12. mine eye shall view] to weet, evil, or destruction, as the Chaldee
explaineth: or the reward of my foes. See Psalm. 54, 9. and 91, 8.

Verse. 13. palm-tree] or date-tree; which grows not in these cold parts: it
is a tree of tall and upright stature; whereto the scripture has reference,
Song. 7.7. the branches, fair and green; wherewith they made boothes at their
solemn feasts, Lev. 23, 40. the fruit pleasant to eat; Song. 7, 8. Exodus, 15,
27. This tree though laden and pressed, yet indureth and prospers; therefore
the branches carried in the hand, or worn in garlands, were signs of victory,
Rev. 7, 9. with such graven trees, the walls of Gods house, and other holy
things were beautified, 1 King. 6, 29. and 7, 36. figures of the flourishing
estate of the godly always, as this psalm shows, with Ezekiel. 40.16, 26, 31.
and 41.18, 19, 20. whereas the wickeds prosperity, is momentany, as grass;
verse 8. a Cedar] see the note on Psalm. 29, 5.

Verse. 15. sprowt] or grow, waxing in stature and fruitfulnes; through the
blessing of God, in whose house they are planted, 1 Cor. 3, 6. Unto this, are
all Gods people exhorted, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Colos. 11.10. in graines] or
hoary-age, when natural strength decays; God ministers vigor above nature.
See Psalm 71 9, 1. Isa. 65, 22. Heb. 11.11.12,

Verse. 16. no injurious-evill] no manner of injustice; for the Hebrew has a
letter more then ordinary to increase the signification, as Psalm. 3.3. and
125.3. And his respects Moses speech, Deuteronomy. 32.4. where injurious-evil, is
opposed to Gods faithfulness in his administration.

Annotations, Psalm XCIII.
Verse. 1. IS cloathed] or has put on, to weet, as an ornament, and in abundant
mesure, for so clothing does signify, Psalm. 65.14. girded himself] that is, is
in a readiness, to perform his work. Isa. 8.9. Luke 12.35.

Verse. 2. from then] that is, of old; or before then; which the Chaldee
expounds, the beginning: this phrase spoken of God, or Christ, means
eternity, Prove. 8.22. in respect of the creatures, it is the beginning of time.

Verse. 3. The flouds] these are often put for the tumultuous rage, and tyranny
of peoples. Psalm. 65.8. and 18.5. Isa. 17.12.13.

Verse. 4. wondrous-strong] excellent, or magnificent billows: this phrase is
taken from Exodus 15.10. See also this word, Psalm. 8.2. the high-place] or
height, that is, heaven. So Psalm. 71.19.

Verse. 5. faithfull] or, made sure, constant. See the note on Psalm. 19.8. to
length of dayes] that is, for ever. See Psalm. 21.5. and 23.6.

Annotations, Psalm. XCIV.
Verse. 1. GOd of vengeances] to whom vengeance belongs, as Deuteronomy. 34.35. and
which punishest evils. So elsewhere he is called the God of recompenses, Ier.
51.56. shine clear] to our comfort, and our foes terror. See Psalm. 50.2. and
80.2.

Verse. 2. be lifted up] on thy throne, and in thy just judgment. So Psalm.
7.7.8.

Verse. 4. Vtter] or talk lavishly, Well-out as a fountain: see Psalm. 19 3. Iam.
3.11. a hard-word] hard things; durable reproaches; see Psalm. 31.19. boast] or
exalt themselves with speaking and applying things to their own praise. This
word is used in the good part, Isa. 61.6.

Verse. 9. that planted the ear] that is, made, and set it in the body. So in
Isa. 51.16. he is said to plant the heavens.

Verse. 10. man knowledge] here is to be understood, shall not he know? Such
imperfect speeches through passion of mind, are often in scripture. Psalm. 6.4.
2 Samuel 5.8. supplied in 1 Chronicles. 11.6.

Verse. 11. the thoughts of earthly-men] the inward disceptations and reasonings
of all men, even the wisest. This sentence Paul alleges against the wisdom of
the world, 1 Cor. 3.20. and as an expositor, in stead of men, he puts the
wise.

Verse. 12. the man] Hebr. geber, the mighty. chastenest] or nurturest,
instructest, as this word is Englished, Deuteronomy. 4.36. which this place seems to
have reference unto. For chastisement, or restraint, is by word or deed. And
here the doctrine of Gods law, is opposed to all wise men's cogitations.

Verse. 14. not leave his people] not give them over, or reject them; (as the
Greek turns it:) to weet, those whom he has fore-knowen and chosen; because
it has pleased the Lord to make them his people; as 1 Samuel 12.22. Romans 11.1.2.
etc.

Verse. 15. judgment shall return to justice.] that is, severity to mercy: the
rigor of the law, changed to the elemencie of the gospel. So judgment is
often used for sentence of punishment, as Ier. 52.9. and justice, for grace and
mercy, see Psalm. 24.5. or judgment, which in the affliction of Gods people,
and prosperity of the wicked, seems to be parted from justice, shall return
into it, when the godly are delivered and the wicked punished. after it] so the
Greek turns it: or, after him, meaning, God.

Verse. 16. who will rise up] or who stands up, namely, to assist me? meaning,
no man does.

Verse. 17. an helpfulnes] that is, a full help, see Psalm. 44.17. in silence]
the place of stilnes and silence, that is, the grave, as the Greek explaineth
it: so Psalm. 115.17. see also Psalm. 49.13.

Verse. 18. is moved] or slippeth; see Psalm. 38.17.

Verse. 19. my cogitations] my careful troubled thoughts, perplexed as the
branches of a tree, (for so the word properly signifies,) therefore the Greek
turns it, sorrows. So Psalm. 139.23.

Verse. 20. of woeful evils] or of mischiefs; the mischievous tyrannous throne
of the unrighteous judge: shall it have fellowship, (or be joined) with thee (O
God!) meaning, it shall not: as, Shall thou build? 2 Samuel 7.5. is, Thou shall
not build; 1 Chronicles. 17.4. See also Psalm. 5.5. which frameth] or, he that
frames, or forms. by a decree] or, for a statute, a law.

Verse. 21. run-by-troup's] combine, and gather together as banded to fight: in
Greek, they hunt for.

Verse. 23. will turn] Hebr. has turned; that is, will assuredly turn. in their
malice] or, for their evil.

Annotations, Psalm. XCV.
Verse. 1. COme] or Go to. The holy Ghost by David thus exhorts Israel to
laud the Lord and obey his voice. For he penned this psalm, Heb. 3.7. and 4.7.
the Rock] meaning Christ, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 3.6.7. the Greek
translateth it, God our savior.

Verse. 2. prevent] come first, and speedily.

Verse. 3. great God] or, great Potentate; Ael. So Christ is also entitled,
Tit. 2.13. all Gods] Angels, Princes, or false Gods. Psalm. 8.6. and 82.6. and
96.4.5.

Verse. 4. deep-places] or, deep closets, Hebr. searchings; that is, deep secret
places for which search is made, Job 28.1.2. etc. and which cannot by man's
search be found. Job 38.4.5.6.18. strong-heights] or, wearisom-heights, high
mounts which weary men to clime them: but the word has also a signification,
of strong, and not being wearyed; Number. 23.22.

Verse. 7. of his hand] that is, of his guidance; Psalm. 77.21. See also Psalm.
100.3. to day] hereby is meant the whole time wherein Christ speaks by his
gospel. Heb. 3.7.13.15. and 4 7.8.

Verse. 8. in Meribah] that is, in the Contention (or Provocation, as the Greek
turns it.) The name of a place in the wilderness, where Israel contented with
Moses, and tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us or no? because there
was no water for the people to drink. Therefore he called the place Massah,
(Tentation) and Meribah, Contention.) Exodus 17.1.2-7. Also an other place,
where again they contended with Moses, and with the Lord, Number. 20.1.3.13. day
of Massah] that is, of Tentation: by day again, we may understand the whole
space wherein they tempted God ten times, as is said, Number. 14.22. (so the day
of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. is the time thereof.) Yet there was a special day and
place of Tentation named Massah. Exodus 17.2.7. whereupon Moses warned the
people, Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah.
Deuteronomy. 6.16.

Verse. 9. tempted me] hereupon the Apostle says, they tempted Christ; 1 Cor.
10.9. my work] that is, works, Heb. 3.9. both in miraculous mercies giving them
bread from heaven, and waters out of the rocks, etc. Psalm. 78.15-23, etc. and
in punishments for their rebellions, Psalm. 78.31.33, etc. Heb. 3.17. For work
sometime signifies reward. Psalm. 109.20. Job 7.2. Levit. 19.13.

Verse. 11. if they shall enter] that is, they shall not enter, Heb. 3 11.18. a
part of the oath is not uttered; see Psalm. 89.36. This oath was made at Cadesh*
where the people through unbeleef refused to enter the promised land. Number.
14.21.22.23.30.32. Heb. 3.17.19. my rest] the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 12.9. 1 Chronicles. 23.25. a figure of a better rest which we that have believed the word,
do enter into; Heb. 4.3. for if that land (wherein now they were) had been
their rest, David would not have spoken of an other; There remains therefore a
Rest for the people of God; let us study to enter into it* Heb. 4.8.9.11.

Annotations, Psalm XCVI.
Verse. 1. A New song, etc.] see Psalm. 33, 3. This Psalm is a part of that song
wherewith God was celebrated, when the Ark of his covenant was brought with joy
into David's city from Obed-edoms house, 1 Chronicles. 16.23, etc. And it contains
a prophecy of Christ's kingdom, and of the calling of the Gentiles from idols,
to serve and praise the living God.

Verse. 2. preach-the-good-tidings] or Evangelize: see Psalm. 40, 10.

Verse. 4. praised] and praiseworthy: see Psalm. 18, 4.

Verse. 5. Vain-idols] or things of naught; as the Apostle opens this word,
saying, we know that, an idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8, 4. Aelim, and
Aelohim, in Hebrew are Gods of Strength. Aelilim, Idols; as being Al-Aelim not
Gods; without strength. So elsewhere they are plainly called, lo Aelohim, no
Gods, 2 Chronicles. 13, 9. un-able to do good or evil, and un-profitable. Ier. 10,
5. Isa. 44, 9, 10. And as the name of God, is joined with things to show their
excellency, Psalm. 36, 7. so is this contrariwise, to show their vanity; as of
Physicians, Job 13.4. of shepherds, Zach. 11.17. of false doctrine, Ier.
14.14. The Greek here turns it, daimonia, devils; by which name idols are
called, 1 Cor. 10.19.20. Rev. 9.20. 2 Chronicles. 11.15.

Verse. 6. beauteous-glorie] for this in 1 Chronicles. 16, 27. is written joyfulnes.

Verse. 7. Give, etc.] Compare Psalm. 29.1.2.

Verse. 8. to his courts] to his face, or presence; as 1 Chronicles. 16.29.

Verse. 9. of the sanctuarie] or, of sanctity; see Psalm. 29.2. tremble] or be
payned, as in travel of childbirth.

Verse. 10. with righteousnesses] that is, most righteously.

Verse. 11. Let rejoyce] or shall rejoice; and so the rest. So Psalm. 98.7.8 9.

Verse. 13. with justice] or, in justice, that is, justly: so Rev. 19.11.

Annotations, Psalm XCVII.
Verse. 1. JEhovah] that is, Christ, called Jehovah, our justice, Ier. 23 5.6.
of him and his reign is this Psalm, as the 7. verse manifests. the many yles]
that is, nations, or gentiles, dwelling in the yles: as, the yles shall wayt
for his law, Isa. 42.4. which is expounded thus, the Gentiles shall trust in
his name. Mat. 12.21. So Isa. 60.9.

Verse. 2. gloomy-darknes] see Psalm. 18.10. this notes the terour of his
doctrine and administration. Mal. 3.2. Mat. 3.12. as at the law giving; Deuteronomy.
4.11. stable-place] establishment, or base; see Psalm. 89.15.

Verse. 3. Fire] severe judgments for Christ's enemies, as Isa. 42.25. and
66.15:16: Psalm. 50.3.

Verse. 4. illuminateth] or has illumined: as at the giving of the law, the
law, there were thunders, lightnings, voices, earthquake, etc. Exodus 19. so the
like proceed from the throne of Christ, Rev. 4, 5. trembleth] or is payned; see
Psalm. 77, 17.

Verse. 5. at the presence] or, from the face.

Verse. 6. The heavens] heavenly creatures, as thunder, lightning, tempest, etc.
or the Angels. See Psalm 50.6.

Verse. 7. vayn-idols] see Psalm. 69.5. all ye Gods] that is, as the Greek says,
all ye his Angels; see Psalm. 8, 6. Unto this the Apostle seems to have
reference, saying, when he brings in his first begotten son into the world,
he says; And let all the Angels of God worship him. Heb. 1, 6. Although the
very words of the Apostle are found in the Greek version of Deuteronomy. 32, 43. but
the Hebrew there has none such. See the fulfilling of this, Luke 2, 13, 14.
Mark. 1, 13. Rev. 5, 11, 12.

Verse. 8. daughters] that is, cities of Judah; the Christian Churches: see Ps.
48, 12.

Verse. 11. Light is sowen] that is, Comfort and joy is reserved after trouble,
as Esth. 8, 16. but hidden for the present, as seed in the ground; for, we are
dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God, Colos. 3.3.4. and it does not yet
appear what we shall be. 1 Ioh. 3.2.

Verse. 11. confess to] that is, celebrate it. see Psalm. 30.5.

Annotations, Psalm XCVIII.
Verse. 1. A New song] see Psalm 33.3. saved him] or, got him salvation, and
victory over all his enemies, See Isa. 59.16. and 63, 5.

Verse. 2. his salvation] the redemption by Christ, as Luke 2.30.31.32. so his
justice, is that which is by faith in Christ, Romans 10.3, 4, 6, 10.

Verse. 3. remembred] and consequently performed his mercy, etc. so Luke
1.54.55.72.73.74. all the ends] that is, the dwellers in the ends of the earth:
so Isa. 52, 10.

Verse. 6. voice of the cornet] or sound of the trumpet: for here are two
several words for trumpets, some of which were made of metal, as silver, etc.
Number. 10, 2. some of horn, Ios. 6, 4. and these were used both in wars, and in
the worship of God: see Psalm. 81, 4.

Verse. 8. clap the palm] clap hands; a sign of joy; as Isa. 55.12. Psalm. 47.2.

Verse. 9. in justice] that is, justly. So Psalm 96.13. in righteousnesses] that
is, most righteously. So Psalm. 9.9.

Annotations, Psalm XCIX.
Verse. 1. A Restirred] or, though they be stirred, to weet, with anger; as the
Greek translateth, be angry: see Psalm. 4, 5. This is opened in Rev. 11.17.18.
thou (Lord) reignest, and the nations are angry. Thus the wicked are affected:
but the godly do rejoice. Psalm. 97.1. he sitteth] or, even he that sits on
the Cherubims. reigns: see Psalm. 80.2. is moved] with indignation; stirred up
to resist, as Act. 17, 13.

Verse. 4. the strength] this is joined with Gods wrath, Ezra. 8.22. and here
seems to have like meaning, that God is strong to punish in judgment the
rebellious, and defend his people.

Verse. 5. at the footstool] or toward it, meaning the Sanctuary and Ark
there. Isa. 60.13. 1 Chronicles. 28, 2. Lam. 2, 1. Psalm. 132.7. Ezekiel. 43, 7. he is]
as is expressed, verse 8. or it (the temple) is holy.

Verse. 6. with his Priests] or among his principal officers: the Hebrew Cohen,
which we call a Priest, or Sacrificer, is the name of the Kings chief officer,
as in 2 Samuel 8, 18. David's sonns where Cohens (Cheif-rulers, Aularchai, as the
Greek turns them;) which is expounded in 1 Chronicles. 18, 17. to be the first (or
Chief) at the Kings hand. It has the name of ministration, Isa. 61.6.10. and
was a title specially given to Aaron and his sonns, that ministered unto God in
the Sanctuary. Exodus 28.3.4.41. called] or were caling: that is, prayed for
the people, as Exodus 32, 11. etc. Number. 14.17, 19. and 16.22, 46. 1 Samuel 7 9.
and 12.19.23. Hereupon Moses and Samuel were noted for chief intercessors with
God, Ier. 15.1.

Verse. 7. of a clowd] as Exodus 33, 9. Number. 16, 42. and this notes Gods favor,
but with some obscurity: and so is inferior to the mediation of Christ, who
has without clouds or shadows obtained eternal redemption for us; that we
may go boldly to he throne of grace, for to receive mercy and find grace to
help in time of need. Heb. 4, 14.16. and 7, 25. and 9.11.12.

Verse. 8. a God forgiving] a mighty-God that pardonedst, or tookest away, to
weet, the punishment of their sin: see Ps. 25, 18 and taking] or though thou
tookest vengeance, on their practises] theirs, that is, the peoples, for whom
Moses prayed, as Number. 14.20, 21.23. Exodus 32.14.34.35. or theirs, that is,
Moses and Aarons sins; which God punished and would not be entreated; as Number.
20, 12. Deuteronomy. 3.23.24.25.26.

Annotations, Psalm C.
Verse. 1. FOr confession] for the public praise of God, with thanks for his
mercies.

Verse. 2. singing] or shirlling, showting-mirth.

Verse. 3. made us] this word is used both for our first creation in nature,
Genesis 1.26. and for the making of us high and excellent with graces and
blessings; as 1 Samuel 12.6. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Isa. 43.7. and 29.23. Ephe. 2.10. and
not we] or, and his we are: as the Hebrew in the margin reads it. Both
senses are good. sheep] or flock which he feeds. See Ezekiel. 34.30.31. Psalm.
95.7.

Verse. 4. confession] the sacrifice of thanks was thus named; 2 Chronicles. 29.31.
Ier. 17.26.

Verse. 5. faith] or, faith-fulnes: truth, in performing his promises.

Annotations, Psalm CI.
Verse. 2. DOe-wisely] behave my self prudently; as David is said to do 1 Samuel
11.14. when will thou come] namely to assist me in the performance hereof: or,
when thou shall come, namely to call me unto an account of my life, etc.

Verse. 3. of Belial] that is, mischeivous (or wicked) word, or thing. See
Psalm. 41, 9.

Verse. 4. know] or acknowledge, that is, regard, or approve; so Psalm. 1, 6.

Verse. 5. hurts with tongue] that traduceth, or (as the Hebrew phrase is)
belongs. Hereupon a man of tongue, is for a pratler, or calumniator, Psalm.
140, 12. large] or wide, broad of heart, meaning, proud; as Prove. 21, 4. I
cannot] here the word bear, or suffer, is to be understood, as is expressed
Prove. 30.21. So Job 31.23. and in Greek, 1 Cor. 3, 2.

Verse 8. In the morning] that is, every morning, or early: see Psalm. 73, 14.

Annotations, Psalm CII.
Verse. 1. FOr the poor] agreeing to his estate; or, of the poor. overwhelmed]
with fears, cares, sorrows, etc. See Psalm. 61, 3.

Verse. 4. as smoke] or, with the smoke, vanishing in the aier; so verse 37, 20.
The Hebrew letters, beth, with; and, caph, as, are one like another, and
sometime put one for another, as 2 Samuel 5, 24. with 1 Chronicles. 14, 15. an hearth]
the place whereon fire burns. Compare Job 30, 30.

Verse. 5. as grasse] or as the herbs, smitten with blasting. Amos. 4.9.

Verse. 6. to my flesh] that is, my skin, as Job 19, 20. so elsewhere skin is put
for flesh, Job 18, 13. See also Lam 4, 8.

Verse. 7. a Pelican] a bird living in wild and desolate places, Zeph. 2, 14.
Isa. 34.11. It seems to have the name in Hebrew, of vomiting, and to be that
fowl which we call the shovelard, which swalloweth shell fishes, and after
vomiteth them to get the fish. It was a bird unclean by the law, Levit. 11, 18.
Some think it to be the bittour; which makes a loud and doleful noise.
Compare Job 30, 29.

Verse. 9. rage against me] or vaunt against, or would-make a fool of me: the
Greek says, that praise me; meaning feighnedly. The word signifies to lift up
with praise and glory; and also ingloriously to vaunt, rage, or be mad; see
Psalm. 5, 6. and 75, 5. The word, against, is here to be understood; as in Prove.
8, 36 he that sins against me. An example of such raging madness, see against
Christ, Luke 6, 11.

Verse. 12. declined] or stretched-out; as the shadow of the sun, when it is
near down, which though it seem longer, yet soon passes away. So Psalm. 109,
23. and 144, 4.

Verse 13. sittest] that is, continuest, as the Greek explaineth it: for sitting
and standing (as after in verse 27.) are often used for sure and settled
abiding. thy memorial or remembrance of thee: so Psalm. 135, 13. from Exodus
3.15.

Verse. 14. the appointed time] promised for restoration of the church; as Dan.
9.2, 24, 25. etc. Ier. 29, 10.

Verse. 15. delight] or do favor the stones, though ruinous: as Neh. 2, 13.
etc. and 4.2. Zach. 1.12.

Verse. 18. the lowly] so the Greek here turns it, which elsewhere we call
heath, that grows in the wilderness, Ier. 17, 6. and 48.6. by the name in
Hebrew, it seems to be some naked shrubbe, and so a fit resemblance of Gods
afflicted people made low, naked, desolate, by their enemies, Or we may turn
it, the broken-down, or ruined: from Ier. 51, 58.

Verse. 19. This shalbe] or Let this be written, to weet, for remembrance to
ages after, as Exodus 17, 14. Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21. This shows these to be
prophecy for our times. that shall be created] that is, restored and made anew;
as Psalm 104.30. Isa. 65, 18. created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2,
10. so a people born, Psalm 22, 32.

Verse. 20. the height of his holynes] that is, his holy high-place, meaning
heaven. This is taken from Deuteronomy. 26.15.

Verse. 21. groning] or mournful-cry, so Psalm. 79.11. sonns of death] appointed
to die, as Psalm. 79.11.

Verse. 24. in the way] in the course of my life; see Psalm. 2.12.

Verse. 25. take me not away] or, make me not ascend.

Verse. 26. Afore-time] that is, At the beginning; as Hebr. 1.10. where these
things spoken to God; are applied to Christ; to prove his godhead.

Verse. 27. shall stand] that is, endure, or continue, as the Greek expresses
it; Hebr. 1.11. change them] by folding them up, as the Greek explaineth, Hebr.
1, 12. for the heavens when they are changed shall be folden like a book, Isa.
34, 4.

Verse. 28. art the same] or: art he: that is, unchangeable. Mal. 3, 6. Iam.
1.17.

Verse. 29. shall dwell] to weet, in Sion, verse 14.22. as is also expressed
Psalm 69.36, 37. before thee] that is, so long as thou do dure, meaning, for
ever, as the Greek well explaineth it. So before, the moon, and sun, Psalm.
72.5, 17. is, so long as the Moon and Sun endure.

Annotations, Psalm CIII.
Verse. 2. ALl his rewards] that is, any of his benefits. All, is often used for
any: Psalm. 147, 20. 1 King. 10.20. and rewards, for benefits: see Psalm. 13.6.

Verse. 3. sicknesses] all diseases, greifs, and punishments in soul or body,
(and spiritually, sins) are meant by the word sicknesses, Exodus 15, 26. Deuteronomy.
28.59 61. Isa. 33, 24. See also Psalm. 41.5. and 147, 3.

Verse. 4. pit-of corruption] death, and the grave, whither men hasten by their
sins* till God by chastisement brings them to repentance, and then spares
them. See this at large handled, Job 33.1.9.23.24.27 28.30.

Verse. 5. good-things] Hebr. the good-thing: see the note on Psalm. 65.5. is
renewed] or thou renewest thyself, as an eagle; as thy youth: thy flesh being
fresher then in childhood, thou returning to the days of thy youth: as is
said, Job 33, 25. This change is by the renewing of the mind, Romans 12, 2.
wrought by the holy Ghost. Tit. 3, 5. as an eagels] which casts her feathers
yearly, and new grow up; whereby she seems fresh and young, flies hie, and
lives long. Compare Isa 40.31.

Verse. 6. justices] that is, all manner justice, and that which is chiefest.
Things are often spoken of plurally, for their excellency. So wisdoms, Prove.
9.1.

Verse. 7. his wayes] wherein men ought to walk; as Exodus 18, 20. Psalm. 25.4.5.
or, therein himself walks, his administration, his works, as Psalm. 77, 20.
Job 40, 14. This later seems most meant here, by comparing it with Exodus 33,
13. and 34.6, 7.

Verse. 8. long-suffering] or slow-to-anger: see Psalm. 86.15.

Verse. 9. contend] or chide: compare Isa. 57, 16. keep] understand his anger,
or enimitie, as both Greek and Chaldee do explain it: sometime the Hebrew it
self manifests the defect; as he set, 1 Chronicles. 18, 6. that is, he set
garrisons, 2 Samuel 8.6. This phrase is taken from the law, Levit. 19, 18. So
Ier. 3.5. Nahum. 1, 2. See also Psalm. 109, 21.

Verse. 14. our forming] that is, our formed-nature and condition; our matter
and form: the original word properly is a formed-vessel of earth: applied to
our frail estate, Romans 9.20, 21. sometime this is spoken of our fictions, and
sinful imaginations, Genesis 6.5. Deuteronomy. 31.21. and so the Chaldee interprets it
here.

Verse. 15. as the grass, etc.] that is, few, and transitory, though making a
fair show. Compare Psalm. 90.5, 6. Job 14.1.2. Iam. 1.10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.24.

V. 16. not know it] or know him, that is, he shall have no more place here. So
Job 7.10.

Verse. 18. to do them] this notes the outward practice and operation of the
law; whereas keeping, or observing, is with the heart and spirit of man. Prove.
3.1, 3. and 4.4, 21. Psalm. 78, 8.

Verse. 19. prepared his throne] or stablished it, a sign of dominion and
government, to be administered in heaven, whereby the Church is figured, Rev. 4,
1, 2. See also Psalm 9, 5, 8, 9. and 11, 4.

Verse. 20. hearkning] or to hearken, to obey; and this notes a willing and
ready mind in the Angels: and our Lord teaches us to pray for the like. Math.
6, 10. The The Hebrew phrase to obey; may be Englished obeying, as the like in
Psalm 104, 14, 15, 21. and 105, 11. See also Psalm. 49, 15. and 65, 11.

Verse. 21. his hosts] or armies; the thrones, dominions, principalities,
powers, etc. that are in the heavenly places, Ephesians. 3, 10. Col. 1, 16. for
they are his hosts, 1 King. 22, 19. Genesis 32, 2. and generally all creatures are
his hosts, see Psalm. 24.10. ministers] the Angels which minister unto him.
Psalm. 104, 4. Dan. 7, 10. the same title is given also to men. Isa, 61.6.

Annotations, Psalm CIV.
Verse. 1. ANd comly-honour.] that is, show thy self by all thy works, to be
God over all, to whom glory and honor is due. Therefore God challenges Job
(and so all men) to do thus if they can, and they shall be celebrated of him.
Job 40, 4, 5-9. Of these words, see Psalm. 8.2-6.

Verse. 2. Decking] or Clothing, or He clotheth, to weet, himself with light,
dwelling in the light, that none can attain unto, 1 Timothy 6, 16. and at first
commanding the light to shine out of darkness, wherewith he decked the world,
Genesis 1.3. 2 Cor. 4.6. as a courtain] that is, as a canopie, or tent; Song. 1.5.
Ier. 49, 29. when he spread out the firmament by himself alone, Genesis 1, 6. Isa.
44.24. and 51, 13. Job 37.18.

Verse. 3. Planchering] He planketh, or planchereth his lofts, (or
upper-chambers) that is, the clouds aloft, or upper regions of the aier, as
after in verse 13. in the waters] among them; or with waters, which are above
in the firmament. Genesis 1.7. where God binds the waters in his clouds, and the
clowd is not broken under them, Job 26.1. making] or putting, that is,
disposing them his charret, to sit and ride on, as Isa. 19.1. Rev. 14 14.
Compare Psalm. 18.11.

Verse. 4. spirits] that is, spiritual substances; so differing from Christ, who
is no made or created spirit, but the maker of all things, Psalm. 102.26. and
from men, made of flesh and blood, Luke 24.39. The original word also
signifies winds; and Angels by interpretation are messengers; whereupon some
translate he makes the winds his messengers: but the holy Ghost in Heb. 1.7.
shows this to be spoken of Angels properly; who are named also ministering
spirits, Heb. 1.14. flaming fire] effectual in their administration: the Angels
therefore have appeared like horses and carrets of fire. 2 King. 6.17 and 2.11.

Verse. 5. bases] firm and fit groundsels* see Psalm. 24, 2. and 78.69. Job
38.4.6.

Verse. 6. the deep] or depth of waters, which hid the earth, till God separated
them, Genesis 1.2, 9.

Verse. 8. they went up] that is, the mounts showed themselves on high, when the
waters of the deep were gathered into the channels of the sea. Genesis 1, 9. and
8, 5. etc. or, They (that is, the waters,) went up the mounts, and down the
dales, when they were patted from the dry land; as if that thing were effected
by thunder, wind, and tempest, called here Gods rebuke, driving the waters.
verse 7. see Psalm. 18.16.

Verse. 9. a bound] or limit; shutting up the sea with doors and bars, saying,
hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall it stay thy proud
waves; as Job 38.8, 10.11. So Psalm. 148.6.

Verse. 10. That sendeth] or He sends: so after. welsprings] or fountains,
meaning rivers flowing from such; as the next words show. they walk] that is,
run: so Psalm. 105.41.

Verse. 11. break] that is, slake, or quench their thirst. So we say, to break
ones fast.

Verse. 12. give-the voice] that is: sing loud and cheerfully: see Psalm. 68.34.

Verse. 13. his lofts] or his high-chambers, the skies, that give rain. the
fruit] that is, the rain, which God only gives, Ier. 14.22. and 10.13. and
consequently, the corn and herbs that grow after rain. Compare Job 38.26.27.28.
Deuteronomy. 11.14.15.

Verse. 14. the use] or service. bringing] or to bring; but this is referred
still to God: so after, to make, that is, making faces, etc. see Psalm 103.20.
bread] that is, bread-corn: so Isa. 28.28. and 30.23. Job 28.5. Eccles 11.1.

Verse. 15. chearfull] or merry, so the Greek turns it, so also the Hebrew
singnifieth, as Esth. 8.15. or, to shine. with oil] wherewith they used to
anoint them; Psalm. 23.5. or more then oil, that is, wine makes the face seem
more cheerful then if it were oincted. upholdeth] that is, comfort: so Genesis
18.5.

Verse. 17. the stork] a bird somewhat like a crane; named in Hebrew Chasidah, of
mercy or kindness, which is said to be in this fowl, that the young will nourish
their dames, when they are old.

Verse. 18. wild goates] or roes, named of climing rocks for they haunt high
hills and rocks, where they are safe from dogs that hunt them. 1 Samuel 24.3.
Job 39.4 coneyes] commended for wisdom, that being a people not mighty, they
make their howses in the rock, Prove. 30.24.26.

Verse. 19. appointed-times] seasons of the year; as the Chaldee paraphraseth,
for times to be counted by it: or certain times, for that the moon is not
always seen. knoweth] to weet, by Gods commandment, the time and place for to
sit and rise. see Job 38.12.

Verse. 21. for the prey] or at it: see Isa. 31.4. Job 4.11. and 39.1.2.

Verse. 23. labour] or his tilth, service, husbandry; as Genesis 2.5.

Verse. 24. riches] or possessions.

Verse. 25. wide of spaces] or of hands, that is, broad and spacious, reaching
out his arms on every side. Job 11.9. A like phrase is of other spacious
things, Genesis 34 21. Nehem. 7 4. Isa. 33, 21.

Verse. 26. Livjathan] or the whale; the sea-dragon: see Psalm. 74.14. Job 40.20.
etc. to play] or playing in it; as Behemoth and the beast are said to play on
the mountains, Job 40.15. which word is also used for conflict, or fight, 2 Samuel 2.14.

Verse. 27. look-attentively] or, wait with hope: so Psalm. 145.15. in his time]
that is, in due season, see Psalm. 1.3

Verse. 28. openest, etc.] that is give freely; as Deuteronomy. 15.11.

Verse. 29 gatherest] that is, take away: see Psalm. 30.9. to their dust] their
earth, whereof they were made: Genesis 1.24. and 3.19. Psalm 146.4. This is taken
from Job 34.14.15.

Verse. 30. renewest] by causing new creatures, to come in place of the old.
Eccles. 1.4. and restoring the estate of things decayed, Ezekiel, 37.

Verse. 31. be] or shall be for ever. rejoyce] in beholding the holy order and
obedience of his creatures, and not repent or be sorry for the work of his
hands, and destroy them. Isa. 65.19. Genesis 6 5.6.

Verse. 32. they smoke] a sign of fear. Exodus 19.18. so Psalm. 144.5.

Verse. 33. in my life] so long as I live: so Psalm. 63.5. and 146.2.

Verse. 34. Sweet shall be,] that is, delightful to me: or be it sweet, that
is, acceptable, to God.

Verse. 35. Consumed be sinners] or, they shall be consumed; by sinners meaning
men given to sin. See Psalm. 1.1. Halelu-jah.] that is, Praise ye Iah, an Hebrew
phrase kept in the Greek, Rev. 19.1.3.6. and in other languages: set sometime in
the beginning, sometime in the end of Psalms.

Annotations, Psalm CV.
Verse. 1. CAll on his name] or, proclaim, that is, preach his name. The first
part of this psalm, is part of that which David appointed to laud the Lord
with; when his Ark was seared in Jerusalem. 1 Chronicles. 16.7.8.-22.

Verse. 2. discourse] or talk, meditate.

Verse. 3. Glory] or Praise your selves: see Psalm. 34, 3.

Verse. 4. his strength] that is, his Ark, from whence God gave his oracles;
Number. 7, 89. See Psalm. 78, 61. The Chaldee paraphraseth thus, Seek ye the
doctrine of Jehovah and his law. his face] his counsel and oracle: see the
note on Psalm. 27, 8,

Verse. 6. of Abraham] in 1 Chronicles. 16, 13. it is, of Israel. his servant] this
is meant of the seed, as well as of Abraham, as the next words show; therefore
the Greek turns it servants.

Verse. 8. He remembreth] therefore also Remmber ye; as it is written 1 Chronicles.
16, 15. the word] or the matter; the conditions of the covenant: and so the
promises, which for the more certainty are said to be commanded, as in Psalm.
113, 3.

Verse. 11. land of Canaan] the son of Cham, the son of Noah, who was cursed by
his grandfather, and made a servant to his brethren, Genesis 9.18.22.25. This
Canaan had eleven sonns, heads of their families, Genesis 10.15, 20. they seated
in the lesser Asia, in a goodly country having the great sea westward, the
river Jorden, Syria, and Arabia eastward; the wilderness on the south, and the
Mounts of Lebanon on the North. It was the pleasantest of all lands, and stowed
with milk and honey, Ezekiel. 20, 6. it had store of rivers, and fountains, of
corn, and wine, and oil, and mines, of mountains and valleys; watered with the
rain of heaven, and cared for of God continually, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. and 11.10,
11, 12. This land, God promised Abraham to give unto his seed. Genesis 12.6, 7.
and 13.15, 17. See also the note on Psalm. 25.13. the line] that is, the portion
of your patrimony, measured as by line. See Psalm. 16, 6.

Verse 12. When they were] in 1 Chronicles. 16.19, it is, when ye were. men of
number] that is, a few men, soon numbered: so Genesis 34, 30. Deuteronomy. 4, 27. The
contrary is, without number, or, innumerable, Psalm. 147, 5.

Verse. 13. from nation to nation] up and down in the land of Canaan, where were
seven mighty nations, Deuteronomy. 7, 1. How there the Patriarks walked as strangers,
see Genesis 12.8, 9, 10. and 13, 18. and 20, 1, and 23, 4. and 26.1, 23. and 33,
19. and 35, 1. etc. Heb. 11.9, 13.

Verse. 14. wrong] or, to oppress them. reproved Kings] plaguing Pharaoh, Genesis
12.17. threatening Abimelech, Genesis 20, 3.

Verse. 15. anointed] men consecrated to me by the oil of the spirit: see 1 Ioh.
20.17, Prophets] so Abraham is called, Genesis 20, 7. See Psalm 74, 9.

Verse 16. called famine] that is, effectually brought it: so 2 King. 8, 1. The
contrary hereof is, to call for corn, Ezekiel. 36, 29. the land] of Canaan,
Egypt, and other countries. Gen 41, 54. etc. staff] or stay, stabiliment: so
bread is called Lev. 26.26. Ezekiel. 4, 16. for it upholdeth man's heart, Psalm.
104, 15.

Verse. 17. a man] Hebr. Ish; a nobleman; see Psalm. 49.3. The Chaldee says, a
wise man, for a servant] for a slave, by his brethren to the Ismaelites, and by
them to the Egyptians; Genesis 37.28.36.

Verse. 18. his soul entred] or, as the Greek says, passed through the iron,
that is, he (his body was laid in yrons, when he was cast into prison most
unjustly, Genesis 39, 20. and there he was in peril of his life. Of soul, see
Psalm. 16, 10.

Verse. 19. his word came] that is, the word spoken of him was fulfilled, which
God had showed Joseph in a dream, touching his advancement. Genesis 36, 5.-8, 9,
10. and 42, 9. So coming, is for fulfilling. Ier. 17.15. 1 Samuel 9, 6. Job 6, 8
tried] or fined him, by trying, as in fire, his faith and patience in
afflictions; as 1 Pet. 1, 7. see Psalm. 12, 7.

Verse. 20. The King] Pharaoh (for that Joseph interpreted his dream,) set him
out of prison, a ruler over the land. See Genesis 41, 14. etc. and 45.8.

Verse. 22. To bind] that is, inform, and govern as subjects: see Psalm. 2.3. to
his soul] to his will, or pleasure, (as Psalm. 27.12.) so as without him, no man
should lift up his hand, or his foot, (that is, attempt to do any thing) in
all the land of Egypt. Genesis 41.40.44. or, with his soul, that is, with
himself; as the Greek expounds it, to nurture his Princes as himself; which
may mean, to inform them in virtue, wisdom, etc. wherein himself excelled, Genesis
41, 38, 39, With, is sometime used for as: Psalm. 102.4. and the soul, for ones
self: see Psalm. 16.10. The words following, seem to favor this exposition. his
Elders] or Senators, the Kings, Nobles, and Counselors; Genesis 50.7.

Verse. 23. came unto Aegypt] being sent for by Pharaoh; and encouraged thereto
by God himself, Genesis 45.17-20. and 46.3.4. of Cham] the father of Mizraim, or
Egypt: see Psalm. 78.51.

Verse. 24. increased] made them fructify: that the land was soon full of them;
Exodus 1, 7, 9.

Verse. 25. to deal-craftily] or conspire-guilefully, for their destruction, as
Genesis 37, 18: Pharaoh and his people fretting at Isreal's prosperity, thought to
work wisely with them, when they plotted their ruin. Exodus 1, 9, 10, 12, etc.

Verse. 26. had chosen] to be Moses his mouth to the people, and prophet to
Pharaoh: Exodus 4, 12, 14, 16. and 7, 1, 2, etc.

Verse. 27. words of his signes] the signs which he spoke and commanded,
together will the doctrine and use of them, for the letting of Israel go. See
Exodus 7, 1, 2, 3. etc. or, words of signs, as words of song, Psalm. 137, 3. are
signs, and songs. So Psalm. 145.5.

Verse. 28. darknes] the ninth plague of Egypt, where was black darkness in all
the land, for three days; that no man saw another, nor rose from the place
where he was. Exodus 10, 22, 23. turned not rebellious] or, they disobeyed not:
(see Psalm. 5.11.) that is, his words (or word) were not disobeyed, or changed;
but effected as God had spoken: see a like phrase noted on Psalm. 49, 15. or
they may be referred to Moses and Aaron, who performed the things commanded
them, though with danger to them.

Verse. 29. to blood] the first of the ten plagues. Exodus 7. See Psalm. 78, 44.

Verse. 30. froggs] the second plague: Exodus 8, 3, 6. Psalm. 78, 45. Kings]
Pharaoh and his Princes: so Isa. 19, 2.

Verse. 31. swarm] of flies, or beasts; see Psalm. 78, 45. This was the fourth
plague; Exodus 8, 24. lice] the third plague. All the dust of the earth was
lice, and went upon man and beast. Exodus 8.17.

Verse. 32. showers] of rain; in stead whereof they had hail; the seventh
plague. Exodus 9. See Psalm. 78, 47. of flames] that is, sorely flaming and
blasting: never was the like there seen. Exodus 9, 24.

Verse. 33. tree] for trees, so after, verse 34, 40. and often See Psalm. 34, 8.

Verse. 34. grassehopper] or locust: the eight plague, Exodus 10. see Psalm. 78,
40.

Verse. 36. the first born] the tenth plague; whereof see Psalm. 78.51.

Verse. 37. feeble] ready-to-fall through weakness; there being an army of six
hundred thousand men; Exodus 12, 37. and 13, 18. A like promise is made to the
Church, Isa. 33, 24.

Verse. 38. dread of them] that is, of death for their sakes; so that they
forced them out, and gave them treasures; Exodus 12, 33, 35. See the like
speech, Esth. 8, 17. and 9.2.

Verse. 39. a fire] that they might travel night and day, toward the promised
land; Exodus 13, 21. Psalm. 78, 14.

Verse. 40. quayl] that is, quayles which for their lust he gave them; Number. 11.
Compare Psalm. 78, 27, 28. bread] Manna, whereof see Psalm. 78, 24, 25.

Verse. 41. the Rock] at Rephidim, Exodus 17. and at Kadesh, Number. 20. a river] so
that the people, and their beasts drank. Number. 20, 11. and for this, the wild
beasts, dragons, ostriches, honored God, Isa. 43, 20. this mercy is applied to
other times, Isa. 48, 21.

Verse. 44. heathens] the seven nations; whereof see Psalm. 78, 55.

Verse. 45. keep his lawes] The end of all Gods mercies was, that he might be
glorified in his peoples obedience: see Exodus 19, 4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 4, 1, 40. and
6.21-24.25.

Annotations, Psalm CVI.
Verse 2. THe powers] that is, the powerful-works: such as after follow, verse
8. etc. Thus also were Christ's miracles named, Mat. 11, 20, 21. So after,
praise, for praiseworthy acts. cause to hear] that is, sound forth; or
display, so as it may be heard: so Psalm. 26, 7.

Verse. 4. visit me] that is, come and bestow thy salvation, (help or
deliverance) upon me, See Psalm. 8.5. and compare herewith, Luke 1.68.69.

Verse. 5. To see] That I may see, or enjoy: see the note on Psalm. 27.4 to
glory] or boast joyful; see Psalm. 34, 3. thy inheritance] that is, the people
whom thou inheritest: see Psalm. 28, 9.

Verse. 6. sinned with our fathers] This confession agrees with the law, Lev.
26, 40. and with the practices of other godly. Ier. 3.25. Dan. 9.5.

Verse. 7. turned-rebellious] the Greek says, provoked to bitterness; see Psalm
5.11. By the red sea, the Israelites distrusted God, and murmured against
Moses; Exodus 14.11.12. yet there he saved them, verse 15, 16, etc. the red sea]
so the new testament calls it in Greek, Hebr. 11, 29. but the Hebrew is the
sea Suph; that is, the sea of sedge, or seaweeds, which grew therein.

Verse. 9. he rebuked] that is, powerfully repressed the waves, etc. See the
like, Nahum. 1.4. Isa. 50, 2. Mat. 8, 26. Psalm. 18, 16. in the deeps] Israel
went in the bottom of the read sea, on dry ground; the deep waters being as
walls on each hand of them. Exodus 14.21, 22, 29. See also Isa 63, 11, 12, 13.

Verse. 10. the hater] Pharaoh and his host that pursued them, Exodus 14, 23, 24,
30.

Verse. 12. they sang] as is expressed, Exodus 15.

Verse. 14. with lust] that is, greedily; even weeping for desire of flesh to
eat, and loathing Manna, Numb. 11, 4, 6.

Verse. 15. leannes] a sudden plague whereby the souls or lives of the fattest
of them were taken away; see Psalm. 78, 30, 31. also Isa. 10, 16.

Verse. 16. the holy one] sanctified of the Lord to the work of the Priesthood;
Exodus 29, 44. Levit. 8.12, etc. which Korah with other Levites envied, opposing
their own holiness, Number. 16.1.3.5.

Verse. 17. Dathan] and Abiram, princes, with their families and all their
goods, went down alive into hell, Number. 16, 32, 33.

Verse. 18. the wicked] 250. men that would burn incense to the Lord, were burtn
with fire from the Lord, Number. 16, 35. Korach was the chief of them.

Verse. 19. in Horeb] a mount in the wilderness called the mountain of God, Exodus
3.1. 1 King. 19.8. for there God gave his law unto, and made a covenant with
them. Deuteronomy. 4.10. and 5.2. but while Moses was with God on the mount, they made
themselves a God of gold. Deuteronomy. 9, 8, 9-12. Exodus 32.1, 4, 31. It was called
also Sinai, Psalm 68, 9. of bushes that there grew; and Horeb, of the drynes:
for it was a waterlesse desert. Deuteronomy. 8.15.

Verse. 20. their glorie] that is, their God: so Ier. 2, 11. Thus did they like
the heathens, Romans 1, 23. from] pattern, structure, or type, as the Apostle
calls it in Greek, Heb. 8, 5. from Exodus 25.40.

Verse. 23. to abolish] or, that he would destroy them; and put out their name
from under heaven, as is expressed, Deuteronomy. 9, 13, 14. in the breach,] in the
gap, which their sin had opened for God as an enemy to enter and destroy them.
A similitude taken from war, when by a breach in the wall, the enemy enters
the city: so Ezekiel. 13, 5. and 22, 30. But Moses earnest prayer stopped this
breach. Exodus 32, 11.-14. corrupting] that is, consuming them. See Psalm 57, 1.

Verse. 24. land of desire] the pleasant land of Canaan, which was to be desired
for the pleasures and profits of it, above all other countries, Ezekiel. 20, 6.
Deuteronomy. 11, 11, 19. This land they through unbeleef refused to take possession
of. Number. 14, 1, 2, 3, etc. Heb. 3.19. So meat of desire, is dainty meat; Job
33, 20.

Verse. 26. his hand] that is; swear, (as the Chaldee explaineth) for so lifting
up the hand often signifies, as Genesis 14, 22. Rev. 10, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 32.40.
Nehem. 9, 15. How God swear against this people, see Number. 14, 21, 23. Psalm
95.11.

Verse. 27. to fann] that is, scatter: see Psalm 44, 12. Ezekiel. 20, 23.

Verse. 28. were joyned] or, coupled, yoaked unequally with infidels, which the
Apostle forbids, 2 Cor. 6, 14. Baal-pehor] the God of Moab and Madian, to
whom by Balaams counsel, Israel joined. Number. 25, 3. and 31, 16. Rev. 2, 14.
Baal signifies a Lord, master, husband, or patron: Pehor was the name of a
mountain, where this God was worshipped, and had a temple called Beth-pehor;
Number. 23, 28. Deuteronomy. 3, 29. Baal was a common name whereby the heathens called
their Gods, 2 King. 1, 2. Judge. 8, 33. and so Israel also called the true God,
Hos. 2.16. but for the shameful abuse of Gods worship, the scriptures turn
Baal, a Lord; into Bosheth, a shame; as Ierub-besheth, 2 Samuel 11, 21. for
Ierub-baal (or Gedeon) Judge. 8, 35. and 9, 1. Ish-bosheth, 2 Samuel 2, 10. for
Esh-baal, 1 Chronicles. 8, 33. Mephi-hosheth, 2 Samuel 9, 10. for Merib-baal, 1 Chronicles.
8, 34. Hereupon the Prophet says, they went to Baal-pehor, and separated
themselves unto that Shame, (Bosheth;) Hos. 9, 10. and so Jeremy calls the
Idols, Shame, or Confusion, Ier. 3, 24. and 11, 13. the dead.] idols, that have
no life or breath, and so are opposed to the livig God, Ier. 10, 5, 10. 1 These.
1, 9.

Verse. 29. brake in] with violence killing 24. thousand men. Number. 25, 9.

Verse. 30. Phineas] nephew of Aaron the Priest: he being zealous for the Lord,
thrust through with a spear, Zimri and Cozbi that wrought abomination, Number. 25,
7, 8, etc.

Verse. 31. for justice,] for a just action, though don without ordinary
authority; and God rewarded him for it, Number. 25, 11, 12, 13.

Verse. 32. Meribah] that is, Contention, where they strove with the Lord; Number.
20, 13. See Ps. 95.8. evil was] Gods displeasure toward Moses, who uttering
his anger, for it was deprived of coming into the land of Canaan: Number. 20, 12.
Deuteronomy. 3, 25, 26.

Verse. 34. the peoples] the heathens in Canaan, as is noted, Judge. 1, 21, 27,
29, 30.31, 33. though God commanded them, Exodus 23, 32, 33.

Verse. 36. idols] or images, named in Hebrew of the curious labor spent in
framing and serving them, Ier. 10.9. Isa. 44, 9, 12, 13, 15. or of sorrows that
they bring to such as worship them: Psalm 16, 4. sometime they are called Gods,
2 Samuel 5, 21 compared with 1 Chronicles. 14, 12. a snare] a scandal (as the Greek
says.) whereby they fell into miseries, Judge. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15. Exodus 23, 33.

Verse. 37. devils] the idols forementioned, whereby devils are worshipped, and
not God, as 1 Cor. 10, 19, 20. Rev. 9, 20. 2 Chr. 11.25. Deuteronomy. 32.17. Lev. 17,
7. Devils here are called Shedim, Wasters, in opposition to Shaddai, God
Almighty, Psalm. 68. ^5.

Verse. 39. whored] committed spiritual whordom, that is, idolatry; see Psalm.
73, 27. Judge. 2.17. Eze. 23, 7, 37.

Verse. 42. their haters] the heathens round about, as was prophesied, Levit.
26, 17. and fulfilled Judge. 3, 8, 14. and 4, 2. and 6, 1. and 10, 7, 8, 9. and
13, 1.

Verse. 43. Many times] by Ehud, Barak, Gedeon Iephtah, Samson, etc. Judge. 3.
and 4. and 7. and 11. and 15. Nehem. 9, 28, 30. by their counsel] that is,
purposely and advisedly, as 1 Chronicles. 12, 19.

Verse. 46. gave them] that is, procured mercy (or favor) toward them.

Verse. 47. from the heathens] among whom diverse Israelites were scattred by
reason of their often troubles at home. So 1 Chronicles. 16, 35, 36. to glory] that
we may glory, or commend our selves.

The fifth Book.
Annotations, Psalm CVII.
THe fifth book] see Psalm. 42, 1.

Verse. 2. whom he hath] or, that he has redeemed them: of the distresser] or
of distress.

Verse. 3. the sea] that is, the south, where the red sea was situate from
Judea; (as the Chaldee explaineth it, the southern sea:) for the main sea, was
westward, Ios. 23, 4. and so is often used for the West.

Verse. 4. desert way] Hebr. desert of way, meaning, where no was, as verse 40.
see also Isa. 43, 19. This estate figureth out men's dispersion among the
peoples of the world; Ezekiel. 20, 35, 36. when men are without the law. Romans
2.14. dwelling city] Hebr. city of habitation, or seating: so verse. 7, 36. that
is, no harbor, or place of refreshing; for wild and venomous beasts only
haunted there. Ier. 2.6. Deuteronomy. 8.15. Compare also Eccles. 10.15. Gen, 21, 14,
15, 16.

Verse. 5. overwhelmed] fainted: see Psalm. 61, 3.

Verse. 9. with good] or good-things; as the Greek explaineth it: see Psalm 65,
5. Luke 1, 53.

Verse. 10. shadow of death] that is, terrible darkness, meaning hereby sore
afflictions in body and soul. See Psalm. 23, 4. Isa. 49, 9. and 9, 2. Mat. 4,
15. Luke 1, 79. affliction] as with cords and fetters; see Job 36, 8, 9, etc,

Verse. 16. barrs] that is, all the most strong hindrances: so Isa. 45, 2.

Verse. 17. Fools] evil disposed persons, so named of their unadvised-rashnes,
see Psalm. 38, 6. are afflicted] or, bring affliction on themselves.

Verse. 18. soul] that is, appetite: see the like in Job 33, 20. and the
contrary in Psalm. 78, 18. gates] that is, imminent peril of death: see Psalm.
9.14. Job 33.22.

Verse. 20. heals them] example in Hezekiah, 2 King. 20, 1, 4, 5, 7. and the
contrary in Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16, 12, 13. for God wounds and heals, Deuteronomy. 32,
39. Hos. 6, 1. Job 33, 19, 24. corruptions] that is, corrupting-diseases, or
corrupting-graves, whereinto they are ready to come: see Psalm. 7.16. Job 33,
28, 30.

Verse. 22. of confession] that is, thank-offrings; see Psalm. 50, 14.

Verse. 23. do labour] that is, occupy, or get their living: so Rev. 18.17.

Verse. 25. rayseth-up] or maketh-stand; which notes also the continuance of
the storm. See an example, Ion. 1, 4.

Verse. 29. he setteth] or restoreth-firm. See Mat. 8, 26. Ion. 1, 15.

Verse. 30. because they] or, when they, that is, the ways.

Verse. 32. the sitting.] or the Assise (session) of the Elders, or Senators,
the governors of the people.

Verse. 33. He puts rivers] that is, he turns watery fruitful places to a
dry barren desert. Rivers here (as, waters in Isa. 32, 20. Eccles. 11, 1.) are
put for most fertile grounds: as wilderness, for a dry barren ground. Deuteronomy.
8.15. yssues] that is, places where water-spring are. thirstines] that is, a
thirsty, dry land.

Verse. 34. saltnes] that is, a salt barren land: so Ier. 17, 6. Job 39, 9. for
salt causes barrennes, Deuteronomy. 29.23. Judge. 9.45.

Verse. 35. land of drought] that is, a dry barren land; compare Isa. 41.18.

Verse. 37. yield fruitful revenue,] Hebr. make fruit of revenue (or increase:)
see Psalm. 1, 3.

Verse. 39. And they are] that is, And again, when he curses them, they are
minished. etc. the contrary to the former, blesses, is to be understood; as in
the law, Deuteronomy, 28, 4.18. restraint] either of liberty, by imprisonment, as Isa.
53, 8. or of any blessing.

Verse. 40. contempt] a base contemptible estate, so Job 12, 21.
deformed-wildernes] or wild ground; unordered; so Job 12, 24.

Verse. 41 rayseth up] or sets in a high place, safely: so 1 Samuel 2, 8. Psalm.
113, 7, 8

Verse. 42. all in^urious-evil] that is, all evil persons, that deny Gods
providence, or blame his administration shall have their mouths stopped: so
Job 5, 16. and so pride, is for proud persons; Psalm. 36, 12.

Verse. 43. Who is wise?] a complaint how few there be that mark these things:
and an intimation that every wise man will observe them; so Hos. 14, 10. Ier.
9, 12. and they shall] or, as before, who will understand?

Annotations, Psalm CVIII.
Verse. 2. YEa with my glorie] that is, with my soul and tongue, (as Psalm. 16,
9.) or Yea my glory, to weet, shall sing. This Psalm is composed of the 57.
Psalm, from the 8. verse to the end: and of the 60. Psalm, from the 7. verse,
to the end: see the annotations there.

Verse. 7. answer me] or us: see Psalm. 60, 7, etc.

Verse. 14. valiantnes] that is, valiantly, and so prevail; as Balaam
prophesied, Number. 24, 18.

Annotations, Psalm CIX.
Verse. 1. OF my praise] that is, which art praised of me; as Psalm 22, 4. or,
which praysest and justifiest me against the calumnies of mine enemies: 2 Cor.
10, 18. Romans 2, 29. Number. 12, 7, 8. cease not] or be not silent, see Psalm. 28,
1. of deceit] that is, the deceitful man; as the Greek explaineth it: so pride
for proud person, Psalm. 36, 12. are] or have opened, to weet, themselves.

Verse. 4. And I prayer] to weet, I made, or give my self to prayer, (as the
Greek says, I prayed:) or, I am a man of prayer. So I peace, Psalm 120, 7. See
also 1 Cor. 14, 33.

Verse. 6. Set in office] or Make-visiter, or overseer: see verse 8. the wicked
one] the devil, as 1 Ioh. 2, 13, 14. and 3, 12. and 5, 18. or generally*
wicked rulers. the adversarie] in Hebrew Satan, in Greek the Devil; who is an
adversary to mankind. 1 Pet. 5, 8. Rev. 12, 9. at his right hand] to resist,
and overcome him, Zach. 3, 1. and this is spoken of all his foes, as of one
man; or of some one special, as Doeg enemy to David, 1 Samuel 22, 9. etc. Judas
to Christ, Ioh. 13.2. But God is at the right hand of the poor, verse 31. Psalm.
16.8.

Verse. 7. wicked] that is, (as the Greek says) condemned: see the note on Ps.
1.1. to sin] that is, turned to sin, and so abominable; Prove. 28, 9. and 15, 8.

Verse. 8. his office] or charge, visitation, bishopric, (Episcopee:) and this
is applied to Judas, whose office was derived to Matthias; Act. 1, 16, 20, 26.
A bishop, and bishops-charge, (so called of visitation) is a common name to al
overseers, and offices. Number. 4, 16. and 31, 14. Ezekiel. 44, 11. 2 King. 11, 15. 2 Chronicles. 34, 12, 17. Nehem. 11, 9.

V. 9. fatherless,] or orphans: and this is a curse of the law, Exodus 22, 24.
Ier. 18, 21.

Verse. 10. wander] rogue-about, as vagabonds, Genesis 4, 12.

Verse. 11. the creditour] he to whom he is indebted; or the extortioner let him
seize on all his goods. his labour] goods gotten by his labor.

Verse. 13. posteritie] or his last end; see Psalm. 37, 37. to cutting-off] or,
appointed to be cut off; to perdition, or to destruction, as the Greek
explaineth. The verb active, is of passive signification; as Psalm 32, 9. and
36, 3.

Verse. 15. memorie] or memorial, Psalm. 34, 17. Job 18, 17.

Verse. 16. smitten] with grief, that is, sorrowful, or as the Greek says,
pricked in heart. So verse 22. See Psalm. 102, 5. and 34, 19.

Verse. 17. let it come] or, it shall come: and so after.

Verse. 18. his rayment] or, a mantel. let it enter] or it entered. It may be
understood of his delight in cursing, which pleased him as water and oil: or of
the efficacy of the curse, that should pierse his own bowels and bones, as Number.
5, 22.

Verse. 20. the work] that is, the wage, or, reward due for his work: so Levit.
19, 13. Isa. 49, 4. Job 7, 2. Ezekiel. 29, 20.

Verse. 21. Iehovih] the name of God: see Psalm. 68.21. doe] to weet, mercy; as
the next words show; and is expressed, Psalm. 18, 51. See also Psalm 103, 9.
where the word anger is omitted.

Verse. 23. I am gone] or, am made to go (or depart,) namely, toward my grave;
as Psalm. 58.9. See also Psalm 102.12. 1 Chronicles. 17.11. tossed as the grashopper]
or, shaken off as the Locust; which has no nest, or biding place, but is
driven to and fro, being a fearful creature; Nahum. 3.17. Job 39.23. or which
is carried away with the wind: Exodus 10.19.

Verse. 24. feeble] or, losened, So that I am ready to stumble and fall. So Paul
calls them loose, or feeble knees, Heb. 12.12. from Isa. 35.3. for fatnes] or
for oil, that is, for want of fat, or oil; as, for the fruits, is, for want of
the fruits, Lam. 9.4. for five, is for want of five, Genesis 18.28. or we may
turn it, without fat: for the Hebrew min, sometime signifies without: Job 21.9.

Verse. 25. shaked] or wagged; a sign of scorn, Psalm. 22.8.

Verse. 27. thine hand] that is, thy handy work.

Verse. 28. rise they up] to weet, against me (as the Greek explaineth it) and
be they abashed as disappointed of their purpose.

Verse. 31. at the right hand] to assist; contrary to Satan, verse 6. that
judge] that is, condemn and persecute him to death.

Annotations, Psalm CX.
Verse. 1. JEhovah] that is, God the Father. assuredly said] see Psalm. 36, 2. to
my Lord;] that is, to Christ, whom David here calls his Lord, though he was
also his son according to the flesh, Math. 22.42.45. Romans 1.3. Act. 2.34. So
the Chaldee, The Lord said unto his word: meaning Christ, John 1.1. sit at my
right-hand] sitting, notes reigning with continuance, 1 Cor. 15.25. Heb. 10
12.13 Gods right hand means his power and majesty in the heavens. Luke
22.69. Mark. 16.19. Heb. 1.3. and 8.1. and this above all Angels, Heb. 1.13.
thine enemies] even all of them, the last whereof is death, 1 Cor. 15.25.26. Of
this place, the Apostle gives this exposition, Every Priest stands daily
ministering, and ofttimes offering the same sacrifices, which can never take away
sins: but this man having offered one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at
Gods right hand, henceforth exspecting till his enemies be put the footstool of
his feet. Heb. 10.11.12.13.

Verse. 2. the rod] or, staff (scepter) of thy strength; thy strong staff (o
Christ) that is, the powerful word of thy kingdom; Isa. 11.4. Mat. 13, 19.
which was to come out of Sion and Jerusalem, Isa. 2, 3. Luke 24, 49. Act. 1.4.
and 2.1.2. etc. For in Sion, Christ reigns, Psalm. 2, 6. Reve. 14.1. rule
thou] that is, thou shall surely rule, or have dominion; see the note on Psalm.
37, 3.

Verse. 3. voluntaries] a people of voluntarinesses, or of liberalities (as
Psalm. 68.10.) that is, shall most freely, willingly and liberally present
themselves and their oblations to thee: as Judge. 5, 9. Act. 2.41. Exo. 25, 2.
Romans 12, 1. Psalm. 47.10. and 119, 108. Song. 6, 11. of thy power] or, army (as
Psalm. 33, 16.) that is, when thou sendest forth thy powerful gospel, and
preachers of the same, to conquer the world. Romans 1, 16. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Reve.
6, 2. Psalm. 45, 4, 5, 6. in the honourable-beauties of holines] or, in the
comly-honours of the sanctuary: meaning either the comely (or honorable)
places of of holiness, (or of the sanctuary) as Psalm. 29.2. that is, the
Church: or rather in the beautiful ornaments of holiness; that is, holy graces
and virtues, wherewith Christ and his people are adorned, as the Priests and
Levites, of old with Vrim, Thummim, and holy garments; Exodus 28.2.40. Isa. 52,
1. So the warries in heaven, are clothed with fine linen white, and pure, the
righteousness of the saints. Revel. 19, 14, 8. of the womb, etc.] This place is
difficult, and may diversely be understood, either of Christ himself, or of his
people: and again if of Christ, either in respect of his godhead, or of his
manhood. Of his Godhead, that the Father says unto him, of the womb (that is,
of mine own essence) before the early-morning (that is, before the world was)
to thee was, (or thou had) the deaw of thy youth, (or birth;) so noting the
eternal generation of Christ before all worlds, as is showed, Prove.
8.22.23.24.25. And this sense the Lxx. Greek interpreters seem to follow,
translating, Of the womb before the morning-starr begat I thee. If it be meant
of Christ's manhood, we may take it thus, of the womb of the dark-morning (or of
the obscure womb, of the virgin) thou had the deaw of thy birth. If of
Christ's people before mentioned, it may thus be read. Of the womb of the
morning to thee shall be (or shall come) the deaw of thy youth; that is, thy
youth (thy young or new born people) shall be to thee as the morning deaw;
which is falls secretly from the heaven, and abundantly covers the earth:
For so the deaw is sometime used, 2 Samuel 17, 12. and unto rain, deaw, ye, etc,
the scripture, applies the names of womb, and begetting; Job 38, 28, 29. and
the increase of the Church is by this figure described, as The remnant of
Iaakob shall be among many people, as a deaw from the Lord, as showers upon the
grass, that wayteth not for man, etc. Mic. 5.7. This last sense accords best
with the beginning of the verse. of the womb] or, from the womb of the morning.
of the early-morning,] or before the dawning: the morning (or day-dawning) in
Hebrew Mishchar, is named of the blacknes or darkness, which also the scripture
shows, John. 20, 1. and the letter M. is either a preposition, signifying
from, or before, as Isa. 43.13. or, but a part of the word, here meaning, of.
to thee] understand was, or shall be; that is, thou have, or shall have. deaw
of thy youth] or, of thy birth: that is, thy youth which is like the deaw.
Youth or native; may either be taken properly for young age, as Eccles. 11.9.
or figuratively, for young persons, meaning the regenerate, which are as new
born babes, John. 1, 13. and 3, 3. 1 Pet. 2, 2.

Verse. 4. sware] For as much says the Apostle) as it is not without an oath,
etc. by so much is Jesus made surety of a better testament. Heb. 7, 20, 22. a
Priest] or Sacrificer; see Ps. 99, 6 for ever,] Among the Levites, many were
made Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by reason of death: but
this man because he endures ever, has an everlasting priesthood. Wherefore he
is able also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him; seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7* 23.24, 25. to the order] or,
according to my speech: both these interpretations are good, the one from the
Apostles authority, Hebr. 7.17. the order from the Hebrew propriety,
dibrathi, as Job 5, 8. meaning the manner and order of Melchisedek, as God
speaks of him in the history, where he is brought in without father, mother,
kindred, beginning of days, or end of life, continuing a Priest for ever; as
the Apostle gathers Heb. 7.1, 3. from the narration Genesis 14, 18. etc. of
Melchisedek] the King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God, whose name and
office is opened, Heb. 7.1.2. etc. from which he infers, If perfection had
been by the Priesthood of the Levites, etc. what needed it that another Priest
should rise after the order of Melchisedek, and not to be called after the
order of Aaron? Heb. 7.11.

Verse. 5. The Lord] Christ, as in verse 1. at thy right hand] this may be
spoken to God the Father, at whose right hand Christ sits, as verse 1. or to
the people of God, at whose right hand he stands, as Ps. 109.31. has
wounded] or shall wound, or embrue in blood, as Ps. 68.22.24. a prophecy
spoken as of a thing done. So usually in the Prophets, Isa. 9, 6. and 53, 4, 5.
etc. See this fulfilled, Reve. 19.18.

Verse. 6. has filled] or shall fill, to weet, all places with dead bodies
slain and unburied, as Ier. 16, 4. the head] Antichrist the man of sin, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, 2 These. 2, 3, 8. or head,
for heads; and land, for lands; that is, all wicked governors wheresoever.

Verse. 7. of the brook] or stream, to weet, of affliction (as waters usually
signify, Psalm. 18.5.) Christ was to drink, that is, to suffer, and so to enter
into his glory, Mat. 26.39.42. Luke 24.26. 1 Pet. 1.11. Philip. 2, 8, 9. Or,
drinking of the brook in the way, may mean a short refreshing of himself, and
then a hot pursuit of his enemies without delay, till he has got a full
conquest of them. Compare herewith the history of Gedeons soldiers, Judge. 7,
4, 5, 6. etc.

Annotations, Psalm CXI.
Verse. 1. HAlelu-jah] Praise ye Iah. This Psalm sets forth the praises of
God: and is composed after the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, every sentence
beginning with a several letter. So also the Psalm following. See Psalm. 25, 1.
the secret] or, Council; see Psalm. 64, 3. and 89, 8.

Verse. 2. sought-out] that is, regarded and cared for; so Isa. 62, 12. a city
sought out, that is, cared for; as Deuteronomy. 11.12. or sought out; that is, found,
or manifested unto, as Isa. 65, 1. compared with Romans 10, 20. or sought, that
is, worthy to be sought; as Praised, Psalm. 18, 4. for praiseworthy. of all
that delight] or for all their delights: that is, the delights and pleasures of
Gods works are such, as they are worthy to be sought into. The original may
bear either sense.

Verse. 3. Majestie] that is, most majestical and honorable. standeth] that is,
continues, or abides firm: as 1 Samuel 16.22. Ps. 102.27. and 33, 11, 2 Cor. 9,
9. from Psalm. 112, 9.

Verse. 5. a prey] that is, a portion of meat, or food, as the Greek explaineth
it. So Prove. 31, 15. Mal. 3, 10.

Verse. 6. in giving] or, to give unto them.

Verse. 7. faithfull] or sure, constant: see Psalm. 19.8.

Verse. 9. redemption] or deliverance; which means both a riddance from the
evils wherein they have been, Deu. 7.8. and 15.15. Ps. 25.22. and 130.8. and a
preservation from the evils whereinto the wicked fall, Exodus 8.23. Psalm. 49, 7,
16. and 119.134.

Verse. 10. beginning the first, chief and principal; either in time or
dignity. So, the first, Mark. 12.28. for the great commandment, Mat. 22.36.
prudencie] understanding, or success and felicity, which commonly follows
prudencie. Prove. 3, 4. have all] or, shall be to all. do them] the precepts
mentioned verse 7. or these things generally. The Greek says, do it, meaning
the covenant, verse 9. his] that is, Gods praise, whom this psalm is composed,
verse, 1. etc, standeth] that is, abides, or continues; as verse 3.

Annotations, Psalm CXII.
Verse. 1. HAlelujah] or, Praise ye the LORD. This Psalm sets out the praises
of the godly man: and is composed after the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, even
as the former 111. psalm; with which in many things it is to be compared.

Verse. 2. his seed] his children, as Psalm. 21, 11. Levit. 21.17. the
generation] their progeny, as Deuteronomy. 29, 22. Job 42, 16. or, the nation, (the
multitude) of righteous men: see Psalm. 12, 8. and 14.5.

Verse. 3. Wealth] or, Store of riches, sufficiency of wealth gathered with
labor and industry: the Hebrew Hon, signifies also sufficiency, Prove. 30,
15. standeth] that is, continues, abides, as Psalm. 111, 3. where the very
same is spoken of God. So after, verse 9.

Verse. 4. light ariseth] or, springs up, properly as the sun rises; Mal. 4,
2. Light, signifies comfort, peace, joy, etc. as darkness, affliction. Job 30,
26. Esth. 8, 16. Psalm. 107, 10. Lam. 3, 2. And so in religion, Act. 26, 18, 23.
Romans 2, 19 2 Cor. 4, 6. Compare this sentence with Isa. 58, 10. Exodus 10, 23.
and the contrary, Job 38, 15. gracious] this may be understood of God, thus;
from him that is gracious, etc. as Psalm. 111, 4. or of the godly man, that he
is gracious, etc. as the next verse shows: or, of the light, that it is
gracious, etc: meaning it of God, who is our light, as Psalm. 27, 1.

Verse. 5. will moderate] or, measure out; or carry and dispense them, as the
Greek explaineth it, by the similitude of a steward. his words] or assaiers,
matters. in judgement] or with discretion, as is fit and right. Psalm. 25, 9.
Ezekiel. 34, 16.

Verse. 6. Surely] or, For: compare Psalm. 15, 5.

Verse. 7. hearsay] or, hearing, that is, tidings, fame, rumor, or report,
which he hears; as the word signifies Romans 10, 16, 17. So that which one
Evangelist calls akee, hearing, Mark. 1, 28 another calls echos, a sound,
or ecchoe, Luke 4, 37. both meaning same or rumor. See the contrary to this in
the wicked, Ier. 49, 23. fixed] or firmly-prepared, not to be moved with ill
tidings.

Verse. 8. he see] to weet, Gods work, or reward; see Psalm. 54.9.

Verse. 9. scattered] to weet, his riches (as the Chaldee explaineth it:) that
is, given and lent it freely without looking for any thing thereof, as Luke 6,
35. though thereby he is more increased, Prove. 11, 24. See 2 Cor. 9, 9.
justice] this generally is all righteousness, sometime alms; see Psalm 24, 5.
his horn] that is, powers and glory; see Psalm. 75, 5, 11. and 92, 11. and 89,
18, 25. 1 Samuel 2, 1.

Verse. 10. the desire] that is, the thing that he desires shall not be granted
him. Compare Prove. 10, 24, 28. and 13, 12.

Annotations, Psalm CXIII.
Verse. 2. FRom this time] or, from now; henceforth. So Psalm. 115, 18. and 121,
8 and 131, 3.

Verse. 3. rising] that is, the east part of the world; as Psalm. 103.12. going
in] or going-down; that is, the west; where the Sun is said to go in, as when
it rises, to come-out: Genesis 19, 23. meaning by east and West, all the world
over: so Mal. 1.11.

Verse. 5. lifteth-high to sit] or, to dwell; that is, (as the Greek explaineth
it) dwells on high: and so after, sees the things below.

Verse. 7. from the dust] that is, from base estate, as 1 King. 16, 2. So after,
from doung, as Lam. 4.5. This speech is taken from 1 Samuel 2, 8.

Verse. 9. the barren of house] that is, the woman which never had children; as
on the contrary, fruitful women are said to build their husband houses, Ruth.
4, 11. so house; is used for children, or posterity, Psalm. 115, 10, 12. Exodus
1, 21. See also Psalm. 68, 7. The scriptures apply this to the Church of the
Gentiles, as Rejoice o barren that did not bear, etc. Isa. 54.1. Gal. 4, 26,
27.

Annotations, Psalm CXIV.
Verse. 1. BArbarous-speech] or, speaking-barbarously, of a strange, rude,
uncouth language. This word is here only used, and means all speech that was
not understood of Gods people; which he that speaks, is called of the Apostle
a Barbarian that is, a stranger. 1 Cor. 14, 11. even as here also the Chaldee
turns it. Spiritually it means such as speak against the faith, the
language of Canaan. Isa. 19.18.

Verse. 2. Iudah] that is, the congregation of that tribe, which was most
principal, Number. 2, 3. and 7.12. and 10, 14. was] or became; and it is of the
feminine gender, to signify the Congregation, usually named a daugher, as Psalm.
9, 15. his sanctuary] sanctity; or sanctification; which God had sanctified to
dwell among them: Levit. 19. 2. and 20, 7, 26. and 26, 11.12. 2 Cor 6, 16.
dominions] or dominations (siegneuries,) ruling over the tribes by his laws
and spirit.

Verse. 3. The sea] the red sea, through which Israel passed; Exodus 14.21. Ps.
77, 17. and 78.13. and 66.6. and 136, 13. the Iorden] the great river in the
land of Canaan. Ios. 3. Psalm. 66, 6.

Verse 4. The mountains] Sinai, Horeb, and other hills in the wilderness quaked,
Exodus 19.18. Heb. 3, 6, 10. Psalm. 61, 9. So leaping is used also in Psalm. 29,
6. yonglings] Hebr. sons; meaning lambs: so verse 6.

Verse. 5. What ayled thee] or, what was to thee?

Verse. 7. At the presence] or, At the face, or Before the Lord. For these
phrases are used indifferently; as milliphni, at the presence, 1 Chronicles. 16.33.
is liphnei, before; Psalm. 96, 13. So Milliphnei, before, or from the face, 1 Chronicles. 19.18. for which in 2 Samuel 10, 18. is Miphnei, before. tremble thou]
with pain as a woman in travel; see Psalm. 29, 8. It is an answer to the former
question, and therefore may also be turned, the earth trembled, (as the like is
observed in Psalm. 22.9.) and so the Greek here translateth, the earth was
shaken.

Verse. 8. the stint] that is, hard flintie rock, as is explained Deuteronomy. 8.15.
Compare Isa 41.18.

Annotations, Psalm CXV.
Verse. 1. NOt to us] or, for us. This psalm the Greek joyneth with the former,
and makes a part of the 114. psalm. See the note on Psalm. 10.1.

V. 2. now] or, I pray. A word of entreating, but used here in mockage. See Ps,
79, 10.

Verse. 3. And] or, But our God. It is a sign of indignation, as Psalm. 2, 6.

Verse. 5. They have] Hebr. is to them. speak not] or cannot speak: as Psalm. 77,
5. and so the rest. Compare herewith Ier. 10, 3, 4, 5, 9. etc. Deuteronomy. 4, 28.

Verse. 7. sound] or mutter, meditate, see Psalm. 12.

V. 9. Israel] The Church is here distinguished into three parts; 1. Israel, or
the body of the common wealth: 2. Aarons house, the ministers; and 3. the
searers of the Lord, that is, strangers, converts of all nations: Act. 2.5. and
10, 35. So after verse. 12.13. and Ps. 118.2, 3, 4, trust thou] the Greek says,
has trusted; and so the rest. See the notes on Ps. 22, 9. and 114, 7. their
help] to weet, which trust in him. Or it may be for your help: one person put
for another, as often is. See Ps. 59, 10.65.7. and 80, 7.

Verse. 10. House] that is, children, or posterity. See Psalm. 113, 9.

Verse. 12. will blesse] to weet, us; as the Greek turns it, being mindful of
us, has blessed us. See the like want, in Psalm. 59, 14. and 69, 2. and 45.4.

Verse. 13. small] or little, in age or degree. So Rev. 11, 18.

Verse. 14. will add unto] or add upon you; that is, increase you, as Deuteronomy.
1.11. Isa. 26.15, or, add his blessings.

Verse. 15. shall you be of] or, are you to Jehovah: that is, by him. See the
like phrase, Genesis 14, 19. 2 Samuel 2, 5.

Verse. 16. he has given] or understand, which he has given: for the earth
also is his. Psalm. 24.1. though heaven properly is his dwelling place; yet not
able to contain him. 1 King. 8, 30, 27.

Verse. 17. to silence] the grave, the place of silence and quietness: as Job
3.17.18. See Psalm. 94.17.

Annotations, Psalm. CXVI.
Verse. 1. I Love] to weet, the Lord: or I am lovingly-affected, and welpleased.
The Greek here begins the 114. Psalm; see the note on Psalm 10.1. and after,
verse 10. heareth] or will hear, to weet, continually.

Verse. 2. and] that is, therefore will I call; or, when I did call. my dayes]
that is, whiles I live: or days of affliction, as Job 30.16. see Psalm 119,
84. and 37.12.

Verse. 3. pangs] or pains: compare Psalm 18.5. etc. hell] the state of death,
or grave: see Psalm 16.10. found] that is, came upon me. So 1 Chronicles. 10.3.
Nehem. 9.23. Esth. 8.6. Psalm. 119.143.

Verse. 5. Oh] or I beseech thee: O-now. The Hebrew Anna and Na are words of
entreating; as the Greek Nai; Philem. 1, 20. Rev. 1.7.

Verse. 6. brought-low] drawn-drie, weakened, and afflicted: see Psalm 41.2. and
79.8.

Verse. 7. thy rest] the quiet comfortable estate in God, without trouble of
conscience. This Christ gives, Mat. 11.29. but sin takes away, Deuteronomy. 28.65.
rewarded] or, as the Greek says, been beneficial: see Psalm 13.6.

Verse. 8. sliding] or thrust, fall: see Psalm 56.14. 1 Samuel 2.9.

Verse. 9. walk on] to weet, pleasingly, as the Greek explaineth; or pleasingly
administer: so 1 Samuel 2.30.35. Psalm 86.14. the living] in this world, See
Psalm 27.13.

Verse. 10. therefore] the Hebrew K^, For, is here used for therefore, as the
Greek translateth, and the Apostle allows, 2 Cor. 4.13. So may is also be
taken, 1 Samuel 2.21; so the Greek hoti; as Luke 7.47. for she loved, that is,
therefore she loved much. Here the Greek version, begins the 115. Psalm.

Verse. 11. my hastening] through fears, in Greek, my ecstasie or trance): see
Psalm 31.23. hereto is opposed his quietness, Psalm 30.7. every man] even, the
Prophets, which have promised me the kingdom, etc. and thus it might be David's
infirmity: or indeed, every man in respect of God, is a liar, and unable to
help in time of need 1 Number. 23.19. Romans 3.4. Psalm 33, 17.

Verse. 12. for all] so the Greek supplieth the word for: and by rewards, he
means benefits, as verse 7. Compare 1 These. 3.9. 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

Verse. 13. the cup of salvation] or of healthes: that is, of thanksgiving for
Gods saving health and deliverance of me. For mercies received, the Israelites
used to offer peace (or thank) offerings; whereof they did eat, and rejoice
before the Lord; and at their bankets, took up the cup of wine in their hands,
and blessed God: called thereupon the cup of blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16. So our
Lord, at the feast of the Passover, took the cup and gave thanks; Luke 22.17.
call on] that is, pray, and praise God: or call in, that is, proclaim and
preach Gods mercies: so verse 17.

Verse. 15. Precious, etc.] that is, God will not easily suffer his saints to be
slain: see Psalm 72.14. So the soul is said to be percious, when the life is
spared: 1 Samuel 26.31. 2 King. 1.13.

Verse. 16. handmaid] born thy servant in thy house: see Psalm 86.16. hands]
that is, have set me at liberty; (as Job 39.8.) from afflictions; Isa 28.22. a
similitude taken from captives, Isa. 52.2.

Verse, 17. confession] that is, a thank-offring, see Psalm 50.14.

Annotations, Psalm CXVII.
Verse. 1. GEntiles] or nations, all which are exhorted to glorify God, for
obtaining mercy by Christ, who has received us into the glory of God; as the
Apostle shows from this scripture, Romans 15.7,-11.

Annotations, Psalm CXVIII.
Verse. 1. FOr he] or, that he is good: so verse 29.

Verse. 4. that fear] strangers of all nations, as before he mentioned the
church and ministers: see Psalm 115.9.

Verse. 5. with a large-roumth] that is, by bringing me into it; as is expressed
Psalm 18, 20. and 4.2.

Verse. 6. for me] to weet an helper, as the Greek explaineth; which the Apostle
follows Heb. 13.6. See also Psalm 56.5.12.

Verse. 7. with them that help me] instead of all helpers: see a like phrase;
Psalm. 54, 6. The Greek says, mine helper. see on them] to weet, their reward;
or vengeance, as the Chaldee explaineth. See Psalm 54.9. and 91 8.

Verse. 10. but in, etc.] or, in the name of Jehovah, I trust) that I shall cut
them off. The Greek agrees with the former; the Chaldee with this latter: and
so in the verses following.

Verse. 12. were quenched] or (on the contrary) were kindled, as both the Greek
and Chaldee do translate it. Sundry words signify contraries, as barac, to
bless, and to curse, 1 King. 21.13. The fire of thorns is both soon kindled,
and soon quenched; so Christ's enemies. for] or but in the name, etc.

Verse. 13. Thrusting, etc.] that is, Thou did sorely thrust: speaking to the
enemy; an Hebraisme often used; as after verse. 18. So Cutting* shall be cut off.
Number. 15.30. that is, shall die without mercy, Heb. 10.28.

Verse. 14. song] or melody, that is, whom I sing land unto. This is taken from
Exodus 15.2. so Isa. 12.2. for a salvation] or, a salvation; that is, has saved
or reskued me, against mine enemies, as 2 Samuel 10.11. where the like phrase is
used: so after, verse 21. the word for, may be omitted, as sometime in the
Hebrew it self, 2 Chronicles. 18.21. compared with 1 King. 22.22.

Verse. 15. salvation] that is, victory, as Psalm 98.1 or thanks for salvation,
as Psalm. 116.13. See Rev. 19.1. tents] that is, dwelling-places; but spoken of
as in wars, or for short continuance; as Hebr. 11.9. So tents of the saints
Rev. 20.9. See also 2 Chronicles. 31.2.

Verse. 18, gave] or delivered: so Ezekiel. 31.14.

Verse. 19. gates of justice] that is, of Gods sanctuary, the gates whereof
were to be opened by the Priests and Levites, for men to come and serve the
Lord. 1 Samuel 3.15. Called gates of justice, because only the just and clean
might enter into them, as verse. 20. Isa. 26, 2. 2 Chronicles. 23, 19. Rev. 21.27.

Verse. 22. The stone, etc.] By this stone, is meant David himself, and his son
Christ; by the builders, are meant the chief men of Israel, that refused David
and Christ to reign over them: Mat. 21.42, Act. 4, 11. for head] that is, the
chief corner stone, which coupleth and fastneth the building: see also Isa. 28,
16. 1 Petr. 2, 6.7.8. Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

Verse. 24. made] that is, preferred in honor above others: so making sometime
signifies, as 1 Samuel 12, 6. and the making of a day, is the sanctifying and
observing of it, Deuteronomy. 5, 15. Exodus 34.22. Also day, is the whole time of grace
in Christ, 2 Cor. 6, 2.

Verse. 25. save now] or, I beseech thee save: in Hebrew Hoshiah-na, or Hosanna,
as it is sounded in Greek, Mat. 21, 9.15. where the people and children welcome
Christ into Jerusalem, singing Hosanna the son of David, that is, praying God
most high, to save the King (Christ) who then came in the name of the Lord.

Verse. 26. he that commeth] that is, the King (Christ) that comes in the name
(power and authority) of the Lord; Luke 19.38. we bless you] these seem to be
the Priests words; whose office was to bless Gods people in his house; Number. 6,
23. Deuteronomy. 10, 8. 1 Chronicles. 23, 13.

Verse. 27. the feast-offrings] or festivitie. This word often used for a
festival day, as Psalm 81, 4. is sometime figuratively used for the sacrifices
offered at those feasts, as Exodus 23, 18, Isa. 29, 1. and so the Chaldee
explaineth it here. Thus Christ is called our Passover, 1 Cor. 5, 7. that is,
our Paschal-lamb. with cords] This word is sometime used for thick twisted
cords, Judge. 15, 13. sometime for thick branches of trees, used at some feasts,
Ezekiel, 19.11. Levit. 23.40. Hereupon this sentence may two ways be read, bind
the feast with thick branches, or bind the sacrifices with cords; both mean one
thing, that men should keep the festivity with joy and thanks to God; as Israel
used at their solemnities. unto the hornes] that is, all the Court over, until
you come even to the horns of the altar: intending hereby many sacrifices, or
boughs.

Annotations, Psalm CXIX.
Verse. 1. PErfect in way] entire (or unblemished) in their state, or
conversation: see Ezekiel. 28, 15. Psalm 1.1.

Verse. 2. seek him] with hope and trust; as the word also imports, Isa.
11.10. with Romans 15, 12. See also Deuteronomy. 4, 29. Ier. 29, 13. 2 Chronicles. 15.15.

Verse. 3. Also they, etc.] the Greek turns it thus; For, not they that work
iniquity, do walk in his ways.

Verse. 4. to be observed] or, for men to serve. See the note on Psalm 36, 3.

Verse. 5. O that] or, My wishes, are that etc.

Verse. 8. unto vehemencie] or, vehemently; that is, utterly: a like prayer is
against Gods anger, Isa. 64, 9. or, it may here have reference to the former, I
will keep thy statutes with vehemency, if thou forsake me not.

Verse. 10. let me not wander] or make me not to err: in Greek, repel me not.

Verse. 14. as above] as that which is superior to all riches; or, as for all
abundant wealth.

Verse. 16. delight] or solace, recreate my self.

Verse. 18. Vncover] or Vnveile. that I may] or, and I shall: so after in this
and other psalms often. See Psalm. 43, 4.

Verse. 19. in the earth] or in the land: see Psalm 39, 13.

Verse. 20. for desire] or, with desiring, or, to desire; as the Greek says, my
soul coveteth to desire. A like form of the Hebrew word; is in Ier. 31.12.

Verse. 23. spake] or talked of me; spake-largely, and freely: see the word in
this form, Ezekiel. 33, 30.

Verse. 25. quicken me] or, spare my life, as Ios. 9, 15.

Verse. 27. and I will] or, that I may; as verse 18. and 33.

Verse. 28. droppeth] to weet, tears, that is, weepeth: as Job 16.20. raise up]
or confirm, stablish: as verse 38. and 106.

Verse. 30. of faitfulnes] or faith, that is, a sure and faithful way.
proposed] to weet, before me, as Psalm 16, 8.

Verse. 32, inlarge] that is, amplify and increase with wisdom, as 1 King.
4.29. (as to want an heart, is to be foolish; Prove. 9, 4.). or, with comfort;
as Isa. 60.5. or love, as 2 Cor. 6.11.

Verse. 33. to the end] Gr. continually, some turn it, for reward; as after the
Greek does, verse 112. The Hebr. properly is the heel, or footsole;
figuratively, the end, and sometime reward: see Psalm 19.12. that I may] or, and
I shall keep, etc. So verse 34.

Verse. 37. Turn-away] or Make pass; Transferr: so verse 39. from seeing] or,
that they see not; Psalm. 69.24. and 66.18.

Verse. 38 Confirm] or raise-up; that is, perform and do it, as 2 Samuel 7.25. and
that continually, as Deuteronomy. 27, 26. with Gal. 3, 10 So, to confirm words, 2
King. 23.3, is to do them, 2 Chronicles. 34.31. which] that is, which servant is
given (or addicted) to thy fear; or, which word, is given for the fear of thee,
that thou may be feared, Psalm 130.

Verse. 41. come] that is, be performed, as Judge. 13.12.

Verse. 42. answer] Hebr. answer him word, that is, return him answer, as this
phrase imports; 2 Samuel 24, 13 1 King. 20, 9. and 12, 16. so Prove. 27.11. or,
answer him the matter.

Verse. 43. unto vehemencie] or vehemently; as verse 8. and it may be referred
to the word, vehemently true; or to the former, past not, utterly.

Verse. 45. in a large-roumth] or, in widenes; that is, at liberty, cheerfully,
free from fears, distresses, etc. Psalm 4, 2. and 18, 20. and 118.5.

Verse. 48. lift my palms] that is, put my hands to the practice of thy law,
with earnestnes.

Verse. 53. A burning-horrour] a storm of terror and dismay; as the Greek
says, swowning, or fainting: see Psam 11.6. for] or from the wicked; a storm
of trouble raised by them.

Verse. 54. songs] theams, or arguments of singing. the house] the earthly house
of this tabernacle, where man sojourneth in his body; as 2 Cor. 5, 1. etc. in
Greek, the place: that is, wheresoever I sojourn.

Verse. 56. This was] Thus ordered I the course of my life: or, this variety of
estate, persecution, consolation, etc. befell me.

Verse. 57. my portion] that is, as the Greek explaineth, O Lord thou art my
portion; as Psalm 142.6. and 16, 5. Ier. 10, 16. or, my portion, O Lord, shall be
to keep thy words.

Verse. 58. besought] or entreated, see Psalm 45, 13,

Verse. 59. thought upon] considered, and counted.

Verse. 60. delayed not] or, distracted not my self, to meet, with worldly
cares, fears, pleasures, etc.

Verse. 61. Bands] or Coards, as the Greek also turns it; or Companies, as the
Chaldee explaineth it: so a band of Prophets, for a company of them, 1 Samuel
10.10.

Verse. 66. reason] or behavior: Hebr. taste, or savor: see Psalm 34.1.

Verse. 67. afflicted] or answered, cried, to weet, for my affliction.

Verse. 69. forged] or composed, adjoined: so Job 13, 4.

Verse. 70. grosse] congealed, and so made heard and senseless: in Greek,
crudled as milk. Compare Act. 28, 27. Ephesians. 4.18.

Verse. 72. thousands [to weet, of pieces; as is expressed, Psalm 68, 31.

Verse. 73. fashioned] or sitted, composed. Compare Job 10, 8.

Verse. 75. with faithfulnes] or in faith, or truth. God is faithful, which
will not suffer us to be temped above that we are able, but will give the issue
with the tentation, etc. 1 Cor. 10, 13.

Verse. 78. depraved] perverted, wronged me, dealt perversely with me; or would
pervert me, from the right way.

Verse. 80. perfect] sincere, Greek, without spot: unblemished; as verse 1.

Verse. 81. sainteth] fails, or, is consumed, to weet, with desire. So Psalm
84, 2. fail] or, are consumed, as verse 81. and 123. See Psalm, 69.4. 1 Samuel 2,
33.

Verse. 83. in the smoke] that is, dry, and wrinckled. Compare Psalm 32.4. and
102, 4.

Verse. 84. dayes] to weet, of afflictions; see Psalm 37, 12. and 116.2.

Verse. 85, dug pits] to take away my life: Psalm 35.7. the Greek says, told
me tales: to entrap me with errors,

Verse. 86. faithfulnes] or faith, that is, faithful, true.

Verse. 89. is stedfast] or, standeth-fast; abides: compare Isa. 40, 8.

Verse. 90. stablished] or fitly-settled: see Eccles. 1.4.

Verse. 91. To thy] that is, According to thy ordinations; or For thy
judgments; in the manner and to the ends that thou appointedst them, they
stand and continue: as Psalm 33, 9.

Verse. 96. of all perfection] or consummation; that is, of every most-perfect
thing: large] or broad, wide; meaning infinite.

Verse 98. thou makest] or it makes. it is with me] or, it is mine: that is,
thy law, (or every one of thy commandments,) is mine.

Verse. 103. my palat] that is, my taste.

Verse. 105. a lamp] or, a candle; lantern: so Prove. 6, 23. Compare Job 19.8.

Verse. 106. sworn] making covenant to walk in thy law; as Nehem. 10.29.
ratific] perform, or stablish.

Verse. 108. free-offrings] or, voluntaries: see Psalm, 54, 8.

Verse. 109. in my palm] or, hand; that is, I go in danger of my life. See the
like phrase, Judge. 12, 3. 1 Samuel 19, 5. and 28, 21.

Verse. 112. to the end] as verse 33. Here the Greek turns it, for reward:
respecting the end and reward of faith and obedience, as Psalm. 19.12. Heb.
11.26. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9.

Verse. 113. vain- thoughts] or wavering-cogitations, or vain- thinkers; as the
Chaldee explaineth it; the Greek also turning it, transgressors-of-law. It has
the name of top-branches of trees; figuratively applied to the thoughts, or,
opinions of the mind, wavering and uncertain, as 1 King. 18, 21. or, persons
distracted with their own cogitations.

Verse. 117. delight] or, have respect, or contemplate, meditate delightfully.

Verse. 119. Like drosse] consumed with the fire of thy wrath. See Ezekiel.
22.18-12. Prove. 25.4, 5. makest-cease] that is, removest, or take away.

Verse. 120. feels horrour] as when the hair stands up for fear; and by flesh,
may be meant, the hair of his flesh, as is expressed Job 4, 15. from whence
this phrase seems to be taken.

Verse. 121. Be-surety] answering for and defending him. Or, give sweetness (or
delight) unto him.

Verse. 126. to do] or work, showing his power, etc. made-frustrate] of none
effect, or disspated: see Psalm. 33.10.

Verse. 128. hold-righteous] or make-righteous; that is, do esteem, and defend
to be most right, and do rightly use them.

Verse. 130. The opening] or door: that is, the declaration (as the Greek
interprets it); or the first entrance into them.

Verse. 132. according to thy judgement] that is, as is right, and meet, and
behooveth: or, after the manner, wont, and custom that thou usest. So
judgment, is for manner, or custom; Genesis 40.13. Ios. 6.15. 1 Samuel 13. and
27.11.

Verse. 136. they] men in general; or the wicked; as after, verse 158.

Verse. 137. righteous] to weet, is every of thy judgments; or upright art thou
in thy judgments.

Verse. 138. justice of thy testimonies] that is, thy just and very faithful
testimonies. Or, justice, thy testimonies, and faith.

Verse 139. suppresseth] or cutteth-off; that is, consumes. Compare Psalm. 69.10.

Verse. 140. fined] purified as in fire: Psalm. 12.7.

Verse. 142. for ever] that is; everlasting: so verse. 144.

Verse. 143. sound] that is, come upon me. Psalm. 116.3.

Verse. 144. justice of etc.] or, Thy testimonies are just, etc.

Verse. 147. prevented to weet, thee, with prayer; as Psalm. 88.14. and 95.2.
twilight] the dawning of the morning; as the Chaldee explaineth it; and the
Hebrew sometime signifies, Job 7.4.

Verse. 148. watches] see Psalm. 63.7. and 90.4. and 119.62.

Verse. 149. judgement] equity, or custom, as verse 132.

Verse. 160. the beginning] or, the head, but the Greek and Chaldee do explain
it, from the beginning thy word is truth: and so for ever. Or, taking head, for
excellency; thy most excellent word is truth.

Verse. 164. Seven times] that is, often: for seven is used for many: as Levit.
26.18. Prove. 24.16. and 26.25. 1 Samuel 2.5.

Verse, 165. is no stumbling-block] or, they have no offense, (or scandal.) So
in 1 Ioh. 2, 10. he that loves his brother, there is no scandal in him. He
walks without fear of falling.

Verse. 172. resound] or, sing: Hebr. answer.

Verse. 175. Let my soul live] that is, Let me wholly live: as on the contrary,
let my soul die, Judge. 16, 30. that is, I, all that I am, desire to die.

Verse. 176. a lost sheep] a sheep of perdition, or perishing, that is, ready to
perish. All we like sheep have gone astray: Isa. 53, 6.

Annotations, Psalm CXX.
Verse. 1. OF degrees] or, of ascensions, of heighths: (Heb. ham-mahaloth:) that
is, a Psalm to be sung with an high voice; as the Levites are said to praise
God with a great voice on high, (Heb. le-mahlah,) 2 Chronicles. 20, 19. Or this
title notes the excellency of the song, for short, grave, and pitthy
sentences: as Adam ham-mahalah, is a man of emmencie, (or of high-degree,) 1 Chronicles. 17, 17. Sundry other ways is this title understood, as of the stayres
that went up to the house of the Lord, whereon the singers should stand; of the
coming up from Babylon, (called mahalah, an ascension, Ezra. 7, 9.) etc.
Fifteen psalms together have this title prefixed. distressednes] that is,
sore-distresse: the Hebrew adds a letter to increase the signification: so,
helpfulnes, for full help, Psalm. 44.27.

Verse. 3. What shall it give] or, (as the Greek has) what shall be given; that
is, what good, or profit shall thou get? meaning, none at all. The verb
active, is often used passively; see Psalm. 32.9. and 36.3. Or, what shall he
(meaning God, or any one) give to thee O deceitful tongue? it add] or be
added, to weet, as good; or advantage, so Psalm 115.14. tongue] this may also
be read, what shall the tongue of deceit give to thee; that is, profit thee;
speaking to the calumniator.

Verse. 4. arrows, etc.] This may note out the hurt of a guilefull tongue,
whose evil words are like arrows, Psalm 64:4. Prove. 25.18. or, the reward
which God will give the deceitful tongue; his plagues, like arrows, Psalm
45.6. Deuteronomy. 34, 23. Ezekiel. 5.16. coals of Iuniper] which wood in burning;
smells sweet; but the coals thereof, burn extremely, and last long: so that
under the ashes the glowing coals may be kept (as some write) a year long. So
it fitly notes the long lasting infamy of an evil tongue. Or, if we referr it
to Gods judgments, they are severe and durable, as Deuteronomy. 28.59. Psalm 18 9. and
140.11.

Verse. 5. sojourn] or am a pilgrim: a stranger. with Meshec] that is, with a
profane and barbarous people; like the posterity of Meshac and Kedar;
mentioned in Genesis 10.2. and 25.13. Meshec signifies length, or protraction;
and so may here be taken for no proper name, but I sojourn so long; and thus
the Greek turns it, my peregrination is prolonged. Tents of Kedar] the son of
Ismael, Genesis 25.13. whose children dwelt in Arabia, Isa. 21.13.-17. therefore
the Chaldee here turns it Arabians; they dwelt in tents or cottages in the
wilderness, as shepherds, See also Isa. 42.11. Ier. 49.28.29. Ezekiel. 27.21.

Verse. 6. it has much] or, to it self (in it own seeming) has long dwelt: so
Psalm 123.4.

Verse. 7. for peace] or, to peace (as after, for, or, to war) that is,
addicted thereto; or understand, a man of peace, that is, peaceful, as the
Greek expounds it; so Job 5.24. and 21.9. 2 Samuel 17.3. See the like phrase
Psalm 109.4.

Annotations, Psalm. CXXI.
Verse. 1. OF degrees] or, for degrees, or, ascensions: see the note on the
former psalm: the mountains] Sion and Morijah, where was the sanctuary of God,
who had his foundation in the holy mountains, Psalm 87.1. which was a figure of
the heavens, Heb. 9.24. and sometime mountains and heavens are used for the
same, as Psalm. 18, 8. with 2 Samuel 22, 8. So the meaning is, that when he looked
up to God for help; he received it. Or we may read it thus, Shall I lift up
mine eyes to the mountains? that is, to the places where Idols are worshipped;
Deuteronomy 12, 2. as if he should say, far be it from me. For in vain is help
exspected from the hills, or the multitude of the mountains: but in Jehovah our
God, is the salvation of Israel. Ier. 3.23. The lifting up of the eyes,
signifies hope and exspectation, Ezekiel. 18.6. So Psalm. 123.1.

Verse. 3. to be moved] or, to slide, or to commotion; which means a falling
into evil: see Psalm. 38, 17. not slumber] that is, not neglect any care or
diligence for thy good. Psalm. 132, 4. Prove. 6, 4. Isa. 5, 27.

Verse. 5. shadow] that is, protection, comfort, and refreshing from heat. Isa.
25, 4. and 4, 6. Number. 14, 9. See also Psalm. 109, 31.

Verse. 6. The Sun] which annoyeth with heat, as the moon does with cold
vapors; Ion. 4, 8. Genesis 31, 40. And the Sun and Moon being rulers of day and
night, Ps. 136, 8.9. imply all other things whatsoever. But this has reference
to Gods protection of Israel in the wilderness, Exodus 13, 21. Isa. 4, 5.

Verse. 8. Thy going out, and comming-in] that is, al thy administration,
affairs and actions. See the like phrase, Deuteronomy. 28, 6. 2 Chr. 1, 10. 2 Samuel 3,
25. Act. 1, 21. and 9, 28.

Annotations, Psalm CXXII.
Verse. 1. IN them] or for them: Greek, for the things that were said. we wil]
or, let us go; exhorting one another, as Deuteronomy. 33, 19.

Verse. 3. joined to it self] compact, fitly framed and builded together for an
habitation of God through the spirit, Ephesians. 2, 21, 22. so the curtains of the
tabernacle were conjoined, Exodus 26, 3.

Verse. 4. to the testimonie] that is, the Ark, wherein were the tables of
testimonies* and from whence God testified his presence by oracle; Exodus 25,
21, 22. or, by the testimony to Israel, that is, according to the charge given
for their coming thither* Deuteronomy. 16, 16.17.

Verse. 5. sit thrones] that is, they stand, or remain still: or, are set;
active for passive, as Psalm 36, 3. of the house] or, for the house, that is,
the posterity, as Psalm 115, 10.

Verse. 6. Ask] that is, Desire, or pray for the peace: in Greek; the things
that belong to the peace: see the like speech, Luke 19, 42. Ier. 15, 5.
safe-quietnes have] or, they shall have safe-ease, or tranquillity,
prosperity: the word means both quietness from troubles, and abundance of
welfare: so Psalm 30, 7. and 73, 12.

Verse. 7. fort] or skonce, walls.

Verse. 9. good for thee] or, thy good: see Nehem. 2.10.

Annotations, Psalm CXXIII.
Verse. 2. THat he be gracious] or shew-mercy: this notes continual prayer
without fainting, as Luke 18.1-7.

Verse. 4. it is] or, to it self; as Psalm 120.6. of the proud] or, be to the
proud, as a prayer that the evil may turn upon themselves.

Annotations, Psalm CXXIV.
Verse. 1. EXcept Jehovah, that he] or, But for Jehovah who was. If it had not
been he.

Verse. 4. waters] that is, sinful people, as, Isa. 59, 19. Rev. 17, 15.

Annotations, Psalm CXXV.
Verse. 3. OF wickednes] that is, of the wicked: as pride, for proud men, Psalm.
36.12. lot] that is, inheritance; as Ios. 18.11. 1 Pet. 5.3.

Verse. 5. crookednesses] crooked ways; or vices.

Annotations, Psalm CXXVI.
Verse. 1. THe captivitie] or, the reversion; that is, the multitude of captives
returning from bondage. See Psalm. 14.7. and 68.19. Deuteronomy. 30.3 The return from
Babels bondage, figured our redemption by Christ. Isa. 10.21.22 Romans 9.27. that
dream] that felt joy and comfort incredible, which we doubted whether it were
true or no: as did Peter, Act. 12.9. See also Isa. 29.7.8.

Verse. 2. joyful-showt] or song, or shril-singing: so verse 5.6. Compare Job
8.21. done very great things] or done magnificently, or magnified his doings,
(as the Greek translateth this phrase, in Joel. 2.20.) the Hebraisme being, he
has magnified to do: like that in 2 Chronicles. 33.6. Manasseh multiplied to do
(that is, did much) evil. with them] or with these men.

Verse. 4. our captivitie] that is, the rest of the captives which remain yet
behind, bring them also. So captivity, is for captives, Ezekiel. 11.24.25 in the
south] that is, in the dry ground; for so the Hebrew word signifies; and so
south lands were waterlesse, Judge. 1.15. Here we may understand, this shall be
to us as rivers in the south.

Verse. 5. shall reap] or let them reap: as continuing the former prayer; so
after.

Verse. 6. He going goeth] that is, every sower, forementioned: therefore the
Greek says, they did going go: which phrase means, a continual and diligent
going. the sowing seed] the seed to be sown: Hebr. the drawing of the seed;
that is, the seed of drawing, or, of sowing, as this phrase means, Amos 9.13.
or, the dray of seed, that is, the seed-basket. Sometime drawing, is purchasing,
as Job 28.18. which may also be minded here, the purchased, (that is, precious)
seed.

Annotations, Psalm. CXXVII.
Verse. 1. FOr Solomon) as Psalm. 72.1. or, of Solomon.

Verse. 2. to rise early] or, to be early in rising, to be late in sitting;
eating, etc. of sorrowes] that is, gotten with much sorrow or pains: as bread
of wickedness, Prove. 4.17. is that which is wickedly gotten: or bread of
sorrows, may mean course meat, as bread of pleasures. Dan. 10.3. is dainty
fine meat. so] by building, keeping and blessing their labors without sorrow;
or surely he will give. his beloved] or dearling; the Hebrew Iedid, has
reference to Solomon's name, Iedid-jah. 2 Samuel 12.25. that is, Beloved-of Iah:
but the Greek turns it plurally, his beloved ones, sleep] quiet rest without
cark and sorrow. Therefore also the Hebrew word Shens is written with aleph) a
quiet dum letter, (otherwise then usual) to denote the more quiotues.

Verse. 3. an heritage] that is, a reward (or blessing) given of the Lord: so
Job 20.29. Isa. 54.17. Psalm. 61.6. a wage] or reward, which sometime is of debt,
for service, Number. 18.31. Genesis 30.28. sometime of favor, Romans 4.4. as Gods
rewards to his servants, Genesis 15.1. Isa. 62.11.

Verse. 4. sonns of youth] that is, young men; who are a help to their parents
against the enemy, as arrows in the battle. Compare 1 Ioh. 2.14. Prove. 20.29.

Verse. 5. his quiver with them] that is, his house full of children. when they
shall speak] that is, plead in judgments* which was at the city gates; see the
contrary, Job 5.4. It may also be read, but they shall subdue the the enemies
in the gate. The Greek gives the first interpretation. Compare Genesis 22.17.

Annotations, Psalm CXXVIII.
Verse. 1. O Happy] or Blessed.

Verse. 2. When thou) or, For thou shall eat: or, Surely. the labour] that is,
things got with labor, according to the law, Genesis 3, 19. and this is of Gods
hand, Eccles. 2, 24. the contrary whereof is, a curse, Deuteronomy. 28, 30, 31, 33.
good] profitable, and pleasing; as Deuteronomy. 23, 16.

Verse. 3. fruitful] or, fructifying: see also this similitude, Ezekiel. 19, 10.
Genesis 49, 22, Olive plants] always green, Psalm. 52, 10. and legitimate, as the
Olive admits no other graff.

Verse. 4. Lo surely thus] or, Lo that thus; in Greek, Lo thus, etc. counting
that superfluous.

Verse. 5. will Iehovah] or, prayer-wise (as the Greek has it) Jehovah bless
thee. see thou] or, thou shall see, that is, enjoy: look the notes on Psalm. 27,
4. and 37, 3. the good] that is, the good things, as the Greek has it: see
Psalm 65, 5.

Verse. 6. thy sonns sonns] or, sonns to (or of) thy sonns. See this fulfilled
in Job 42, 16.

Annotations, Psalm CXXIX.
Verse. 1. OFten] Or Much: vehemently. from my youth] my first constitution, in
Egypt. Ezekiel. 23, 3.

Verse. 3. plowers] that plow iniquity, Job 4, 8. the Greek, sinners. furrow]
and furrows: that is, every of them; for the Hebrew has both readings:)
meaning their injuries, or iniquity, as the Greek turns it.

Verse. 4. cord] for cords, or ropes: one put for many; see Psalm 8.9. by cords,
meaning counsels and enterprises, wherewith they drew the plough of their
iniquity: Isa. 5.18.

Verse. 5. Let them] or, They shall be abasht.

Verse. 6. pulls it off] or pulls out, namely, the book to cut it.

Verse. 7. his bosom:] his arms; as Isa. 49, 22. or lap.

Annotations, Psalm CXXX.
Verse. 1. DEeps] that is, great calamities, Psalm 69, 3, 15.

Verse. 3. shall stand?] or, can subsist? meaning, no man can.

Verse. 6. watchmen] or warders, keepers. for,] or to the morning.

Verse. 8. his] or their iniquities: see the note on Psalm 25, 22.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXI.
Verse. 1. HAughty] or lifted up, with pride: see Deuteronomy. 17, 20. Prove. 16, 5. 2 Chronicles. 12, 25.26. Psalm 101, 5. marveilous] that is, too hard for me, high, and
above my reach: as Psalm. 139, 6.

Verse. 2. If I have not] that is, Surely I have: an oath, whereof part is
concealed; see Psalm. 95, 11. Ier. 49, 20. composed] or put fit, and in order.
stilled] or, made silent, refraining it from noisome lusts. as a weaned-child]
that is, meek, modest, humble, submissive, simple, etc. See Mat. 18, 1, 2, 3, 4.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXII.
Verse. 1. Unto David] or for him, that it, for good unto him: or, David: with
all his affliction. So Psalm. 137, 7. affliction] or, humiliation,
afflicting-care, for to have the Ark brought home unto him. 1 Chronicles. 13, 1, 2,
3, 1^. and 15, 1, 2. etc. or, to build God an house, 2 Samuel 7.1.2.

Verse. 2. the Mighty one] in Greek, the God of Iaakob: so called first by
Jaakob himself, Genesis 49, 24. This title is also given to other things, as Psalm,
78, 25. and 22, 13.

Verse. 3. If I enter] that is, surely I will not enter: see Psalm 95, 11. and
89, 36. Compare this care of David, with the contrary negligence of the people,
Hag. 1.4. 2 Samuel 7, 1, 2. mine house] mentioned 1 Chronicles. 15.1.

Verse. 5. find] that is, prepare, or build: so Act. 7.46. Also in Psalm. 36.3.
finding, is accomplishing, dwelling-places] or, habitacles, see Psalm. 43.3.

Verse. 6. it] Gods Ark; verse 8. Ephrathah] the country of Ephraim, the city
Shilo; where Gods house and Ark had long continued Judge. 18, 31. and 21, 19. 1 Samuel 1.3. therefore an Ephramite is called an Ephrathite, Judge. 12.5. the
fields of the wood] in the city of Kirjath-jearim (that is, the City of the
woods) where the Ark was twenty years, after it came home from the Philistines,
1 Samuel 6.21. and 7.1.2. It was also called Baale (the Plains) of Judah, 2 Samuel
6.2.

Verse. 7. at the footstool] or toward it, meaning the sanctuary: see Psalm.
99.5.

Verse. 8. thy rest] the sanctuary builded for thy name, as 1 Chronicles. 28, 2. 2 Chronicles. 6.41. Ark] or Chest, Coffer, which was made of Shittim (or Cedar) wood,
overlaid with plates of gold, whose cover (called the Mercy-seat) was all of
pure gold, on which were two glorious Cherubs of gold, from whence God gave his
Oracle; Exodus 37.1.2-6.7. Number. 7.89. In this Ark were the two tables of the law
or testimony, written with the finger of God. Deuteronomy. 10.3.4.5. This Ark is
called Gods strength, Psalm. 78.61.

Verse. 9. clothed with justice] that is, let them justly and holily administer
their priests office: So Job speaking of his just administration, says, I put
on justice and it clothed me, my judgment was as a robe and crown: Job 29.14.
Therefore the Priests had holy garments to administer in, Exodus 28.2.3. In 2 Chronicles. 6.41. and after here in verse 16. the Priests are clothed with
salvation: so Christ, and his people, Isa. 61.10. Rev. 1.13. and 19.8. -- thy
saints] the people of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 15.28.

Verse. 10. David's sake] for the promises made to David: or, for Christ's sake,
called often David: see Psalm. 18.51. turn not away the face] that is, deny not
the request: as 1 King. 2.16.17.20.

Verse. 11. truth] that is, a true oath, a faithful promise. fruit of thy womb]
or belly, that is, thy children: see 2 Samuel 7.12. And this prophecy respects
Christ, Act. 2.30.

Verse. 13. his seat] or dwelling place; see Psalm. 68.17.

Verse. 15. vittailes] or meat: see Ps. 78.25. blessing blesse] this notes
certainty and abundance of blessing.

Verse. 16. with salvation] the ministration of the word, whereby they save
themselves and those that hear them. Deuteronomy. 33.10. 1 Timothy 4.16. So Gods
ministers, are called Saviors, Obad. 21. See before, verse 9.

Verse. 17. the horn to bud] or to grow: that is, the kingdom and power to
increase. See Psalm. 75.5. and 89.18.25. So Christ is called the horn of
salvation, Luke 1.69. ordained a lamp,] or, prepared a candle, the bright glory
of the kingdom by a successor; as 1 King. 11.36. and 15.4. 2 King. 8.19. See
Psalm. 18.29.

Verse. 18. cloth with shame] they shall be disappointed and confounded in all
their interprises. So Psalm. 35.26. and 109.29. crown] or diadem, a sign of
government, and sanctity: therefore the Greek turns it sanctification: see
Psalm. 89.40.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXIII.
Verse. 1. TOgether] in unity and concord.

Verse. 2. the good oil] the balsam, or oil of holy ointment, made of the
principal spices, for the Lords tabernacle and ministers, Exodus 30.23.25,
26-30. the coller] Hebr. the mouth, the upper hole or border which was bound
about, that it should not rent, Exodus 39.2.^.

Verse. 3. Hermon] an high and fertile mount without Jorden, watered with the
dew of heaven: it was called also Shirion: see Psalm 29, 6. which descendeth]
understand here again, and as the dew that descends: for Hernion and Sion
were far asunder. there] where brethren dwell in unity. commanded] appointed,
and sent effectually: see Psalm. 42.9.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXIV.
Verse. 1. THat stand] that is, serve, or minister: as, which stood before the
King, Ier. 51, 12. for which is written, in 2 King. 25, 8. servant of the King.
Here is meant chiefly the Priests, and Levites, whose office was to stand and
minister, Deuteronomy. 10, 8. and 17, 12. Ezeck. 44, 11, 15. So Neh. 12, 44. the
Priests and Levites that stood; that is, served. See also Psalm 135, 2. in the
nights] keeping the watch of the Lord, See Lev. 8, 35. 1 Chronicles. 9, 33.

Verse. 2. in the sanctuarie] or, toward the holiness, that is, the most holy
place, where God dwelt between the Cherubims: or, in holiness; that is, holily.

Verse. 3. blesse] or will bless thee, speaking to Gods people. Compare Number. 6,
24. Psalm 128, 5. and the promise, Exodus 20, 24. In all places where I put the
memory of my name, I will come unto thee, and bless thee.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXV.
Verse. 1. HAlelu-jah] that is, praise, or glorify ye Iah; it is a word of
joyful exhortation to sing praises to the Lord for his mercies; and in the end
of Psalms, is added as Amen, for a cheerful acclamation: see Psalm 104, 35. and
106, 48. Rev. 19, 1, 3, 6.

Verse. 4. peculiar-treasure] or, precious and singular-possession, propriety:
so Deuteronomy. 7.6. This was promised by the law, Exodus 19.5. but performed by Christ
his redeeming and purifying of his people, Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9.

Verse. 7. vapours] or elevations; in Greek clouds: for by vaporous clouds drawn
from the end of the earth, or sea, comes rayn; as it is said, he calls for
the waters of the sea, and powers them out, on the face of the earth; Amos
5.8. So Ier. 10, 13. and 51, 16. with the rain] or, to the rain; so fire and
water are mixed in one clowd. treasuries] or coffers, storehouses: see Psalm.
33.7.

Verse. 8. from man, etc.] that is, both men and beasts: see Psalm 78, 50, 51.
Exodus 12, 12, 29.

Verse. 9. Pharaoh] the King, who was plagued first in Egypt, and after drowned
in the red sea, Exodus 7. and 8. and 9. and 10. and 14.

Verse. 10. Many] or ample, great nations: the Amorites, Canaanites, etc.

Verse. 11. Ogh] a giant, whose bedsted was of iron, nine cubits long, and fowr
broad. See Number. 21, 23-35. Deuteronomy. 3.11. kingdoms] thirty and one, as is
reckned, Josh. 12, 9-24.

Verse. 12. a possession] or heritage: see Psalm 78, 59

Verse. 14. for] or concerning his servants: this is taken from Deuteronomy. 32, 36.

Verse. 15. idols] compare this that follows, with Psalms 115, 4. etc.

Verse. 19. house of Israel] that is, the posterity of Israel; so after. of
Aaron] to whom the Priesthood was committed. Exodus 28.1.

Verse. 20. of Levi] which were taken from among the sonns of Israel, and given
and joined with the Priests to minister unto them: Number. 18, 2, 6. ye that fear]
all strangers converts; proselites: Act. 2.5. and 10, 35.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXVI.
Verse. 1. MErcie] the Hebrew Chesed, signifies, a sacred affection of mercy,
piety, grace, benignity, and bountiful good will toward any without respect
of merit. In man sometime it is, the pious benign affection, wherewith he does
good: sometime, the mercy, or, bountihed, which he receives; as in Isa. 40, 6.
it is the glorious grace which man has from God, called by the holy Ghost in
Greek, doxa, glory, 1 Pet. 1.24. usually the Greek version has for it, elios,
mercy, which the new Testament allows, Mat. 9.13. from Hos. 6.6. Hereof a
godly man is called, Chasid, gracious, or merciful: see Psalm 4.4.

Verse. 8. dominion] or rule, sovereignty: see Genesis 1.16.

Verse. 10. Aegypt] or, the Egyptians: see Psalm. 78.43-51.

Verse. 13. parts] or divisions. By the Jews tradition, the red sea was parted
into twelve several parts, for every of the 12. tribes to go through.

Verse. 15. shook-off] that is, overthrew: so Exodus 14, 27.

Verse. 18. magnificent] mighty, and excellent: mentioned after, and Psalm
135.10 11.12.

Verse. 24. redeemed] or delivered, broken off, and pulled away as by violence:
for so also the word signifies, Psalm 7.3.

Verse. 25. bread] that is food: Bread is used for all meats: so in the Greek,
to buy bread, Mark. 6.36. is, to buy meat (or victuals) Mat. 14.15. Therefore
this word is used also for beasts food, Psalm. 147.9.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXVII.
Verse. 1. BAbel] or Babylon, the chief city in Chaldea, or land of Shinar,
where Nimrod the mighty hunter (the son of Cush, the son of Ham,) began his
reign, called therefore his land; Genesis 10.9.10. Mich. 5.6. There in a plain,
the people were building a city and tower whose top might reach to heaven:
but God confounded their language, so the building ceased; whereupon it was
called, Babel, that is, confusion; Genesis 11.1.2.4.8.9. Afterward, when
Nebuchadnezar reigned there, it was the chiefest city in the world for
luxury, cruelty, idolatry, and other sins, (so that Shinar is noted for the
land and seat of Wickedness, Zach. 5.8.11. and Babylon is a type of the city
and seat of Antichrist, Rev. 17.1-5.) In this city and country were the Jews
captives 70. years, Ier. 25.11.12. Jerusalem and the temple being burned, 2
King. 25.8.9.10.11. In that captivy, they lamented as in this psalm is showed.

Verse. 3. words of song] that is songs: so, words of marvails, Psalm. 145, 5.
mirth] understand again, they asked of us mirth; or, words of meriment.

Verse. 4. land of a stranger] or, land of alienation, that is, a strange land;
or of a strange God, or people.

Verse. 5. hand forget,] to weet, her cunning, some such word is often
understood, in defective passionate speeches. See Psalm. 103.9.

V. 6. to my palat] or, to the roof of my mouth: that is, let me be
speechless, as Ezekiel. 3.26. Job 29.10. preferr] or, make to ascend. the head]
that is, the chiefest.

Verse. 7. unto the soons of Aedom] that is, against the Aedomites: see the like
speech in a contrary sense, Psalm. 132.1. Of Aedom, see Psalm 60.10. and 83.7.
the day] that is, the calamitous time: see the note on Psalm. 37.13. rase] or
power out, empty, (as the Greek also turns it) that is, destroy, and leave it
bare. See this word, Psalm 141.8. The Aedomites being always enemies to their
brother Israel, rejoiced at his ruin, and helped forward his destruction: for
which they are menaced by the prophet, Obad. 1.12.13.14. etc.

Verse. 8. Daughter] that is, Congregation, or Common wealth: see Psalm 9.15.
wasted] that is, worthy to be wasted; as praised, Psalm. 18.4. is praiseworthy.
Or, that shall be washed, as, is born, Isa 9.6. for, shall be born: because God
had so certainly promised, Ier. 50, and 51, or, the waster, to weet, of others.
thy reward] or, thy evil deed: see Psalm. 13, 6. where it is contrarily used
for a good-deed. Compare herewith Ier. 50, 29. Reve. 18, 6.

Verse. 9. the Rock] that is, rocks, or stones: compare Isa. 13, 16.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXVIII.
Verse. 1. THe Gods] the Kings and princes of the earth, as verse 4. called
Gods, Psalm. 82, 1, 6. before such David used to confess the Lord, Psalm.
119:46. The Greek here, for Gods, says, Angels, as Psalm. 8.6. which also he
hold Gods holy things in his Church: 1 Cor. 11, 10. 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10.

Verse. 2. thy word] or thy saying; the promise in Christ, concerning thy
people, is greater then all other things whereby thou have made thy self known.

Verse. 3. with strength] which I have from thee; as the Greek says with thy
might: strengthened by Gods spirit in the inner man, as Ephesians. 3, 16, 20.

Verse. 5. in the wayes] or, of the ways; whereof see Psalm. 103, 7.

Verse. 6. For,] or Though. the haughty] the proud person: in Greek, the high
things? The Chaldee paraphraseth, the proud he will drive far from heaven. a
far off] or aloof; not near, or familiarly; but in wrath to punish them.

Verse. 7. revivest] or, wilt revive and keep me alive: so after. against the
anger] to repress it; or, on the nose (the face,) to smite it with thy hand.
The Hebrew signifies both anger, and nose, Psalm. 2, 5. but the Greek says,
anger.

Verse. 8. perfectly-accomplish] or, perform, to weet, his work begun, against
my foes; and his mercy concerning me. So the Greek turns it, he will
recompense for me; and the Chaldee he will recompense them evil for me. See
Psalm. 57.3. slack not] or, leave not off. It is properly to leave off work by
unloosing the hand: Neh. 6, 3. So David prays, that God which had begun a
good work for him, would not give it over, but perform it, until the day of
Jesus Christ, as Philip. 1.6.

Annotations, Psalm CXXXIX.
Verse. 1. David's psalme] see the notes on Psalm. 40, 1.

Verse. 2. my familiar-thought] in Greek, my reasoning (or disputing) thoughts:
in Chaldee, my followship; the Hebrew has the signification of friendship and
familiarity, used here, and in verse 17. for thoughts, or cogitations.

Verse. 3. fannest] or, winnowest, or compassest: that is, discussest and triest
out to the utmost, even tracing the footsteps, as the Greek signifies. Compare
Job 31, 4. accustomed to] and so acquainted with: the Greek, foreseest.

Verse. 4. When the speech, etc.] or, For there is not a word in my tongue, but
lo, etc.

Verse. 5. beset] straightly beseige, and enclose, hold strait: or, have formed
me. thy palm] or hand: that I cannot break away. The like phrase is in Job. 40,
27.

Verse. 6. a knowledge] or, This knowledge; namely, of thee, as the Greek
adds, it is high] or, set on a high place. as Psalm. 59, 2. attain to it] or,
prevail against it, as Psalm. 129, 2.

Verse. 7. thy presence] or, thy face.

Verse. 8. make my bed] or, spread-my-couch: in Greek, descend. Compare Amos 9 2.

Verse. 9. wings of the morning] or, day-dawning, which is said to have wings,
for that it speedily flies over all the aier. of the sea] meaning the furthest
parts of the world; for so the sea often signifies, Psalm 65.6. and 72, 8. Isa.
24.14.

Verse. 11. shrowd] over-dim me, as with the dark twilight; or, shall bruise,
shall crush me down; as Genesis 3.15. so the Greek, shall tread me down.

Verse. 12. darkneth] that is, hides: compare Job 34, 22. Ier. 23, 24. as is,
etc.] or, like darkness, like light; that is, they are equal; as that which in
Mat. 22, 30. is like, in Luke 20, 36. is equal.

Verse. 13. covered] that is, safely kept, and protected; as the Greek says,
helped me: or, covered me with skin and flesh, etc. as Job 10, 11.

Verse. 14. fearfully] or, in fearfull-sorts; to weet, I am made: or, these are
fearfull-things, marveilously-made] or, excellently-made: elsewhere this word is
used for separated from, and excelling others: see Psalm. 4, 4.

Verse. 15. my bone] that is, bones, any of them, or my substance, or strength:
for thereof the bone is named. embroidered] that is, cunningly wrought with
nerves, sinews, veins, and variety of limms. A similitude taken from
broiderie work, Psalm. 45.15. nether places of the earth] so he calls his
mothers womb: because of Gods secret and unknown making of men there, Eccles.
11, 5. And thus may the like phrase Ephesians. 4, 9. be understood of Christ's
incarnation.

Verse. 16. My unformed substance] or, Mine embrion, which is the body in the
womb before it has perfect shape, or unwrought up, as the Greek here
translateth it. The Hebrew name is of wrapping, or, winding up like a bottom:
my wound-up-masse, or body. all of them] all my members, wound up in that my
embiron, or, unperfected-substance. Or generally, all men. The Chaldee says,
all my days were written. were written] Hebr. shall be written, which means
a continual act: see Psalm. 2, 1, So after, shall be formed. in the days they
were formed] or, what days they should be formed: meaning that all his
members, in the days that they were in fashioning in his mothers womb, were
written down of God: or, that the days of their forming were written. and,
when not one] Hebr. and not one of them, or in them. Meaning, that God had
written down all parts of his body, not only when they were in forming, but
long before. So commending his providence, who calls things which be not, as
though they were, Romans 4, 17.

Verse. 17. how precious are] that is, how rare are thy thoughts to me, how few
of them can I speak of, how incomprehensible are thy cogitatoms! The words
following, show this to be the meaning. Compare Job 26, 14. And a thing is said
to be precious, which cannot be attained unto or effected; see Psalm. 49, 9.
Otherwise we may take it thus: Thy thoughts, that is, the thoughts that I have
of thee, how precious, of how much esteem and worth are they to me? So precious
is used, Psalm. 36, 8. mightly-increast] many and strong: see Psalm. 40, 6. the
summs] Hebr. heads: used for sums, and so the Greek archee: Number. 1, 2. and 26,
2. I awake and] or, when I awake I am still with thee: that is, still
meditating of thee. The Chaldee refers this to the last resurrection, thus,
I shall rise again in the world to come, and shall be ever with thee. See Psalm.
17.15.

Verse. 19. If thou wouldest] or, O that thou would, for it seems here to
be a wish: as also in the Greek of the new Testament Luke 12.49. what will I,
if it were (that is, o that it were) already kindled. Or, Surely thou will
slay, etc. and men. etc.] this may also be referred to God, thus; and would
say ye bloody men depart from me: or to David, who says, depart ye from me.

Verse. 20. speak of thee,] or, against thee, as the like Hebraisme means 1
King. 21, 13. witnessed of (or against) him. See the note on Psalm. 5, 5. Or say
thee, that is, mention, or speak of: as Psalm. 40.11. 2 Samuel 6, 22. to a
mischievous-purpose] or, with a crafty-intent, that is, traftily, wickedly. See
Psalm. 10, 2. lift up do thy foes, etc. or, thy foes take-up thy name to
vanity: this sense the Chaldee paraphrase gives; and the phrase is taken from
Exodus 20.7. the word name being understood; (as in Levit. 24, 11. the word Lord
is understood;) or, thy foes lift up their head (as is expressed Ps. 83, 2.) in
vain; that is, they are vainly proud, and insolent. Oftentimes, words wanting
are to be supplied; see the note on Psalm. 103, 9. Or, they lift up thy foes in
vain; that is, the wicked (which speak evil of thee,) do vanely extol thine
enemies. to false-vanitie] or, in vain: see Psalm. 12, 3. and 24, 4.

Verse. 21. am not I grieved] or, grieve, (yrk) myself: so Psalm. 119, 158.
Compare also 2 Chronicles. 19, 2. Prove. 29, 27.

Verse. 23. Prove] or, try me, Compare Psalm. 26, 2.

Verse. 24. way of sorow] or, of grief, that is, wicked way (purposes, or
actions) which are grievous to God and men: and in special, the way of
idolatry; for of this word, Idols have their name; see Psalm. 16.4. So a word
of grief, Prove. 15.1. is that which grieveth him to whom it is spoken. way of
eternitie] or, of antiquity, the old way, as Ier. 6, 16. meaning the way of
faith and godliness, which God taught from the beginning, and which continues
for ever: contrary to the way of the wicked, which perishes, Psalm. 1, 6.

Annotations, Psalm CXL.
Verse. 3. THey gather warrs] or, are gathered to wars: getting themselves and
other together. The active is often used passively, Ps. 32, 9. and 109, 13.

Verse. 4. of the Asp] or, Viper: Greek, of asps, so Romans 3.13. Compare Psalm.
58, 5.

Verse. 5. to thrust-away my feet] or, to overthrow my footsteps.

Verse. 6. by the paths side] or, fast by my path: Hebr, at the hand of the
path. Compare Psalm. 142, 4. Ier. 18, 22. Prove. 29, 5.

Verse. 8. Iehovih] or God: see Psalm. 68, 21. of arms] or, of armor, that is,
of battle as the Greek translateth it;) when men harness themselves. This is
that helmet, salvation, Ephesians. 6, 17.

Verse. 9. further not] or, bring not to pass. least they] or, they will exalt
themselves; that is, be proud, or lofty. Compare Deuteronomy. 32, 27.

Verse. 10. The head] that is, As for the head (the chief) of those, etc. An
head sometime signifies a company of chief men, 1 Chronicles. 4.42. though here
perhaps some one man is meant: It is also used for a band of men, as Job 1, 17.
Sometime the Hebrew word signifies gal, as Ps. 69, 22. Which sense also is not
amiss here. shall cover] or prayer wise, let it cover them, and him; (as Ps.
2, 3.) that is, every of them.

Verse. 11. They shall bring] or, make move (as Ps. 55, 4. upon them selves: or,
coals shall be moved (that is, thrown) upon them. The Hebrew has a double
reading, yiedling both these senses; their judgments to be from God, but
procured by themselves. he] that is, God, shall sell them; or indefinitely,
they shall be felled, or cast. deep-pits] or suddain-sorrowes; the Greek says,
calamities.

Verse. 12. An ill- tongued man] Hebr. a man of tongue, that is, a pratler, or
evil speaker, that has tongue at will to use and abuse at his lust, and to
smite therewith, as Ier. 18, 18. So a man of lips, Job 11, 2. is one
talkative: a man of words, Exo. 4.10. is one eloquent: a man of arm, Job 22, 8.
is one mighty; and sundry the like. to a suddain-overthrow] or, his
utter-ruine and misery: Hebr. to (or with) thrustings-down.

Verse. 14. sit before thy face] or, dwell with thy face, that is, in thy
presence: see Psalm. 16, 11. and 61, 8.

Annotations, Psalm CXLI.
Verse. 2. BE firmly-directed] or, prepared; and so acceptable. as incense] or,
perfume, which was a confection of sweet spices, made after the art of the
Apothecarie, pure and holy, and was by the Priests, burned upon the golden
altar every morning before the Lord. Exodus 30.34.35.36.7.8. a figure of the
prayers of the saints, acceptable to God, through Christ's mediation; as this
place shows, compared with Reve. 8, 3. my palms] or hands, lifted up in
prayer; see Psalm. 63, 5. evening oblation] the Mincah properly was the meat
offering; (which was fine flower mingled with oil) offered together with the Lamb
every evening, before the Lord continually: as Exo. 29, 39, 40, 41, 42. Number.
28.2, 3.-8. Here it is taken for the whole oblation, at the time of the offering
whereof, the godly used to pray. Exodus 9.5, Dan. 9.21. it was at the ninth
hour of the day, (about three of the clock in the after upon,) called the hour
of prayer. Act. 3, 1.

Verse. 3. a watch] or, a ward, custody, to keep me from speaking amiss. keep]
observe thou: or, an observation, before the door. the dore] or, gate of my
lips, by which my words pass out as at a door: so the doors of the womb; Job
3.10. The original dal, is contracted for deleth, a door: though this be rare:
yet the Hebrew text sometime does the like; as Chaji, 2. Sam. 23, 20. for
Chajil, 1 Chronicles. 11, 22.

Verse. 4. Incline not] to weet, by Satan, or mine own corruption: for God
properly tempts no man to evil, but the Devil, and man's own concupiscence,
Iam. 1.13, 14. 1 Cor. 7.5. and by Satan, God moves men's minds; as appears, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. with 2 Samuel 24, 1. So Mat. 6.13. evil thing] or, word: see Psalm.
7.1. to pretend-prentenses] or, excuses, thus the Greek turns it: the Hebrew
also signifies occasions pretended, as Deuteronomy. 22, 14, 17. Or, we may read it,
to practice practices, in wickedness. with men that work] or, with men workers,
that is, such as stoutly, boldly, and manfully work iniquity.

Verse. 5. smite] or beat me; the word properly signifies beating with an
hammer, Psalm 74, 6. Judge. 5.26. applied to sharp rebukes. So Prove. 23, 35.
Compare also Prove. 9, 8. and 25, 12. and 28, 23. Zach. 13, 6. it shall be a
kindnes] a mercy, or, with kindness, that is, let him smite me, kindly, and
reprove me. the head oil] that is, the chief, or precious oil: (as head spices,
are chief and principal, Exodus 30, 23.) or oil, of the head, which is to
anoint the head with. Or, by head, understand the Chiefest of his adversaries
as before Psalm. 140.10. for this seems to be an opposition to the former,
thus, let the just smite me, but let not the precious oil (or the oil of the
head) of the wicked, break mine head: and this the Greek favors, saying, but
let not the oil of the sinner supple mine head: by oil, meaning flattering
words, as Ps. 55, 22. Otherwise, we may referr it to the former just man's
reproof, it shall be a precious oil, let him not make it fail my head. let it
not break my head] nor distract, or dazel my wits, not overcome me, the Hebrew
word signifies breaking, and bringing to naught, Psalm 33, 10. and is applied
to the breaking of the heart by discouragement, Number. 32, 7. and here to the
breaking of the head, or bringing to naught of counsels, purposes, etc. by
flattery. Or, if it be understood of the just, we may read it, let him not make
it sail mine head; that is, let the oil of his reproof, not be wanting upon
mine head. in their evils] or, against their evils: which may be applied to the
evil deeds of the wicked, or calamities of the just; and here understand, is,
or shall be, in their evils.

Verse. 6. Their Iudges] the princes of mine adversaries. are thrown-down] or
thrown-down themselves, that is, secretly pursue and beset me in the rocks and
mountains whither I am forced to flee, 1 Samuel 24, 3. and 23.26. The word may
also bear their throwing-down to destruction; as 2 Chronicles. 25.12. by the rock
sides] or, in rocky places: Hebr. in the hands of the rock: as Psalm. 140, 6.
and they shall hear] or, though they have heard.

Verse. 7. cutteth and cleaveth] to weet, wood; or the ground with the plough.
of hel] or, the grave. Compare Ezekiel. 37.1.11.12. Iehovah] or God: see Ps.
68.21. power not out my soul] to weet, unto death, as Isa. 53.12. that is, kill
me not: or, make not my soul bare, that is, leave it not destitute and
helpless.

Verse. 10. Let the wicked fall] or, They shall fall. into his net] that is,
every of them into his own net, or flue. together] namely with their fall; or
together with them that are with me: or, altogether (wholly) pass over, and
escape: the Greek says, alone I am, until I pass over. See this word Psalm
33, 15.

Annotations, Psalm CXLII.
Verse. 1. IN the cave] fled thither from the persecution of Saul, 1 Samuel 24, 4.
etc.

Verse. 4. was overwhelmed] or, swowned, sainted: see Psalm 77, 4. then thou
Hebr. and thou.

Verse. 5. I did look] or Look thou, etc. continuing his complaint to God. But
the Greek turns it, I considered: and the Hebrew Look thou, or To look, is
often resolved by other definite persons: see the notes on Psalm 22.9. and 49,
15. and 65.11. and 77.2. and 103.20. and see] or, and behold, to weet, on the
left hand.

Verse. 5. refuge] or slight: is perished from me] that is, fails me: I have
no place to fly unto, and escape. So Job 11.20. Amos 2.14. seeketh] that is,
cares for: so Prove. 29.10. usually to seek the soul, is in the ill part to
destroy it: see Psalm. 15, 4.

Verse. 7. brought-low] or, weakened: see Psalm 116.6.

Verse. 8. the prison] the cave wherein I am shut up close. inviron] compass,
as Psalm 22.13. or exspect, as Job 36.2. and so the Greek translateth, the just
shall wait for me, until thou reward me. See Psalm 13, 6.

Annotations, Psalm CXLIII.
Verse. 2. ANd enter not into judgement] or, but go not to Law with me, by the
deeds whereof, no flesh shall be justified in thy sight, Romans 3.20. so Job 22.4.
and 14.3. Isa. 3.14, not any] or not all, that is, none living: so Mat 24.22.
not all, that is, no flesh: 1 Ioh. 2.21. every lie is not, that is, no lie is
of the truth, so 2 Pet. 1.20. Psalm 76.6.

Verse. 3. my life] or, my company; the Hebrew signifies both: Job 33.18, 22.
Psalm 68.11. darknesses] or, dark-places: so Psalm 88.7.19. and 74.20. for
ever] or, of eternity, of old; meaning, dead long since, and forever after:
the word respects time past and to come. So Lam. 3.6.

Verse. 4. overwhelmed] faints, or, is perplexed: see Psalm 77.4.
wondrously-amazed] astonished: or desolate. Greek, troubled. See this word,
Isa. 59.16. and 63.5. Dan. 8.27. Psalm 40.16.

Verse. 5. of old] or, of antiquity; so Psalm 77.6.

Verse. 6. spread-out] that is, pray: see Psalm 44.21. weary] that is, dry and
thirsty; in Greek, waterlesse: see Psalm 63.2.

Verse. 7. for I] or least I; Hebr. and I: which may be supplied thus, least I
perish, and be made like, etc. See Psalm 28.1.

Verse. 8. in the morning] speedily: so Psalm 90.14.

Verse. 9. I flie-for-covert] or I cover (I hide) my self, flying unto thee: or,
to thee covertly-flie; secretly disclosing to thee, that which I would hide
from others: so the Greek, I fly to thee.

Verse. 10. thy good spirit, shall lead me] so the Greek translateth this, and
the rest, as assured: we may also read it prayerwise, let thy good spirit lead
me; or, thy spirit is good; let it lead me, etc. and so the rest. Compare
Nehem. 9, 20. in the land] or into the land of righteousness; in a plain or
even) ground: see Psalm. 26.12. Isa. 26.10.

Annotations, Psalm CXLIV.
Verse. 1. MY Rock] in Greek, my God: see Psalm. 18.3.

Verse. 3. take knowledge] or acknowledgest, carest for: compare Psalm. 8.5.
and 1.6. and 31.8. make account] or, think on him.

Verse. 4. passeth-away] vanishes. Compare Psalm. 102.12. Eccles. 7.2.

Verse. 5. come down] for my help, and my foes ruin: see Psalm. 18.10. and they
shall] or, that they may smoke; see Psalm. 104.32.

Verse. 6. Lighten] that is, Cast forth: compare Psalm. 18.15, disturb] or
trouble; that is, discomfit and destroy: see this word, Exodus 14.24. and 23 27.

Verse. 7, the high-place] that is, heaven: compare Psalm. 18.17. sonns of the
stranger] of a strange God, or people: as Psalm. 137.4.

Verse. 9. new song] of triumph: see the notes on Psalm 33.2.3.

Verse. 10. That giveth] understand, O he that gives, that is, O thou that
give, etc. See the like phrase, in Psalm 59.10. and 65.7. Or, It is he that
gives, etc.

Verse. 12. as plants] understand, are as plants: for this seems to be an
imitation or expressing of the vain words of the wicked, forementioned, which
say, our sonns are as plants; etc. whose boasting continues till the last
clause, which is opposed to all their worldly felicity. The Greek to make this
plainer, changes person, and translateth, Whose sonns (or, Of whom their
sonns) are as new-plants, etc. Or, understanding it of the godly, supply, may
be as plants, etc. and so it has respect to the outward blessings of the law;
Deuteronomy. 28.4. etc. cut] that is, hewn, carved, polished

Verse. 13. garners] or, Corners, chambers, cellars, places of store and
provision, made usually in nooks and corners of houses. from meat to meat] or
from sort to sort, that is, all sorts and store of victuals.

Verse. 14. loden] that is, fat and fleshy: or, able to bearlodes: or, big with
young. no breach] in the walls, for the enemy to enter the town. none going
out] no cattle driven away by the enemy.

Verse. 15. whose state is such] as is before mentioned: the Greek turns it,
They count that people blessed, which has these things. whose God] this
sentence is opposed to all the other worldly wealth.

Annotations, Psalm CXLV.
Verse. 1. AN hymne] or Praise; and hereof the whole book in Hebrew is called
the book of Hymns. This hymn is composed after the order of the Hebrew
Alphabet; only one letter wanting. See Psalm. 25.1. aye] or perpetually: see
Psalm. 9.6.

Verse. 3. praised:] see Psalm. 18.4. no search] that is, it is past finding out:
of greatness, see Psalm. 150.2.

Verse. 4. powers] that is, powerful (mighty) acts: so verse 12. Mat. 13.58.

Verse. 5. honor of the glorie] or glorious honor, or comelines. words of thy
marvels] that is, thy miracles, thy marveilous words (or things.) So, words of
song, Psalm 137.3. talk], discourse of, or meditate.

Verse. 8. pitifull] or, compassionate. Compare Psalm. 103.8. Exodus 34 6.
long-suffring] or, slow to anger: see Psalm. 86.15.

Verse. 10. shall confesse] or, let them confess, etc.

Verse. 11. tell] talk of, or preach: Heb. say.

Verse. 14. up-righteneth] lifteth-right up, or, makes straight all that are
bended down, or bowed together: so Psalm. 146.8.

Verse. 15. in his time] that is, in due season: see Psalm. 1.3. and 104.27.

Verse. 16. the desire] or pleasure, or with contentement, contentedly;
acceptablie; with that which seems good to thee, and pleases (or contenteth)
them.

Verse. 18. in truth] this word implies faith, sincerity, earnestnes and
constancy, Compare Deuteronomy. 4.7. Ioh. 4 24.

Verse. 19. the desire] or, the will, the pleasure, and contentment; as verse
16. we are to desire that Gods will may be done. Math. 6.10. here he does his
servants will: so he honors them that honor him; 1 Samuel 2.30.

Verse. 21. shall speak] or, Let my mouth speak, all flesh] all sorts of people:
see Psalm 65.2.

Annotations, Psalm. CXLVI.
Verse. 1. HAlelu-jah] that is, Praise ye Iah: see Psalm 135.1.

Verse. 2. in my life] so long as I live: so Psalm 104.33.

Verse. 4. his spirit] man's ghost; so the soul is said to go forth, Genesis 35.13.
to his earth whereof he was made; earth is in Hebrew Adamah; hereof man was
called Adam, Earthly; compare Genesis 2.7. and 3.19. Psalm 104.29. his thoughts]
or purposes, the most excellent effects of the mind or spirit of man.

Verse. 7. the bound] or prisoners; but here it may be meant more largely; for
sicknesses also are Satan's bonds, which our Lord Christ loosed, Luke 13.16. See
also, Isa. 61.1.

Verse. 8. opens the eyes] or, gives sight to: compare Mat. 9.29.30. Ioh.
9.6.7.32. uprightneth] or makes straight; as Psalm. 145.14. see this fulfilled
Luke 13.13.

Verse. 9. setteth-upright] makes to continue sure: so Psalm. 20.9. and 147.6.
Compare Deuteronomy. 10.18. and 27.19. Exodus 22.22.23.24. Psalm. 68.6. overthroweth] or
turns up side down: so Job. 19.6. see also Psalm. 1.6.

Annotations, Psalm CXLVII.
Verse. 2. OVtcasts] or driven out, in Greek the dispersions, (that is, the
dispersed,) which word the Apostle uses, 1 Pet. 1.1. Iam. 1.1. Compare Deuteronomy.
30.4. Isa. 11.12. and 56.8. Ioh. 11.52.

Verse. 3. binds up their greifs] that is, heals their wounds; as Luke 4.18.
with Isa. 61.1 Compare also Ezekiel. 34.16.

Verse. 4. Counteth] or Tells, numbreth; which to man is impossible; see Genesis
15.5. Ier. 33.22. Isa. 40.26.

Verse. 5. no number] nor searching-out, Isa. 40.28.

Verse. 6. setteth-upright] conserveth, to continue yet: see Psalm. 146.9.

Verse. 7. Sing] or, Answer, that is, Sing-by turns, one after another: as Exodus
15.21.

Verse. 8. with clowds] as in Elias time, 1 King. 18.45. the mountains] and
deserts where no man is, as Job 38.26.27. Psalm. 104.14.

Verse. 9. food] Hebr. bread; that is, the beasts their food: as the Greek has
it. young ravens] Hebr. sonns (that is, yonglings) of the ravens. So in Job
39.3. who prepares for the raven his meat, when his young ones call unto God,
wandering for lack of meat?

Verse. 13. strengthneth] or, has made strong; a sign of Gods favor, and
Sions safety: see the contrary, Lam. 2.9. Ier. 51, 30. Amos 1.5. Psalm
107.16. Isa. 45.2.

Verse. 14. puts in] or puts thy border, etc. that is, makes peace in thy
borders. Compare Isa. 60.17.18. Ier. 12.12. and 15, 13. and 17 3. fat] that is,
fine flowr: so Psalm. 81.17.

Verse. 15. his edict] or saying, that is, commandment.

Verse. 17. yee] or frost; the frozen hail stones. can stand] that is, endure
it: so Prove. 27, 4. Nahum. 1.6.

Verse. 19. his words] the ten commandments (or moral law) Exodus 20.1. called
the ten words; Deuteronomy. 10.4. statutes] decrees and constitutions of Gods worship;
see the note on Psalm 2, 7. judgements] the judicial laws for punishing
offenders, Exodus 21.1. Psalm 19.10.

Verse. 20 any] or every: but in Hebrew, all, is often used for any: see Psalm
103.2. and 143.2. judgements] the Greek says, his judgments he has not
manifested to them.

Annotations, Psalm CXLVIII.
Verse. 1. FRom the heavens] ye heavenly creatures: so after, from the earth,
verse 7. is earthly creatures. Compare Rev. 5.13.

Verse. 3. stars of light] bright shining stars; which praised God together,
Job 38, 7.

Verse. 4. above the heavens] in the clouds of the aier, Genesis 1, 7. Job 26.8.
and 37.11.

Verse. 6. stablished] or, made them stand: Psalm. 119, 91. a statute] that is,
statutes, or decrees, rules, ordinances, whereby every creature is bounded to
his set time and place, as Job 14.5, 13. and 26.10. whereupon mention is made
of the statutes, or ordinances of heaven, of the Moon and stars, etc, Job
38.33. Ier. 31.35. and 33.25.

Verse. 6. it shall not pass the statute (or bound,) set of God: or it, the
statute, shall not pass away, or fall.

Verse. 7. dragrons] or whale-fishes.

Verse. 8. vapour] or smoke, exhalation, damp.

Verse. 10. fethered fowl] or winged bird: Hebr. bird of wing.

Verse. 13. high-advanced:] or set-on-high; so Isa. 12.4. It is a strong tower,
into which the righteous runs, and is also set on high in safety, Prove.
18.10.

Verse. 14. the horn] the power, and glory; see Psalm. 75.10. This is
accomplished in Christ, the horn of salvation, Luke 1.69. the praise]
understand, which is the praise of his saints; or, an agument of praise to
them. near him] Gods people are said to be near unto him, in respect of his
covenant with them in Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. their service of him, Lev. 10.3. and
spiritual alliance in Christ, Ioh. 20.17. 1 Ioh. 3.1. For this word, nigh, is
used for kindred, Levit. 21.3. Christ draws near unto God for them, Ier.
30.21. and they by him. Heb. 10.19.22.

Annotations, Psalm CXLIX.
Verse. 2. HIs makers] the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, which three are
one, 1 Ioh. 5.7. The mystery of the Trinity is in the Hebrew phrase; so in many
other, as God said, Let us make man in our image, Genesis 1.26. Where is God my
makers? Job 35.10. Thy makers is thine husbands, Isa. 54.5. Remember thy
Creators, Eccles. 12.1. and sundry the like God also is our maker, both in
nature, and grace; see Psalm. 100.3. their King] Christ: as Mat. 21.5. Song 1.4.

Verse. 3. with flute] as Psalm. 150, 4. or, in a dance: as Ier. 31.4, 13. Psalm.
30.12. One name is given both to the dance, and the pipe whereto they danced.

Verse. 4. beautifie] or, adorn, make glorious: so Isa. 60.7.9.13. The Greek
here says, exalt.

Verse. 6. The exaltations] that is, exalting-songs, high-acts, high-praises;
or, lifting-up of the voices, preachings. in their throat] that is, alowd
spoken of, and proclaimed: so Isa, 58.1. Cry with the throat, is, Cry alowd.
two-edged] Hebr. a sword of mouths; that is, of two mouths, as is expressed,
Judge. 3.16. in Greek, two-mouthed, that is, two-edged, biting or cutting both
ways. This sword, is Gods word, and comes out of Christ's mouth. Ephesians. 6.17.
Heb. 4.12. Rev. 1.16.

Verse. 7. on the heathens] by preaching against their idolatries, Act. 14.15.
and 17.16.17.22. etc. Compare 2 Cor. 10.4.5.6. Isa. 41.15. reproofs] for sin,
as Ioh. 16.8. etc.

Verse. 8. To bind their Kings] restraining their vices, and bringing them under
the bonds and subjection of the gospel; see Psalm. 2, 3. Mark. 6.20. Act. 24.26.
Rev. 21.24. Isa. 45.14. a figure of captivity, Nahum. 3.10. 2 Cor. 10.4.5.6.
Mat. 16.19. Nobles] or Honorable.

Verse. 9. written] in the book of God; see 1 Cor. 4 6. Rev. 22.18. And this may
have reference to that law, Deuteronomy. 7.1.2. etc. honor is] or this shall be the
honor, of all his Saints.

Annotations, Psalm CL.
Verse. 1. IN his sanctitie] or, for his holiness; his most holy being: Isa. 6.3.
the first argument of praise from Gods holy essence in himself: or, in his
sanctity, (his sanctuary) his holy place; meaning heaven. in the firmament of
his strength] that is, for his strong firmament, (called heaven, Genesis 1.8.) the
second argument of praise, from the frame of the world, whereof heaven is
chiefest: see Psalm. 19.2. or for the out-spreading of his strength; that is,
for his strength, spread out as the firmament.

Verse. 2. in his powers] or, for his powerful-acts, as Psalm. 145.4. the third
argument of praise, from Gods mighty administration of all things since the
creation. of his greatnes] or majesty; in special mercy toward his own
people, and against their enemies: which is the fourth argument of his praise.
Compare Deuteronomy. 3.24. and 9.26. and 32.3. Exodus 15, 16. 1 Chronicles. 17.19. Luke
1.46.49.58. Act. 2.11. Psalm. 79.11. and 145.3.6. Majesty, has the name of
greatness, and is applied to the greatest state of Policies, or Common weals:
which is to be minded here.

Verse. 4. flute] or dance: Psalm. 149.3. Virginals] or, stringed-instruments:
this word is not elsewhere in scripture. Organs] or, the Organon, as the Greek
translateth it: the Hebrew name signifies a lovely (or delightful)
instrument: it is one of the ancientest of the world, invented by Iubal, Genesis
4.21. and an instrument of joy. Job 21, 12. and 30.31. well- sounding cimbals]
Hebr. cimbals of hearing, that is, easy, or delightful to be heard, which the
Greek translateth, well sounding. The Cimbals were of metal, as bells, and
have their name of their shrill tinkling sound. lowd-sounding] or
joyfully-sounding, or, tinkling; as 1 Cor. 13.1. Hebrew. cimbals of
showting-sound.

Verse. 6. all breath] or, every breath, that is, every thing that has breath:
this word is used for the breath that God inspired into man, Genesis 2.7. and so
for man's mind, or immortal soul, Isa. 57.16. and usually is applied to man,
and to the breath of God, Psalm. 18.16. but in Genesis 7.22. it seems to be
spoken of all living things. Compare Rev. 5.13. where every creature which is
in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea,
and all that are in them; were heard, saying; Unto him that sits upon the
Throne and unto the Lamb; be blessing, and honor, and glory, and power for
ever and ever, Amen.

The end of the Annotations, of the Psalms.
A Table, directing to some principal things, observed in the Annotations of
the Psalms.
A.
ABashing, what it signifies, Psa. 6, 11. Aedom described, Psalm 60, 10.
Egypt, Psalm. 68.32. the plagues of Egypt described, Psalm. 78.44. etc. and
105.28. etc. Aethiophia, Psalm 68.32. Almighty, Shaddai, how God is so called,
Psalm 68, 15. Alone, diversely taken, Psalm 4, 9. Amalek, Psalm 83, 8. Amen,
what it signifies, Psalm 41, 14. Ammonites. Psalm 83, 8. Angels, Psalm. 68, 18.
and 104.4. And, instead of For: Psalm 1, 3. and 7.10. and 55, 13. And, for But,
Psalm 55, 14. And, for That, Psalm 43, 4. and 49, 10. And, a sign of passion,
Psalm. 2.6. and 115.3. Anger, outward, as wrath inward; Psa. 2.5. Arrows, what
they mean, Psalm 18, 15. and 45, 6. Asaph, who he was, Psalm 50, 1.
B.
Belial, what it means; Ps. 18, 5 and 41.9. Baal, what it signifies, and how
it is turned into Bosheth, Psalm 106.28. Bands, signs of subjection. Psalm 2,
3. Babel described, Psalm 137, 1. Blessed: a title given to God. Psalm. 68, 36.
Blessing, diversely used: Psalm 3, 9. O Blessed, or Happy: how it differs from
the former. Psalm 1, 1. Bloods, and man of bloods, what they mean, Psalm. 5, 7.
and 51, 16. Bounteous-princes, Psalm 47, 10. Bounteous-reward, Psalm 13, 6.
Bread, for all food, Psalm 78, 20. Brooks, what they are, and of what use,
Psalm 1, 3. Burnt-offring, what it was, Psalm 20, 4.
C.
Captivity for captives, Ps. 14, 7. and 68, 19. Cedar-tree described, Psalm 29,
5. Cherub, Cherubims, what they were, Psalm. 18, 11. Christ, or Anointed, Psalm
2, 2. Commanding, diversely used, Psalm 42, 9. Condemn as guilty, Psalm 5, 11.
Confession, diversely used, Psalm 6.6, and 32, 5. and 50, 14. Corrupt not, a
title of some psalms: Psalm 57, 1. Corruption, Psalm 16, 10. Corrupting-ditch,
or pit, wherefore so called, Psalm 7, 16. Covenant what is signifies, Psalm
25, 10. Striking Covenant, Psalm 50, 5. Covetous, or gain-thirsty, whereof it
is named, Psalm 10, 3. Courts of Gods house, Psalm 65, 5. Cursing, Psalm 10, 7.
D.
Daughter for Congregation, Psalm 9, 15. Daughters for villages, Psalm 48, 12.
David put for Christ, Psalm 18, 50. and 40, 1. and 89, 4. Day, for time of
affliction. Psalm. 37.13, 11. Deceit, whereof named. Psalm 5, 7. Decree, or
Statute, what it means, Ps. 2.7. Degrees, what they mean, Psalm 120, 1.
Devils whereof they are named, Ps. 106, 37. Doing, for yielding fruit, Psalm 1,
3.
E.
Edom described, Psalm 60, 10, Egypt, Misraim. Psalm 68, 32.
F.
Face, for anger, Psalm 21.10. Face, for grace, Psalm 27, 8. and 42, 6.
Faithful, what it means. Psalm 19, 8. False-vanity, Psalm 12, 3.
Falsly-deny, Psalm 18, 45. Favourable-acceptation, Psalm 5, 13. Fear, for God,
Psalm 76.12. Fear, for Gods worship, etc. Psa. 19, 10. Feeding what it means,
Psam 23, 1. Finding, diversely used, Psalm 36, 3. and 116, 3. and 132, 5. and
46, 2. Fist born, ministers of God, Psalm. 78, 51. the Chief over others, Psalm
89, 28. Fools-vainglorious, Psalm 5, 6. Fool: Nabal, Psalm 14, 1. Fool, Aevil,
Psalm 38, 6. Fool-unconstant, Psalm 49, 11. Forgiving, what it means, Psalm
25, 18.
G.
Gates of death. Psam 9, 14. Gates of the daughter of Sion. Psalm. 9, 15. Gates
of justice Psalm 118, 19. Gathering, diversely used, Psalm 26, 9. Generation,
what it means, Psalm 12, 8. Girding what it means, Psalm 76, 11. Giving for
putting, setting, etc. Psalm 4, 8, and 8, 2. Giving, for granting, suffering.
Psalm 16, 10. Gladness, gladsomnes, outward, as joy is inward. Psalm 2, 11.
Glorious-majestie, Psalm 8, 2. Glory, or Honor, whereof it is named, Psalm 3,
4. and 85.10. Glory, for the tongue. Psalm 16, 9. Glorying, or praising ones
self, Psalm 34.3. God, Elohim, what it means, Psalm. 3, 3. God, El; Psalm 5,
5. Gods, for Angels, Psalm 8:6. and 97, 7. Gods, for Magistrates, Psalm 82,
1.6. Gods name added to things for excellency, Psalm 36, 7. The living God,
Psalm 42, 3. Gospel, or, Euangelie, whereof it is named, Psalm 40, 10.
Gracious-saint, what it means, Psa. 4.4.
H.
Halelujah. Psalm 104, 35. and 135, 1. Harp, Psalm. 33, 2. Heavens, what they
are, Psalm 8, 9. Hell, what it means, Psalm 16.10. Heritage, Heir,
Inheritance; what they mean, Psalm 2, 8. Hiding the face, what it signifies.
Ps. 13.2. High refuge, what it is Psalm 9, 10. Hopefully-wait, Psalm 31, 25.
Horn, for power, glory, Ps. 18, 3. and 75.5, 11 Hosts, or Sabbath, Gods title,
Psalm. 24, 10. House, whereof it is named. Psalm 5, 8. Hypocrites, why so
called, Psalm 35, 16.
I.
Iaakob, what it means, Psalm 14, 7. Iah, the name of God, Psalm 68, 5.
Jehovah, the name of God and Christ opened, Psalm 83, 19. and 97 1. Iehovih, or
God, Psalm 68.21. Jerusalem described, Psalm 51, 20. Incense, what it
signified, Psalm, 141, 2. Inheritance: for land, or people, Psalm. 79.1. and 28,
9. and 2.8. and 47.5. Iniquity, Psalm. 18.24. it is sometime put for
punishment. Psalm. 31.11. and 40.13. and 59, 5. Israel, what it means. Psalm
147, 7. Judging, what it is. Psalm 43.1. Judging, expressed by two words
usually, Psalm 7, 9. Judgments, for laws. Psalm 19, 10. for rites, Psalm 81,
5. Justice, for benefits, Psalm 24, 5.
K.
Knowing, what it means, Psalm 1, 6. Korach, and his sonns, who they were,
Psalm 42.1. Kissing, what it signifies, Psalm 2.12.
L.
Land of Canaan, Psalm 25.13. described, Psalm 105.11. the land of desire,
Psalm 106, 24. Law, whereof it is named. Psalm 19, 8. Leading, gentle guiding,
Psalm 23.2. Lebanon a mount. Psalm 29, 5. Life, Psalm 7, 6. and 30, 6. Lifting
up the soul, Psalm 25.1. Light, what it means, Psalm 27.1. and 97, 11. and
112, 4. Light of the face. Psalm 4, 7. and 31.17. Lightning of the eyes, Psalm.
13, 4. Lightning the lamp. Psam. 18, 29. Lions of sundry kinds, have sundry
names, Psalm 7, 3. and 57, 5. Livjathan, the whale, Psalm 74, 14. Lodge, for
continue, Psalm 49.13. Lord, Adonai, what it means. Psalm. 2, 4. Lot, what it
means, Psalm 16, 5.
M.
Making, diversely used, Psalm 100, 3. Man, Ish, of his excellency, so named,
Psalm 4, 3. and 49, 3. Sorry- man, Enosh; and earthly-Man, Adam. Ps. 8, 5. and
strong- Man, geber, Ps. 18.26. Man of tongue, what it means, Psalm, 140.12.
Man of bloods, Psalm 5, 7. Mansion, or dwelling place, Psalm 26.8. Master of
the music; who he was, Ps. 4.1. Meditate, is not only to think, but to speak.
Psalm 1, 2. and 55.3. Mercy, what it signifies, Psalm 136, 1.
Mercifully-cover, Psalm 65.4. Michtam, what it means, Psalm 16, 1. Moab,
described, Psalm 60, 10. Molestation, what it is. Psalm 7, 15. Morning, what it
means, Psalm 5.4. and 49, 15. Moving, implies often evil, Psam 15, 5. Moving
of the foot, also is evil, Psalm. 38.17. and 66, 9. Mountains, diversely used.
Psalm 121.1.
N.
Name, how it is used. Psalm 8, 2. Near, or nigh, what it means, Psalm.
141.14. Neginoth, stringed instruments, Psalm. 4.1. and 33, 3. New song, what it
means, Psalm 33, 3. Nose, and anger, have one name in Hebrew. Psalm 10.4.
O.
Oblation, what it was, Psalm 20, 4. Outspred-firmament, what it is, Psalm.
19.2.
P.
Painful-iniquitie, why so called: Psalm 5.6. Palace, what it is. Psalm 5.8.
Palestina, Philistims, Psalm 60.10. Palms, and hands, lifted up and spread in
prayer, Psalm 63, 5. Palm Tree described, Psalm 92.13. Parable, diversely used,
Psalm 44.15. and 49.5. and 78.2. Part, for inheritance, Psalm 16, 5. Peace,
what it signifies, Psalm. 29.11. of it Solomon was named, Psalm. 72.7.
Perpetuity, victory of time, Psalm 9.7. Pit of corruption, see Corruption:
and Ps. 7, 16 Pleading, what it is. Psalm 35, 1. Prayer, whereof it is named,
Psalm 4, 2. Precepts why so called, Psalm 19.9. Precious, diversely used, Psalm.
36.8. and 116.15. and 72.14. and 49.9. and 139.17. Priest, what it signifies.
Psalm 99.6. Prophet, what it means, Psalm. 74.9. Psalm, whereof it is named,
Ps. 3.1. and 7.18. Psalterie, Psalm 33.2.
R.
Rebel, or, turn rebellious, whereof it is named, Psalm 5.11. Rebuke, for
destruction. Psalm 9.6. Redeemer, whereof named, Psalm 19, 15. Reward. Psalm
19.12. Rock, the title of God often: Psalm. 18.3.32. Rod of God, what, Psalm
23.4.
S.
Sabbath, day of Rest, Psalm 92.1. Sacrifice, and sacrifice of justice: what it
is, Psalm 4.6. of showting. Psalm 27.6. Salvation, and Saving, largely used,
for help, victory, deliverance, etc. Ps. 12.2. and 98.1. and 118.15.
Scornful, proud, Psalm 1.1. Seat, sometime is a chair, sometime a dwelling,
Psalm 1.1. and 107.4. Secret, or mystery, Psalm 25.14. Secret, for Council.
Psalm. 64 3. and 89.8. Seed, for children, Psalm. 21.11. Seeking, is for good or
evil, Psalm. 35.4. Selah, what it signifies: Psalm. 3.3. Shadow, Psalm 121.5.
Shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4. and 107 10. Showt joyfully, Psalm 5.12.
Showt-triumphantly: Psalm 41.12. Silence, for submission, Psalm 62.2. Silence,
for destruction, Psalm 31.18. and 49.13. Simple, why so called, Psalm 19.8.
Sion, the mount; Psalm 2.6. Sitting, diversely used, Psalm. 1.1. and 102.13.
Skies, Psalm 18, 12. Sleep, for rest, Psalm 127.2. Sleep, for death, Psalm 13,
4. Son, diversely used, Psalm 79, 11, and 80.16. and 89.23. Son, for every young
thing. Psalm 114, 4. and 147, 9. Soul, what it is, Psalm 16.10. Soul, for life,
Psalm 35.4. for will. Ps. 26.12. Standing, for continuing, Psalm. 33.11 and
111.3. for ministering, Psalm 134.1. Statute, or Decree, what it means. Psalm
2, 7. and 148.6. Strength, for praise, Psalm 8.3. Strength, for Kingdom. Psalm
21.2. Strength for Gods Ark. Psalm. 78.61. Stilnes, what it means, Psalm. 4.5.
Stirring, Psalm. 4.5. Sun, whereof it is named, Psalm 19.5, Sin, properly is
missing, or misdoing Psalm 4.5. Sinners, who they are, Psalm. 1.1. Swallowing,
for destroying, Psalm 21, 10.
T.
Tarshish, for the Ocean sea, Psalm 48.8. Tell, for preach, Psalm 2.7. Tent,
what it is, Psam 15.1. Testimonies of God, what they are, Psalm 19.8. Together,
diversely used, Psalm 33.15. an^ 141, 10. Trespasses, what they are, Psalm 5,
11. Tribes of Israel, whereof named, Psalm 78, 55. Tyrus, the city described.
Psalm. 45.13.
V.
Vain-idols, Aelim. whereof named, Psalm 96.5. Vanities, for idols, Psalm 31.7.
Vnconstant-fool, Psalm 49.11. Unicorn, Psalm 22.22. Voice, for thunder, Psalm
29.3. To give the voice; what it means, Psalm 18, 14. Vowe's, Psalm 50.14.
W.
Walking, for conversation. Psalm 1.1. an^ 66.14. War, whereof it is named,
Psalm 35.1. Way, for course of life, or religion; Psalm. 1.^ and 25, 4. Wicked,
what it signifies; Psalm. 1.1. Woeful-evils, whereof so called, Psalm. 5.1^
Wondrous-excellent, Psalm 8.2. Word, for thing, or matter, Psalm 7.1.
Hebrew phrases observed, which are somewhat hard and figurative.
1. DEfect or want of words; as of a verb substantive, am, art, is, etc. Psalm.
2.7. and often. Of a nown substantive after a verb; Psalm 103, 9. and 109, 21.
and 137, 5. and 139, 20. Of a nown substantive after an adjective, ITEMsalm 10,
10. Of a verb generally, Ps. 69, 11. and 18, 7, 29. Of a pronown, Psalm. 45, 4.
and 59, 14. and 68, 36. and 69, 2. and 71, 18. and 115, 12. Of a preposition,
Psalm. 5.4. and 2.8. and 9, 12. and 42.3. Of a part of a sentence, Ps. 6.4. and
89, 36.
2. Overplus or redundance of some small words, Psalm. 1.4. and 46, 7. and 118,
14. and 137, 3. 3. Change, or putting one for another, as Of number, foul for
fowls, Angel for Angels, etc. Ps. 8.9. and 34, 8. and 78, 2.45. and 79, 2. and
often. Of person, Psalm. 59, 10. and 65.7. and 80, 7. and 115, 9. and 144, 10.
Of time, Psalm. 2.1. and 18.7. and often. Of gender, Psalm. 45, 17. and 79, 8. Of
an active verb, for a passive, Psalm. 32, 9. and 36, 3. and 109, 13. and 49, 15.
4 Questions or expostulations, used For affirmations, Ps. 56, 9. and 14, 4.
For denials, Psalm. 94, 20. For prayers, Psalm. 10, 1. For wishes, Psalm. 4.7. and
14.7.

5. Words used in the plural number for excellency, etc. Psalm. 103, 6. One
word singular and another plural, used for exactnes, Psalm 66, 3.
6. The mystery of the holy Trinity, Ps. 11, 7. and 3.3. and 149, 2. 7. A
verb indefinite, of like signification with that which went before, Psalm.
49.15.
General observations touching the Psalms.
THe Psalter is in the Hebrew divided into five books. 1. The first contains
the 41. first Psalms. 2. The second contains the next 31. psalms, to the
73. 3. The third has the next 17. psalms, unto the 90. 4. The fourth
contains the next 17. psalms, to the 107. 5. The fifth contains the 44.
last psalms.
Every of these books is ended with Amen, or Halelu-Iah. But being all joined
together, they are usually counted one book, and so the Apostle Peter speaks
of them, Act. 1.20. The inditers of these Psalms are expressed five; Moses,
David, Asaph, Heman, and Aethan.
Of the titles of the Psalms.
THe Psalms, many of them have no title at all: others have titles, but very
diverse. Some signify the writers, as David, Asaph, etc. some the singers, as
the sonns of Korach, Ieduthun, etc. some the instruments whereto they were
sung, as Neginoth, Nechiloth, etc. some the nature of the Ditty, as a Psalm, an
hymn, etc. some the use of it, as an instructing Psalm, etc. some the occasion
of making it, as David's flying from Absalom, his going in to Bathshebah, etc.

Five and twenty psalms are without any title: namely, the 1.2.10
33.43.71.91.93.94.95.96.97.99.104.105.107.114.115.116.117.118.119.136.137. and
147. Yet of some of these the holy Ghost witnesses, that David, wrote them,
Act. 4.25. Heb. 4.7. and so we may judge of the rest.

David. David's name is prefixed unto 74. psalms; but diversely.

Five and thirty are entitled, a Psalm of David, as, the
3.4.5.6.8.9.11.12.13.14.15.19.20.21.22.23.24.29.31.38.39.40.41.51.62.63.64.70.101.109.110.139.140.141.143.

Three are entitled, A psalm a song of David, Psalm. 30. and 65. and 68.

One is entitled, A song a psalm of David: Psalm. 108.

Fourteen are entitled, Of David; understanding the word Psalm, or Song: as
the 1^.25.25.26.27.28.34.35.36.37.61.69.103.138.144.

One is entitled. An hymn of David: Psalm 145.

Two are entitled, A prayer of David: Psalm 17. and 86.

Six are entitled, Michtam of David; Psalm 16.56.57.58.59. and 60.

Five are named Instructing psalms of David: psalm 32.52.53.54.55.

One is called An instructing psalm of David: a prayer, etc. psalm 142.

One is entitled, Shigajon of David; psalm 7.

Five are entitled A song of degrees of David; psalm 122.124.126.131.133.

Asaph. Asphr. name is set to 12. psalms as written by him, or at least,
committed unto him.

Seven are entitled, A psalm of Asaph, psalm 50.73.77.79.80.81. and 82.

Two are entitled, A psalm of Asaph, a song, psalm 75. and 76.

One is named, A song a psalm of Asaph, psalm 83.

Two are called, Instructing psalms of Asaph; psalm 74. and 78.

Heman. One is named, An instructing psalm of Heman; psalm 88.

Aethan. And one, An instructing psalm of Aethan; psalm 89.

Fourteen other have this title, An instructing psalm, or Maskil; Psalm
42.44.45.46.32.52.53.54.55.142.74.78.88.89.

One of these is called An instructing psalm; a song of the welbeloved virgins.
psalm 45. So the title of Instruction, is set in all, over 24 psalms.

Four have this title before them, Corrupt not, or Al tashchith; psalm
57.58.59.75.

Two are entitled, for to record; psalm 38. and 70.

Moses. One is entitled, A prayer of Moses the man of God; psalm 90.

One is entitled only, A psalm, psalm. 98.

Two have this title, A psalm a song; psalm 67. and 87.

One is entitled, A song a psalm; ps. 66.

One is entitled, A psalm for confession, psalm 100.

One, A psalm a song for the Sabbath day* psalm 92.

One, A prayer for the afflicted, etc. psalm 102.

Fifteen are entitled, Songs of degrees, as from psalm 120. to the 134.

Two have the titles, for Solomon, psalm. 72 and 127.

Five and fifty are entitled, To the master of the music; as psalm
4.5.6.8.9.11.12.13.14.18.19.20.21.22.31.36.39.40.41.42.44.45.46.47.49.51.52.53.54.55.56.57.58.59.60.61.62.64.65.66.67.68.69.70.75.76.77.80.81.84.85.88.109.139.140.

Two are entitled, To Ieduthun, psalm 39. and 77.

The sonns of Korach: have eleven psalms directed unto them. Of which,

Four are entitled, A song a psalm to the sonns of Korach, psalm 47.49.84.85.

Two thus, A song a psalm to the sonns of Korach, psalm. 48.88.

One thus, To the sons of Korach, a psalm, a song: psalm 87.

One thus, To the sons of Korach on Alamoth a song, psalm 46.

Three are named Instructing-psalms to the sonns of Korach, psalm. 42.44.45.

Nine Psalms have before them Halelu-Iah. psalm.
106.111.112.113.135.146.148.149.150.

FINIS.

