THE BOOK OF PSALMS IN METER.

CLOSE AND PROPER TO THE HEBREW: SMOOTH AND PLEASANT FOR THE METER: Plain and
easy for the Tunes.

With Musical Notes, ARGUMENTS, ANNOTATIONS, AND INDEX.

Fitted for the ready use, and understanding of all good Christians.

PSALM. 47. 7. (...)

GOD IS KING
All lands Commanding:
PRAISES SING
With Understanding.
Hezekiah commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the LORD, with the words of
DAVID and of ASAPH the Seer, etc. 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for the Company of STATIONERS. 1644.

At the Committee of the House of COMMONS in Parliament concerning Printing,
April 2. 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the said Committee, that the Poetical Translation
of the PSALMS by W. B. etc. -- be entered into the Register-book of the Company
of Stationers, and Printed.

JOHN WHITE.

Tunes for PSALMS
of pure Eights, i. e. Eight syllables in a line.
I. The first French Tune is the tune of the old 100. Psalm, used every where,
and may serve for all the Psalms in Eights.
^ O come sing we with joyful noise, To our Sal- ^ vations surest rock: With
Psalms of praise and ^ shouts of joys, To our Gods presence let us flock.

II. The second French tune, is the old tune of the 10. Commandments, used often
in London.
^ A God a King of great Command, Above all ^ Kings and Gods he is: The earths
deep places ^ in his hand, The strength of hills is also his.

III. Sweet tune is the tune of the old 51. Psalm. used in most places, proper
for the 77. Ps. 1 p. 119. Ps. 11. p. 142. Ps. and for the 25. observing
sembrief pauses ^n the four-lin'd metres.
^ Dry land and seas, even both of these, His holy ^ ^ands did form and frame:
O come adore, with ^ bended knees, The Lord our makers blessed Name.

^ For he is our God, and none but he: we are his ^ pasture-people choice: The
sheep of his own ^ hand are we, If ye this day will hear his voice.

IV. Choice tune is an easy extract out of the old 113. Ps and serves
properly for the 20. 76. and 99. Psalms.
Then harden not your stubborn heart, As, in ^ the Provocation, they, In that
extreme temp- ^ tation day, Provoked me in the desert part.

^ When as your fathers tempted me, They proved ^ me and my work did see; I
forty years was grieved, ^ and said, This tempting age has wholly strayd.

V. 1. Strain tune, i. e. a strain ( viz. the first and third line) of the old
113. Ps. instantly learnt, and is proper for all Psalms in the form of the 15th.


VI. 2. Strain tune, viz. a strain of the old 148. Ps. And also ye, etc.
instantly learnt, and is proper for the 70. and 135. Psalms. Moreover, these
two strains put together, make a most complete and proper tune for the 23. 26.
and 146. Psalm.
^ This people have in heart digrest: And have ^ not known my path most blessed.
To whom therefore, ^ In wroth I swore, They should not enter in my rest.

Single tunes of Eights and Sixes.
VII. Martyrs tune (proper for sweet and sad ditties) used commonly in all
places.
^ Sing to the LORD a new-made song, For he ^ has marvails done: His holy
hand* and arm ^ most strong, The victory has won.

VIII. Coventry tune (proper for sweet and solemn ditties, mixed with fours like
the 8. Ps.) used in private families in London.
^ The Lord almighty has made known, His sa- ^ ving health and might: His
truth he openly ^ has shown, In all the Heathens sight.

IX. York tune (proper for joyful ditties) used every where, and may best
serve for both the Coventry tunes, to those that cannot sing them.
^ Toward Isreal's honored house has he, Re- ^ membred truth and grace: The
earth did his ^ salvation see, Declared in every place.

X. David's tune (most proper for joyful ditties) used now frequently in London.
^ Make joyful noise unto the LORD, All dwell- ^ lers in the earth: Make noises
loud, his praise ^ record, ^n songs of joy and mirth.

XI. Cambridge old tune (proper for sad and solemn ditties, mixed with four,
like the 40. and 41.) used in most places.
^ With Harp, and Psalms melodious voice, And ^ Trumpets to him sing: With
sound of Cornet eke ^ rejoice, Before the LORD the King.

XII. Pause tune, used in Coventry, most proper for the 49. 52. and 111. Psalms.
^ Let seas and shores rejoice their fills, And both ^ roar out with noise: Let
waving floods, and ^ towering hills, Clap hands and join in joys.

XIII. London long tune, proper for solemn ditties, and used every where.
^ Before the LORD, whose coming shall, The ^ earth with judgment try:
Judging the world, ^ and people all, With truth and equity.

XIV. Oxford tune, proper for sad ditties, (such as the 6. and 7. Psalms) used
commonly in all places.
^ Behold, how much it does excel, And what ^ great joy to see: When Brethren
do together ^ dwell, In perfect unity.

XV. Dutch bass tune, used commonly in Cambridge, and of late in Aldermanbury,
it agrees in consort with the tune following, so that it is all one whether you
take, for they may be sung both together.
^ Its like the precious ointment, which was powered ^ on Aarons crown: Which to
his beard and gar- ^ ments rich, Even to the skirts, ran down.

XVI. Dutch tune (proper for mixed ditties) is the most excellent and ordinary
tune in all England.
^ Like pearly dew of Hermon hill, Or Sions ^ silver showers: Blessings of life
for ever still, ^ The LORD upon them powrs.

Double tunes of Eights and Sixes.
XVII. Sinners tune (proper for the saddest ditties in the form of the 38. 51.
88.) as the tune of that which was called, The humble suit of a sinner; A most
excellent tune, mnch used of old.
^ Hard by the brooks of Babylon, We sat down ^ weeping there: When Sion hill
we thought up- ^ on, Each thought enforced a tear. Amidst it there ^ green
willows were, Whereon our harps we ^ hung: For they that led us captive there,
^ Required of us a song.

XVIII. Old England tune, is the tune of the old 119. Psalm, fi^ for mixed
ditties, and may be used for any staff tune of eights and sixes, being best
known, but when it is put to any of them with four-lin'd metres, as the 143,
145. 148. it must be observed with sembrief pauses, which the very meeters will
point at.
^ And they that wasted us that day, Did ask and ^ urge us thus: Sing one of
Sions songs, said they, ^ And make some mirth for us. What tongue can ^ tune or
utter them? In foreign land what heart?

^ If I forget Jerusalem, My right hand lose its art.

XIX. New tune or New staff tune (proper for Psalms of mixed forms, viz. the
12. 59. 94. 101. 109. 120.) is the old tune of Te Deum, only paused and
altered in a line or two to fit the metres.
^ If I do not remember thee, My tongue be speech- ^ less quite: If thou be not
preferred of me, Above ^ my chief delight. And now O Lord, full well re- ^
cord, The sons of Edoms cry: Thus did they ^ say, In Salems day, Raze, raze
it utterly.

XX. Magnificat tune, a most delicate joyful tune, used frequently of old, and
not fit to be forgotten.
^ O daughter Babel, thou whose fall, And ruin is ^ designed: O happy is the
man that shall, Reward ^ thee in thy kind. He shall be blessed for his pains, ^
That takes thy little ones, And dasheth our their ^ infants brains, Against the
pavement stones.

Tunes of Sixes and Fours.
XXI. Short Staff tune, is the same with, Where righteousness does say, only
perfected in the 3. and 7. line: It is proper for mixed ditties, like the 36.
Psalm.
^ O praise the LORD all lands: All people ^ praise his Name, Whose marvailous
kind love ^ to us, Deserves eternal fame. His truth eternal ^ stands, On firm
and sure record; For evermore, ^ Do ye therefore, Give praises to the LORD.

XXII. London short tune, is the tune of the old 67. Psalm, used in all places;
And may serve for all the tunes of sixes and fours.
^ Thy Church Lord bless and keep, So that it ^ perish never: Nor only keep,
but feed thy ^ sheep, And lift them up for ever.

XXIII. Southwell tune, proper for sad ditties, as the 13. Psalm.
^ Lord God of Hoasts incline, And cause thy fa^^ ^ to shine; Turn us to thee,
And then shall we, ^ For ever saved be.

XXIV. New verse tune, a most sweet tune, fit for doleful ditties, as the 57.
Psalm.
^ So we whom thou do call, Thy flock and peo- ^ ple shall Bless thee
always, and spread thy ^ praise, To generations all.

XXV. Tune of the old 113. Psalm, is proper for the 98. Psalm, and for the 9.
and 19. parts of the 119. Psalm* but they that cannot sing it at large, may use
only three first metres.
^ Unto the Lord a new song sing: For many a ^ great and wondrous thing, His
mighty power to ^ pass does br^ng. His holy arm of soveraigntie, ^ And his
right hand exalted high, Has gotten ^ him the victory. He has made known his
sa- ^ ving might, And brought his truth to open light, ^ Even in the very
heathens sight He graciously ^ has called to mind: His perfect truth and mer- ^
cies kind: As all the house of Israel find.

An Apologeticall Preface To the READER.
Courteous and Christian Reader,
MAy it please thee to understand, that I have collected the most choice and
exquisite tunes that are or have been used in all England; I have only added
or altered a little in some, to make them adequate and suitable to several
forms of meter, and to bring some choice strains and ditties into more frequent
use, leaving multitudes of tunes (in Ravenscroft) as unnecessary and burdensome.

The Tenor-part of these tunes I have here pricked out, both for readiness to
hit, surenes to hold, suitablenes to the subject, pleasantnes of variety, and
easines of distinction: For to tie our selves to the tunes prescribed, will be
a better distinction, then to print them in staves, because they are not all
staffe-tunes.

The want of such an help as this causes the Clerks to stumble so much upon
the same tune, and to sing joyful and doleful ditties all alike, and makes
the Congregation often to mistake, and fall sometimes into several tunes at
once, which disturbs the spirits and dulleth the devotion.

And (Reader) were it but believed what an easy thing it is to understand the
use and meaning of the Music notes, thousands (that have good voices) would
observe, inquire, and exercise so much, as to be able to sing all these
Preface-psalms in that variety of tunes which are here described, and so chaind
on purpose as that one may easily fall out of one tune into another all along.

And whenever thou would learn a tune by it self, repeat those words that
bear the burden of it; for instance, if thou would learn David's tune, use
those words, Make joyful noise unto, etc. for by harping still on the same
words, a tune is more easily learnt.

Company and custom, the use of an instrument, or observation of a chime, are
excellent and speedy means to learn tunes, which I leave to them that list, and
to them that listen.

Nevertheless, for such as care not, or cannot learn, and till such learning be
attained, know that Viz. Dutch tune, old England tune, French tune, and London
long tune.
three or four of these tunes (every where known and heard of) with two or
three lines of the old 113. psalm, will serve handsomely to sing all the Psalms
in the book.

Now lest any man (in this stumbling age) should scruple at the lawfulnes of
singing David's psalms (as unsuitable to our occasions) let him consider that
express Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. which fully shows their lawfulness and
worthiness, and the Arguments, Annotations, and the very Index will convince
thee of their suitableness and excellence, for surely had people known those
types and examples that are written for our learning in the book of psalms,
Ignorance of the sense of Psalms, the cause why people doubt whether they
should use them.
they would have acknowledged our state and story contained in them, and as fit
for our times as for our text. Why may not a Christian sing and say now with
David, I will divide Sichem and mete out the valley of Succoth, etc. Are not
these types of Christ his conquests, and has not every Christian a share in
his Saviors Victories? 1 Cor. 3. 21. All things are yours, etc. He conquers
for us, and we in him. And if such a passage as this, be current, what can be
excepted?

And what an acceptable service the singing of these psalms is, we have
evidence in the holy Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 20. 21. 22. When they began to sing
and to praise, the Lord set Ambushments against the children of Ammon, etc.

Lastly, touching the translation it self, since Hebrew must be made English,
English must be made Verse, and Verse ryme, we must of necessity admit some
alteration and amplification of words, although without extravagant excursions
of unnecessary paraphrase or frothy flourishes of undivine Poetry.

But since Poetry is a gift of God too, and very notable to kindle, quicken,
and inflame affection. Since this gift (in the greatest measure) is most
necessary for such a work as this, wherein much majesty and gracefulnes,
together with plainnes, sweetness, cleernes (suitable to the capacities of vulgar
people, (and even of so many women) is required; Me thinks none should be of
that mind to tie us so strictly to the prose and text, as must constrain us to
render it in such rugged ungrateful and misshapen verse, as many judicious men
have already much misliked, and such as multitudes of plain people would deem
to have neither ryme nor reason.

One translation I find little better compacted throughout then this verse:
And will deliver them: He shall
Them all deliver from
The wicked, and shall save them all,
Because they trust in him.


Another translation is full of uncouth Hebraisms.

My heart a good word boyleth servently, Psalm. 45.

I to the King do say mine actions:
My tongue the pen of writer speedily,
Much fairer art thou then be Adams sons.
Others are full of extravagancies and incongruities: He has in thee showed
wonders great, Psalm. 135. Quid hoc ad rhombu^? Psalm. 5.

O Egypt (void of vaunts)
For thou art God, in wickedness
That take no delight, etc.


Doubtless therefore it will please the most, and most judicious, to make it
smooth, clear, and easy, yea, so that every line may contain distinct sense in
it self, or else convey it so methodically to the next, that no disordered
ruptures (which darken, dissipate, and adulterate the sense) might be found
therein, which as it is the most dainty, so it is the most difficult piece of
service of all other, and is only found fault withal by many, because it is
is so hard to hit: and for my liberty, and thy liking thereof, I pr^y thee
give me leave to plead these ensuing Considerations.

1. The ^oly Scripture uses as much difference and indifference in Following
the Sentuagint (...) most common (but yet the most corrupt) translation.
recitations of Scripture, as I desire to be allowed me in this translation.
Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have received gifts for men, is rendered Ephesians. 4. 8. And gave
gifts to men. Psalm. 40. 6. Mine ears have thou opened. Heb. 10. 5. A body have
thou ordained me. Yea, in the Old Test^ment, even in the tenor of the
Commandments. Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Deuteronomy. 5.
12. Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has commanded
thee. Ver. 14. That thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as
thou. And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the
Lord thy God brought thee out thence, through a mighty hand, and by a
stretched-out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath day. And in the New Testament, Mat. 6. 12. Forgive us our Debts. Luke
11. 4. Forgive us our sins. Yea, in the Psalms themselves, Psalm. 14. 5. There
were they in great fear, for God is in etc. Psalm. 53. There were they in great
fear, where no fear was: for God has scattered the bones, etc.

2. Tho I change a word of the translation, yet possibly it may be as proper,
pertinent, and significant, as that which is taken in the prose translation.
Psalm. 1. 3. I have translated (...) fade. Psalm. 2. 1. I render (...) think.
Buxtorf.
Psalm. 3. 2. (...) Succor any way (the word signifying all manner of
Salvation, etc.) In diverse other places tho I change the word, yet (I hope) I
have not trespassed upon the text.

And I trust I may affirm that notwithstanding any alteration of the prose, I
have neither omitted any material word, nor inserted any thing besides the
scope and meaning of the text, but whatsoever I have expressed, is included,
intended, and intimated in that Scripture which I render, Ellipsis and
Pleonasmus (so frequent in the Hebrew) making much for paraphrase; yet have I
not gone so wide with all my metres, but that others, with very scont metres,
have been forced to paraphrase far wider; Neither are those Psalms which
meter most frequently, more remote from the words then the rest, for I always
took the matter in that form that it would most easily admit of meter, and
thought it impossible to translate some Psalms neatly, had I not given way to
let them fall into those forms, wherein thou now find them.

Lastly, I affirm constantly, Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere, etc. Hor.
that it is the duty of a translator in such a work as this, to follow the
idiom of his own language, otherwise he does not keep to his text, but corrupt
it rather: It is true, some words and phrases are so peculiar to a language,
that no other may be found to render it genuinely: I know not in what language
to render this phrase without an Hebraism. Psalm. 56. 12. Thy vows are upon me
O God. (...)


And some phrases are best understood by metaphrase of other language. I cannot
but suppose that phrase, Psalm. 129. ult. The blessing of the Lord be upon you,
to be most properly rendered in our, God speed you Sirs. And th^^ phrase, Psalm.
125. 3. Should put forth their hand to iniquity, in most complete sense thus,
Should d^ they care not what.

As for many Hebrew phrases, ( Men of bloods, i. e. bloody men, an heart and an
heart, i. e. a double heart. Speak thee into wickedness, i. e. speak against
thee wickedly) if I should keep to such like, I should fill the translation
with absurdities and solecismes, and from Hebraismes should run into
barbarismes: And, I pray tell me, in what other language learned men have don
so: who would translate, Auri sacra fames, O holy hunger of gold: but o cursed
thirst of gold, etc. Wherefore having been overruled to alter the first verse
of the book, into that beginning, which seems to ^ear it self so ^old upon the
Hebrew (tho partly sharing with the English phrase) yet being suspicious (by
what I hear from good critics) I here reca^t, and lay down my first version in
the other balance (which is according to the Manuscript-Copie presented to the
reverend. Assembly.) Take which you will.

THat man has God pronounced blessed,
That does not walk astray;
By counsels which lewd men suggest,
Nor stands in sinners way.
TRIN^-UNI DEO SOLA GLORIA.
TO The High and Honorable Court OF PARLIAMENT.
An Epigram.
GReat Senators, I ow devoutest prayers,
For both the Houses honorable chairs,
Their Orders furthering these Psalm-affairs.
I know not yet, what friendship got between
Has set me down so far behind the screen,
That scarce enough I may be heard or seen.
But if I can appear, I may appeal,
And venture something for the Churches weal,
In some case it is capital to conceal.
I dare not parley, but I dare protest,
I aim God should be served with the best;
The judgment is referred to your breast.
Your beams are bright, and day light does appear,
The text and the translation both are here;
Judge by the clock of your judicious ear.
Then cherish virtue with a gracious face.
If either do excel, give that the place;
If both have done alike, give both their grace.
So shall great Academies crown our brows,
With learned laurel: And they shall allow's
To voice your votes, and say you have paid your vows.
Great Chronicles shall also blase your Name,
And set it burning in a lamp of fame,
Guilding your just acts with its shining flame.
TO THE RIGHT-HONORABLE EDWARD Earl of Manchester, Speaker (pro tempore) of
the Hou^^ of Peers in Parliament.
A double Epigram.
NOw I see that malice fli^s
As a Meteor from the skies,
Never caring where it light,
So it show sufficient spite,
Here, a pattern of the meek
^ears aspersion on his check,
Native pure^esse clears again,
As a spring his muddie stain.
Lo, his countenance confutes
All these vile and vulgar bruits,
Scattering mists where he does bow
That bright splendor of his brow,
Fret Errinnys, break thy gall,
Till it drown thee, spleen and all:
I must tell his trust abroad,
In this well deserved Ode,
For his country h^th not seen
One more true then he has been.
My Lord and loadstone of my heart and more,
I felt none mortal pull so strong before,
Oh let me still find favor in those eyes
That scatter clouds; and where bright Sunbeams rise.
To the tribunal of so mild a look
I will adventure this Oracular book,
The which elsewhere I have presented twice,
And at the third time shall not bate the price.
I care not, I, although I hear men say,
Your Psalms are censured for Apocrypha:
I ask no more, but when you next consult,
You please to let them sing Quicunque vult.
My last ambition is but to present
Great gratulation to the Parliament;
And till this promised panegyric come,
I leave this begg'ring poetry struck dumb.
Reader vouchsafe to see, and look, and taste a sup of Hymns, and creamy
afterings, made up in the last sheet of all the book, with directions given to
make all even, if the Reader also please to see the titles and the prefaces.

THE BOOK OF PSALMS IN METER.
PSALM. I.
To Dutch tune.
Argument.
David shows the felicity and fruitfulness of the godly; the defection and
destruction of the wicked.

THat man is blessed and blessed again
That does not walk astray, Heb. Blessednesses.

By counsels of ungodly men,
Nor stands in sinners way, Much less practices and perseveres.

Nor sits in seat of scornful mates:

And t^ereupon he meditates
Continual days and nights.
Palm tree ever green. Therefore perfect in kind and measure Work for good.

Such one shall he be made,
Which in his season fruit forth-brings,
Whose leaf shall never fade.
All shall succeed by him designed;

But like the chaff which boyst'rous wind
Drives easily to and fro.
Not boldly as guiltless. Any judgment, specially the last.

Nor any sinner may
In Congregation of the Just,
Stand up at Judgment day.

The Lord with favor knows:
Whereas the way shall perish quite
Wherein the sinner goes.
PSALM. II.
To Dutch bass tune.
1. Part.
Argument.
David prophecies of Christ his kingdom, how opposed by Jews and Gentiles: The
derision, and destruction of implacable adversaries.

WHy do the heathen rage, and fret,
And people think vain things?
Act. 4. 25.
and are in counsel set,
Both governors and Kings:
GOD and his Christ oppose they do,
And thus presume to say;
Laws.
let us break their bonds in two,
And cast their Cords away. Luke 19. 14.


Their doings shall deride;
And laugh to scorn his foes that swell
with such presumptuous pride.
When he sees fit time.
in his wrath, the most supreme
Shall all his foes control:
And in displeasure most extreme
Torment their guilty soul.
II. Part.
Argument.
Christ his Dignity, Deity, and Dominion; Kings and great ones (for examples
sake) are exhorted to embrace his Gospel for their own safety.

Sions holy hill, Over the Church.

Yet have I placed my King;

And I declare the thing.
The Lord has spoken thus to me,
Thou art my only Son,
This day have I begotten thee:
Day of Eternity.

All heathen kingdoms I will make
The priv'ledge of thy birth: To convert or confound

And thou shall in possession take,
The utmost parts on earth.

Thy weighty iron rod:
And dash them, like a potters cup,
In pieces small, o God.

That ye may understand:
Be well instructed ye that are
The Judges of the Land.

With reverence and respect:
Love, honor, obey Christ.
kiss the Son,
Lest ye in wrath be checked.
So should ye perish from the way,
If his least anger flame; Wa^ of salvation.

O blessed, blessed then are they
That trust upon his Name.
PSALM. III.
To Oxford tune.
Argument
David complains of Absalom, and his adherents, conspiring against him; his
confidence in God, that defends the faithful, and destroys the wicked.

LOrd, how their number multiplies,
That vex and grieve me sore!
Yea, they that do against me rise,
Wax hourly more and more.

His God no help shall yield,
Nor bring him succor any way:

Thou art the uplifter of my Head,
My glory and my pride:
My voice to God I uttered,

He heard me from his holy Hill:
From heaven typed by Sion.

And wak't again in safety still,
By him sustained and kept.

Beset me round about,
I will not be afraid of those,
Nor of my safety doubt.

Defend my righteous Cause;
For thou have smote mine enemies
Upon the very jaws. As sure as done already.

Break thou the teeth of all the throng
That work ungodliness:

Thou do thy people bless.
PSALM. IV.
To London long tune.
Argument.
David appeals and prays to God, blames Saul's Courtiers for discrediting his
Election of God to the Kingdom; Admonishes them to repent: prefers
spiritual desires to carnal, and reposeth himself in Gods safe protection.

O God that art my righteousness, Witness Judge, Protector, and rewarder of it.

Hear when I call to thee:
In woeful time of my distress,
Thou have enlarged me.
Have mercy and attentive be,
Unto the prayer I frame:
Speak basely of my anointing. So do the wicked of Christ and his Saints.
how long will ye
My glory turn to shame?
How long will ye vain things affect,
And follow after lies?

And he will hear my cries.

And stand in awful dread;
In silence commune with your heart,
Upon your secret bed.

And righteousness present:
And wholly put your confidence
In God omnipotent*

Great multitudes inquire:
But Lord thy shining Countenance
Is all that we desire.

With sacred comforts more,
Then worldlings when they were increast
With Corn and Wine good store.

And also sleep secure:
For only thou, o Lord, do make
My dwelling safe and sure.
PSALM. V.
To Cambridge old tune.
1. Part.
Argument.
David prays for audience with confidence of success: because, though Gods
pure Nature hates odious and obstinate sinners, yet the Saints have free
access to the throne of grace.

O Lord unto my words give ear,
My meditation weigh:

For I to thee will pray.

In The morning I Will direct
My prayer to thee, and from on high
Thine answer I Will expect.

With sin delighted be,
No wickedness nor any ill
Shall ever dwell with thee.

The foolish shall not rest:
All workers of iniquity
Thy Nature does detest.

To utter tales and lies:
God will abhor the bloody one,
And such as fraud devise.

In thine abundant grace:
And worship in thy sacred fear, For they looked toward the Temple, when
absent 1 Kin. 8. 38. Dan. 6. 10.

Toward thy holy place.
2. Part.
Argument.
He prays for Gods safe protection, and sure direction, lest he should fall
into the power or practice of the wicked here described; the sweet and safe
condition of the godly.


Because of all my foes:
Thy paths (lest I should go aside)
Before my face disclose.

Nor truth have any room:
Their inward parts mere wickedness, They gape for good men's destruction.

Their throat an open tomb.
They flatter with dissembling tongue,

By their own counsels going wrong,
Let them be sure to fall:
Cast out in their iniquity,
And multitudes of sin;
For lo they have rebelliously
Offended thee therein.

And love thy holy Name;
Since they by thee defended be,
Be joyful in the same.
For gladness let them ever shout,

And guard the Righteous round about
With favor as a Shield*
PSALM. VI.
To David's tune.
David complains of his sickness, the impossibility to serve God in the state
of Death, the extremity of his sorrows, malignitie of his adversaries; he
gets victory over his temptations.

O Lord my God rebuke me not,
When thou shall angry be;
When thy displeasure waxes hot,
O do not chasten me.

For I am wondrous weak:
Lord I beseech thee make me whole,
My bones with anguish break.

But Lord how long a space?

O save me of thy grace;

Remembrance Lord, of thee;
Who hopes to thank thee in the grave?
And I am near to death with grief and misery.

All night I make my bed to swim,
My Couch with tears o're-flowes:

Because of all my foes.

For lo my voice that wept,
The Lord has heard, the Lord, I say,

God heard my suit at my desire,

With sudden shame let them retire,
And sore vexations wound.
PSALM. VII.
To Coventry tune.
1. Part.
Argument.
David being forced out of Jerusalem by Absoloms Conspiracy, and railed upon by
Shimei, pleads his own innocence.

O Lord my God, I do repose
My confidence in thee;
From all my persecuting foes,
Save and deliver me.

My soul he piecemeal rend,
And tear it, while no Savior's by
To succor and defend.
Of seeking Saul's life. 2 Samuel 26. 9
if I have done,
This treasonable act;
Or if my hands have ere begun
So treacherous a fact.

That was with me at peace;
(Yea, I did still, by my good will,
My causlesse foe release)

And take, and tread it down;
Trampling my life with proud control,
And bury my renown.
II. Part.
Argument.
David prays for restoration to his Kingdom, to minister just judgment to the
people, after the example of almighty God.


Because my foes so storm;
The Judgment which thou did command, Settle my Kingdom promised.

Awaking now perform.

Themselves to me betake;
Return therefore, As a Judge on the Bench.
and sit on high,
Even for this peoples sake.

O let my Judgment be
According to the integrity
And righteousness in me.

To lewd men's wickedness:
As for the righteous men, o God,
Establish them no less.
The righteous God tries heart and reins,
And every secret part:

Who saves the upright heart.
3. Part.
Argument.
God tries the righteous with wise and just corrections; plagues the wicked
with dire and dreadful punishments, confounding them in their own cursed
Counsels.


The righteous to repay:
And with the lewd and wicked doer,
God's angry every day.

His glittering sword is whet:
His angry bow the Lord has bent,
And has it ready set.

Determining to shoot
Choice arrows at the vip'rous hearts*
Of those that persecute.

He travailes in his thought,
Conceiving mischief craftily, Fails of his wicked purpose.

And falsehood forth has brought.

Great pains himself did take;
And now is fallen into the ditch
Which he himself did make.

His mischief, spite, and hate;
His violent dealing shall come down,
And light upon his pate.

For all his righteous ways;
And to the Name of God most high,
Sing cheerful songs of praise.
PSALM. VIII.
To Coventry tune.
David admires God glory, most glorious in weak instruments; his goodness to
mankind, giving him dignity and dominion over the inferior world, which
Christ (taking our nature) subdues and sanctifies to us.

O Lord our Lord how excellent
In all the earth's thy Name?
Behold thou have
They glory placed
Above the heavens frame.

To preach thy power and skill; Mat. 21. 16

That thou might so
The avengefull foe*
And adversary still.

The heavens thy fingers frame;
The Moon on high,
And starrie sky,
Which by thine ord'nance came:

Think I, what wondrous love,
He should of thee
Remembered be,
Or visited from above!
Heb. 2. 9.

Then Angels in degree;
And did him crown
With great renown,
And glorious dignity.

The works which thou have wrought,
Beneath his feet
Subjection meet
Thou have all creatures taught.

And cattle him obey,
What e're the field

And fishes of the Sea.
What ever's in the paths of Seas.
Or passes through the same,
O Lord our Lord
All lands record
The splendour of thy Name.
PSALM. IX.
To David's tune.
Argument.
David praises God for defense of the Church, and destruction of the enemies:
God the supreme King, and righteous Judge of the world, in whom the faithful
happily conside.

O Lord I Will praise thy holy Name,
With true and hearty zeal:
Thy wondrous works will I proclaim,
And none of them conceal,

And to thy Name will I
In songs of praise lift up my voice,
O thou that art most high.

Be turned back with shame:
For in thy presence they shall fall,
And perish by the same.

Maintained my righteous Cause:
Thou fatest in thy righteous Throne,
To judge by righteous Laws.

And made for ever void
Their hateful name, so that the lewd
Are utterly destroyed.

O Enemy, The foe can destroy no more. Thou thou did destroy others.
so it frames:
Thou have destroyed, and ruined
Great Cities, and their names.

For ever shall abide: 2 King. 19. 25.

He has prepared his kingly throne,
Just Judgment to decide.

Exactly just and true,
To judge the world, and will assign
To every man his due.

A refuge for the oppressed:
In times extremely troublesome,
Securest place of rest.

That know thy faithful Name:
For thou have not forsaken those
That duly seek the same.
2. Part.
Argument.
God is glorified in delivering the Church, and taking the wicked in their own
craftiness.


That dwells in Zion mount:
And all his wondrous works, and ways
Unto the Church recount.
When he sets upon judgment.

Those he forgets not then:
But into his remembrance takes
The cries of humble men.

Have mercy on my state:
Think on the troubles that I bear,
Of those that do me hate.
The chief places of assembly.

May all thy praise record:
For thy salvation consolates
My thankful heart, o Lord.

Into the pit they made: Heathen in life.

Their foot is taken in the snare,
Which they themselves have laid:

The wicked man is snared
By that destruction which his own
Mischievous hands prepared.

These God-forgetting men:

In dark oblivions den.
The needies long expecting eyes
For ever shall not fail:

And let not man prevail.
Let them be judged in thy sight,

With fear and dread be danted quite,
And know themselves but men.
PSALM. X.
York tune.
The presumption and cruelty of the wicked.

WHy do thou Lord stand off so far,
And seem thy self to hide:
And see what troublous times here are,
And what oppressing pride:

O let them be surprised,
Caught in the snare they thought so sure,
And which themselves devised.

And does the covetous bless; Coveting to do mischief.

Whom (while the wicked does admire)
The Lord abhorres no less.

Such is his staring pride;
In all his thoughts God comes not,

Thy Judgments Lord are far enough
Above his purblind sight:
At's enemies he makes a puff,
And by them all sets light.

Shall never be displac't:
Nor of the least adversity
At any time shall taste.

Of fraud, deceit, and wrong:
Mischievousness and vanity
Sit underneath his tongue.

Of Villages he sits:
The innocent he takes and slays
In secret holes and pits.
2. Part.
Argument.
The craft and cruelty of the wicked; prayer prevails against their power.


He bends his murderous eyes:
And, like a Lion in his den,
In wait he closely lies.
That he the simple man may get,
He lies in secret wait:
When once he draws him to his net,
Then does he catch him strait.

Humbling himself withal:
That so the poor man (that is his end)
By his strong Ones may fall. Strong clutches or confederates.


He hides away his eyes,
On purpose he beholds it not:

Forget not, but thy hand forth-stretch
For poor men undertrod:

Contemn all-mighty God?
It shall not be required at all,
Thus has he said in heart:

Thou Lord a witness art.
And wilt requite it with thy hand,
The poor man does commend
Himself to thee, for thou do stand
The fatherless his friend.
3. Part.
Argument as before.


Lord break in sunder quite:
Search out his secret wickedness,
Till all be come to light.

By whose revenging hand, Uncircumcised in heart rooted out.

The heathen people perishing
Are banished the land.

Has pierced thine easy ear:
An heart thou will prepare us then
And cause thine Ear to hear. Zach. 12. 10.


That are oppressed so sore,
That earthly men may not oppress
Nor vex them any more. A sorry lump of earth.

PSALM. XI.
French. 1. Tune.
Argument.
The Saints impregnable safety so long as God is in heaven; his different
dealing with the good and bad.

IN God I put my Confidence, Ye O my friends.

Why do ye utter such a word?
Why say you to my soul, fly hence
Unto your mountain, as a bird?

Their arrows on their strings prepare,
In secret for to shoot at those
That upright-hearted persons are.
If outward props fail.

What can the Righteous do? they say;

For God is present there for ay.
The Lord within the heavens high,
Has stablished his royal throne:
His Eyes behold, Behold narrowly.
his Eyelids try
The sons of mortal men each one.

But he the wicked greatly hates,
And him that loves cruelties
His righteous soul abominates.
Which they cannot evade.
and tangling snares
Upon the wicked rain shall he;
An horrible tempest he prepares
The portion of their cup to be.

Does righteousness as much affect:
The upright man he looks upon
With very singular respect.
PSALM. XII.
To new tune.
Argument.
The great corruption of the wicked world; their profane and presumptuous
speeches; The preservation of the Church.

O Lord put to thy helping hand,
For now the godly cease:
The faithful people of the land
Exceedingly decrease.

Speak vanity
Unto their friends apart:
Their conference slips
From flattering lips,
And from a double heart.

The Lord will cut away:
And tongues that speak presumptuous things;

We shall not fail
But to prevail
With tongue and lips most free, With our bold words.

They are in our
Peculiar power,
For who are Lords but we?

And sighs of needy souls,
I Will rise, says God, and him secure
From scornful foes controuls.

Gods words are pure, Promises infallible.

As silver from the mines,
In furnace tried,
And purified
No less then seven times.

Preferved by thy grace;
They shall for ever be secured
From this ungodly race.

The base and vile
Are set in place of power:
On all sides then
Do wicked men
Seek whom they may devour.
PSALM. XIII.
To London short tune.
Argument.
He complains of desertion and distress; prays for seasonable relief and
release; apprebendeth confidence and comfort.

HOw long, o Lord, of thee
Forgotten shall I be?
How long a space
Wilt hide thy face
For evermore from me?

Take counsel in my soul,
With daily care:
O how long bear
Exalted foes control?

Clear, Lord my God, mine eyes, Lest I perish.

Lest sleep of death
My last-drawn breath
Perpetually surprise.

Lo, I have got the day,
And glad they be
That trouble me,
When put beside my stay.

The rock whereon I staid,
My heart in me
Shall joyful be
In thy salvations aid.

Sing praises cheerfully,
Because I felt
How he has dealt
With me most bounteously.
PSALM. XIV.
London long tune.
Argument.
The corruption of mankind; hatred of the godly; deliverance prayed for and
expected in all distressed times.

THere is no God the fool has thought,
Corrupt is all the brood:
Abominations have they wrought,
And none of them does good.

From Heaven, to discern
If there were any one that knew,
Or sought Gods will to learn.

They all aside are gone:
Not one that any good has wrought,
No verily not one.

So brutishly misled;
To eat my people greedily, With delight and without scruple.

Devouring them like bread?
Upon the Lord they do not call:

For God will surely be with all
The righteous every where. Psalm. 53. 5.

Despised his weapons of faith and prayer.

Whose faith on God was stayed:

From Sion saving aid.
When God his peoples bondage turns,
That freedom once is had,
Then Jacob shall rejoice, that mourns,
And Israel shall be glad.
PSALM. XV.
1. Strain tune.
Argument.
The description of a true Isralite.

LOrd who shall have a dwelling place, Congregation.

In Tabernacles of thy grace?
Thy holy hill who shall possess? Heaven.


That walks upright, and speaks the truth; Word and deed.

And this even from his heart he does.

Nor does his neighbor any wrong*
Nor takes up (tho others broach)
Against his Neighbor a reproach. By his good will.


But honored they that fear the Lord.
That changes not what once he swears, Hates perfidiousnesse.

Tho he the loss and damage bears.

To gain by biting usury.
Nor takes reward to circumvent, Covetousnes and all injustice.

Or prejudice the innocent,
He that does these things is approved,
And never shall that man be moved.
PSALM. XVI.
Oxford tune.
Argument.
David professes and praises his interest in God, A Type of Christ in all.
and charity to the Church; he disclaimeth merit and idolatry.

LOrd save me, for I trust in thee,

I have acknowledged thee to be
My Lord, and so thou art.
My goodness unto thee, I know,
Can never have extent;

The truly excellent.
In whom my sole delight is placed,

That after other Gods make haste,
Shall multiply their woes.
The blood of their drink offering, Gentiles offered humane blood to Idols.

I Will not present the same:
Nor move my lips in mentioning
Of their detested name.

And portion of my cup:
Of mine allotted maintenance
Thou art the holder up.

In pleasant places fell: Measured with lines.

The heritage which God assigns
To me, does much excel.
2. Part.
Argument.
He praises God for his Spirit and providence; professes his hope of
resurrection and life everlasting.

Prophesying of Christ's resurrection.
by whose good means
I was advised aright;
Yea, by his counsel have my reins
Instructed me by night.
As my Protector.
and still conceived to stand
The Lord before my face:
Because he is at my right hand
Shall nothing me displace.

This therefore fills my breast:
Glad is my glory, and my flesh
In certain hope shall rest.
My person. Act. 2. 31.

Nor ever wilt permit
Thy Saints dead body to receive
corruption in the pit.

And joys abundant store
At thy right hand there are with thee,
And pleasures evermore.
PSALM. XVII.
York Tune.
Argument.
He prays for audience, professing his sincerity.

LOrd hear the right, attend my cry,
Unto my prayer give heed;
That does not, in hypocrisy,
From fained lips proceed.

And let thine eyes be moved,
Things equal to behold and see:
For thou my heart have proved.
By night thou tri'st me, Of affliction
but shall find
In me no wickedness:
For I am purposed in my mind
My mouth shall not transgress.
By murmuring.

Thy lips did guide me so, Thy counsels.

That from the paths I do refrain
Wherein destroyers go.

In those thy paths divine,
So that my footsteps may not slide
Out of those paths of thine.

Sure thou o God wilt hear:
Lord hear my words, incline to me,
And lend a gracious ear.

Oh thou whose strong right arm
Saves all that trust in thee from those
That rise to do them harm.
2. Part.
Argument.
He prays to be delivered from the wicked, the scourge of the godly, their
temporal prosperity, and eternal destruction.


As the apple of thine eye:
Oh hide me underneath thy wings,

From deadly foes that have intrapt
My soul on every side:

Their mouths are fraught with pride.

In our own footsteps now: We may always say now.

And down unto the very ground
They bend their lowering brow.

To take his prey in chase:
And as it were a Lion young
That lurks in secret place.

And cast him to the ground:
Defend my soul from wicked men,
Which are thy sword to wound.

From worldlings filled and crammed
With temp'rall blessings at command,
And afterward are damm'd.
Thy treasures hid their bellies fill,
With store of children blessed:
They spend their substance at their will,
And leave their babes the rest.
A glimpse thereof now.

Beholding of thy face: Waking from affliction, and in the resurrection.

And waking shall be satisfied
With the image of thy grace.
PSALM. XVIII.
To London long tune.
Argument.
David delivered from Saul, etc. gives thanks, and sweetens these thoughts with
forepast dangers.

O Lord my strength, I will love thee,

And my DELIVERER is he,
My God, and my support:
My strength and station most secure,
In whom my trust shall be:
The horn of my salvation sure,
And my high tower is he.

Who is most worthy praise:
So shall I escape mine enemies all,
With safety all my days.

Wherewith I was dismayed,
The floods of wicked men arose,
And made me much afraid.

Set round on every ^ide:
The snares of death prevented me,

I called upon the Lord most high,
In my distress and fear:
He from his Temple heard my cry,
My words came to his ear.
2. Part.
Argument.
David describes Gods wrathful judgments under the similitude of those
prodigious tempests, which he sometimes really executed on his adversaries.

Earthquakes

A trembling on it seized:
The mighty hills did also quake,
Because thou wast displeased.
God described as a warrior.

And from his mouth there came
Devouring fire, which did provoke
Sulphurous coals to flame.

And downward did descend: Yet invisible.

Beneath his feet a sable cloud
Of darkness did extend.
Angels.

Whose plumes he made his sail:
The winds his winged coursers were,
And darkness was his vail.
Vapor and Clouds.
dark the sky,
Dark waters duskie clouds
Compose a very Canopie,
Wherein himself he shrowds*

Before him in his ire, Lightnings.

His thick clouds past, and with the same
Hailstones and coals of fire.

His voice the Lord most high
In hailstones gave, and in a cloud
Of fire, powered from the sky.

And scattered them by those:
He shot out lightnings dreadfully,
Discomfiting his foes.
Sea-tempests.

And worlds foundations vast,
Disclosed at thy rebuke so keen,
Even at thy nostrils blast.
3. Part.
Argument.
Gods great goodness to his people, planting grace in them, and then rewarding
it.


And drew me from the deep: Of affliction


He did me safely keep.

In that so dangerous day,
That threatened my calamity,
But God was then my stay.

My soul he quickly brought:
Because he took delight in me,
He my deliverance wrought.

Was my reward made sure:
The Lord did give in recompense,
Because my hands were pure.

Continually trod:
And have not ever wickedly
Departed from my God.

His statutes unremov'd:

Wherein no guile was proved.
From stains of mine iniquity
I kept my Conscience free.

Has recompensed me.
According to the integrity,
And cleanness of my hands:
Which he, beholding with his eye,
Exactly understands.
4. Part.
Argument.
Gods different dealing with good and bad. Seen in David's example.
The military virtue of the Saints.


With mercy, in their kind,
And they that are themselves upright,
The like in thee shall find.

Thou will O Lord declare:
And thou will deal as frowardly
With those that froward are.

whom sharp afflictions tried:
And wilt bring down all those that have
The lofty looks of pride.

This darksome night of mine,
The Lord my God will make as bright
As lightsome day to shine.

And safely escaped them all:
And by my God (assisting me)
Have I leapt o'r a wall. Scaled the walk of a City and taken it.


His way is perfect pure:
To all that have on him reli'd,
He is buckler sure.

A God esteemed may be:
And who a mighty rock but one,
And our JEHOVAH he?

My soul with power so great:
My enterprise to be achieved. Castles and Forts.

And makes my way complete.
He sets me on the places high,
By conquest mine they are:

Of exercising war.
So that a bow completely steeled
Is broken by mine arms:

Thy right hand holds from harms.
Thy gentleness did me advance,

That by no danger of mischance
My foot should slip aside.
5. Part.
Argument.
David triumphs in his Victories, A president of ours, a type of Christ's for us.
and prophecies of the access of the Gentiles to the Church.


And also overta'n:
And, till they were extinguished,
I did not turn again.

I wounded them so sore;
Beneath my feet, mine enemies
Are fallen in bloody gore.

To battle with my foes:
And under me have them subdued
That up against me rose.

Were given me by thee:
That I might root out of the land
All them that hated me.

But there was none to save:
Yea, even to the LORD they cried,
But he no answer gave.

When boisterous winds do meet:
I beat my foes, and cast them out
As dirt into the street.

From all seditious hands:
And thou have made me to be head
Of all the heathen lands.
A people shall my servants be
Whose face I never saw:

They shall obey my law.
Heb. Lie fainedly, as hypocrites for fear.

The strangers shall submit,
And fade away, and be afraid
Where they in secret sit. Exo. 15. 14

6. Part.
Argument.
God is glorified for the victories of Christ, and the Church the true seed of
David.


That ever does abide:
And let the Lord my Savior
Be highly magnified.

My people he subjects:
And my Deliverer is he
That me from foes protects.

That did my hurt conspire:
And me from him delivered
Whom fury set on fire.

Thy praises I Will proclaim:
And cheerful songs of triumph sing
To thy victorious Name.

And mercy keeps in store,
For David his anointed King, After the Spirit.

And HIS seed evermore.
PSALM. XIX.
To David's tune.
1. Part.
Argument.
The creatures show Gods glory; the Scriptures his grace and saving knowledge.

THe heavens give to understand
The glory of the Lord:
The operations of his hand
The firmaments record.
The motions of the spheres day and night, teach the Creator to all Nations.
Their course and compass. Specially the Sphere of the Sun.

And day with day conferred:

Where their voice is not heard.

The vast earth round about:
Unto the worlds remotest end
Their words are passed out.
The Lord a TABERNACLE there
Did for the Sun compose:

That from his chamber goes,
Rejoicing for to run a race
Like to a champion stout:

Begins his going out.
And he to heavens utmost end
His circuit makes complete:
And there is nothing can defend
Or hide it from his heart. With Gods blessing. 2 Cor. 10. 4.


The soul it purifies:
His testimonies are most sure
And make the simple wise.
PSALM. XIX. 2. Part.
Argument.
The names and properties of the Scriptures; the benefit of obeying them, which
makes the godly sue for grace.


And consolate the mind:
His precepts pure, affording light
To eyes by nature blind.
The rule that guides us in Gods fear.

And always does endure:
His Judgments just in all respects,
And truth it self no truer.

Of gold to be embraced:
Far sweeter then the hony-combes,
Or honey to the taste.

How he his life should frame:
A great reward's provided for's
If we observe the same.

O cleanse my heart within
Heb. Prouds, headstrong temptations*
o keep thou me
From all presumptuous sin..
O let it have no Regiment
In me at any time:
And then shall I be innocent,
And clear from greatest crime.
As apostasy, desperation, and such like.

And every word I say
Take in good part, o Lord that art
My Savior, strength and stay*
PSALM. XX.
To choice tune.
Argument.
David going forth to battle, offers sacrifice; A type of Christ, and pattern
for us.
the Church prays confidently for acceptance and success.

LORD hear thee in this troublous day,
The name of Jacobs God defend;
From heaven typed by Sion.

Help from the Sanctuary send.

He thy burnt Sacrifice accept:

And all thy counsels LORD fulfill.

And spread our banners in the name
Of thee our God and confidence,
LORD hear thy prayers, and grant the same.
Now having prayed.

With saving strength of his right arm,
And hears his anointed one,
From heaven his high and holy throne.

And some in horses hope the same,
But we will ever bear in mind,
The Lord our Gods all-helpfull name.

But we are risen and stand upright: Are victorious.


Now when we pray, our prayers to hear.
PSALM. XXI.
To Dutch tune.
Argument.
David gives thanks for victory, A type of the blessings of the Gospel*
and the rich blessings of God.

O LORD, in thy salvation
The King shall much delight
With joy and exultation
In thy great strength and might.

Thou granted'st every thing:
And what his lips of thee did crave
Was not denied the King.

Thou have him richly sped:
And thou have set a royal crown
Of pure gold on his head.

To him that blessing prime:
Even length of days, He in his person, Christ of his loins, we of his faith
live for ever*
that he might live
An everlasting time.

In thy salvations aid:
For honor and great majesty
Thou have upon him laid.

Thou did to him impart:
And with thy countenances beams
Rejoiced his joyful heart.

Does put his trust in thee:
And through thy mercy, o most High,
Removed he shall not be*
2. Part.
Argument.
The consuming wrath of Christ against all implacable adversaries.

Thy omnipotent power.

Thy hand thy haters all:

What time thy wrath shall fall.
The Lord shall swallow them in fume,
Fire shall devour them then.

Their seeds from sons of men.

A most mischievous thing: The utter extirpation of thy Church.

But cannot bring to pass the end
Of their imagining.

To turn their backs apace,
Charging thine arrows on thy strings,
Against their stubborn face.

Thy matchless glory raise:
So shall due cheerful songs record
Thy powers deferved praise.
PSALM. XXII.
To Oxford tune.
1. Part.
Argument.
David complains of desertion and disdainfulness of his enemies, remembers (to
his comfort) Gods ancient dealing with the Saints.

MY God, my God, wherefore have thon
Forsook me? O wherefore!
Why art so far from helping now,
When I do cry and rore?

Yet hear'st thou not my moan:
All night I cannot hold my tongue,

Thou that inhabit'st Isreal's praise! The place thine in type, and the service
thine own for ever.


In thee they trusted all their days,
And thou did set them free.

A blessed deliverance got:
And, trusting in thy holy Name,
Confounded were they not.
Meditate of Christ's humiliation.

A despicable worm:
A mere reproach of men I am,
Whom all the people spurn.

Shoot out the lip do they:
And shake their heads with scornful nod,
And thus they speak, and say:

A Savior for his sake;
Let him deliver him since he
In him delight did take.
2. Part.
Argument.
Gods original providence to his Saints; a Representing Christ's sufferings.
complaint of savage adversaries and extreme afflictions.


O Lord, thou took'st me thence:
When I was on my mothers breast,
Thou wast my confidence.

Upon thy care alone:
Thou from my mothers belly wast,
The God my soul does own.

And none to help me out:

Encompassed me about.
Strong Bashan bulls encompassing
Prevent me all escape;

And roaring Lion gape.
Spirits la^^guishing.

My bones dis-joynted all:
My heart, within my bowels shrunk,
Like molten wax does fall.

My tongue cleaves to my jaws: Seeming as helpless and hopeless as the dead.

In dust of death to be and bide,
Thou do thy servant cause.

Assembled wicked bands
Have me enclosed and compassed; Meditate of Christ's passion.

They pierce my feet and hands.
Leanness.

On me they gaze and stare:
Luke 23. 39.

And they my garments share.

And be not far from me:

And bloody sword set free.
Savage adversaries. Experience.

Save and deliver me:
For from the horns of Unicorns
Thou heard'st me pray to thee.
3. Part.
Argument.
The relief of the afflicted, the dainties of the Gospel, conversion of the
Gentiles, and successions of the Church.

I David, as a type of Christ, Heb. 2. 11.
I will declare thy Name
Among my brethren dear,
And I will spread thy praise and fame
In congregations here.

Praise him in word and deed:
Glorify him with one accord,
O all ye Jacobs seed.
Ye seed of Israel do no less,
But always fear the Lord:

He never has abhorred.
He did not such a soul despise,
Nor unaffected hide
From him his favorable eyes,
But heard him when he cried.

And pay my vows I will
Before them all that fear thy Name.
Feed on the sweet promises.

They shall, that seek him, praise the Lord,
Your hearts shall live for ay.
Remember the truths of the Gospel.

And turn to God shall they:
All kindred nations shall to thee
In humble worship fall:

Supreme of nations all.
Rich and poor seek and submit to Christ

And worship him they must:
And they must bow before his seat
That stoop, and lick the dust.
His own soul none can keep alive. Procure or prevent his own salvation.


A Generation shall survive
Which we for his record.
One gen^ration o^ ^^lievers to another.
and there declare
His righteousness to those
That born in after ages are,
That God did thus dispose.
PSALM. XXIII.
To the 2. French tune.
Argument.
The sure supply of the Saints.

THe Lord's my Shepherd to provide,
No woeful want shall I abide: Spiritual pastures.


He makes me rest,
He leads me by still waters side.
From sin and error.

For his names sake, in paths most true:

Deaths horrid shade, Saddest afflictions.

That darksome valley walking through,
Yet I will fear no kind of ill:
For thou art ever present still
With me, Thy power, providence and spirit.
O God,
They staff, thy rod,
My heart with heavenly comforts fill.
Corporal blessings.

Even in the presence of my foe,
Thine ointment spread
Upon my head:
Making my cup to overflow.
Yea, all my life's continued space,

Shall follow me: The Church on earth and in heaven.

Thy house shall be
My ever constant dwelling place.
PSALM. XXIV.
Dutch Bass tune.
Argument.
He exhorts to receive Christ the King of the world: describes the Citizens of
his spiritual Kingdom.

THe earth's the Lords with all her goods, Made one globe of earth and water,
bu^ quere, if water be not the center and basis. 2 Pet. 3. 5. Sion hill a type
of heaven.

And all the worlds contain:

And fixed it on the main.

His hill ascend unto?

Whose oaths are just and true.
Who suffers not his soul to cleave
To Idols most abhorred:

The blessing from the Lord.
From God his Savior he shall speed
With gifts of saving grace:

Even theirs that seek thy face.

Ye gates lift up the head: Doors of your hearts in all generations.

And give the King of glory scope
Within your courts to tread:

His royal name record;
In battle always conquering,
The Strong and mighty Lord.

Ye gates lift up your head:
And give the King of glory scope
Within your courts to tread.

And all the glory his?
The Lord of hosts, and none but he,
The King of glory is.
PSALM. XXV.
To Sweet tune.
Argument.
David sueth for Gods protection, and pardon of his sins, specially those of
his youth.

LOrd, Raise my af^ections.
I lift up my soul to thee,

O Let not me
Ashamed be,
Nor over-topt by envious foes.

To wait upon thy holy name:
Who break thy laws
Without a cause, Persecute without provocation.

Let them be rather put to shame.


On thee all day
I wait and stay,
For thou my God and Savior art.

And thy sweet mercies manifold,
O Lord now please
To think on these,
For they have ever been of old.

Nor yet my sins of youth record:
In mercy free
Remember me,
Even for thy goodness sake O Lord.

To them therefore that go aside,
Will he, alone,
His ways make known,

He to the meek will teach his way,

To such are they
As do obey
His covenant, and his laws embrace.

For thy names sake I thee entreat
To pardon my
Iniquity.
For it is most exceeding great.
2. Part.
Argument.
He prays for help in affliction, and the like for the Church.


With grace and care the Lord to please,
To him God shows To do all for the best. In quiet and contentation.

What way to choose

His seed shall have inheritance here,

To them most clear,
That do him fear:
And he to them his covenant shows.
In hope and prayer.

By whose great help I make no doubt
My feet to get
Out of the net, Net of affliction

For he shall surely pluck them out.

Affliction has me over-charg'd,
Behold, my state
Is desolate,

O bring me out of my distress,

What painfulness
Does me oppress,
And Lord forgive me all my sin.

For very many such there be,
Rank hatred shows
It self in those,
And cruelly they hated me.

And unto me deliverance send:
O let me not
Be shamed a jot,
For on thy name do I depend.

Preserve me, for I trust in thee;
Lord grant redress
Of all distress,

PS AL. XXVI.
To the 2. French tune.
Argument.
David's integrity, and love to the ordinances: he avoydeth the ungodly way, and
unhappy end of the wicked.

MY righteous judgment, Lord decide,
For I in innocence abide,
Still walking just,
In God I trust,
And therefore sure I shall not slide.

My secret reins, O Lord descry:

Before mine eyes,
And walked in thy truth have I.

For hypocrites I am no mate:

Of sinners lewd
I verily detest and hate.
I do not sit with wicked bands,
Not worshipping thee with a wicked heart as they do.

So I no doubt,
Will press about
The place, whereon thine Altar stands.

And publish all thy wonders rare:
Such love did I
Continually
Unto thy habitation bear.

The house of thy frequented grace.

With sinners lot,
Nor yet my life with bloody race.

Their right hand full of bribery.

I Will constant be,
Walking in my integrity.
Redeem me, grant me, Lord, thy grace,
My affection and conversation is upright.

I will record,
Thy praise, O Lord,
Before the congregations face.
PSALM. XXVII.
To Martyrs tune.
1. part.
Argument.
David's care to serve God is his crown and comfort against all adversaries and
afflictions.

THe Lord's my saving health, and light,
Why should I be dismayed?
He of my life's the strength and might,
Why should I be afraid?

Most wicked persons all,
To eat my flesh, against me rose,
They, stumbling, down did fall.

Should fear my heart surprise?
No, I will be thus confident
Tho wars against me rise.

Which I will seek for still:
That I, till life be quite expired,
May dwell in Sions hill.
That there, within his house, I may
The Lords fair beauty view:
Enquiring for the blessed way,
Within his Temple true.

He shall securely lock,
And hide me in their secret place,
And set me on a rock.
In his pavilion shall he me
In troublous times enclose: His temple's a protection.

Now that God has put an end to my temptations under Saul, etc.

Above my neighboring foes.
I therefore to his tents profess
My offerings for to bring:
A sacrifice of joyfulnesse
Will I present and sing.
Yea, to the LORD sing praise will I,

With earnest voice I call and cry,
Have mercy answering me.
2. Part.
Argument.
The sweet echoes of a gracious heart; the providence of God to the Saints in
want of worldly friends.


My heart said unto thee,
I Will seek thy face, Lord grant thy grace,

In anger cast me not away,
Nor leave thy servant quite,
Forsake me not, thou wast my stay,
O God my saving might.


And in a plain path be my guide,
Because of all my foes.

To have their will on me:
False witnesses against me rise,
That breath out cruelty.

But that I hoped to see,
Here in the land of living men,
GODS goodness showed to me.

Thy heart with courage stay;
And he shall fortify the same,
Wait on the LORD, I say.
PSALM. XXVIII.
To York tune.
Argument.
He prays for the Church, and curses the wicked hypocrites and atheists.

O LORD my rock, The Sanctu^ Sanctorum, where Oracles were delivered.
I cry to thee,
To me o be not dumb:
Lest if to me thou silent be,
I like dead men become.

Hear, A type of heaven, and the Church of God.
when I call to thee:
When towered thy holy Oracle
My hands up-lifted be.

O draw me not away: Draw me not to their sin, nor drag me to their judgment.

Which speak their neighbors fair to face,
But secretly betray.

Endeavors, and deserts:
With all their wickedness that lurks
In their malicious hearts.
H^ed not his providence, nor means of grace. Unrecoverable.

Nor what his hands fulfilled,
Destruction sure is their reward,
God shall them never build.

My supplications voice:
My hearts repose, and help conferred
Which make it much rejoice.

I Will sing his praise alone:
Of all the faithful as well as mine
and Savior
Of his anointed one.

So that it perish never,
Nor only keep, but feed thy sheep,
And lift them up for ever.
PSALM. XXIX.
To David's tune.
Argument.
Potentates exhorted to praise the supreme King, For example of others, etc.
for the wonders of nature; and the people of God, for their perpetual
protection.

YE mighty to the LORD give you
Deserved strength and fame*

To his most facred Name.
In beauteous place of holiness,
Worship the Lord most high;

In waters of the sky. Thunder in the Clouds.

Lord God of glory's thunders fly
From elements watery tower:
Thunde. 5.

Gods voice is full of power.

Breaks down the Cedars tall:
The Lord in thee, o Lebanon,
Makes Cedar trees to fall.

(With tottering earthquakes torn)
Mount Lebanon, and Syrion too,
Like youngling Unicorn.
Flashes of lightning.


Yea Kedesh desert, terrified
With his dread thunder, quakes.

And hindes to calve compells: To cast calf.

And all his house his praise rehearse,
Each tongue his glory tells.
Ruling the Seas and tempests. Metaph. tyrants.

His kingdom shall not cease:

And bless his Church with peace.
PSALM. XXX.
Dutch tune.
Argument.
David magnifies Gods everlasting mercies, by his happy recoveries from
momentany miseries.

LOrd I Will extol thee with my voice,
For I Am advanced by thee:
Thou have not made my foes rejoice,
Nor triumph over me.

Thou Lord have made me whole:
Grave of destruction.

Brought back my gasping ^oul.
That I to pit should not go down,
Thou sav'dst my life, O Lord:
Which is such an argument of his faithfulness and goodness.

His holiness record.

Life from his favor springs:
Tho weeping for a night may last,
The morning comfort brings.

I shall not moved be:
My kingdom.

And favored so by thee.
Thou did thy face obscure and hide,
And trouble did invade:

And supplication made.

When I to pit go down?
Shall from the dust thy praises bud,
Shall dust thy truth renown?

In that which I have prayed:
Have mercy on me, and be thou
My all-sufficient aid.

My sorrows doleful noise:
My sackcloth loosed, wherein I mourned,
And girt me round with joys.

And never silent be:
O Lord my God, through all my days
Will I give thanks to thee.
PSALM. XXXI.
To Oxford tune.
Argument.
David resignes himself to God.

IN thee, o LORD, I put my trust,
O put me not to shame:
Deliver me, as thou art just,
By that most righteous Name.

With speed deliverance send:
A rock of strength, an house be thou
Thy Servant to defend.

VVhereto I me betake:
Then lead and guide me by thy power,
O GOD for thy Names sake.

In thee my strength does stand:

And to no other hand.
Lord God of truth, I Am thy redeemed,

That lying vanities esteemed, Worldlings and Idolaters.

But I trust in the LORD.

Yea, much rejoice in those:
For thou have weighed what cares I had,
And known my soul in woes.

Enclosed me by thy doom:
But made my steadfast feet to stand,
In large and spacious room.
2. Part.
Argument.
New persecutions renew his supplications. See 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27. and 24. 1, 2.



Whom troubles great befall:
My mournful ey's consumed with grief,
My belly, soul and all.

Have all together failed:
Consumed and spent with sighs and groans,
Of wickedness bewailed.

And to my friends a fear:
And specially reproach't by those
That were my neighbors near.
When seen without, In the desert for fear of incurring Saul's displeasure.
they from me fled,

As men are out of mind when dead,
I Am like a broken pot.

On every side was fear,
While they together have conferred,
And all against me were.
They thought to take my life away;

Thou art my God (I used to say)
M^ lot and affairs.

From persecuting foes of mine,
And enemies hands me take:

Save me for mercies sake.

From shame thy servant save:
Let wicked men be put to shame
And silence in the grave.

That with contempt and pride
Such grievous things have lewdly spoke,
And righteous men belied.
3. Part.
Argument.
The great happiness of the Saints in this life.


For them that fear thy name! How much more in another world.

And wrought for them that trust in thee
Where men behold the same.

Shall keep them safe and sure:
Thy close pavilion shall them hide
From strife of tongues secure. Thy protection. Calumnies and curses.


To me in wondrous sort;
As in a City strongly fenced,
His name be blessed for it.

Off from before thine eyes:
Yet heardst thou when I cried to thee
My supplications cries.

The LORD sincerely love:
For every true believer is
Preserved from above.
He plenteously rewards proud doers:

Confirm that valiant heart of yours,
O ye believers all.
PSALM. XXXII.
To Cambr. old tune.
Argument.
The free forgiving grace of God, and benefit of penitent confession.

O Blessed man is he,
Whose sins God passes by;

From all iniquity.
Whose spirit entertains no guile; But confessed, Sees all.


My weary bones waxed old the while, Perplexed, as if my bones were full of ach,
as in old age.

Through roaring all day long.

Each day and night throughout:
My natural moisture is become
As summers parching drought. Prove. 17. 22.


My sins to thee reveal;
And did not mine iniquity
In any point conceal.
I said, I will to God confess
What all my sins have bin:
And thou forgav'st the wickedness
And guilt of all my sin.

What time thou may be found: By my example, 2 Co. 6. ^.

Nor rising flood, nor roaring wave, No temptation overcome them.

Them ever shall surround.

Thou shall preserve from wrongs:
And round about encompass me
With sweet salvations songs.
2. Part.
Argument.
He profers to direct Saints and sinners: unhappy they that brutishly reject
his counsel.


The way that thou shall go:
And guide thee with my watchful eye
That I may teach thee so. Watching if thou take the way as I directed.


By reason nothing led,
Whose mouth the bit and bridle rule,
Lest they too near thee tread.

Shall miseries abound.
But him that in the Lord does trust,
Shall mercy compass round.

And in the Lord delight;
With joyful shouts lift up your voice
All ye whose hearts are right.
PSALM. XXXIII.
York tune.
1. Part.
Argument.
The admirable stability of Gods works and counsels, in the Trinity of persons.

Ye righteous in the LORD rejoice,
For praise becomes the Saints.

And ten-string'd instruments.

Sing loud and play with skill:

His works all truth fulfill. Accomplish all perfection.


His goodness fills all coasts;
His Son, Ioh. 1. 3. And holy Ghost. Genesis 1. 2. From overflowing the earth,
Job 38. 11.

His Spirit all their hoasts.

And heaps the billows curled:
In storehouses he lays the deeps,
O fear him all the world.

That dwell from sun to sun:
The creation.

He spoke, and it was done.

The Lord does bring to naught:
And their device does fruitless make,
What ere the people thought.

And so for ever shall:
The intentions of his heart endure
To generations all.
2. Part.
Argument.
Gods special and common providence, the creatures vanity, and Gods
All Sufficiency to help in hardest times.


That people's blessed whom he
Has chosen of his own accord,
His heritage to be.

Beholding all abroad
All mortal man's posterity

In all the earth, and all the parts
The dwellers he surveys:
Made the soul of one as well as another.

And all their works he weighs.

Their corp'rall strength saves none:

His great strength saves not one;

That him in reverence have.
And them that in his mercies hope,

To keep alive when death's destroy,

He is our help, our shield, our joy,

Because we have put confidence,
In his most holy name:

As we hope in the same.
PSALM. XXXIV.
To Martyrs tune.
Argument.
David by his own practice and experience, inciteth to praise and trust in God.

AT all times I will bless the Lord,
Thy praise o Lord of host

My soul in him shall boast.
The humble wondrous glad shall be,
In hearing of the same:

Let Us all exalt his Name.

And all my terrors dash't:

Nor was their face abash't.
Remembers how poor David did and sped.
the Lord did hear,
And all his troubles end:

Gods children to defend.

Who trusts in him is blessed.

Such shall not be distressed.

Their food shall be so scant:
But they that seek the Lord to find,
Not one good thing shall want.
2. Part.
Argument.
The way to true happiness; with the privileges of the godly, and wickeds
misery.


Gods fear I teach to you:

And days desires not few.

And wicked words refrain:

Seek peace, and peace maintain.

God casts intentive eyes:
And opens his attentive ear
To their uncessant cries.

An angry brow he frames,
To cut from earth the memory
Of their detested names.

And all their troubles ends.

And contrite souls defends.

The LORDS most holy ones:
But God shall help them out of all,
Every part and piece of him. Mat. 10. 30.

So that not one of them is burst.

Who hate the righteous shall be cursed,
And utterly subdued.

His servants souls each one: From hell, sin, and misery.

And there shall none be desolate
That trust in him alone.
PSALM. XXXV.
To Oxford tune.
Argument.
An earnest prayer against Persecutors.

LORD plead my righteous cause with those
That are with me at strife:
O fight against my mortal foes
That fight against my life.

My help stand up unto:

Against them that pursue.
Say to my soul, I Am thy defense,
Let shame their hopes control.

That seek to hurt my soul.
Let thy fierce hand them backward strike,
Confusion may they find

The chaff before the wind.
Let Gods swift Angel make pursuit, The messenger of vengeance.

Close at their heels I say:

In dark and slippery way.

A net for me they hid:
Even for my soul they dug it,
And this they causless did.

Upon this monster fall:
And let him, having hidden snares,
Be taken therewithal.
Even that destruction LORD decree,
That he fall in the same:

In Gods all-mighty Name.
And joy in his salvation much,

Shall say, Every vein in my heart, etc.
What other God is such
Who saves the needy ones?
Thou helpest him that stands in need,
From foes that are too strong:
The poor from spoilers thou have freed,
And wretched men from wrong.
2. Part.
Argument.
The perfidiousness and ingratitude of the wicked.


To witness things untrue:
And charge me with iniquities,
Whereof I nothing knew.

My love with hate requite:
And sought my souls destruction still, Sought my life.

With utmost of their might.

In sackcloth fasted, mourned:
The prayer of mine afflicted soul. Did me good tho not them Some understand
zeal and constancy in his prayer.

Into my bosom turned.

As for my friend or brother:
I bowed down heavily, as he
That mourns for his mother.

And were together got:
Base abjects, when I did not know,
They tore me ceasing not. Tore my good name.


They gnash't their teeth at me:

Both seen and suffered be?
Destroying Lions o defeat,
My darling soul defend:

Where multitudes attend.
3. Part.
Argument.
He prays against the spitefulness of the wicked here described.


Lift up their horn on high:
Nor let them wink with scornful eyes
that hate me causlesly. Wink mockingly.


Against such men they plot
As are most quiet in the land,
For peace they utter not.

Against me spitefully:
Aha, Aha, mine enemies cried, The mischief we wished.

We saw it with our ey.

Lord from me be not far:

And come to Judgement-bar.
My Lord my God, move to my cause,

According to thy righteous laws,
Nor suff'r it undertrod.

Ah, we would have it thus:
Nor let them say, he is made a prey,
He Is swallowed up by us.

With self-confusion clad:
Themselves who'gainst me magnify,
And at my hurt are glad.

With my just cause that side:
Yea, let them say continually
The LORD be magnified.
Who joys in's servants prosperous state;

Thy righteousness shall celebrate
With praises all day long.
PSALM. XXXVI.
To London short tune.
Argument.
The vileness of the wicked; the greatness of Gods mercies, and the interest of
the righteous in him and them together.

LEwd men's transgressions great,
Unto my heart descries,
And makes it clear,
That there is no fear
Of God before his eyes.

Gross flatteries does propound: Of prosperity and impunitie. Cursed of God
and man.

Until the sin
He lives in
An hateful thing be found.

Are wickedness and theft
Good things to do
And wisdom too
He has for ever left.

Devises to fulfill:
He does delight
In ways not right,
And he abhors no ill.

Thy truth the clouds does touch:

Or swallowing deep,
Thy truth and judgement's such.
Thou, Lord, sav'st man and beast,

Thy love, thy grace
Make mortals place
Their trust in thy spread wings.

With thy sweet houses fat: With the sweet of spiritual comforts, much more
with eternal, as full as a river, and thou art the fountain it self.

Thy river which
Yield pleasures rich,
They all shall drink of that.

We shall see light in thine.

From them thy love
That know thy name divine.
Thy love and clemency
Let th'upright hearted prove:

Let make me slide,
Nor wiekcd hand remove.

Destruction shall surprise: There where we may see it.

Lo there they fall,
And never shall
Be able more to rise.
PSALM. XXXVII.
To Martyrs tune.
Argument.
The many and happy privileges of the Saints controlling envy and ingratitude.

THy mind for sinners nor disturb,
Nor evil doers envy:

Are soon cut down and die.

To actions that are good; Sure supply.

So shall thou dwell within the land,
And be assured of food.

And he shall condesend
Thy hearts desire to satisfy;

Trust in him, and it shall be done,
Sunshine name cleared from scandal in Gods due time.

Thy judgment as the noontide Sun,
Thy righteousness as light.

Fret not thy self a jot
At him that prospers in his way,
And speeds his wicked plot.

Distemp'ring wrath forsake:
Fret not thy self in any wise,
In evil to partake

But earth shall sure afford
An heritage by them enjoyed, A standing house and memorial.

That wait upon the Lord.

Within a little space: Scarce leave a fly^ blown chronicle.

Yea, thou shall study thereupon,
Yet shall not find his place.
After the last day, some think.

And there they shall delight:
And bath themselves in blissfulness
Of peace most infinite.
2. Part.
Argument.
The impotent malice of the wicked, and precious privileges of the godly.


And at him grates his teeth:

Whose day he coming see'th.

Drawn out and ready bent:
The poor and needies overthrow
Their mischievous intent.
And them that uprightly converse,
To slay with cruel stroke:

Their bows shall all be broke.

Though it be small and poor,
Is better far then house or lands,
Of many a wicked doer.
Their great power crushed.

But God's the just man's stay:

Their heritage lasts for ay. At least in the world to come.


When evil times betide:
And in the day of scarcity,
They shall be satisfied.

As fat of Lambs consume:
Gods enemies shall fade away,
And vanish into fume.

But cares not to repay:
But still the righteous mercy shows,
And frankly gives away.

The earth shall be enjoyed:
And such as he does curse suppressed,
And utterly destroyed.
3. Part.
Argument.
Many remarkable providence toward the godly.


Delighting in his way:

For him Gods hand does stay.

Yet to my hoary head,
The just forsook did never behold,
Nor HIS seed begging bread.

His seed is surely blessed:

And ever dwell in rest.

For he in Judgment joys:
He will for ever them protect,
But wicked seed destroys.

And therein ever dwell: Hereafter, See Romans 8. 19.


With oracles to tell.
His tongue deep judgment does impart,

His Gods commandment in his heart,
None of his steps shall slide.

But to the hand of them

Nor him (when judged) condem'.
4. Part.
Argument.
Holiness tends to happiness, wickedness to destruction.


And thou (raised by his hand)
Shall see when he the wicked slays,
And shall enjoy the land.

And spread like Laurel green:

And could no more be seen.
I sought, but him could no where find,
But he of upright ways

In peace he ends his days.

Together God shall slay:
And this shall be the wickeds end
To be cut off for ay.

Of God Almighty is:
In times of tribulation
He is a rock to his.

To aid and keep the just:
And save them from the wickeds hand,
Because in him they trust.
PSALM. XXXVIII.
To Oxford tune.
Argument.
David laments his sickness, sin and sorrow, his bitter enemies and
false-hearted friends.

ME Lord in wrath do not control
Nor scourge in fury fierce:

Thine arrows deeply pierce.

Because thou art displeased:
My bones, by reason of my sin,
By no means can be eased.

Which o'r my head does roll,
Even as a heavy burden lies,
Too heavy for my soul.

My wounds corrupted stink: To provoke thee by my sins.


And under troubles sink.
I all the day lament afresh,

That leaves no soundness in my flesh,
And on my loins does seize.

Disquietness does grind
My woeful heart, and makes me rore,
How penitent, patient, prayerfull.

My groaning is not hid from thee,

My strength and ey-sight fails me,
My eyes their light do want.

Far from my sore retire:

Who against my life conspire.
And they that seek to do me wrong
Do speak mischievous things:
And base deceits, even all day long,
Are their imaginings.
2. Part.
Argument.
David's patience and prayer in affliction.


My lips I never stirred: I seemed not to hear the reproaches of the enemy.


That does not hear a word.
And in whose mouth is no reproof No answer to my reproehers.


Thou hear'st me to my souls behoof,
O Lord my God most just.

Lest their insulting pride
Should them against me magnify,
My foot being slipped aside.

Ready I am to halt: Almost lamed wit mischief.


with sorrow for my fault. Genesis 32. 31.


And they are strong beside: But I will try what repentance will do.

And they that hate me wrongfully
Are greatly multiplied.

That good with ill repay:
Because I carefully pursue
A good and godly way.

Far from me never be:

But haste to succor me.
PSALM. XXXIX.
To Cambr. old tune.
Argument.
David troubled at wicked men's prosperity, answers it with consideration of
the vanity and brevitie of life.

I Will look to my ways, I said
Lest with my tongue I fin:
My mouth, as with a bridle staid, Lest I murmr.

I Will carefully hold in.
While wicked men before me stood,

I held my peace, yea even from good,
Then was my sorrow stirred.
Beholding their prosperity, I would rather say nothing, (...) good thoughts
came in. The passion continued.

While musing hereabout:
The fire fierce burning ceased not,
At last these words burst out.

And days most certain date:
That I may fully apprehend
The frailty of my state.
In comparison of thy Eternity.
thou have made my days a span,
Mine age as nothing deemed:
Mere vanity is every man,
At best estate esteemed.

In vain are mortals vexed:
He heaps up wealth, and does not know
What gath'rer shall come next.
2. Part.
Argument.
David exposed to contempt by consuming afflictions, is patient, and prays for
respite to improve his short life to the best advantage.


All other hopes forborne:

From fools reproach and scorn. Murmured not at the affliction which I know
came from thee. Lev. 10. 3.


Because the deed was thine:

Which while I feel I pine.

Of sin-chastising pain,
It wastes his beauty like a moth, Job 13. 28.

Sure every man is vain.

Not silent at my tears:
A sojourner my days I spend, Heb. 11. 13.

As all my fathers theirs.
Mine is a strangers residence,

Restore my strength, ere I go hence,
And shall be seen no more.
PSALM. XL.
To Cambridge old tune.
David magnifies Gods mercies to himself, and admires the greatness of them to
his Church.

FOr God I waited patiently,
Plunged in a dreadful pit,
My cry he heard
And did regard,
And plucked me out of it.
From the deep dungeon of misery, to asure rock of safety.

And to a rock me led,
My feet to stay
In safer way
My steps he stablished.
Godly men at least shall learn to fear and trust in God by my example.

His praises to record:
Many shall see,
And fear, by me,
And trust upon the Lord.

In God does firm abide, Regards not the example of Ido^aters and unbeleevers.

And no whit knows
The proud, nor those
To lies that turn aside.

The works which thou have wrought?
How numerous
Are, toward us,
The thoughts which thou have thought?
No man can reckon what they are
In order unto thee:
Would I compare
And them declare,
They cannot numbered be.
PSALM. XL. 2. Part.
Argument.
The circumcised heart and ear of the Saints: the perfect obedience of Christ,
and publication of the Gospel.

Not in comparison of Spirit, or Christ.

Nor offering brought thee in:
None made by fire
Do thou require, Ier. 7. 22.

Nor offering brought for sin. Alluding to that, Exodus 21. 6.

But thou have opened mine ear,
Ioh. 5. 39.

Thy volumes bear
Me witness there,
Thy book contains the sum.

Thy law is in my heart:
Where throngs do fill
Thy Sions hill,
Thy truth will I impart.

O Lord thou know no less:

Have not retained
Or hid thy righteousness. Act. 20. 27.


Concealed in any sort:
Thy truth nor thy
Benignity
From all the great resort.

Thy tender love therefore:
Thy favor free
And truth let be
My keepers evermore.
3. Part.
Argument.
David shows the grievous persecution, Herein a type of Christ, and a pattern
to us.
and gracious preservation of the Saints.


And mine iniquities
On me take hold,
So uncontrolled,
I cannot lift mine eyes.
More mis'ries do my soul assail
Then hairs are on my head:
They so prevail
My heart does fail,
By them discouraged.

My help make haste unto:

And shame on these
That my souls hurt pursue.
Who wish me ill, o cause that they
With shame repulsed be;

Their shame, that say,
Aha, Aha, to me.

Who thy salvation love
Let them reply
Continually
Extolled be God above.

Yet not of God forgot:
My help and my
Assured supply,
My God o tarry not.
PSALM. XLI.
To Camb. old tune.
Argument.
Gods goodness to the poor, and to such as pity them: the hypocrisy and
maliciousness of our adversaries.

THe man is blessed by whom the poor
Is duly thought upon: The afflicted and persecuted.

The Lord will sure
His peace procure.
When troublous times come on.

And him alive will save:
Great blessings he, Both he that suffers and he that pities him.

O Lord, from thee,
On earth is sure to have.
He shall not be delivered
Unto his enemies will:

Be strengthened,
When he is weak and ill. God will give him ease, a couch of conten^ment.

His bed all made, when sick and sore,

I said therefore,
My soul restore, I am a poor sinner needing mercy.

For I offended thee.

When comes his dying day:
And when shall we
Survive to see
His perished name, say they?

His heart it self does load
With vile intents,
All which he vents
When ere he goes abroad.
2. Part.
Argument.
The mal^ce of persecutors, and mercies of God.


Against my soul combined:
Some hurtful thing
On me to bring
Devise they in their mind.

And cleaves to him so fast,
That now he lies
He shall not rise,
But breath's, say they, his last.
A figure of Judas.

Disdainful heels did he
Against me bend,

Thy mercy soon to me.
And raise me to requite the blow, By justice in a lawful ^. y.


By this I know,
Because my foe
Ore me triumphs not. A pledge of my deliverance, and their destruction.


In mine integrity:
Thou do me place
Before thy face
And that perpetually.

For ever day by day,
And all his fame
Let us proclaim,
Amen, Amen, I say.
PSALM. XLII.
To London short tune.
David expresses his great desire to the public Ordinances, and delight in the
remembrance of them.

EVen as the Heart when he
For brooks of water pants:
So, after thee,
My soul in me,
When Lord thy presence wants.

The living GOD most dear:
O when shall I
Approaching nigh
Before the Lord appear?

Wherewith I sup and dine,
Both night and day,
While still they say,
Where is that God of thine?
Melts in grief.

While I these thoughts renewed,
Because that I
Had formerly
Gone with the multitude.
We to Gods Temple went
With voice of joy and praise,
Where there ensued
A multitude
Observing holy days. Such seasts and Sabbaths as God appointed.


My soul why do thou grieve?
Why should thou be
So moved in me?
O still in God believe.
Still shall I give him praise
For his sweet favors aid:

I Am undertrod,
My soul in me's dismayed.
Wherefore, in these sad days,
Remember thee I will
From Hermon and
Swift Jordans land, To think of them in these places of banishment, will
comfort me.

And Missars little hill.
2. Part.
Argument.
David in deep affliction incourageth his soul in God.


Each other do invite:
Thy waves and all
Thy billows fall,
And overwhelm me quite.
Songs of his experienced power and goodness.

Remembered still by day:
His song shall be
By night with me,
To God my life I Will pray.

Why have forgot me so?
And why go I
So heavily
Oppressed by my fo?

Does pierce my heart like swords:
While, where is thy
Good God, they cry,
And daily use such words.

These sorrows to depress,
O why, my soul,
Do thou condole
With such unquietness?
Hope thou in God, even yet
His praise shall I record,
Who does advance
My countenance,
And is my gracious Lord.
PSALM. XLIII.
To Oxford tune.
David longs after the Ordinances, and incourageth his soul in God.

Judge me o Lord, and plead my cause,
Against the ungodly train:
From subtle tyrants greedy jaws
My righteous soul sustain.

Why do I mourning go:
Cast off by thee, and undertrod
By my imperious fo?

To lead and bring me near
Unto that holy hill of thine,
And tabernacles there.

Of God my wondrous joy:
O God my God, thy Name to bless
My harp I will employ.

Within me o my soul?
Why art thou thus discouraged?
Let faith thy fears control.
And hope in God thy help to be,
Whom I shall still applaud:
My countenances health is he, Makes me hold up my head with comfort.

And my most gracious God.
PSALM. XLIV.
Old England tune.
He sets out Gods ancient mercies to the Church, renouncing all confidence in
themselves.

O God our fathers have us told,
We heard it with our ears:
What works thou did in times of old,
In those rare days of theirs.

Quite dispossessed were:
Afflicted and expelled the land,
To plant our fathers there.

Possession of the land:
Their own puissance saved them not,
But thy right arm and hand.
This from thy lightsome countenance,
Much favoring them, did spring:

O God that art my King.

Through thy great Name O God:
And all that up against us rise,
Shall thus be undertrod.

In swords defense nor bows:

And saved us from our foes.
2. Part.
Argument.
Former mercies aggravate present miseries.


And daily praise thy Name:

But casts us off with shame.

Faint-hearted to retire:
And they that hate us spoil us so
Even as themselves desire.

As sheep ordained for food:
And scattered us in all the lands,
Among a heathenish brood.
It Is but a vile price they are sold for.

And lo, thou did not add
Nor yet increase thy substance ought
By price for Israel had.

And scornful tauntings flout:
We are become as laughing-stocks
To dwellers round about.

Among the heathen spread:
Among the people everywhere
A shaking of the head.

Before me still I see:
The shame of my abashed face
Has also covered me. Makes me blush and hang down my head.


Such blasphemies and taunts:
By reason of the avenger fierce
And adversaries vaunts.
3. Part.
Argument.
The constancy and integrity of the Church in persecution.


Yet have not thee forgot:
Nor in thy Covenant falsely dealt,

Nor from thy ways our steps have strayed,

In Dragons dens, and deaths dark shade,
Where we are covered ore.

To strange gods reared our hands,

Our thoughts that understands.

Even for thy dear Names sake:
As sheep for slaughter we are ta'n,

Cast us not off for evermore,

Forgetting our afflictions sore,
And our distressed case.

On earth as worms we craul:

Rise, help, redeem us all.
PSALM. XLV.
To Coventry tune.
The perfections and prerogatives of Christ Jesus, set forth in a type of
Solomon.

MY studious heart contemplating,
Good matter does indite:
I of the King
Composed a thing
Which here I will recite. A Poem, a bride-song.

My tongue is as a Writers pen, Forward to utter thy praises. Spiritual beauty.

To frequent writing used:

The sons of men,
Thy lips have grace infused. Ioh. 7. 46.

God therefore has thee ever blessed, Exercise O Christ, thy martial and
princely power, convince, convert, etc. Magnanimity mixed with meekness.


And be thou dressed
O mightiest
With state and majesty.

With prosperous success:
Because of thy
Humility,
Thy truth and righteousness.
And thy right hand shall teach thee things, Thy success shall be glorious.

Even rare and dreadful arts:

Shall wound the Kings
Proud adversaries hearts.
Whereby thy foes are undertrod.

Thy ruling rod
Even thine o God,
It is a righteous one.
Oil of the Spirit making joyful in God.

And God thy God therefore
Thee consecrates
Above thy mates
With oil of gladness store. Above Moses Melchisede^, etc. and the best Saints.
Thy adorning sweet smelling gifts and graces come from heaven, typed by
Solomon's ivory palace.


With fragrant garments clad:
Myrrh, Aloes,
And Cassia please,
Whereby they make thee glad.

Kings daughters were enrolled:
At thy right hand
The Queen did stand
In purest Ophir gold. Kingdoms and Provinces added to the Jewish Church.

2. Part.
Argument.
The happy calling, and manifold privileges of the Church in type of Solomon's
Queen.


Consider and incline:
Forget what were
Thy people there, Forget carnal affections.

And fathers house of thine.

Desire thy beauty trim: The Churches obedience is her beauty.

For he must reign
Thy Lord supreme,
And thou must worship him.
Gentiles be Proselytes.

Thy daughter there, o Tire;
The richer sort,
There craying for it,
Thy favor shall desire.

Within for to behold, Spiritual beauty.

Does with divine
Resplendence shine, 1 Pet. 3. 4.

Her clothing all wrought gold.

In needle work aray'd: At last day in robes of righteousne^s Ephesians. 5. 27.
Additionall Churches.

And unto thee
Her train shall be,
And virgin-mates convay'd.

They shall these Ladies bring:
Where met, they shall
Have entrance all
To the Palace of the King. Mat. 25. 10.

Succession of the Church, and some famous instruments.

Shall leave a fruitful birth;
Whom thou mai'st take
And Princes make
In all the Christian earth.

Remembrance of thy Name: This Psalm shall ever honor Christ.

Thy praise therefore
For evermore
Shall all the earth proclaim.
PSALM. XLVI.
To Dutch tune.
The siege of Jerusalem is raised; the Church triumphs in God. Its thought
that of Senacherib.


GOD is our strength and present aid, 2. Chr. 32. 21.

Our refuge in our need:

Nor tottering earthquakes heed.

Tho troubled waters rore:
And swellings of the billows curld,
Make mountains tremble sore.
Siloh runs still for all their threats and brags.

Shall glad that City of his:
The sacred tents of God supreme:
2. King. 18. 27. 19. 24.

Right early God shall help her there,
She shall not once be moved: Much more the spiritual springs.


And most outrageous proved.
He uttering then that voice of his, 2 King. 19. 35

Made the earth to melt away:

And Jacobs God our stay.

The earth has des'late made:

He breaks the desperate blade.
He fires the Chariot, breaks the bow;

That I am God on earth below,
And there extolled will be:
Among the heathens magnified
Shall be my glorious power.

And Jacobs God our Tower.
PSALM. XLVII.
To Martyrs tune.
The happy calling of the Jews and Gentiles; Figuring Christ's ascension, and
the glorious state of the Church.
the triumphant carrying up of the Ark. 1 King. 8. 4.

CLap hands ye people generally,
With voice of triumph glad:

And greatly to be drad.
Ore all the earth a mighty King:
Subject the Gentiles to our faith.

And people in subjection bring,
To Isreal's commands. As he chose us and provided for us, so he shall bring in
the rest with us.


The portion fair set out
Of Jacob whom he did affect:
Ioh. 10. 16.

The Lord's gone up with trumpets sound,
To God due praises sing:

Sing praises to our King.

Sing praise with knowledge then:

Reigns ore the heathen men.
The Governers ow duty to God.

People of Abraham's God:
The shields of the earth to God belong,
Exalted all abroad.
PSALM. XLVIII.
To old England tune.
To siege of Jerusalem is raised; In token of the spiritual beauty of the
Church.
He praises the beautiful structure thereof.

GReat is the LORD, his praise no less:
For so must we record,
In mountain of his holiness,
And City of our Lord.
Sion where the Temple was built, was on the South Side Jerusalem.

And on her Northern side
The City of the mighty King,
The whole earths joy and pride.

Is known a refuge nigh:
The Princes of Senacherib and others.

Together they past-by.

And troubled sore they were: 2 Kin. 19. 36.

2 Chr. 20. 2.

Which seized upon them there.
As child bed-pains take woman-kinde,
So sorely pained were they:

The Tarsean ships at Sea. It was a shipwreck like defeat, full of fear and
confusion.


We saw as we were told:
The City of this God of ours, Tarshish a City famous for shipping. We have
seen proved what we heard promised, and prayed for in the Temple.

God ever shall uphold.

Amidst thy Temples frame:

According to thy Name.
Thy right hand's full of righteousness,
Lord, let thy Judgments voice
Make Judahs daughters joy express,
And Sion hill rejoice.

Her stately turrets tell:

And mark her bulwarks well.
That so to all posterity,
It may be testified,

Till death will be our guide.
PSALM. XLIX.
To pause tune.
The vanity of worldlings prosperity, though a riddle to the world it self.

ALL people hear
With careful ear
The thing which I shall tell:
Ye great and small,
Rich, poor, and all


Shall now unfold
The wisdom of the wise:
My studious heart
In sacred art
It self shall exercise.

Own ears incline
This parable to mark:
With sweet harp sing,
While opening
My parable so dark.

Of grief dismay:
When as my conscience feels
It self hemmed in
With all the sin
Of mine offending neels? Of my misdeeds and evil ways; or of my close
persecutors.


That trust repose
In wealth-replenish'd bags:
And, having more
Abundant store,
Of riches make their brags.

Of them that can
His brothers life redeem: Much less his soul.

Nor for him may
A ransom pay
Sufficient in esteem.

Great price to do,
And so much cease for ever:

Alive should be,
And see corruption never.

All die and leave
To others their estate:
The fool, the wise,
And brutish dies;
For death's the common gate.
2. Part.
Argument.
The misery of worldlings in death and judgment, wherein the godly have
pre-eminence.


Their houses shall
Be set for ever fast:
Their dwelling place
From race to race
As they believe shall last.
Their mansions all
These worldlings call
By their appropriate name:

In dignity
Abides not in the same.
Like beasts, a thing
Soon perishing,

Yet are they by
Posterity
Approved in all they say.

The grave does hold,
Pale death shall them devour:
And upright men
Shall surely then
Have over them the power. At the resurrection when the night of death is past.

When mornings light
Concludes this night:
And all their beauty brave,
Shall death expel
From whence they dwell,
To perish in the grave.

My soul secure,
When I this earth shall leave: Which shall recompense my lying in the grave.

On me the grave
No power shall have,
For he shall me receive.

To worldlings fall,
Be not discouraged then:
When flattering fame
Exalts the name
And house of worldly men.

Deprived of breath,
Shall no possession have:
His pomp shall end,
And not descend
With him into the grave.

He magnified
His soul for worldly pelf:
And worldly men
Will praise thee then
When thou befriends thy self.

To th'place below, The grave and hell.

To which his fathers old,
When they were dead,
Were gathered,
And never light behold.

In dignity
Yet understanding not,
In his decease
Is like the beasts
Which quickly die and rot.
PSALM. L.
To Martyrs tune.
God (as at the great Judgment) condemns mere formal service, wherewith
hypocrites please themselves.

THe mighty God the LORD spoke out,
And gave the earth a call:
From Suns up-rising, round about
To his far-distant fall.
Gloriously, as coming from that holy and glorious place. 1 King. 8. 11.

From Sion God has shined:

To utter all his mind.
A flame of fire devouring quick
Shall go before his face:
Tempestuous storms shall gather thick
Before his Judgment place.

His peoples Judge to be: Heaven and earth shall be witness.


Gather my Saints to me;
Those that with me in Covenant are, Professors by all the seals of my Covenant.

By sacrifice each one:

For God is Judge alone:

To Israel speak will I,
I that am God, For thinking the outward Ceremony enough.
that God of thine,
Against thee testify.

I will not Israel blame:
To have them still before mine eyes,
I do not mind the same.

Nor bullocks from thy stall:

Mine own I justly call.
A thousand hills my Cattle feed,
All mine, I say, not thine:

The fields wild beasts are mine.

I would not tell it thee:
The world and all therein contained,
Pertains alone to me.
2. Part.
Argument.
God promises to hear and help the truly grateful and godly, but rejects
and threatens wicked professors.


Or drink goats blood will I?

To him that is most high.

And promise of me claim:
And I will sure deliver thee,
And thou shall praise my Name.

Them God will say unto:
My Statutes why do thou declare,
What have thou there to do?
My Covenant should thy mouth relate?

Instruction to detest and hate,
And cast my words behind.

To th'practise of his sin:
And with the loose incontinent,
Thou have partaker bin.

Thy tongue does mischief frame:

Thy brothers honest name.
Thou do reproach with slanders vile,
Even thine own mothers son:

That thou these things have done.
Just like thy self did thou suppose
Me also to have bin:
But I Will reprove thee, and disclose
In order, all thy sin.

Th'avengefull God forgot:
That I (when there is none to save)
In pieces tear you not.

Shall glorify me so:
To him that orders well his ways,
Will God salvation show.
PSALM. LI.
To sinners tune.
David bitterly laments his sin, His adultery and murder 2 Samuel 11.
and sues for pardon and peace of conscience.

HAve mercy LORD, and pity take,
On me in my distress:
For thine abundant mercy sake,
Blot out my wickedness.

And separate sin from me:

My sin I always see. As a ghost in my sight. As the only punisher or
pardoner, Oh what a majesty have I offended?


Did I my sins commit:
That, when thou speak and judge me,
Thou might be clear and quit.
I did this evil in thy sight:
Whereby o Lord thou shall
Be said to pass thy judgment right,
And I in all the fault.
Original corruption aggravates, and so does grace received.

For I am formed therein:
My mother has conceived me,
Even in the heat of sin.

In every inward part:
Thou made me to know wisdom there,
In secret of my heart.
With the blood of Christ, signified by it.
and I know,
I shall be clean and free:
And whiter then the driven snow,
If also washed by thee. Exodus 12. 22.


And make me hear their voice:
That so the bones which thou did break,
May feelingly rejoice.
2. Part.
Argument.
David prays for renewing grace, As unable to recover of himself.
and for the Church which he had scandalized.


And my misdeeds deface:

Renew my mind with grace.

(Thy presence shunning mine)
Nor ever take away from me,
That holy Spirit of thine.

Restore to me again:
And thy free Spirit to me afford,
My soul for to sustain.

Thy ways to penitent men: By publishing this Psalm of my fall, and thy favor.

And sinners (unto whom I preach)
Shall be converted then.

Thou God and Savior mine:
Then shall my song aloud record
Thy righteousness divine.

Shall be thy praise to show:

Which else I would bestow.
Burnt-offring is not thy delight,
But other sacrifice:

Thou will not Lord despise.

Build up Jerus'lems wall:

Thou shall be pleased withal.
Burnt offerings then, and those entire,
In sacrifice shall they:
With Bullocks (fit for holy fire)
Upon thine Altars lay.
PSALM. LII.
To pause tune.
David condemns all treacherous time-servers and malicious persecutors of the
godly, By occasion of Saul and Doeg. 1 Samuel 21.
who shall surely flourish, while these perish utterly.

WHy do thou boast
Of mischief most,
O man of mighty power?
Gods goodness will
Continue still,
Even every day and hour.

That tongue of thine
To practice mischiefs great:
Yea it has been
A razour keen
In working of deceit.

Good things do love
Ill ways to entertain:
And righteousness
Thou love less
Then for to lie and fain.

Thou love all wrong
And words that do devour.

For evermore
Destroy thee by his power.
He shall, I say,
Take thee away
From place where thou do dwell:
With vengefull hand
Thee from the land
Of living souls expel.

Shall see and fear,
And, laughing at him, say,

That could not see
To make the Lord his stay.
But, for defense,
Put confidence
In heaps of worldly pelf: In getting wealth and preferment by wickedness.

And in the sin
He lived in
Encouraged himself.

Shall I be seen
To have a flourishing place, I shall flourish specially in my soul.

In Gods house still,
And ever will
Betrust me to his grace.

Will magnify,
And on thy Name attend:
Since thou did bring
To pass the thing, Their destruction and my deliverance.

And Saints thy Name commend.
PSALM. LIII.
London long tune.
The corruption of mankind, full of persecution and profaneness; a prayer for
deliverance.

THere is no God, the fool does say,
At least his heart says so:
Corrupt are they, and vile their way,
And all good works forgo.

From heaven to descry:
If any of them understood,
Or sought God faithfully.

Is every mothers son:
None, no not one does virtue mind,
Nor one good action's done.

That wicked ways have trod:
To eat my people like to bread,
And have not called on God.
Prove. 28. 1. No marvel, for sometimes God has torn them in pieces that sought
the ruin of the Church.

To fright those guilty ones:
For God has piecemeal scattered,
Thy strong befiegers bones.
Because the LORD did them despise,
Thou putst them to disgrace:

From Sion, saving grace.
The Lord from thraldoms cruel yoke,
His people setting free:
Shall Jacobs heart to joy provoke,
And Israel glad shall be.
PSALM. LIVE.
Cambridge old tune.
A complaint of treacherous adversaries.

LOrd save me by thy mighty Name,
Me by thy strength defend:

And these my suits attend.
As barbarous as heathen.

Oppressors seek my soul:
They set not God before their eyes,
Their actions to control.
Take their part that take mine.
God's my help, the Lord's with those
That do my soul maintain:

He shall repay again.
Destroy them in thy righteousness,

With sacrifice thy Name to bless,
For it is good o Lord.

From all perplexing woes:
Mine eye has seen accomplished
His will upon my foes.
PSALM. LV.
Oxford tune.
David dangerously beset, Being in Keilah.
and in grievous perplexity, wishes opportunity of flight.

O God unto my prayer give ear,
Hide not thy face from me:

Attending what they be.
In my complaint I cry aloud,
A mournful noise I make:

So insolently spoke.
Because of lewd men's tyranny,
Wherewith I am oppressed: Threap it upon me tho guiltless.

Who charge me with iniquity,
And me in wrath detest.

Deaths terrors on me fall:

They come upon me all.
And horror has overwhelmed me quite:

That I might take to sudden flight,
And rest from these sad things.

In The Wilderness behind:

From tempest, storm, and wind.
2. Part.
Argument.
The base perfidiousness of the wicked.

Set them at ods, to their destruction in Keilah, and let them not agree about
betraying me.
divide their tongues,
For I have seen how rife,
And how the bloody City throngs
With violence and strife.

The very walls of it:
Mischief and sorrow there are found,
Amidst the same to sit.

That with the mischief meets:
Most base deceit and crafty guile,
Depart not from her streets.

I could the same have born:
Or had my hater been the man,
Who against me lift his horn,
Then I from him my head would hide:

Yea mine acquaintance, equal guide,
This tragedy began.

In most familiar kind:
And to the house of God we went
In unity combined.
3. Part.
Argument.
Prayer prevails against persecutors; provision and protection promised to the
godly.


And send them quick to hell:
For there is all iniquity,
Among them where they dwell.

Defended by his might:

At morning, noon, and night.
The LORD shall hear me when I pray,

From battle marshaled in array,
And bent against my soul.
For there was many a one with me, Angels, or companion^ with me delivered.


He that abides of old, even he,
And it shall cost them dear.
Since they no sudden changes see, No bad success. Saul did so.

They fear not the most high:

With him at unity.
He brake the Covenant on his part. 1 Samuel 19. 6.


While cruel war possessed his heart,
No butter was so smooth:
His speeches were more soft then oil,
Yet pierced like swords drawn out:

He shall provide, no doubt.
The righteous to be under-trod,
He never will permit:

Into destructions pit.
To bloody and deceitful ways,
Who ere addicted be,
Shall not continue half their days:
But I will trust in thee.
PSALM. LVI.
London short tune.
David makes God his refuge, showing the cruelty and subtilty of his
adversaries.

HAve mercy LORD on me,
Whom man would make a prey,
Behold how he
Oppresses me,
Contending every day.

Would daily me devour:
For infinite
Against me fight,
O thou of highest power.

Lo, I will trust in thee:

Still magnify
In God inabling me. Commend the faithfulness of his promises.

In Gods assured aid
I have reposed my trust:
I fear not you
What ye can do
That are but mortal dust.

And every day they wrest:
Their thoughts are still
To work me ill,
What ever they suggest.

Themselves they closely hide,
When as they watch
My soul to catch,
They mark me every stride.
2. Part.
Argument.
The sins of the wicked, and sufferings of the Saints, are for our comfort, and
their confusion.

Persecutions causing me to flee and flit from place to place.

Nay, rather let them fall:
In angry frown
By thee cast down.
Yea, thou keep a Register of them. Be repulsed by my prayers.

O bottle up my tears,
These in thy book are plain:

To thee shall cry,
My foes shall turn again.
For God is on my side:
By Gods grace I will praise the certainty of his promises.

His word will I
Still magnify
In God I Will praise the same.

I will not fear for ought
That ever can
By mortal man
Against my soul be wrought.

I Will render praise to thee:

My soul from grave, Deadly dangers.

When death arrested me.
O wilt not thou accord
To keep my feet upright? From falling into sin or sorrow.

To walk with grace
Before thy face
With them that live in light.
PSALM. LVII.
To Dutch bass tune.
David makes God his refuge in great dangers.

O Lord vouchsafe, vouchsafe thy grace,
Be merciful to me:
For my distressed soul does place
Her confidence in thee.
Yea to the shadow of thy wings,
I will for refuge fly:
Until these lamentable things
Be passed quietly.

Even unto God most high,
Who faithfully accomplisheth
My competent supply.

And, by his mighty power,
From their reproach my soul defend,
That would the same devour.
God shall send forth his truth and grace,

My soul is prisoner in a place
Among enraged men. Setting Saul on, 1 Samuel 24. 9.

I lodge with men whose teeth are spears,
And arrows are their words;
And those envenomed tongues of theirs,
Are like to sharp'ned swords.
2. Part.
Argument.
David extends his thanksgivings for deliverance to the coasts of the Gentiles.
So prophesying of the Gospel to be heard there.



Above the heavens stand:
Advance thy glory, raise thy fame
Above both sea and land.

My soul to take and drown:
Within the very midst of which,
Themselves are fallen down.

Is fixed upon the thing:
I Will praise thy Name with all my art.

Awake my Harp and Psaltery, My tongue.

My self will early wake:

Thy praises undertake.
And by my song shall thou be praised
Among the heathenish crowds:

Thy truth does reach the clouds.

More high then heaven stand:
Advance thy glory, rear thy fame
Above the sea and land.
PSALM. LVIII.
Martyrs tune.
He inveigheth against ungodly Governors and great ones; showing their
corruption, obstinacy, and utter destruction.

DO ye O Congregation
Speak righteousness indeed?
O humane generation
Do ye with truth proceed?
Isa. 48. 8. Inchanters ticed the adder out of her hole by a voice or tune to
kill them, but some were so crafty, as to stop one ear with the tail, and the
other with the ground, lest the enchantment should tice her out.
ye in heart work wickedness,
Ye tyrannize on earth:

Estranged even from their birth.
As soon as they be born they err,
By lies they go astray:

Such poisonous breath have they.
Deaf Adder-like, that as she lies,
Stops close her wilful ear,

His voice she will not hear.

Each side their mouth, be burst:
Break out o God the cruel fangs,
Of these young Lions cursed.
Make them as weak as water.

And when the tyrant heeds,
To shoot his shafts from bended bow,
Be they as broken reeds.

As snailes to slime do run: A snail out ^f her shell.

Or like a woman's timeless birth,
And never see the Sun.
Heb. Before they ( i. e. the godly) feel your thorns pricky, he ( i. e. God)
shall blast both the quick and burned ( i. e. dead thorn.)

The Lord shall them disperse:
The dead and dry, the keen and quick,
As with a whirlwind fierce.

Rejoicing much to see it:
And in the blood of wicked men,
Victorious wash his feet.

Men shall acknowledge so:
Sure he is God that executes
Just judgment here below.
PSALM. LIX.
To new staff tune.
A prayer against persecutors, describing their villainous and ravenous
dispositions.

FRom all my cruel enemies,
My God deliver me:
From them that do against me rise,
My strong defender be.

Vain multitude,
And bloody men defend:

In secrecy
My soul to apprehend.
The mighty men, with one accord,
Against me do combine:
Yet not for my transgression LORD,
Nor any sin of mine.

Prepared, to run
In haste, without my fault:
Awake, and see,
And succor me
Against their fierce assault.

The sovereign LORD of hoasts,
Awake and visit with thy rod,
Even all the heathen coasts. Such as are implacable, and incorrigible.

Transgressors lewd
Do thou exclude
From pardon and from pity:

Like dogs they bark,
And go about the City.

Their mouths belch out their pride:
For who, say they, shall hear our words?

The heathen born
Thou LORD shall scorn.

Because of thine
Own strength divine,
For God shall me defend.
2. Part.
Argument.
Prayers and praises returned for deliverance from persecution.


With his compassions free:
Upon my foes my hearts content,
The LORD shall let me see.

And by thy might
Disperse, but slay them not: Some think it a prophecy of the dispersed
unbeleeving Jews.

O LORD our shield
Some sign to yield
That may not be forgot.

And cursing lips let slide,
And for their lies let them be ta'n,
Yea, even in their pride.

My foes consume,
That none of them remain: None remain in honor or happiness.

That every land
May understand
Great Jacobs God to reign.
Since they raven like dogs, let them speed no better, let them be empty, etc.

As howling dogs are wont:
And round about on every side,
In every corner hunt.

Unsatisfi'd
For meat let them repine:

Shall sing a song
To praise thy power divine.
Yea, in the morning I Will begin,
Of thine affection deer,
To sing aloud, for thou have bin
My sole Protector here.
Thou wast my stay
In dangerous day,

God's my defense
And rock from when
My mercy has her spring.
PSALM. LX.
To Old England tune.
David remembers the sad desertions of the Church, Meditate of the advanced
kingdom of Christ thus typed.
prays for better success, and for the advancement and enlargement of his
Kingdom.

O God thou did thy people leave,
And then were we dispersed:
Displeasure great thou did conceive, The land feels the sad effects of
war to this day.

Thy wrath let be reverst.

Yea, thou the same have broke:
O heal her breaches, A more bitter cup of affliction, but of late appear great
tokens o^ thy love to witness the truth of thy promises; proceed Lord to
prosper David, to conquer the remotest places.
for it shakes,
By such thy dreadful stroke.

Thou on thy folk did bring:
And made thy woeful people drink,
A wine astonishing.

A banner have bestowed,
Because of truth and verity,
To be displayed abroad.

Delivered may be:
Let thy right hand assistance bring,
And kindly answer me.

I therefore make no doubt,
But Shechem to divide and take,
And Succoth-vale mete out.

To me in dutious aw:
My heads chief strength is Ephraims tribe, Ephraim for Soldiers, Judah for
Counselors, servile Moab etc. yet glad that Christ overcomes them.

And Judah gives my law.

My wash-pot Mo'b shall be:
Philistia shall triumph and shout,
And that because of me.

Unto the City strong:

Nor with us went along?

O help us in distress:

He shall our foes suppress.
PSALM. LXI.
Old England tune.
David forced from Jerusalem, prays for restoration, By Absol^ms conspiracy.
with confidence and thankfulness.

LOrd hear my cry, my prayer attend:
From the deserts, whither I am fled. persuade me to rest on thy power and
promises.

Mine earnest cries to thee I send,
When overwhelmed in heart.
Conduct me to the rock of power,
That higher is then I:

Against the enemy.
I desire to frequent thy Tabernacle. Thy mercies represented by the Cherubims.
Exo. 37. 9.

I will for ever house:
And trust in covert of thy wings;

Thou gav'st the King the heritage
Of them that fear thy Name:
The best heritage. Acts 26. 18.

Thou will prolong the same.
In his seed according to faith.

For ever to endure:
Thy truth and mercy o provide,
Which may preserve him sure.

The praises of thy Name:
That, having vowed, I daily may
To thee perform the same.
PSALM. LXII.
Dutch tune.
The confidence of Saints, vileness of persecutors, vanity of men and worldly
means, and impartial judgment of God.



My only rock, defense, and aid,
I shall not much be moved.

Ye shall be slaughtered all:
Ye shall be like a tottering fence,
And like a bowing wall.
To disparage the righteous.

His exc'lence to despise:
Ye bless with mouth, ye curse in heart,
And take delight in lies.

My expectation's thence:

Salvation and defense.
I shall not therefore much be moved,

My rock of strength and refuge proved,
On whom my spirit stays.

Ye Saints with one accord:
Power out your heart before his throne,
Our refuge is the Lord.

They whose condition's base,
And they no better then a lie,
That are of higher place.
In balance laid are found more light,
Then vanity it self:

Become not vain in stealth.
Though wealth increase not got amiss,
Set not your heart on gains:
Once and again, many a time and often.

That power to God pertains.

Compassion does belong:
Thou renderest to every one
Reward of right or wrong.
PSALM. LXIII.
To new verse tune.
David longs for the public Ordinances; feeds his soul with meditations
thereupon. The joy of the godly, and utter destruction of Christ's and our
enemies.

O God thou God to me,
I Will early seek for thee:
My soul, my flesh
With longings fresh
Desires there to be.
In thirsty land and dry,
Where is no water nigh: No ordinances.


And glory bright
As in the Sanctu'ry.

Are life it self above:
My lips shall frame
To praise thy name,
And that does make them move.

Thy Name, even all my days:
And unto thine
Own Name divine.
My hands devoutly raise.

My soul shall sure be sped:
My mouth and lips
(Sweet fellowships)
Thy praise shall speak and spread.

Upon my bed at night,
And meditate
Upon thee late
Before the dawning light.

Proceeds my defense,
Thy wings safe shade
Shall now be made
My joyful residence.

Thy right hand is my guard:

My soul to slay
Shall death and hell reward.
Slain in batt^ll and left a prey to the beasts. And for every good Christian.
Rev. 1. 6.

The foxes portion all:

Fresh joys shall spring,
While he on God does call.
All swearing by his Name,
Shall glory in the same.
Their mouth likewise
That utter lies, All that worship the true God aright. Genesis 31. 53. but God
will discover hypocrite-professors.

The Lord shall stop with shame.
PSALM. LXIV.
York tune.
He shows the destruction of crafty and cruel persecutors, and how Gods
judgment shall be reverenced of others.

VOuchsafe o Lord to hear my cry,
And to my prayers give ear:
Preserve my life from the enemy
Of whom I stand in fear.

That wicked men devise:
From them that wicked workers are,
And up against me rise.

As sharpest edge of swords:
That they might deadly arrows shoot,
Most cruel bitter words.

The perfect man to hit:
They do shoot at him suddenly,
And do not fear a whit.

And commune how to lay
Their privy snares, in hope to speed,
For who shall see, say they?

Have diligently sought:
Their hearts are deep and bottomless, Cunning to conceive, close to conceal
mischief.

With every secret thought.

Shot from the Lord to slay:

Beholders flee away. Their threats and curses fall on themselves.


They shall Gods work declare:
Most prudently considering,
What these his doings are.

Trust in his holy Name:
And all that are in heart upright,
Shall glory in the same.
PSALM. LXV.
New verse tune.
The promptnes of the Church to serve God; The assurance of pardon of sin,
access to his presence, and success in our prayers with the great and terrible
God.

PRaise waits for thee still,
O God, in Sions hill:
And unto thee
The vow shall be
Performed with good will.

To thee all flesh repairs:

And so prevail,
They fill me with dispairs.
But Lord no sins are they,
But what thou do away:

Whom thou have chose, ^n and thorough Christ

That near approach thee may:
Within thy Courts to abide, Published, pressed, and experienced by the
ordinances there.

Where we are full supplied
With grace, of which
Thy house is rich,
Thy Temple sanctified.
Judgments against our adversaries.

Which thy sure justice brings;
An answer frame,
O thou great name,
Whence our salvation springs.
Who art the confidence
Of earths concumference:
And also theirs
Whom The Ocean bears,
Remote so far from hence.

And, girt with power, he stills

With boisterous waves,
And men's rebellious wills: Eclipses, Comets, and strange accidents.


Who all parts dwell about:
The mornings voice
Thou make rejoice, Every day has some remarkable providence rejoicing the
creatures.

And th'evenings goings out.
2. Part.
Argument.
The rich blessings of God upon the earth.


And wat'rest with thy hand: Rain is God river.

Gods river which
Makes earth so rich,
Powrs down at thy command.
It do'th with water flow,
And corn thou do bestow,
When as thou have,
By thy forecast,
Provided for it so.

Thou wat'rest plenteously:
Her furrows cast
Thou setlest fast,
And softning showers apply.
Thy blessings make the crop,
To spring upon its top:

With goodness mere,
Thy paths do fatness drop.

And deserts far and wide,
While rain distills
The little hills
Rejoice on every side.

With corn which they forth-bring:
The pastures glad
With flocks are clad,
They shout for joy and sing.
PSALM. LXVI.
To Coventry tune.
He praises God for miraculous deliverances.

SIng to the Lord o all ye lands,
And make a joyful sound:

And glorious Name,
And make his praise renowned.

Thy power (say) Lord, how great! (hands!
Foes bow before,

At his most sacred seat.
Yea sing unto thy Name shall they,
In songs thine honor spread:

Whose actions be
To mortals full of dread.
The red Sea.

And all the waters moist:
There went they through
And dry-shod too:
There we in him rejoiced.

His eyes all lands descry:
O let not then
Rebellious men
Exalt themselves on high.

With earnest voices strive,
His praise renowned
To make resound.

And suffers not on any side,
Our feet to be removed:

With smarting rod,
Have us thy servants proved.
As silver in a furnace tried,
So thoroughly tried were we:

Within the net,
And therein brought by thee.
Afflictions sore and violent,
Thou made our loins abide:

Cause furious men
Over our heads to ride.
Through flames of fire we also went,
And through the watery floods:
But surely thou
Have brought us now
To places stored with goods. As from Egypt into Canaan.

2. Part.
Argument.
He gives us an example of true gratitude, by performance of vows, sacrifices,
exhortations, abstaining from sin, and cheerful praises.


There those sworn vows to pay,

And mouth made thine,
In my distressfull day:

My soul to thee devotes:
With incense too,
Of Rams enough,
With Bullocks offering Goats.

To you declare will I;
What favor he
Has done for me,

I with my tongue extolled his fame:

And purpose in
My heart to sin,
My prayer should not be heard.

And has been well content;
With willing ear
The voice to hear
And prayer I did present:

Who turned not away,
Nor grace has he
VVith-held from me,
When I to him did pray.
PSALM. LXVII.
A prayer for the publication of the Gospel, and the blessings that do
accompany it.

O God be merciful to thine,
And bless us every one:
Command thy face on us to shine:

Thy saving health to Nations all:

O let them all in general
Give praises to the same.

Sing out with joy and mirth:
For thou shall justly judge and guide
The Nations of the earth.

Praise thee, and not surcease:

yield plentiful increase.
Yea God our God shall bless us then,

He shall be feared of mortal men,
To earths remotest end.
PSALM. LXVIII.
To Dutch tune.
David (at the remove of the Ark) celebrates the greatness and goodness of God.
See Numb. 10. 35. 1 Chr. 15. 16. 26.


LEt God omnipotent arise,
His scattered foes to chase:
And let his hateful enemies,
Flee from his angry face.

As fire makes wax to fry;
So in Gods presence perish they
That work iniquity.

Before Jehovahs face:
Let them rejoice exceedingly,
And sing unto his grace.

Extolled by JAH his Name;
And in his presence much rejoice,
That rides on heavens frame.

A Judge of widows case,
Is God in place of holiness,
From that his dwelling place.
Calls to marriage and blesses it; releaseth prisoners and bondslaves.

And brings out the bound;
But lets rebellious enemies,
Inhabit barren ground.
2. Part.
Argument.
A memorial of Gods miraculous works in the Wilderness, and the land of Canaan.


O God did undertake:
And marchedst through the deserts wide,

Then also did the heavens drop, Exodus 19. 18.

'Cause Isreal's God was there:
Yea at thy presence Sinai's top
Did move and quake for fear.
Ier. 5. 24. All manner of blessings. (...) 34. 26.

Thine heritage thereby
Was strengthened and confirmed again,
When it was faint and dry.
Thy chosen people, and for their sake the land was blessed. Presently in all
men's mouths.

O God thou art the doer:
Thou of thy goodness brought us in
Provision for the poor.

Immediately there came
Innumerable company
That published the same.

For they were put to foil: Women had spoil brought home.

And she at home that tarried,
Helped to divide the spoil.
As scullions.

Ye shall be like a Dove:
With checkquerd wings of silver spots,
And yellow gold above.

Proud Kings, that came to kill's:
Victorious Israel shined as clear
As snow on Salmon hills.
3. Part.
Argument.
The happiness of Sion, excelling Sinai, Intimating the happiness of the church
above all other people.
and all other hills, because the Temple was there built. The glorious acts of
Christ for the Church thereby typed.


As Bashan hill we count:
A lofty hill, that parallels
The height of Bashan mount.

This is that famous hill:
Wherein the Lord precisely wills.
To have his dwelling still.
Yea here to dwell for evermore.

But thousands, yea a thousand score
Of powers Angelical.
The Lord's with them, as formerly, As Angels waited on God on Sinai. Exo. 19.
So on the Church. Heb. 1. 14. Christ (after his passion) ascended, conquering
our captivers and received power to send down the Holy Ghost, even for the
Elect Gentiles that were yet rebellious. Escaps from death corporal, spiritual,
temporal and eternal.

In Sinai's holy ground:

And led captiv'tie bound.
Thou have received gifts for men,
Yea those men that rebel:
That God the Lord might also then
Among the Gentiles dwell.

With ben'fits does us load:
Even our salvations God, I say,
Who has them so bestowed.

Even God on whom we call:
And unto God the Lord himself
Belong deaths issues all.

Their hairy scalp and skin;
That having lewdly trespassed,
Dare still persist therein.

From Bashan come shall these: Tho another Og of Bashan or red Sea were in
their way.

My people I will bring away
From bottoms of the Seas.

Of adversaries slain:
And where thy slaughtered enemies stood,
Thy dogs their tongues may stain.
4. Part.
Argument.
The pompous carriage of the A^k to the Tabernacle, Meditate of Christ's
glorification and appearance at the last judgment.
the resort of great men thereto.


Thy goings Lord my King,
The people saw apparently:

The skillful play'rs on instrument,
Close following at their feet:
Amidst them there the damsells went,
That tuned the timbrels sweet.
From the first Israelite to the last, or from the gifts of God himself.

The Lord from Isreal's spring:

Together with their King.
There Is Judahs Princes generally,
And Counselors of theirs:
From Zebulon and Nepthali,
Each famous Prince appears.
Outward magnificence of that kingdom, a type of the Church.

Thy strength has founded thus:
Strengthen O God with thy good hand,
What thou have wrought for us.
5. Part.
Argument.
The conversion of the Gentiles, and confusion of implacable adversaries.


Shall foreign Kings allure:
To come and bring their gifts with them,
Thy favor to procure.
Wanton and brutish adversaries.

And that unruly crew
Of Bulls and calves, till generally
They pay their tributes due.
Till each man silver-plate presents, 2 King. 8. 2. Mat. 2. 11.

Disperse and scatter far
All these tumultuous male contents,
That take delight in war.

And Egypt send her King:

To great Jehovah sing.

Of heavens framed of old:
And sends out his thunders there,
A mighty voice, behold.

His strength in clouds in shown:
Over Israel is his excellence,
Yet in thy house we learn thy magnificence best.

The same thy Sanctuary shows:
Yea Isreal's God's the same;
That strength and power on his bestows,
And blessed be his Name.
PSALM. LXIX.
Oxford tune.
David in deep affliction, prays that no good man might be discouraged by his
sufferings, which were for the cause of God.

SAve me O God, for to my soul
swift waters flow apace:

Where is no standing place.
In deepest waters I am come,
Suppressed with floods main force:

My throat is dry and hoarse.
Mine eyes do fail while (hard bestead)
I for my God do wait:

Do bear me causless hate:
My wrongful foes are mighty men,
That seek my soul to slay:
The things have I restored then,
Which I took not away.
My exceeding innocence.

My foolishness thou know:

O Lord O God of host.
Let none that wait on thee have shame,
None to confusion sell:
For my sake, none that seek thy Name,
O God of Israel.

My face was filled with shame:

A stranger I became.
My mothers children do with me, Consumed with care to maintain thy pure
service. Job. 2. 22.

As with an aliant deal:

And with thy houses zeal.
I bore thy scorners blasphemies,

My soul with fasting to chastise,
That to my shame they turned.

A byword to the throng:

I was the drunkards song.
2. Part.
Argument.
David in danger to be swallowed of affliction, makes his earnest prayer to God.


In acceptable hour:
In thy great mercy hear thou me,
And truth of saving power.

And me from sinking keep:
From such as hate me o defend,
And from the waters deep.

Whose water over-flows,
To 'ore-top my head, nor let the pit
Her mouth upon me close.

O hear thou me therefore:
Turn to me LORD, as may accord
With thy compassions store.

For I Am bereft of peace:

Unto my souls release:
For my foes sake deliver me:

My shame and scorn and enemies be,
Before thee every one.
3. Part.
Argument.
The extreme malice of the wicked, adding affliction to the afflicted.
Reprobates are bitterly and eternally cursed.

Meditate of Christ's sufferings.

And sorrow filled my soul:
I looked for pity showed by some,
But no man did condole.
I looked, but found no comforter.

For drink they gave me Vinegar
To quench my thirst withal.

And whatsoere might hap
For to have made them well to fare, Smite them with the worst diseases, as
blindness, palsy, etc.

Let it become a trap.

Their loins let always shake:

Of thy fierce wrath partake.
Take hold of his ungodly race,
With wrath that never relents:

Let none dwell in their tents,

They persecute the more:
And talk unto the grief of those
Whom thou have wounded sore.
Let them increase sin, but never get pardon.

Heaped up in great excess:
And let them never never come
Into thy righteousness.

Their most detested name:
And with the righteous let them not
Be written in the same.
2. Part.
Argument.
David prays in affliction, Both of Jews and Gentiles.
commends true gratitude, and prophesies good to the Church.


O God do thou me raise:
Let thy salvation set me high.

And with thanksgiving him extol:

Or stalled ox presented whole
Can be so well approved.

Hearts seeking God shall live;

A gracious ear does give:
His prisoners he does not contem', Held under the bondage of affliction.


Give God due praises all of them,
And all that moves in these.
The true Church. Also he promises the conversion of the Jews. In the true
Church typed by the land of Judah.

And Judahs Cities rear:
Which men may in possession have
For constant dwelling there.

Inheriting the same:
There they shall have a dwelling place
That dearly love his name.
PSALM. LXX.
To 2. strain tune, or to both.
A prayer against persecutors, and for the speedy succor of all the godly.

MAke haste, O LORD,
And help afford:
Make haste to help me, O my Lord.

Confound them whole
That seek to hurt my harmless soul.
Confusions hire
Cause them retire,
That do my hurt and harm desire.

Aha, Aha,
Repulse and shame their shame repay.

Let joyful be,
And also very glad in thee:
Still let them frame,
To praise thy Name,
That love salvation from the same.

Still stand in need,
Do thou o God to me make speed:
Thou art my tower,
And saving power,
Lord tarry not, but come this hour.
PSALM. LXXI.
To Cambr. old tune.
A prayer for preservation, alleging Gods promises and providence.

O Lord, I put my trust in thee,
O put me not to shame:

By thy most righteous Name.
To me be thy salvation showed;
Give ear unto my prayer:

Where I may still repair.
For thou to save me gav'st command, Gave command to thy Angels. Psalm. 91. 11.

Thou art my rock and fort:

Of all the wicked sort.
Out of the hand of the unjust,
And of the cruel man:

Even since my youth began.

And thou alone art he,
That took'st me from that narrow room,
My praise still waits on thee.

But thou my refuge strong:

And honor all day long.
2. part.
Argument.
David prays for preservation in his old age, In which time Absalom rebelled.
considering the malice of his adversaries, and mercies of God, which he
praises.


When old age makes me break:
Forsake me not when strength decays,

They have together counsel took,
Who for my soul lay wait:

Pursue and take him strait.
For there is no deliverer:
O be not far from me:

Make haste my help to be:
All adversaries to my soul,
That seek to hurt the same;

And cover them with shame.
With ignominious infamy,
Let them be covered over:

Still praise thee more and more.

And saving health all day: More then can be told.

For I thereof no numbers know,
So infinite are they.
3. Part.
Argument.
David's confidence in Gods experienced protection, he desires to publish it to
all the generations.


I will courageous walk:
Thy righteousness will I recite,
And thereof only talk.

O God thou have me taught,
And hitherto declared have I
The wonders thou have wrought.

And when my head is gray,
O do not slack, or leave thy hold,
O cast me not away,
Until thy strength I have made known
Unto the present age:
To after comers every one
Till I thy power presage,

In wonderful degree:
Thou have performed wondrous deeds
O God who is like to thee?

Thy power shall me revive; From deepest and darkest dungeon of adve^sity.

And from the depths of earth restore,
And bring me up alive.

My greatness thou shall raise:

With cheerful songs of praise:
Yea, even thy truth and verity
O God my God alone,
And sing to thee with harp will I,
O Isr'els holy One.

When I shall sing to thee:
Thus my glad soul shall be employed,
For thou redeemest me:

Continuing all day long:
For they are quelled and brought to shame
That seek to do me wrong.
PSALM. LXXII.
Martyrs tune.
David prays for Solomon, praises his just and happy government and large
extent of his Dominion a type of Christ's.

LOrd give the king thy judgments wise,
His son thy righteousness: 1 Chr. 23. 1.


The poor and succourless.

And little hills by right: Then barren places will be fruitful when justice
abounds.


And crush oppressors might.
The needies children he shall save,
Meditate of Christ's government.

While Sun and Moon their course shall have,
Through generations all.

Upon the mowen grass: After one crop to produce another.

As showers that water hill and plain,
What ever way they pass.

And most abundant peace;
In days of this most happy King,
Until the Moon surcease.
From the red Sea to the Syrian, from Euphrates to the great desert, in token
of Christ's dominion all over the world.

And spread from sea to sea:
From rivers side to earths far end,
All lands shall him obey.

Before him bow they must:
His enemies he will compel,
To stoop and lick the dust.

Shebah and Sabahs King,
And all the Islands adjacent,
Their gifts to him shall bring.

All nations shall him serve:

He shall their life preserve.
2. Part.
Argument.
The graciousness and happiness of Christ his government, and the great
applause thereof.


The poor and succourless:
The souls of them that needy are,
Deliv'ring from distress.

Their abject souls redeem:
And in his sight their blood shall be
Of singular esteem.

And daily for him pray:
And honorably he shall live,
Applauded every day.

The pregnant mountains top: Some fruitfulnes in the barrennest places, yea, a
plentiful crop to rustle as the boughs. The subjects of Christ's Kingdom shall
flourish.

Whose fruit shall shake like Lebanon,
So plentiful the crop.
The Citizens shall spring and spread,
As grass most fresh and fine:

As long as Sun shall shine.
His Name shall be retained in mind,
For ever to remain:
And in the same shall all mankind,
Great blessedness obtain. Gal. 3. 8.

All lands shall call him blessed one.

The God of Israel who alone
Has mighty wonders raised.

To all eternity:
The world be filled with his fame,
Amen, Amen, say I.
PSALM. LXXIII.
To Oxford tune.
Asaph sets forth the great prosperity of the wicked, and what a temptation it
is to the godly.

TO Israel truly God is good,
To each true-hearted one:

my feet were almost gone.
VVel-nigh my steps had slipped aside,

At wicked men, whom I descri'd
To speed and prosper so.

Their strength is firm and sure:
They die of age or easy diseases, without pangs of body or conscience. Job
21. 13.

Which other men endure.

Encompassed round with pride:
And violence does them enclose
And (like a garment) hide.

No heart can wish such hoards:

And speak great swelling words.
They lewdly speak concerning wrong, They meddle, censure, curse, how and whom
they list. Gods people seek their favor, that have so much, and that makes
them more carnal and profane.


And their unbridled lavish tongue
Throughout the earth does walk.

And brimfull waters flow,

How does God come to know?
Is knowledge sure in God most high?

Who have the worlds prosperity
And riches multitude.
2. Part.
Argument.
Asaph seeming to question the good condition of the godly, learns from Gods
Word the unhappiness of the wicked, and overcomes the temptation.


Have cleans'd my heart in vain:
And washed my hands in innocence
With labor for my pain.

With plagues for my repast:
And every morning was my pay
With blows to break my fast.

I should (said I) offend
The generation of thy Saints,
And rashly read their end.

And see the full extent:
But found it hard to find it out
Till I consulted with that word which I had heard there.

I saw their end made recompense,

Thou setst them there to cast them thence
Into destructions pit.

O great and wondrous change!
They are consumed utterly
With thoughts of terror strange.

from walking senses flies;
So Lord when thou awak'st shall thou
Their image quite despise. When thou awakest to judgment thou shall make
their vain pomp, which is but an Idea, a fancy.

3. Part.
Argument.
Asaph confesses his folly to be so much troubled at wicked men's prosperity;
he places temporal and eternal happiness in near communion with God.



And brutish error on my part,
Yet thou did not suffer the temptation to overcome me.

Thy right hand's all my stay and guard,

And shall receive me afterward
To heaven glorified.

Nor is there any one
That lives on earth desired of me,
Except thy self alone.

But God does fail me never:
The strengthner of my heart is he
And heritage for ever.

Shall perish every one:
Thou have destroyed all them that be
From thee a whoring gone.

For that is my wisest care:
In God the Lord I put my trust
All thy works to declare. Hoping to set out thy works so as that none may
stumble at prosperity or adversity of good or bad.

PSALM. LXXIV.
He complains of grievous desolations by fire and sword, and lingering
calamities.

WHy have thou, Lord, rejected us,
And do thine anger keep:
And keep'st it ever smoking thus
Against thy pasture-sheep? The land of Canaan and people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.
9.


Mount Sions purchased rod
Of thine inheritance behold,
Where thou have dwelt, O God.
Live to be perpetual.

Come succor Lord betime:
Which in the sanctuarie's done
By the enemies wilful crime.

Here where thy people joins. For signs of victory.

And in their congregations have
Set Ensigns up for signs.
It Was once a credit to build, now to break down.

Men once obtained renown:

The carved work break down.

The place where dwelt thy name;
These furious foes have overturned,
And so defiled the same.

Thus did their hearts conspire:
Gods Synagogues throughout the land
They have burnt up with fire.
No sign of mending or ending our misery.

None of us knows how long:

The foes reproachful wrong?
Shall the enemy still blaspheme thy name?

Out of thy bosom pluck the same,
And be no longer slack.

And by his powerful hand
He wrought salvation uncontrolled
In sight of all the land. We can witness many former deliverances.

2. Part.
Argument.
Gods ancient deliverances, omnipotent works and faithful covenant incourageth
their prayers.

Pharaohs hosts and officers, that great Leviathan. Exodus 15.

The Dragons heads in these,

Thou brok'st them in the seas.
The same thy people did receive
In The wilderness for meat.
It Was meat and drink to thy people to see his destruction. The red sea and
river Jordan.

And dri'dst up rivers great.

Peculiarly is thine:
O Lord, thou have prepared the light,
And caused the Sun to shine.

Thou have ordained the same:
Summer and VVinter, both of these
By thine appointment came.

O keep it in record:
The foolish men speak blasphemies
Against thy name, O Lord. Thy dearly beloved Church into the hand of, etc.


To many a wicked doer:
For ever let not be forgot
Th'assemblies of the poor.

Thine ancient covenant still:
For cruel habitations do
The earths dark places fill. Ignorant heathenish places abound wi^h tyrants.


Return with cause of shame:
O let the poor and men distressed
Have cause to praise thy Name.

Think on the fools reproach:
Thy name into contempt it draws,
With slanders which they broach.

Of thy tumultuous foes:
Their tumult that against thee rise
continually grows.
PSALM. LXXV.
David's tune.
David (newly come to the Crown) promises justice, inveighs against the base
corruption of Saul's officers, minding them of Gods supreme power and terrible
vengeance.

O God we render praise to thee,
To thee we give the same:
For by thy wondrous works we see
The neerness of thy name. We see by what is done who is the doer that David so
much opposed reigns King, but medicate more of Christ.


An upright Judge I Will be:

Her pillars hold by me.

Ye wicked fools, said ^,
Be not so vain, The kingdom is in a to^^ering condition under Saul for want
of Justice, but David put it in frame. The cup of Gods wrath is a bloody one,
like their sins.
be not so vile,
Nor lift your horn so high:

Nor speak with haughty mouth:

From East, or West, or South.

Some others down does pull:

Of crimson wine mixed full.
He powers it out, and he will make
The wicked of the land
Wring out the very dregs, and take
And drink them at his hand.

Declare fresh songs of praise:
Their power

But righteous men's I Will raise.
PSALM. LXXVI.
Choice tune.
A memorial of Senacheri^s m^raculous defeat.

IN Judah God is known to his, For a faithful and powerful protector.

His name is great in Israel:

He does in Sion-mountain dwell:
Arabian robbers are not so strong as God, not the kingdoms of the world.

The battle, shield, and sword, and spear:

And excellent then mounts of prey.

And they have slept their sleeps last night:
And of the mighty men not one
Has found his hands wherewith to fight. See 2 Chr. 22* 21.


Spoild rattling wheel and thundering hoof:
Charet and horse at thy fierce blast
Into a sleep of death are cast.

For who may stand before thine eyes?
Who dares approach, who dares appear,
When once thy burning wrath does rise?

The sile^t earth was sore afeard: Thy judgment terrified the world which was
wrought for poor distressed Israel. Thou gettest glory by permitting and
stopping tyrants rage.


To save on earth all humble men.

Henceforth held in by thy restraints:

Unto the Lord your God ye Saints.
Let all about him presents bring
To him that daunts the proudest King:

And Princes spirits curbs and quells.
PSALM. LXXVII.
To sweet tune.
Asaph strives against desperation.

I With my voice to God did cry,
Even with my voice expressed aloud,
I cried to God most fervently,
And unto me his ear he bowed.

I sought the Lord in that my grief:
My ceasless sore ran all night long,
My soul refused all relief.

And my complaint while I do make;
My spirit overwhelmed I find,

I cannot speak I Am troubled so:
I seriously considered

That were of old determined.
What comfort I had heretofore.

I commune with my private heart,
My spirit was most exquifite,
Yea even in this examining art.
To find out what the cause, or what the end might be.
eternally,
And is his favor clean removed?

His promise past but never proved?

And wholly left compassions path?
His tender mercies all confined,
And has he shut them up in wrath?

To be mine own infirmity:
But I will call to mind the years
Of his right hand that is most high. Such times wherein God displayed his
greatest favors.

2. Part.
Argument.
He overcomes temptations to desperation, by consideration of Gods ancient and
miraculous mercies to his Church.


The mighty works of God the Lord:
The wonders which of old he wrought,
Surely (said I) I will record.

And meditate of all thy powers:
Thou have appeared most unto thy people in such great works.

Who is so great a God as ours?

A wonder-working God indeed:

Jacob and Joseph's fruitful seed.
The red Sea seemed to be sensible of Gods presence. Tempests there.

The waters saw, and were afraid;
Because they did the visage see,
The depths were also sore dismayed.

The skies a thundering sound forth sent:
Thine arrows were dispersed abroad,
Shot from the flaming Element.

Thy lightnings did the world surround:
Earth shook and trembled sore afeard*

Thy paths are in the waters deep,
Thy footsteps none can understand: None knows now where that passage was.


By Moses and by Aarons hand.
PSALM. LXXVIII.
York tune.
He exhorts to hear the story of Gods ancient works, and to relate it to our
generations.

MY people to my Law give ear,
Unto my speech incline:

A parable divine. As excellent things as Proverbs and Apothegms.

Dark sayings treasured up of old,
I Will utter now to you:

And what we heard and knew.
We will not from their seed conceal,
But with a joint accord,
Unto the future age reveal
The praises of the LORD.
And all his wonders excellent,
Performed by powerful hand:
He appointed us to rehearse these things.

In Jacob firm to stand.
For Israel he a law decreed,
And gave our fathers charge,
That they to their ensuing seed
Should make them known at large.

His Testaments might know:
Who should arise in fathers place,
And them to theirs might show.

Not from his laws remove:
Nor Gods almighty works forget,

A stubborn and rebellious brood,
Whose hearts were wrong inclined:
Whose soul with God unstedfast stood,
Still wavering in their mind.
2. Part.
Argument.
The shameful repulse of Israel going up without God, of whose works they had
so wonderful experience. See Numb. 14. 40.


The tribe of Ephraim carries the name of all Israel.

Nor did they armor lack,
In day of battle with their foes,
Faint-hearted turned back.

Nor for his precepts cared:

Which he to them declared.

Had their forefathers known,
Accomplished in Egypt land,
And in the fields of Zoan.
Zoan the chief Court of Pharaoh, where greatest wonders were done. Red Sea.
Exodus 14. 29. 19.

And made them passage there:
With clatt'ring heaps on either side,
He made moist waters rear.

A cloud their guide assigned:
And all night long he made them way,
With lights of fire that shined.

Within the desert ground:
And store of drink to them he gave,
As out of deeps profound.
Meditate of Christ the foun^ain of grace.

And made fresh waters thence
Run down like Rivers from a spring:

G^^ev'd God most high in desert ground,
By provocations great:
Numb. 11. 4.

By lustful asking meat.

Can God spread tables here?

Can deserts yield good cheer?
The waters gusht from rocks hard side,
And streams did overflow:
But for his people flesh provide,
And can he bread bestow?
3. Part.
Argument.
The great displeasure of God for the monstrous infidelity and ingratitude of
Israel.


Against Jacob fire did flame:
And anger also came agenst
All Israel for the same.

Nor in this Savior hope:

And heavens door set open.

And gave them for their fare
Grew not on earth, but distilled from heaven, as if Angels had sed-on it.
Man did eat
The food of Angels rare.
He fed them full with food good store:

His power set open the Southern door,
Both execute his mind.
Quails.

Like Summers dust for store:
And feathered fowl he brought them fresh
As sands upon the shore.

He let it gently fall:
And there dispersed it round about
Their habitations all.

And were suffi^'d and filled:
For he did give them, look what meat
Themselves desired and willed.

But while they chewed their meat,

Before they could it eat.
The fattest of them, there he slew, The chiefest and greatest.

And, smiting down, did kill
The chosen men, all Israel through:

For all his wonders was their crime
Most shameful unbelief: So that 600000. were consumed in 40. years in the
wilderness.


In vanity and grief.
4. Part.
Argument.
The Hypocritical humiliation of Israel, Gods favor and their unfaithfulness.


And many of them were flain,
Then they for God inquired and sought,
And turned to him again.
With early care to him they flock,

That God the high God was their rock,
And their Redeemer kind.

While their fair words entreat,
They did but lie, and flatter tho,
With teeth and tongues deceit.

Nor to his covenant clave:

Their wickedness for gave.
And would not overthrow them quite,
But did his wrath assuage
Full many a time: nor would excite
The utmost of his rage.

How that they were but flesh:
A temporary fading wind,
That does not come afresh.

When they in deserts were?

While they continued there.
And Isreal's only one confined, Limited his power to possibilities and
likelihoods.


Nor yet that day they called to mind
That quit them from the ^o.
5. Part.
Argument.
Isreal's ungrateful neglect of Gods Judgments on their behalf against Egypt.


What signs in Egypt land
Were brought to pass before their eye
By Gods almighty hand.

When every ford and flood, In Phar^ohs Court, and all the land over.

And every river he did change
Into a lake of blood.
That they to drink thereof abhorred,

Of diverse sort sent from the LORD,
And croaking frogs destroyed.

The fruit of all their soil:
And gave their labors hopeful sweat,
To be the Locusts spoil.

And wealth of their quick stock:

Hot thunderbolt their flocks*

And indignation fall:
God sending evil Angels there,
To vex and plague them all. Messengers of vengean^^.


Nor spared their soul from death:
But gave their lives unto the b^ne
Of pestilentiall breath.

In Egypt he did smite;
Within the land of Ham that were
The chief of all their might.
6. Part.
Argument.
Gods safe conduct of Israel: their Apostasy and Idolatry, and the bitter
fruits thereof.

GOD for his people did provide,
That they went out like sheep,
Whom safe through deserts he did guide,
As flocks which shepherds keep.

But in the briny waves
Their enemies overwhelmed were,
The seas became their graves.

The Lord his people led,
^he mountain which his own right hand
With power had purchased.

And did their lands assign
And heritage to Israel,
Dividing it by line.
He made his tribes dwell in their tents

And kept not his commandments;
Provoking God thereby.

And all false dealing show;
And like their fathers turned aside,
Like a deceitful bow. On mountains where they set up Images. Ezech. 20. 28,
29.


They did the Lords displease;
And moved him to jealousy
With graven Images.
Their Idolatry cried loud in Gods ear, Ier. 7. 14.
and was angry then
Abhorring Israel sore:

He would come at no more. His ark a monument of his mighty Name.


His strength he (careless) gave,
And from his foes prevailing hand 1 Samuel 5. 1.

His glory would not save. Fire of Gods wrath.


He gave his people over:
Against his chosen heritage
His wrath was kindled sore.
Because the men were killed up.
Consumed with fire their young men were, The wives (as Phinehas wife) died
also.

Their virgins nuptials failed:

No widows them bewailed. Also it was a fashion for widows to mourn,

7. Part.
Argument.
Gods merciful returning to his people; his free election of place and person.
Ier. 9. 17.



As one from sleep does start;
And shouting like a mighty man,
When wine has cheered his heart. With the piles.


He smote his bedridden foes: 1. Sam. 5. 12.

Whom to perpetual infamy
He thereby did expose.

He did their tents refuse: To build his Temple, and call a king a type of
Christ and his Church.


And Judah's tribe did choose.

Like high reared palace sure:
Like earth which he established
For ever to endure.

And him from sheep folds bring: Build the Temple, in the Antitype the Church.

A type of Christ our Shepherd.

And brought him to be king.
To regal throne did him advance,
That he might daily feed
All Israel his inheritance,
His people Jacobs seed.

So he all Israel fed;
And disciplined with policy
His people safely led.
PSALM. LXXIX.
To Oxford tune.
The grievous calamities of invasive war: In the Babylonian invasion, or
that, 2 Marc. 5. 15.
He prays that the storm may recoil on the adversaries.

O Lord, our God, thine heritage
Rude heathen now invade,
Jerus'lem, through their barbarous rage,
A ruinous heap is made.
Thy holy Temple they defiled,

Some to the beasts, some to the wild
And ravenous fowls of heaven.

Like water have they shed:
And none was left to bury them,
When they were flain and dead.

And scornful tauntings flout:
We are become as laughing-stocks,
To them that dwell about.

Shall thy fierce wrath persever?
Shall thine outrageous jealousy
Burn out like fire for ever?

Power out, power out the same:
And let it be the Kingdoms lot,
That calls not on thy Name. Worship thee not aright.


And laid his dwelling wast;

Against us now be placed.
2. Part.
Argument.
He prays for rescue of the Church, and revenge against the wicked.

PRevent us soon with tender grace,
For we are much brought down:

To get thy Name renown.
Save us and purge our ^^ns away,
For thy Names sake that bears:

Where is that God of theirs?
O let him be acknowledged,
By heathens in our sight:
The servants blood which they have shed,
Let just revenge requite.

And LORD preserve thou them:
Even of thy powers almightiness,
Whom they to death condemn.

O recompense the shame;
Wherewith our neighbors have bin bold,
To vilify thy Name.

Will ever bless thy Name;
And spread thy praise from age to age,
And never cease the same.
PSALM. LXXX.
Asaph humbly sues for succor in the bitter calamities of war. 2 King. 17. 5.


O Isreal's Shepherd lend thine ear, Joseph put for Israel.

Who Joseph's flock lead'st out:
Who dwell'st between the Cherubs there, Amos 6. 6.

Shine clearly round about. 2 Chr. 5. 13.

Shine forth in favor to us all.

O let thy strength appear:
In Benjamins sight, stir up thy might,
To save us Lord draw near.

And turn our hearts to thee:
Shine on us with thy cheerful face,
And we shall saved be.

While we to thee repair;
How long shall burn thy wrath extreme,
Against thy peoples prayer?

Thou make them to be fed:
And giv'st them tears in measure great,
For drink as well as bread.

An argument of strife: They strive who shall have us their slaves.

Amongst themselves our enemies
Deride our woeful life.

And cause (as we have craved)*
Thy face to shine on Isreal's coasts,
And then shall we be saved.
2. Part.
Argument.
A complaint of Isreal's desolation, Under parable of a vineyard.
and prayer for restoration, promising faithfulness.


Thou did from Egypt bring: Psalm. 44. 2.

The heathen folk thou did expel,
To plant it here to spring.

Preparing by thy hand:
And when it once had taken root,
It filled all the Land. The great increase of Israel, peopling the land of
Canaan.


Her shade the hills did hide:

From Sea to Rivers side.

The quick-set hedges so, Psalm. 72. 8.

That all the transient passengers
Do pluck her as they go? Subject to the weakest adversary.

Cruel tyrants.

Wild beasts from neighboring coasts

We pray thee Lord of hoasts.
Look down from heaven, and behold,
And visit this thy Vine,

By that right hand of thine.
The branch which was made strong for thee,
Alas, it was but a little branch, a little people.

And burnt with fire thy branches be,
They perish at thy frown.
The poor people whom thou did fence and favor.

The son of man sustain:
Made strong by thee, for thee to stand,
O make him strong again.

O quick'n us for the same,
And we shall faithful suppliants be,
To call upon thy Name.

And turn us now again:
Command thy cheerful face to shine,
And safe shall we remain.
PSALM. LXXXI.
London short tune.
An exhortation to praise God with music. Signifying the melody of our hearts
Signifying our spiritual deliverance.
A celebration of the deliverance from Egypt.

O Sing aloud this day,
To God our strength and stay:
O make a noise, Feast of Tabernacles.

Exciting joys
To Jacobs God, Lev. 23. 43.
I say.

The timbrell hither bring:
The Psalt'rie too
And harp take you,
The harp that pleasant thing:
Lev. 23. 24. 31. 41.

This new Moons festival:
The time has thus
Appointed us,
Solemnity does call.

O Israel kept by thee:
The Almighty drew,
This law for you,
It Was Jacobs Gods decree.

In Joseph firm to stand: In Israel. In memorial of Isreal's going from Egypt
and God with him.

A Testament
When as he went
Throughout all Egypt land.
I heard a language there,
All unknown words they were. Lev. 23. 48.


The burdenous yoke
Which Isreal's neck did bear. Psalm. 114. 1.

His hand from pots were freed, From making earthen vessels.

And in the time of need,
Exodus 1. 14.

I set thee free,
Deliverance did succeed.
I answered thee with grace, With favor when I might on a sudden have
destroyed thee.

In thunders secret place,
I proved thy way
At Meribah,
Where waters ran apace. Exodus 17. 7.

2. part.
Argument.
The blessedness of obedience, the baseness of Idolatry, ingratitude, and
disobedience.


I Will testify to thee;
O Israel mine,
If thou incline,
And hearken unto me.

Be no strange God at all;
And never more
Shall thou adore,
Or on a strange God call.

Who brought thee graciously,
With powerful hand
From Egypt land,
And servile tyranny.
Thy mouth then open wide,
In prayer to be supplied,
And sure I will
Thy pray'r^ fulfill;

They to my voice so free,
Obedient would not be,
And (grief to tell
Of Israel)
He would have none of me.

Even left them to their lust,
And they fulfill
Their way and will,
In their own counsels trust.

Had hark'ned unto me:
That Israel
Had walked so well,
As after my decree.

Their adversaries rude:
And turned my hand
Against the band
Of all their enemies lewd.

Had bowed down at his gate: Established in a prosperous condition.

But Isreal's time
Had been in prime,
And born eternal date.

The finest of the wheat:
And made the rock
An honey stock,
In plenty very great.
PSALM. LXXXII.
To Cambridge old tune.
God the supreme Judge, convinces and condemns wicked Governors.

AMong the Gods, God takes a room
To judge among the great.

While sitting in his seat?
The wicked ye are partial to,

Unto the needy justice do
And fatherless secure.

These poor and succourless:
Tyrants will not know their duty. All runs to ruin for want of justice.

But walk in darksomness.
The earths foundation quite decai'd,
All out of order runs:

Are high Jehovahs sons.
As Iezabel, Athalia, Herod, etc.

Like Princes fall shall you:

All Nations are thy due.
PSALM. LXXXIII.
Martyrs tune.
Consederate enemies conspire against the Church, and are cursed.

LOrd be not still, hold not thy tongue,
Behold, how furiously

And lift their heads on high.

Against us all at once:
Consulting how to work the bane
Of all thy hidden ones.

And leave no root behind:
So that the name of ISRAEL may
No more remembrance find. In hot countries they dwelt in tents. The Saracens
were indeed Hagarens of Hagar the bondmaid.


Advised with joint consents:

And those at Edoms tents.

And Gebal do conspire,
The Philistims, Amalakites,
With them that dwell at Tire.
The Turks succeed these pagans.

To help the sons of Lot:
Genesis 19. 37.

Gain they what Sis'ra got.
2. Part.
Argument.
God is glorified in the destruction of persecutors, according to the ancient
examples of his judgment.

SPeed they as Jabin, Canaans King,
O'rthrown at Kishon brook:
Judges 4. 15. 7. 25. 8. 11.

Became as scattered muck.

Their noble Peers to fall:
As Zeba and Zalmunna fell,
So let their Princes all.

Come on, and let us take
The houses of the LORD to us, The dwellings of Gods people.

And them our houses make.
Restles, ever falling into evil, as a wheel dragd ith dirt.

Or stubble tossed with wind:

Let them this fury find.
As kindling flames at mountains foot,
With fury all deform.

And fright them with thy storm.
If not for love, for fear.

With shame their faces fill:

Confounded, troubled still.

Whom we Jehovah call,
In all the earth the only one
Art highest over all.
PSALM. LXXXIV.
Old England tune.
The great zeal of the Saints to Gods public Ordinances, and blessedness of
such desires.

O Lord of hoasts how lovely fair,
Thy Tabernacles be!
I even envy the sparrows. And emulate the Levites constant attendance upon
the public service, Psalm. 134.

Thy sacred courts to see.
O living God, my flesh, my heart
For thee cry out amain:

Blessed house-room does obtain.
The swallow builds her nests full close,
Where she her young may bring:
Even to thine Altars, This Bac^ was a dry plain where they were fain to dig
for water, or use rainwater as they journeyed to the Temple, Exodus 32. 17.
Lord of hoasts,
My God and glorious King.

They still will give thee praise:

Who minds thy servants ways.

In passing to and fro:
The Pools are also filled with rain;

To Sion hill they all repair, Their going from stage to stage was a type of
our progress in grace, and holding out to the end. Remember thy covenant in
Christ, for we rejoice in thy service.

Before Jehovah there:

O Jacobs God give ear.

O Lord our shield behold:

Excells a thousand-fold.
In thy fair Temple, I profess,
I Would rather keep a door,
Then in the tents of wickedness
Have dwelling evermore.

A constant Sun and Shield:
He will vouchsafe his grace to his,
And glory freely yield.
From them that walk in upright way,
No good thing hold will he:
If he have faith, tho perhaps he cannot always come: Meditate of ours from
the Romish Babylon, and pray for a full reformation.

That put their trust in thee?
PSALM. LXXXV.
Martyrs tune.
He praises God for deliverance from the Babylonian captivity, praying God to
make it complete.

LOrd thou have dealt most favorably,
With thy beloved land:
And Jacobs hard captivity,
Brought back with powerful hand.

To seal a pardon free:
Their grievous sins and trespasses,
Are covered all by thee.

Fierce anger turned to peace:
Perfect the good work.

Thine anger toward us cease.

And not thy wrath recall?
Will thou draw out thy wrath so sore, Some of thy people are in Babylon still.

To generations all?

Again revived be:
That so the people that are thine,
May much rejoice in thee.

Thy mercy let appear:
I am persuaded God will grant our prayers.

That will I gladly hear.
He to his Saints and people deer,
Will utter words of peace:
But let them take a warning here,
And former follies cease.
2. Part.
Argument.
He prophecies honor and happiness to the Church, in token of the good things
of the Gospel.

Wait for Gods good time.

To them that do him fear:
That glory may invest the Land,
And be a dweller here.
The performance joined to the promise.

And both in one consist:
Now righteousness and peace do greet,
And mutually have kissed.
Christ from heaven in his divine nature, from earth in his humane nature,
shall come, teach, and give example.

While truth from earth shall spring:

With gifts of each good thing.
Our land shall yield her fruits (no doubt)

Shall go before, and point us out
The way that he has trod.
PSALM. LXXXVI.
London long tune.
The transcendent goodness and greatness of God encouraging prayers.

LOrd bow thy ear, and hear my plaint,
A needy wretch and poor:

My troubled soul secure.
O thou my God, thy servant save,

Who trust in thee, and daily crave,
And call and cry to thee.

I lift my soul to thee:

And to forgiveness free,
To all that call upon thy Name,
Most rich in mercies fruits.

Mark well my voice and suits.

In my most troublesome time.

Nor any works like thine.

Thee Lord shall come before:
And there to glorify thy name,
Submissively adore.

Thy power great wonders does:

I Will walk in all thy truth.
2. Part.
Argument.
As before.

UNite my heart to fear thy name,

Applaud and magnify the same
To all eternity.

Thy mercy does excel;
Which thy peculiar power has freed
Even from the lowest hell.

My souls destruction sought
By violent men assembling all,
On thee they have not thought.

Suff^ing no little space:
Compassions store in thee we find, Born in the Church, deny baptism of
Infants, and none can be called thy ha^dmaids son. He asks a providential
sign, and not a miracle.

And plenteous truth and grace.

Thy grace to me extend:
Thy strength unto thy servant give,
Thy handmaids son defend.

That hateful foes may see,
And be ashamed, because thou Lord
Did help and comfort me.
PSALM. LXXXVII.
Coventry tune.
The happy privileges of the Church typed by Sion. Specially in the later days.


SIons foundations edifice
In holy mountains lies: As God chose Sion and made it holy, so his people*
Psalm. 78. 68.


Does far above
All Jacobs dwelling prize. Have glorious privileges.


Obtains a glorious name. Egypt and other heathen shall be converted. I Will tell
the faithful that believe it, and pray for it. Such and such a man was new
born, regenerate in the Church.


And Babylon
I to my friends will name.
Philistia, Ethiop, Tire lo there

And Sion (they
Shall point and say)
Did this and that man bear.
The highest himself shall stablish her,

To Sion mount, God himself shall number them among his elect. Store of
Preachers and Confessors.

So make his count
When he shall register.

As him that tunes the strings
Of music sweet,
Therein shall meet,
In thee are all my springs. All springs of grace and comfort in the true
Church,

PSALM. LXXXVIII.
To sinners tune.
Heman in the deep dungeon of affliction, destitute of all outward comforts,
makes lamentable complaint.

I Cried before thee day and night,
Lord God my saving aid:

And all the prayers I prayed;
Incline thin ear unto my cry.

My life unto the grave draws nigh
Because oppressed with those.

The path to pit they tread:
I Am like a man that has no might,
As a man discommoned from the world, free from any affairs of the world.

Even like slain men's my present state,
Which in the grave do rot;
Which from thy hand are separate,
And utterly forgot.

Beneath deep darkness barred:

Thy wrath does press me hard.

And made them me abhor:
As one whom, now shut up so fast,
There Is no redemption for.
2. Part.
Argument.
He humbly sues for redress of his grievous afflictions, Knowing that after
death there was no hope.
while there was yet hope.

MIne eye laments a burd'nous load,
Of sorrows multiplied:
Lord I have stretched my hands abroad,
To thee I daily cried;

Thy wonders to the dead:
Shall dead men rise again, that so
Thy praises may be spread?

Within the grave express:
Shall in destruction men record
Thy truth and faithfulness?

Thy wonders manifold: All these are descriptions of the state of death.

And in oblivions cloudy land
Thy righteousness behold?

Yea, Lord I cried to thee:

Why hide thy face from me?

Suffering from youth to age;
I am distracted, while that I
Endure such wrath and rage:

Thy terrors cut me down;

As streams that threat to drown:
They all together me invade.

And darkness with it is misty shade
Does my acquaintance cover.
PSALM. LXXXIX.
Dutch tune.
Ethan magnifies Gods love and faithfulness to the house of David. A type of
his favor to the church in Christ.



The mercies of the Lord:
My mouth shall all his faithfulness
From age to age record. Thy promises (as engraven in heaven) are as sure as
the heavens themselves.


For ever to endure:
Thou in the very heavens wilt
Thy truth establish sure.

To faithful David swore;

To stand for evermore.
To ages all thy throne I Will raise, Saints and Angels there Mat. 2.


Thy wondrous faithfulness to praise
Thy gathered Saints among.

With our Lord God compare:
Who of the glorious Angels may
So bold compar'son dare?

Must greatly fear his Name,
And all that round about him is
Must reverence the same.
2. Part.
Argument.
Gods goodness to the Church in creation and government of the world.


Like thee, with great power crowned?
Thy faithfulness who parallels
In all thy circuits round?

Thou rulest at thy will:
Her swelling waves thou do appease,
And make it calm and still.

Like one that slaught'red lies:
Thou have with thine almighty hand
Dispersed thine enemies. Made Egypt ^ dead corpse by the ten p^agues.


The world and all enclosed,
Thou foundest by that power divine, All coasts and corners of the world praise
thee, (Tabor and Hermon are put for East and West, because they stood so) who
have enriched them with thy blessings. The sound of the Gopel, and that which
calls thereto.


Tabor and Hermon wondrously,
Shall in thy Name delight:

Thy arm is full of might.

Retain a dwelling place:
Pure truth and mercy joined in one,
Shall go before thy face.

That knows the joyful sound:
Thy countenances light o Lord,
Shall safely them surround.

And they shall take delight

And glory of their might.
Thy favor such, that shall there spring,
Our horns advancement thence:

The Lord is our defense.
3. Part.
Argument.
Prophecies and promises to David's house recorded. Fulfilled to the Church in
Christ. In prophecy or by Prophets thou did promise to promote David, a type
of Christ.



For then thou made it known:
Lo, I my helping hand have laid,
Upon a mighty one.

With holy Oil have I:
My servant David, whom I found
Anointed purposely.

Mine arm shall make him strong:
No wicked tyrant.
no son of wickedness,
Shall crush or do him wrong.

Plague them that do him hate:

With him perpetuate.
^is horn shall be exalted high, His power and dominion.

By my great Names command:
See Ps. 72. 8. His seed shall cry Abba father.

To th'river his right hand.

So invocate my Name:
My God, my rock, my sure supply,
Whence my salvation came.
David was the first King that God chose. Meditate of Christ.

All earthly Kings above:

Unto him of my love.
My covenant shall with him stand fast,

And I will make his throne to last,
As days of heaven sure.
4. Part.
Argument.
He shows that God corrects his people, but never casts them off.

Much more Christ's seed.

Not execute my will:

Not my commands fulfill:

Their wickedness and sin,
With scourges of a smarting rod,
To visit will begin.

I will not him bereave:
Nor will my faithfulness permit
To take a final leave. Then how sure in Christ.


By me shall never be broke:
Nor will I alter any thing,
Which once my lips have spoke.

To David I Will not lie:

His throne before mine eye.
I Will never fail them while the world stands.

For ever they shall be
Heavens faithful witnesses betwixt
My chosen King and me.
5. Part.
Argument.
He complains of great distress besall'n the house of David, Afflictions may
object that God has cast us off, but never prove it. The glory of his kingdom
(which was a type of so sacred a kingdom) is much abased, by desolation of
war.
seeming to disprove Gods promises.


Thou have cast off in wroth:

The covenant of thy troth.
By casting down to ground thou have
Profaned his sacred crown:

His hedges all broke down.

He is in enemies scorn:

And liftest up their horn.

His swords puissant edge:
And for to stand it out in fight,
Thou have not been his pledge.

And cast his throne to ground: In the very beginning his kingdom is decayed,
and seems to be brought to a decrepit state.


And him with shame confound.
6. Part.
Argument.
He prays for restoration of David's kingdom, considering Gods faithful
promises, and the greatness of the adversaries.


Shall thy continual rage
Flame out as fire so long a space?
The Church in a dying state.

Why have thou made all men in vain?
As thou would pity short breathed man, ^o much more thy Church.

That shall his soul from grave detain,
And not at all see death?

Which thou did swear and vow
To David in thy righteousness,
O Lord where are they now?

What taunts my bosom bears:
Which all the mighty people broach,
Thine enemies taunts are theirs.

Of thine anointed King: As the wicked do Christ.


Amen, Lord grant the thing.
PSALM. XC.
London long tune.
Moses prays God (the eternal stay of the Church) to sanctify the many
mortalities of Israel in the Wilderness for their sins.

LOrd thou have been our dwelling place,
In generations all:
Thou wast ere there was form or face
Of creature great or small.

The world or smallest clod
Of all this vast and spacious earth,
Thou art eternal God.

He Is soon unmade again:
And falls to dust when thou do say,
Return ye sons of men.

So seems in thy fight,
As yesterday when past appears, A fourth part of the night.

Or as a watch by night.
Mat. 24. 43.

Thou make man's lifetime pass: Mat. 13. 35.

Or like a transitory dream,
Or like the springing grass.

Most pleasantly up-grown:
And in the evening withers,
Soon after it is mown.

Are we consumed and spent:
And troubled with thy stinging rod,
Of wrathful punishment.

Wherein we lewdly run:
And thy clear countenance descries
Our sins in secret done.

Thine anger taking hold:
We spend our years from day to day,
As when a tale is told. A pleasant tale delights us, and steals our thoughts
from us, and is done ere we are aware or willing, so, etc.

2. Part.
Argument.
Moses prayer for grace to make good use of our frail life, and a happy change
of their sad condition.


That we continue here:
And if some stronger sort of men
Do live to fourscore year:
Their life is labor, strength is none,
But sorrowful decay:
So soon is it cut off and gone,
We post, we fly away.

What power thine anger has? Thy wrath is as dreadful as we do or can imagine.

For answerable to thy fear,
So great appears thy wrath.

Of numbering out our days: To consider the shortness and uncertainty thereof.

That so we may apply our heart
To sacred wisdoms ways.

O leave thy discontent:
And for thy servants sake return,
Concerning them repent.

And that without delays:
That we may be most joyful men
And glad even all our days.

And mis'ries making sad,
And also for the evil years,
Comfort and make us glad.

That are thy servants true: Thy work of mercy, for Judgment is called his
strange work Isa. 28. 21. but mercy his own work, Isa. 26. 12.

Thy glorious shining rays disclose
Unto their childrens view.

His face on us to shine:
Confirm the actions of our hand
Confirm them Lord by thine.
PSALM. XCI.
David's tune.
The admirable safety of the Saints in most perilous times.

WHo dwells in the secret place
Where God most high does hide; Under the wing of Gods protection is all
safety.

In shadow of the almighty's grace
Full safely shall abide:

Even he, and none but he,
He is my refuge, and my fort
In whom my trust shall be.

Both from the fowlers snare; From the Executioner of Judgment.

And from infectious pestilence
Which poysoneth the air.

His wings thy confidence: This Psalm is thought to be made on occasion of
that plague, 2 Samuel 24.

His truth a shield to save thy head
And buckler for defense:

For terrors of the night:
Nor for the arrow be dismayed
That flies in open light. The sickness is most infectious (some write) in the
night and at noon.


That walks in darksome way;
Nor that destuctions violence,
That wastes at height of day. Object. Why does the sickness take us away
promiscuously?


Millions at thy right hand;
Yet shall it not come near at all
The place where thou do stand. Answ. I doubt we want that goodness they had
of old.


Shall thou behold and see
How wicked men's iniquities
Shall recompensed be. Thou shall see how it a^ lights on the wicked.

2. Part.
Argument.
God keeps his Saints by his providence and Angels from all savage enemies,
and deadly dangers. Tyrants, robbers, heretics and hypocrites meant by these
beasts.



Who is my rock and shade,
Even the Lord the highest One
Thy habitation made:

Nor come thy dwelling near:

To keep thee every where:

From stumbling at a stone:
On Lions neck thy foot shall stand,
And th'Adder tread upon.

Trod under foot by thee:

Because he loved me.
I Will set him up in high degree,
Because he knew my name:

I answering the same.
I will preserve, to honor raise,
Be with him in temptation:

And show him my salvation.
PSALM. XCII.
Short staff tune.
God is highly magnified for his work of creation and providence, the depth of
his judgments, Entitled a Psalm for the Sabbath day.
especially to the wicked.

TO give thanks to the Lord,
It is an exc'lent thing:
To magnify
Thy name most high
In praises when we sing. Therefore should we keep the Sabbath (for such
memorials) from morning to night.


So soon as morning springs:
At night express
Thy faithfulness.

On harp and psaltery
With sweet and solemn sound:

Own works divine
Thou made my joys abound. Music of affections now.

In them triumph will I,
The works which thou have wrought,

O Lord they are,
How deep is every thought? Romans 11. 33.


No fool perceives this thing:

Lewd wicked men
As morning grass do spring.
Then is the final lot
Of their destruction nigh:

The most supreme
To all eternity.
2. Part.
Argument.
The certain downfall of the wicked, and exaltation of the righteous, and their
perpetual fruitfulness.


For lo thy foes shall fall:
Thy truth assures
That wicked doers, Though multitudes. Maintain my dignity: They write that the
Unicorn is never taken ^ive.

They shall be scattered all.

Upon the Un'corns head:
So Lord thou shall
My horn exalt,
And fresh oil on me spread. Renew thy gifts and graces on me.


On wicked enemies:
The same mine ear
Of them shall hear
That up against me rise.

That Lebanon forth brings
The just shall grow
And flourish so,
As laden palm tree springs.

In our Gods Courts each one: The true members of the Church.


Their fruitful juice,
When they are ancient grown.
Still fat and flourishing,
How ever the godly are tried, or the wicked suffered.

My rock is he
Most pure and free
From all unrighteousness.
PSALM. XCIII.
Coventry tune.
The Majesty of God, stability of his works, and of his Church and Ordina^^es
against all the waves of wickedness.

The Lord our God does reign on high,
And does himself invest
With Majesty
And potency,
With both is girt and dressed.

Thou have prepared thy throne:
Of old thou have
Confirmed it fast,
Thou art the eternal One.

The floods lift up their waves,
Up to the skies
Their uprore flies
Their voice rumultuous raves.

Far more of might than these:
Though numerous store
Of waters roar,
And mighty waves of seas.

Are sure, and alter never:
Pure holiness
Does seemly dress
Thy house, Holy promises, ordinances, exercises.
O Lord, for ever.
PSALM. LXXXXIV.
New staff tune.
The insolence and cruelty of tyrants; the All-seeing eye, and All-judging
power of God.

O Lord to whom it does belong
Just vengeance to repay:
O God the punisher of wrong,
Do thou thy self display.

In general
Thy self no longer hide:
Arise, dispense
A recompense
To all the sons of pride.

Triumph as Lords and Kings?

Pronounce and speak hard things?
The multitude
Of sinners lewd
How long shall boasting use?

Thine heritage
How they afflict and bruise?

With murderous hands have smote:

Nor Jacobs God shall note. The God of the puritans.


The brutish throng,
O understand, discern:
Ye foolish men,
Why when, why when
Will ye be wise and learn?

Not he both see and hear?

The heathen every where?
Not he discern
That makes man learn? That gives man the faculty of reason.


The thoughts of man,
Which he does skan, To think they are unseen, or shall escape unpunished.

And finds them merely vain.
2. Part.
Argument.
The blessing of sanctified affliction; The destruction of the wicked in their
sins.


Is infinitely blessed:
Whom by thy Law thou make wise, Not every man afflicted, but he that learns
by it.

That thou may give him rest.

Times troublesome,
Till dangerous days be past:
And till the ditch
Be dig'd, Esa. 26. 20.
in which
The wicked shall be cast.

The people whom he took: Tho God try the righteous, and suffer the wicked for
a time, it will change.

The heritage to him select
Shall never be forsook.

To righteousness
Shall judgment have again:
And jointly then
True-hearted men
Shall wait upon her train.
Yet I was ready to distruct for my own part, Then God came in, etc.

Or who for mee's at hand,
Against workers of iniquities,
In my behalf to stand?

Did help afford,
My soul had very nigh
In silence dwelt, I had been in my grave ere now.


My foot to slip awry.
Thy mercies, Lord, did me uphold.

Within my breast so manifold,
Thy comforts glad my soul. Comforts of thy Word and Spirit. Shall they that
make laws for traps plead thy authority: you must obey the King, si^, i^ all
things.


Of wicked ones
Have fellowship with thee?
When as the same
Lewd mischief frame
By purposed decree.

They guiltless blood condem':

And my defense from them.

Their bold offense,
And take them in their sin:
The Lord, I say,
Our God shall slay,
And cut them off therein.
PSALM. XCV.
To short staff tune.
An exhortation to praise God the maker and governor of the world, the Shepherd
and Savior of the Church. A dehortation from rebellion, and hardness of heart,
like our unbeleeving forefathers that were debarred entrance into Canaan.

O Come, sing we a song,
A joyful noise be made:
With joint accord,
Before the LORD,
Our rock of saving aid:

Hearts truly thankful bring:
And make a noise
Exciting joys,
Sweet Psalms unto him sing.

Whose power all Gods transcends:
The spacious lands
Are in his hands,

The strength of hills is his.
The Sea in his command:
He made the same,
His hands did frame
The dry and solid land.

Before him let us fall:
Let us adore
And kneel before
The Lord that made us all.

His folk and flock are we:
This day give ear
His voice to hear, When ever ye hear his word or spirit moving you.

If ye obedient be.

As once at Meribah
Ye did transgress
In Wilderness, In forty years space (a long day) specially that notorious
temptation, Exodus 17. 6.

In that temptation day.
As in the desert part

And proved my might
Each Israelite,
My wonders they did see.

With this lewd race, and said,
They are indeed
An erring seed
In heart and judgment straid.
Nor known nor have believed,

And did protest Into Canaan a type of heaven.

That to my rest
They should not tread the path.
PSALM. XCVI.
Coventry tune.
The incomparable majesty of the true God.

COmpose new songs, and sing the same
To God, o all the earth:

And glorious Name
All men of mortal birth.
From day to day, o do not spare
His saving health to show:

And fame declare,
That Nations all may know.

And greatly praised must be:
And every where
Be had in fear
Above all Gods must he.

Are Idols every one:
The Lord this same
Most glorious frame
Of heaven made alone.

With majesty divine:
Adored might,
And beauty bright, Greatest tokens of his glory are in his Church.

In's Sanctuary shine.

Let every stock and tribe,
Unto the LORD
With joint accord,
Glory and strength ascribe.
2. Part.
Argument.
He magnifies God for the hopeful revelation of the Gospel, For by Christ they
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22.
the joy of all creatures.


Due to his Name most high:
Devoutly bring
An offering
And to his courts draw nigh.

Of his most holy place: Gentiles come in.

Earth far and near,
O stand in fear
Before his awful face.

Be bold to say the word,
He Earth sustains
That it remains, The Church militant in unity, verity, safety.

And never shall be stirred.
He righteously shall judge the Earth,

Let all the Earth
Be filled with mirth,
And seas swift billows rore.

Of mirth with one accord:
And then shall these
The woodland trees

For lo, he does himself address,
And judgment he pursu'th, His coming is nigh at hand, to teach, judge,
justify, sanctify. Mediate of his coming to judgment.

To judge all flesh
With righteousness,
And people with his truth.
PSALM. XCVII.
David's tune.
The majesty of Christ's kingdom, the confusion of Idolaters, and great
harvest of joys, promised to the godly.

LEt earth rejoice God reigns alone, Islands as well as continent, rejoice for
the Kingdom of Christ, dreadful only to his adversaries.

Let numerous Isles be glad:

With clouds and darkness clad.

There goes before his feet:

The earth did quake to see it.

Before the earths great Lord: Kingdoms of Tyrants tremble at his Judgments.


The heavens his truth record.
Angels and men.

Confusion on them fall,
That boast of Idols such as these: Let all false gods fall as Dagon, etc. and
their disciples worship the true God.

Ye Gods adore him all.

With joy affected much:
And Judahs Daughters joy'd for that
Thy judgments Lord were such.

Ore all the earth most high:

Hate all iniquity;
His servants souls he saves each one,
And adverse power controuls:

And joy for upright souls. Light of comfort, which if it spring not up in*
this world, will be plentiful hereafter.


Great joy in him express:
And give him thanks when ye record
His perfect holiness.
PSALM. XCVIII.
To the three first lines of choice tune.
The victorious salvation of Christ, Such a holy nature cannot fail of his
promises.
the revelation of his gracious Gospel, to the great joy of all creatures.

UNto the LORD a new song sing,
For many a great and wondrous thing,
His mighty power to pass does bring.
His holy arm of soveraigntie, Luke 1. 69.

And his right hand exalted high,
Have gotten him the victory.

And brought his truth to open light:
Even in the very heathens sight.
Published to the Gentiles.

His perfect truth and mercies kind;
As all the house of Israel find.
The ends of all the earth abroad
Have seen declared and plainly showed
The saving health our God bestowed.

Let all the earth express their joys,
And sing his praise with loudest noise.

With instruments of music choice;
With harp and psalms melodious voice.

Before this Lord and King renowned;
Let sweet and sacred joys abound.

Even all that dwells on seas or shore;
The world and all its fullness rore.

And let the hills with one accord,
Rejoice with joy before the Lord.

The world and people gen'rally
With righteousness and equity.
PSALM. XCIX.
To choice tune.
The majesty and equity of Christ and his kingdom; The prayers, answers,
errors, corrections, mercies, miracles, recorded of the ancient Saints for our
example.

THe Lord does reign, Heb. 12. 28. Christ's government delights in
righteousness. Kings thrones are adorned with Purple, Arras, etc.
let people quake,
'Twixt Cherubims he sets his seat:
O let the earth be moved and shake.

Above all people he is high,

O let them praise the dreadful Name,
For high and holy is the same.

Thou do establish equity: Christ's with righteousness*

Thou execut'st them from above,
And rul'st in Jacob righteously.

And rev'rently his name adore
At footstool of his holy throne, At, or before the Ark, a Type of Christ.

For he is a high and holy one.

Among his Priests and men of fame: The word for a Priest is sometimes put for
a great person Number. 16. 46. 1. Sam. 7. 9. Exodus 13. 21. Ancient miracles belong
to us. Pardon and chastisement may stand together.

And Samuel among them there
That called upon his holy name.
They called, and answer he did make

They to his his testimonies clave,
And kept the ord'nance that he gave.

Thou wast a pard'ning God likewise:
Though thou tookst vengeance with thy rod,
And their inventions did chastise.

And worship at his holy hill: For the things they did besides and against the
word.

For sure the Lord our God alone
He is a high and holy one.
PSALM. C.
Southwell tune.
He exhorts to praise God for our happy calling in Christ Jesus.

ALL men of mortal birth
That dwell in all the earth
O make a noise
To God with joys,

O come before his throne
With singing every one:

The Lord most high
Even he is God alone.
He made us, He made us his people, Ioh. 15. 16.
and not we,
Not we our selves, but he
His folk and flock
And pasture stock
He made us for to be.

And in his Courts relate
His laud and fame,
And bless his name,
His honor celebrate.

His mercy fails never:
His truth does last
All ages past,
And constant does persever. How much more does Christ in his Church?

PSALM. CI.
To new staff tune.
In this song publicly profess it.
David vows to rule his house and Kingdom with discreet Comprehe^ding all the
virtues of a governor. Doing all for thy glory. When will thou settle me in
my kingdom, mean while I will do so in my house*
justice, to curb and cut off the wicked, and countenance the godly.

LOrd, I will sing of mercy sweet
And judgment, to thy praise:

In all thy perfect ways.
When will thou Lord
To me accord
Thy justice to impart:
At home will I,
Walk righteously
And with a perfect heart*
I^^ do no wrong to my subjects, nor suffer any one to counsel me so, I hate
such doings, etc.

Before mine eyes to be:
I hate their works that turn aside,
It shall not cleave to me,

From me shall part,
An^ have no more access:
And I will no
Such persons know
As practice wickedness.

I will cut off, be sure:
The stout in heart, whose looks are high,
I will not once endure.

The faithful men, The servants both of my Court and Crown shall be the best
deser^ing.

That dwell with me they may;
And then shall he
My servant be
That walks in perfect way.

No guilefull man to dwell:
Nor in my sight shall he remain
That lies invents to tell.

The wicked sort
And wickd works condem'
That so I may
Them take away
From Gods Jerusalem. Typing our bondage to Satan, and the Romish Babylon.

PSALM. CII.
Sinners tune.
The lamentations of the whole Church, as one man, in the captivity of Babylon.

LOrd hear my prayer, and let my cry
Come speedily to thee:

Hide not thy face from me.
Incline thine ear invoked to day,
Thine answer quick return;

My bones hearth-like do burn.

With deep and doleful groans;

My skin cleaves to my bones.

And deserts Owl I match:

On houses top I watch.

To my malicious foes;
The mad men are against me sworn,
Against me that arose:

My drink with weeping mixed:

And anger comes betwixt.
For down thou have thy servant cast, Therefore my adversity is the greater.

First having raised me high:

Like withering grass am I.

From all mutation free:
To every generation sure
Shall thy remembrance be.
2. Part.
To martyrs tune.
The Churches restoration from Babylon, and happy reformation in the days of
the Gospel: he desires to see it, but contents himself with consideration of
Gods eternity and perpetuity of his Church.


To Sion mount extend: Seventy years, Ier. 25. 12. Of the ruins of the
material temple, how much more of the living temple of the holy Ghost? Prayer
shall bring thee deliverance. Though in after ages.

Her time for favor which was set
Is now come to an end.

Her dust to them is dear;

Thy names renown shall fear.

When Sion he repairs:

Unto the needies prayers.
Their humble prayer he will not scorn,

For future ages yet unborn,
That they may praise the Lord.

The earth viewed from the sky:
Captives in Babylon.

And save the doomed to die.

His name and praise record: Gentiles conversion.


Meet there to praise the Lord.
Oh that this generation might see these days, but we are broken with
affliction, and wearing away.

My lingering days decayed:

Amid'st my days, I said.
Thy years throughout all ages last,

The earths foundation firm and fast,
Thy hands the heavens have made.

But thou shall still endure:
As vestures thou shall change their spheres,
And changed they shall be sure.


Their seed before thy face appears,
Established still alive.
PSALM. CIII.
York tune.
An exhortation to praise God for his incomparable mercies to his Church and
children.

MY soul I charge thee to express
The Lords renown and fame:
Let all within me praise and bless
His great and sacred name.

But bless the Lord my soul:

And makes thee sound and whole.

Destruction threatening sore:
With loving kindness crowned thy head,
And tender mercies store.

Thy mouth sufficing, fills:
So that thy youth is now renewed,
As Eagles casting bills. Her bill in old age grows so crooked, she cannot eat
till it fall off and then she revives. Psalm. 147. 29.


And righteousness conclude:
For persons that are destitute,
Oppressed by tyrants rude.

His acts to Isr'els seed:

And merciful indeed.
To anger slow, aboundless deep
Of mercies multiplied:

Nor everlasting chide.

And wickedness has bin:
Nor given us due recompense,
According to our sin.

The earth so far above:
So great to them that do him fear,
Is Gods surpassing love.

Removing, by his grace,
As far from us, as East and West
Are separate in space.
2. Part.
Argument.
He magnifies the sweet compassion of God, exhorts all creatures to praise him
for his greatness also.


Unto their children dear:
So God does them commiserate
That truly do him fear.

Our crasie frame he knows:

The grass which short time grows.
He prospers as a flower in field,

Is perished, and the place can yield
No knowledge of it more.

Eternity does fill:
His constant righteousness takes place
To childrens children still.

To keep his covenant true:
And thinks on his commandments,
For observation due.

The Lord has set his throne:
And over every kind of thing,
His kingdom rules alone.

And Gods commandments do:
That know his voice and word so well,
Still harkening thereunto.

Ye glorious hoasts of his:
Ye Ministers that do fulfill
What ere his pleasure is. Numerous Angels.


Bless ye the Lords great Name:
Through his Dominions every where,
My soul bless thou the same.
PSALM. CIV.
David's tune.
The admirable power and providence of God in the creation and government of
the world*

MY soul the great God magnify,
My God thou do thee cloth,
With honor and with majesty,
^xceeding great in both.

As with a Princely robe: The father of lights, for thou made light the first
day.

Like curtains drawn thou stretchest out
The bright celestial globe.
Second day Genesis 1. 6. As nimble as a flame to execute his will.
Upon the watery element there,
His chamber-beams he binds:
He makes the clouds his Chariot bear, Genesis 1. 3. Some think he treats of the
five days Creation.

And walks on winged winds.

His Angels spirits he makes:

So sure, it never shakes.
Third day. Genesis 1. 9. At first water lapt about the earth, but God bounded the
water, to make the earth habitable.
Which thou did cover with the flood,
Like garments overspread:
The waters ore the mountains stood, Quere, if Angels were not made the second
day.

Thy word, Genesis 1. 7. was soon obeyed.
rebuke they fled.
Thy thundering voice compeld them all,
To haste away apace:
Heb. The mountains ascend, the valleys descend.
mountains rise, the valleys fall,
Each to his founded place.

By setting them their bound:
That they may As naturally (being a lighter element) they would.
never turn again,
To cover all the ground.
Yet Rivers accommodate us, tho the Seas cover not the earth.

Which run among the hills:

Here take and drink their fills.
Wild asses here their thirst do slake;

And nests for habitations make,
And sing among the boughs.
2. part.
Argument.
The works of creation intermixed; the use of them for man.


The earth with rain has stored:
Thy works the whole earth satisfy,
With fruits that they afford.

And herbs for man's own use:
Convenient food for every thing,
He makes the earth produce.

Bring forth the grape for wine:
Heart-strengthning bread, and suppling oil,
To make the countenance shine.

Those goodly Cedar trees
Which he in Lebanon did plant:

The stork in stately firre-trees dwells,

The Conies in the hollow cells
Of stony rocks do sit.
Genesis 1. 14.

And he ordained it so:
And when to set none tells the Sun,
For he the time does know.

The forests beasts do then,
(Whom glittering daylight did affright)
Creep all out of their den.

Of God do seek their meat:

Together make retreat.

And then does man begin
To set upon and ply his work,
Till evening calls him in.
3. Part.
Argument.
The admirable works of God both by Sea and Land; the dependence of the
creatures upon him; the wicked are cursed for contempt of his works.


In wisdom all composed:
The earth by thee is richly stored
With treasures there-inclos'd.

Replenisht therewithal:
Where things innumerable creep,
And beasts both great and small.

Leviathan here keeps,
Whom thou have made to sport and play
Within the tumbling deeps.

For seasonable food:

And they are filled with good.
They gather what thou do supply,

Thou take away their breath, they die,
And to their dust return.
Tho individuums ( i. e. particular creatures, men, beasts, plants) die, yet
the species (the kinds of each) continue still.

Which them anew creates:
And all the surface of the earth,
Thy Spirit renovates.

His works his joy provokes:
As at Sina. Exodus 19. I will not neglect to praise God for his work, as
profane men do.
Earth made to tremble at his frown,
Hills at his touch to smoke.

While I remain alive:
While I have being, shall my tongue
In his choice praises strive.

In God will I be joy'd:

Be from the earth destroyed.
And let the wicked be no more: Take him away in his sins.

O thou my soul record
The praises of the Lord therefore,
Praise ye, praise ye the Lord.
PSALM. CV.
Old England tune.
An exhortation to seek Gods favor, help, and succor, upon consideration of
his wonderful works, expressed all the world ^ver.

GIve thanks to God, call on his Name,
To men his deeds make known:

And wonders every one.

Boast in ^is holy Name:

For ever seek the same.

And every wondrous deed:
His miracles and judgments all,
Which from his mouth proceed.

His chosen Jacobs sons:

Through the earth his judgment runs.
2. Part.
Argument.
The fidelity and confirmation of God; Which signifies our safe conduct to the
kingdom of glory.
promises to the faithful, instanced in Isreal's conduct to Canaan.


His covenants contents:
The word which he commanded to
A thousand of descents.

And next to Isaac swore:

To Jacob, as before.
An everlasting Covenant
With Israel firm to stand:

All Canaans fertile land:
An heritage allotted you,

Their number was exceeding few,
And also strangers there.

When, traveling along,
They to another people went:

But for their sakes he Kings controlled,
Let no presumptuous arm

To do my Prophets harm. My people taught and anointed with my Spirit.

3. Part.
Argument.
Gods preventing providence to his Church, Typing our provision and
preservation in the world.
instanced in Isreal's coming into Egypt, and preservation there.


That famine should be spread
Ore all the Land, Ou^ of evils God intends good for his children.
and wholly brake
The succouring staff of bread.

Whom for a slave they sold:

He lodged in irons cold.
Till the time came that God had said with himself ( i. e. decreed) to deliver
him; his word of permission tried Joseph's patience.

By Gods word tried was he:

To loose and set him free.

And ruler of his treasure:

And bind his Peers at pleasure.

And Jacob there found place
To sojourn in the land of Ham,

He made them stronger then their foes,
God guides wicked men's malice to our good.

And subtly made them deal with those
The servants of the Lord.
4. Part.
Argument.
A memorial of Gods miracles in Egypt; They are forced to let Israel go with
honor and riches.


Moses and Aaron too,

Wonders and signs to do.

A cloud of darkness fell:
Against his flat commandment,
They no way did rebel. No creatures disobedient to God, but Devils and men.


And all their fishes killed:

Abundantly were filled.

In all their coasts remain:

And flaming fire for rain.

He smote, and brake the same:

And Caterpillars came:

And all their fruits devour:

The chief of all their power.
Exodus 12. 35.
hired thereunto
With gold and silver bribes:
And not a feeble soul quite through
The Israelitish Tribes.
Exodus 33. 12.

Their terror did affright:
Exodus 13. 22.

And fire by night gave light.
5. Part.
Argument.
A touch of Gods miraculous mercies to Israel in the Wilderness and Canaan,
These were types of heavenly food. Meditate of the continual care of God for
our bodies and souls. And of Christ, signified by the rock of water. 1 Cor. 10.
4.
and the end for which they were bestowed.


Such as they asked to have:
And satisfied them with the bread
Which he from heaven gave.

Fresh waters gusht amain:
And like a river ran about
The dry and desert plain.

His holy Word and all:

With joy and festival. From Wilderness to Canaan, and us from earth to heaven.


on Israel he bestowed:

O spread his praise abroad.
PSALM. CVI.
To short staff tune.
The great goodness of God to his chosen people, which godly men desire to
partake of.

GIve thanks unto the Lord,
Who is with goodness stored:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
His praise do ye record.

Performed by his might:
Who can forth-show,
That men may know
His praises infinite?

That walk in judgments way:
And he that does
The works of truth, Wilfully transgressing.

And never goes astray.

Even with thy favor free:
Which to thine own
Is born alone
To them vouchsaf't by thee.
To visit me draw near
With thy salvation dear:

Well understood
Let unto me appear. Let me experimentally feel thy favor, as thy elect Saints
shall do.

In that deliverance
Which does thy land advance
Let me rejoice,
With glorying voice,
With thine inheritance.
2. Part.
Argument.
Our disobedience and ingratitudo, instanced and exemplifi'd by Israel, and
humbly confessed.


The father and the son:
Transgressing by
INIQUITY,
We wickedly have done.

Performed in Egypt land,
Our fathers old,
Who did behold, Did not edi^^e by them.

Yet did not understand.
Thy mercies many a one
They did not think upon:
But at the Sea,
Provoke did they,
The red Sea scor'd it on.

He saved them every one,
For his Name sake,
That he might make
His mighty power known:

At his rebuke was dried:
Through depths profound
As desert ground
He did his people guide.

Against their haters hand:
Redeeming those
From hand of foes,
That ruled them at command.

Not one was left of those:

Believed then,
His praise their songs compose.

For's counsels waited not:

Their lusts excess
Restraining not a jot.
3. part.
Argument.
The judgments of God upon Corah, and shameful Idolatry of Israel.

IN deserts God they tempt:

Quails to bestow, As diverse dyed suddenly by surfeit, Psalm. 78. 31. So some by
consumptions, going to the heart of them.

With leanness tho,
Into their soul 'twas sent.

Good Moses they envied:
On Aaron too
They envy drew,
Whom God had sanctified.

Became a swallowing grave:
Where Dathan and
Abiram stand,
And unto all they have.

Fire kindled suddenly:
The flame caught then
Those wicked men,
Which were burnt up thereby.

To make a calf of gold,
And worshipped
An image dead
Which they did melt and mould.

Into a molten mass
Of Oxes rude
Similitude,
A beast that eats grass.
4. Part.
Argument.
Gods vehement wrath against Israel, pacified by Moses intercession: But that
intercession was through Christ, on whom we must meditate.
their incredulity and contempt of the promised land.


They were forgetful quite,
Whose power and dread
Accomplished
Great things in Aegypts sight. Egypt was peopled by the posterity of cursed
Cham.


In Hams accursed land,
Dread things were they
At that red Sea
Performed by his command.

Would their destruction be:
Had not, alone,
His chosen one
Good Moses been so free:
He stood, to save them each,
Before him in the breach:
To turn away
His wrath that day,
Lest them destruction reach.

That pleasant land despise,
And entertain
His words as vain,
And deeming them but lies. As unbeleevers do the heavenly Canaan.


And gave not their consents,
With willing ear,
The voice to hear
Of his commandments.
Swear. See Ezekiel. 20.

That he would them withstand,
To overthrow
That people so
Within the desert land.

And scatter them also
In foreign lands
And tyrants hands
To serve a heathen to.
5. Part.
Argument.
The corporal and spiritual adultery of Israel; The zeal of Phinehas, their
provoking of Moses to passion, and lenity to the Canaanites.

Some write this God was Priapus a filthy God, worshipped pudendis pa^^facti^.

Themselves adjoined were:
They are likewise
The sacrifice
Of those dead Idols there.

To fiercest angers stroke:
So hateful their
Inventions were,
The plague upon them broke.
Number. 25.

With justice he repaid
Their foulest facts,
This part he acts,
And so the plague was stayed.
An approved act, how ever men might censure it.

Which that act did express:
And ages all
For ever shall
Esteem it for no less.

And him they angry make:
So discontent
That ill it went
With Moses for their sake. Number. 20. 10, 11, 12.


Rash speeches from him broke:
Such error slips
From hasty lips,
So unadvised he spoke.

And charged to smite them dead,
Yet did not they
Those Nations slay,

The works which heathenish are
To learn they did not spare:

Their Idols carved,
Which were to them a snare.
6. Part.
Argument.
The horrid Idolatries of Israel: Meditate how prone our nature is to sin.
the dreadful judgment of God for the same.


Their little girls and boys,
(Daughters nor Sons
Their blind zeal shuns)
To Devill-Deities.

Which sons and daughters bled:
Whom they likewise
In sacrifice
To Canaan Idols led.

With works of their own hand,
Which they invent
A whoring went,
Defiled with that foul brand.

Against them kindled sore:
So that the Lord
His own abhorred,
Such blame his her'tage bore.

And under the commands
Of heathen men,
Whose hatred then
They felt in foreign lands.

Oppressed and brought them low:
His people were
Subjected there
Under a foreign fo.
7. Part.
Argument.
Gods merciful compassions to his distressed people: It Is thought to be made
in the Babylonian captivity.
he takes heart to pray for de^^erance from present calamities.


Yet their unjust designs
Provoked him so,
They were brought low
For their abhorred crimes.

Their pitiful distress,
He did regard,
When as he h'ard
Their cry in bitterness.
And he to mind did call,
His covenant for them all:

Their multitude,
For he repents their thrall.

Of all whose slaves they were.

Now save we pray
Thy people every where.
Gather thy flock that strays,
Among heathen now adays:
That we may fame
Thy holy Name,
And triumph in thy praise.

To all eternity:
And people then
Say all, Amen,
The Lord to magnify.
PSALM. CVII.
To Dutch tune.
That God is magnified for his admirable providence over captives and planters.
No sort of men undergo harder things.


O Give ye thanks unto the Lord,
Who does with goodness flow:
With everlasting mercies stored,
How much more then for our spiritual deliverance.

Whom he redeemed from enemies hand,

From North and South, in every Land,
And from the East and West.
Planters of a new country; It was a common trade in ancient times.

They wandered in the ways
Of solitary desert ground,

Their weary souls did in them faint,

Unto the Lord they made complaint,
Who their distresses eased.

To Cities of abode:

For all his mercies showed.
And for his works and wondrous deeds,
To men of mortal kind:

And fills the hunger-pin'd.
2. Part.
Argument.
Gods providence toward poor prisoners and sick persons, though incurring
their miseries by their sins.


With shade of death ore-cast,
Whom irons and afflictions load,
Which fetters bind them fast.

Rebelled against by them:
The counsel of the Lord most high,
Because they did contem'.

They fell quite succourless:

He saved them from distress.
Out of a dungeon.

Which they were subject under:
He brought them out to life and light,
And brake their bonds asunder.

For every wondrous deed:
And goodness showed in all his ways,
To man's unworthy seed.
Prison-gates

And iron bars divide:

Great miseries abide.

To gates of death draws near:

He saves them from their fear.

From ruins were they raised:

Were for his goodness praised.
And for his wondrous works likewise,
To us that mortal are:

His works with joy declare.
3. Part.
Argument.
Gods rare providence over Seamen.


And have affairs to do

Gods wonders see into.
His works in deeps discern do they:

The storming wind to stir the Sea,
Which lifts her waves aloft.

Down to the deeps they roll*
The dangerous trouble they sustain,
Dissolves their very soul.

And reeling to and fro,

They cry to God in woe.
He them from their distresses saves,

Becalms the Seas tumultuous waves,
And stills their boisterous rage.

And are most joyful for it:
And so he brings them, at the last,
To their desired Port.

For all his goodness then:
And for his mighty wonders raised
To all the sons of men.
4. Part.
Argument.
All sorts exhorted to praise God, that raises the poor, and depresseth the
proud; the blessedness of such as observe Gods providence.


Let them exalt his Name:
Among assembled Elders spread,
His most renowned fame.

And rivers deserts makes:

For wicked dwellers sakes.

Into a standing Well:
Dry desert ground to water-springs,

Inhabited Cities to prepare,

Plant vineyards with industrious care,
Increasing fruits to yield.

That they are much increast:
Not suffering them of all the herd
To lose a sorry beast.

And brought to low estate:
Through great affliction suffered,
Distressed, disconsolate.

And causes them to stray
In solitary desert place,
Where is no beaten way.

sets him on safeties rock:
And makes him up a family,
Like to a numerous flock.

Rejoicing in the same: To convince Atheists, that heed not providence.

And all iniquity controlled,
Shall stop her mouth with shame.

These matters to record;
Even they shall understand the love
And kindness of the Lord.
PSALM. CVIII.
London short tune.
David praises God, and prays for the enlargement of his kingdom a type of
Christ's.

O God I fix my heart,
My glory bears a part:
And (as my tongue)
So shall my song
Praise thee with musicks art.

Right early wake will I: I will divulge thy Gospel in these psalms to the
Gentiles.


Will I record,
The people standing by.
I Will praise thee with my song,
The nations all among:
For the Angels both receive thy mercy, and report it, and it is infinite mercy.

To clouds of sky,
His truth and mercies throng.

Above the heavens frame:
Let earth below
The Trumpet blow
Of thy renowned fame. Command deliverances for thy Church, and to David in
token thereof


Delivered may be:
Thy help command,
With thy right hand,
And kindly answer me.
2. Part.
Argument.
David hoping to enlarge his kingdom according to Gods promises, So must we for
the enlarging Christ's kingdom.
depends wholly on Gods power. Remote parts, as Shechem are my heritage. And
all the tribes and coasts of Israel.



Which does me joyful make:
Shechem my share
And Succoth are
To measure out and take.

And Ephraim I Will assign, Yea and the Gentiles also, be tokening Christ's rule
over all. But (as Moab a wash-pot to wash the feet) some are but slaves,
submitting to Christ out of necessity.

While Judahs tribe
My laws prescribe,
To keep this head of mine.

Edom I Will tread on thee:
Philistia do
Thou triumph too,
And that because of me.
To conquer the City as well as the field, in token that Christ overcomes the
most obstinate.

To Edom fortified?

Assist us now
That have before denied?
O Lord will thou refrain
(...) Armies to maintain?

In trouble Lord,
For mortal succour's vain.

We shall do acts renowned:
For he it is,
The power is his
That shall our foes confound.
PSALM. CIX.
To new staff tune.
David fearfully cursing Judas with a prophetical spirit, leaves a dreadful
example to deter all false hypocrites and furious persecutors.

O God my praise, my just cause plead:

Their mouths have opened, and inveighed
Against me with false tongue.

And causless fight
They compass me about:

My foes they prove,
But I ply prayers devout*
Let the Devil be ready to tempt him to sin.

And ill for good reward:

To be a Master hard. Some understand, Let all his actions be cross as hindered
by Satan, i. e. an adversary.

Let Satan stand
At his right hand,

Appoint that he
Condemned be,
And turn his prayer to sin.
Turn his apology and plea at judgment against himself.

Cut short his treacherous life:

With widowhood vex his wife.

Continually
Abroad, as vagrants base.
And begging fed
Seek out their bread
In every desolate place.

Catch all he has away:
And let some greedy foreiners,
Of's labors make a prey.

That may extend
Relief in his distress:
And let there no
Man favor show
Unto his fatherless.
2. Part.
Argument,
as before.


With everlasting shame:
And in the age that next succeeds,
Extinguish quite his Name.

To mind be brought,
Before the Lord for ever.
His mothers crime
By length of time
Let be extinguished never.

Before the Lord in mind:
To cut from earth the memory
That Is left of them behind.

Forgot to show,
The poor and needy still
With fresh pursuits
He persecutes
The broken heart to kill.
Loved to be in an unregenerate state, subject to the curse, and cared not for
the blessings of the Gospel.

Let it come to him so:
As blessing did not him delight,
So let it from him go.

As garments clad,
His cursing let recoil:
Let it like drink
In's bowels sink,
And soke his bones like oil.

That covers him always:
And like the girdle that is girt
About him every day:

This recompense
Mine enemies to control:
That are incenst
To speak agenst
Mine inoffensive soul.
3. Part.
Argument.
Complaints and prayers of the poor and persecuted.


Even for thy Names dear sake:
Because right good thy mercies be,
My freedom undertake.

Do stand in need,
With misery sore distressed:
My grieved heart
With wounds does smart,
And bleeds within my breast.

Like wandering locust tossed:

My flesh her fat has lost.

To them a shame,
On me they gaze and stare:
Their heads they nod,

Me by thy mercies spare.

That thou have done the deed:

A blessing to succeed.
Them when they rise, Rise to attempt any wicked act.

Let shame surprise,
But make thy servant glad:

That are my foes,
And self-confusion clad.
O let their mantle be of shame:

Give God due praise, and sing his fame
The multitude among.

At his right hand, Stand up a near helper to the poor and persecuted.

And for his sake control
The doom of them,
That would condem
The poor man's harmless soul.
PSALM. CX.
To Magnificat tune.
The Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical offices of Christ Jesus.

THe Lord unto my Lord thus spoke, To Christ my Lord.

Sit thou at my right hand:
Till I thy foes a stool shall make,
VVhereon thy feet may stand.

Thy powers prevai^ing rod: Gospel first preached at Jerusalem*

Thy rule shall in the midst extend
Of all thy foes o God.

Shall yield unto thy power:
From mornings womb thy first dew falls Conversion at the first preaching, as
plentiful as the morning dew.

In the Church a beautiful creature.
In sacred beauties bower.

Thou art for ever called
A Priest with priesthood permanent,
Heb. 7. 3. Destroying the adversaries by heaps pursuing the victory as a
warrior, wetting his lips only for have. Some understand it of Christ's
passion and resurrection.
Melchis'dek-like enstall'd.

The Lord at thy right hand

In many a heathen land.
Filling the places where he struck
With bodies of the dead:

And so lift up the head.
PSALM. CXI.
To pause tune.
The Church exhorted to praise God for his mavelous works, which are here in
part described.

PRaise ye the Lord,
I will record
His praise with heart sincere:
Where men upright
Themselves unite
In The Congregation there.
Viz. Creation, preservation, etc.

Sought out they are
Of all that so delight:

With glory crowned
His justice infinite.
His wonders he
Has made to be
Retained in thankful mind:

A gracious one,
Compassionate and kind.

For them to eat
That fear his holy Name: Provision for soul and body, typed by Manna of old.

He will fulfill
His Covenant still,
Still mindful of the same.

He showed his might,
And did his works advance:
That he might so
On them bestow
The heathens heritance.

And his commands
Are truth and judgment sure:

And ever last
Accomplished true and pure.

Sent down to his, Redemption

His Covenant still the same:
As he commands
It firmly stands;
O holy reverend Name!

Does wisdom bring, Sanctification, without which we have no true knowledge of
his great works.

Good knowledge have all they,
That do fulfill
His holy will,
His praise endures for ay.
PSALM. CXII.
Magnificat tune.
The great piety, justice, and charity of the Saints: the blessing upon them
and theirs, to the great grief of the wicked.

PRaise ye the Lord: Blessed are such
As serve the Lord in fear:
In his commands delighting much:

The uprights offspring God shall bless,

His memorable righteousness
Endures for evermore.
Good out of evil.

In darkness rises light:
He Is gracious and compassionate,
In justice exquisite*

And lends to him that needs:
And with discretion will direct
His thoughts, his words, his deeds.

He shall not moved be;
But had in lasting memory,
For evermore shall he.

He shall not be afraid:
His faithful heart which makes him bold,
On God is firmly stayed.

Afraid he shall not be:
Till his desire accomplished
Upon his foes he see.

And given to the poor:
He shall to perpetuity
Be styled a right'ous doer.
His horn shall high exalted be
With honor so atcheiv'd:

And be extremely grieved.
Yea he shall gnash his teeth for spite,
And pining melt away:
And his desire shall perish quite,
The wicked man's, I say.
PSALM. CXIII.
To Coventry tune.
Gods gracious respects to the creatures; His mavelous advancing of mean
persons.

PRaise ye the Lord, praise him, I say,
All ye his Saints professed:

For ever may
His glorious Name be blessed.

Of all men to be praised:

The heavens frame,
Above all Nations raised.
It Is his mere grace that he should respect any Saint in heaven, much more the
poor on earth.

Who dwells in heaven high:

For things that are
Both in the earth and sky.


And dunghill base
To Princes place,
To sit enthroned with Kings.
As barrennes was of old a great grief and children a great blessing, so much
more, spiritually understood.

So that of children store,
A mother she
Full glad may be,
Praise ye the Lord therefore.
PSALM. CXIV.
David's tune.
The rare providence of God to Israel, in remove from Egypt toward Canaan.

WHen Israel Aegypts bounds forsook, Meditate of our coming out of the world
into the Church, and traveling toward heaven. Israel was a holy and obedient
people. Red sea* Sinai.

Their dwelling to exchange:
And Jacobs house their journey took
From folk of language strange:

He ruled in Israel:

And Jordan backward fell.

Low hillocks like young sheep:

Why fled the liquid deep?

Like timorous flocks of rams?
Ye little hills, how chance, how chance,
Ye skipt like frighted lambs?

Even Jacobs God, that brings

The flint to water-springs.
PSALM. CXV.
London long tune.
Great glory appropriated to God; the derision of Idols and Idolaters.

LOrd not to us, Lord not to us,
But give thy Name renown:
And let thy works miraculous,
Thy truth and mercies crown.

Now where is their God become?

And all he pleased has done.

The handiwork of man:

Nor speak at all they can.

Have noses, but no sent:

And feet, but never went.
Their hollow throats no breath goes through,

And so are all that trust thereto,
The work^man like the ware.
2. Part.
Argument.
The Church exhorted to praise God, as most interessed in his mercies.


Thy shield and helper be:

Their help and shield is he.

All ye that do him fear:

Still mindful of us here.
In Isr'els house he will bless them all,
And Aarons house no less:

The Lord will surely bless.

Will God increase the birth:

That formed heaven and earth.

Even all the heavens are so:
But he the spacious earth affords
To sons of men below.
The Church shall survive in its generation to praise God.

Do never praise the Lord:

Do ye his praise record.
PSALM. CXVI.
To 2. French tune.
David gives humble thanks for great deliverance from extreme temptations.

I Love the Lord, who heard my cry,
And to my suits good ear did give:

I Will call upon him while I live.
Afflictions seeming as bitter as death.

Trouble and anguish on me came:
The pains of hell on me gat hold,

O Lord I pray to thee alone,
From sorrows pit my soul to pull.

Yea, and our God is merciful.

I was brought low he helped me:

God has dealt bounteously with thee.

Mine eyes from tears, my feet from falls:
Lead my life as in thy sight, with a particular trust that thou look to me.
2 Cor. 4. 13.
I Will walk before thee, thee to serve,
Here where the living on thee calls.

Tho scorched in afflictions fire:

Tush, every man is found a A vanity, a thing of naught, which who would think
God should regard. They were public mercies in respect of the person
representing Christ.
lier.
2. Part.
Argument.
David studies true gratitude, and celebrates his deliverances in public.


For all thy benefits to me:
A custom of the Jews at feasts to lift up a cup at singing a Psalm, which they
called the cup of salvation, to which Christ alluded, Luke 22. 17. Born in the
Church of believing progenitors, and therefore interessed in the Covenant.
cup lo I will take,
And therewithal will call on thee.

Yea, now in all his peoples eyes:
He recals what he said, man's a liar n^, a Saint is a precious thing to God,
who prevents their death, or rewards it.
The death of all his Saints sincere,
The Lord does very highly prize.

I am a servant of the Lords:
Thy handmaids son O Lord, am I,
And thou have loost thy servants cords.

And on the Lords Name I will call:

In sight of these his people all.

In Gods own house in midst of thee,
Of thee o great Jerusalem,
O therefore praise the Lord with me.
PSALM. CXVII.
1. Strain tune.
The Gospel, truth, and grace of God, joyful to all Nations.

O All ye Nations praise the Lord,
Ye people all his praise record:

His loving kindness is to us.
His truth endures for evermore,
O praise his holy Name therefore.
PSALM. CXVIII.
York tune.
An exhortation to praise God as most worthy, and to trust in him as most safe.

THe Lord, the Lord is good and kind,
O give him thanks therefore:
Because we do his mercies find
Continued evermore.
Day of David's settling in the kingdom, a type of Christ's.

His mercies still prevail:

His mercies never fail.

His mercies still remain:

He answered me again.

The Lord does take my part;
For all that man to me can do,
No fear shall seiz my heart.

And I fulfilled shall see
What I desired in my heart,
On enemies hating me.

To trust in God alone;
Then for to put our confidence
In any mortal one.

Our confidence in thee;
Then for to put our trust in those
That powerful Princes be.
2. Part.
Argument.
The triumphant and typical victories of David, to the great joy of the Church.

Meditate of Christ, conquering the sons of B^lial.

Whom yet I overcame:
For I shall surely root them out
In Gods assistant Name.

They compast me about:
But in the Name of God shall they
Be all destroyed, no doubt.

They compast me about:
But like a fire of bramble trees,
Are soon again put out.
Yea I shall soon destroy them all,
In Gods assistant Name.
Saul or Ishbibenob, 2 Samuel 21. 16.

But God my help became.

And my salvation sweet:
David's deliverance a joy to all the Church.

In just men's dwellings meet.

The Lords right hand's renowned:
The Lords right hand's exalted high,
With valiant actions crowned.
Not be slain by Saul, or any adversary.

Gods works to testify:

Though sore chastis'd was I.
3. Part.
Argument.
David magnifies God for choosing him (a contemptible person) to the Crown,
Meditate of Christ, of whom he was a type. Gate of the Sanctuary* where
righteous men, righteous ordinances. etc.
praying for the preservation of his kingdom.


Then shall thy Courts be trod;
Where I thy praise may celebrate,

Here shall the righteous entrance have.

For thou becam'st my rock to save,
And thou have heard my prayer.
David by Courtiers, Christ by Cavillers, Mat. 21. 42.

Is now become the stone
Which for the corners-head is used,

This in our eyes is mavelous,

Shall be a day of joy to us, Day of David's inauguration, and of Christ's
incarnation, etc.

Therein delight to take.

O send us good success:
Blessed Ministers that preach these glad tidings. It seems this Psalm was used
at some solemn feast.

You from his house we bless.

Which this high day adorns:
Then bind the sacrifice with cords
Unto the Altars horns.

My God I Will spread thy praise:

His mercies last always.
PSALM. CXIX.
2. French tune.
The blessedness of true Religion; The Saints great desire thereto, and prayer
against desertion.

O Blessed blessed are the pure,
That never from Gods laws depart:

And seek him with a perfect heart.

Walk in his ways, and never swerve:

That we with care thy laws observe.

And to thy statutes rightly framed:

Then sure I shall not be ashamed.

When I have learned thy judgme^ts right:

O do not Lord forsake me quite.
2. Part.
Dutch tune.
The power of the word to curb the lusts of youth: The earnest affections of
the faithful to that Word.


From error in his youth?
If thereunto he take good heed,
According to thy truth.

Even with a perfect heart:
From paths of thy commandments pure,
O let me not depart.

From sin to keep me free:

Thy statutes teach to me.


With thy commandments ways compared,
To yield so sweet a pleasure.

Much by thy judgments set:

And not thy words forget.
3. Part.
2. French tune.
The word of God a good guide, and a strengthening comfort against reproach and
persecution.


To deal with me in bounteous wise,
That I may live and keep thy word,

That I the wondrous things may see,
Which from thy testimonies flow:

That am a stranger here below.

Thy judgments having still preferred:

Which from thy precepts greatly erred.

For I have kept thy just decrees:

Thy servant (Lord) for keeping these.
But in thy Statutes exquisite,
Thy servant meditation plied*

They are my counsel and my guide.
4. Part.
To 1. Strain tune.
David's deep affliction and great affection to the Word, but the grace is of
God.

My soul faints.

O quick'n me for thy promise just.
Opened my heart in confession and petition.

And thou have heard and noted me.

And let me know thy precepts way.
So my discourse shall wholly tend,
Thy works and wonders to commend.

Lord for thy promise send relief.
Heresy and error.

And grant me graciously thy law.

I laid thy judgments in my sight.

Lord shame me not for what I do.

When as thou shall my heart enlarge.
5. Part.
2. French tune.
David's desire of grace, and to avoid temptations.


And I shall keep it to the end:

With my whole heart thy laws attend.
Yea, I to keep them shall be sure,

In paths of thy Command'ments pure,
For therein only I delight.

And not to cov'tousnes (I pray)
Greediness of any lust, restrains all my senses.

And quicken me in thy good way.

Who is devoted to fear thee:
Therefore I would have nothing else to fear.

For very good thy Judgments be.

Thy blessed laws to know and do;
Vouchsafe then in thy righteousness,
To move and quicken me thereto.
6. Part.
Southwell tune.
A prayer for courage in our profession: Gods service is perfect freedom.


Come also unto me, As well as to other good Christians.

According to
Thy promise do,
And my salvation be.

Reprove his envious lust;
Who ever he be
That taunteth me,
For in thy Word I trust.

My mouth abandon quite;
For lo the scope
Of all my hope
Is in thy judgments right.

For ever constantly;

I keep thy laws,
Will walk at liberty.

To Kings, I will not shame;

To do thy will
For I have loved the same.

To thy beloved commands,
And on them pitch
My thoughts, to which
My strong affection stands.
7. Part.
London long tune.
David's great affection to Gods Word, even in his greatest adversity: His
night-devotion is commended.


Whereon thou made me rest:

Thy word revives my breast.

Thy ways I never declined:
Thy judgment on the wicked.

And comforted my mind.

Which does thy laws forsake:
In time of my flitting and fleeing from Saul's persecution. My grace was
rewarded with more grace.

Thy laws my songs did make.

When night her curtain draws:

Because I kept thy laws.
8. Part.
2. French tune.
David's contentment in God, and in all the godly.


I said that I will keep thy Word:

Thy promised grace to me afford.

And to thy laws my feet ^ bent:

To keep thy just commandment.
As at Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30. 3. judgments of thy mouth, and thy hand.

Yet have I not forgot thy laws:

For thy just judgments give me cause.

Such men I am companion to:

Teach me thy laws to know and do.
9. Part
to 3. first lines of choice tune.
The special goodness of God to his servants, and the great benefit of
sanctified affliction.


Lord thou have dealt full well with me,
That am thy servant fearing thee.

And knowledge of thy word and way, I grounded my faith on thy Word.

For I believe what thou do say.

I went astray from thee, O God;
But in thy paths I since have trod.

And thou do good, thy works do show,
O teach me Lord thy laws to know.
Does at good for me.

But my whole heart will I apply,
To keep thy precepts faithfully.
Proud and fottish with prosperity.

But, Lord, the law which thou do own,
Is my delight, and that alone.

The afflicting hand of God, I know,
That I might learn thy Statutes so.

Better to me a thousand fold,
Then heaps of silver and of gold.
10. Part.
Dutch tune.
The godly desires and mutual love of the faithful.


Give me thy laws to learn:
And thy Commandments what they
Give knowledge to discern.

When they shall me behold:
Because I have assurance had
In what thy word foretold.

I understand no less:
I know thou have afflicted me
Of very faithfulness.

Come to thy servant Lord:
For comfort to my troubled mind,
According to thy word.

That I may live thereby*
For lo in thy Commandment,
Full great delight have I.

For they without a cause
Have most perversely dealt with me,
But I will mind thy laws.

And that have known my Name:

That I be free from shame.
11th Part.
To sweet tune.
David's assurance, notwithstanding delay: His faithfulness, notwithstanding
persecution.


But in thy word is all my stay:

When will thou comfort me, they ^ay.

I am rightly compared unto: Prove. 17. 22.

But lo the word which thou have spoke,
I have not yet forgot to do.
The days of my affliction.

When will thou judgment execute?
On them that persecutions raise
Against my soul with close pursuit?

Which with thy law do not accord:

They persecute me, help me Lord.

Their cruel and injurious hands,
Had even consumed me almost:
But I forsook not thy commands.

To quicken up my fainting mind:
So shall I keep the Testament
Which thy most holy mouth assigned.
12th Part.
1. French tune.
The stability of Gods Word and works: The comfort of the Word in trouble, and
perfection of it above all things else.


As sure as heaven from whence it came:

From age to age it is the same.
The earth, by thee confirmed, abides
No decay in nature. Genesis 8. 22.

Just as thine ordinance provides,
For all things do obey thy will.

And inward comfort ministered:
Affliction had destroyed me quite,
And I therein had perished.

I never will forgetful be:
But think upon them evermore,
For thou with them have quickened me.

And I do seek thy precepts still:

Intending to destroy and kill.
But still thy laws I entertain,
And thereon are my thoughts bestowd:
Of a latitude to give full content.

Only thy laws are wondrous broad.
The 13th Part.
1. French tune.
Gods Word the best Schoolmaster, and practice the best proof of divine
knowledge.


All day I meditate on those:

That make me wiser then my foes.
For they are evermore with me.

Then even my Teachers skill can be, Such teachers as were not godly.

For they my meditation store.

And so more skill then the ancients gaind:

From all lewd ways my feet refraind.

For thou have taught me wondrous well.

Counting its sweetness to excel.
No honey to my mouth so sweet,

That I am made so wise, discreet.
Detesting all erroneous ways.
The 14th Part.
1. Strain tune.
The cleerness of Gods Word, Saints desire to keep it, praying for assistance
and acceptance.


A light to guide my paths most meet.

Thy righteous judgments I will do.

Lord keep thy word, and me restore.

Let I beseech thee be allowd.
Lord from my mouth accept the^ each,
And unto me thy judgments teach.
My life in continual danger. Judge. 12. 3.

Yet I forget not thy command.

Yet erred I not from thy decree.

A constant heritage of those.
For they are all and every part,
The dear rejoicing of my heart.

To keep thy statutes to the end.
The 15th Part.
To sweet tune.
David's dislike of the wicked, and dread of Gods judgments.

vain thoughts, but love thy laws. Heb. Boughs metaph. thoughts that wind
crookedly. Ier. 4. 14. Some read, I hate the ^nstable.


My shield (when danger near me draws)
And I have hoped in thy word.

Your fellowship must needs withstand:
For I am purposed in my heart
To keep my righteous Gods command.

As thou have promised the same:
That for my expectation bold,
I never may be put to shame.

And I shall very safely stand:
And I will have respect each hour
To all thy Statutes shall command.

Which from thy Statutes go astray;
For all their policy they deceive themselves.

As basest dross thou putst away.
Therefore I love thy holy laws.

And all thy dreadful judgments cause
A trembling fear to rise in me.
The 16th Part.
1. Strain tune.
David professing integrity, prays against Tyrants, and the iniquity of the
times.


O leave me not to tyrants hands.
Engage thy self for my defense.

To proud oppressors leave not me.

And till thy righteous word prevail.

And unto me thy laws reveal.

That I may know thy blessed will.
To work a reformation.

For they thy laws have undertrod.
Being confident that thou will maintain the truth.

Yea gold and finest gold above.

In all things right: All false ways hate.
17th Part.
To 1. French tune.
The cleerness and sweetness of Gods Word, His great desire thereto, and
extreme sorrow for the general contempt thereof.


Therefore my soul does keep them right:

And understanding to the dull.


As those thy usual dealing find,
Whom pure affection towered thee draws.

From sins dominion set me free:

So shall I keep thy word o Lord.

And in thy statutes make me wise*

Because they keep no laws of thine.
The 18th Part.
To 1. Strain tune.
The singular excellencies of Gods Word, and ardent zeal of the Saints
thereunto.


And righteous judgme^ts have decreed.

Are very righteous faithful things.

Because my foes thy words forgot.

That I thy servant love it much.

Yet do not I thy laws forget.

Thy law is truth, the truth divine.

Yet thy co^mandments sweetly pleased.

And I eternally shall live.
19. Part.
To the 3. first lines of choice tune.
David prays early and earnestly for audience and deliverance; comforts himself
in the stabilitie of Gods grace and truth.


Lord hear the words which I let fall:
For I will keep thy Statutes all.

Thy testimonies then shall be
Most faithfully observed by me.

In The morning did I cry and pray:
I made thy Word my hope and stay.

That I might sweetly contemplate,
And on thy Word might meditate.

And after thy compassions free,
Lord hear my voice, and quicken me.

That follow after wickedness:
But from thy law they far digress.

And thy command'ments generally
Are perfect truth and equity.

I know of old they must persever:
For thou have founded them for ever.
20th. Part.
To London long tune.
David sollicits for mercy, shows the wretchedness of the wicked, and stabilitie
of the Word.


For I do mind thy laws:

Defend me, plead my cause.

Who never seek thy ways:

Me by thy judgments raise.

Which persecute me sore:
Yet did not I thy laws decline,
Nor go aside therefore.

Who kept not thy decree:

In kind love quicken me.

To be a bulwark sure:
Thy righteous judgments every one
Perpetually endure.
21. Part.
2. French tune.
David professes his constancy in a persecuted condition, the comforts of the
Word, and all-seeing eye of God.


Maliciously without a cause:
Yet stands my heart in fear of thee,
So much thy Word my conscience aws.

So do I in thy law delight:
Errors and Heresies. Nothing needs disquiet or discourage them what ever falls
out.

But love thy laws, for they are right.

Even for thy righteous judgments sake:

And no offense they need to take.

Of thy salvations welcome aid:
And thy command'ments for thy sake,
To execute have not delayed.

Which great affections in me raise:

For thou beholdest all my ways.
22. Part.
To 2. French tune.
David sollicites for mercy, confessing his backslidings.


Thy faithful promises to prove:
O give me understanding clear,

For me a sure deliverance raise,
According as thy promise stands:

When thou have taught me thy commands.

I Will speak of them with cheerful voice:

For of thy precepts I made choice.

And have delighted in thy laws:
My soul thy praises shall record,
Though his backslidings were not total, yet could he not recover of himself.

O let thy judgments give me aid,

Who like a wandering sheep have strayd,
For I thy precepts bear in mind.
PSALM. CXX.
To new staff tune.
The wickedness and barbarousness of slanderers and incendiaries of mischief.

I Cried in my distresses great,
To God who did attend:

My soul O Lord defend.

Or done to thee
False tongue thus used to err;

That mighty is, Some interpret this of the sin, others of the punishment, as
keen and fierce as etc. Juniper coals will keep fire a twelve-moneth, if some
may be believed. Moll. in loc. As barbarous as Moors and Arabians.

With coals of Juniper.

In Mesech to reside:
And must in Kedars tents remain,
And therein still abide.

Converst with such
As unto peace are foes:

But, when I spoke,
They straight to wars arose.
PSALM. CXXI.
David's tune.
The perpetual vigilance of God over his Church.

I To the hills will lif^ mine eyes, To heaven, typed by Sion-hill.

My help comes from the same:

That heaven and earth did frame.

Nor thy foot moved permit:

Nor slumbers any whit.

The Lord's thy shady bower:
When they lie in camp the hurtful influences of heaven shall be restrained.
nor Sun by day,
To smite thee have the power.

And guard thy soul about:

Thy going in and out.
PSALM. CXXII.
London short tune.
The religious devotion and mutual affection of the Saints; the honor and
privileges of the Church, typed by Jerusalem.

I Joy when they exhort
To Gods house let us resort; Made at their Arks remove. 2 Samuel 6. 2.


Shall early meet,
Jerus'lem, in thy port. signifying unity and uniformitie of the Church. The
males came thrice a year to worship before the Ark of the testimony
(represe^ting Christ) Exodus 34. 23. and 25. 21.


Like to a City fair;
For form exact,
And close compact;

The Lords tribes are the same,
To Isreal's Ark they came;
Each several tribe,
There to ascribe
Thanksgiving to his Name.
Typing Christ's government and discipline.
thrones of David's stem,
There Is Judgment-thrones for them;

May never cease
From fair Jerusalem.
Thy lovers peace befalls,
In all the Cities and famous places, typing Christ's Congregations. Which
Temple typed the Church, and Christ's body that died for us. Ioh. 2. 21.

Prosperity
Dwell constantly
Within thy stately halls.

For friends and brethrens sakes;

For neighborhood,
Which our Gods Temple makes.
PSALM. CXXIII.
Oxford tune.
The patient waiting of Saints, and opprobrious contempt of adversaries.

O Thou that dwell'st above the skies,
I lift mine eyes to thee:

His Masters hands to see.
As handmaids watch their Mistress hands,
Our eye of faith even thus,
Upon our God fast fixed stands,
Till he commis'rate us.

Have mercy on our woes:
For we are filled exceedingly,
With foul contempt of foes.

With foul contempt, and scorn
Of those that are at ease, and such
As have lift up the horn.
PSALM. CXXIV.
2. French tune.
God is glorified in the salvation of his, from the fury and fraud of our
adversaries.

BUt that the LORD (may Israel say)

When enemies rose to hunt their prey,

Whose kindling fury nothing stopped.

Our soul had then been over-topt,


Into their cruel teeth a prey:

So is our soul escaped away.
The snare is broke that held the game,
By that good means do we evade:

Who has both earth and heaven made.
PSALM. CXXV.
David's tune.
The perpetual protection of the Church.

ALL they that on the LORD rely,
As Sion Mount shall prove:
Abiding firm perpetually,
That nothing can remove.

So God is altogether
About his people, guarding them,
From this time forth for ever. Their rod and rule may be upon the back of the
godly, but notabide over long, to make Gods people desperate.


Upon the just men's lot:
Lest righteous men (too much oppressed)
Should do they care not what.

To men of upright heart:

To crooked ways depart.
With workers of iniquity,
The Lord shall lead them out: As malefactors to execution*

But Israel shall, undoubtedly,
With peace be hedged about.
PSALM. CXXVI.
York tune.
The Church celebrates her happy return from the captivity of Babylon, Typing
our deliverance from Romish Babylon.
praying for the completing of their deliverance.

WHen as the Lord brought back again, We thought it but a dream.

The bondage most extreme,
Wherein poor Sion did remain,
We were like them that dream. Act. 12. 9.


And singing filled our tongue:
Among amazed heathen men,
These speeches past along.
Great things for them and mavelous,
The Lord has done indeed:

Which does our gladness breed.

As streams in Southern parts: As comfortable as rivers in dry places.


To reap with joyful hearts.
They that sow seed when the dearth is so great, they weep to spare so much.

A pledge behind him leaves
To come again with joy, no doubt,
And with him bring his sheaves.
PSALM. CXXVII.
Dutch tune.
The unprofitableness of worldly care; The sweet blessings of posterity.

EXcept the LORD the house do build,
Vain pains the builders take:
Except the LORD the City shield,
In vain the watchmen wake.

And eating careful bread:
While Gods beloved in their estate,
Sleep quietly in bed.

And children can bestow:

Shot from a Giants bow.

Enjoys a happy state:
Such shall not be ashamed to treat
With the enemy in the gate. In the gates of war, or Courts of justice,
which were built in the gates.

PSALM. CXXVIII.
To David's tune.
The blessings of the godly in provision and posterity.

BLessed are all that fear the LORD,
And walk as God commands:

By labors of thy hands.
All welfare shall to thee betide,
And happy be thy life:

Lo such shall be thy wife.
Thy children round about thy board,
Like plants of Olive tree:

Thus blessed shall he be. From heaven what was promised in Sion.


Rich blessings shall convay:
And thou Jerus'lems good shall see,
Unto thy dying day.

A plentiful increase
Of childrens children, being old,
And Isreal's stablisht peace.
PSALM. CXXIX.
The often assaults sustained by the Church: he curses the implacable
adversaries.

THey from my youth may Israel say, From the very beginning of the Church.


And sorely grieved me many a day,
But never have prevailed.

And made their furrows long: All the means and instruments of destruction.


The wickeds cords so strong.

Confound, and overthrow:
Such ears of corn as grow on the house top, never have the honor of a
harvest, so let the wicked never come to good.

Which withers ere it grow.

So much as hands can gripe:
Nor he that binds up the sheaves,
A bosom full grown ripe.

At gathering of the same,
To say thus much, God speed you Sirs,
We bless you in his Name.
PSALM. CXXX.
Oxford tune.
The depths of sorrow and sin; he seeks succor in Gods mercies, and exhorts
all thereto.

OUt of the depths I cried to thee,

And let thine ears attentive be
Unto my suits preferred.

If thou should mark the same:

That men may fear thy Name:

I on his Word depend:

For morning that attend.
I say, more earnestly then those
That watch for mornings light:

Whose mercie's infinite.
Redemption in most plenteous wise,
With him is found to be:

Shall he set Israel free.
PSALM. CXXXI.
Dutch tune.
David's meek and quiet spirit, waiting upon God by faith, exhorts the Church
to follow his example.

O LORD, I have no lofty eyes,
Nor haughty heart have I:
My soul I do not exercise,
In things too great and high.

And have my self contained
In silent meekness, like a child
From his fond mother weaned.
Like to a weaned infant just,
My soul is pacified:

And trusting so abide.
PSALM. CXXXII.
York tune.
David's zeal to turn the Tabernacle into a Temple: Meditate how zealous we
should be to promote Religion. Never quiet in his mind till he could resolv
where to build a Temple. Which also betokened the temple of our hearts 1 Cor.
6. 19.
He foretells the joy of the people therein, and prays for Gods favor.

KIng David's case o LORD record,
And all his torturing care:

Who thus did vow and swear.

Nor come my house amids:

Nor slumber to my lids:

A place wherein may dwell
The mighty God of Jacobs race,
The God of Israel.
David born at Bethlem-Ephrata, told us where the temple should be built,
namely, in Jerusalem, which was once a wood land place.
Lo, Ephrata this news did yield,
There heard we of it so:
We found it in the woodland field;
When these Tents are turned into a Temple (figuring the settled state of the
Church) and the Ark (representing the strong God) placed in the Propitiatory (a
type of Christ, 1 Ioh. 2. 2.) then shall we go to worship joyfully.
We to his Tents will go.
And at the footstool of his grace,
With reverent worship bow:

Thy ARK of strength and thou

Thy Saints let shout apace:

Thy Kings anointed face. For thy Covenant sake with David through Christ, of
whom he is a type.

2. Part.
Argument.
David's good will is taken for the deed, his son Solomon (another type of
Christ) builds the Temple; a blessing is promised to David's seed reigning in
Jerusalem. A type of Christ's reigning in the Church.



Which shall not be recalled:
With children of thy body born,
Thy throne shall be enstall'd.

Thy seed therein persever:
Their childrens children shall not want
To hold the throne for ever.
The Temple was built on Mount Moriah, David's house on Sion, which being more
famous, carries the name, and types Christ's Kingly office as well as
Prophetical and Priestly.

His habitation willed:

My dwelling here I Will build.
For so have I desired to do,

Will bless provision thereunto,
Her poor with bread suffice.

And make her Saints to shout

Make DAVID'S horn to sprout.
I have for mine anointed there
Ordained a shining flame: A type of the light and glory of the Church.


But cloth his foes with shame.
PSALM. CXXXIII.
1. Strain tune.
The commendation and blessing of unity.

BEhold how good and full of bliss,
And what a pleasant thing it is:
When Brethren do most lovingly
Together dwell in unity.

Upon the top of Aarons head,
Which drencht his beard, and from his crown
Even to his garment skirts ran down:

Or which on Sion Mount distills:
Where GOD powrs down his blessings store,
Blessings of life for evermore.
PSALM. CXXXIV.
Old England tune.
An exhortation to the Levites to praise God, Typing the duty of Ministers.
And ours too, who are Gods (Clergy, 1 Pet. 5. 3. (...) and) Priesthood.
and their blessing and praying for the people.

BEhold, bless ye the LORD of might,
Ye servants of the Lord:
Which in his house do stand by night,
All ye his praise record.

In his most holy hill:
1 Pet. 2. 9.

From Sion bless thee still.
PSALM. CXXXV.
To 2. Strain tune.
The happy election, vocation, and preservation of the Church, by the creator
and governor of all things, who executed his judgments on our behalf.

PRaise ye Gods Name:
His praise proclaim,
O ye his servants spread his fame.

The Courts of God,
The Temple Courts of our great God.

For good is he,
And praises very comely be.

And Israel his
Peculiar and choice treasure is.

Is great, I know,
All Gods they are our LORD below,

Earth, deeps, and Seas,
He did what ever did him please.

From earths far ends,
And rain with lightning makes and blends.
The winds swift wings
From treas'ries brings,

The first increast
Of man and beast,
Even from the greatest to the least.

In midst of thee
Sent tokens that most wondrous be.
In general
Those judgments fall,
On Pharaoh and his servants all.

And overthrew
Great Kings, and mighty Nations too.

And Bashanite,
Sihon and OG his hands did smite.
By him alone
Were overthrown
The Kings of Canaan every one:

To Isr'els hand,
An heritage at their command.

And Name endure,
Not any age shall them obscure.
2. Part.
Argument.
Gods gracious reconciliation to his Church; the definition of Idols, and
praise of God.


Our punishment:
To judge his people he is bent.

Are formed of gold
And silver, which men's hands did mould.

They have likewise:
But blind and speechless Deities.
Each side an ear,
But cannot hear:
No breath does in their mouths appear.

Be like them just:
And so are all that in them trust.

His praise express,
Isreal's and Aarons house no less.

To do the same:
And all that fear his holy Name.

Him bless we will
That dwells at Salem, By some special tokens of his presence at Jerusalem,
i.e. peace.
bless him still.
PSALM. CXXXVI.
London short tune.
A thankful commemoration of Gods mercies, testified in so many miraculous
works.

UNto the LORD, Typing the Church, whence God gives peace of the Gospel.
o ye
Give thanks, for good is he:
His mercies sure
Do still endure:
For they eternal be.

With praises to his Name:
His mercies sure
Do still endure
Eternally the same.

With praises magnify:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
To all eternity.

Great wonders many a one:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
To ages all made known.

His wisdom all the sky:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
To perpetuity.

The seas to comprehend: Caused the shore to stint and bound the Sea, which
naturally would cover all the earth.

His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And never have an end.

Did make great lights to shine,
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
Not subject to decline.

The motions of the day:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And never fall away.

He made to rule by night:
His mercies sure
Do still endure;
For they are infinite.
2. Part.
Argument.
A memorial of Gods mercies to his Church, Instanced in Egypt, which is a
typical deliverance.
and judgment on our adversaries.


Who Aegypts firstborn smote:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
Of everlasting note.

Brought Israel out of thrall:
His mercies sure
Do still endure:
And so for ever shall.

With his Almighty hand:
His mercies sure
Do still endure:
For they eternal stand.

The Sea on either side:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And evermore abide.

Amidst it to evade:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And never fail nor fade.

His host in red Sea drowned:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And ever shall abound.

Through deserts all unknown:
His mercies sure
Do still endure:
As permanent alone.


His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And so shall ever do.

That Giant Amorite:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
Continuing day and night.

He did to ruin bring:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
An unexhausted spring.

To be an heritage:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
Out-wearing time and age.

His servant Israel:
His mercies sure
Do still endure;
Times constant parallel.

When low and desolate:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
And bear eternal date.

That were our mortal foes:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
A spring that ever flows.

Whereof all flesh may eat:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
For ever most complete.

With thankful thoughts adore:
His mercies sure
Do still endure,
Henceforth for evermore.
PSALM. CXXXVII.
Southwell tune.
Isreal's excessive lamentation in the Babylonian captivity: the cruelty of
the enemies, and Gods dreadful curse upon them.

BY Babels Rivers deep, By pleasant Rivers side, which seemd to tice us to
mirth and music.

There sat we down to weep:
And thinking still
On Sion hill,
Our tunes in tears we steep.

On willow-trees we hung: The trees grew so pleasantly too, but we had no
heart to music.


Required thus,
Sing us a Sion-song.
And even there, did they
That carried us away
In captive state, We counted it cruelty for our enemies to urge us.

And desolate,
Urge us to sing and play.
They mirth of us demand,
Tho wasted by their hand:

Tune Sions Songs,
Here in a foreign land?

Forgotten here of me
In foreign land,
Let my right hand
Forget her faculty.
If I forget thee ever,
Then let me prosper never:
But let it cause
My tongue and jaws,
To cleave and cling together.

I do not quite contem'
All joys that be,
And count not thee
Above the chief of them.

Showed by the Edomite:
Thus did they say
In Salems day, At the sacking of Jerusalem.

Down with it, raze it quite.

Whose ruin now comes on:
Oh happy he
That does to thee
As thou to us have done.

That dasheth out the brains
Of little ones, How much less should we favor the Idols of Romish Babylon?

Against the stones,
When Babels judgment raigns.
PSALM. CXXXVIII.
David's tune.
David praises God for outward and inward mercies, proclaming the comforts of
the Gospel, and his hope of further favors.

BEfore the Gods thy praise I Will sing, Before great men (and perhaps Angels
there) in the Congregation, looking toward the Propitiatory, a type of Christ.

My heart shall have regard

Thy holy Temple-ward.
Thy praise, for thy compassions tried,
And truth, will I proclaim.
For thou thy Word have magnified,
Yea more then all thy Name. Made known thy goodness in fulfilling thy Word
more then thou have set forth thy justice, or other attributes. Kings need thy
help for their temporal, more for a spiritual kingdom.


Thou answeredst me again:
With inward strength thou strength'nedst me,
My soul for to sustain.

When they understand how thou wast good to me, and to all in Christ.
When they shall hear thy words:

Such great fame is our LORDS.

To such as lowly be:
But then they must be meek and seek thee in humility.
But all proud persons does neglect,
Sure thou will quicken me.

Thy hand shall thou extend
Against the wrath of all my foes,
Thy right hand shall defend.

Most firm thy mercy stands:
Forsake not Lord, but succor still
The work of thine own hands.
PSALM. CXXXIX.
The all-seeing eye of God, and admirable workmanship of man's creation.

O Lord thou have me searched and known,

My rising up, my thoughts each one,
Thou see, when distant most.

And all my ways do note:

But thou do fully know it.

And on me laid thy hand: Thou art ever all about me, doing what thou will
with me, I cannot know how great thy knowledge of me is.


Too high to understand.

Or from thy presence fly?

Or climb to heaven high:
Behold, thou art in each of these.
If I had wings as swift as the Sun (that goes from east to west) I could get
no further from thee; thou should hold me still as thy prisoner.

To dwell in parts of utmost seas:

There thy right hand shall hold me fast.

Shall cover me with skies ore-cast;
All shall surround with light.

But night as day shines clear:
To thee the darkness and the light,
Do both alike appear.

My reins most secret room: Yea thou knew me an embryo in the womb, and
every vein and part of me in my mothers belly.

And covered in the secretest,
My mothers narrow womb.

Of rare and fearful frame:
Thy handy-works are mavelous,
Well knows my soul the same. He names the reins being the most inward; for the
bowels being plucked out the kidneys stay behind, and have the obscurest
passages.


When secretly composed;
Most curiously thou formedst me,
In the wo^b as dark as any cranie of the earth.
In earths dark caves enclosed.

Thy decree ordaind every part of me and formd me by degrees.
Thy book my members named:
Which in continuance fashioned were,
Whiles yet they were not framed.
2. Part.
Argument.
David acknowledges Gods exceeding goodness, shows his dislike of the wicked,
and approves his heart to God.

Thy purposes of good to thy children.
thoughts account,
O God how great's their sum!

If they to reckoning come.
And whenever I Awaking from sin, sleep, or sorrow, I feel fresh tokens of
thy power and presence.
awake,
Lord I am still with thee:

On them that wicked be.
Surely O God thou will them slay,
Therefore say I to them,
Depart from me, depart, I say,
O all ye bloody men.

With blasphemous disdain:
Thine enemies are bold to take
Thy sacred Name in vain.
Hate their vices, and familiarity with their persons, seeking to bring them
to shame and punishment.

And that for hating thee?
And them that do against thee rise,
Am not I grieved to see?

I count them foes of mine:

My heart and thoughts untwine.

In any course of sin:
Set open the everlasting way, The path of thy commandments that leads to
everlasting life.

And lead me LORD therein.
PSALM. CXL.
Cambridge old tune.
A prayer against persecutors, expressing their malice, and experience of Gods
deliverance.

LORD save me from the violent,
Preserve me from the lewd:

A vile intent
Against me have pursued.
Continually for wars they throng,
Serpentine-Adder-like:

And poison strong
Between their lips, they strike.

And from my furious fo:
Hells fier-brands,
Whose purpose stands
My steps to overthrow.

Close snares, and cords did hide:
They spread a net,
They grins have set
Hard by the highway side.

Thou art my God alone:
LORD bow thine ear,
That thou mai'st hear
My supplications groan.

My soul with saving might:
And thou my head
Have covered
In day of bloody fight.
2. Part.
Argu.
As before.


The wicked man's desire:
O further not
His wicked plot,
Lest that should lift him higher.
Saul etc. representing grand adversaries.

That do me round enclose:
With mischief sprung
From their own tongue
The LORD shall cover those. Psalm. 64. 8.


And cast them in the fire:
In deepest holes
Whence (damned souls)
They never may retire. Into the most intricate and inextricable judgment, such
as hell it self.


Be stablish't here below:
Mischief shall sent
The violent,
And hunt to overthrow.

That is the most of might,
That undergo
Such storms of woe,
And poor men's lawful right.

Thanks to thy Name shall give:
And all that bear
A mind sincere,
In thy safe presence live.
PSALM. CXLI.
Martyrs tune.
David sues for acceptance of his person and prayers, for direction of his
words and works; to avoid the inticings of the wicked, and to obtain the
reproof of the righteous; He prays for them against the wiles of the wicked.

To thee, O Lord, I call and cry,
Make haste, make haste to me:
Give ear unto my voice, when I
Cry earnestly to thee.

As incense in thine eyes:
And lifting up of hands devout,
An evening sacrifice.

And keep my mouth from sin:

My soul partake not in.
Incline my heart to no misdeed,
With them that wicked are: Let me not swallow their doctrines of carnal
liberty.

Nor let me ever dare to feed
Of their delicious fare.

Which I shall kindness deem:
And his reproof an oil shall be
Of singular esteem. I will requite their reproofs with prayers in the saddest
times of their adversity, to show the truth of my love.

Such smiting shall not break my head:
For still I Will pray to thee,
When as they shall be hard bestead,
With great calamity.
The ringleaders of wickedness ( Saul's courtiers now in authority) being
fearfully overthrown, will cause the vulgar to hearken to good counsel.
Their Judges being overthrown
In dangerous stony ground,
Shall make them hear my words each one,
For they full sweetly sound.
Tho while these tyrants reign they chop the righteous as flesh to the pot.
The graves devouring mouth is found,
With our dead bones bestrew'd:
As chips belitt'ring all the ground,
When wood is cleft and hewed.

Leave not my soul deprived:
I trust in thee, O save thou me,

From wicked workers setting grins:

Even in their own devised gins,
While I escape withal.
PSALM. CXLII.
To sweet tune.
David in the cave of Adullam, 1 Samuel 24.
prays to God in that desperate condition, expecting deliverance, to Gods
glory, and comfort of the faithful.

WIth voice, with voice, and cries devout,
To God the Lord I made request:

I showed the Lord my case distressed.
In the deserts of Engedi, where Saul sought to take me. 1 Samuel 24.

My private path was known to thee:
Even in the way wherein I went,
They laid a secret snare for me.

But there was no man would me know:
For my poor soul no creature cared,
All refuge failed of things below.

Among the living in the land,
Thou art my portion, and my aid,
And all the help I have at hand.

For I am brought exceeding low:
Save me from them that persecute,
Too hard for me, too strong a fo.

That I may render praise to thee:
The just shall compass me about,
When thou dealst bounteously with me.
PSALM. CXLIII.
To old England tune, the latter part twice.
An humble confession of sin, and complaint of suffering; a prayer for pardon,
deliverance, and the Spirit of grace.

LOrd hear my prayer and humble suit,
Thy willing ear address:
Yea answer me
By thy decree
Of truth and faithfulness.

Nor action let be tried:
Before thee can
No mortal man
Be ever justified.
It seems to relate to David's condition in the deserts.

My life quite undertrod:
My dwelling made
In darksome shade,
As men long dead O God.

My heart is desolate:
Psalm. 77. 11.

Thy works and ways,
I mind and meditate.
Of all thy handy-works I think,
Lift up my hands in prayer.

My soul does burst,
With fervent thirst,
For thee, like thirsty lands.

Hide not thy face from me:
Like them that go
To pit below
Lest I should quickly be.
To gather comfort by thy Word which I have heard.

When morning does begin:
Cause me to know
What way to go,
For thee my trust is in.

Me from mine enemies save:
I fly to thee
To shelter me,
No other God I have.

Thy servants soul instruct:
In thy command, Let me lead my life among godly persons, in a godly way.

And to the land
Of uprightness conduct.

And that this very thing
May well express
Thy righteousness,
My soul from trouble bring.

My foes destroy and dam':
Destroy them whole
That vex my soul,
For I thy servant am.
Thine heritage Lord bless and keep.
So that etc. Ps. 28. ult.
PSALM. CXLIV.
York tune.
Gods wonderful protection on his people in war and battle; Instanced in
David a president unto us.
his gracious respects to mankind: the quickened desires of the faithful to
praise God.

O Blessed be the LORD my might,
Who, in the warlike field,
My hands and fingers taught to fight:

My fort, high towr, in whom I trust,
My people that subdues:

Such poor acquaintance choose!
Or what is man's posterity,
Whereof such reckoning's made?

His days as fleeting shade.
Thou can be as dreadful as thou wast on Sinai Exodus 19. and can destroy
my adversaries with lightning and thunder.

Touched mountains make to smoke:

By dreadful lightnings stroke.
Destroy them with thy bended bow:

Send thy high hand, rid, save me so
From swallowing waters grave.
Even from the hands of children strange, From hypocrites, aliens from true
grace, of strange untoward dispositions.


And their right hand's a mere exchange
Of falsehood and deceit.

To thee composed anew:
And on a ten-string'd instrument,
Will sing thy praises due.

Salvations welcome pledge:
His servant David he defends,
From swords offensive edge.
2. Part.
Argument.
A prayer for the flourishing estate of the Co^mon-weal. Felicity is placed in
God alone.


From hand of sinners vile:
Whose subtle mouth speaks vanity,
Their right hand full of guile.

And daughters, to us born,
Let be as some carved cornerstone,
Fair palace to adorn.

With every kind of thing:
Our sheep a thousand thousand fold,
Within our streets may bring.

No en'mie to invade:
No leading captive, no complaint
Within our streets be made.

With such like blessings stored:
O rather blessed people they
Whose God is God the Lord.
PSALM. CXLV.
Old England tune.
David in a well composed song of praise, In the Name of all Saints.
extolls Gods majesty, might, and mercy.

I Will extol thee Lord my King,
And ever bless thy Name:

Will bless and praise,
And never cease the same.

Whose greatness none can reach:

Thy works and ways,
To thy succeeding Church.
Thy mighty acts shall they recite,

The fame of thy
Great Majesty:
And works miraculous.

Men shall speak of the same:
They dreadful are;
And I Will declare
The greatness of thy Name.

They fully shall make known:
In songs express
Thy righteousness.

The LORD is easy to entreat,

His mercies do
Extend unto
His works in general.

Thy Saints thy Name shall bless:

Thy Kingdoms fame,
And powers Almightines.

To man's posterity:
And celebrate
The glorious state
Of thy supremacy.
2. Part.
Arg.
As before.


And thy dominion shall
Endure and last
All ages past,
Crushe under tyrants.

And raises all the bowed down,
Ps. 104 27.
All eyes do wait on thee:
Thou give meat
For them to eat,
When fittest seasons be.

Each living things desire:

In all his ways,
His holiness entire.

Even all that call sincere:

Their prayers fulfill,
Who ever do him fear.
He Will hear their cry, and help afford,

Will God secure,
But he will, sure,
Destroy the wicked crew.

And universal flesh,
His holy Name
And glorious fame
Shall ever sound afresh.
PSALM. CXLVI.
To both Strain tunes.
The vain trust in men, and happy confidence is Gods salvation, who made all
things, and is most gracious to us in his providence.

THe Lords deserved praise proclaim,
My soul do thou extol the same:

Will praises give
Unto the Lords Almighty Name.
Unto my God will I sing praise,
While breath prolongs my life and days:

Nor mortal thing,
They can no help nor succor bring.

And he returns to dust of death;
That very day
His thoughts decay,
And each of them then perishes.

Who ever Jacobs God has known
To be his aid:
Whose hope is stayed
Upon the Lord his God alone.

The earth and all the numerous store
In liquid seas:
He made all these,
And keeps truth for evermore.

For to avenge oppressors deeds;
From bondage He
Set prisoners free;
The Lord likewise the hungry feeds.

The bowed down he does erect; Psalm. 45. 14.

Opening likewise
The blind man's eyes, Both spiritual and corporal.


The Lord relieves the fatherless,
And helps the widow in distress:
But in his wrath,
The sinners path,
The Lord does utterly suppress.

Thy God O Sion rules on high;
And so he shall
To ages all:
His Name do ye still magnify.
PSALM. CXLVII.
To 1. French tune.
God is glorified for the works of his admirable providence, and specially for
favors to his Church in his Word and Ordinances.

PRaise ye the Lord, for it is meet
The praises of our God to sing:
For it is an employment sweet, The captives and exiles, it is thought that
this Psalm celebrates the deliverance from Babylon.

And praise a very comely thing.

The outcasts gleans of Isreal's bounds:

And binds up their bleeding wounds.
Much more does he know his elect.
The number of the stars he tells,
And all their names he does recite:

His understanding infinite.

But treads the wicked to the ground

And with the harps harmonious sound.

Prepared rain on earth distills: Gods work indeed, that grass should grow on
the barren mou^tains.

And makes the earth to fructify
With store of grass on highest hills.

And feeds young ravens when they call:

Nor yet the legs of champion tall.

And such as on his grace rely:

Thy God o Sion magnify.

Strengthened the bars which bar thy gates:

And in thy borders peace creates.

His word through the air most swiftly posts:

He spreads like ashes hoary frosts.
How much less his eternal burning wrath.

His pinching cold who can sustain?

And makes the waters melt again.
His power does cause the winds to blow, The ice to thaw, so can he our hard
hearts to melt.

Whereby the rugged waters flows:

His laws and judgments Israel knows.

As for the Judgments of the Lord,
No heathen people understands;
Do ye therefore his praise record.
PSALM. CXLVIII.
Old England tune.
The creatures (in their kind) praise God, how much more his people, obliged
by his benefits?

PRaise ye the LORD, praise ye the Lord, All celestial creatures.

From heavens lofty frame:
Him, from on high,
O magnify;

O all his hoasts his praise record:

Ye stars of light,
That shine so bright,
The like of you be done.

Praise him with full consent;
And waters, ye
On high that be,
Above the firmament.

The LORDS almighty Name:
For lo they were
Created there,
When his commandment came.

For ever and for ever: Till the end, and then a renovation of all things.
Psalm. 102. 26.

So firm decree
Ordained he,
That they shall pass it never.
Terrestrialls.

Dragons and every deep:
Serve in your kind according to his ordinance. Psalm. 119. 91. which condemns
our disobedience.

Hail-storms that blow,
His word that firmly keep.

All hills and Cedars tall;

And creeping things,
Ye beasts and cattle all.

Ye Judges of the earth:

Children and babes,
And men of elder birth.

For that alone excells:
And far more high
Then earth or sky,
His glittering glory dwells.
He is both the object of their praise, and the author of their dignity by
Christ Jesus, whose kindred they are spiritually. Mat. 12. 50. Taken from
occasion of the Babylonick bondage. Ier. 25. 11.

His people near allied;
From Israel born,
He exalts their horn:
The Lord be magnified.
PSALM. CXLIX.
Magnificat tune.
The triumphs of the Church, in memorial of great deliverances, and the
subjection of the adversaries.

PRaise ye the Lord, sing to the Lord
A new composed song:
His memorable praise record,
His gathered Saints among. Meditate of Christ our King and spiritual mercies.
Melody of hearts.


In their Creators Name:
Let Sions children in their King,
Triumphant joys proclaim.

The harp before him bring:
And join the timbrell to the same,
With these his praises sing.

In Israel does delight:
The meek he will richly beautify
With robes of saving might

Sing loud upon their bed:

The Lords high praise to spread. Fulfilled in the happy days of reformation.
Rev. 11. 15, 17, 18. and finally at the last judgment.

And let a double edged sword,
Be put into their hands:

Upon the heathen lands.
T'impose the peoples punishments,

Their noble Peers and Presidents
In iron links confined.

The judgment on record:
Such honor to the Saints does fall,
Praise ye, praise ye the Lord.
PSALM. CL.
To London short tune.
An exhortation to praise God with instruments of music; typing the melody of
Christians affections.

PRaise, praise the Lord most high, The Sanctuary was a type of the hearts of
the faithful, the temples of the holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 6. 16.

Within his Sanctu'rie:
In topmost tower
Of his great power,
With praise him magnify.

With excellency crowned:
According to
His greatness do:

O praise him cheerfully,
With harp and psaltery:

His praise advance,
And timbrells melody.
Praise him with joint consents
Of stringed instruments:
The organs bring,

Each one his praise presents.
High-sounding cymballs ring,
Not only instruments that are blown, but all men, Jews and Gentiles: some
understand it a description of all creatures, because the most have this
property.
breathing thing,
The praise record
Of this great Lord:
And HALLELUJAH sing.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Affliction
MOderated, Psalm. 30, Ps. 118 ver* 18. Sanctified, Ps. 94. ver. 12. Ps. 119.
ver. 67. Consisting with Gods love, Ps. 89. 4 part. Ps. 99. ver. 8.
Angels
Serving God, Ps. 103. 2. p. Ps. 104. 1. p. For the godly, Ps. 34. 1. p. Ps.
91. 2. p.
Age.
Prayer for succor in old age, Ps. 71. 2. and 3. p.
Atheism
Described, Ps. 14. and 53. Cursed, Ps. 28. ver. 5. Ps. 104. v. 35. Ps. 107.
ult.
Blessings
On the ground, Ps. 65. 2. p. Ps. 67. upon the godly, Ps. 112.
Babylonian
Bondage, Ps. 102. 1. p. Ps. 106 last. p. Recovered, Ps. 85. 1. p. Ps. 126.
Backsliding.
Ps. 119. 22. p.
Church
Selected, Ps. 95. and 135. 1. p. Called, Ps. 100. Corrupted, 106. 2. p. etc.
Afflicted, Ps. 74. 79. 80. Restored, Ps. 85. 1. p. Ps. 102. 2. p. Preserved,
Ps. 124. 129. Privileges thereof, Ps. 65. 1. p. ps. 87.
Christ.
His kingdom opposed, Ps. 2. Raised, ibidem. His perfection, Ps. 45. His
offices, Ps. 110. His Gospel government, Ps. 72. 97. 98. 99.
Complaints
Of miseries personal, Ps. 38. 88. 69. 1^ p. Ps. 25. 2. p. Of miseries
National, Ps. 74. 79. 80.
Conscience.
Ps. 18. ver. 21.
Creation and Creatures.
All of God, Ps. 33. 1. And governed, Ibidem. Ps. 103. 2. p. Ps. 119. ver. 91.
Subjected to man, Ps. 8. Their dread of the Creator. Ps. 77. and 115. ult.
Their dependency on God. Ps. 104. 2. p. etc. and 145. 2. p. They must be
renewed, Ps. 102. 2. p.
Deliverance
Prayed for, Ps. 14. 53. 74. 2. p. 79. 2. p. 80. 2. p. Experienced, Ps. 134. 1.
p. 40. 1. p. 61. 66.
Desertion.
Ps. 77. 1. p. 88. 2. p. Prayed against, Ps. 70. and 40. ult. 119. 1. p.
Exhortation.
To seek God, Ps. 105. 1. p. To serve God, Ps. 95. and 100. To praise God, Ps.
115. 2. p. and 103. 118. 148. 150.
Example
Of good men, Ps. 34. 1. p. Ps. 99. Of bad men, Ps. 78. 1. p. Ps. 95. ver. 8.
God.
His goodness to the Saints, Ps. 31. 2. p. 34. 86. 106. 1. p. 119. 9. p. 145.
His majesty and greatness, Ps. 96. 89. 2. p 104. 1. p. His praises, Ps. 89. 3.
p. Ps. 66. 107. His works, Ps. 19. 1. 104.
Gospel
Foretold. Ps. 96. 2. p. 97. 98. 102. 2. p. Good things thereof, Ps. 85. 2. p.
Prayed for. Ps. 67. Praised, Ps. 117.
Grace.
The gift of God, Ps. 119. ver. 32. and 22. p. Increased, Ps. 119. v. 56.
Rewarded, Ps. 18. 3. p. Freeness of it, ps. 78. 7. p. And fulness also, ps. 86.
Grief.
For Gods dishonor, Ps. 119. ver. 158. 139. v. 21. For personal affliction,
Ps. 6. and 13. and 25. For public. ps. 79. 80. Gods Spirit grieved, Ps. 78.
ver. 40. Ps. 95. 10. ver.
Heaven.
Saints shall go thither, ps. 73. ver. 24. Our passage typed, ps. 114.
Heart.
Hardness thereof, Ps. 95. ver. 8. Search of it, ps. 4. 4. v. 77. 6. ver. God
searching it, Ps. 17. 3. ver. 44. 21. ver. Sincerity of it, Ps. 17. 1. p. 26.
119. 1. p. Subtilty, ps. 64.
Hope.
Ps. 71. 3. p. From old experience, Ps. 74. 2. p.
Humility.
Psalm. 131.
Hypocrisy.
Ps. 78. 4. p. and ps. 28. 41. 1. p. 50. 2. p.
Idols
Derided, Ps. 115. 1. p. Ps. 135. 2. p. Destructive, Ps. 78. 6. p. 97. and ps.
106. v. 36. Baseness of Idolatry, ps. 106. 5. p. Horrid Idolatry, ps. 106. 6. p.
Idolizing the creature, ps. 73. Ingratitude, Ps. 41. 2. p. ps. 81. 2. p. ps.
78. 4. and 5. p. Ps. 109. 1. p.
Judgments.
Against the wicked, ps. 7. 3. p. 9. 2. p. 69. 3. p. 94. 2. p. 83. 2. p. Depth
of Gods judgments, ps. 92. 1. part. Reverence of them, Ps. 40. 1. p. ps. 64.
Life.
The end of it, ps. 119. 3. p. Maintaining of it, Ps. 66. 9. v. 103. 4. ver.
Way to long life, Ps. 34. 2 p. 91. 2 p. Frailty of it, Ps. 39. 1 p. 90. 1 p.
How improved, Ibidem. Eternal life, Ps. 16. 2 p. 21. 1 p. 36. 9. ver.
Magistrates.
Doing worthily. Ps. 75. 78. last ver. 106. 5. p. 101. unworthily, Ps. 75. 58.
82. 106. ver. 34.
Ministers.
Ps. 134.
Night.
Devotion, Ps. 119. v. 55. Affliction, Ps. 16. 2 p. 77. 1 p. Consolation, ps.
42. 2 p.
Obedience.
Best sacrifice, ps. 40. 2 p. Best sign, Ps 119. 13 p.
Ordinances.
Saints love them, ps. 26. 27. 1 p. 41. 1 p. 43. 84. 119. Saints privilege in
them. ps. 1^3. 1 p. 147. 2 p.
Patience.
Ps. 39. 2 p. 40. 1 p.
Peace.
Who love it, Ps. 120. Who hate it, Ps. 35. v. 20. Who gives it, Ps. 85. ver.
8, 10. Who receive it, Ps. 119. v. 165. ps. 125. and 127. ver. 14. How good,
Ps. 34. 2 p.
Persecution.
How vehement and vile, Ps. 10. 14. 35. 109. 140. How resolutely sustained, Ps.
17. 1 p. 27. 1 p. 119. 21 p.
Poor.
How provided for, Ps. 132. ver. 15. ps. 107. last p. How raised, ps. 113.
Posterity.
Ps. 113. 127. and 128.
Prayer.
Saints exercise, Ps. 5. 1 p. 55. ver. 17. Accepted thereto, Ps. 65. 1 p. 66.
v. 20. ps. 102. v. 17. 141. v. 2.
Preaching.
Ps. 40. 2 p. 51. 2 p.
Presence.
Gods omnipresence, ps. 139. 1 p. 119. 168. v.
Prosper.
Saints prosper, Ps. 1. No prospering without God, Ps. 78. 1 p. 127.
Prosperity how vain, ps. 30.
Righteous.
Their dignity, ps. 8. and 92. 2 p. Their fidelity, ps. 44. 2. p. Their
graces, ps. 45. 2 p. 27. 2 p. Their innocence, ps. 7. 1 p. 109. 1 p. Their
protection, Ps. 5. 2 p. ps. 12. and 140. latter end. Their description, Ps. 1.
15. and 24. Their birth privilege, ps. 86. and 116. 16. verses. Their sure
supply, ps. 23. 27. 2 p. 33. 2. 34. 1. p. ps. 55. 3 p. Their selection of God,
ps. 4. And happiness therein, ps. 65. 1 p. Their privileges, ps. 37. 149. Gods
special favor to them, ps. 11. and 31. 3 p.
Repentance
Should be present, ps. 95. ver. 8. Dangerous to delay, ps. 7. 2 p. Is Gods
gift, ps. 80. ps. 51. 2 p. 119. 22. p.
Restoration.
Ps. 30. ps. 80. 2 p. 90. 2 p.
Saints, see righteous. Sin.
Its sinfulness, ps. 51. 1 p. 99. v. 8. ps. 19. 2 p. Its hurtfulness, ps. 81. 2
p. 107. v. 34. Hindering prayer, ps. 66. v. 18. Imbittering affliction, ps. 38.
1 p. Confessed, ps. 32. 1 p. 106. 1 p. 130. Sinfulness of the wicked, ps. 5. 1
p. ps. 14. and 53.
Sea and Seamen.
Ps. 104. 3 p. 107. 3 p.
Temptation.
Ps. 37. and 73. To desperation, ps. 42. 2 p. 77. 1 p. 88. Tempting God, ps.
78. 3 p.
Thanksgiving.
Ps. 81. 1 p. 103. 145. In public. ps. 116. 2 p.
Times.
Sinful, ps. 12. and 119. ver. 53. and 126. Distre^full times, ps. 10. 1. p.
74. 79. 80.
Tongue.
Wickedness of it, ps. 5^. 140. 109. Glory of it, ps. 108. 1 p.
Treachery.
Ps. 41. 2 p. 55. 2, 3 p.
Trinity.
Ps. 33. 1 p.
Trust in God.
Ps. 4. and 22. 1 p. 55. 3. p.
Trouble.
Ps. 3. 10. 13. 31. 2 p. Help in it, Ps. 31. 1 p. 46. 138.
Vanity
Of the creature, Ps. 33. 2 p. 146. 1 p.
Victory
Of Christ, Ps. 18. 21. 45. 108. 110. 118.
Unbelief.
How shameful, Ps. 78. v. 22, 32. 106. v. 24.
Vows.
Ps. 56. v. 12. 61. v. 8. 65. 1 p. 50. 1. p. 76. 132. 1 p.
Unity.
Psalm. 133.
Wars.
Gods works then, ps. 46. 48. 76. 144. Saints exploits, ps. 18. 4 p. etc. 60. 2
p.
Wicked.
Their insolency, ps. 10. 12. 94. 1 p. 140. Their ruin, ps. 36. 2 p.
Confederacy in evil, ps. 83. 1 p. The scourge of the godly, ps. 17. 2 p.
Word.
How sure, ps. 12. and 18. ver. 30. How powerful, ps. 19. and 119.
Works
Of God, ps. 29. 96. 104. 148.
World.
Degenerate, ps. 12. and 14.
Worship.
How due to God, ps. 29. 95. 99. 100. 122.
Zeal.
Ps. 69. 1 p. ps. 132. 1 p.
Errata in Textu.
Psalm. 32. 1. read, O Blessed blessed man, This is in some copies only.
etc. Ver. 6. for roaring read rolling.

Psalm. 83. ver. 6. for at read of Edoms, etc.

Errata in Margin.
Psalm. 9. 6. Thou o enemy may destroy no more, though thou have destroyed
whole Kingdoms, Isa. 37. 26. 29.

Psalm. 32. 2. But confesses all without dissimulation, In some copies.


Psalm. 24. 1. Made the earth (one globe with water) habitable, tho naturally
the water would cover it, being the center and basis.

FINIS.

