

A PARAPHRASE UPON THE PSALMS OF DAVID.

By SAM. WOODFORD.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Octavian Pullein, near the Pump in
Little-Brittain, 1667.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, GEORGE Lord BISHOP of WINTON.
My Lord,
THe favorable sentence your Lordship past on the following Paraphrase, when
it first appeared before you as its judge, has encouraged me to make choice of
you alone for its Patron: and I heartily wish it were as fit an object of your
Protection now, as it was then of your Clemency. There is nothing, I confess,
worthy its Commendation to so Great a Name, but the Argument on which it is
employed; and having designed it to the Service of the Altar, I was convinced
there was no hand more proper than your Lordships to offer it up there. For
beside the perfect understanding, which your Lordship has of affairs of this
nature (being able not only most justly to decree according to the old, but to
give new, and more substantial Laws to all kinds of Poesy) the most
considerable part of the ensuing Work was done under your Lordships
jurisdiction, in a place where I had the happiness to enjoy all the contents of
a private Retirement, and amongst the rest, that secessum scribentis, and otia,
which the great Master of Verse knew absolutely necessary to such an
undertaking. So that by the severest form of Dedication, your Lordship has an
undeniable right to this, and it would be a piece of great injustice, to make a
Present of that to another, which to your self only is a true and warrantable
debt. For such indeed it is, as respecting your Lordships Title, who, over and
above all other qualifications, are the most obliging Promoter of these
studies; and on my part so easy to satisfy, that it amounts to little more
than a bare acknowledgement, like the presenting a Rose once a year, and doing
Fealty for some great Tenure; the smallest Chief-rent that can be paid by any
Tenant, especially him, who has an ambition to hold of none, rather than your
Lordship, all those Demesnes of Christian Poesy, if he may so call them, of
which, under you alone, he desires to be looked upon as the Unworthy Improver,
and to profess himself with all manner of Devotion,

Bensted Haunts, 1667. My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and obedient
Servant, SAM. WOODFORD.

The Preface.
IT is not my intention to spend time in transcribing those several Elogies,
which Holy men in their writings have given the Book of Psalms; For to do that
here, were but to make a tedious repetition of the same thing, and usurping
another Province, but meanly to pursue that, which is no less powerfully, than
frequently inculcated by the Divine Oratory of the Church. I think there is
none but will acknowledge that it is a part of Scripture, which is, and shall
for ever be esteemed worthy the care, and study both of the greatest Scholars,
and sublimest Wits of all ages; and where, as the weakest understandings may
find enough for their satisfaction, the severest and most curious Critics,
may have scope and opportunity to exercise, and improve their richest Talent.
For what can be more pleasant than to inquire, who were the Composers, to
explain the many obscure Titles, and frequent allusions to several customs by
us utterly unknown, and to let the World understand, what it is yet ignorant
of, wherein consisted the true nature of the Hebrew Poesy? But these, as above
my Capacity, I shall purposely omit, and make it my business only to give some
little account of the design, and conduct of the following Work.

But before I can proceed to that, I must here, by way of Apology for my
undertaking it, freely confess that such an argument as this, would have
appeared much better in the hands of one, who had made Divinity his chiefest
study: and can only say for myself, that as I did it to please some particular
friends, and for my own diversion (next to that great design of the glory of
God, and service of his Church:) so having now at length finished it, and by
them, and several others urged to make it more public, I thought my self
bound, by some such Preface as this, to provide for this issue of my brain,
with the same diligence and care that other Parents are wont for their
legitimate Children. Not that I have so good an Opinion of these labors, as
fondly to believe they deserve it, but because their natural deformities
require the greater Portion to put them off. For I am too conscious of their
many defects, and my own inabilities for so great an affair, as in good
earnest to attempt their defense: or, if I would have no way left to make it,
but that, which to all ingenuous spirits is very disagreeable, by throwing the
blame on others better able, and who have had, it may be, much fairer
opportunities than my felf of performing so worthy an enterprise. Had any such
excellent person so employed his vacant hours, it might have prevented the
publishing these rude Essays of mine; whereas now all that I can expect from
them is, that after a severe censure, they may happily be so fortunate, as to
give occasion to another better thoughts: And I heartily wish some One of Our
many Reverend, and Learned Divines, who have a true understanding and gust for
Poesy, would hereby be provoked to undertake so noble a subject. For as there
is not any condition of men so fitted for the sublime notions of Poesy as they;
there is no study whatsoever, which either is so truly worthy of, or comes
nearer their Profession. Theology and Poesy have in all ages of the World gone
hand in hand, nor is there really such a disparity between their Natures, as is
generally, though without any reason, imagined. For if one has been looked on as
containing the Will and Pleasure, the other no less has been reckoned the
Style, and Language of Heaven. Music and Numbers, the chiefest of the Liberal
Arts, serve but as Handmaids to this Great and All-commanding Mistress. It Is I
know not what kind of Divine Science, purely singular, and only like it self,
which even in the Opinion of all, has more of Divinity in it than words can
express, and therefore was continually allowed a Stall in the Temple, and
received into the Devotions of the most Religious, and Civilized, as well as
Barbarous Nations. If we look into the Jewish Administration, we shall find
that the People of Israel were no sooner delivered from the Egyptian chains,
and that the same Sea, which parted it self to make them way, returned upon
their Enemies, but immediately Moses, their great Lawgiver, continues the
remembrance both of the Miracle, and their deliverance in a most excellent and
Poetical song: which I verily believe is not only the most ancient piece of
Poetry now extant, but written as soon, if not before any other part of the
Pentateuch. Nay God himself, we afterward find, gave him particular charge,
and inspiration, a little before his death, to compose another Hymn, with
strict command to teach it the People who thereby having it continually in
their mouths, (such he knew was the charm of verse,) might both be encouraged
in their duty, and become witnesses against themselves, when at any time they
turned to Idolatry. If the Book of Job shall be esteemed by any of an ancienter
date (which I should very hardly be persuaded to assent to, as imagined to be
done, though by the same hand, yet during his retirement with his
Father-in-law, before he was sent on his great Embassy to Pharao) from the
beginning of the third chapter, to the middle of the last, it is one continued
Poem: in which there are such lofty and exalted Metaphors, lively Similitudes,
pompous Descriptions, strength of Elocution, and prodigious flights of Wit and
Fancy, that you cannot meet any thing to compare with it in the choicest
collections of all the Old Poets. You there may see Divinity flourishing upon a
root of Poesy; and that again loaded with the generous productions of Divinity:
both so inseparably united each to other, that like stock and cyon they make
but one plant, and leave it hard to be judged whether the Author were the
greater Divine, or Poet. The Latins very properly comprehended both these
sublime Functions under the single Title of their Vates, accounting it no less
unfit than unreasonable, that two offices so straightly united of those of the
Priest and Poet should be known by distinct, and different Names. I shall not
here inquire into the Reasons they had for so doing, only this I am assured,
how many and strong so ever they were, they cannot compare with Ours of the
true Religion. The inspirations of both proceed from the same Father of
Spirits, and are Celestial flames, that darted from above, are never well but
when they are thither rising up again: Only Poesy like that Sacred fire, which
God sent down of Old to consume the Sacrifices, returns with a little more
smoke. They both came down from Heaven, and thither are always taking their
flight; but Divinity never seems to make such have, as on the wings of good
Poesy. I must confess at this day, but by what ill Fate I know not, they are
looked upon without the least relation to each other, and grown themselves so
much strangers, that like sister-streams once parted from the Spring, they run
different courses, and are so far from meeting again, that they very seldom
come in sight of each other. For though the Precepts of the School serve
excellently, if rightly applied, to adorn and enrich his Fancy, who has a
natural Genius to Poesy, yet we daily see them ineffectual to create it. And he
who finds not in himself those hidden Mines of Invention, and most happy and
unaffected Facility, which only make the Poet, should never be persuaded by me
to attempt the ravishing her by force, whom by fair means he cannot allure to
be his Mistress. For to what but this may we attribute those many lame, and
imperfect draughts of Poems, both Originals, and Translations, which are to be
seen in almost every language? where, if they have been the Authors own, they
are his bare thoughts and lifeless Prose (for I speak now especially of Modern
Poesy) made worse by the uneasy shackles of confining Meter: and if versions so
exactly labored ad verbum, that what by the unlucky transposing of words, what
by leaving out some little particles, wherein the grace of the sentence did
consist, they lose all their former beauty, and from excellent Prose, though
the language continue the same, degenerate into very indifferent, and
untuneable Rhyme. This has been a failing so general, that I need not seek far
to illustrate it by examples. But none in my opinion have been so guilty of it,
as those, who have had for their argument some excellent piece of Scripture, or
pious matter, which with the embellishments of Art, and the true Poets
easiness, and invention would, upon the most durable foundations, have made the
fairest superstructures in the World. But how miserably have the greatest part
been overseen, whilst all their pains have been bestowed to compose a few
ill-contriv'd Cadences, putting themselves to an unimaginable torture to make
those conceptions intolerable by the straitness of verse, which else might have
done well enough in looser Prose. These are the men to whom we are in a great
measure beholden for the low esteem. Poesy now has amongst us, though at the
same time they have not only rendered that ridiculous, but humbled Divinity,
which supplies the Poet with his noblest, and most lofty subjects. And I am
very apt to believe, that a man of an Harmonious soul (such as all true Poets
are) though he be but indifferently skilled in the controversies of the
Schoolmen, and the nicer points of Divinity, (by which possibly the Peace of
the Church has been more disturbed, than ever it was advantaged) shall make
much better work in his way of an Argument taken from the Holy-Bible, than the
sublimest and most Scholastical Wit, who is unacquainted with the laws of
Poesy. But how few are there of these severe Scholars, and only learned men (as
they would be thought) in an age, who have any relish, or the least esteem for
Poesy, but rather judging it by the abuse, look on it as a fruitless, and most
unprofitable study, unworthy the thoughts of such as are advanced in years; and
the greatest incentive to looseness, and debauchery in youth? Others there are
of a quite different humor, who though possibly they may have for it the
highest, and most reverend esteem, yet think Holy-Writ is barren of all good
subjects, and the only thing that is incapable of its gay and splendid
embroyderies. I shall make it my business therefore, in shaping an answer to
both these, at once to defend Poesy in the general from those calumnies, which
are no less maliciously, than falsely charged upon it, and then give a short
assay to the restoring Divine Poesy to its ancient dignity and luster.

If therefore we consider Poesy in her first institution, e're she became a
common Prostitute to lust, flattery, ignorance, and ambition, we shall find her
alone acknowledged as the Sovereign Princess of the civilized World, and behold
her from her Throne giving Laws, not only to their Religion and Policy, but
also to their manners. Her Court was esteemed the proper, and only school of
Virtue, to which the greatest Princes formed theirs, and under her custody
alone was kept sealed that Fountain, whence all the profitable instructions of
life were to be drawn. Philosophy it self was a thing of no use, and destitute
of arms, till she supplied them, nor durst it appear in the World without the
easy chain of Verse, in token of submission to her, for its passport. And when
afterward the Porch and Academy by main force brake it off, the strictest
Precepts of the most rigid Sect, as to the regulating of Manners, came
infinitely short of those examples, which she exhibited on her Theaters. The
same may be said of almost all other Arts, that from her they received their
birth and vigor. Neither was this Divine Mistress less courteously received
into the Camp, where her soft Numbers were with pleasure heard amids the
confused noise of Arms. Hence mighty Generals had the best Instruction both for
their Conduct, and Valor, and were encouraged by the Records of Antiquity,
which some Poet had faithfully preserved, to do themselves famous Acts, worthy
the like praise of Posterity. This was that, which in all their Victories they
especially sought, and in perpetual acknowledgement, that they thence received
their greatest honor, in their most solemn Triumphs, when Crowns of Gold were
only in state carried before them, they chose themselves to wear the Poets
Meede, Laurel, Chaplets.

Such was Poesy of old, with a command as absolute, and unconfined as her
Dominions, and always found either serving at the Altars, or of Counsel Royal
to the greatest Princes. But it was not long that she continued in this great
dignity and repute; For in punishment for her early defection from the service
of the True God, where she first attended, to that of Devils, of a Princess she
became a slave, and sensibly, though by degrees lost all her Title to
Sovereignty, and absolute jurisdiction, for in the Temples of the Heathen
Deities, though by a kind of Spiritual Authority, she kept in awe whole
Nations, which from her mouth received all their Oracles, yet even there, by
her own Priests was she her self abused, and knew no Inspirations, but what
either they did invent, or were suggested to her by the great Deceiver. Here it
was, that by frequent use, she learnt all manner of Profaneness, and by often
ascribing that to false gods, which was the alone glory of the True, from low,
and mean thoughts of him, she brake forth into open rebellion, pursuing Heaven
with her blasphemies, and sending all her impieties up thither, whence at first
she obtained all her Power; like a River, whose passage is obstructed, that
runs back upon its own spring, carrying mud and slime along with it, and
overflows, and defiles those Altars, which in its clear and un-interrupted
course before it did but wash. Having thus humbled her, it was some ages e're
the grand Tyrant offered her any other violence, and even fearless of a revolt,
permitted her the free use of that command she had gained over the minds of
men, and still continue to be, according to her own nature, the Patroness of
all true and Heroical virtue. But in process of time from his and the Priests,
she was made the peoples Idol, and no longer remaining so much as a supposed
Virgin, became perfectly obsequious to the wills and humors of such as had the
confidence to debauch her (though a perpetual curse of Poverty constantly
followed the committers of so great a Rape) to please them she began to affect
new, and immodest dresses, which to all the world else rendered her still more
deformed, and in a while guilty of all that obscenity, which she had before
condemned upon the stage.

And in this state of slavery is she looked on by the most part of men, who
only judging of her by the present, and what hurt she may do, by what she has
already done (like Artillery by surprise come into the Enemies hand) forget how
serviceable she has notwithstanding formerly been to the civilized, and may yet
be to the Christian World. Instead of censuring and condemning her, it were
good I think, to take her by force, and restore her to the Church of God, where
she has been too long a stranger. Poems of Morality, which have been of late no
less auspiciously, than worthily begun (such Epique and Lyrique Poems I chiefly
mean, though the Drammatique also may be of excellent use, so it be kept within
its due bounds, as with all the liberty of Invention, riches of Fancy and the
true Poets Art, have been contrived to express the real Portraict of Virtue in
all its various appearances, and to describe Vice in its lively, though
otherwise most hateful colors, these I say) make the first step to her
conversion: and it may in my poor opinion be promoted amongst us, by
translating anew the best of the ancient and some few modern Poets, who have
made it their business to cloth excellent Morality, and various learning in a
chaste style, and by gracefully rendering them in our own language: so that the
sense may neither seem tortured, and put on the rack by too strait a version,
nor be out of knowledge in one too loose and flowing. But this great task can
never be perfected, since we are to expect no new Revelations, till Poesy comes
again to be settled upon her first great Basis, The Divine inspiration,
revealed in the holy Scriptures.

And this brings my discourse to them, who confidently, though without any
reason, assert that the sacred Word has not subjects agreeable enough for this
kind of writing. But because Mr. Cowley in that part of his Preface before his
Poems, which concerns his incomparable Davideci has taken the pains fully to
remove that ill report, which was brought on this happy Land, if I may so call
it, either ignorantly or maliciously, I shall give my self the less trouble,
and refer my Reader to the place it self, where he may have all that
satisfaction that either Reason or Religion can expect. Nor can those
authorities he brings be excepted against, seeing he has so strongly confirmed
them by the Poem it self, where though the Argument be wholly Divine, there is
to be found, as much as could be expected for the first sitting, what ever is
requisite to make an Heroic Poem beautiful: sound judgment, happy invention,
graceful disposition, unaffected facility, strict observance of decencies, and
all set off with that majesty and sweetness of verse, that it is to be lamented
he had not an opportunity before his death, to finish it according to his own
Model, and the provision he had laid up to that purpose. And truly all his
Divine Poems, have I know not what greatness of spirit, which you shall seldom
meet with elsewhere, and in which generally he has as much outdone himself, as
in the rest equaled the most happy of our modern Poets. So that if Religious,
and Pious compositions, as has been often observed, please not, the fault can
be no longer unjustly thrown upon the Materials, but must return upon the
Composers want of skill to manage them to the best advantage. The Holy Bible
doubtless is an excellent Soil, and of such kindly nature, that if it were
cultivated either as it ought, or only as the barren sand of Antiquity, and all
the tedious fables of the Heathenish superstition too often have been, it would
produce the greatest, and most rich increase. For besides, that like them it
has never yet been thoroughly broken up, the most unfruitful part of it, at
least that which may seem so, abounds with inexhaustible Mines, which would
plentifully reward any that should labor in them. And it were beside
unreasonable to think that Palestine alone, which was so fruitful of all things
else, should be barren only of Laurels.

The blame our language is a fondness every whit as extravagant, especially
considering the great supply, which has been of late years, and is daily
brought to it by unexpected discoveries of Nature, and improvement of the Arts,
which do not only furnish the Poet with incredible variety of new and unusual
conceits to exercise his Fancy, but with an immense company of words also to
enrich his expression But to such Objectors I shall only say, that if the
English Dialect, not only as it is spoken at this day, but as it was in use the
last age, were seriously and impartially examined, it will appear not only as
copious and significant for Prose, but as comprehensive of the sublimest
notions of Verse as any modern Language in Europe, and to equal, if not in some
qualities exceed, those of old Rome and Athens. But for Numbers it is so
naturally suited that excepting the Rhyme, which in so great a choice of words
as we have is very easy to be found, even in ordinary speaking, or writing,
they can hardly and not without some pain (if it were curiously inquired into)
be avoided. But my zeal for Poesy has carried me, I am afraid, too far, and
made me almost forget what I promised in the beginning, to give a short account
of the following work.

It is now therefore some years since I had my first and great desire to turn
the Book of Psalms into English verse, and in order thereto did, very little
different from what at present it is, the CIV. Psalm. But I know not how, on a
sudden, all my heat was laid, and the greatness of the labor, together with
my own insufficiency, deterred me at that time from proceeding any further.
Hereupon for about three years the design slept with me, till reading over with
a little more than ordinary intention the CXIV. Psalm of Mr. Cowleys, I was
again warmed, and in imitation of him I was resolved once more to try how well
or ill I could write after so excellent a Copy. Not because I was by that time
grown more confident of my strength (which I must confess I found all along
very unequal to so weighty an affair) but because I hoped thereby to increase
it, and fix my mind otherwise fleeting and uncertain upon something that might
be of advantage, if not to the Public, yet at least to my Friends, and my own
private Meditations. Considering also the infinite variety with which this part
of Holy Scripture was replenish't, I judged the tediousness of the passage
would thence, and by the many resting places I should meet with by the way, be
very much abated. And that my Fancy might be as little confined as my time, I
ever used to take that Psalm to paraphrase, which best suited with my present
temper, and so letting out the chain a little longer, and never trying how far
it reached, I scarce remembered that I was bound. And this is some reason,
though not the whole, of that different manner, which is to be seen in my
Version. For even the Psalms themselves are not all of a kind, that being no
more necessary than that all precious stones should be Rubies, or Diamonds. If
you look in one place you shall see some, taking rise from their lofty
subjects, sore above the clouds, like Birds of Paradise, as it were, all wing,
and as if designed for nothing lower than the Heavens: If in another, some of
an humbler sort, in their strains lowly, and trailing on the ground, so far
from attempting such a bold flight, that they dare hardly look so high: some
are all gaudy, and embroydred, others again in a sad, and mournful dress,
according as the condition of the Church or Author was at the time they were
composed. This so great difference therefore being in the Original, no wonder
if it yet appear more plainly in my rude and imperfect Copy. Besides I have
been forced to make use, though as sparingly as I could, of several terms, and
manners of speaking not to be found in our late exact Writers, nor so well
fitted for the numerosity of verse as might be wished, which yet by reason of
our Translation of the Holy Bible, and by frequent use seem not altogether so
rough as else they would: rather choosing to confine my self to expressions and
phrases generally known, and allowed of in the Church, than appear guilty of
any innovation. This may particularly be observed in the CXIX. Psalm, where I
have kept exactly (as they fell in our Text without synonimous names) the
Words, Statutes, Ways, Testaments, Precepts, etc. Nor was it more ease to my
self, than I hope it will be a pleasure to some few, who prefer such a
translation before any other, where is taken a greater liberty. But I must
confess ingenuously, I did it merely to save the labor of a larger Paraphrase,
which in a Psalm of that length, and plainness, would have been both tedious,
and unnecessary. In other places I have done what lay in my power to make the
Psalmists speak as intelligible and proper English as I could (though I have
not altogether neglected it even in that) not introducing any obsolete, or
fantastical words, or omitting those little particles of speech, the grace of
any language, which make Poesy of all other kinds of writing the most
distastful, and obscure. And indeed the manner of speaking amongst the Jews, by
reason of their insensible connections, and frequent change and shifting of
persons, discernable enough by our own versions, is so difficult and harsh to
our ears, even in the prose, that it very ill needs the straitness of Numbers
to make it more dark, and uniuneable. To avoid this fault possibly I have been
more prolix than I ought, though I cannot but say I was forewarned of it by a
very judicious friend Mr. Thomas Sprat. Yet if it be an error I have chosen
rather to offend with Sieur Godeau, a forreigner, in the fullness of my
Paraphrase, than with any of our own Countrymen in too strait a confinement.
The only Person who seems to have kept a mean between these two extremes, is G.
Buchanan, by that bare name better known, than all my art is able to express
him. It would be too long to reckon up the many worthy men in this nation,
(without mentioning King James of blessed memory, who amids the great affairs
of his Crown thought it not unbecoming his Royal cares to divert himself with
these Meditations of the princely Prophet and Poet) who have within this last
age bestowed their labors on this Book, among whom the most known are the
Right Reverend Bishop of Chichester, now living, and Mr. George Sandys. There
is also in private hands a Manuscript of somewhat an ancienter date, which for
the Persons sake, though out of its due time and place I shall join with them,
and that is of the truly Honorable and Learned Gentleman Sir Philip Sidney. It
was a long time, from my first hearing of it e're I could get a sight of the
Papers, neither should I at last have obtained the favor, had I not used the
mediation (amongst several others, to whom I am obliged,) of one to whom all
good Learning of what kind soever it be, must remain perpetually indebted; and
in this all will agree with me when they know I mean the Learned Dr. John
Wilkins Dean of Rippon. This Paraphrase as I remember Dr. Done calls by the
name of Sir Philips and the Countess of Pembroks translation, and not without
good reason, as far as I could judge by that cursory view I had of it, during
the short time it remained in my hands; There appearing that difference as I
conceived in the composition, which is wont to be in the aires of Brother, and
Sister, not so unlike, as to have no resemblance, nor yet so perfectly
resembling, as to have nothing but the sex to distinguish them. I mention not
here a thousand others who have done excellently particular Psalms, as my Lord
Bacon, Sir Hen. Wotton, Bishop Hall, Mr. Herbert, etc. and instead of many
more, that absolutely complete Gentlewoman, whose leave I very hardly obtained
to honor this volume of mine with two or three versions, long since done by
her, the truly virtuous Mrs. Mary Beale, amongst whose least accomplishments it
is, that she has made Painting and Poesy which in the Fancies of others had
only before a kind of likeness, in her own to be really the same. The Reader I
hope will pardon this public acknowledgement which I make to so deserving a
person, when I shall tell him that while as a Friend and one of the Family, I
had the convenience of a private and most delightful retirement in the company
of her worthy Husband and her self I both began and perfected this Paraphrase.

But without all these in naming the two first above, (the Bishop of Chichester
and Mr. Sandys) I have said enough to call my self into question for daring to
offer any thing at this part of Scripture, after them. I must therefore clear
my self, and here do it, of all ambition to vie with, or envy to detract from
the true value of their labors, which must be judged meriting all Praise: and
I am sure neither of these can be longer objected against me, than till any one
shall be pleased to take the pains to compare all three together, and then it
will immediately appear, how great the difference is between us, both as to the
style, manner of composition and disposing of the Numbers. The Bishops is
close, exactly answering the Text, and for that kind of measure, which himself
has truly observed to be the least graceful of any, very smooth, and roundly
expressed; though that Essay of his on the CXXX. Psalm in Heroic verse,
paraphrased for an Anthem, make it to be wished, he had used a like freedom in
the rest. Mr. Sandys on the otherside, though he has confined himself to almost
as near a rendering of the words, has used greater variety of measures, and such
as have by experience been found to be very agreeable to Music the life and
spirit of Poesy. In mine will yet appear a greater liberty, both as to the
expression and the different sort of stanzas which I have used; but with what
success I must refer to my Reader, of whose favor I shall have greater need to
excuse my faults, than justice, and severity to examine them. I know all that
has ever yet been assayed may be infinitely outdone, and I should be so far
from grieving at it, though now a little concerned, that I heartily wish this
way of mine may give the first occasion to some excellent Person to undertake
another version, and publish the Book of Psalms with greater beauties than ever
it has appeared in, since it left Jerusalem. In the mean time I could be
content, I must confess, that this trial of mine might be kindly received, that
so I might thereby be encouraged to prosecute another design (in this way)
which at present lies before me, The History of the first great week of the
World, wherein new discoveries of that, and nature, make the subject more large
and comprehensive for verse than ever it has been; and in the performance of
which I promise my self great assistance, by the unwearied and most successful
labors of The Royal Society; which seems to be raised in this last age, not
only for the improvement of Natural Philosophy in the general, but amids the
invention of new, for the restoration of decayed Arts, and amongst them all of
none more than this of serious, profitable, and sober Poesy.

As for the manner, which I have endeavored to observe, it has been to give,
as near as I could, the true sense and meaning of the Psalm, and in as easy and
obvious terms as was possible, suiting them to the Capacity of the meanest:
which I found my self the better able to do, by having the difficulties
resolved to my hands, by the labors of that truly Pious, and Learned Divine
Dr. Hen. Hammond (though I made use also as occasion required of other
Commentators.) If I have in any place not perfectly agreed with him, as in
several left them, since it is not in matters of Faith, I beg that the same
liberty may be given to me, which is indulged to all who write this way. I have
bound my self all along to observe one certain measure in a Psalm, and after I
had fixed the first stanza, made the rest like it, endeavoring so to dispose my
Numbers, that neither the length of the staff should cause a too close and
often repetition of the same Rhyme, nor the shortness of the measure confine
the Fancy and hinder the freedom of expression: generally closing it with a
verse of more than ordinary length, as being not only most proper for that
place, as a band to the staff, and sense; but more tuneable, and graceful. For
this reason also have I taken notice of the Versus intercalares, as I may call
them, where they fell and made no scruple, on occasion given in the text,
though it may be the words were not the very same, to make them more evident in
my Version. For the Historical Psalms I chose the Heroic (or five foot
couplets) as most suitable, using it very sparingly elsewhere. The XVIII. L.
LXVIII. and CIV. I have done after Mr. Cowleys Pindarick way, endeavoring by
the kind of verse, which is various and uncertain, to imitate the many and
sudden changes, which are in those Psalms. The XXI. and LXXII. I have with
very little straining of the Text brought down to our times, and without
offense to any, I hope, in the first paralleled his Majesty's sufferings with
those of David; in the other the Happiness and Glory of his Kingdom with that
of Solomon, heartily wishing that the sincerity of my Prayers may make amends
for the defects of my Numbers.

To my dear Friend Mr. Samuel Woodford, upon his Paraphrase of the Psalms.
I.
HAppy the first, and harmless days!
When the young World, like Children bred at home
Though froward still and troublesome,
Was by its careful Parent taught the ways
Of easy Duty, and of natural Praise.
When every cheap Delight, and every pleasant Art,
And all that Wit and Fancy could impart,
Like the first Issues of each vital thing,
Of all the stock the Pledge and King
Which the glad Owners either did redeem or bring,
Were freely given up and Consecrate,
The great Creator's Praise to Celebrate.
When the chaste Numbers of the Pipe, and Voice,
And all the Instruments that Art could show,
The very Music of the Feet, and Body too,
And whatsoever could delight
And feast the various Appetite,
Were used as well to Worship as Rejoice.
And every Mask, and every Ball,
And every solemn Festival,
The public Triumphs, and the Holy days,
The very Pastimes, and the Plays
Were legal Rites of Honor and of Praise.
Of every clean and spotless Beast
The most delicious and the best,
That Nature for man's use, or Pleasure did afford
Was at God's board;
One part was Sacrifice, and all the rest a Feast.
II.
So uncorrupted then, so chaste and White
Were all the Daughters of Delight;
But none of all the Family
So innocent, and so divinely bright
As the fair Virgin Poesy,
The earliest, and the strictest Votary;
Dwelt at the first in holy ground,
In sacred Groves, and Temples only could be found;
Still at the Altar did appear,
Brought her First Fruits, and Perfumes there;
Of all Gods Priests (and without blame
Her Office will allow the Name,
Though scarce her Sex) 'twas she alone
That offered up to God Devotion;
Did the pure Incense of the Fathers praise,
And holy Vows, to Heaven raise;
And like a faithful Vestal kept the Fire,
That did nor Day, nor Night expire.
Whoever a true Worshipper would be
Was taught his Duty first by Poesy,
Of Heman, and of Asaph learnt the ways
Of Penitence, and Praise,
By which Gods anger to appease, and Glory raise.
III.
This was her first Choice, and Desire,
In Gods House to retire,
In which she took her Vow, and solemnly Professed,
(And happy had she been and blessed,
If she had kept the rest
As well as the least needful of the Three
Unhappy Poverty)
But in the compass of this Privacy,
She was not always at her Beads, and Book,
But did her bended Thoughts with various Arts release;
Whether in Shepherds Guise with Reed, and Hook,
The Nuptial Song she does express
Of mighty Solomon, and by his side
The comely black Egyptian Bride,
A wondrous Song, but said to be
Not for their fakes alone, but holy Mystery,
Or else with bold, and skillful hand
Works the known Story of the promised Land,
How God the People went before,
And brought them from the Egyptian shore,
By the two Brothers brought them thence,
That is, by Power, and by Eloquence,
Two things which seldom fail
Over the mightiest Adversary to prevail,
Or when she pleases Nature draws and Wars
Pens the Heroic Acts of famous Conquerers,
And Sayings of Philosophers;
Rich are the Works of Nuns, but none so rich as Hers.
IV.
So grave and hopeful was her youth,
So dear a Friend she was to Piety and Truth,
That God himself, who did bestow
Number, and Measure to each Thing,
And in whole Nature living Poetry did show,
Of Her took care, from whom she first did spring;
And for her Guardians did assign,
The mighty Men of Valor and Renown,
Whom he had trusted first with Conquest, and a Crown,
Or did in peaceful Arts, and Wisdom shine,
All full of Virtue, and of Power divine,
He would not such a ripe, and virtuous Wit
(As Jacob would not Benjamin) commit
To any hand that was unfit,
Only to Judah did the Trust ascribe,
Judah the Royal, and the Valiant Tribe.
To you (says God) whom by my spirit I raise
To fight my Battles, and my Works to praise,
Wonders to perform, and see,
And publish Laws, and Mystery,
And find out Nature, and Philosophy,
Princes, and Prophets, and the Sons of War,
To you this Charge I give, and to your Care
Commit this bright, and beauteous Heir;
Bright and beauteous is she now,
And by your Guidance may improve,
If the vain show,
And Breeding of her Sex you not allow,
And keep her but from idleness, and wanton Love.
V.
So wise a Care, one would have thought,
Might serve however to prevent the worst,
In one so well inclined at first,
Though by the powerfull'st Charms, and Courtship sought.
But, Oh, the treacherous Arts of Wit!
(Arts which upon the Sex too often gain)
To which even Poesy herself does still submit,
And bear the pleasant Tyrannies of it,
Although sometimes in bitter language She complain,
Wit was her Friend, and her Companion still,
Did challenge, and employ her skill,
But was so wanton, and so wild,
With every painted Thing, and every Show beguiled,
Did such pleasant Sports devise,
And such fantastic Resveries,
Bewitch't the unwary Lovers Eyes.
Out of her Cell the Votaress then would go,
And loosly wandered into every Show;
Would needs herself resign
Unto the Female Government of Nine,
And the mad Inspirations of the God of Wines,
To whose wild Revels She was born,
And did his Triumphs, and his Groves adorn;
Did nor the Stage, nor the Piazza scorn;
But, like a wandering River, flow,
That visits every Land, and every City views,
But with the Travel does the impurer grow,
And the bright Nymph still more abuse;
She did no filthy Lust refuse,
Nor whatsoever could come
Or from the Excess of Greece, or Wantoness of Rome.
VI.
But all along the time of this Apostasy,
Some mighty Men arose,
Whom God in mercy chose,
These wandering Follies to oppose,
And to redeem her Fame, and native Liberty;
That fertile Land of all the rest
With Pleasure, and with Poets blessed,
Where Wit, and Nature still are fresh, and green,
And Tiber's golden streams are seen,
Has to the world in every Age set forth
Some Phoenix of immortal worth,
Whose Monuments of noble Verse
Posterity shall still disperse,
Which the bold Fame of wanton Wit assuage
And expiate the Follies of the looser Stage.
Nor is the British glory less,
The British Poets with a ripe success
The weightest Arguments express,
Like a deep Crystal stream,
Spread a pure spirit through the manly Theme.
One of each Sex this fruitful Age has shown,
(And fruitful had she been, if none
But that immortal Pair were known;)
Though she has many more to boast,
Cowley, and bright Orinda do adorn it most.
VII.
Cowley, and bright Orinda shall for ever live;
And you (my Friend) who with them strive
Of best and greatest Things to write
And the rich Monuments of Eastern wit revive,
Wit, that does, like the Sun, there first in sight,
Serve the Worlds profit and delight,
And, like the Sun too, with the World shalllast;
Your Memory shall with theirs be placed;
Their's, who in heavenly verse
Do their own praise in Gods rehearse.
The sacred Harp, which lay unstrung,
Broken, and out of tune as much
As when upon the Willows once it hung,
No English hand could hit the graceful Touch,
Cowley took up, and with an artful stroke
One Lesson played; One Lesson did provoke
Your tuneful Soul, which could no longer stay
Till it found out this only skilful way;
At length the skilful way you found,
With a true Ear judged the melodious sound,
And with a nimble hand run descant on the Hebrew ground.
To the Author, on his excellent Version of the Psalms.
A Pindariqu' Ode.
I.
SEE (Worthy Friend) what I would do,
(Whom neither Muse, nor Art inspire,
That have no friend in all the sacred Quire)
To show my kindness for your Book, and you,
Forced to disparage what I would admire!
Boldman, that dares attempt Pindariqu' now,
Since the great Pindar 's greatest son
From the ungrateful Age is gone;
Cowley has bid the ungrateful Age Adieu!
Apollo 's rare Columbus He
Found out new worlds of Poetry;
He like an Eagle tower'd aloft
To seize his noble prey;
Yet as a Dove's, his soul was soft,
Quiet as night, but bright as day.
To Heaven in fiery Chariot He
Ascended by Seraphick Poesy,
But which of us poor Mortals since can find,
Any inspiring Mantle that he left behind.
2.
His powerful numbers might ha'done you right;
He could ha'spar'd you immortality;
Under that Chieftains banners you might fight,
Assured of Laurels, and of Victory.
Over devouring time, and sword, and fire,
And Jove 's important ire.
My humble verse would better sing
David the shepherd, than the King:
And yet methinks it is stately to be one,
(Though of the meaner sort)
Of them that may approach a Prince's Throne,
If 'twere but to be seen at Court.
Such (Sir,) is my ambition for a name,
Which I shall rather take of You, than give;
For in Your Book I cannot miss of fame,
But by contact shall live.
Thus on your Chariot's wheel shall I
Ride safe, and look as big as Aesop 's Fly,
Who from the Olympian race new come,
And now triumphantly got home,
To his neighbors of the Swarm thus proudly said,
"Don't you remember what a Dust I made?
3.
Where e're the Son of Jesse 's Harp shall sound,
Or Isreal's sweetest songs be sung
(Like Sampson 's Lion sweet and strong)
You and your happy Muse shall be renowned;
To whose kind hand the Son of Jesse owes
His last deliverance from all his foes;
Blood thirsty Saul (l^ss barbarous than they)
His person only sought to kill,
These did his deathless Poems slay
And sought immortal blood to spill,
To sing whose Songs in Babylon would be
A new Captivity.
Deposed by these Rebels, You alone
Restore the glorious David to his Throne.
Long in disguise the Royal Prophet lay
Long from his own thoughts banished:
Never since his death till this illustrious day
Was Scepter in his hand, or Crown set on his head.
He seemed as if at Gath he still had been,
As once before proud Achish he appeared,
His face besmeared,
And spittle on his beard,
A laughing stock to the insulting Philistin,
Dressed in their Rimes he looked as he were Mad,
In Tissue You, and Tyrian Purple have him clad.
Thomas Flatman M. A.

To the Reader
Notwithstanding the great care and diligence that has been all along used,
many faults by reason of the Authors absence the whole time, have escaped the
Press, some whereof disturb the sense very much, many the verse; The reader
therefore is desired with his pen to supply the place of the Corrector, and to
take the pains to mend the grossest, noted in the following list, by which he
will not only do the Author justice, but himself, if he means to peruse the
book, a Courtesy.

Errata.
PAge 6. read exaudivit p. 7. verse 6. r. hundred folds, p. 19. l. 2. r. The
just, p. 25. l. 12. r. their own darts, p. 27. l. 6. r. move the rocks, p. 29.
l. 3. r. fills, p. 32. l. 5. r. where he his, p. 38. l. 2. r. has bowd, p. 44.
l. 15. r. And break, p. 49. l. 2. r. May Jacobs, p. 52. l. 14. r. Thy wrath
shall make their darkness bright, p. 60. l. 6. r. The hands. which p. 64. l. 2.
r. only know, p. 71. l. 23. r. Syrion, p. 77. l. 15. r. A Fear I Am to, p.
82. l. 21. r. Gods, who, p. 85. l. 12. r. than Peaces, p. 123. l. 25. r. and
burns the, p. 155 l. 5. r.

There till these storms are past ly hid
under their shadow ly, else on them fly away.
p. 166. l. 21. r.

It Was once spoke, and the Almighty words
I twice did hear --
p. 175. l. 24. r.

The wind which raised, Thy Name away should bear, p. 178. l. 9. r. He Kings
and, p. 179. l. 22. r. which bear Him guides, p. 181. l. 7. r. How God, p. 183.
l. 2. r. along the, p. 196. l. 15. r. The vallys and the, p, 203. l. 5. r.
secure they live, l. 25. r. what it meant, p. 209. l. 17. r. e're this, p. 211.
l. 8. r. Hills of Prey, p. 213. l. 4. r. I felt if He, p. 222. l. 10. r. and
washed its stones, p. 228. l. 15. r. I had led, l. 20. r. Have strewed fresh, p.
232. l. 8. r. Monuments of grass, l. 26. r. Fill every Face, p. 245. l. 3. r.
Though Death, p. 246. l. 9. r. uphold thy Throne, p. 249. l. 12. r. the blow,
p. 278, l. 7. r. may back, l. 24. r. shall raise it, p. 279. l. 2. r. theirs
my, l. 3. dele shall, p. 283. l. 16. r. of his care, p. 293. l. 17. r. who most
shall. p. 300 l 24. r. For as the, p. 310 l. 20. r. From whence, p. 311. l, 16.
r. And thought, l. 22. r. Or teach His, p. 320. l. 15. r. A City, l. 26. r.
their noise, p. 321. l. 15. r. gates of Brass, p. 331. l. 4. r. till He gets
the, p. 335. l. 14. r. where, as it stands, p. 348. l. 25. r. did obtain, p.
356. l. 18. r. Before Kings, and not take, but turn on them the shame, p 397.
l. 24. r.

But to thy Temple be restored again.

p. 427. l. 14. r. Fruitful seasons, l. 26. r. as poor a thing is Man:

THE FIRST BOOK OF PSALMS.
The First Psalm. Beatus Vir qui non abiit, etc.
I.
THrice happy man, who in the beaten ways
Of Careless sinners, never blindly strayes
In their assemblies, nor maintains their part,
Their scoffs, or their debates will hear,
But leaves the place as well as Chair,
And keeps his ears as guiltless as his heart!
II.
Who in the Almighties Law his age does spend,
Grows old in that which will his age commend;
By day he reads it, meditates at night,
Makes it his Guide, makes it his Stay,
His greatest business night and day;
But less his business makes it, than delight!
III.
He shall be like a Tree by the Waters side,
Whose root receives the Tribute of the tide;
The tender plant does into vigor grow,
Is always green, has always fruit,
Extends into the streams its root,
And spreads in top, as that does spread below.
IV.
So shall the Righteous flourish, and that hand,
Which planted him at first, shall make him stand;
No storm or drought against him shall prevail,
But bending to the streams his root,
He shall be green, he shall have fruit,
Which till they cease to flow, shall never fail.
V.
But the unjust by every billow tossed,
Shall in the storms himself has raised, be lost:
Shall be like Chafe, with which the Wind does play,
That now flies here, and now falls there,
Now on the ground, now in the air,
Till that which raised it, blow it clean away.
VI.
And when The Eternal Judge to th'Bar shall bring
Each secret thought, and every hidden thing,
The difference then much greater shall appear:
For when the Just to glory go,
The Wicked shall begin their woe,
More unlike in another World than here.
Psalm II. Quare fremuerunt gentes.
I.
WHat makes this stir? Why do the People rage?
And all their little Kings engage?
Their ancient strifes they mind no more,
Forget they once were Enemies,
And though they never agreed before,
Now all conspire against their God to rise.
II.
Their God's become their Common Enemy,
And his Anointed they defy:
"Off with his yoke, let us break His bands,
"Away with all his Chains, they say,
"Our necks we know, let us try our hands,
"If they can rule, as well as those obey!
III.
But He, who reigns above, sees all their pride,
And does their boasts and threats deride;
If they go on, He Will to them speak,
And if God speaks, sure man shall hear,
For when His voice does Cedars break,
Proud Libanus, which bears them, quakes for fear.
IV.
Yet let them rise, and do their worst, my Throne
Stands fixed, as th'Hill it is set upon:
(Sion which cannot be removed;)
And that no further doubt may be
Whether God has my choice approved
I Will show His Seal, and publish His Decree.
V.
"Thou art my Son; This day I Thee begot;
(He spoke the Word, who changes not.)
"Ask of me, and the World is Thine;
"The utmost skirts of all the Earth,
"Nations unknown, beyond the Line,
"Whose Countries yet have neither Name, nor Birth.
VI.
"Thou shall their Sovereign be, and to Thee all,
"Who will not stoop shall lower fall.
"Their potsheards shall Thy Scepter feel;
"For since its rule they will have no more,
"From gold it shall be turned to steel,
"And make them dust, who were but earth before.
VII.
Be wise, O Kings, and you, who others give
Their Laws, hear Mine, that you may Live!
Great as you are, look not too high,
For one above you stills your noise;
Yet since your Office calls you nigh,
Serve Him with trembling, and with fear rejoice!
VIII.
Least He be angry kiss the Eternal Son!
Happy are they, who thus have done!
And there have placed their Chief desire!
Unto your selves, and Him return;
For if His anger once take fire,
Those Flames which should but only warm, will burn!
Psalm III. Domine quid multiplicati, etc. A Psalm of David when he fled from
Absalom his Son.

I.
LOrd, how are they increast who trouble me?
How many, Lord, against me rise,
For Thy sake are my Enemies,
Yet would persuade me I am so to Thee?
God has no help for him, they say;
As if they knew Thy Will, or Power;
But when thou Plagues on them do shower,
Over me Thou shall Thy Love display,
And raise my head, when theirs Thou in the dust shall lay.
II.
To God Almighty, my defense, I cried,
Who heard me from His Holy Hill,
With praise my heart, and mouth did fill,
And me from trouble in His hand did hide:
I laid me down, and rose again,
Nothing shall make me now afraid,
Though thousand Enemies me invade;
For God, who did their rage restrain,
Whilst I securely slept, awake will me sustain.
III.
Arise, my God; see where my God does rise;
And how His foes before Him fall;
Already He has smote them all,
Already has struck out their teeth, and eyes!
Thus by unknown, and secret ways,
The Lord does help, and save His own;
Salvation comes from Him alone,
Who thus delights His Name to raise:
O, since He sends the help, let Him have all the Praise!
Psalm IV. Cum invocarem exaudavit, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THou, who have heard me heretofore,
And help beyond my Prayers did send;
Gav'st me my Right, and do that Right defend,
Thy wonted aides I now implore;
To my sad miseries incline Thine ear,
And them, my God, and with them Thine own Mercies hear!
II.
Fond Men! how long will you, in vain,
God, and my Glory thus despise?
Him you reject, when against me you rise,
For I, but as His Viceroy, reign.
By Him I rule, and He, you ought to know,
First judged me fit to be your King, then made me so.
III.
To Him I call, He hears my Cry,
If you are wise, in time forbear!
Be still, least He your murmurings also hear,
For though you see not, He stands by:
Behold His Face, but if that Sun's too bright,
Consult your own black thoughts, and treasons, when it is night!
IV.
Your feigned submission, and false Vows,
How basely with your God you deal,
When under them you falser hearts conceal,
He who is their Judge, and searcher knows:
A pure heart, and clean hand's the Sacrifice,
Which carry their acceptance with them, as they rise.
V.
Wealth, since it is so hard to get,
Must be the chiefest Good, most say;
And call them wise, who thither find the way,
Though strayd from Thee in seeking it;
From Thee my Portion, Lord, who can bestow
More with one look, than all their pains can find below.
VI.
Let them to hundred fields increase,
And their redoubled wishes have,
Till they no longer know what more to crave,
Harvests of Plenty, years of Peace;
Their fields with fruit, with oil their faces shine,
Their jollity's but madness, if compared with mine.
VII.
Olive and Vine Thou art to me,
Those blessings, and a thousand more,
Which thou have laid up in thy boundless store,
Unknown to all, who know not Thee;
Therefore in peace secure I Will sleep, Thy Grace,
Which gives me rest, will also guard my Resting place.
Psalm V. Verb a mea auribus percipe, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd to my earnest Prayers incline Thine ear,
And those desires, which Thou first gav'st me, hear!
Attend, my King, my God, unto my cry,
For to Thy Name alone I fly!
If thou art longer silent, what that meant
I Will ask no more, but still will pray,
And hasten with my calls the day,
And silence then shall witness Thy assent.
II.
To Heaven I Will look, and pray with confidence,
For I am sure of help, and pity thence;
I know Thou can not wickedness endure,
Nor shall the wicked be secure,
Hated by Thee, as Thee he never did mind;
His own day dazles his weak sight,
And how then can he bear Thy light?
If his own dazles, Thine will strike him blind.
III.
Thou shall destroy him, and his lying tongue
Shall to himself alone do all the wrong;
That blood of other men, which he has shed,
Shall justly fall on his own head.
Whilst to Thy Temple I will come with praise,
And make Thy love the subject be,
Whence I Will take wing to mount to Thee,
And in my flight toward Heaven, Thy glory raise.
IV.
O, bring me thither, and make strait my way,
And let me see the snares my Enemies lay!
Be Thou my guide; that I the path may know,
And lead me, where I ought to go!
I dare not trust them though they seem to bless,
For even their flatteries poison have;
Their tongue is death, their throat the grave,
Wicked their hands, their heart is wickedness.
V.
Destroy them, Lord, but not by Thy right hand,
That signal justice from their own command!
By their own secret counsels let them fall,
And send those plagues, for which they call!
In their transgressions let them be overthrown,
Burst with that pride, with which they sweld,
For against Thee they have rebelled,
And let the Curse they suffer be their own!
VI.
But let all those, who trust in Thee, rejoice,
And where their hearts are, lift on high their voice!
Let them be fearless who adore Thy Name,
Preserved by their own heavenly flame!
For Thou all times the Righteous wilt defend,
Thy mighty Power shall be his shield,
Never overcome, hene're shall yield,
But certain Conquest shall his arms attend!
Psalm VI. Domine, ne in furore tuo, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd, in Thy wrath rebuke me not,
Nor in thy fury chasten me!
For such weak things that furnace is too hot,
And by my clay no more endured can be,
Than my injustice, and repeated wrongs by Thee. ^. Penitential Psalm.

II.
Uphold me, Lord, for I am weak,
Whilst Thou Thy hand do on me lay;
My bones are shaken, and my heart will break;
Heal me with Speed, and take Thy hand away,
Or let me know how long, and I Will with patience stay!
III.
Return, and for Thy Mercy sake,
My Soul from this affliction save!
O now some pity on thy servant take,
For Thou in death can not Thy praises have,
But they, and I shall be forgotten in the grave!
IV.
I weary out the day with sighs,
And when that is done, the night with tears;
So vast a deep comes rolling from my eyes,
That down its tide my bed it almost bears,
Yet though it wash my couch, it cannot drown my fears.
V.
My eyes are hollow and decayed,
And from their windows hardly see;
Quite buried in the graves my tears have made,
They only show where they were wont to be,
So that what age to others, grief has done to me.
VI.
But hold; why do I thus complain,
Like one whom God does never hear?
For God has heard me, and I Will pray again:
Avoid Profane, avoid, least while yo'are near,
That wickedness, which hardens yours, should stop His ear!
VII.
The Lord has heard me, and my tears
Have found acceptance in His eyes:
My sighs already have blown over my fears,
And scattered with their breath my Enemies:
So let them fly with shame, all who against me rise!
Psalm VII. Domine Deus meus noster, etc.
A Psalm of David, which he sang unto the Lord concerning the words of Cush the
Benjamite.

I.
ALmighty God, to Thee for help I cry,
And on Thy Power alone rely;
Thou have preserved me, and once more
Thy ancient favors I implore,
The same, which Thou have granted heretofore.
Thy hand has raised me, when brought low,
In my distress Thou did Thy mercy show,
May that strong hand, which raised me then, defend me now!
Lord, from my Enemy deliver me,
And let my flight from him, be but to Thee!
II.
Should Thou withdraw, or not let me come near,
My Soul he would in pieces tear;
Just like a Lion, having found
His helpless prey, who looks around,
And only with his eyes gives the first wound:
But when he sees the guards are gone,
And shepherds scattred, he falls boldly on,
And with his paws does finish, what his eyes begun.
Such would, O Lord, my certain ruin be,
Did not Thou interpose to rescue me!
III.
Yet, Lord, if I have done this wicked thing,
For which they charge me to the King;
Or if, for some unworthy end,
I did but in my thoughts intend;
(Wretch as I was) a mischief to my friend;
Yea, if I have not spared my foe,
Who without any cause of mine was so,
And when thy hand had given him to me, let him go:
Then let my Enemy take my life away,
And spurn that honor I so low did lay!
IV.
Lord, in Thine anger to my cause arise,
Against my vengefull Enemies!
Awake, and up in Judgment stand,
The same, which Thou do me command,
And take both Scales, and Sword into Thy hand!
Then let the Congregation see,
That they themselves are blind, who fancy Thee,
Filleted, as they feign and make their Justice be!
Return Thou therefore, for their sakes on high,
That they may know there is in Thy hand an eye.
V.
For Thou indeed art Judge: and Lord begin
With me when Thou have purged my sin!
Remember my Integrity,
And after that Thy servant try,
Who to Thy Bar does for just judgment fly!
That wickedness may have an end,
When thus to every cause Thou shall attend,
And let Thy equal sentence upon all descend!
I Am sure to be absolved, at this debate,
For He, that is Judge, shall be my Advocate.
VI.
God shall the Righteous clear, and but delay
The Wickeds sentence for a day;
For every day with him He Is grieved,
He is not pardoned but reprieved,
Not into favor, but on proof received:
And if he turns not to the Lord,
Out from His mouth shall come the dreadful Word,
His bow's already bent, and He will whet His sword:
The instruments of death all furbisht are,
And for the blow The Almighty arm's made bare,
VII.
But unconcerned, he travayles with his sin,
And falsehood to the birth does bring:
Leaves not, till having dug a pit,
He falls himself the first in it,
A just reward, and for the maker fit:
On his own head his sin returns,
He feels the weight of his own heavy scorns,
And in a quenchless fire, which he first kindled, burns:
So righteous art Thou, Lord, so just Thy ways,
Thy Name to heaven does reach, so shall my Praise!
Psalm VIII. Domine, dominus noster, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
SOle Monarch of the World, Prince of all Powers,
Fountain of Beings, glorious King,
Who can enough Thy praises sing,
Who art the Worlds great Lord, as well as Ours?
Fondly by Verse we strive Thy Name to raise,
When it already is above our highest praise.
II.
Thou and Thy Name alike are excellent,
And though we something see below,
The greatest part we cannot know,
Glorys, which are above the Firmament:
Heavens of heavens a mean extent would be,
And low as hell, were they in height compared to Thee.
III.
Great as Thou art, yet sometimes Thou do love
Some glory for Thy self to raise,
Let'st babes, and infants speak thy praise,
And do below what Angels do above:
Open'st their mouths, when Thou will check the pride
Of such, who open theirs, but only to deride.
IV.
When I my serious thoughts do entertain
With those great works Thy hand has done,
The Heavens, and in those heavens the Moon,
Whom Thou have made over all the stars to reign,
More glorious in Attendants, though less bright
Than he, who rules the day, and sends her out at night.
V.
Lord, what is Man, then to my self, I say,
Or, what is Man's Posterity,
That he thus visited should be,
Be made to rule, when such great things obey?
Be little lower than Blessed Angels made?
And have at last their glory to his honor laid?
VI.
For King of all Thy works, with Thine own hand,
Thou on his head have set the Crown,
Enjoining all his Power to own,
And his obey, as if it were Thy command;
Creatures, which at his feet the yoke now bear,
But would have higher risen, if not by Thee placed there.
VII.
They are his slaves, and just obedience show,
All in their offices attend,
Their lives all in his service spend,
And count their honor for his use to grow:
All that the Sea inhabit, or the sky,
And Earth, or for his pleasure live, or at it dye.
VIII.
Sole Monarch of the World, Prince of all Powers,
Fountain of Beings, glorious King,
Who can enough Thy praises sing,
Who art the Worlds great Lord, as well as Ours?
Fondly by Verse we strive Thy Name to raise,
When it already is above our highest Praise.
Psalm IX. Confitebor tibi Domine, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd, I will praise Thee, and Thy Works declare;
Of all Thy glorious Acts rehearse;
My Song their praises shall not spare,
But with their numbers I will raise my Verse:
In Thee I will be glad, in Thee rejoice,
And where Thou art, on high, send up my voice.
II.
My Enemies, by Thee persu'd, gave back,
In vain they strove to shun Thy sight,
My Enemies Thou did overtake,
And those, who escaped the battle, fell in flight:
Thou heard'st my cause, and did my right maintain,
Take then the Crown, who did the Victory gain.
III.
God on the Throne did sit, a final doom
On the Rebellious World to pass,
Their troops alone were not overcome,
But their vile Names He also out did raze:
So totally by Him they were overthrown,
That only in such songs they shall be known.
IV.
At length, O Enemy, thy boasts are done,
And thy destructions have an end;
The next that comes, will be thy own,
And at the door swift ruin does attend;
As of the towns thou sack'dst there is no sign,
But even their Names have perished, so shall Thine!
V.
God, who for ever reigns, has fixed His Throne,
And to His bar the Earth will call;
In righteousness He shall come down,
And by His equal Justice sentence all:
Under His wings secure the Just shall lie,
And He Will their refuge be, who to Him fly.
VI.
Lord they, who know Thy Name, will trust in Thee,
For power, and strength, and safety's there,
That quiver cannot emptied be,
And those, who bear such arms, need never fear:
For never yet thou any man did leave,
Who was Thy help but willing to receive.
VII.
Praise to that God, who care of Sion takes!
And all His wonders tell about;
For when He Inquisition makes,
The blood which now is silent, will cry out:
Aloud 'twill cry, nor will God stop His ear
To blood, who keeps it open for a tear.
VIII.
Arise, My King, to Thee for help I pray,
Behold the Mis'ries I endure;
Thou, who from death did guard my way,
And made me stand from all his shafts secure:
That in Thy house I may Thy love record,
And where He has returned me, praise the Lord!
IX.
Down in the pit, which for me they had made,
In The pit the heathen are sunk down;
Are taken in the toils they laid,
Whilst by so just a judgment God is known,
That when the heathen fall by their own snare,
Thy Just, for whom 'twas laid, in safety are.
X.
To hell they shall be turned, and with them all,
Who God or know not, or forget;
But those, who for His succor call,
Shall have it, like their expectation, great:
For though at present God seems not to hear,
His hands are only held, and not His ear.
XI.
Appear, O lord, and let not man prevail,
But judge the Nations in Thy sight;
The Nations, who dare Heaven assail,
And overthrow them with Thy glorious light!
And, when Thou have subdued their forces, then
Let them know Thou art God, themselves but men!
Psalm X. Ut quid Domine recessisti, etc.
I.
MY God, why do Thou thus Thy self withdraw,
And make as if Thou did not see
Those mis'ries, which are better known to Thee,
Than him, who bears their sharpest law?
Why do Thou thus Thy face in trouble hide?
It Were hell, should I be ever so denied.
II.
Look how the wicked, in his pride encreast,
Destroys the poor, who flies to Thee!
May all the plots, he lays, discovered be,
And on himself their vengeance rest!
May the destruction, which he did intend
For Thine, in his own ruin only end!
III.
He boasts of that, which Thou like Him, do hate,
His loose, and uncontrolled desires,
And to no greater happiness aspires,
Than what flows from a great estate:
Applauds the Covetous, and counts him wise,
And valiant, who for earth can Heaven despise.
IV.
He has a better God than what rules there,
And need not any further try;
Alas, he has no wings to mount on high,
Give him a God, that will be near;
That may be handled, like his baggs, and told,
And can give solid comfort, like his gold.
V.
No other De'ty with the wretch goes down,
This takes up all his thoughts, and mind:
No matter what report he leaves behind,
For what shall be, to him's unknown;
Above, in Heaven, he hears Thy Judgments are,
And is content they should be always there.
VI.
His Enemies he laughs at, thinks their plots
More worthy of his scorn, than rage;
Fearless against all storms he does engage,
His even-spun thread is without knots:
Perpetual peace, constant Prosperity,
Has been his lot, and shall his portion be.
VII.
These are his thoughts, and thus unmoved he stands,
With fraud, and curses in his mouth,
His feet never trod the sacred paths of Truth,
And like them are his cruel hands:
But in the lonely fields in wait he lies,
And stains the groves with humane sacrifice.
VIII.
For as a Lion, in some shady breach,
Humbles himself, and couches down,
His prey with greater force to set upon,
If it shall come within his reach,
Does all the postures of submission feign,
Till to resist he knows their strength is vain:
IX.
So does he couch, but having caught the poor,
With his disguise aside does lay
His feigned humility, and tears his prey,
Nor, whilst there is life, thinks it secure:
And all the while flatters himself, that he
To the All-seeing eye concealed shall be.
X.
Arise, O God, to strike lift up Thy hand,
And on Thy Enemies let it fall!
That those, who daily for Thy mercy call,
May thence Thy pity understand:
That Thou do not their miseries forget,
But that their helps shall, like their pains, be great!
XI.
Why should the Wicked man Thy Power despise,
Or whilst Thou only do forbear,
Think that indeed Thou can not see or hear,
Deaf, as himself, to the poor man's cries?
For Thou have seen, and wilt his rage requite,
That by Thy hand he shall confess Thy sight.
XII.
With Thee the Poor entrusted has his ways,
And Thou preserv'st the Fatherless:
To Thee he makes his suppliant address,
And on Thy mighty goodness stays:
Therefore appear, and by one fatal blow,
The wicked, and his wickedness overthrow!
XIII.
Then as Sole Monarch, Thou over all shall reign,
When thus Thou have secured Thy land,
When thus they fall, who slighted Thy command,
And all their spoils resign again:
When on the heathen Thou Thy chain shall lay,
And make their proud Usurpers to obey.
XIV.
For this the humble, and oppressed do pray,
With groans, that God delights to hear,
Though not to see the mis'ries, which they bear,
For them He feels, as well as they:
Arise then, Lord, to help the Fatherless,
Nor let the Sons of Earth, Heavens seed oppress!
Psalm XI. In Domino confido, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
I Know my trust, on whom I have believed,
So certain that I cannot be deceived:
God is my rock, and all in vain,
You like a bird to the hills would have me fly,
For he, who can this rock but gain,
His Enemies arrows may defy,
The bird, whose feathers wing them, never soared so high.
II.
I saw the wicked draw the fatal bow,
And from the string I saw the arrow go;
It levelled was at the upright,
And had assur'dly sunk into his heart;
His Innocence had been the White,
Had not the Almighty took his part,
And on his head, who shot it, turned the vengeful dart.
III.
The Almighty God, whose power all things sustains,
Heavens dreadful King, who in His Temple reigns,
And with a look all hearts does try,
Sentencing every work, and word, and thought,
There, as they all unformed do lie,
E're they are to perfection brought,
And into all their several shapes, and fashions wrought.
IV.
He sees the Righteous and the Wicked too;
Without His help, what can the Righteous do?
They are His love: but fire, and rain,
And floods of Brimstone on the unjust He Will pour;
Fire, which shall never be quenched again,
But light those rivers with its shower,
Whose burning gulf at once shall both drown, and devour.
V.
Such is the mixture fills the wickeds Cup,
A brimfull bowl, and he shall drink it up:
Darkness without one gleam of light,
Torments, which have no measure, or allay,
And after all Eternal night;
Whilst God from heaven shall dart a ray
Upon the Just man, and be both his Sun and day.
Psalm XII. Salvum me fac Domine, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
A Rise, O God, and save; it is time to rise,
And with Thee bring all Thy supplies!
Help, for the Faithful man no more
Has either place reserved, or power,
Is not at all, and was but only scorned before.
II.
There Is not a just man left, they flatter all,
And Prudence, what God hates, miscall:
To one another lie, and feign,
And what they least intend, maintain,
And as their tongue is false, their daring heart is vain.
III.
But God such tongues shall cut out, and such hearts
Wound, and strike through with their darts;
Against Him, and Heaven they up were thrown,
But on themselves are all hurled down,
And, by the wounds they make, they find they are their own.
IV.
"Who Is Lord over us, with devilish mouth they say,
"Or who is He we should obey?
"That Is I, says God, now I Will arise,
"And since my Kingdom you despise,
"And subjects scorn to be, you shall be Enemies.
V.
"I Will rise now, and in safety set the Poor;
"From all the storms you raise, secure:
That word has said it, which is tried
Like Silver, seven times purified;
Pure without any dross, too great to be denied.
VI.
Thou shall preserve them, Lord, by Thy Right hand,
In The midst of a rebellious land,
Where basest men most honored are,
Some on the Throne, some in the Chair;
And they as Criminalls stand sentenced at the Bar.
Psalm XIII. Usque quo Domine, etc.
I.
HOw long, my God, will Thou thus hide Thy face,
And thus withdraw the presence of Thy grace?
How long shall I forgotten be,
As if indeed it were in vain
Of all my mis'ries to complain,
And I might sooner mount the rocks, than Thee?
I look, and sigh, and wait, O, come away,
Why should my En'my triumph, when Thou do but stay?
II.
Arise, O God, and with Thee bring fresh aid,
Thy very sight will make my Foes afraid!
By it overcome, they will fall asleep,
Too weak to bear Thy glorious sight,
Will here begin their endless night,
Whilst Thou my eyes shall ever waking keep;
Let them not on Thy servants ruin stand,
Least what Thine only did, they challenge to their hand!
III.
Thou art my confidence, in Thee I trust,
And, though I am afflicted, God is just:
I in His mercy shall rejoice,
In that Salvation He has brought,
In that deliverance He has wrought,
Something my heart shall do, something my voice:
Both heart, and voice in songs of praise shall move,
And since I am Thy Care, Lord, Thou shall be my Love!
Another Version of the same. By M. M. B.
I.
HOw long, O God, shall I forgottenly,
As one cast from Thy memory?
Will Thou from me Thy face for ever hide?
For so that time, which nothing is to Thee,
Seems an Eternity to me,
Who only on Thy favor have relied.
II.
Will Thou no period to my griefs allow,
But fresh afflictions on me throw,
Which I as little as Thy wrath can bear?
To see my Enemies triumphing stand,
And my self stoop to their command,
Who only Thee, and Thy command should fear.
III.
In mercy, Lord, again remember me,
And from Oppressors set me free!
Unto Thy servants prayers attention give,
Revive his hopes, and let Thy glorious light
His joys renew, that in Thy sight,
Though now cast out, he may for ever live!
IV.
Why should my Enemy increase his pride,
With Thee, and conquest on his side?
And those, who trouble me, in this rejoice,
That I am exiled from Thy resting place,
The sacred presence of Thy grace,
Who often have glori'd that I was Thy choice?
V.
But I have trusted in Thy power, and love,
That Thou will all my fears remove:
And this sure hope with joy so fill my mind,
That I will now Thy mighty praises sing,
From whom my happiness shall spring,
Whose bounty, like Thy self, is unconfined.
Psalm XIV. Dixitinsipiens in cord, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
"THere is no God, the fool in's heart does say,
And that his life may not his heart betray,
He like one, that believes it, lives:
Does with blasphemous mouth deny
The very Being of the Deity,
And in his works that lie,
Which he to man dares not, to Heaven profanely gives.
II.
From heaven The Almighty God came down to view
What He there saw, and there could punish too:
Yet down He came, and looked around,
He searched, if He might any see,
Any of His, least they should numbered be
To the Common misery,
He searched, but not a Just man in the Number found.
III.
Are they all thus, O God, all gone aside,
As if from Thee they could their follies hide?
Are all thus greedy to devour,
And eat Thy People up like bread,
Thankless for that, and not some judgment dread,
Like those by quails once fed,
Tempting that Heaven, which Manna down before did shower.
IV.
Amids their jollity in fears they were,
Their meat a trap, their table proved a snare:
But God himself defends the Poor,
Will both their cause, and right maintain,
And though the proud their Innocence would stain,
The spot shall out again,
And God, who sends them help, shall with it that restore.
V.
From Sion, Lord, may Isreal's help appear,
Thence come, since all his confidence is there!
Bring back their long Captivity;
That Israel may adore Thy ways,
And Jacob to Thy Name give all the praise,
Together strive to raise
Thy Honor, and admire Thee, as thou ought to be!
Psalm XV. Domine quis habitabit, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
MY God, who shall Thy Holy Mount ascend,
And in Thy House his life and praises spend?
Blessed Soul, who always shall be near,
Nearer than any other can,
When he his God may see, his God may hear, David.

And where his God is, still be there,
O tell me who it is, or let me see the Man!
II.
It Is one who from his heart the Truth does speak;
Whose company, and laws he n'ere does break: God.

His Heart's the wheel, which first does play,
And all the other wheels commands,
Whose motion all the other wheels obey,
All go, when that first leads the way,
Truth and his heart first move, and then his feet and hands.
III.
He dares not his just Neighbor vilify,
Nor give his conscience with his mouth the lie:
Dares not speak fair, before his face,
And once withdrawn, retract his fear,
Sinning to bring another in disgrace,
But thinks, what if 'twere his own case?
And against him, less than against himself will hear.
IV.
Whose heart against a wicked man does rise,
And shows true scorn, yet pity by his eyes:
The good he honors, counts them dear
Worthy his love and favor too,
All who in truth my Sacred Name do fear;
And when he to his Word does swear,
What he has sworn, though he is sure to lose will do.
V.
He puts not out his Gold to Usury,
Nor by Extortion into wealth does fly:
No bribes will take against the Just,
Or balance with those weights his hand,
Which there inclines where the cause merits most:
And having thus discharged his trust,
He on my Holy Mount shall dwell, and like it stand.
Psalm XVI. Conserva me Domine, etc. Michtam. A Psalm of David.

I.
PReserve me, Lord, for unto Thee I flee;
I, who upon thee heretofore have staid,
And when I saw Thee not have said,
"Thou art my God, and though my Good to Thee
"Can never come, yet Thine may reach to me.
II.
My good like gold to Thee can never extend,
Though it to airy thinness I should beat:
The distance still would be too great,
Nor will it is dross let it to Heaven ascend:
O, may it spread below, and know no end*
III.
Spread to the Saints, in whom is Thy delight,
And who, as they Thy pleasure be, are mine:
Let others to dumb Idols join,
Their very Idols once shall do them right,
And though they could not help, against them fight.
IV.
I Will not approach them, Lord, least for their sake,
I share the sorrows, which on them are laid:
I of their Offerings am afraid,
For all who to them sacrifices make,
Are their own Victims, and in the flames partake.
V.
God is my Portion and maintains my Lot,
My lines are in a pleasant Country cast,
My Heritage shall fall at last,
And in a time when I expect it not;
God has both given, and will secure the Spot.
VI.
His Name I Will therefore bless, who counseled me,
Make Him my meditation every night,
Till the young Sun brings back the Light;
As I in His, He in my sight shall be;
Nor shall the Darkness hide His face from me.
VII.
Unmoved I Will stand His mighty praise to tell,
My very flesh in certain hope shall rest
Of the Resurrection of the Blessed;
For Lord, Thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell,
Nor let Thy Holy One with Corruption dwell.
VIII.
To the safe paths of Life direct my way,
Thy Presence, where perpetual joys flow over,
Whose Pleasures spring for evermore:
By those clear streams let me delighted stay,
And melt away in love, as well as they!
Psalm XVII. Exaudi Domine justitiam, etc. A Prayer of David.

I.
GReat God of all the Earth, to Thee I fly,
And to thy just Tribunals Bar appeal;
Thou know my cause, and Thou shall hear my cry,
And, what Thy pleasure on it is, reveal:
Upon Thy sentence I depend,
Let that my suit, and troubles end;
For Thine own sake my right maintain,
Heart did never closer join with lips, nor they less feign!
II.
Lord, Thou have searched me, and my heart have known,
Then, when concealed from all the World, but thee,
The silent Night had left me all alone,
By Thee examined, mine own Judge to be:
In thousand flames I have been tried,
But as gold thoroughly purified,
From thousand flames I came more bright,
For I before had past Thine All-discerning sight.
III.
As my heart thought, so my lips always spoke,
And with them both my hands did freely join;
With the Destroyer I did never partake,
But always left his paths to follow Thine:
Thou were my rule, and Thou my guide,
When I or slipped, or turned aside,
Thus guarded let me ever go,
For as Thy ways are certain, my steps shall be so!
IV.
Lord, Thou have answered me, when heretofore,
In my distress I made my Prayers to Thee!
Incline Thine ear to my desires once more,
And as then, let me now Thy mercy see!
Thou, whose Almighty hand does save
All those who its protection crave,
Thy mighty hand for me extend,
No power but Thine can to my miseries put an end.
V.
And as the Eye around with guards is set,
And safely compassed in on every side,
To keep off dangers (which may hazard it)
Display its glory, or its beautys hide;
Under Thy wings so let me lie,
Secure, as under those, my Eye!
For as those guards my eye enclose,
For safety, I am girt, for ruin by my foes.
VI.
Riches to them are Shield, and Coat of Mayle,
Whilst with vile mouth they basely God defy:
They, more than Innocence, are their Brazen Wall,
Which as their own proud thoughts they wish were high
With fat their eyes are closed around,
And though still fastened on the ground,
No conscious marks of guilt do bear,
Nor view it as their own desert, but wish me there.
VII.
Just like a Lioness, that wayts her prey,
Urged by her young whelps hunger, and her own,
All threatening force aside she seems to lay,
And try's new plotts, when that is useless grown:
Unto some shady Covert flies,
And there as dead, or dying lies,
That if her scent infect the wind,
She may her self appear the prey, she there would find.
VIII.
But rise O God, and disappoint his rage,
And where himself has vowed, there let him fall!
May he no longer Thy great power engage,
Nor against Thine, with Thy own arms prevail!
The Sword he brandishes is Thine,
Thou guid'st his hand, and make that shine,
Without Thy help he could not be
Or thus Thy seeming friend, or thus my Enemy.
IX.
This portion here below the Wicked have,
The World, and all it is boundless stores are theirs,
Though when they once descend into the grave,
They All behind them leave, and Children heirs;
But my great Portion is to come,
When happy death shall bring me home,
When I shall in Thy sight appear,
And, to Thine Image changed, be with Thy Son Coheir.
Psalm XVIII. Diligam te Domine Fortitudo, etc. A Psalm of David the Servant of
the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the words of this Song, in the day that the
Lord delivered him from the hands of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul
-- And he said,

I.
LORD, I will love Thee, and Thy mighty praise
My humble Song to Heaven shall raise;
Thou art my Rock, my strength, my Power,
My God, my Help, and ever just,
My Buckler, Fortress, and strong Tower,
Who have been always, and shall always be my trust.
To Thee the Spoils I consecrate,
Which by thy hand I from my Enemies took,
That, when in time to come, I on them look,
Thinking how in their ruin Thou preserv'dst my state,
And those remains of Trumph see,
I may new Trophies dress to Thee,
Who only sav'dst, and only worthy of my praise can be.
II.
'Twas the most gloomy day I ever saw,
And Death in all its horrid shapes stood by;
Trouble without, within despair did ly
And not content by drops my blood to draw,
And leave when glutted, it my heart did gnaw,
That sensibly I could perceive my self to die.
Hell compassed me with all her waves,
Enlarged her mouth, and thence did throw
In pitchy streams her terrors, and the graves
That by its train death might more dreadful show,
And I, before hand, all its cruelties might know.
Before it lay devouring cares,
Envys, distrusts, and bands of snares,
Suspicious, jealousies, and fears,
Chains, and imprisonment, a wretched life,
Beyond the reach of fancy or belief,
With which around 'twas blocked so fast,
That thousand deaths must first be past,
E're one could touch the Blessed, and Happy One at last.
III.
What to resolve, or what to do,
Which way to turn, or where to go,
I had no friend to tell me, nor my self did know.
At last to Heaven I looked, and there
A passage for my flight did see,
The Coast all empty, wide and clear;
But who on high my Soul could bear,
Or give me wings that I might thither flee?
And then aloud to God I cried,
And in my trouble made a noise,
Anguish did help to raise my voice,
And heard I would be, though I were denied.
"Lord bow Thine ear, said I, to me,
"Or suffer that my prayers ascend to Thee!
"And up I sent them with a gale of sighs,
That sooner than my thought, had pierced the skies
And entrance found, or made to His ears,
Whilst I too slow to follow with mine eyes,
Reflecting ever on my fears,
Could only their desired return expect in tears.
IV.
I looked not long, e're the Earth began to shake,
The Rocks to tremble, and the Hills to quake,
And, to attest the presence of its God,
Who to the Judgment on a Cherub rode,
The World its fixed foundation did forsake;
Out from His nostrils a thick smoke did go,
And from His mouth devouring fire,
Which more impetuous, as it large did grow,
And made the Heavens almost with th'heat expire.
He bowed the Heavens, and then came down,
Under his feet chained Darkness lay,
And tempests, that no will but His will own,
In have flew on before, to make Him way;
He followed close, and their slow pace did chide,
Bid them with greater speed and swiftness ride;
And that He dreadful might appear,
Yet not consume till got more near,
Dark waters and thick clouds His face did hide.
V.
Such His Pavilion, such the secret place,
To which His Glory did retire,
But yet how thick so e're the covering was,
The waters could not quench, nor clouds conceal the fire,
But it through both did force its way,
And all the louder thunders calls obey:
In thunder God aloud from Heaven did call,
And made His voice over all the World be heard,
Hayl-stones, and coals of fire did at it fall,
Hailstones and coals of fire, which those, who slighted thunder, feared.
These were the poisoned arrows, which He threw,
In vain with Heaven they saw it was to fight;
And since so swift it did their guilt pursue,
As vain thought all their flight,
And it was truly curse enough, to see the light.
VI.
Then were the Channels of the Ocean seen,
And Earths foundations did appear
Never so low before the Sun had been,
Or saw the wonders, which he met with there.
And down he stoopt his watery bed to view,
Which he till then never truly saw, or knew,
And scarce behev'd, that what he saw was true.
At thy rebuke, O God, it open stood,
And the same breath, which made, did part the Flood.
To Heavens high Vault the waves did rise,
And threatened all to break upon my head,
But I prevented them with shrieks and cries,
And from that deep Thou did thy servant lead:
Which as the billows saw, more fraid thau I, away they fled:
VII.
God from my Enemies my life did save,
And those who were too strong for me, subdued:
No sooner could I his assistance crave,
But with my prayers, I saw my help renewed;
That weakness, which my foes did most enrage,
And to the certain prey did call,
Was my best argument His power t'engage,
Who did, unlooked for, on them fall,
And found a way to conquest, when they thought they would (stopped up all.
To a large plain he brought me our,
Where I might see His wonders all about,
And by new trials His sure mercies prove:
He rescued me, because I was His love.
The Justice of my Title did defend,
And on my head set fast the Crown;
His wonted goodness to me did extend,
And, recompensing what my hands had done,
Their innocence both witnessed, and rewarded with His own.
VIII.
He saw how constantly I kept His way,
And never to th'beaten roads of sin withdrew;
How I His Judgments did obey,
And all His Laws before me lay,
To be my guides, least I should stray,
And when I failed, how I my Cov'nants did renew.
From my own sin my self I kept,
And found acceptance in His sight,
He raised me up, and held me, when I slipped,
And I before Him [counted] was upright,
So that forgetting what I did,
My Sins He only, not His Mercies hid:
My righteousness did recompense,
And both approved, and crowned my Innocence.
For like Thy self, O God, Thou do impart
Most just rewards to every man's desert;
And what he is to Thee, to Him again Thou art.
Mercy do on the merciful bestow,
And with the Righteous art upright,
Thy purity the perfect know,
(For thou alone first made them so)
And to perfection by Thy strength they grow;
But those, who scorn Thee, Thou as much do slight:
Bring'st down high looks, the Poor do raise;
And Thy afflicted land to save,
Have helps, as different as Thy ways,
And those, as many from it, as Death has to the grave.
IX.
'Twas Thou who made my darkness bright,
And from the pit did bring me back;
Restor'dst, what I despaired to see, the light,
And, that I should no beauties lack,
Did add new glories from Thine own great sight.
By Thee I Nations have subdued,
Conquering, when I their troops but only viewed,
And Victory as much as them, pursued.
Through arms I followed her, over Forts, and Walls,
Nor, till possessed would give her over,
Her flight but forced me on the more,
And anew made me help implore
Of Him, who gives it those, whom he to battle calls
The mighty God, whose way is just,
And Word like Silver tried,
But more than silver puriry'd,
The Widows and the Orphans trust:
Who never aid to them, who wanted it, denied,
The mighty God, who only is the Lord,
And as a Rock, on high, has set His Word,
From whence He has made bare His Arm, and flaming sword.
With that I girded was to the fight,
More fatal than Goliabs, and more right,
For 'twas in war my Sword, surer than Parthian shaft in flight.
X.
For fly I did, but 'twas like them to overcome,
My feet were Hinds, both to overtake, and bring me home;
I saw, and wounded from afarr;
God taught my hands the subtle arts of War,
And gave them strength a bow of Steel to draw,
And brake a bar of Iron as if it were but straw.
His Shield protected me, His Discipline
Both held me up, and guarded round my head,
Above me made new glories shine,
And for my footsteps Palms and Laurels spread;
Which having thence a larger compass gained,
Over all the plains secure from sliding reigned.
And then once more to the Camp I went,
And with new heat my Enemies did assail,
Their flight could not my hand prevent,
But certain death it after sent,
That both pursued, o'retook, and did prevail,
Down to the Earth, but never more to rise,
I, by Thy strength, did hurl them to the ground,
My own could not their force confound,
But Thine did guide, and bless my Victories*
And now my Song Thy praises shall resound;
To Thee I will Thy right resign,
And since Thou did my Triumphs meet,
And put my Enemies necks below my feet,
Those Laurels, which Thy conduct has made mine,
By Thine own purchase, and my present shall again be Thine.
XI.
Small as the dust I to the empty wind
Them and their pride together did expose;
A while they mounted, but fell where they rose,
Again with mire and common dirt were joined,
Like dross cast out, and never more with fire to be refined.
They cried for help, but none would save,
To God, but He attended not,
Whilst to my prayers He gracious answers gave,
And for me kept those Honors He had got*
In Civil Wars preserved me safe at home,
Made me abroad fierce Nations overcome,
Who heard no sooner of my Name,
But to submit their Empires came,
And, by accepting me to be their King, increased their Fame.
With them came people quite unknown,
And from my hand each Prince received a Crown,
Which he more gloried in, and valued than his own;
When those, who yielded not, yet hoped by flight
To escape the shame they got in fight,
My luster only made more bright,
And like thick darkness, scattred at the approach of morning light.
XII.
Blessed be that God, who this has done!
My shield, my Rock, whose mighty hand
At once avenged me, and subdued my Enemies land,
And when to Hell He threw them down
My head not only raised, but did with mercy crown;
Who from the violent man delivered me,
And from his Throne made me the subject Nations see,
My Laws, and their own Kingdoms take upon the knee.
Therefore to Him alone my Verse I Will raise,
And what I sing, the Heathen teach His praise,
That They, as well as I, may know, and fear His ways.
I Will tell the glories, which to Him belong,
How great His Power, His arm how strong,
And this shall be the bearing of my Song,
"'It Was He that gave deliverance to our King,
"Who did to David mercy show,
"And from that never failing Spring,
"Will cause new blessings, on his seed to overflow.
Psalm XIX. Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THat boundless space we see above,
The Heavens, where all the Stars their courses run,
Where greatest Stars have room enough to move,
And seem but points to the vast Expansion;
The Heavens, whose Arms the World embrace,
Which over our heads, under our feet do go,
And alike near themselves make every place,
Their great Creators glory show;
The mighty God, who by His powerful hand
At first did make, and with His Word does bid them stand.
II.
His Will gives Laws unto the day,
Makes darkness in its turn succeed the Light;
Both light, and darkness, His commands obey,
And by alternate powers rule day and night:
Through the whole World their Line is gone,
All Nations do their language understand,
Nor was there ever savage Nation known,
Who in them could not read His hand,
In their own tongues all read what is written there,
For Heaven alone's the Universal Character.
III.
From thence God makes His Sun to shine,
Which like a Bridegroom from his bed does rise,
Blushes at first, but then looks gay and fine,
And with his luster dazles our weak eyes:
At first he gently seems to move,
And Heavens steep hill in state walks up, but when*
Midday is touched, like's own beams from above,
To the Earth he shoots himself again;
From East to West round the whole world does wheel,
And makes dull minerals, unseen, his influence feel.
IV.
These Works of Thine we see below,
And in them Thy great Wisdom all adore;
But by Thy Law we come our selves to know,
And what we often have heard, to experience more:
Just as Thy self are all Thy Ways,
Thy Statutes, and Commandments pure, and right;
Teaching us how we should exalt Thy praise,
One gives us joy, the other light:
To Thee they all direct, our Leaders are,
And where Thou art, not only bring, but fix us there.
V.
The Fear of God true pleasure is,
Is always clean, is always full of love,
Opens the way to an eternal bliss,
And by its constancy its truth does prove:
Unjust that sentence cannot be,
Which from the Righteous Judge of all does go;
His Judgments are from all injustice free,
Are Just themselves, and make us so:
The finest gold near them looks wan, and pale,
And honey from the Comb does of its wonted sweetness fail.
VI.
Gain, and reward in them are found,
Sometimes they are my staff, sometimes my guide,
But, Lord, how often have I fell to ground,
And in my secret wanderings gone aside!
Cleanse me, O God, and through Thy grace
Let not presumptuous sins of me take hold,
But let my Innocence still keep its place,
And make me in the Judgment bold!
Hear me, O Thou, who my Salvation art,
That when my'heart moves my lips, Thy Spirit may move my heart.
Psalm XX. Exaudiat te Dominus, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
SO may Thy God be always near,
Nay Jacobs God all Thy Petitions hear,
And when Thy Enemies huge Armies send,
As if they would Thy land devour,
And with their numbers Thee ore'power,
Then may His Name be Thy strong Tower,
To break their rage, and Thee from danger to defend!
II.
From Sion may Thy aids appear,
Invincible as He, who governs there;
With fire from Heaven may he Thy Offerings crown;
And as with every Sacrifice,
Thy prayers and that again does rise,
Till they together reach the skies
Let thy God meet them, and as they ascend come down!
III.
May He Thy just desires fulfill,
And always fix Thy counsels to His Will!
It Is done, O King, and in it we rejoice,
Let the whole World our shoutings hear,
What we adore, let them all fear,
Honor Him far, and dread him near,
Let the whole World hear Ours, and God Himself Thy voice!
IV.
Our God shall hear Thee, and His hand,
Moved by His ear, deliverance shall command:
From Heaven He shall His mighty arm unbare,
Brandish His Sword, and make it seen.
Nothing but blood shall come between,
And He, who has Thy Savior been
Shall be Thy praise as once the subject of Thy prayer.
V.
Let others on their Troops rely,
Chariots and Horse which Victory can out-fly;
We on the Name of God will only stay,
That shall Our Horse and Chariots be,
Our Armies, and Our Victory;
Let but us, Lord, be kept by Thee,
We shall stand Conquerours, when they fall, or run away.
VI.
Already they are all brought down,
But on Thy head God has set fast the Crown;
May He be still to Thee propitious,
Always incline a willing ear,
To His Anointed still be near,
And Thy petitions ever hear,
And as He hears Thee, Gracious King, may Thou hear us!
Psalm XXI. Domine in virtute tua, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
GReat God, who Wonders for Our land have done,
And saved Our King, whom Thou made so,
Again have set Him on the Throne,
And made His Fathers foes before Him bow;
Our King shall in Thy strength rejoice,
That He was Thine, as well as His own peoples choice!
II.
Thou did not ever His requests deny,
Nor to His Vows shut up Thine ear,
In vain He did not always cry,
Though Heaven, which saw His wrongs, seemed not to (hear;
For the desires He thither sent,
Thou with unhop'd for blessings did at last prevent.
III.
He only sue'd for Life, Thou gave'st a Crown,
And on His head have set it fast;
The Royal Diadem never shone
With so great luster, or so long to last,
To Kings, which from Him shall proceed,
Not to His head alone secured, but to His seed.
IV.
Home Thou have brought Him, and so fixed Him here,
All say His power is most like Thine;
The Honors Thou have made Him bear
Have rendered Him, and Monarchy Divine;
That for their Kings Our Sons shall wish,
Like Him they all may be, and all their Reigns like His.
V.
For in the Lord His confidence He placed,
And up to Heaven for help did fly,
And having there His anchor cast,
Our Seas, He knew, could never rise so high;
And that the Ocean, which was there,
Was all Pacifique, and no seed for storms did bear.
VI.
In vain from Thee, O God, His foes would fly,
And having shunned His hand, escape Thine;
But their close walks are in Thine eye,
And all around them does Thy glory shine;
His Enemies Thou count'st Thine own,
And what His hands reach not, by Thine shall be overthrown.
VII.
Thou on them their own Consciences shall turn,
Thy wrath shall on their darkness light;
For like an Oven it shall burn,
With flames that scorch, and even as Hell affright;
And when it has raged all about,
Upon the guilty standers by it shall break out.
VIII.
But, if reserved for future misery,
Thy vengeance here they shall survive,
It Is but to see, before them, dye
Those children, in whose names they hoped to live:
Yet though like them their Names shall rot,
They still shall want the happiness to be forgot.
IX.
For Thee, O King, the mischief they designed,
Which on Thy Fathers head did light;
And with you both the Crown was joined,
That was the Cause did animate the fight;
Whilst Heaven was all the while defied,
To see the rule established there, on earth denied.
X.
Heaven saw the Treasons, and did armed appear,
Returned the darts they up had thrown,
Now, less with feathers winged, than fear,
And in all wounds the arrows were their own:
Lord, since Thou 'hast thus preserved Our King.
Uphold His Throne, that with Him, we Thy praise may sing!
Psalm XXII. Deus, Deus meus, quare dereliquisti, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
MY God, my God, why art thou turned away,
And thus forsak'st me in my agony;
Shall I in vain for ever pray,
And pour out fruitless words, which reach not Thee?
All day I cry, but Thou seem not to hear,
The night does witness to my roarings bear,
Yet though they rend my heart, they cannot move Thine ear.
II.
But Holy still, and Righteous, Lord, art Thou,
And worthy of Thy People Isreal's praise,
Who on Our Fathers did bestow
Freedom from Chains, and conduct in their ways;
On Thee they trusted, and to Thee they cried,
Who heard'st their groans, and conquering out did ride,
Their trust met no reproach, nor was their prayer denied.
III.
But I Am a Worm, my God, and not a Man,
Reproach of Men, and shame of the multitude,
Whose mockings with my grief began,
And ever grew, as that increased, more rude:
With all the antic looks that show disgrace,
Distorted mouth, and head, and riv'led face,
They me the Common butt, for all their scorns did place.
IV.
"Let Us see, said they, with jests more sharp than swords,
And mortaller than all the wounds they gave,
"Let Us see, if yet, for all His Words,
"The God on whom He trusts, His life will save;
"If He so dearly loves him, at his call
"Why comes He not, we challenge Him and all,
"For without that, this single conquest would be small.
V.
Yet still in Thee I all my trust have placed,
Who art the God, who took'st me from the womb;
On whom I from the breast was cast,
And to these years through thousand cares have come;
To Thee, who have defended me I fly,
And on Thy power alone for help rely,
Be not far off to save, since trouble is so nigh!
VI.
Around with Bulls I fiercely was beset,
Basans wild Bulls whom none but Thou could tame;
And with their hoofs the ground they beat,
And open mouthed upon me bellowing came;
Like ravening Lions hasting to the prey,
That roar, and call their fellow beasts away,
Such was their noise, and haste, but savager were they.
VII.
My blood and spirits like water are poured out,
And all my bones are from their joints removed;
My heart it self to the fire is brought,
And melted down, like Silver to be proved;
A Potsheard from the furnace is less dry,
My shriv'led tongue close to my jaws does ly,
And I bear all the effects of death, before I die.
VIII.
Dogs hunted me, nay worse than dogs, those men
I came to save, in judgment on me sat;
My Good deeds were forgotten then,
Nor could my innocence their rage abate;
But sentence given, lots for my Coat they cast,
And on a rack my naked body placed,
Whose staring bones, only by them could be out-fac'd.
IX.
On me they star'd, and furious through their pride,
With cruel nails pierced through my hands and feet;
Then opened with a Spear my side,
To see my heart where all those wounds did meet:
But, mighty Savior, be not far away,
Rise to my help, and make no longer stay,
Least to their bloody Sword my Soul be made a prey!
X.
Thou, who have saved me from strong Unicorns,
Now from the Lions mouth, Lord, rescue me!
These hungry Dogs, and fierce Bulls horns,
Nor to their rage let me delivered be!
Then to my Brethren I Will Thy power declare,
And Trophies to Thy mighty conquest rear,
And with the Captive Spoils Thy Courts shall look more fair.
XI.
All you, who fear the Lord, recount His praise;
And you, blessed Jacobs seed, His Honor sing!
Who, though most fearful in His ways,
And the Worlds Judge, is both your God, and King!
Who never has the poor man's suit denied,
Nor from my tears His glorious face did hide,
But heard, and answered me, as soon as e're I cried.
XII.
Of Him alone my numerous Song shall be,
To whose great hand I all my safety ow:
And in Thy Church I Will pay to Thee
Whatever there I in my fears did vow:
Then shall the poor, with famine long oppressed,
Eat, and be full, the weary be at rest,
And those, who fear Thy Name, with peace and joy be blessed.
XIII.
The worlds wide ends, when they Thy power shall know,
Again to their Allegiance shall return:
Their Kings shall to Thy Footstool bow,
And now in love for their Rebellions burn;
Acknowledge Thee the Universal King,
Who on their Princes do confusion bring,
And make Heavens Vault, with their loud acclamations ring.
XIV.
My seed shall serve Him, for they shall be His,
And tell the wondrous works, which He has done;
How Righteous, and how Good He is,
And to the Age to come His Name make known:
That those, who long hence shall a People be,
When they the Records of these times shall see,
May trust in Him, who did all this, as well as We.
Psalm XXIII. Dominus regit me and nihil, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THE Mighty God, who all things does sustain,
That God, who nothing made in vain,
Who nothing that He made did e're disdain;
The Mighty God my Shepherd is,
He is my Shepherd, I His sheep,
Both He is mine, and I am His;
About His Flock, He always watch does keep;
When God provides Poor Man can nothing need,
And He, who hears young Ravens cry, His Sheep will feed.
II.
And as His Flock the Faithful Shepherd leads
To purling Brooks, and flowery Meads,
And by soft streams in pleasant Pastures feeds;
So does the Mighty God with me,
Conduct's me to the bubling springs,
Himself is pleased my Guide to be,
And when I stray again me homewards brings;
Making His love in thousand favors known,
Not for my goodness sake, but only for His own.
III.
Secured by Him, I will no danger fear,
Not death it self, if it were near,
And should in its most horrid shape appear;
Death's gloomy shadow by His Sun
Shall cheerful grow, as morning light,
And at the day His eye has sprung,
The grave it self shall with new beams look bright,
Thy Staff shall bear me up; My Way, O God,
Not by my Scepter shall be guarded, but Thy Rod.
IV.
It Is Thou, who all times do my Table spread,
Both fill'st my Cup, and crown'st my head;
And by the same hand I am saved and fed:
My Enemies see it, and repine,
And when they look that I should fall,
Behold me with more glory shine,
And that Almighty Hosts are at my call:
Lord, since Thy mercies thus to me extend,
My life thou best know when, let my Praise never end!
Psalm XXIV. Domini est terra, and plenitudo, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THE Earth, and all the Earth contains,
Infinite Hills, innumerable Plains,
With all their Riches, are that Gods, who over them reigns
II.
The Universe is His, and all
Those glorious Beings, which complete this Ball,
The Hand which holds it, and them first from naught did call.
III.
God founded it upon the Flood,
First made the world, then saw that it was good,
And on unstable waves unmoved it since has stood.
IV.
He all things made, but Sion chose,
Before all places for His own repose,
Sion His Palace, who no other builder knows.
V.
But who shall Sion's Mount ascend,
Be counted worthy there his life to spend,
And undisturbed may at thy Altar, Lord, attend?
VI.
He whose pure hands no stains defile,
Whose heart is innocent and free from guile,
And tongue blasphemes not God, nor does the Truth revile.
VII.
This is the Man, who shall receive
Blessings from Him, who does all blessings give,
Both seeks His Face, and on His Hill shall ever live.
VIII. Versus,

Lift up your heads, O Gates, make room,
Open ye everlasting Doors, for home
The King of Glory to His Rest, through you, will come!
IX. Resp,

Ask you who is this Glorious King?
The Lord of Hosts is He. His Triumphs sing,
Who Victory, that you gained not, to your Gates does bring!
X. Versus.

Lift up your heads, O Gates, make room!
Open ye everlasting Doors! for home
The King of Glory to His Rest, through you, will come!
XI. Resp.

Ask you who is this Glorious King?
The Lord of Host is He. His Triumphs sing,
And whom you cannot shut out, open and let in!
Psalm XXV. Ad te Domine levavi, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
TO Thee, O God, my troubled soul I raise,
Who have been heretofore my Trust,
And shall be still, for Thou art ever just;
Let not my Enemies reproach Thy Ways,
Nor me count that my shame, which is my chiefest Praise!
II.
To follow Thee, my God; let them do so,
Who sin and no reward can gain,
But find too late, that all their plots are vain;
When those, who wait on Thee still bolder grow,
And through Thy Sacred Ways like Mighty Victors go.
III.
Show me those paths, for, Lord, to Thee I pray,
Then lead me in them by the hand,
Else when they are rough I shall discouraged stand,
And to some easier passage hope to stray,
But loose my own, and never find (I fear) Thy Way.
IV.
Let not my sins to Thy Remembrance come,
Nor all those spots which stained my youth;
But wash them out, and mindful of Thy Truth,
Receive the Prodigal returning home,
And let Thy Mercy for Thy ancient Love make room!
V.
In this Thou gloriest, as Thy chiefest praise,
Repenting sinners to receive
And when unable to come on, they grieve,
The weak Thou lead'st, the fallen up do raise,
And anew show and guid'st them in Thy pleasant Ways!
VI.
Truth and Thy Mercy make. them smooth, and plain
And though far off they rough appear,
They are with Roses strewn, when I come near;
Purge my great sin, and lead me there again,
For that alone, and not Thy Ways are full of pain!
VII.
Those, who The Almighty fear, His Will shall know,
And to His sacred steps form theirs;
Blessed in their lives, and happy in their Heirs,
To whom the Lord will all His secrets show,
And what He shall command, supply with strength to do
VIII.
My God, to Thee I look, on Thee depend,
For Thou my feet caust only guide,
To shun those snares, the wicked for me hide,
Thou know what I, and what their plots intend,
And with one look can them, and all my troubles end.
IX.
Behold their Numbers, how they are increast,
And how like waves new pains succeed;
Forgive my sins, whence all these tempests breed,
Let me be calm, my Enemies oppressed,
And the foul Sea, and storm be only in their breast!
X.
Prevent their malice, and my Savior be,
For Thou have been, and art my Trust!
Let Thy protection show that I am just;
Preserve me, for I only wait on Thee;
But chiefly Israel save, what e're becomes of me.
Psalm XXVI. Judica me Domine quoniam, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
Judge me, O God, for I to Thee appeal,
Who only knows my innocence,
Who do the secrets of my heart reveal,
And all hypocrisy have banished thence;
Thou heretofore in need have been my Trust,
And to Thy Word I Am sure to find Thee just.
II.
May I be found so, Lord, O try my ways,
And prove that heart, which Thou do see;
Thy mercies have been with me all my days,
Still in my eyes, as I am viewd, by Thee;
That Truth, which is Thy love, Lord, has been mine,
And from its paths I never would decline.
III.
In Council with the vain I never sat,
Nor with dissemblers have I gone;
Their private conferences did always hate,
And left the place, when once the cause was known;
Have heart, and hand alike kept innocent,
And from the Laver to Thy Altar went.
IV.
There did I all Thy wondrous acts proclaim,
And undisturbed recount my joys;
And with my sacrifices holy flame,
That thence to Heaven went up, I sent my voice;
Thy Temple, Lord, with us, Thou know I love,
But much more that Thy presence makes above.
V.
Number me not with fierce, and cruel men,
Nor make me to possess their fears!
Our lives, Thou know, have very different been,
Let Our deaths too, and mine not be like theirs!
In The right hand bribes, a sword in the left does shine,
And to Oppression, muderous thoughts they join.
VI.
But as for me, though poor, I Am still upright,
My Justice does unshaken stand;
Preserve me Lord, and make my Innocence bright,
And left I slip, uphold me with Thy hand!
So when my foot shall a sure standing gain,
Equal to Hills my song shall raise the Plain.
Psalm XXVII. Dominus illuminatio mea, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
WHen in the silence of the Night,
That darkness, which should hide, creates new fears;
When darkness quickens my dull sight,
And profound silence fills with noise my ears;
Presenting there, and to mine eye
Horrors, which in my fancy from'd do ly;
God through the darkness darts a ray,
And He, who made the Light, becomes Himself my day.
II.
Since God's my trust, whom need I fear?
He, who first gave it, will my life secure,
Will make my Enemies disappear,
When (His clear light unable to endure,
By it struck blind) they fall, a prey,
Into those snares which they for me did lay:
For though to swallow me they came,
The ruin, which has buried theirs, shall raise my name.
III.
Though mighty Kings against me rise,
And with their Armies compass me around,
Armies and Kings I would despise,
Themselves, not me, their numbers should confound:
On high I Would look, and Legions call
From Heavens great Hosts triumphant General;
He to my rescue should come down,
And those who escaped His hand, should perish by their own.
IV.
But neither's this my chief desire,
Nor the too hasty glories of a Crown,
Not to be Great do I aspire,
Or from on high on others to look down;
But this is my unfeigned request,
And to Thy pleasure, Lord, I leave the rest,
That in Thy Temple I may dwell,
And all Thy beauties there to after Ages tell!
V.
There would I rest, and be at ease,
Counting it both my hiding place, and Rock;
There should I find perpetual peace,
And stand unshaken by their rudest shock;
When winds and waves engaged shall be,
And find themselves that grave they threatened me.
Louder than them my voice I Would raise,
And in dark clouds of Incense thunder out Thy praise.
VI.
Lord, to my prayers Thine ear incline;
Nor let them, or my confidence be vain!
With favor on Thy Servant shine,
And to Thy Temple bring me back again!
No Echo can more ready be
To answer the quick call, than I to Thee;
For when Thou say, "Seek ye my Face,
My Soul returns the word and says, "I Will seek Thy Face.
VII.
O turn not then that Face away,
Nor let my sins between Us interpose;
Thou heretofore have been my day,
When darkness did my Enemies enclose;
Now that my Friends for fear draw back,
Do not Thou too, my God, Thy Child forsake;
Who Fatherless indeed should be,
Were not Thou, the Almighty Father, One to me!
VIII.
Show me Thy path, and make it plain,
To me, Lord, plain, but to my Enemies
Rugged, and broken, full of pain,
And unto heights, they dare not venture, rise!
Direct them by some other way,
And make me not unto their teeth a prey!
On them their perjuries return,
And let their own breath make the fire they kindled burn.
IX.
Under these troubles my support
Is only that I hope Thy Power to see,
My Confidence is my strong Fort,
Which I Will maintain, whilst I can look to Thee:
Then bear up Soul, and God attend,
Expect the succors which He Will surely send:
Bear up, but till this Storm is over,
And wait, Soul, but a while, and Thou shall wait no more.
Psalm XXVIII. Ad te Domine clamabo Deus, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
TO Thee, O Lord, my Rock, I cry,
O be not silent to my Prayer,
Least if Thou art, now Seas are high,
The Floods away my confidence should bear;
And I beswallow'd up by the next wave.
My God be not a Rock to hear, though Thou art one to save
II.
The voice of my Petitions hear,
When I for help to Thee shall cry;
Let my hands feel, that Thou art near,
Though I unable am Thy Face to spy!
Hear me, when toward Thy Oracle I pray,
And as I thither look, be pleased to cast one glance this way!
III.
Number me not with the Unjust,
And those who study to do wrong;
On whom, if any poor man trust,
Their heart is war, though peace be in their tongue:
Let equal punishments pursue their sin,
And may their just rewards be, as their base deserts have been!
IV.
They never mind what Thou have done,
Nor what Thy mighty hands can do;
What wonders Thou have for me shown,
And for me wilt continue still to show:
But they shall see them, and consumed with pain,
Into the lowest pit descend, to view it thence more plain.
V.
Blessed be that God, who bowed His ear
To those requests I to Him made;
He is my shield, my strength, my spear,
And was my help, when I unto Him prayed:
On Him I trusted, and in Him rejoice,
My Heart, that is gone before to Heaven, I Will follow with my Voice.
VI.
He is their Shield, His strength their Spear,
Who on Him for those Arms depend;
The Lords Anointed need not fear,
For God who is His King supplies will send:
O, save the People, who indeed are Thine,
Feed them, and Lord, lift up their head, as Thou have raised up mine.
Psalm XXIX. Afferte Domino Filii Dei, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
YOu, whom your birth for Scepters has designed,
Whom God has blessed with wealth to guard your birth,
From Sons has made you Lords of the Earth,
And on yours stamped the Portraict of His mind,
Your Scepters to Him yield, they are His due,
Who only to serve Him, first gave them You.
II.
He is your King, and though you reign below,
You are but Vassals to His Throne above;
Your fear does your dependence prove,
And when He speaks, before Him you all bow;
When from above He thunders, all your Powers
Scatter like Clouds, and melt away in showers.
III.
He thunders from above, and with the noise,
Whether they will or no makes Seas to hear;
For at His Word they all crowd near,
Exalted up to Heaven by His great Voice;
A voice which sure is full of Majesty,
When sluggish Seas are by it raised so high.
IV.
Affrighted Libanus begins to heave,
Like his own Cedars trembles, they all quake,
Their roots, as much as branches, shake,
And both look which should first the other leave:
Like a young heifer Syrian starts away,
But does through fear, what that is wont at play.
V.
From Heaven it came, a Fire before it went,
Consuming Fire behind brought up the rear,
That all might see, as well as hear,
And by the Message know from whom 'twas sent:
Kades did at the Clap bow down his head,
And whom all feared, his frighted Lions fled.
VI.
The fearful Hind, hearing the thunder roar,
Cast her untimely Calf with speed to fly,
And thinking by this shot to die,
Forgot the Dogs her only dread before:
The Lightning made the gloomy Forest bright,
And what the Sun could not, displayed at night.
VII.
The whole World is Gods Temple, all things bow
Before His Footstool, and recount His praise,
All in their place His glory raise,
And unto man, by theirs, his duty show:
Lightning and Thunder to serve Him contend,
And His great charge proclaim to the Earths wide end.
VIII.
Upon the Floods He sits, Floods to Him bring
Their gifts, and humbly at his feet lay down
Their Spoils as Customs to His Crown,
And worship Him, as their puissant King:
He stills their noise; and God, who raging Seas
Stills with a word, shall give His people Peace.
Psalm XXX. Exaltabo te Domine, etc. A Psalm of David, at the Dedication of his
House.

I.
MY God, I will to Thee give praise,
Because Thou have exalted me;
Thou from the grave my life did raise,
And now my Song shall honor Thee:
When against me my foes did come,
And shared the prey, and in their minds led home
Their Captives, Thou appeard'st, and would not let them overcome.
II.
'Twas then that to my God I cried,
And He, who wounded, made me whole;
All other helps, which I had tried,
Did but afflict, not ease my Soul;
Even then He me did keep alive,
My ransomed life did from the grave reprieve,
And a new Lease, when I had forfeited the old, did give.
III.
O, ye His Saints, sing to His Name,
His Holiness with thanks record;
Thence take new fuel to your flame,
Sing Holiness unto the Lord!
His wrath a moment may remain,
But love shall make the storm a calm again,
And give a life as free from danger as it is from pain.
IV.
Trouble, and grief may last all night,
And to its dismal shade add theirs;
But when the morning brings the light,
Darkness shall scatter, and my fears:
And as the Sun, which guilds the day,
Out from the briny Ocean makes his way,
My Sun, which breaks through tears, shall brighter shine, and look more gay
V.
Fixed on my Throne, with mercy crowned,
Unmoved like some huge Rock, I stood;
Me thoughts with pleasure I looked round,
And saw my feet kissed by the flood:
"Sure now I Am past all fear, I said,
(Thy favor Lord, my Rock so strong had made,)
"Others may well of me, but I of none can be afraid.
VI.
But as I thus expressed my pride,
Forgetting Him, who made me so,
Thou, Lord, Thy face did from me hide,
And then I came my self to know:
Trouble, and pain, no certain ground,
Which way so e're I looked, new griefs I found,
And the same floods, which kissed my feet before, my head surround.
VIII.
Then to Thee, Lord, again I cried,
"What profit is there in my blood,
"If in the pit I must abide,
"Can Thy praise there be understood?
"Shall the grave praise Thee, or declare
"Thy Truth, and Mercy, what their glories are,
"The grave, which is as senseless as the dust that is buried there?
VIII.
Hear me, O God, and mercy show,
Unto my Help Thy self come down!
My God has heard me, and I know,
Bv this, He will His servant own:
To laughter He has turned my tears,
With gales of joy, has blown away my fears,
And He, who mourned, now a Triumphant Robe and Laurel wears.
IX.
For this I will Thy praises sing,
And never in them silent be;
My glory shall its Anthem bring,
And faint not while it is praising Thee.
Thy Mighty Power the ground shall give,
My noblest skill to manage it shall strive,
And when I cease, my God, to praise Thee, let me cease to live!
Psalm XXXI. In te Domine sper avi non confundar, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THou art my hope, O God, in whom I trust,
Let not my confidence procure me shame;
But save me in Thy Truth, for Thou art Just,
And in my great escape consult Thy Name;
Least those, who know it not, Thy care should blame!
To my complaint, and cries incline Thine ear,
And by Thy help make me assured, that Thou do hear!
II.
Thou art my Rock, where till the storm is past,
Above the floods I shall securely stand,
At Sea a Rock, where all my safety's placed,
And a strong Tower and Arsenall at land;
O bring me thither by Thine own Right hand!
Guide me, my God, who only art my strength,
And by the pleasures of the way, deceive its length!
III.
Remove the snares, which for my feet are laid,
Thou, to whose hands my spirit I resign;
Of all I am the purchase Thou have made,
And so redeemed, I can be only Thine,
And what is Thy love, or Hatred shall be mine;
Liars, and their fond vanities I hate,
But trust in Thee, who have preserved my life, and state.
IV.
In Thee will I be glad, in Thee rejoice,
Who have my troubles seen, and heard my cries;
To the Songs my heart begins, I Will tune my Voice,
And count of all Thy glorious Victories,
And on their wings to Heaven in Triumph rise.
I Will sing how for me Thou made bare Thy hand,
And set me in a place, where round I might command.
V.
This Thou have done, and these Thy Works I Will praise;
But yet my troubles have not their full end,
Fears and continual snares surround my ways,
And grief to The Earth my soul so low does bend,
That scarce in sighs I can to Heaven ascend;
Consumed with care my bones, and life decay,
And in my wasted flesh unwillingly do stay.
VI.
On my winged groans away my years do fly,
And for my sins my strength does fail:
Nor am I only scorned by my' Enemy,
But friends, with whom my sorrows should prevail,
With scoffs he thought too sharp, my life assail.
A Feast I Am to my own, and those who see
My miseries afar off, less fly the plague than me.
VII.
Like a dead man, forgotten in the grave,
An earthen Vessel, all to shivers broke,
Which Art too late would or repair, or save,
My old acquaintance strangely on me look,
And tremble, as they see me, at Thy stroke:
Traitor the Great ones call me, and as so,
My life they have decreed shall for my treasons go.
VIII.
In this sad state to Thee, my God, I cry,
Knowing Thou all their Threats can countermand:
Their malice by Thy strength I can defy,
For all my Times are measured by Thy hand,
And in Thy Sacred Roll recorded stand;
For my deliverance show Thy Power Divine,
And for Thine Honors sake upon Thy Servant shine!
IX.
Guard me from shame, for I have called on Thee;
And make it theirs to whom Thy Name's unknown!
Let silence and the grave their portion be,
And may all those, who on the Just have thrown
Reproach, find it rewarded with their own!
Stop lying mouths, which use proud things to speak,
And with their causless envy let them swell and break!
X.
But who enough Thy Goodness can adore,
Or knows the treasures, which thou up have laid
For them who fear Thee, in Thy boundless store,
How glorious they hereafter shall be made,
Over whom Thy wings already are displayed?
There shall Thou hide them from the strife of tongues,
And on their proudest Enemies return their wrongs.
XI.
So was I hid, and thus His power have seen,
(Blessed be His Name,) when girt with Foes around,
He interposed Himself, and came between,
In a strong City made me keep my ground,
And foes too potent for me did confound;
"I Am lost, I said, cut off, and quite undone,
Yet, when I cried, was heard by Him I called upon.
XII.
By my example love Him, all His Saints,
Who for the Faithful does so well provide;
But on the stubborn multiplies restraints,
His Face for ever from their suit does hide,
And on them pours the vengeance they defied:
Cheer up, all you who on the Lord depend,
The present Storm in an Eternal Calm shall end!
Psalm XXXII. Beati quorum remissae sunt, etc. The II. Penitential Psalm. A
Psalm of David.

I.
HE whose iniquities are purged away,
And he alone indeed is blessed,
Short of True Happiness all others stay,
And, where they cannot have it, seek for rest:
No other path the way to life does show,
And only that which leads from sin does thither go.
II.
Blessed is the Man, whose faults remitted are,
To whom the Lord imputes no sin:
Whose hands are guiltless, and Whose heart is clear,
Without all pure, and all refined within:
Whose filthy spots of lust appear no more,
But now one Royal Purple dies his Soul all over.
III.
This when I knew not, nor what ease it gave
My faults before Thee to confess;
My grief, which could no certain measure have,
Daily increased, instead of being less;
I grieved indeed, and mournfully complained,
Of sins effects, never thinking that the Cause remained.
IV.
Grief, and Thy hand upon me night and day,
Low as the earth did beat me down;
And all the tears, which I had thrown away,
But dryer left me, when their flood was gone;
Dry as the thirsty earth for want of rain,
When all the moisture which it gave, Heaven takes again*
V.
At length perceiving all my groans were vain,
I thought upon some other way;
To thee I did disclose my sin and pain,
Thou in return their fury did allay:
No sooner, "I Will confess my sins, I said,
But He, who heard, forgave them me, e're I had prayed.
VI.
For this shall every Just man thee implore,
And call when Thou will surely hear;
The Seas, which now against him proudly roar,
May spend their Mouths, but never shall come near:
He is above their reach, and shall despise
Their greatest rage* and scorn them, when they highest rise.
VII.
Thou art my hiding place, my life wilt save,
And teach me Songs of praise to sing;
Others, who of Thy Ways no knowledge have,
Guided my self by Thee, I Will to thee bring:
Then be not, Man, more brutish than thy Mule,
Which thou thy self have broke, and with a Curb can rule:
VIII.
Perpetual sorrows, Trouble without ease,
Is the whole portion of the Unjust:
Whilst thousand Mercies, and eternal Peace
Encompass those, who on the Almighty trust:
Mercies and Peace, encompass them around,
With these their feet are stablisht, and their heads are crowned.
IX.
Rejoice, ye Righteous, and shout forth your praise,
Be glad in Him, who is Your King!
In the Almighty God, whose wondrous ways
Give life, and spirit to the dullest string!
He is Your God, and Him with praise adore,
If any to rejoice have cause, sure you much more.
Psalm XXXIII. Exultate Justi in Domino! etc.
I.
Rejoice ye Righteous, and to God sing praise,
With all the Numbers Music can invent,
The Harp, and Lute, and ten-string'd instrument,
And with their sound to Heaven your voices raise!
Express your thanks thus, and your love;
And in the Consort join with Saints above;
In Anthems His great Name adore,
Nothing can please Him better, or become you more!
II.
Make Him your Song; and of His Acts rehearse,
Whose Word is like the God, who spoke it, true;
And every day His constant praise renew,
Who is the Sovereign of the Universe!
Who the whole Earth with goodness fills,
With Flowers the valleys clothes, and crowns the hills;
Whose care to all His Works extends,
And the strait bounds of Time, as well as Space transcends!
III.
Beyond new Lands, which undiscovered lie,
Beyond the Circuit of the Tractless Air,
Beyond those Heavens which first created were,
And in the skirts of His vast Empire be;
His breath did all the Frame compose,
The Heavenly Hosts by it from nothing rose;
Those sparkling fires we see above,
In which His power appears, declare to us His love.
IV.
He spoke the Word, and Seas obedient prove,
Stood up in heaps the Earth to overflow,
Till He their bounds set out, placed some below,
And treasured others in His stores above:
The raging Deep in Prison laid,
And of its Jailer bid it be afraid;
The sand which chains it to the shore,
With Law to overlook, but never to pass over.
V.
Let the whole World before their Maker fall,
And of His Power the Nations stand in aw!
For He, whose Spirit from nothing all did draw,
Has ruin no less ready at His Call.
His Counsels shall for ever stand,
Their plots though never so deep to countermand,
Making them know they are but Men,
And less than so, when He His breath shall call again.
VI.
Thrice happy Soul, who here has fixed his joys,
And on the Lord alone for help depends,
Such constant happiness His Love attends,
That even their land is so, who are His choice;
God, who from Heaven with curious eyes
Sees every heart, and all their actions tryes;
To whom all hearts are better known,
For He first made them, than t'each single Man his own.
VII.
In vain Fond Kings expect sure Victories
From numerous Armies, and a mighty Host,
For Victory on airy wings is tossed,
And only to the side He favors, flies:
The greatest Champion cannot save
His own head, sentenced by Him to the grave;
And all the speed his horse can make,
In flying one, is a worse ruin to overtake.
VIII.
Those only are secure, who have His eye,
On whom He looks for good, who fear His Name,
And present hopes by ancient love can claim;
When they in need for help, or mercy cry,
Their lives He from the pit brings back,
And what was once their fear, their Song does make:
In famine they by Him are fed,
Who is at once The Eternal God, and living bread.
IX.
On Thee, O God, we wait, Thou art our shield;
Nor will we to another fortress fly,
There have we placed our trust, resolved to die,
If the Almighty will no succor yield:
But He will help, and send new joys,
To fill our hearts, and to employ our voice;
And only as we trust in Thee,
So let Thy Mercy, Lord, and our Salvation be.
Psalm XXXIIII. Benedicam Dominum, etc. A Psalm of David, when he changed his
behavior before Abimelech, who drove him away, and he departed.

I.
LORD I will bless Thee, and Thy praise
Shall up to Heaven my Voice and numbers raise:
Of Thee my Soul all times shall boast,
Who save'dst me, when I gave my self for lost:
And with us shall the humble join,
Hoping Thou will their refuge be, as Thou were mine.
II.
Come, ye blessed Saints, and let us rise
Together with our Songs, and reach the skies!
Praise Him, who my first groans did hear,
Yet with His hand seemed to prevent His ear,
And when, like mine, your troubles be,
But look to Him, that hand shall save you, which helped me.
III.
Tell Him the Wonders He has shown,
What for my sake He did, and what for 'His own;
Say, "Lord. This poor man to Thee cried,
"And Thou heard'st him, why then am I denied?
"I, who no less am Thy great care,
"Since equally round both encamped Thy Angels are?
IV.
Try Him but thus, and thou shall know
Thine own as certain as my joys are now;
How Good He is, how happy they,
Who make His Power their hope, His love their stay:
Dread Him, for if He has Thy fear,
Thou may be confident Thy wants shall have His ear!
V.
He Will be himself Thy mighty store,
When savage Lions shall for hunger roar;
Whilst those, who glory in their Gold,
And in his own Chains would the Prisoner hold,
Spoylers themselves are Captives made,
And into sudden want, which they least feared, betrayed.
IV.
But, Children, yield to me your ear,
I Will tell you whom, and how you ought to fear!
Would you have life, and happy days?
Keep well your tongue, and that will guide your ways;
Do good, and from all vice abstain,
No easier road than Peace, and no way more plain.
VII.
On such God looks, and to their cries
His ears are open, to their griefs His eyes:
They for deliverance need but pray,
The hand which saves, shall wipe their tears away;
But to the wicked He Is a flame,
Which shall consume their very Memories with their Name.
VIII.
Himself He Will to the Just reveal,
The humble save, and broken hearts will heal:
Their pains indeed are sharp, and long,
Yet till deliverance comes, He 'll make them strong:
And all the while they 're on the Rack,
Will see that those, who torture them, no bones shall break.
IX.
But as the wicked live, they die,
The Just man's, but their own worst Enemy:
Their own designs shall haste their death,
Killed by that poison, which themselves did breath:
Whilst God redeems the Souls of His,
And shows His help more certain than their trouble is.
Psalm XXXV. Judica Domine nocentes, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
GReat God, and Judge, to hear my Cause arise,
And on my part just sentence give;
Subdue and scatter all my Enemies,
And only to be conquered, let them live!
Go out, and in the battle stand,
Thy Shield in one, and glittering Sword in the other hand!
II.
Let it be drawn, and with their blood all stained,
Make a Red Sea around to flow;
Let it maintain the passage it has gained,
And safely guard the way where I should go!
Say to my Soul that I am Thine,
And that for my defense Thou make'st Thy glory shine!
III.
Those, who dare still resist, too stout to yield,
And with new heat my Soul pursue,
Let them with shame and infamy be filled,
And find the battle, though they fly, renew!
Upon Thee let them turn their back,
To be Thy Butt, and all Thy poisoned arrows take!
IV.
Let them like chaff be driven before the Wind,
And by Thy Angels, Lord, be chased!
Let them in the dark a way so slippery find,
That headlong ruin may attend their have!
O'rewhelm them in the pits they made,
And take theirs in the net, which for my feet they laid!
V.
Let their destruction hasten, unperceived,
The same which they decreed for me!
Whilst I for better days am still reprieved,
And my deliv'rances ascribe to Thee:
That Thy Great Name may be my Song,
Who thus the weak and Poor, save'st from the proud and strong!
VI.
False Witnesses did up against me rise,
With charge of Crimes I never knew;
My good deeds answered with indignities,
And to the death my Soul did close pursue;
Those, for whose griefs I truly mourned,
And prayed for, sick, though on my self the prayers returned.
VII.
For my best Friend I could have done no more,
Nor more, had he my Brother been:
I did as heartily his loss deplore,
As if I then my Mothers grave had seen;
Though in my troubles they rejoice,
And all my griefs outbrave with their insulting voice.
VIII.
Basest of men against me make an head,
And unawares my Name did tear:
Scoffs spent on me, was all they paid for bread,
And gnashing teeth for their delicious fare:
And shall it thus for ever be?
Lord, from these Lions save my Soul, redeemed by Thee!
IX.
Let not my causless enemies rejoice,
Nor me with scornful looks upbraid!
Whose hearts are viler than the common voice,
And seem for discord only to be made.
Then I Thy fame to Heaven will raise,
And in Thy Peoples sight return Thee all the Praise.
X.
On me with open mouth they railing came,
"And this, said they, we wished to see;
My God, behold it too, and let a flame
Dart from thy sight that they consumed may be!
Arise great Judge, and come away,
Stand up, nor longer, e're Thou pass the sentence, stay.
XI.
Be Thou our Judge, who art my Advocate,
Nor let my Enemies thus boast,
"So we would have it, and it is now too late,
For God to help, though he in God should trust.
But let them be to ruin brought,
Who thus have raised themselves, thus low of Thee have (thought.
XII.
But let all those who favor my Just cause,
Continually with shouting say,
"Blessed be Our God, who with such equal Laws,
"Peace on His flock, chains on His foes does lay!
His Righteousness shall be my Song,
And all my life to praise Him shall not seem too long.
Psalm XXXVI. Dixit injustus ut delinquat, etc. A Psalm of David, the servant
of the Lord.

I.
BAse hypocrite, think thou by this disguise,
To' impose on Him, who sees thy heart,
And more than thou, its guiles descries,
Both knows it whole, and searches every part?
Thy wicked words thy thoughts declare,
And like them both thy actions are,
Speaking aloud, what once to think thou should not dare.
II.
They tell me thou do not the Almighty fear,
Though thou would have me think thou do:
But God does all thy whisperings hear,
And could thou Him deceive, thou then might boast;
At length, like fire, sin will break out,
With vengeance, which thou shall not doubt,
When it like fire shall burn, and scatter all about.
III.
To wrong the easy is his chief design,
Mindless of doing any good,
This takes up all his thoughts, and time,
And every night he lays new trains for blood:
But, Lord, Thy Mercy far extends,
And the close bounds of Heaven transcends,
Without beginning ever was, and never ends.
IV.
Thy Righteousness, my God, does stand secure,
Fixed like the everlasting hills;
Deep as the Sea, yet flows more sure,
Though nothing its unfathomed Ocean fills:
Full from it self no Ebb it knows,
But into thousand channels flows,
And to this deep both Man and Beast its Being owes.
V.
And as Thy Righteousness, such is Thy Love,
Therefore to Thee for help we fly;
On Thine own wings we toward Thee move,
And covered under them in safety ly:
This is our comfort, while below,
That we beyond our fears can go,
And what we shall enjoy, in part before hand know.
VI.
For when this wretched life an end shall have,
And our unpinion'd Souls fly home;
When freedom shall spring from the grave
And death the fertile womb of life become;
No sorrows then our joy shall spoil,
Nor shall we need the day beguile,
Eternity it self shall seem a little while.
VII.
Pleasures and joy eternally shall flow,
For Thou their Spring shall never decay;
That Region does no darkness know,
For Thou the Suns Sun art Thy self its day:
A Sun which makes all objects light,
Without the least allay of night,
A Sun, whereby we may see Thee, it is so bright.
VIII.
Till Thou art thus enjoyed some glimps bestow,
Let from above Thy glory shine,
Dart but one ray, that I may know,
Though yet I see Thee not, that I am Thine!
Thy Righteousness assign the just,
Thy Mercy those who on Thee trust,
And let the proud, though raised, be driven like the dust!
IX.
Against Thy servant let him not prevail,
Nor to offend him raise his foot,
Let all his Toyls, and Engines fail,
And his hands prove too weak to stir my root!
But lo! he is fallen to the ground,
The Earth did with the shock resound,
And opening made a way, whose tract shall never be found.
Psalm XXXVII. Noli aemulari in malignantib. etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
FRet not thy self to see the prosperous state
Of him, who dearly buys it with his sin;
Nor thy content for his abundance hate;
Thou know not how he is lasht and torn within;
The Worm, which at the root does ly;
And though the Flower look never so fair,
Though hand, or Scythe its life should spare,
By this intestine Enemy,
Which first assails the heart through all its guards, 't will die.
II.
Never envy him, but all thy Confidence
There only place, where it secured may be;
On God, who blessings does around dispense,
Yet what He gives, expects again from Thee;
Like His, Thy goodness must extend,
For thus Thou shall the Land possess,
Thy Land enjoy the fruits of Peace,
On its ne're-failing stock shall spend,
Till there is no further need, and thou to Heaven ascend.
III.
Let the Almighty be thy love, and care,
Thy Counselor, to whom thou may commit
All thy distrusts, thy troubles, griefs, and fear,
And judge that always best, which He thinks fit!
Then to thy prayers shall he incline,
Grant thy desires, and bring about
Affairs, whose end thou most did doubt,
Make thee to His thy will resign,
That having done His Pleasure, thou may say'tis thine.
IV.
Then shall thy Justice like the day appear,
First breaking through the dungeon of the night,
Backward it looks, and sees behind all clear,
And bids the Sun close follow with his light;
Thy Righteousness shall be that Sun,
Which all the Mines of night displayes,
And all its treasons open lays,
Clear as his own fair beams at Noon,
When he has reached Heavens top, and half his course has run.
V.
What though thy forward prayers his help outgo,
And that the time, thou had prefixed, is past;
Wait still, for God the fittest time does know,
And what is deferred a while, shall come at last!
Thy murmuring does but feed thy pain,
For envy, rage, and guilt makes way,
And vice, which in no bounds will stay;
Indulge thy self but to complain,
Thy hand e're long, as much as mouth, will need a rein.
VI.
Why should thou envy him, whose great estate
Prepares him only for the greater blow;
Which shall be swift, and certain as his fate,
And his vast riches to another go?
They 're gone already, and behind
There Is nothing left of all he did,
The glories of his house ly hid,
And with his fame are turned to wind,
Whose very ruins, though thou seek'st, no where can find.
VII.
But those, who patiently on God depend,
He with a numerous family will bless;
No tempest can their settled calm offend,
But they in peace their Souls, and Land possess:
No matter, though incensed with rage,
The wicked curse them in his pride,
God does no less his threats deride,
Sees him in his declining age,
And the Scene finished, with him will remove the stage.
VIII.
Against the Righteous, with drawn Sword he stands,
Has bent his bow, and let the arrow fly;
Would in his blood embrew his cruel hands,
And his least threatening is, that he shall die:
But God, who does the Poor sustain,
By his own Sword shall make him fall;
Against him his own aids shall call,
Which he to fly shall seek in vain,
When in his heart the arrows, which he shot, remain.
IX.
Better's that little, which the Righteous have
Than all the stores whereof the Wicked boast;
God shall disperse what he raked up to save,
And there most scatter, where he gathered most:
For He the Just man's way does know
What he has suff'red, what has done,
Lending His arm to lean upon,
Will show him, where he ought to go,
And after a long life Heaven in reward bestow.
X.
In War he shall be kept, in Famine fed,
In the worst times, nor blush, nor be afraid;
God, who is his shield, Himself will find him bread,
And only make his Enemies dismayed:
They like the fat of lambs shall waste,
And only leave a smoke behind,
To be the triumph of the wind;
Their goods ill gotten shall not last,
But like their sudden growth, their end shall come as fast.
XI.
The wicked borrows, but never means to pay,
The Righteous gives, and counts for so much more:
For God returns it him another way,
(That God, whose Word makes either rich or poor)
Directs his passage through the land,
Upholds him as he goes along,
By this assistance makes him strong;
And when he stumbles gives His hand,
Both leads him when he slips, and makes him firmer stand.
XII.
Through all my life, which has so wondrous been,
From its first journey Youth to this last stage,
Where every day I have new wonders seen,
And been my self the greatest of the age,
The Liberal man I never knew need,
Himself quite left, or Children crave
An alms, but what he lent, they have,
For thus he did but cast that seed,
On whose increase they live, and plentifully feed.
XIII.
Fly Vice, and that thou may a blessing leave
For Childrens Children, to Gods ways form Thine!
Return that justice, which thou did receive,
So shall thy help be from the hand Divine!
That on thee shall pour mercies down,
Below shall give thee many days,
And happy all, then after raise
Thy head to an immortal Crown,
Whilst the whole race of wicked shall to Hell be thrown.
XIV.
As his heart thinks, the Just man ever speaks,
From Gods Law there, like streams right judgment flows;
The Statutes he commands, his hand never breaks,
And where that points, his foot unerring goes:
In vain the Wicked snares does lay,
And spreads in vain for him his nets,
To take his life the way besets,
For God shall in the Judgment day,
When he clears him, the privy murderer justly slay.
XV.
Wait on the Lord, and see what end He Will make;
Keep close to His, and He shall guard thy way:
Thy duty's all the care He Would have thee take,
And only to possess the Land, obey.
And when thy Enemies turn to dust,
And like that vanish from thy sight,
Thou shall behold it with delight:
On His own terms the Almighty trust,
For He, who promised thee, and threatened them, is just.
XVI.
How could that be else, which mine eyes have seen?
The Wicked in great power, exceeding high,
Like some proud Cedar stand, and ever green,
With his leaf age, Heaven with his head defy;
But yet he passed, and yet he fell,
An hand immortal gave the wound;
No more could root, or branch be found,
I looked, and asked, but none could tell,
Where was the place it grew, or whence it sunk to hell.
XVII.
Unlike the Perfect man, whom God defends,
For if you mark him, and observe the Upright,
Mercy his life, his deathbed peace attends,
Without all storm, or Conscience to affright:
While that overthrow the wicked have
Is a light taste of what shall be
Their portion, to Eternity;
From which their riches less can save
Their guilty souls, than their vile bodies from the grave.
XVIII.
In God the Poor does all his trust repose,
To Him in trouble flies, in straits complains;
Who in return confounds His bloody foes,
And leads them captive in eternal Chains,
For none e're yet his eyes did raise
To Heaven for help, and sought it thence,
With certain hope, and confidence,
But Heaven did crown his head with bays,
And turned his Prayers into triumphant Songs of Praise.
Psalm XXXVIII. Domine ne in furore tuo arguas me, etc. The III. Penitential
Psalm of David.

I.
LORD, in Thy wrath rebuke me not,
Nor in Thy fury chasten me;
For such weak things that Furnace is too hot,
And by my clay no more endured can be,
Than my injustice, and repeated wrongs by Thee.
II.
In vain Thy wrath I strive to fly,
And from my self in vain make haste;
For, lo, the dart, by which I needs must die,
At once has pierced, and in my side sticks fast,
By no hand to be drawn, but His, from whence 'twas cast.
III.
It Is Thou alone my life must save,
For not my least part, Lord, is sound;
My bones with rottenness prevent the grave,
Turned to that dust, the dead are, under ground,
And my whole body is, all over, but one great wound,
IV.
My sins, like billows, over me roll,
The sinner all engaged to drown;
And with huge weights so press my helpless Soul,
That it, unable to resist lies down
Under the load, that is yet made heavier by Thy frown.
V.
Uneasy weight, which as it lies
New galls and bruises me all over,
Under whose burden I scarce hope to rise,
For if I do, I shall afresh but roar,
As long as that remains, which caused at first my sore.
VI.
My foolishness, which like a fire,
That inward burns, takes reins, and heart,
Fed with that blood, by which it should expire,
Seizing, e're felt, the best, and noblest part,
Beyond the cure of herbs, or helpless Physics art.
VII.
Thus weak, and broken, thus cast down,
To Thee alone my prayers I make,
Who all my sighs, and tears, and wounds have known,
And the great cure can only undertake,
Now all my friends, me, as a dying man, forsake.
VIII.
Nor is this all; my Enemies
Least I should escape, new toyls prepare;
Their tongues speak out the malice of their eyes,
And, what too long they had concealed, declare;
Lord, what is their hand, if even their words thus cruel are?
IX.
As one past hope they of me speak,
And think by that to make me fear;
But all their words, nor can my silence break,
Nor them convince, that I so much as hear;
Without reproofs as dumb, patient as without ear.
X.
But Thou, O God, art my great trust,
And unto Thee my heart does pray;
Hear me, My God, lest they who so much boast,
Seeing me fall, presumptuously inveigh,
'Twas caused by theirs, when Thou but took'st Thy hand (away.
XI.
I know I have deserved to fall,
And even to Hell to be cast down;
But let my tears Thy help, and pardon call!
I grieve, Thou see, and my transgressions own,
Forbear Thine, Lord, where sentence has already gone.
XII.
For this my Enemies increase,
My sins, I know, have made them strong;
For this all thoughts of former kindness cease,
And my just deeds they recompense with wrong;
Yet still I Will follow Thee, though the way be rough and long.
XIII.
Forsake me not, but be my guide,
And lead me, that I never stray:
For should Thou go too fast before, or hide
Thy gracious sight, I should benighted stay,
And still the more I sought, the more should lose my way.
Psalm XXXIX. Dixi custodiam vias, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
"LEt him go on for me, I said,
"And into his rude passions break;
"I Will keep the resolutions I have made,
"And though he urge me to it, will not speak;
"Will not of all his injuries complain,
"For though his words are Spears, his sight shall be a rein.
II.
This, while the wicked was in sight,
I with my self resolved to do;
My stubborn mouth was silenter than night,
Grief struck me dumb before, his presence now:
Not one good word did from my lips once fall,
Least I should speak amiss, I would not speak at all.
III.
But as a wild unruly fire,
The more it is checked, the more't does burn,
My heart, inflamed by vchement desire,
To answer him, did on it self return;
And there it raged and there it burnt so long,
Till it brake out at last, and set on fire my tongue.
IV.
"Lord, said I then, make me to know,
"What bound is set to my few days!
"How long from thee I must remain below,
"Strange to my own, but stranger to Thy ways:
"How frail I am, how near unto my end,
"That what is Thine own, I may before hand to Thee send!
V.
"I know I Am frail, and if with Thine
"I my uncertain life compare,
"That age, which I may truly say is mine,
"And all my days to Thy years nothing are:
"Man's best estate is but an empty strife,
"And if there can be less than nothing found, it is Life.
VI.
"The faint resemblance of a shade,
"That scarce can in conception be;
"And yet how great a slave poor Man is made,
"Whom God at first appointed to be free,
"An airy thing that only lives by Fame,
"And whom unweildy passions, ruin give and Name.
VII.
"He loves, and hates, and hopes, and fears,
"And with fresh wounds renews his pain:
"Troubles himself at every thing he hears,
"And scarce recovered, slips, and falls again;
"Erects vast Piles, and endless wealth does save,
"Yet knows not who the fruit of all his cares shall have.
VIII.
"What then my God, can I expect,
"Truly my hope depends on Thee;
"May Thou Thy Servant from all wrongs protect,
"And from my sins (worse Foes) deliver me!
"Not that they were unheard, I dumb did stand,
"But when they spoke, upon my self I felt Thy hand.
IX.
"When Thou do man for sin chastise,
"And with Thy judgments on him fall;
"No beauty in his own, less in Thine eyes,
"Is left of that, which he did beauty call:
"But like a garment, which the Moth has fret,
"Just such a thing is Man, though never so high and great.
X.
"Remove Thy hand, for, Lord, I faint!
"Thy wrath I can no longer bear;
"From Heaven bow down, and hear my sad complaint;
"Speak, Lord, that I may know I have Thine ear!
"O from my tears turn not Thy face away,
"They on Thee call, and be not Thou more dumb than they.
XI.
"Thou know I have no resting place,
"I, nor my Fathers here below;
"They 're gone, and I must follow them apace,
"Spare me, before I that great Journey go;
"Lord spare me, who e're long shall be no more,
"Forgot by mine, as I have those, who went before!
Psalm XL. Expectans expectavi, etc.
I.
IN my great trouble, when all hopes did fail,
I patiently for God did wait,
And found my Prayer then to prevail,
When all means else, or useless proved, or came too late.
II.
The Lord unto my voice inclined His ear,
And from the pit delivered me;
A pit, whose sight struck me with fear,
And, only as my dungeon, could more dreadful be.
III.
There stuck my feet, and thence He brought me out,
And on a rock to fall no more,
But to view Him, and look about,
As high He raised me, as I was cast down before.
IV.
Where as I stood I sang with cheerful Voice
His praises who delivered me;
Whilst those who feared before, rejoice
A certain Providence in all events to see.
V.
Blessed is that man, who makes the Lord his trust,
His firmest stay, and confidence;
Unbiased by another lust,
And keeps his own from having any influence!
VI.
Many and fearful things Thy hand has done;
And whose can with Thy works compare?
But could Thy thoughts to us be known,
Numberless, Lord, and like Thee infinite they are.
VII.
I heard Thee say Thou do not blood desire,
No Offerings, or Burnt-Sacrifice,;
That Altars smoke with daily fire,
And with the clouds they upward send, obscure the skies:
VIII.
Instead of them my self I bring to Thee,
And in Thy Roll, if Thou but look,
It Is written there concerning me,
Nor is my Name alone, but Office in Thy Book.
IX.
It Is entered there what my delights have been;
And that I more to Thee might draw,
How I Thy Righteousness have seen,
And what I knew and kept, to others preached Thy Law.
X.
Thou know, O God, my tongue has not been still,
And that Thy Word I never concealed;
But as I knew what was Thy Will,
Its Truth and Faithfulness have in Thy Church revealed.
XI.
Thy wonted Grace, ah! do not then withhold!
But in Thy mercies, Lord, draw near,
Those mercies, which have been of old,
And in my help with greater luster will appear.
XII.
For thousand evils have begirt me round,
And all my sins upon me seize;
With pensive eyes fixed on the ground,
I dare not upward look, their numbers so increase.
XIII.
If to the sky, I in the sky behold
Stars, which one yet may sooner count;
My hairs, could every hair be told,
Compared with them, are lost, and to no sum amount.
XIV. Versus.

Wherefore, my God, be pleased to come away,
And to my rescue make more haste!
My troubles call, O, do not stay,
Nor let Thy help be slow, when they come on so fast!
XV.
Now come, and with Thy Presence, Lord, confound
My proud, and cruel Enemy:
Level his greatness with the ground,
And when he surely thought to conquer, let him fly!
XVI.
Let him be backward forced, and for the scorn,
His cursed malice threw on me,
Let on his head that scorn return,
And be himself as low as he wished I should be!
XVII.
Whilst those who on the Almighty's Arm do trust,
In Thee, who their Salvation art,
Always rejoice that Thou art Just,
And have their mouths as full of praises, as their heart.
XVIII.
May I my God, one of that number be;
For though at present I am low,
Thou know I still belong to Thee,
And only for my sins, till they are purged, am so!
XIX. Versus.

Then help me, Lord, O do not ever stay,
But to my rescue come at last;
My troubles call Thee now away,
Let not Thy help be slow, when they come on so fast!
Psalm XLI. Beatus Vir qui intelligit, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
Blessed is that man, who does the poor relieve,
And feels the miseries, which he sees them bear;
The Lord will sure deliverance to him give,
And always to his Prayers incline His ear:
Will set him from his troubles free,
And his past griefs with pleasure let him see.
II.
God will preserve him from the rotting grave,
And here, on earth, let him behold His face;
His life from all his Enemies will save,
And grant him now the presence of His grace:
His Enemies Wills shall stoop to His,
And here he shall begin his endless bliss.
III.
When on the bed of sickness he shall ly,
His bed that God, which holds him up, will make;
Will give him strength, though able scarce to cry,
And faithful hands, which Heaven by force shall take;
That Mercy then, which he has shown,
And all he gave, shall truly be his own.
IV.
Dear God, said I, on whom all things depend,
Though I have thus by Thy commandment, done,
I merit nothing, Lord, for I have sinned,
And what I gave Thee, was before Thine own;
Yet grant it mine; Lord, heal my Soul!
For Silver streams cleanse not, what Sin makes foul.
V.
My Enemies, Thou know, assault my Fame;
When will he die, say they, and leave behind,
That, which we will look shall not bide long, his Name,
But to it given, be quickly turned to wind?
And when one comes to visit me,
Instead of Comfort, he speaks Vanity.
VI.
Notice of every groan he seems to take,
And weeps, and sighs to bear me company;
But gone, a sport of all my grief does make,
And laughs to think how he imposed on me:
Abroad he tells where he has been,
And lies invents of what he there has seen.
VII.
A base disease, says he, to him cleaves fast,
(Thus, Lord, Thou know they still against me speak)
This sickness cannot choose but be his last,
His bodies pain his heart will doubtless break:
He cannot escape as heretofore,
But this time fallen, he shall rise no more.
VIII.
Then to increase my miseries, my Friend,
Whom I, till then more than my self could trust,
Who of my bread did eat, new cares did send,
And then most failed, when he was wanted most;
Against me has lift up his heel,
And for my love made me his malice feel.
IX.
But Thou, O God, to me be merciful,
And raise him up whom Thou have cast thus low!
Vengeance may I upon my Enemies pull,
And up to Heaven my self more freely grow!
Hence it is I know Thy love to me,
That from their hands by Thine I am set free.
X.
Thou art my stay, and Thou do me uphold,
Else my integrity would quickly fail:
In Thy warm Sun I never shall be cold,
Nor in Thy sight my darkness, Lord, prevail.
To Jacobs God let all sing praise,
And to His Name Eternal Arches raise!
Amen and Amen.
The End of the First Book of Psalms.
THE SECOND BOOK OF PSALMS.
Psalm XLII. Quemadmodum desiderat, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.

I.
LOok as the Heart by dogs and men pursued,
(Seeing his heels betray their flight,
When he of both had lost the sight)
Pants for the streams, and takes at last the flood,
With hopes by changing thus the Element,
To cool his heat, and in its streams to drown the scent:
II.
After my God so pants my chased Soul,
My Soul so thirsts for Thee, my King;
When will Thou me to Sion bring,
Where I may serve Thee, Lord, without control?
Thou know my grief, how tears have been my food,
When my insulting Foes have cried, "Now where is your God?
III.
I grieve, but when I think the time will come
That I shall to Thy Temple go,
And on my Harp Thy wonders show,
How I again in triumph shall come home,
These happy thoughts dispell my darkest fears,
And what grief did before, my joy dissolves in tears.
IV. Versus.

Why art Thou troubled Soul, and restless grown,
As if forgotten, through despair,
As if Thy God had left His care,
And lower, than indeed Thou art cast down?
Trust in Him still, for Thou His Name shall praise,
And whom His absence has depressed, His sight shall raise!
V.
Down to the Earth my troubled Soul is cast,
Yet will I Lord remember Thee;
The whole World is Thy Royalty,
Missar, and Hermon part of Zions Waste;
Whither from thence my eyes delight to stray,
And though they cannot see it, love to gaze that way.
VI.
Deeps upon Deeps in louder tempests call,
The Seas above to them b^low,
Together over my head they go,
And on they bid the conquering billows fall,
In troops they come, as to divide the prey,
And hollow to their fellow waves to haste away.
VII.
Fall on proud waves, on me spend all your rage,
I can withstand your roughest shock,
Fall on, and break against this Rock,
Which dares your pride, and for me does engage!
My God will still your noise, your fury lay,
And change this dismal night into a glorious day.
IX.
But where is my God, that I to him may sing?
Let me not ever suffer thus,
But to me be propitious,
Break forth, O Sun, and healing with Thee bring!
Pierced to the Heart, Thou know I could weep blood,
When my insulting foes say daily, "Where Is your God.
IX. Versus.

Why art Thou troubled Soul, and restless grown,
As if forgotten, through despair,
As if Thy God had left His Care,
And lower, than indeed Thou art, cast down?
Trust in Him still, for Thou His Name shall praise,
And whom His absence has depressed, His sight shall raise!
Psalm XLIII. Judica me Deus and discern, etc.
I.
THou, who art Judge of all the World, be mine:
Be both my Judge, and Advocate
My Cause both sentence, and debate,
And let the issue prove that I am Thine:
From the deceitful Man deliver me,
Others he may deceive, but never impose on Thee!
II.
Thou art my strength, and on Thee I rely;
Why does my God this distance keep,
Whilst I ly buried in the Deep,
And only with my sighs can upward fly?
Pity my Darkness, Lord, dispell this night,
And from Thy sacred Hill send forth Thy Truth and Light!
III.
That glo^ious Light, which may direct my way,
And where Thou always art, bring me;
That we may still together be,
In Sion where Thy Presence makes it day:
Then with my Harp I Will to Thy Altar go,
And, what above shall never cease, begin below.
IV. Versus.

Why art Thou troubled, Soul, and restless grown,
As if forgotten, through despair,
As if Thy God had left His care,
And lower, than indeed Thou art, cast down?
Trust in Him still, for Thou His Name shall praise,
And whom His absence has depressed, His sight shall raise.
Psalm XLIV. Deus auribus nostris audivimus, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.

I.
GReat God, we often have heard our Fathers tell
The Mighty works which Thou of old have done,
When to make room for them, where they might dwell,
And in a Land of thine own choice sit down,
The Natives by Thy hand were overthrown;
How Egypt at Thy Signs admiring stood,
And thinking to pursue, were drowned in the flood.
II. Versus.

'Twas not their Bow or Sword, which forced their way,
Nor the weak aids their helpless arms could bring;
But Thou, whose Word the Sacred Hosts obey,
Made'st certain Victory attend their string,
And as their arrows flew, direct her wing:
Thy Light and Favor was their Arms and Guide,
And when they fought, to conquer Thou did ride.
III.
May Thou again do thus, who art Our King!
And new deliverance for their Seed command;
Thou only can such great Salvation bring,
As may again return us to Our Land,
And make us on our Enemies necks to stand:
And when Thy Power Thou on our side shall show,
And beat them down, through Thee we will keep them so.
IV. Versus.

"It Was not our Bow, or Sword that helped, we will say,
"Northose weak aids our useless Arms did bring;
"But He whose Word the Sacred Hosts obey,
"Made certain Victory attend our string,
"And as our arrows flew, direct her wing:
"He put our Enemies to flight, and shame,
"And His great Praise for ever we will proclaim.
V.
But we, alas, not they, are forced to fly,
Since Thou, who lead'st our Armies out of old,
Art now become Thy self an Enemy,
And make'st them more successful grow, and bold,
That what with wrong they got, by force they hold:
Like one great flock of Sheep, we scatt'red are,
And wolves devour those, whom the Shambles spare.
VI.
We openly are sold, but it is for naught;
Nor does Thy treasure by our sale increase;
By those, who hate us we for slaves are bought,
Nor by our miseries does their fury cease,
But we in War less suff'red than in Peace:
A shame, reproach, and proverb, we are made,
In scorn to hands, which were of ours afraid.
VII.
It Is not our disappointments, and disgrace
That are the only causes of our shame;
Not these alone with blushes fill our face,
But the sad thoughts that Thou should bear our blame,
And have exposed with us Thy Sacred Name:
For what is our own we could with Patience bear,
But Blasphemies against Thee can never hear.
VIII.
Yet both Lord we have heard, and both have born,
But in our sufferings not forgotten Thee,
Resolved our steps from Thy Laws never to turn,
How rough, and hard soever the way may be,
Or in Thy Oath to deal perfidiously:
Though for our Masters we fierce Dragons have,
And all our service is in sight of the grave.
IX.
Had we forgotten His, or to strange Names
Of Idol-gods stretched out our suppliant hands,
Should not God know, and visit this in flames,
Who the vast Empire of all hearts commands,
And thoughts, more than we actions, understands?
But for His sake alone all day we 'are slain,
Like Sheep, and where we fed, have died the Plain.
X.
Awake why sleep'st Thou, Lord, awake, and rise!
And turn nor us, nor Thy bright face away;
Let our distress find pity in Thine eyes;
Which see the weights they on our shoulders lay,
And how we prostrate for Thy succor pray!
Ah, cause Thy face for Thy loves sake to shine,
And for our help arise, who still are Thine.
Psalm XLV. Eruct avit Cor meum verbum, etc. A Song of Loves.

I.
A Thousand fancies from my heart the Spring,
(Like a swollen stream which banks can never control,
Increasing still as it along does roll,
And grown impetuous, scorns to be kept in)
Too great already in my Soul to stay
They out will burst, and by my tongue,
Flow in a swift, and numerous Song,
Will there, or find, or force their way,
And make my hand, which cannot stop, to run as fast as they.
II.
Dread Sovereign, when the argument is Thine,
And Thou art pleased to give me leave to sing
Of all that grandeur, which enthrones my King,
No wonder if my Verse be gay and fine;
Thy beauty, not my skill does make it so,
Thou, who in beauty do excel
The fairest Soul; which best does dwell;
From whose soft lips there ever flow
That Grace, and Blessing Heaven till now on Man did never (bestow;
III.
Go on then, Valiant Prince, and gird Thy Sword,
Wherewith Thou have so often Conqueror been;
Appear more glorious than Thou e're were seen,
And let the whole world own Thee for their Lord!
Then mount Thy Chariot, and in triumph ride,
With Meekness, Truth, and Equity,
And all the Virtues running by,
Whilst Victory does Thy journeys guide,
And flies before new Conquests, and fresh Laurels to provide!
IV.
Then shall Thy arm for slaughter be made bare,
And Thy proud Enemies receive the darts,
Which Thou shall throw, and bury in their hearts,
Whilst those that yield, Thou do as freely spare;
Nor Time, nor place shall Thy Dominion bound,
The Justice of Thy Righteous sway,
Shall make all Lands, all men obey,
And wheresoever Thy Name shall sound,
Amids Thy foes, new Subjects of Thy Kingdom shall be found.
V.
That Righteousness Thou love shall be Thy Crown,
And at Thy Feet Envy and Hate shall lie;
The Mighty God, who raised Thee up so high,
Above Thy Fellows, pour His Unction down,
With greater luster make Thy Face to shine,
When He the Sacred Oil shall shed,
Himself, upon Thy Royal Head,
And, to express the Love Divine,
Meekness with Majesty, and to Thy Joys, Thy Peoples join.
VI.
They shall rejoice, when from the Ivory Throne,
Clad in Thy Robes of State, Thou shall appear,
When all the perfumes, which the East does bear,
And the bright Sun or makes, or looks upon,
To Thine their Spirits and richest Odours add,
And breathing out their Souls shall say,
Thou have more Sweets, more Charms than they,
Thus near Thee to have come, are glad,
That they may higher scents receive thence, than at first they had.
VII.
Daughters of Kings make Thy illustrious train,
To do what e're Thy pleasure shall command;
And chain our eyes, but that at Thy right hand
The Queen with hers remands them back again;
Next Thee she stands, Her Pall with Gold all wrought,
Where curious Art and Nature strive
Which greater Ornament shall give,
Beyond Inventions barren thought,
Made of the richest Spoils were e're from Ophirs treasure brought.
VIII.
And Thou O Queen, incline Thy willing ear,
Forget Thy Father, and Thy Country too;
What was theirs once, is now a Sovereigns due,
Who merits all Thy honor, love, and fear.
The Kings, who shall no less make Thee to reign,
And to Thy Rule Himself submit,
To The Empire of Thy Eyes, and Wit,
Become their slave, and take the Chain,
And what Thy hands presented Him, to them resign again.
IX.
Tire with a Present shall her daughters send,
To seek thy favor, and thy love entreat,
It Is thy Alliance, which shall make them great,
And not their own wealth, though it knows no end;
Not that their gifts and store can add to Thine,
The rich embroydery of Thy Vest,
Where all the Needles art's expressed,
To Beauties which are more Divine,
And all within, unseen by mortal eye, far brighter shine.
X.
Thus shall Thou be conducted to the King,
Whilst all the Virgins, who Thy Pomp attend,
In shouts to Heaven their acclamations send,
And as they follow to the Palace, sing,
"Hail Fairest Queen, forget Thy Fathers land,
"Nor let His Throne disturb thy mind,
"For Thou instead of them shall find
"Children, who with the Sovereign Wand
"More Empires than He Cities governed, shall the World command.
XI.
My Verse shall praise Thee too, and Thy great Name
Shall in its lasting Monument survive,
My Verse Eternity to Thee shall give,
And thus it self perpetuate in Thy Fame:
For when the Age to come by that shall know
These wonders, and renew Thy Praise,
In Altars which their Zeal shall raise,
Thou then shall make my Verse to grow,
And what to Thee it gave, Eternity on that bestow!
Psalm XLVI. Deus noster Refugium, etc. A Song for the sons of Korah.

I.
TO Armies some for refuge fly,
Others to Walls, which they must first defend;
But God's our help, and when to Him we cry,
Or He our troubles soon will end,
Or to a City where they come not, us will send.
II.
We will not fear, though tempests roar,
And one storm mingle Sea, and Earth, and all,
Though real Mountains, torn from the loose shore,
To Heaven be tossed, and Heaven quite fall,
The God, who is our help, will then be near our call.
III.
Fly ye swift winds, tempests be gone,
Be still proud Seas, there is no need of you,
We have a stream, which though it softly run,
Can more than all your billows do,
Both cleanse the Holy City, and refresh it too.
IV.
Slow Siloah, which so gently glides,
As if 'twere unresolved to go away,
And passing where the Most High God resides,
To view the place so long does stay,
The enamored River one would guess forgot its way.
V.
It Sion views, where God does dwell,
Sion His Throne, which like the Earth remains;
Heaven is her guard, and all the Powers of Hell
Shall never move her, for there He reigns,
Who is the God of the Hills, and lays on Vales His Chains.
VI.
The Heathen Kings began to rage,
And all their strength against her did command;
But God Himself to save her did engage,
Utt'red His Voice, and showed His hand,
And though the Earth did melt, Sion unmoved did stand.
VII. Versus.

The God of Battles fights for us,
On whom the Hosts of Heaven and Earth attend;
Through Him our arms shall be Victorious,
And when our Prayers to Him ascend,
He that is Jacobs God, His Israel will defend.
VIII.
Come, and behold, what He has done,
The mighty works which His right hand has wrought,
How on their Foes He turned destruction,
But to His own deliverance brought,
And made them Conquerours, when He for them fought!
IX.
All the World over He ends all Wars,
And in their room brings plenty, mirth, and ease;
He hides with Laurel the Triumphers scarrs,
And all, but in their Pomps, makes cease
The Trumpets noise, and turns the broken arms to Peace.
X.
"Be still, said He, and see my Power,
"Only be still, that is all you need to do,
"For on your Enemies I Will vengeance shower,
"Exalt your heads, but lay their low,
"And they as well as you, That I am God, shall know!
XI. Versus.

The God of Battles fights for us,
On whom the Hosts of Heaven and Earth attend;
Through Him our Arms shall be Victorious,
And when our Prayers to Him ascend,
He that is Jacobs God, His Israel will defend.
Psalm XLVII. Omnes gentes plaudite manibus, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.

I.
Rejoice O World and you, who dwell therein,
This Solemn day your mirth commands!
Rejoice, for the great Show will now begin,
And lift your voice up with your hands!
Let them both join, whiles you His Praises sing,
Who only is the Universal King. Versus.

II.
Mighty, and terrible, the Lord of all,
His entrance those who will not meet,
Too proud to kiss his hands, shall lower fall,
And yield their necks unto His feet;
So Jacobs seed He will make glorious,
And what Himself has done, ascribe to Us.
III. Versus.

God is gone up, ascended with a shout,
With sound of Trumpets risen on high;
And having put His enemies to the rout,
Upon their Trophies up did fly:
Sing praise to God, your Praises to Him sing,
Who only is the Universal King!
IV.
God only is the Universal King;
His Name with understanding praise!
And in the Services you to Him sing,
Let that inspirit all your lays!
The World around His just Commands shall own,
For Holiness is the Throne He sits upon.
V.
See how the Tributary Kings crowd in,
And one united People make,
Their Crowns to deck His Victories they bring,
And from His hands all new ones take:
Each in His Temple Homage to Him yields,
And there hang up their Consecrated Shields.
Psalm XLVIII. Magnus Dominus, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.

I.
GReat is our God, and greatly to be praised,
Upon that Hill, which He himself has raised;
Sion, which He His City made,
Beautiful Sion, whom the World obeyed,
And for whose Peace as for their own all Countries prayed;
Which on the North Jerusalem does guard,
Safer than gates most surely barred;
Which on the North does on Jerusalem shine,
So that around it has the Sun, or Natural, or Divine.
II.
Within her Palaces the Lord is known,
For not hers more He counts them, than His own:
The Kings perceived it, marching by,
But thither they no sooner cast their eye,
But from the conquering sight, as soon they strove to fly;
Away they hasted thence, but all in vain,
Their fears pursued them with fresh pain,
Like Childbed throes till there is born a Son,
A greater pang succeeds, as soon as e're the present's gone.
III.
In Ships they thought their Spoils to carry home,
But Thou at Sea their Navy did overcome;
All this, O Lord, we heard before,
And now believe, because we see Thy Power,
But who that had seen half so much, would not do more?
God will establish Sion, and command
The Sacred Pile unmoved to stand;
Thither we will come for help, in our distress,
And where he has bid us bless him, expect he us should bless.
IV.
Lord, as Thy Name is, so shall be Thy Praise,
And to adorn it we will invent new ways:
To the wide Earths extremest end,
From East it shall unto the West extend,
And when it has filled all below, to Heaven ascend;
That goodness which Thy hand around does throw,
Like fruitful seed, shall upward grow;
Solyma to Thy Courts her gifts shall bring,
And all her Cities shout forth Acclamations to their King.
V.
Walk about Sion, all her Bulwarks count,
The humble Valleys, and the Holy Mount,
Her lofty Towers, up to the Sky,
To which the Heavens desire to be more nigh,
And their own heights, to kiss her sacred Spires, deny:
Round it again, and her great Wonders see,
To tell the Age which is to be;
And that Her God will Ours till death abide,
And through the Graves dark gloomy way to Heaven our passage guide.
Psalm XLIX. Audite haec omnes gentes auribus, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of
Korah.

I.
ATtend, O World, and bid thy Nations hear,
Those, who ly furthest off, and those more near,
Both rich, and poor, and high, and low,
My Song no difference makes, and none does know,
But those who serve, and those who rule,
The Soldier, Statesman, and the Fool,
The young, the old, the great, the small,
It does without distinction call,
And like the grave, alike concerns, and equals All.
II.
With God my Song: His Wisdom moves the Lyre,
And makes the chords in lofty sounds conspire:
With Him will I begin my Song,
His Wisdom shall conduct the strains along,
Shall life, and breath, and motion give,
Make them, and they my Voice to live;
Then the stops changed, on the same string,
I will in mighty Numbers sing
Triumphant Death, which next Him is the greatest King.
III.
What profit's it to hoard up endless store
Of wealth for others, and my self be Poor?
Prevent my evil day with Cares,
To leave a Curse, and sorrow to my Heirs?
Since he who has most chains of Gold,
The Prisoner life can never hold;
Can never pay a ransom down
For the fleet Soul away once gone,
And from the grave redeem his Brothers, or his own.
IV.
Death throws an heavier Chain than that over all,
And proudest Monarchs at His Footstool fall;
Look how the Wise, the Brutish dye,
And in one Urn their lots and ashes lie:
The longest livers only have
A tedious journey to the grave;
Whilst most a short way thither find,
And have their Pass-ports sooner signed,
Whither all come at last, and leave their wealth behind.
V.
In vain by Monuments men hope to live,
And their fond Names to Lands and Houses give;
In vain they huge foundations lay
For Tombs, which have their Fate, as well as they;
No Honors bayl in this arrest,
But the same death waits Man, and Beast:
And though enough the Children know
Their Fathers folly, choose to go
With them, and count those greater fools, who do not so.
VI.
They follow close their steps, their sayings hold,
Like Sheep they follow to The Eternal fold;
Where till the Morning they are penned,
The Morning of that day, which never shall end;
Which Titles shall again renew,
And diff'rences the Grave never knew;
From some all beauty take away,
In greater Iustre some display,
Raising them Gold, who buried were but only Clay.
VII.
Then shall I rise too, and with glory shine,
From the Graves power, kept by the power Divine,
It shall no longer trouble me,
Nor know I why the Wise should troubled be,
To see another stores increase,
Since they disturb His present ease,
And must be left all, when he dies;
Then heavy gold begins to rise,
And with his breath, away an empty Honor flies.
VIII.
His former pleasures then avail him not,
But are by him, as he by his forgot:
Nothing remains of all he did,
When with his Fathers, he in night lies hid;
That Wisdom only does abide,
Which for the future did provide:
It Is Wisdom sets the Man on high,
Wisdom the badge to know him by,
Without which like a Beast he lives, and all must die.
Psalm L. Deus Deorum Dominus, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
It Is past, and by irrevocable doom
Decreed that all the World to Judgment come;
Out from the East let the great summons go,
Swifter than Morning light,
In it is first undisturbed, and lusty flight,
When on the Western Hills it hasts to show
It Is Conquests, and drives thence the Captive Night;
Then let the West to the voice give ear,
And all the scatt'red winds, which ly between,
Be ready on the wing,
And over the Earth the dreadful Message bear!
Make the deaf North, and South to hear!
Proclaim it in the open Sky,
That the last day is nigh;
A day which none e're yet did see,
And which but few, till it comes, believe will be,
When God the hearts of all shall open lay,
And bid the World to make room for the Session, have away!
II.
When Sion was the Residence Divine,
God emptied all his glories there;
Sion did with refulgent beauty shine,
And only what was lovely durst appear:
The Air was calm, Heaven seemed more bright,
As if from thence it had received new light;
Before hand would officiously come down,
And take the forward Sacrifice,
E're it began to rise,
And with a sacred flame the Victim crown:
Or if it gathered in a Cloud,
'Twas but some greater Majesty to shroud.
No cries were heard there, or sad groans,
Nothing that could disturb the quiet of the place,
But joy and mirth were seen in every Face,
And left their traces on the stones.
The very walls were glad,
Mourned not in breaches, nor in Yawns looked sad,
But the bright Liveries of Peace did wear;
The walls looked gay, the Altars fair,
And with perpetual throngs
Of those who came to worship there,
The Courts were ever filled with Incense, or with Songs.
Nay God Himself attention seemed to give,
And held His own the Homage of their Voices to receive.
III.
But now that time is past, nor as before,
Will he in love draw near
But all in Flames appear,
Will in the charming murmurs be no more,
But up He Will lift His voice, and roar,
And those flames which the Victim burnt, the Altar shall devour,
A tempest shall before Him ride,
And forward post the sluggish wind,
With thousand Captives running by His side,
Of Lands which he has empty made,
Clearing the way for Plagues which come behind,
And of the following Thunder be it self afraid.
Along the Heaven the Thunder like a Sea shall roll,
And make its noise be heard to either Pole;
With all the Fears, which horror can invent,
With lightnings, not to purge the Air,
And its decays repair,
But to make greater, and disturb it, sent*
To riot there without control,
And sing what it e're long shall burn, that beauteous Scroll.
IV.
Then shall God come, and with a dreadful voice,
Which lays those storms, and checks that Thunders noise,
Making the Dead who heard not them awake,
And Heaven and Earth, and Sea affrighted quake;
When thus He cites them to appear,
And bids them to the Bar draw near,
His Pleasure, and their Charge to hear,
Return, He Will to them say, Return your dead,
To meet the Souls which from them fled,
And both be sentenced, for what both together did!
Into my great Exchequer bring
The Debtors, whose accounts are given in,
And who so many Ages have your Prisoners been!
Resign O Earth, and Sky and Sea your trust,
Be sure no guilty Criminal you hide,
But that all come, and all be tried,
You long enough have unaccounted for their dust;
But first bring in my Saints, who to my bar appeal,
To me their several Names are known,
And in my book their labors are set down,
How they to my just Law did Seal,
Or with their Sacrifices blood, or with their own.
V.
See how they trembling stand,
Receive the charge, and finish the Command,
And to the great Tribunal bring the shakled band?
The Prison-gates are open thrown,
And not till now to their Eternal home,
Those who mistook the grave for it, are truly come;
The Grave, which like an house forsook, it self falls down.
With their own bodies all arise,
The active dust begins to heave,
And ask its fellow if it live,
Scarce daring to believe its ears or eyes;
A hollow Voice is heard around,
Of Souls, which to the Bodies call,
Yet wish that neither might be found,
And till they come, would have the Mountains on them fall;
The Mountains frighted worst of all,
Would for themselves find shelter under ground.
The Sea returns her dead, and here is the Sky,
Which now again from thence like Lightning fly,
But down to Hell, and in eternal flames to ly.
The whole World is one mighty Street,
Where Old acquaintance meet,
And though against their Wills are forced to greet,
Whilst up on high,
The Judges equal Sentence to declare,
The Saints are to the Bench called from the Bar,
And guilty Souls, by their own Witness cast,
Expect to have confirmed at last,
That sentence, which they long before upon themselves had past.
VI.
Attend, O Israel, to thy God give ear,
('It Is He who speaks, and Him thou ought to hear)
I charge thee not for Thy unfrequent Sacrifice,
Thy seldom Offerings, and Thy bloodless Vows,
That perfumes do so rarely rise,
And with their clouds meet, and obscure the Skies:
I Will take no Bullock from Thine house,
Nor from Thy fold a rank He-Goat,
For every Forest, and all beasts of note,
The great who rule, the lesser who ob^y,
The beasts of Pleasure, Service, and of Prey,
Alike are Mine,
And all the Hills whereon they feed, as well as they;
When Thou by a false Title fondly call'st them Thine.
They no subjection to thee owe,
But what my pleasure gave at first:
And when unto Thy Yoke they bow,
It Is not from any Power of Thine, but that I Will have it so,
"Who them to serve, for Thy Sin only cursed,
"And make them thus their just dependence show.
"Nay Birds themselves, whom I gave wings to fly,
"Mount up to Heaven, to come more nigh,
"And the same Homage beasts below, they yield on high.
VII.
"If I were hungry, why should I tell Thee,
"When the Earth's fullness all belongs to Me?
"Or if I eat, must Thou needs with it acquainted be?
"Think Thou that such gross meats as these,
"Bulls blood, or flesh my taste do please,
"And are fit things my anger to appease?
"No, Wretched Mortal, to the God most High
"First pay thy vows, then send thy praise,
"In thy distress unto Him cry,
"And, where it may be always warm, an Altar raise;
"Within thy heart, where groans, and sighs,
"May be the daily Sacrifice!
"For in such Off' rings He delights,
"These are His solemn and accepted Rites,
"Flames, which to Heaven will surely come,
"And both thy passage thither clear, and for thee then make room!
VIII.
But to the Wicked the Almighty says,
"What have thou, wretch, to do with my just Ways?
"To take my Word into thy mouth?
"Expound my Statutes, or declare my Truth?
"As if an Enemy would Trophies to his Conqueror raise,
Or I from thee get any Praise;
Who Counsel, which thou do another give,
Wilt not thy self receive,
And what thou teach, do or slight, or not believe;
Who when thou saw a Theif, did with him steal,
His thest did or partake in, or conceal;
With base Adulterers were so,
"Did never use thy tongue a wound to heal,
"But with it made'st a light one two;
"Most Enemy to them, who never did thee any wrong,
"And whom thou ought to bless, have murdered with thy tongue.
"I saw all this, and held my peace,
"Expecting when thou would repent,
"But silence thou did falsely judge consent,
"Thoughtst me just like thy self, and that such ways as these,
"Since they unpunisht escaped, must please;
"But I Will reprove thee, and they all
"Shall be my Witnesses, when I to Judgment call;
"Then thou too late shall know,
"This patience from my love did flow,
"And dearly pay both for thy sin, and my forbearance too.
IX.
"Remember this, you who the Lord forget,
"And yet at last, if you are wise, return,
"Tempt not those flames, which will break out and burn,
"And make your Judgment like my Patience great!
"Return, e're yet it be too late,
"See how I call, see how I wait,
"There Is no repenting in a future state;
"Deliverance then you shall expect in vain,
"And fruitlesly complain,
"When all your grief shall serve but to increase your pain;
"Return now, whilst you may, and now receive
"Those Mercies, which I freely offer, freely give,
"And that you may be ever so, Now happy live!
"He honors me, who offers praise,
"For he exalts mine, and I Will bless his Ways;
"Will be his refuge, till the storm is past,
"And make him on a Rock stand fast,
"Secure him here, and to my self will bring him home at last.
Psalm LI. Miserere mei Deus secundum, etc. The IV. Penitential Psalm of David,
when Nathan the Prophet came to Him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.

I.
THou, who art full of bounty, and of love,
The Just, and yet the Gracious God,
Whose Mercy has nor bound, nor Period,
Let my distress Thy pity move;
Lord, for Thy Mercies sake blot out my sin,
Whose sum less infinite than that has only been!
II.
To Thee I come, O cleanse and purge away
That filth, which does Thy sight offend,
Receive with favor those requests I send,
And give Thy answer when I pray!
Wash my foul Soul, that is stained all over with sin,
Without I should be clean, if I were so within!
III.
It Is great, I must confess, and wondrous foul,
So ugly that its shape affrights;
All day it haunts me, with me stays whole nights,
And with new horrors fills my Soul:
On me it stares, and when I turn aside,
To shun the Fiend, I meet it where I thought to hide.
IV.
Against Thee only have I done this thing,
And to Thy Just award must stand;
If now upon me Thou should lay Thy hand,
'Twill not be heavier than my sin:
Whatever the sentence be I must confess,
Though sharp that, Lord, in Justice Thou could do no less.
V.
For I in sin was born, in sin conceived,
Full grown in that, when but a Child;
My Nature, and my Life are both defiled,
And Thee by both, Lord, have I grieved:
Truth in the inward parts is Thy delight,
That I may please Thee make me know, then do what is right.
VI.
Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean,
Let through my Soul Thy waters flow;
My blackness shall be changed to purest Snow,
And all my stains no more be seen:
The Snow with me compared, shall seem less white,
And look as fairest colors do for want of light.
VII.
No sooner shall Thou make me hear Thy voice,
But all my pains shall flee away;
The bones, which on the rack all broken lay,
Then knit more firmly, shall rejoice:
Lord, as a Sinner look no more on me,
Or if as such, whom Love has reconciled to Thee!
VIII.
Give me an heart Thou can ungriev'd behold,
And a right Spirit in me renew;
It Is full as easy, Lord, for Thee to do,
As undertake to mend the old:
Cast me not from Thy gracious sight away,
But let Thy Spirit, with mine renewed thus, ever stay!
IX.
Make it my Comforter, with me to 'abide,
And all my Joys again restore;
And that I never from Thee may wander more,
As I to others, be my Guide!
Who shall by my example learn Thy ways,
And changed, like me, in Songs recount Thy wondrous Praise.
X.
Let not the guiltless blood, which I have shed,
And all its waves upon me roll;
But when thy sprinkling shall make clean my Soul,
Let thy Salvation crown my head:
Then shall my Harp of all thy love rehearse,
And thy Salvation be the subject of my Verse.
XI.
Open my mouth, Thy praise I Will speak aloud,
For did Thou Bulls or Rams desire,
A cruel Offering, and perpetual fire,
I blood would expiate then with blood:
But God all Sacrifice for that withstands,
Only a bleeding heart attones for bloody hands.
XII.
Be good to Sion, build her Cities wall,
That all the Vows, which she has made,
With mine, may be upon thy Altar laid,
And Hecatombs before it fall!
No cloudy darkness then shall veil the Skies,
But day all night break from the Evening Sacrifice.
Psalm LII. Quid gloriaris in malitia, etc. A Psalm of David When Doeg the
Edomite came and told Saul and said unto him David is come to the house of
Ahimelech.

I.
INhumane Beast, more treacherous, than strong,
For Treason only makes thee so,
And by perfidiousness Thy Power dos grow,
Why boast'st Thou thus in doing wrong,
And arm'st weak hands with a malicious tongue?
The Almighty Goodness ever dos remain,
More firm, and stable than thy threats are vain.
II.
Sharp as a Lancet, which is newly whet,
Thy tongue dos pierce, and touch the quick,
Wounds mortally, before it is felt to prick,
Discovers plots, framed by deceit,
In thy designs, and malice only great,
Who sin before the chiefest Good do love,
And lies more than the Truth, that is from above.
III.
Bitter, and cruel Words are thy delight,
And all the joy of thy base tongue,
But neither thou, nor it shall prosper long:
For God on thee shall turn its spite,
Destroy thee from this Land, and His own sight;
And in reward for all your bitter fruit,
Both cut thee down, and pluck that up by th'root.
IV.
The Righteous shall behold it, and afraid,
Shrink at thy plagues, but laugh at thee,
And say, when They thy sudden ruin see,
"Lo this Man on his riches staid,
"And sought help from the Gods his gold had made,
"Neglecting Him, who should have been his Trust,
"For them, who thus deceiving him are just.
V.
But like an Olive Tree still fresh, and green,
I in Gods House shall ever stand,
Planted and watered there by His own hand,
And on my boughs have fruit be seen,
Where He may shine, and no cloud come between:
On Him I Will wait, whose Mercies have no end,
And as they fall, my Praises shall ascend.
Another Version of the same: By M. M. B.
I.
MOnster of Men, who can such mischiefs act,
And proudly triumph in the bloody fact,
Must this thy power declare,
That they, who at Jehovahs Altar stood,
The Priests themselves, all stained with their own blood,
The guiltless Victims of thy Fury were?
Yet not even this was able to assuage
Thy own cursed malice, or thy wicked Masters rage.
II.
But though my ruin thou did most design,
And that no blood should quench thy thirst but mine,
Know, wretch, that God is good
And has been always so in ages past,
Nor shall Eternity His love exhaust;
Wherefore it is not thy force, though like a flood,
Nor all thy secret Plots, which shall avayl,
Unless thou can against the Almighty first prevail,
III.
Within thy heart ly hid those poisonous seeds
Of treason, which thy tongue provokes to deeds:
So piercing are thy words
They seem the Razours dullness to upbraid,
As if unfit for action, or afraid,
And have more edge than all my Enemies Swords;
By these thou do the just ensnare, and slay,
And low as earth, their hopes, and lives together lay.
IV.
But who, think thou, these actions will admire,
Since you are inspired by an infernal fire?
A flame, which strongly moves
To lying mischiefs, and unjust deceit,
And all the false delights, which on them wait,
Or sin presents to excite and raise new loves!
Hence it is that Justice seems so mean, and low,
Nor longer fit for great men, than to make them so.
V.
Devouring words do thy best love command,
And to them thou have joined a bloody hand:
But the Almighty God
In thy destruction shall His Power make known,
Which in eternal torments thou shall own,
When he makes bare His Arm, and shakes His Rod,
Removing thee from thy beloved place,
And from the Earth roots out thy traiterous name and race.
VI.
The Righteous, when they see the overthrow,
Shall fear His Power, who has brought thee so low,
And shouting at thy fall,
Cry out, "Lo, where is the man, who fixed his trust,
"Not in our God, but his own glittering dust,
"Which, useless now, can yield no help at all:
"Look how that strength, which he in fraud once placed,
"Is by the breath of the Eternal Word defaced!
VII.
But whilst this wretch deplores his dolorous state,
My God, who on him threw the mighty weight,
Will me assign a place,
Within His Courts, where, like an Olive Tree,
With fruit and blossoms I shall loaded be,
And feel the kindest Influence of His Grace:
It Is in His Mercies I Will for ever trust,
Whose Love, and Wrath thus shown, declare that He is just.
VIII.
Then will I of some nobler subject sing,
And to exalt my God fresh praises bring;
Then, like my Sacrifice,
In flames of purest Love I Will mount on high,
To Him, who saved me from my Enemy,
And in my passage perfume all the Skies
To Heaven; nor short of His dread Presence stay,
Whilst the admiring Saints rise up to make me way.
Psalm LIII. Dixit insipiens in Cord, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THere is no God, the Fool in's heart does say,
And that his life may not his heart betray,
He like one, that believes it, Lives;
Does with blasphemous mouth deny
The very Being of the Deity,
And in his works, That lie
Which he to Man dares not, to Heaven profanely gives.
II.
From Heaven the Almighty God came down to view
What He there saw, and there could punish too;
Yet down He came, and looked around,
He searched, if He might any see,
Any of His, lest they should numbered be,
To the Common Misery,
He searched, but not a Just man in the Number found.
III.
Are they all thus, O God, all gone aside,
As if from Thee they could their follies hide?
Are all thus greedy to devour,
And eat Thy People up, like Bread,
Thankless for that, and not some Judgment dread,
Like those by Quails once fed
Tempting that Heaven, which Manna down before did (shower.
IV.
Amidst their jollity in fears they were,
Though all around appeared no cause of fear;
For unawares God smote them all,
Scat'red them by His Mighty hand;
And as He there Invisible did stand,
Their Plots did countermand,
And made them by their own designs in scorn to fall.
V.
From Zion, Lord, may Isreal's help appear,
Thence come, since all His Confidence is there!
Bring back, their long Captivity,
That Israel may adore Thy Ways,
And Jacob to Thy Name give all the praise;
Together strive to raise
Thy Honor, and admire Thee, as Thou ought to be.
Psalm LIVE. Deus in nomine tuo, etc. A Psalm of David, When the Ziphims came to
Saul, and said, "Does not David hide himself with us?

I.
O Thou, who Isreal's Savior art, be mine,
Be both my Judge, and Advocate,
Appear, e're yet it be too late,
Now make Thy Name, and Glory shine,
And not preserve me only Lord, but make me Thine.
II.
Incline Thine ear to my complaint, and cry!
And since Thou have commanded me,
In my distress to cry to Thee,
Let not me cry, and Thou not hear,
Then farthest of, when Thou have promised to be near.
III.
Strangers, my God, such as Thy Law despise,
And would both That, and me overthrow,
Who nor Thee, nor Thy Judgments know,
Oppressors in great Numbers rise,
And shall Thy aids be fewer, than my Enemies.
IV.
But see how gracious the Eternal is,
Who not my Life alone defends,
But to my Helpers succor sends,
And truly is a God in this,
Both my swift prayers to answer, and prevent my Wish.
V.
Nor shall my Enemies unpunish't be,
Their own designs shall vengeance call;
Their mischief framed shall on them fall,
And in their ruin I shall see
My eyes delight; thy Wrath on them, and Love to me.
VI.
My God has scat'red them, and heard my cry;
To Him my cheerful praise I Will sing,
To Him my Songs, and Trophies bring,
For though I have the Victory,
'Twas He alone who gained it for me, and not I.
Psalm LV. Exaudi Deus Orationem, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd, to my Prayer incline Thine ear,
And turn nor that, nor Thy bright Face away!
Behold the mis'ries, which I bear,
When those, who are its guards, my Crown betray:
In my destruction they rejoice,
Their wrath on me, to Heaven have sent their noise,
May mine be heard above the tumults of their voice.
II.
Seized by this fright, my heart does quake,
And all the terrors of the grave appear;
Hope, and my Trust their holds forsake,
And yield the fortress to usurping Fear:
Around I look, but in mine eye
Only despair, and grizly horrorly,
And none but Heavens great road is clear, if I could fly.
III.
And then I wish, that I had wings,
And like a Dove could 'scape, and be at rest,
Beyond the Cares, which trouble Kings,
And have that ease they find not, in my breast;
How to the Woods then would I fly,
And as I there secure, and hidden ly,
See unconcerned the Winds, and Thunders marching by.
IV.
Divide their Counsels with their tongues;
Theirs, who Thy City fill with violence,
And publish on its Walls the wrongs,
Not which they bear, but do just Innocence:
Both night and day they it surround,
Murders, and Rapes in every street are found,
And with the Oppressors mixed cries of the Oppressed resound.
V.
Had all this by an Enemy,
Or one, who only hated me, been done,
I could have born it, and defy
The Treason, when the Traitor once is known:
My force to his I would oppose,
And to decide our right in battle close,
Or had he been too strong, have fled, and Umpires chose.
VI.
But it was Thou, my Friend, my Guide,
The happy Partner of my Cares, and Throne,
In whose breast I could safely hide
Those secrets I scarce trusted in my own;
Who with me to Gods House would go,
And Zeal for that, which I most honored show,
And like my self, but better, all my thoughts did know,
VII.
But may he now no journey go,
But what is to Hell, and by no hand be staid,
Let Sin, which fills his dwelling now,
His bones, and heart with thousand plagues invade*
For God himself shall guide my Way,
To Him at morning, noon, and night I Will pray,
And He shall hear me, when I thus crown every day,
VIII.
'Twas He preserved my Soul in Peace,
And gave those Wars, which threatened it, an end;
Made the shrill noise of Trumpets cease,
And unexpected aids was pleased to send;
He still shall hear me, and once more
Make bare His Arm, and show His mighty Power,
Who is the same to save now, that He was before.
IX.
But Him they fear not, and miscall
Their Treasons, when they prosper, Loyalty;
No cross event did ever fall,
Which might the Justice of their Cause deny:
And then afresh they Cov'nants make,
And their Allegiance for new Oaths forsake,
Which they with caution, only during pleasure, take.
X.
Murder, and Rapes, Revenge, and War,
Rebellion, and Injustice rage within;
Though smooth as Oil their Speeches are,
And like that used, to make the Razer keen;
But, Soul, on God Thy burden cast,
Only believe, and make not too much have,
He, who protects Thee Now, will Victory give at last.
XI.
God will the Righteous Man defend,
But down to Hell in wrath the Wicked throw;
Blood, and Deceit shall haste his end,
And clear the way, which he to death shall go:
His days shall evil be, and few,
And as they with his crimes to ripeness grew,
Both shall together fall: He said it, who is True.
Psalm LVI. Miserere mei Deus quoniam, etc. A Psalm of David, When the
Philistims took him in Gath.

I.
MErcy, my God, on me Thy Mercy show!
And if thy pleasure does, my need says, Now.
Now, when my Foe is ready to devour,
Threatening to do it every hour,
And grows in malice, as he does in Power.
II.
To swallow up my Soul they ready are,
And gape to do it, but I am Thy Care;
They needs must many be, O Thou Most High,
When I have no place where to fly,
But from one to another Enemy.
III.
But when I fear, Thou shall my Refuge be,
That fear shall give me wings to mount to Thee;
On Thee I Will trust, until my Titles tried,
Resolving never to be denied,
Till Thou, who gav'st it me, my Right decide.
IV. Versus.

On Gods Almighty Word, will I depend;
On God I Will trust, who certain help will send:
There will I rest, and if my God but smile,
Or He these doubts will reconcile,
Or make me scorn, what Flesh can do the while.
V.
Me and my words to wrest they never cease,
And make them most offend, when meant to please:
Their thoughts for evil areagainst me set,
And when they are in Counsel met,
Contrive how by my fall they may be great.
VI.
Shall they escape unpunish't in their ways,
And in Prosperity spend all their days?
Lord, in Thine Anger let them be overthrown,
Thou need'st but only on them frown,
Lower than me, that look will cast them down!
VII.
Thou all my wand'rings, every pace do know,
And not'st how many steps I from Thee go;
See my tears too, what they were shed about,
And in thy bottle they are put,
Whence, with a Sponge, what is in Thy Book blot out!
VIII.
When to my God in my distress I cry,
My very Prayers make all mine Enemies fly;
My sighs shall backwards turn them, in the Rear
They shall a greater Enemy fear,
And in that still voice know that God draws near.
IX. Versus.

On Gods Almighty Word I will depend,
On God I Will trust, who certain help will send:
There I will rest, and if my God but smile,
Either these doubts he will reconcile,
Or make me scorn, what Flesh can do the while.
X.
Thy Vows are on me, and I Will give Thee praise,
The Field is Thine, and Thine shall be the Bays:
Thou have preserved my Soul, will Thou not bless,
My sliding feet with steadiness?
The greater's done, and wilt not do the less?
Psalm LVII. Miserere mei Deus, miserere, etc. A Psalm of David, When he fled
from Saul in the Cave.

I.
OThou on whom my Soul for help relyes,
Let my distress find pity in Thine eyes!
Thou art my Trust, on Thee I stay,
Under Thy Wings, let me concealed abide,
And till these storms are past, me hide
Under their shade, else on them let me fly away!
II.
To my great Savior, who above does reign,
Whose Mighty Power does me, and All sustain,
To Him I Will cry, who down shall send
From Heaven, and save me by His own right hand
From those, who Him, and me withstand;
His Truth shall slay them, and His Mercy me defend.
III.
Among fierce Lions, Lord, hid in their den,
With beasts more fierce than Lions, Cruel Men,
Whose teeth be arrows, and sharp Spears,
Their tongue a two edged Sword, their eyes all fire,
As if in this they did conspire,
By several Torments, to create me several fears:
IV.
With these I live, among these men I lie,
And hardly for my thoughts gain liberty.
Above the Clouds exalted be
Lord, set Thy glory far above the Skies;
And though so high I cannot rise, Versus.

From Heaven do Thou descend, when I look up to Thee.
V.
I could not escape, they had so girt me round,
My very Soul lay prostrate on the ground;
But, as I looked, I saw them fall,
And though for me they had prepared the net,
That I might stumble, dug the pit,
Into that pit they fell themselves, their snare and all.
VI.
I am resolved, nor will I any more
Distrust my God, as I have done before;
No, I will praise Him, and my heart,
Which has so often betrayed me into fear,
Its burden in the Song shall bear,
And when my Harp begins, shall take the highest part.
VII.
Awake, my Harp, it is time for thee to wake,
Prevent the day, and thy great subject take;
Put all thy str^ngs on, show thy skill,
God, and my Soul are ready, be not slow,
For if we should before thee go,
Thy strings would never half way reach up Heavens High Hill!
VIII.
We Come, O God, and with us up will raise
High as Thy Love and Truth, to Heaven, Thy Praise;
The World shall hear, what Thou have done,
How signally Thou have appeared for me,
By Thy great Power have set me free,
And for His Works praise Him, whose Name they have not known,
IX. Versus.

Then to the Clouds we will together fly,
And take new Wing to mount to the Most High;
Above the Clouds exalted be
Lord, set Thy glory far above the Skies;
And if so high We cannot rise,
Descend Thy self, and bear us up along with Thee!
Psalm LVIII. Si vere utique justitiam, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
ARE you, as by your place you ought to be,
True Judges of the Poor man's wrong?
Or rather do you not his suit prolong,
And then bind over, when you should set him free?
You would be thought both good, and just,
And if not so, at least Just though severe;
But when you personate it most,
Your mouth condemns that, which your heart would spare;
For when bribes hold the Scale, the lightest cause most weight does bear.
II.
The Wicked from the womb are gone astray,
Their wand'rings with their life begun,
And will no sooner than their life be done,
Nor seek they, what they know not, the right way:
Under their tongues concealed, and close,
A deadlier poison than the Serpents lies;
Adders less cautiously expose
Their ears to Charms, than they to hear the Wise,
As deaf to Counsel, as they greedy are of flatteries.
III.
Break out the Lions teeth, nor let them more
The Innocent so proudly tear!
Let the young Lions, Lord, themselves in fear,
Not over their prey, but torn with famine roar!
And as the Sand, though kind Heaven poures
The like streams there, as on the fruitful Plain,
To Heaven returns no thanks in flowers,
But only as it falls, drinks up the rain,
Like rain by Sand drunk up, let them be never raised again!
IV.
When against me they throw their poisoned darts,
And in their rage their bows do bend,
Or let them be too weak the shafts to send?
Or turn the Pykes into the Shooters hearts!
And as a Snail, which leaves behind
A silver film, along the way she passed,
But if you follow it you find
Both that, and her in slime conclude at last,
So let them perish, and from filthy slime, to Nothing wast!
V.
Like an Abortive, which never saw the Sun,
But died, e're it had any birth,
Born only that it might be thrown to the Earth,
Let their Race end, e're it be well begun!
E're briars with the thorn can close,
And in their clasping Arms each other take,
Which grew acquainted as they rose,
And only forced by fire, their holds forsake,
Let their ends be as sudden, as those their embraces make!
VI.
The Just shall see it, and at the sight rejoice,
And in their blood his Garments wash;
Without fear shall this Red Sea view, and pass,
And with such Acclamations raise his voice,
Lo, for the Just what Crown remains!
And what Reward God does for Him provide;
There is a King, who over all reigns,
And He with Justice shall each cause decide,
By whose most Equal Laws judges themselves, and Thrones are tried.
Psalm LIX. Eripe me de inimicis meis Deus, etc. A Psalm of David, When Saul
sent, and they watched the house to kill Him.

I.
PReserve me, Lord, and by Thy hand overthrown,
Let them, who seek my ruin, find their own!
From envious Men my honor save,
And to the cruel make me not a prey!
I never cause of wrath, or malice gave,
That to entrap me thus, they snares should lay,
And what for them I could have spent, my life, betray.
II. Versus.

Awake, my help, and to my aid come down,
To visit, and destroy, Thou need'st but frown!
Spare none of them, my God, that they,
Like hungry Dogs which have no Carcass found,
At night may, disappointed of their prey,
With howlings only fill the Streets around,
And see the blood they hunted for, in their own wound!
III.
Look, how they belch out poison, mortal Words,
And how one death attends their tongues, and swords!
"Yet who, say they, What God does hear?
Even Thou, O Lord, who wilt their threats deride,
And having turned upon them their own fear,
In their destruction for my Life provide,
Who only on Thy strength, and bounty have relied.
IV.
They shall prevent my wish, and let me see
It granted, e're my Prayers are made to Thee;
Yet at one blow destroy them not,
But let them wander, and feel how they dye;
Least by my self the Mercy be forgot,
And without Monument to touch mine eye,
A swift Oblivion follow a swift Victory.
V.
Let their own Lips, and pride their ruin be;
And take them in the toiles they laid for me!
Upon themselves their Curses turn,
And in Thy Wrath, my God, consume them all!
Under them may they see the Furnace burn,
Whilst they in vain for help to Thee will call,
And from their heights into the flames but lower fall!
VI. Versus.

Then shall they know how far Thy Rule extends,
From Thy Throne Sion, to The Earths utmost ends;
When they to shun the light, and day,
Like hungry Dogs, at midnight only found,
Beat up and down in vain to seize their prey,
With howlings filling all the streets around,
And have no blood but what they draw from their own wound.
VII.
I the meanwhile will of Thy Power rehearse,
And call the Morning up to hear my Verse;
Of Thee I Will sing, who heretofore
For my defense appear'dst both great, and strong,
And for my safety have new aids in store;
Nor shall Eternity it self seem long,
When all the while My Strength, and Savior is my Song.
Psalm LX. Deus repulisti nos, etc. A Psalm of David. To teach When he strove
with Aram Naharaim and Aram Zobah, when Joab returned and smote in the Valley of
Salt of Edom. XII. M.

I.
LOrd, Thou have smote us, turned Thy Face aside,
And all thy Mercies do in fury hide;
Like us Our very Mountains quake,
Return, least We, and They together fall;
For if Thou come not to Our Call,
We shall Our Land, that its Foundations will forsake.
II.
Low as the Earth, pressed down with miseries,
As little hope is in our heart, as eyes;
And though, O God, we still are Thine,
And only of the Cup Thou giv'st us, drink,
We cannot of Thy Covenant think,
Instead of help, astonishment is in the Wine.
III.
Low as we were, God did His Power display,
And in a moment chased our fears away;
Under His Banner Israel went,
The Lord of Hosts did on their side appear,
And though their Troops encamped in fear,
The God, who led them out, deliverance to them sent.
IV.
God did it, that His Glory might be known,
And with what ease He could defend His Own;
He bowed His Ear, and heard my Cry,
His Promise past, and in it I rejoice,
Gave me of all the World my Choice,
And on my Gods Almighty Promise I rely.
V.
Sechem is Mine, I will divide its Plain,
And over the Vale of Succoth throw my Chain;
The Tribes of Israel shall obey,
Those, which lie furthest of, or nearer stand,
Shall yield themselves to my Command,
Shall serve, while Judah gives them Laws, and holds the sway
VI.
Moab's my Wash-pot, and shall sue to be
A Vassal to my basest drudgery;
Philistia shall my Chariot meet,
Honored enough if she may bear that Yoke,
Proud Edom has so often broke;
And Edom shall submit her neck, and take my feet.
VII.
But who to Edom will direct my Course,
And entrance for me into Bozra force?
God shall direct me to the Town,
God, who of late has seemed to disappear;
And when He comes, knowing He Is there,
The Walls, to make Him way, shall open, or fall down.
VIII.
Help Us, O God, for we in vain implore
A Foreign Aid, which wants our succor more:
Thou art my help, through Thee my head
With Laurel shall be crowned, and in my ways,
Some Enemies neck the ground shall raise,
So that my feet shall triumph too, and on them tread.
Psalm LXI. Exaudi Deus deprecationem, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
HEar me my Savior, for to Thee I cry,
And let Thy answer show that Thou art nigh!
Banished, forlorn; and under deep suspense,
Lord, lead me to some higher Rock,
Where I these straits may overlook,
And though I come not thither, see Thy Temple thence!
II.
Thou have my refuge been, Thy Strength my Tower,
And in my weakness I have seen Thy Power;
And shall behold it still, and yet abide,
For all this absence, on Thy Hill,
And there my present Vows fulfill,
Brought on those wings, under whose shadow now I hide.
III.
I Am confident, for Thou have heard my Vows,
And my experience speaks, but what it knows;
For to the Throne my way Thou first did show,
To rule over them, who fear Thy Name;
And since Thou always art the same,
Thou, who have made Thy Servant King, will it keep him so.
IV.
His Life Thou will prolong to many days,
His Seed in The Age to come, Thy name shall praise;
Preserve him, Lord, let Truth and Mercy be
The chief Supporters of his Throne,
By all the Graces waited on,
That He may pay, as well as make His Vows to Thee!
Psalm LXII. Nonne Deo subjecta erit, etc. A Psalm of David,

I.
ON God alone my Soul depends,
From Him does my salvation come;
Himself is the salvation, which He sends,
And for my Conquests His great Arm makes room;
He is my Rock, and sure defense,
And all that I expect is thence; Versus.

There I unmoved shall stand, when tempests roar,
And Seas, which threaten me, are dash't against the shore.
II.
How long then will you plots devise,
Against a Man, who is upright?
Upon yourselves shall fall your sland'rous lies,
And your own arms against you turn the fight.
By your own mischiefs, you shall fall,
Be like a great, but bowing wall,
Whose own weight, when too weak to stand, it is grown,
Does but with greater violence help to bear it down.
III.
God has advanced me to the Throne,
Above the malice of their eye;
Thence, if they could, they strive to pull me down,
And undermine, what out of shot does lie:
Deceit, and gall is in their hearts,
And there they dip their poisoned darts;
Their hearts they think can by no eye be seen,
If once the Visor of base Flattery come between.
IV. Versus.

But Thou, my Soul, on God depend!
From Him must Thy Salvation come,
Himself is the Salvation, which He Will send,
And for Thy Conquest His great arms make room:
He is my Rock, and sure defense,
And all that I expect is thence;
There I unmoved shall stand, when Tempests roar,
And Seas, which threaten me, are dashed against the shore.
V.
In God is all my Hope, and Stay,
The Rock of Ages is my Shield;
By me, O World, to Him direct Thy way,
And like Thy Guide, seek Him, who help can yield!
He is Our Hope, when all means fail,
And when none else, His hands prevail;
The Poor want help, the Rich are but a Lie,
And to be weighed, are lighter both than Vanity.
VI.
Then in Oppression never trust,
Nor Riches though they be increased!
They will deceive you, for they are but dust,
And the worst Arms, though fondly judged the best
'Twas once spoke by the Almighty's Words,
I heard it twice, All Power's the Lords:
Mercy, O God, does also spring from Thee,
And as each Man's Work is, so his reward shall be.
Psalm LXIII. Deus, Deus meus, ad te, etc. A Psalm of David. When he was in the
Wilderness of Jadah.

I.
EArly my God, before it is Light,
And all the Stars are up, but that which makes the day,
Whilst Heaven alone with flames is bright,
And all below is hurled in the sable veil of night,
Which they can neither draw, nor take away;
Early I Will worship, and one glance from Thee,
E're it is with others day, shall make it noon with me.
II.
And as this dry, and thirsty land,
Where the ground ready to expire for want of rain,
Gaping, and out of breath does stand,
And shows its very bowels shriv'led like its sand,
And having drunk, gapes for more drink again,
The Wilderness and I in this agree,
For as that thirsts for rain, so Lord, I thirst for Thee.
III.
I thirst Thy glorious power to see,
As I have seen it in Thy Temple heretofore;
When ravished with Thy love to me,
To dye I was content, could I but so love Thee,
And so to dye, this life would choose no more;
These thoughts so high my fainting Spirit do raise,
That through my lips they force their way in songs of praise.
IV.
For this I Will bless Thee, and on high
To Thy Great Name send up my praises, whilst I live;
For since at present I enjoy
A mind content, it shall prepare for more supply,
Though Thou at present only that do give;
Even that shall bring my famish't Soul more good,
Than what my Body has, from most delicious food.
V.
Marrow, and Fatness it shall be,
And all the solid meats, which please, and feed the strong;
For I shall come at last to Thee,
Who art the Blessed End of all Felicity,
And the best subject of my humble song:
And on my bed, when I revolve Thy might,
My Praises shall, instead of Watches, part the night.
VI.
Exiled, distressed, and wondrous low,
Under Thy wings secure I in my trouble lay;
Since I so well their covert know,
I Will follow hard, overtake, and never let Thee go,
Unless on them Thou bear me too away;
Then shall I be upheld by Thy Right hand,
And on the empty Air, as on a Mountain stand.
VII.
Then shall my Enemies fall down,
By their own swords, and hasting to th'untimely grave,
Reap truly, what themselves have sown,
And their vile Carcasses to Dogs, and Foxes thrown,
Receive no better Burial than they gave;
Such living Monuments, which shall decay,
And be in other Beasts entombed as well as they.
VIII.
But I shall in my God rejoice,
And as He raigns above, be stablish't in my Throne below;
For I am His, and He my Choice,
And as my heart now praises Him, so shall my voice;
And all who fear Him, and the Wonder know,
In joyous shouts, shall their long silence break,
Whilst my Foes, burst with envy, want all power to speak.
Psalm LXIV. Exaudi Deus orationem, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd to my voice incline Thine ear,
And set me free from danger, and from fear!
Hide me from those, who wicked plots devise,
Are my professed, yet secret Enemies;
Who whet their tongues, instead of Swords,
And shoot for poisoned arrows, bitter Words.
II.
They bend their bow, and out of sight,
Watch how they unperceived may wound the Upright;
At him they fearless shoot, and plot, the while,
If this dispatch him not, what Engine will;
"Through our disguise what man can see,
Or how, say they, can we discovered be?
III.
No art they leave untried, but round
Seek, and never rest, till what they sought is found;
Each has his several way, their heart's so deep,
That each, though partners, their own counsel keep;
And dare not one another trust,
Though all in this agreed against the Just.
IV.
But God shall strike them with a dart,
That shall divide between the thoughts, and heart;
Both shall be wounded, both together fall,
And their own tongues shall give like death to all*
To spare their lives no man shall pray,
But frighted at their ruin flee away.
V.
By their destruction all shall fear,
And dread the judgment, which they see so near;
Shall think, and speak of what the Lord has done,
And joy in Him, whose Power was thus made known;
The Righteous in Him shall rejoice,
And up to Heaven in praises lift their voice.
Psalm LXV. Te decet hymnus Deus! A Psalm of David.

I.
PRaises for Thee in Sion, Lord, attend,
Sion, the fairest Stage in Heavens great road,
Whence thousand Praises daily do ascend,
And come in troops to Thy Divine Abode;
There I my vows will pay,
And with the Convoy they find there, direct their Way.
II.
O Thou, who all times do the afflicted hear,
From the Worlds ends all Flesh shall come to Thee!
My sins I know may justly stop Thine ear,
And make a greater breach 'twixt Thee and me;
But purge them, Lord, and I
Shall never pray in vain, and Thou be always nigh.
III.
Thrice happy man, on whom Thou will bestow,
That Grace, which of a Slave, shall make him Thine;
Thy Friend, who in Thy House Thy love shall know,
And see Thy Glory as it there does shine;
When He shall to thee pray,
Nor Thine own Face, nor his Prayers will Thou turn away.
IV.
By fearful things in Truth, Lord, answer us,
Who sav'st Thy People, and do take their part!
And not theirs only, but propitious
The Earths ends have found Thee, and their help Thou art:
The Earths ends to Thee are near,
And on rough Seas, through storms and clouds, Thou prayers do hear.
V.
God by His strength the Mountains has set fast;
Mountains, whose heads are raised above the Sky;
His Word, not their Foundations, makes them last,
Though they as low, as the World's Center lie:
Their tops no strom can shake,
Yet at His presence, like the little Hills they quake.
VI.
The Sea, when up to Heaven its billows swell,
As if it scorned in its old bounds to stay,
He with his girdle binds the mighty Well,
With charge the sandy Jailer to obey;
Who, when it heaves, and roars,
Its fury checks, and makes it keep within its shores.
VII.
And as tempestuous Seas His Word obey,
And at His louder Call their voice hold still,
The People, a more troub'lous Sea than they,
In all their tumults hearken to His Will;
His Thunder makes them fear,
And those, who get most off, yet think they are too near.
VIII.
From the bright East Thou make Thy Sun to go,
Before him creeps in Chains the Captive night,
And in the West, when he from us draws low,
It Is but to spread his Conquests, with his Light:
And till he comes again,
Bids the Moon fill his place, and in his stead to reign.
IX.
Thou visitest the Earth, and giv'st it rain,
Of Thy rich blessing it does freely spend;
The Earth returns its thanks to Heaven again,
In flowers, which thither their sweet Odours send,
As Customs, which they pay
To Thy dread Throne, who do their Mothers heat allay.
X.
The Flood of God, whose Spring-head's in the clouds,
When on the weary ground it showers distills,
The softened ridge unto its furrow crowds,
And all it is clots the quickening moisture fills;
Thou by degrees do bring
The Tillage on, and Harvest to succeed the Spring.
XI.
Plenty with every shower from Heaven pours down,
The Earth does by thy constant bounty grow;
Thy goodness does the year with blessings crown,
And all Thy steps drop fatness where they go:
They on the Deserts drop,
Whose parched Sands drink deep, of Thy o'reflowing Cup.
XII.
The little Hills drink deep, and look more fair,
The Valleys pledge, till they can drink no more;
The Shepherds, and their flocks both merry are,
And all the Plains with Corn are covered over:
With peace, and fruits abound,
And make the distant Mountains with their Songs resound.
Psalm LXVI. Jubilate Deo omnis terra, etc. A Psalm or Song.

I.
Rejoice, O World, and to Thy God sing praise!
Let Seas, and Isles, and Lands His Name resound;
Together with His Sun your voices raise,
And in Eternal Jubilees go round! Versus.

For if that rise His mighty Power to show,
Much more should you, on whom it shines do so.
II.
Say to the Lord, "How mighty is Thy Power,
Which even Thy Enemies must unforc't confess?
To The Earth they bow themselves, and would fall lower,
But that instead Thou take this poor address:
The Earth shall worship Thee, and their loud same,
Shall fill her Trumpet only with Thy Name.
III.
See what He did to raise it, how His hand
At once declared Him Terrible, and Good!
When raging Seas were turned to firm dry land,
And Israel past through the admiring Flood;
Then 'twas we viewed, and troad His secret Ways,
And roaring Deeps stood lift'ning to His Praise.
IV.
He rules over all, Him Heaven, and Earth obey,
The Universal and Eternal King;
His eyes the Wicked, and the Good survey,
And under chains His Hand the Proud does bring:
Raise not Thy self too high proud dust, for fear
The Wind which fills, thy sails should overbear.
V. Versus.

Rejoice ye Nations, and to God sing praise!
Let Seas, and Isles, and Lands his Name resound;
Together with His Sun your voices raise,
And in Eternal Jubilees go round!
For He from falls our sliding feet does save,
And with new Life returns us from the grave.
VI.
Like Silver in the Furnace, we were tried,
And felt unusual flames rage all about,
But thence, as Silver, thoroughly purified,
We only left our dross, when we came out;
The purer metal had no base alloy,
And all our griefs made way for greater joy.
VII.
Low were we brought, the net upon us cast,
And on our loins prodigious weights were laid,
Through Water trial, and through fire we past,
And a derision to our foes were made:
But He, who there upheld us by His hand,
Brought us Himself, at last, to'th' Promised Land.
VIII.
With praises to Thy House, my King, I Will go,
And make my thanks in clouds of Incense rise;
There solemnly I Will pay the willing Vow,
Which my lips off'red in my Miseries:
Bullocks, and Ramms I Will on Thy Altar lay,
And thence with Flames renew the Wasted day.
IX.
You, who have known The Almighty, Love, draw near,
And to my Speech your ready minds incline;
Attend to that just witness, which I bear,
And to your own experiences take Mine!
"When I in sighs to God my voice did raise,
"And prayed in groans, He turned them into praise.
X.
Had I kept some reserve within my Heart,
In hope to hide it, He had stopped His Ear;
But I unbowel'd my most secret part,
And then He did not only see, but hear;
Praise Him, who thus His glory did display,
Nor turned His own Face, nor my Prayers away!
Psalm LXVII. Deus misereatur nostri, etc. A Psalm or Song.

I.
SAve us O God, and Thy poor Servants bless!
Thy Goodness and Thy Power declare!
In Mercy help us, in Our great distress,
And We no more will doubt Thy Love or Care!
Let through the World Thy Mighty Name be known,
And what We praise, may the whole Earth with Reverence own! Versiculus.

II. Versiculus.

Rejoice, ye Nations, for your God is here,
Who by His Wisdom rules over all!
The Kings, and Kingdoms governs, and that fear
They strike in you, He makes on them to fall:
Let through the World His Mighty Name be known,
And what we praise, may the whole Earth with Reverence own!
III. Versiculus.

Then shall the Lord our Land both save and bless,
His Goodness, and His Power declare;
And then Our fields shall give their full increase,
And with His blessing look more gay and fair:
The Lord shall bless us, and His Name make known,
And what We praise, the whole Earth shall with Reverence own!
Psalm LXVIII. Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
GRreat Leader of the Sacred Hosts, arise,
And scattering Thy Proud Enemies,
Increase Our Triumphs with Thy Victories!
Let those, who hate Thy Name, before it fly,
Like Clouds of Smoke, chased by the Wind,
Which vanish as they mount on high,
And undistinguish't from the Common Sky,
No more in strange Fantastic figures lie,
But without mark, to know them by,
Leave not the smallest stain behind,
That in the air, one may their empty traces find:
Let their destruction sudden be,
Sooner than Wax does melt,
When once the flames are felt,
And in Thine eye may they the fire, which burns them see!
But let the Righteous in Thy Power rejoice,
With Flutes, and Trumpets make a cheerful noise,
And the whole Consort join, and perfect with their voice!
II.
Make God your Song, Ye Just, and from His Ways,
Which are in Heaven, take theme your Verse to raise!
In Heaven, where He in glory rides,
And with His rein the Winds, which bear them guides,
And by His Name Jehovah celebrate His Praise!
Above He rules, but His great Power extends
To what soever is done below,
The Cares of all His Creatures He does know,
And visits the wide Earth's extremest ends:
Is a kind Father to the Fatherless,
The Widows Counsel, and does bless
Desparing Nuptials with a large increase;
Making dead Wombs His voice to hear,
And her, that barren was, a numerous seed to bear:
And when to Him poor Captives cry,
Their tears move pity in His eye;
And with His Arm He gives them Liberty;
Again returns them to their Land,
Made fruitful by His plenteous rain,
When on the Proud, He throws the Chain,
And turns their Pastures to a dry, and barren Sand.
III.
Lord, when Thou through the Wilderness did go,
And their great Journeis to thy Israel show,
And, though Thou fill'dst the Heavens, confind'st Thy self to'a (Cloud below,
Sinai did at Thy Presence quake,
The Rocks bowed down, and the whole Earth did shake,
And stubborn Israel in their horrors did partake;
Thou thundred'st, and to own Thy Power,
The Heavens let fall a mighty shower,
With whose cool drops Thou did restore
The fully'd beauties of the shriv'led Earth,
Giving its fruits, and flowers new birth,
And made'st it fairer, than it was before:
The desert with Thy blessing did abound,
New streams refresh't the weary ground,
And Jacob there a safe retreat from bondage found.
There He securely dwelt,
And all the effects of mighty goodness f^lt:
There for His poor Thou did prepare,
And of His Armies took'st the care,
Still guiding them by Thine own hand,
Till by safe Conduct Thou had brought them to the Promised Land.
IV.
Before the Camp God marched, and Victory
Followed Him close, in view of all,
Our Wives, who saw the Enemy fall,
To meet our triumphs laid their distaffs by,
And took the Cymbal, and the Lute,
And sang to them that praise we shouted to the Flute.
They sang of Armies, and of Kings,
How soon their troops were put to flight,
E're they had well resolved to fight,
With all the Mirth, which certain conquest brings:
Now God abroad did overcome,
And they divided the rich spoil at home;
And though amongst the Pots they long had lain,
Condemned to Brickilns, and the Mine,
How all the flames did but their Oar refine,
And made them with more Luster shine,
When all their former beauties it had first restored again.
Like spotless Doves in their most glorious flight,
Reflecting from their wings the tremb'ling light,
In thousand colors, which the eye both dazzle, and invite.
V.
And so looked Palestine, when the Heathen fell,
And spoils of Kings were scat'red there;
The Land, which was before as dark as Hell,
Received fresh verdure, and became with Trophies fair:
On high its head did bear,
As if with snowy Salmon, 'twould compare:
Basan's high Hill God did with blessings crown,
And on it show'rd such plenty down,
One would have thought that God had chose it for His own,
But hold, O Hill, raise not Thy self too high,
For Sion yet shall over Thee reign,
With Her compared, Thou must fall down again,
And flat as Thine own Valleys lie;
For God in Sion to reside intends,
There must His House, and Altar be;
His dwelling place to all Eternity,
And the whole World to Her shall bow,
And yield their necks as well as Thou;
To Sion, whose Vast sway all bounds transcends,
Beyond the boundless space, wherefurthest Nature ends.
VI.
On Herth 'Eternal will erect His Throne,
God, whom the Powers of Heaven, and Earth obey,
At whose dread Presence Sinai fled away,
When thither He to Israel, all in fire, came down.
Smoke and thick Lightning did the mountain bound,
With twenty thousand flaming Chariots girt around,
The Guard Divine, whose wheels in Thunder did resound.
And when He thence arose, and up on high
Ascended with His glorious trains,
He lead Captivity in Chains,
And gifts on men bestowed, as well as liberty:
To Traitors pardon granted, and a Land,
Which was the purchase of His Own right hand;
And if no more they would rebel,
With promise there to make His Court, and ever dwell.
To Him alone be all the Praise,
Who thus His Name, and Us can raise,
And with ten thousand Blessings crowns Our days!
VII.
It Is He, who saves Us, and to Him belong
The keys of th 'Adamantine Gates of Death:
He opens, and none shuts, gives, and recalls Our breath,
Whose Name is, Our Salvation, Great and Strong:
Who will the Wicked tumble to the ground,
And make His Soul a passage through His Wound.
But to His People says "I will again
"Repeat the Wonders, which I heretofore have shown;
"And greater do, than e're I yet have done,
"On Basan get my self a Name,
"Bow down His neck, and raise in Mounts the liquid Plain:
"The Sea once more divide, to make you way,
"Now truly Red with purple streams, which flow,
"From your fierce Enemies veins, and my great blow,
"That Sea, as well as Aegypt's, trembling shall obey,
"And there you shall securely pass,
"And there your feet, and garments wash;
"Your very dogs shall drink the blood,
"And gorged, with humane flesh, shall sport alone the scarlet (Flood
VIII.
And so they did, and then Thy paths, O God, were seen,
And all Thy goings, nothing came between;
How Thou did both their way, and Armies lead,
Before the Singers went, and then the Flutes,
The Maidens followed with their Lutes,
And fearful Women heard shrill Trumpets without dread.
"Bless ye, said they, the Mighty God!
"Ye streams, which from Old Jacob's spring procced,
"The Faithful Jacob's happy seed,
"And with you stablish His Divine Abode!
"Let little Benjamin be there, and there
"The Governors of Judah, famed for War,
"Whilst Learned Napthali, and Zabulon
"For the great day, and solemn pomp, compose a Song,
"And with their Numbers all the Tribes conduct along!
"Let God Himself new strength command,
"And since He has such wonders done,
"Perfect what is so well begun,
"And as we all before His Temple stand,
"Those heads, which he has saved, exalt with His own hand!
IX.
There, Lord, Our spoils to Thee We'll consecrate,
And Princes thither shall their Tribute bring;
And swear Alleg'ance to Thee as their King,
Thy Peace, and Friendship supplicate,
And on their knees receive new Titles to their State;
Those who refuse, and think their Power so great,
That it or can resist, or vye with Thine,
And Heaven with open blasphemies dare threat,
Against their Spears, Lord, make Thy Lightning shine,
And or overthrow, or force them to a base retreat!
And to those roaring Bulls presumptuous noise,
And bleating of their Calves, oppose the Thunder of Thy (voice!
Till they for pardon sue, and all submit,
And as Thou on Thy Throne do sit,
Their necks and gifts lay humbly at Thy Feet!
Till Egypt, and the Lybian Nations come,
And leaving all the Gods they had at home,
In Sion only seek the True, and Holy One!
X.
Praise Him all Kingdoms, and all Lands,
That God, who has in Heaven set fast His Throne,
And all its Armies with His voice commands,
And makes them trembling His Dominion own!
His Mighty Voice abroad He sends,
That Voice, which tallest Cedars rends,
And makes His Thunder heard, to th'Worlds utmost ends!
Wisdom, and Strength, and Majesty,
To Isreal's Strength and Wisdom give,
Honor, and Praise to the Most High,
And endless Rule to Him, who does for ever Live!
To Thee, O God most Worthy to be praised,
And in Thy Temple to be feared of all;
Who Jacob from the dust have raised,
And so uphold'st, that He shall never fall:
Whose Sacred, and Eternal Name,
That for Him conquered thus, thus overcame,
Can only sounded be by an Immortal Fame,
Psalm LXIX. Salvum me fac Deus quoniam, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
SAve me, O God, for thousand billows roll,
And mighty Floods come tumb'ling over my Soul:
The unstable Wave, no certain footing yields,
And when within my depth I reach the ground, Versus.

The Quicksands draw, and in those watery fields,
Where Mounts of Seas are cast up, there is no standing found
II.
So tired I am that I no more can cry,
My Throat in the midst of all these Seas is dry;
My eyes, and heart with expectation fail,
Whilst all around I am with foes beset,
Which daily grow, and as they grow prevail,
More numerous than my hairs, like their own Numbers great.
III.
Uninjur'd, Lord, they are my Enemies,
And causlesly for my destruction rise;
For though from them I never ought did take,
And what I had, was all my own before,
For wrongs never done, I satisfaction make,
And, as a thief convict, they force me to restore.
IV.
All this Thou know, For what is hid from Thee,
Who do my secret Sins and Follies see?
But with them too my Innocence is known;
For my sake then let those receive no shame,
Who have beside the guards, which are their own,
(A guiltless mind) for their defense Thy Mighty Name!
V.
It Is true, for that Affection, which I Have born
To Thee, I Am made my self the Common scorn;
My Brethren as a stranger on me look,
And though one blood alike fills all Our veins,
And all our streams we from one Fountain took,
Like streams divided once, we never meet again.
VI.
Yet neither this shall make me from Thee turn,
But in a Sacred Flame my Zeal shall burn:
I Will slight the Scorns, which they have on me thrown,
Though all the tempest break upon my head,
And in a thousand deaths comes pouring down,
For it is no more than what against Thee first was said.
VII.
I wept, and with an holy Discipline
Chast'ned that Soul, which abstinence did pine;
In mournful Sackcloth did my beauties hide,
Which from reproach could not secure me long,
But those, who saw it did my grief deride,
I was the Aged's Byword, and the Drunkard's Song*
VIII.
But all the while to Thee I made my Prayers,
Which even then found admittance to Thine Ears;
Lord, as Thou heard'st me then, defend me now!
Now, for Thy Mercy sake deliver me,
Thou could not in a fitter time bestow
Thy Favors, nor could they, I think, more welcome be!
IX.
Save me, My God, for thousand billows roll,
And mighty Floods come tumb'ling over my Soul;
The unstable Wave no certain footing yields,
And, where within my depth I touch the ground, Versus.

The Quicksands draw, and in those watery fields,
Where Mounts of Seas are cast up, there is no standing found*
X.
From my insulting Foes deliver me,
Who worse than all these Floods and Quicksands be!
Let not their Waves my shipwrack't Soul overflow,
Nor in their deep Abyss convey me down;
Let not the silent grave Thy anger show,
Nor shut me up, where Thy great Name's unknown!
XI.
But for Thy mercy sake incline Thine ear,
And Thine own Pity, and compassions hear!
Hear me betimes, nor from Thy servant hide
Thy glorious sight, or take Thy hand away,
But save Thou Him from his Oppressors pride,
Who know them all, and all the snares they for him lay.
XII.
Reproach and shame have torn my very heart,
When none of all that saw me took my Part,
For some kind soul I looked, but all in vain,
No Comforter, or pity could be found;
But such, who striving to increase my pain,
Gall with my meat, my drink with Vinegar compound.
XIII.
May their own table, Lord, be made a snare!
A trap their dainty and luxurious fare!
With constant tremb'ling make their loins to shake!
And let them see no more the joyful light,
But may Thy wrath sure vengeance on them take,
And close attended be with an Eternal night!
XIV.
Let utter desolation on them seize!
And savage beasts defile their Palaces!
No more for men let them possessions be,
But dark repairs of Solitude and fears;
For as if all, which I had born from Thee,
Was not enough, to Thy sharp stroke they added theirs.
XV.
Let in repeated Sin their age be spent!
And make their crime become their punishment!
Let them the effects of Mercy never feel!
But in Thy Book draw over their Names a blot!
And when they suddenly descend to Hell,
Let their Memorial by the Righteous be forgot!
XVI.
But I am poor, my God, and prostrate lie,
By Thy Salvation to be reared on high:
That in my Songs I may Thy Name rehearse,
And up to Heaven in grateful Anthems rise;
To Thee, who do more kindly take a Verse,
Than a young Bullocks blood, or horn-hoof'd Sacrifice.
XVII.
The humble shall behold it, and rejoice;
To Thee incline their hearts, and raise their voice:
For to the Poor God does bend down His Ear,
And their requests nor slights, nor disregards,
But when to Him they cry, He stoops to hear,
And to His Prisoners gives both freedom, and rewards.
XVIII.
Let Heaven, and Earth, and Sea to God sing praise!
And Angels on their Wings His honor raise!
For He will Sion save, her walls rebuild,
And Israel to their Land again restore;
The wasted Cities shall with Men be filled,
Confirmed with Charters to their Seed for evermore!
Psalm LXX. Deus in adjutorium meum, etc. A Psalm of David, To bring to
Remembrance. Versus.

I.
MY God, why does my God thus ever stay,
And to my rescue make no have?
My Trouble calls Thee now away,
Let not my help be slow, when that comes on so fast!
II.
Now come, and with Thy Presence, Lord, confound
My proud and cruel Enemy:
Level his greatness with the ground,
And when he surely thought to conquer, make him fly!
III.
Let him be backward forced, and for the scorn,
He in his malice threw on me,
Let on his head that scorn return,
And be Himself as low, as he wished I should be!
IV.
Whilst those, who in The Almighty's succors trust,
In Thee, who their Salvation art,
Rejoice, because their God is just,
And have their mouths as full of praises, as their heart*
V.
May I, my God, one of that Number be;
For though I am at present low,
Thou know I still belong to Thee,
And only for my sins till they are purged am so.
VI.
Help me, my God, O do not ever stay,
But to my rescue come at last!
My troubles call Thee now away, Versus.

Let not my help be slow, when they come in so fast!
Another Version of the same, by M. M. B.
I.
ALmighty God, whose Power is infinite,
Who with a Word' did all things make;
So great, that when Thou speak, the Mountains quake,
Let my deliverance also show Thy might,
And by its certain speed make that appear more bright!
II.
The Proud, when he is from his greatness thrown,
And does with shame, and horror find
Nothing of all his glory left behind,
Who when Thou, Lord, in wrath do on him frown,
His very Soul is with the heavy weight pressed down:
III.
Make his the Portion of my Enemies,
(Who in their cursed rage contrive
To slay my Soul, when Thou would have it live*)
That they may see by this their sad surprise,
It was not only me, but Thee they did despise!
IV.
Let those, who wish my hurt, and would rejoice,
As senseless of my misery,
Be like to conquered troops, which scatt'red fly,
And with confusion tremble at the noise,
That Is raised by their own fear, and mighty Enemies voice!
V.
For a reward let such be driven away;
And quite astonished, may they find
No hopes of comfort to relieve their mind,
Who at my griefs in sport triumphing say,
"This is as we would have it be, Aha! Aha!
VI.
But on Thy People make Thy Face to shine!
Let them from fears be always free,
(Except it be fears of offending Thee)
The sacred Flame their heart shall so refine,
That now their joy shall only be that they are Thine!
VII.
Such as to Thy Salvation burn in love,
Let them perpetual praises sing!
And with rejoicing this their Offering bring,
With such Expressions let them forward move,
"Our God be magnified on Earth, and Heaven above!
VIII.
But I am poor, and needy, much distressed;
Wherefore, O Lord, make haste to me!
For all the Springs of Mercy are in Thee;
And can I want, while I upon Thee rest,
Whose Word alone commands deliverance to The Oppressed?
IX.
Thou, in whom all my confidence does lie,
My help and hope in my distress,
Let not my Misery make Thy Power be less!
On Thee I wait, to Thee, O God, I fly,
Make haste, and be Thou on the Wing as well as I!
Psalm LXXI. In te Domine speravi non eonfundar! etc.
I.
THou art my hope, O God, in whom I trust,
Let not my Confidence procure me shame;
But save me in Thy Truth, for Thou art Just,
And in my great escape consult Thy Name,
Lest those, who know Thee not, its care should blame!
To my Complaints, and cries incline Thine Ear,
And by Thy Help make me assured that Thou do hear!
II.
Be Thou my Rock, where till the Storm is past,
Above the Floods I may securely stand!
Thy promised aids for me send out at last,
Who art my Rock at Sea, my Fort at Land,
And by Thine save me from my Enemies hand!
The bloody hands of fierce and cruel Men,
And all their shafts on their own heads return again!
III.
For Thou, O Lord, my ancient hope have been,
And from my youth I have Thy Mercies known;
Thy Power was in my first conception seen,
When from the Womb Thou did Thy Servant own;
And thence He into Thy great arms was thrown.
Praise is the least that I can offer Thee
For all the care, which then, and since Thou took'st of me
IV.
But, Lord, despised I Am made the scorn of all,
A greater Wonder Now than heretofore;
Yet still Thou art my God, on whom I call,
My Magazeen, where is laid up all my store:
Nor till Thou sav'st me, will I give Thee over:
And then my Song shall glory in Thy Praise,
And I Will both honor, and admire Thee all my days,
V.
Now that I Am Old, my God, and feeble grown,
And both my eyes, and strength together fail,
Leave me not now, by them to be overthrown,
Who with continual plots my life assail,
And or to dye resolve, or to prevail!
Who say, "We'll fight, overcome, pursue, and take,
"And him, whom God has left, Our Slave and Captive make*
VI.
Thou, who all this, and more then this do hear,
Make haste to help me, and no longer stay!
Let those, who thought Thee far off, find Thee near,
When in consuming flames they melt away,
And to Eternal Wrath are made a prey!
Let shame, Reproach and Scorn their Portion be,
And all the snares their malice had designed for me!
VII.
Then to Thy Name I Will make new Songs of Praise,
By this experience taught to doubt no more;
Recount of Thy great Wonders all my days,
And of Thy Righteous Mercies, boundless store,
Which I sufficiently can never adore:
By Thine own Power, I Will of Thy Power rehearse,
And make Thy Righteousness the subject of my Verse.
VIII.
Thou from my Infancy have made me see
Thy Wondrous Works, which I abroad have shown,
Now that I Am Old continue them to me,
That I may perfect what I have begun,
And tell Posterity, what Thou have done!
How great Thy Bounty is, How great Thy Love,
Like whom there is none below, like whom there is none above!
IX.
Great, and sore troubles, for Thy hand I Have born;
But know Thou will restore my joys again:
And when from death Thou shall my Soul return,
Thy Comforts shall exceed my present pain,
And on my Throne I shall be fixed again;
Shall to my Harp of all Thy Favors sing,
Who art the Holy God, my Hope, and Israel's King.
X.
The joy that is in my heart, my mouth shall speak,
And all my Life be one continued Song;
My Soul, whose wringing fetters Thou did break,
Shall find, or make its passage by my tongue,
And think no time for Thy great praise too long:
For Thou to The Earth my Enemies have thrown,
And in Thy Wrath on them, Thy Care of me made known.
Psalm LXXII. Deus Judicium tuum Regi, etc. A Psalm for Solomon.

I.
GReat God, Thy Judgments to Our Sovereign give,
And let His Throne like Thine abide!
May the Young Prince before Thee live,
And on His Enemies necks in Triumph ride!
Put on His head Thy Righteous Crown,
And to His Fathers glorys add Thy own!
II.
Then shall He judge the People, and dispense
That Justice, which He has received;
To Him the Poor shall look, and thence
Have both their miseries pitty'd, and relieved;
The Needys Cause He shall maintain,
And on their Enemies turn their wrongs again!
III.
So shall the barren Clifts with shouts resound,
And all the little Hills rejoice;
The Valleys from the lower ground,
Shall thence receive the Image of the Voice;
Sweet Peace on every Hill shall reign,
And Justice once more guide the humble Plain.
IV.
Whilst time can measure it, His Rule shall last,
And when even that shall be no more;
When Time it self expired is cast
In The Urn, that had all dust but his before,
No Ages left to count it by,
It shall be measured by Eternity.
V.
And as soft rains on the mowed grass come down,
And give the Meads a second Spring;
As showers are to a Land new sown,
Which swell the Seed, and help it forth to bring,
Making the Fields all fresh and gay,
Such shall his Gover'ment do, but more than they.
VI.
Peace, and Her fruits shall prosper in His days,
And under His Auspicious Reign,
The Palm shall flourish, and the Bays,
And Justice to the Earth returned again,
To Heaven no more be forced to go,
But with Him keep Her Residence below.
VII.
His far stretched sway Nature alone can bound,
Which shall from Sea to Sea extend,
As far as there is any ground,
And only where the World finds here is, have end:
Then up to Heaven His Fame shall fly,
And fill the Mighty Circle of the Sky.
VIII.
Black Ethiopia at His Feet shall bow,
Her neck, for Him to tread upon,
Honored enough, if thus He show
Acceptance of the Footstool for His Throne;
Down in the dust His Foes shall lie,
With heads more low, than once their thoughts were high.
IX.
The Western Continent and farthest Isles,
And both the Indies gifts shall bring,
To Him they shall present the spoils
Of Sea and Land, as Universal King;
All Kings before Him shall bow down,
And do for Theirs, Just Homage to His Crown.
X.
Kingdoms Oppressed, shall His Protection crave,
And Needy States unto Him sue:
The Oppressed He with His Arms shall save,
And with the Needy His Old League renew:
Redeem their Slaves, defend their Right,
And show their blood, was precious in His sight!
XI.
Thus shall He live and reign, and thus receive
The Tributes which to Him are paid;
Some Myrrh, some Frankincense shall give,
And Gold, which shall like Stones be Common made:
And the due Service of each day
Shall be to praise that King, for whom we pray.
XII.
Then shall The Earth produce her richest store,
And Mountain tops be safely plough'd;
Which, though they barren were before,
With Libanus shall vye and shout as loud:
Nor shall the City flourish less
Than Her parched Hills, but like the fields increase.
XIII.
And when to God he shall resign His breath,
Yet in His Name He still shall live:
Above the Power of Grave, or Death,
And to Immortal Verse a Subject give:
Which of His Happy Reign shall sing,
And count that Land so, which has such a King!
XIV.
Bless Him, whose Word these Miracles obey,
And who must all these gifts bestow!
To Israel's God, let Israel pray,
That from His Spring such streams may ever flow!
For ever bless His Holy Name,
Nor bound with less than Heaven His Mighty Fame!
The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are ended.
The end of the Second Book of Psalms.
THE THIRD BOOK OF PSALMS.
Psalm LXXIII. Quam bonus Israel Deus his, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
IT is enough, nor will I more distrust,
As I have done, the Almighty Love;
I know He Is kind, as well as Just,
And by my self this certain Truth can prove,
How cross so 'ere His Ways may go,
At least seem cross to Us below,
Nor Him, nor Them have Israel or the Just found so*
II.
But e're I learned this Lesson it was long,
And many a weary Stage I went;
My sliding feet were almost gone,
And I at last could hardly yield assent:
Whilst with these narrow steps of mine,
I thought to pace the ways Divine,
Slippery as glass they were, though they with flowers did shine.
III.
For when I saw the Wicked's Prosperous State,
And thousand Blessings He enjoyes,
Maintained by that, which God does hate,
In the Worlds glory, and its greatest noise,
My heart did at His honors rise,
And though I did the Beast despise,
In all his Trappings, on him looked with envyous eyes.
IV.
Lusty and strong he laughs at those weak bands,
Which death on all the World does lay;
And when the rest of Mankind stands
With fear appalled he dares the evil day;
Troubles, which other Mortals fright,
He boldly challenges to fight,
And makes devouring plagues before him escape by flight.
V.
Hence springs his pride, with which the Violent
Adorns his neck, as with a Chain,
More for disgrace than Ornament,
And suited to his garments bloody stain;
Plump as the grape his face does shine,
With eyes more sparkling than his Wine,
And to vast Wealth he does unequal wishes join.
VI.
Disdainfully he looks on all below,
As worthyer of his scorn, than fear;
Him and themselves He Will make them know,
And high as his proud mind his head does bear;
But not content his mouth to spend,
Making it heard to the Worlds end,
He up on high to Heaven his blasphemies does send.
VII.
This as the Righteous see, and thence return
Their several Ways to think upon,
In bitterness of heart they mourn,
And the Lords Councels measure by their own:
"How is it possible, say they,
"That Justice thus provoked can stay
"Her hands, and the known Criminal forbear to slay?
VIII.
These are the Men, yet being so they thrive,
Grow rich and wealthy, dwell at ease,
Drones of repute, in the Worlds great hive,
And feed on the industrous Bees increase;
Secure thy life from grief, and care,
Calmy, and smooth their faces are,
And could you see their hearts, no storm came ever there.
IX.
In vain, my heart, to cleanse Thee have I strove,
And guiltless hands have washed in vain;
My Innocence nor can remove,
Nor tell how long I must endure my pain:
Then Fare well, helpless Innocence,
With such a Friend I can dispense,
Who makes me suffer only with the greater sense.
X.
But hold, Fond Tongue, consider who does hear,
And whom Thy babbling does offend;
A seed, who are the Almighties Care,
And whom in love He does afflictions send:
Therefore to search the Point again,
And how I might the cause maintain,
Anew to study I resolved, but all in vain.
XI.
In vain I tried, for I never found it out,
Till to Thy Temple Lord I went;
Though I sought for it round about,
Till thither come, I knew not what I meant:
There first I understood their end,
And what was Thine thus to contend,
And poisoned shafts of blessings through their hearts to send.
XII.
Surely for ruin they were set on high,
As men condemned, in view of all;
And though the Scaffold touch the sky,
It Is but that thence they may be seen to fall:
Down they are fallen, fled away,
As Phantasms at the approach of day,
Like their own dreams, but more ridiculous are they.
XIII.
What a beast was I then, Lord to repine?
A very fool to grieve my heart,
When all this while I have been Thine,
And though unknown secured my better part:
Thy Right hand has upholden me,
Thy Counsel shall my convoy be
Unto that rest, which I can only have with Thee.
XIV.
Thou art my Portion, and from Thee alone
My Peace, and Happiness do flow;
In Heaven besides Thee I have none,
And Heaven it self Thy Presence Lord makes so:
And could I hoard up endless store
Of that the World as God adore,
Without thy fullness, I should empty be, and Poor,
XV.
Dry up then, when you please, Ye failing Springs,
Or seek some other to deceive,
Who rest on such unstable things,
With you can quench their flames, and on you live!
For I am only sick of love,
Nor can your streams my thirst remove,
For still my flesh and heart pant for the streams above.
XVI.
Confounded be all those, whose sottish lust
To senseless Idols bows them down!
For when they most upon them trust,
Then they most surely shall be overthrown:
For my part, I Will to God draw near,
Make Him, my hope, who is my Fear,
Happy I shall hereafter be, contented here.
Psalm LXXIV. Ut quid repulisti in finem, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
Shall We for ever then be cast off thus,
And will Our God no more remember Us?
Shall then His flock no longer be His Care,
But more His rage, than once His love they were?
Forget not, Lord, Thy Purchase, and Thy Choice,
Sion, which Thou have made Thine own,
The Wonders Thou for Her, and Us have done,
And let Our Prayers be heard amidst Our Enemies noysel*
II.
Arise, and to their great destruction come,
Who to Thy Temple Gates have brought it home;
Thy Holy Place, and its Divine Recess,
Instead of stopping, does their rage increase:
Thither they break, and thence profanely bear
The Sacred Treasures of Thy House,
It Is Vessels set apart from Common Use,
And on Thy Captive Altars their proud Trophys rear.
III.
Our sad complaints Axes, and Hammars drown,
As if it were some grove they would hew down:
And all the Adornments of Thy Dwelling place,
They or to powder beat, or else deface:
And to complete Our ruin, when no more
The Ax, or weary hand can do,
They fire into Thy Sanctuary throw,
And what Thou so did consecrate, with fire devour.
IV.
"Them, and their Seed, let Us destroy, they say,
"And in one ruin with their Temple lay!
"What more accepted Flame to Heaven can rise,
"Than an whole Synagogue for Sacrifice?
"And they shall follow. This We see, and hear;
But have no Signs or Prophet more
To tell us when this Tempest will be over,
Or How long, what too long already, we must bear.
V.
How long, Dear God, shall Our Proud Enemy
Not us alone, but Thy Great Power defy?
Shall his vile mouth for ever thus defame,
Thy Sacred, and Unutterable Name?
Or will Thou always thus Thy hand recall,
That Hand where all Our succors lie,
And only lift it from our sight on high?
Let it return at length, and heavier on them fall!
VI.
Thou heretofore have made Thy Strength be known,
And Wonders, which none else could do, have done;
Dividing by the Almighty Wand the Flood,
And made it truly a Red Sea with blood:
When there the Chamian King by Thy Right Hand,
That great Leviathan of the Main,
Sunk in the deep, which cast Him up again,
That what its glutted Hosts had left, might feast the land.
VII.
'Twas Thou, who made the Rock in streams to flow,
And Floods stand still, to let Thy Israel go;
The day, and night with all its lamps are Thine,
Ligh't from that Sun, which Thou made first to shine;
By Thee the bounds of the Round World are cast,
Both where they shall begin, and end,
Summer, and Winter on Thy Word attend,
All for Thy Pleasure made, and during it shall last.
VIII.
Thou, who have done all this to raise Thy Name,
Guard it from those, whose lips would blast its Fame!
Let not Thy mourning Dove become a prey
To Vulturs, but take wing, and fly away!
Deliver her, and mind Thy ancient Care,
Thy Covenant with Our Fathers made,
For the Enemy Our very Graves invade,
And where we thought to lie retired, their Counsels are!
IX.
Some answer to Our Prayers at length return,
Least shame confound Us, and we ever mourn!
Arise, and Thine Own Cause Thy self defend,
And let Thy Enemies Malice have an end!
Forget them not, their blasphemies, and pride,
Now that their Sin for vengeance cries;
For they their heads have raised above the skies,
And Heaven, with all its Thunders, to the Assault defied.
Psalm LXXV. Confitebimur Tibi Deus etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
LOrd We will praise Thee, and Our cheerful Song
Shall of Thy mighty Name rehearse;
For all the Wonders, which to it belong,
Are truly great, and so shall make Our verse:
To it We'll fly, and rest us there,
Adore its Power, and beg its care,
And make it both the Subject of Our Song, and Prayer.
II. God.

"When the Time comes, says God, that I shall call
"The World to Judgment, my Right hand
"Alike its Justice shall dispense to all,
"And none its equal sentence shall withstand:
"It shall reward, it shall chastise,
"Some lower cast, and make some rise,
"And as my Hand's impartial, so shall be my eyes.
III. The Psalmist.

"The Earth shall melt, and all that in it dwell
"To their first nothing turn again;
"By its own weight it long over this had fell,
"But that its mighty Pillars I sustain:
"Fond Man, then said I, what mean Thou?
"No more in vain Just Heaven pursue
"Too great to be opposed, to be gainsaid too true!
IV.
"For shame desist, and your weak plots give over!
"They cannot take Heaven is so High!
"Against your maker vilely speak no more,
"For though His Face you see not, He stands by:
"His breath it is whereby you speak,
"He with one frown your pride can check,
"And though you hold it never so stiff, bow down your neck.
V.
"The Sun, which every day the World surrounds,
("Father of all the Mines below,)
"And with a careful eye surveys his grounds,
"Cannot the Riches, which he makes, bestow:
"Though he in purple set, and rise,
"And rides in Triumph over the skies,
"Can give nor wealth, nor honor to his Votaries.
VI.
"His God at will disposes of his gold,
"And all his honors gives away;
"Whilst his chief Work is only to behold,
"And brightest shine on them, who share his prey:
"The Poor he rayses to the Throne,
"And from it throws the Mighty down,
"Is Judge of all, and knows no pleasure, but His Own.
VII.
"For in His hand there is a dreadful Cup,
"Whose sparkling Wine is red with gore;
"'It Is large, and filled with mixture to the top,
So full the active liquor does run over;
"Of it all drink, and when it is done,
"The dreggs are for the Wicked wrung,
"But never shall quench their thirst, or ever cool their tongue.
VIII.
But I to future ages will declare
The praises of the Eternal King;
And since so Wonderful His glories are,
Of none but Jacobs God the Praises sing:
The Wicked down to Hell Hce'l throw,
The Righteous up to Heaven shall grow,
And Heaven to his exalted head shall seem but low.
Psalm LXXVI. Notus in Judaea Dominus. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
The True, the Only God in Judah reigns,
There is His Temple, there His Court,
To Salem all the Tribes resort,
And learn to sing His Name in lofty strains:
No place such tokens of His love does bear,
His Chariot He has set up there,
There broke the Arrows, and there burnt the shield and Spear.
II.
Sion, more glorious than the Hills of Bey,
How excellent do Thou appear?
How full of Majesty, and Fear,
When from them the Besiegers steal away?
Away the valiant ran, but knew not why,
Till a dead sleep said Death was nigh,
And chaining up their hands, scarce left them Heels to fly.
III.
At Thy rebuke, O God, a sleep they fell,
The Horse and chariot were over took,
The Rider stopped at Thy Rebuke,
And bowed adown to the All-conquering spell:
Thou art indeed to be adored in fight,
Who thus can arm Thy self with light,
But, Lord, what are Thy Hands, if thus Thou kill'st at sight?
IV.
When from above Thou make Thy voice be heard,
The Sea stands still, and Earth does shake;
Even Heaven it self unloos'd does quake,
God thundered from above, and they all feared:
The Clouds to make Him way asunder rent,
An hideous shriek the Mountains sent,
When God, to judge the Meek by them in person went
V.
Nor do these only, Lord, Thy Power declare,
But the fierce wrath of Wicked Man,
Which Thou do punish, or restrain,
Whence to get praise amongst thy Wonders are:
Vow to the Lord, and what you vow see pai'd!
For Vows are debts, when once they 'are made,
And none deserves your praise like Him to whom you prayed.
VI.
Adore Him, all ye lands, and tongues around,
And to Our God your praises sing!
To Him alone your presents bring,
And thus with fear seek Him, whom We have found!
With God the greatest Kings cannot compare,
They Crowns but at His pleasure wear,
And when He Frowns, they and their Honors turn to air.
Psalm LXXVII. Voce mea ad Dominum, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
IN my great trouble to the Lord I cried,
I cried aloud, And He was pleased to hear,
And when the night His Face did hide,
With stretched out hands I felt it, He was near:
I prayed, and was resolved to pray,
Refused all Comfort but my tears,
Whose streams I thought my Feavour might allay,
And as they forced my heart for passage, move His Ears.
II.
Sometimes in groans, sometimes in Words I prayed,
And fluent as my griefs my sorrows spoke;
But suddenly my speech was stayed,
And interrupting sights its order brake:
And then I could nor speak, nor sleep,
Thou Lord did hold my eyes, and tongue;
Only my mind its even frame did keep,
And with weak hands, and muttering lips became more strong
III.
Then of Thy Wonders did I meditate,
Our Fathers days, and what their age did see;
How Thou upheld'st the Tottering State,
And in their troubles made them trust in Thee:
Fresh to my mind then came a Song,
Which heretofore I did rehearse,
An Anthem which had been forgotten long,
Where my Soul with me joined, and thus began the Verse.
IV. Versus.

"And can it be that God will thus reject,
"Be always angry, and never pleased again,
"Will He His Flock no more protect,
"But let us ever, as this day, complain?
"Has He forgotten to be good,
"Or shall His Promise ever cease,
"Who has His Pleasure, or His Power withstood,
"That where He shuts up War, He should imprison Peace?
V. Antistrophe.

"Hold Soul, I said, it is Thy infirmity
"Makes Thee thus judge of God, whose Will shall stand
"Immovable, as it is High,
"Where Thou Thy wings should guide, to his right Hand!
"Of that think with me, and His Power,
"The Wondrous Works which He has done,
"They shall my talk and study be each hour,
"To show Our children, what Our Fathers Us have shown.
VI.
Thy Ways, O God, are far above my sight,
And where Thou hid'st Thy self in Heaven, lie hid;
There Is none like Thee so full of might,
Whose Power I fear, by what Thy hand once did:
When from above Thou made it bare,
Israel, and Joseph's Seed to save,
When their Redemption did Thy strength declare,
And Egypt took the Chain to be her Captives slave.
VII.
The Waters saw Thee, and the Waters fled,
The Depths were troubled, and ran back for fear;
The Clouds rained Seas, Heaven Darkness spread,
From whence there came a voice, which rocks did tear;
The Earth trembled, and the Mountains shook,
Egypt it self abhorred the light,
Which from the flashes came, and horror struck
More terrible, than when three days they felt their night.
VIII.
Thou for Thy People did prepare the way,
And through those Floods a safe retreat they have,
Which Thou Thy Glory to display,
Resolvd'st should after be proud Pharaohs grave;
Along they went, by Thy Command,
Who of the Sacred Flock took'st Care;
Moses and Aaron only showed Thy Hand,
For the Great Shepherd Thou, and they Thy Heards-men were.
Psalm LXXVIII. Attendite Populus meus, etc.
I.
ISrael, Gods own Inheritance, draw near,
And what He did to make Thee so, now hear!
Of Ages long since past, and arms I sing,
And to Thy days their ancient glories bring:
Acts, which with sound belief would never stand,
But that all done by the Almighty Hand;
Our Fathers witness to their Truth did bear,
And what we hear with wonder, saw with fear.
They told them Us, that we might publish down,
To Childrens Children, how His Power was known.
Such was His charge, that late Posterity,
And Generations, which should after be,
People as yet unborn, might know His Ways,
And what they learnt, their children teach His Praise.
That they in Him their Hope might always place,
His statutes keep, and always seek His Face:
Never forget His Works, but still improve
His former Favors, and His present love:
That like their Fathers they rebel no more,
Unless they would feel the Wrath their Fathers bore:
Base stubborn Nation, who their God withstood,
Most cross to Him, who always did them good!
His Wrath this kindled first, then made it burn,
The enraged fire on Ephraims Tribe did turn.
Ephraim, (which durst the stoutest Foe assail,
And never of the certain conquest fail,
But used to Come, and See, and so Prevail,
So terrible His bow, so sure his hand,
The unerring shaft did death at will command)
Ephraim turned back, but strove in vain to fly,
By His own shafts o'retook, did wounded lie,
Worthy thus signally in War to fall,
Whom Peace with all Her Charms could never recall!
The law they brake, that Covenant which they took,
And without cause that, and their God forsook;
Forgot His Works and their own Worthy Stemm,
Their Fathers Trust, and what He did for them.
Mavelous things He did in Pharaohs land,
Zoan still witness of His Plagues does stand.
When Israel saw His Wonders all about,
How He preserved them there, and brought them out.
When He no Common Road did make them keep,
But like His Own, their ways were in the Deep.
The Deep amazed stood up, as they passed over,
Admired their sudden fix'd-ness, and new shore:
How in a moment they were raised so high,
And fell not when they saw no storm was nigh.
By day a Cloud did their great journies hide,
At night a Sacred Flame the Host did guide;
Before them passed, and where their passage lay,
Not only showed, but also made their Way.
Hard Rocks, as they went by, pierced through did groan,
That fire, which dried the Deep, did melt the stone,
Out gusht new streams, so constant, and so strong,
They made their Channels as they ran along.
Yet still they sinned, and tempted Him the more,
Lacked meat, who only Water begged before.
Nor did they closely think, but speak their Sins,
And with vile Mouth the Murmurer thus begins;
"Can He give Bread too? sure if He be God,
"That may as well as streams obey His Rod:
"Let Him now strike more Rocks, and make them Bread,
"That we may hope Our Armies shall be fed!
"Nothing but Manna? Can He flesh provide?
"Here in the desert let His Power be tried!
"And if He does this, we'll distrust no more,
"But all Our murm'rings, as we ought, give over.
God heard them from above, and in a flame,
To see, and be revenged upon them came.
Down came the fire, and like that Mighty Power,
Which gave Commission, did uncheckt devour:
The trembling Camp could not but say 'twas just,
And that no other flame could purge their lust.
Thus were they punished for their unbelief,
Who only in a plague knew Fear, or Grief.
They would not trust Him, though they all had seen
How constant to His Word, and them He' had been.
Though from the Clouds, He did their bread command,
And Heaven did the Office of a fruitful land:
Whole forty years, once a day, open stood,
And at their doors they gathered Angels food;
Made by an Angels hand for them to eat,
But still they discontented would have meat.
And so they shall -- A strong East Wind did blow,
And over the East the Allmighty Word did go:
They heard it rustle, but without all fear,
And never dreamt another plague was near.
It blew all night, and at morning along with the day,
Brought shoales of Quales, which round the Army lay.
The Murmurers saw them, but yet scarce believed
The Miracle, and wished they were deceived;
They saw them lie in heaps, the Camp around,
So thick they seemed a burden to the ground:
Enough a greater Host than theirs to feed,
Would but the event like the beginning speed.
But while the flesh was in their Mouths that God,
Who can of every Blessing make a Rod,
Scourged them with this, and though they saw it not,
In dressing, Death was truly in the Pot.
And down their stomachs with the Quales it went,
And thence unto the Heart its poisons sent;
So swift, they found it was in vain to fly,
And still eat on that they might sooner die,
The Rebel Princes in that plague did fall,
And God was Gracious not to ruin all.
Yet still they sinned, and would not yet believe,
And only, when He slew them thus, would grieve.
Wherefore in vanity their years He spent,
Waiting to see, if thence they would repent;
For when He slew them they adored His Ways,
And unto God their Rock gave all the praise;
Only to flatter Him, for still their heart
Was only constant from Him to depart:
Yet He sorgave them, and destroyed them not,
And both His anger, and their Sins forgot.
He knew they were but flesh, a sudden Wind,
Which passes by, and leaves no trace behind.
How did they tempt Him in the Wilderness?
Many their plagues, their Sins were Numberless.
When in straight bounds they would that God confine,
Whose boundless Power beyond all bounds does shine:
And measuring by themselves the Holy One,
Because they saw no help, thought there was none.
How little did they mind His Mighty Hand,
Then conquering, when He only bid them stand?
What signs in Pharaohs coast He for them wrought,
And gave deliverance e're He scarce was sought?
When with deep gore He stained the Crystal flood,
And Egypt could not drink, though thirst for blood;
Infinite swarms of flies did fill the air,
Through whose thick clouds the Sun could scarce appear:
Armies of Frogs did the whole land invade:
And active lice of nimble dust were made:
Then martial Locusts came, and bore away,
What the Hayl left untoucht, for their rich prey;
For the Hayl before had torn the sturdie Oak,
And what escaped that fell by the Thunders stroke:
Cattle and Flocks smote down together lay,
And scattered limbs of Men strewn every way:
No Common Thunder, 'twas the Prince of the Air,
With all the powers of Hell were ralli'd there,
God let them loose, and bid them nothing spare:
Murrain on beasts, Ulcers on men did rage,
An hand unseen against them did engage;
Darkness upon their Palaces did rest,
A too faint Emblem of that in their breast.
They would not see though God from Heaven came down,
And killing their Firstborn chose Isreal's for His Own.
Then like a Flock they were through Kadesh led,
By Moses hand, but God himself their Head:
Through Seas He lead them, which more scared then they,
Rose up in have, and opened them a way:
But when gone over, they looked upon the Main,
Pharaoh lay drowned, their way was Sea again.
Through thousand dangers, thousand Enemies past,
To the Promised Canaan they were brought at last;
The Heathen conquered, He gave them their Land,
Houses and Towns stood ready built to hand.
The Sacred lot did for each Tribe divide,
And what God gave, was not by Man denied.
Yet here they sinned and did their God provoke,
And all His laws and their Own Cov'nants broke:
So hard it is to fix a Crooked bow,
And make that strait, which Nature made not so.
High places now they seek, and shadie Groves,
And to foul Idols prostitute their loves.
This when God heard, and saw His laws abused
By them, whom He so tenderly had used,
He Israel hated, Shilo did forsake,
And left that Ark, which made His Foes to quake;
Who with Triumphant lays did bring it home,
After it had so often overcome.
It Is taken, and the Captive People fall,
And one small fire gives troops a Funeral:
No Marriage Songs are heard in all the Coast,
But Amorous Harps are in shrill Trumpets lost:
And every Virgin may before she die,
Unsworn, bewayl her sad Virginity;
Wives hear their husbands death without a groan,
And Priests unmourn'd for die, now the Ark is gone.
'Twas then God (like a Giant roused from sleep,
Whom Wine beyond His hour did Prisoner keep,
That shouts and fights) fell on and made them fly,
And on their backs revenged their curious eye.
The Ark returns, but Shilo now no more
Shall be its Residence, as it was before;
Ephraim to Judah, Shilo to Sion yields,
And to the Sacred Mount, their fruitful fields:
So God would have't, who chose Himself the Place,
Sion, the Habitation of His Grace;
It Is there He Is known, there He His Temple made,
Whose ground work stable as the Worlds was laid:
David's design, when from the Ewes with young,
By Him he was anointed to the Throne.
His Fathers flocks he carefully did keep,
And therefore made Chief Heardsman of Gods sheep;
Where all his time he fed them, with such Care,
They never were so strong, nor ever looked so fair.
Psalm LXXIX. Deus venerunt gentes in, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
LOrd see the Miseries, which we undergo,
And how with us Thy Temple suffers too!
Thither at length the Enemy is come,
And Solyma on heaps has laid,
Sion is but one Mighty Tomb,
And the Worlds glory, now the scorn of all is made.
II
Thy murd'red Saints in the feilds unburied lie,
A prey to beasts and fowl, which vengeance cry;
Their blood before was round Jerus'lem shed,
Increast its brooks, and wast its stones,
Yet death cannot secure the dead,
But those that took their lives, again expose their bones.
III.
Living, or dead one shame attends us all;
Nor with less rage Our neighbors on us fall:
Their mirth does only by our pains increase,
And such deep wounds their mercies give,
That death it self we think were ease,
And our slain friends more happy count, than us who live.
IV.
When shall Thy wrath and jealousy expire,
Quenched by that blood, which now but feeds the fire?
Lord on the heathen pour the tempest down,
Whole nations, which never pray to Thee,
Kingdoms, where yet Thy Name's unknown,
And let not what is their due, Thy servants Portion be!
V.
And when their Sins to Thy remembrance come,
Let this be added to complete the Sum,
That they have wasted Jacob, and Thy land!
But let not Our iniquities,
Our former Sins new load Thy hand,
Lest when to rescue us, to ruin Thou arise!
VI.
Prevent us, Lord, for we are very low,
And let us now Thy strong Salvation know!
Now save us, for the glory of Thy Name,
And for its sake Our Sins blot out;
Upon Our foes return the shame,
That though in scorn they ask, none may Thy presence doubt!
VII.
Appear, O God, and let us witness be
They know, and fear Thy Name as well as we!
Revenge the guiltless blood, which they have shed,
And hear Our chains, how loud they cry;
Upon the living right the Dead,
And by Thine Arm save those, who sentenced are to die.
VIII.
Reproach, which they designed to cast on Thee,
And its increase their just reward shall be;
And then Thy People, Lord, Thy sacred Fold,
Shall make the Plains with joy to ring,
The Lambs shall all Thy Acts be told,
And their Great Shepherds praise, both learn, and ever sing*
Psalm LXXX. Qui regis Israel intend, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
GReat Shepherd of the Hebrew Race,
Whose numerous Flock all Israel was,
For Thou did guide them with Thy Hand,
They knew Thy Voice and followed Thee,
The Invisible between the Cherubins did see,
And thence receive the Oraculous command;
Between the Cherubins again appear,
And give Our chains Thine eye, and prayers Thine ear!
II. Versiculus.

Show us Thy Glory, Lord, once more,
As thou did Ephraim heretofore;
When all the Tribes from bondage led,
Thy Presence chased their Enemies,
For if again Thou make Thy Ark, and strength to rise,
Ours shall fly too, as theirs before Thee fled:
Turn us again and cause Thy Face to shine,
We shall be saved, and all the praise be Thine!
III. Versiculus.

How long will Thou be angry thus
Both with Our Prayers, Great God, and us?
Thou know how tears have been our food,
The mixture of Our meat and drink,
Whilst Our insulting Neighbors laugh in scorn, to think
That when those streams shall cease, the next is blood:
But turn us, Lord, and cause Thy Face to shine,
We shall be saved and all the praise be Thine!
IV.
A Vine God into Canaan brought,
And having thrown the Heathen out,
A proper soil did for it find;
From Egypt He the plant did bring,
Where it was bruised, and torn when it began to spring,
By men trod down, and broken by the Wind:
But when it could not there securely stand,
In Canaan it took root, and filled the Land.
V.
The Sunburned Hills it clothed around,
Their heads were with it cooled, and crowned;
Above the Hills its branch did rise,
And vy'd with tallest Cedars there,
As gay it looked, and full as high its top did bear,
And its rich clusters touched the neighboring Skies:
With one it laid hold of the Western Strand,
And touched the River with its other hand.
VI.
But why have Thou her hedge broke down?
And her enclosures open thrown;
So that the stranger who rides by,
Though nothing there he has to do,
Comes rudely in, and tears both fruit, and branches too*
Thither the Wild Bore from the Wood does fly,
And after bids his fellow beasts to haste,
To'a Vineyard, which they may more safely waste.
VII.
Return, O God, and on us shine,
From Heaven look down, and see Thy Vine!
This Vineyard, which Thy right hand made,
By thus transplanting fair, and strong,
And under which it spread, and flourish't has thus long,
For if Thou frown 'twill be to the Common laid:
It Is burned already, but may yet bear fruit,
If though the branch be gone, Thou spare the root.
VIII.
May Thy right hand preserve Our King!
And to an end His troubles bring!
Let Him again be great, and strong!
As by Thy help He was before,
And then nor He, nor we shall ever leave Thee more,
But freely join in one Eternal Song!
Turn us, O Lord, and cause Thy Face to shine,
We shall be saved, and all the praise be Thine! Versiculus.

Psalm LXXXI. Exultate Deo Adjutori. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
TO God our strength let Israel sing,
Triumphant Songs to Our Victorious King*
Awake the Harp, the Psaltery, and Flute,
And fill the Air, with an harmonious noise,
Call in the Sackbutt, Cornet, and the Lute,
And as He raised His hand for you, t'Him lift your voice?
II.
In the New Moon the Trumpets blow,
His ancient Law makes it your duty Now;
When He at first ordained this solemn day,
And bid Our Fathers keep the Pompous Feast;
Israel, and Judah did His word obey,
And thus His praises duly sang, who gave them Rest.
III.
'Twas then when Israel left that Land,
Whose Language they could never understand:
A speech as barbarous as its Nations were;
"When from the weights and pots I set them free
"From cruel tasks, says God, no more to bear
" Egyptian burdens, but my light ones, and serve me.
IV.
"I saw their trouble, heard their Cry,
"And my quick Hand took Light' ning from my eye*
"From Heaven I thund'red, made my voice be heard,
"And there I proved, and there I Israel tried;
"But whom at thundering Sinai Israel feared,
" Israel at Meribah with murmurings denied.
V.
Yet to my Law again give ear,
Once more I Will publish it if Thou will hear!
No other God but Me, shall Thou adore,
For I alone am God, and none beside,
I broke the Chains, which you in Egypt bore,
And now can fill your mouths, though opened never so wide
VI.
But all in vain, they would not hear*
And though I bowed mine down, denied their Ear;
So up I gave them to their loose desires,
Their brutish Lusts, and no destruction sent,
No flames but what were kind'led by those fires,
That what they made their choice, might be their punishment.
VII.
O had they heard Me! and been wise,
Those Ways to follow, which they did despise;
To Victory their Armies I have led,
My Hand their Enemies should have overthrown,
And forced to yield their necks, but on their head
Had put a never fading and Eternal Crown.
VIII.
Plenty and Peace should all Their days
Have showed fresh Palms, and Roses in their Ways;
And opened all the Treasures of the Field;
Even I my self new Miracles would show,
Not water only the pierced Rock should yield,
But living Honey from the Flinty Hive should flow.
Psalm LXXXII. Deus stetit in Synagoga, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
YOU Judges of the World, and Gods below,
Who at your pleasure sentence all,
And never think to whom that Power you owe,
By whose Decree your selves must stand or fall,
The Mighty God does all your Counsels view,
And as you others judge, He judges you.
II.
He sees how partially you sentence pass;
And will you always wrong your trust?
By looking through a false, and flattering glass,
Acquit the Wicked, and condemn the Just?
In your own scales those rise, and these sink low,
But whom their virtue weighs down, you keep so.
III.
Rather defend the Poor, and Fatherless,
And hearken to the Orphans cry,
Instead of helping, do not more oppress,
Least God himself bestow what you deny!
Deliverance for the Needy Soul command;
And give them not your Ear alone, but hand!
IV.
But all in vain, their duty they will not know,
Nor what they might will understand;
Hating the day, in darkness love to go,
And bring to ruin, with themselves, their Land;
If its Foundations shake, and totter thus,
No wonder if the World be ruinous.
V.
You Are Gods, I said, and Sons of the Most High;
His Child'ren, who in Heaven does reign;
Who therefore clothed you thus with Majesty,
That, among Men, you should His Power maintain:
You Are Gods, but must to death your Scepters bow,
Nor of your Titles will the grave allow.
VI.
Immortal only is the God above,
That equal Judge, and glorious King;
Like whom none is so just, or full of Love,
Who to the Bar shall every secret bring:
Arise, O God, The World to Judgment call,
No Judge so fit as Thou, who'art Lord of All.
Psalm LXXXIII. Deus quis similis erit tibi? ne taceas, etc. A Psalm of Asaph.

I.
ENough, My God, Thou have been still,
Now give the Word, and raise Thy Voice;
Their Ears, with the amazing Thunder fill,
Who think they have overcome Thine with their noise!
See how they rise, and lift their heads on high,
Make tumults, and deep plots contrive,
To ruin those Thou hid'st to save alive,
And not Heavens seed alone, but Heaven it self defy!
II.
"Come, say they, on them let us fall,
"We are too easy thus to spare;
"Let the whole Nation perish, Name and all,
"And make Our purple with their blood more fair!
The Motion all embrace, and to the Al-arm,
With one consent together come
Some Troops from Edom, and from Moab some,
All whom or rapine can persuade, or envy arm.
III.
With them are joined the Ishmaelites,
Ammon, and Amaleck, and Tire,
The bold Assyrian in the Quarrel fights,
And executes the Treasons they conspire:
But let them plot, and fight, and conquered fly,
By their own fears like Midian fall;
Let Jabyn's Fate, and Sisera's wait them all,
And by a Woman's hand, first routed be, then dye!
IV.
At Kisons Brook the Army fell,
And with their slaughter stained the Flood;
The torrent did with crimson waters swell,
And Earth's great body had true veins of blood:
Endors fat fields became more fresh and gay,
And its crowned head aloft did bear,
Proud of the Canaanitish Spoils, and there,
In living Monuments of grace, th'Unburied lay.
V.
Oreb, and Zeb Thy hand did feel,
And could not save their lives by flight;
Zeba, and Salmana escaped not his steel,
Who fought Thine, and whose Battles Thou did fight:
So let them fly, and so be overthrown,
They who have said, "Come let us oppress
"The Holy Seed, Our Fathers Lands possess,
"And what from us they took, make once again our own.
VI.
But like a wheel, Lord, turn them round,
And giddy made, lend them no stay!
Then with a whirlwind snatch them from the ground,
And having raised it, blow the dust away!
Make them a Wood on fire, chased by the Wind,
Whose Flame above the Hills does rise,
Leaping from tree to tree, and grows as't flies
Before pursuing storms, which follow close behind.
VII.
Be Thou that Wind, and make them fear!
Till every Face, with dread, and shame;
Till they to expiate their sin draw near
And what before they cursed, adore Thy Name!
That when the World their change, or ruin see,
It may look higher, and above,
Find the First Cause, at whose great Will they move,
And know One God rules Heaven and Earth, and Thou art He.
Psalm LXXXIV. Quam dilecta Tabernacula tua, etc. A Song for the Sons. of Corah.

I.
TRriumphant General of the Sacred Host,
Whom all the strength of Heaven and Earth obey,
Who have a Thund ring Legion in each Coast,
And Mighty Armies listed, and in pay;
How fearful art Thou in their head above, Versus.

Yet in Thy Temple, Lord; how full of Love?
II.
So lovely is Thy Temple, and so fair,
So like Thy self, that with desire I faint;
My heart and flesh cry out to see Thee there,
And could bear any thing but this restraint:
My Soul does on its old Remembrance feed,
And new desires by my long absence breed.
III.
The Sparrows there have found themselves a nest,
And there their untuned notes the Swallows sing;
A place where undisturbed they all may rest,
And have some gift, which they to Thee may bring:
Their young ones, which they on Thy Altar lay,
And may not I as happy be as they?
IV.
Thrice happy Man, who in Thy House resides!
For He Thy glorious Name shall ever praise;
For whose necessities my God provides!
And is the Faithful Guide of all his Ways*
Though through the Vale of Baca he does go,
My King, who guides his Way, will bless it too.
V.
That thirsty Vale, where scorching drought does reign,
Shall in New streams, and Rivers overflow,
Their tears shall help to water the sad Plain,
And make the Mulberies more fruitful grow:
See how in troops they march, till all at length
To Sion come, and there renew their strength*
VI. Versus.

Triumphant General of the Sacred Host,
Whom all the Powers of Heaven, and Earth obey,
Who have a Thundering Legion in each Coast,
And mighty Armies listed, and in pay,
Let not the noise of War so fill Thine Ear,
But that Thy Love through it my Prayers may hear!
VII.
Great God of Battles, Thou who art my Shield,
Jacob's strong God, on Thy Anointed shine!
If Thou encamp'st, I Am sure to gain the field,
And overcome, because the Vict'ry's Thine:
I long to see Thy Glory as before,
And by this Absence learn to prize it more.
VIII.
For one day in Thy Temple to attend,
Before an age of Pleasure I prefer;
And might I in that Place my Life but spend,
The meanest Office is advancement there:
There should I count I had more honor won,
Charged with a Door, than here to wear a Crown.
IX.
My God would there upon His Servant shine,
And when that Sun is or too hot, or bright,
Become a shield against the rays Divine,
And on Himself reflect the glorious light:
Himself would interpose, and be my Screen,
And nothing but Himself should come between.
X.
Grace Now, hereafter Glory will He give;
Nothing that is good, will He from His withold;
He only looks they should uprightly live,
And for returns expect a thousand fold:
Lord, since to Thine All for the Best shall be,
Not only give, but choose what is fit for me!
XI.
Triumphant General of the Sacred Host,
Whom all the Powers of Heaven, and Earth obey,
Who have a Thundering Legion in each Coast,
And Mighty Armies listed, and in pay,
Blessed is that Man, who on Thy Power does trust,
Others may only conquer, but he must.
Psalm LXXXV. Benedixisti Domine terram, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of Corah.

I.
AT length, O God, Thy People are returned,
And now Thy Land enjoyes her Peace;
For emptiness before she mourned,
And that her rest produced no rich increase:
Israel to His inheritance is Come,
And Jacob from Captivity brought home.
II.
Thou have their sins forgiven, and past by;
Those sins with which they stained Thy Land,
And having hid them from Thine eye,
Unless it were to help, with-held'st Thy hand:
Thy wrath, whereby they were consumed before,
Changed all to Love, has flames, but burns no more.
III.
Great God, who have been so propitious,
And made Thine anger thus to cease,
As Thou have turned Thy self, turn us,
And let this Truce conclude in Happy Peace!
A Peace, which none may dare to violate,
And from this very day let it bear date!
IV.
Will God be always angry, ever chide
With them, who daily seek His Face?
And though a while He turn aside,
Shall not one look revive us, and Our Race?
Show us Thy Love, and Thy Salvation grant,
Our fullness shall exceed Our former Want.
V.
Attentively what God shall speak I Will hear,
And listen what He Will please to say;
It Is just His Saints incline their Ear,
To that which none can claim so much as They:
Peace to His People, and His Saints He Will speak,
If they by Sin do not their Cov'nants break.
VI.
To such His help is nigh, and power's at hand,
And those, who fear Him, He will love:
His Glory shall overflow Our land,
And Truth and Mercy kiss here, as above;
Mercy and Truth never to part shall meet,
And Peace Her old friend Equity shall greet.
VII.
Truth from the Earth shall spring (the best increase
Our land e're hoped for, or did yield)
And as it grows up, Righteousness,
The fruit of Heaven, shall meet that of the Field;
Justice, which has the Earth so long forsook,
Shall dwell, where she of late durst hardly look.
VIII.
A thousand Blessings God to these shall join,
And only of All Goods the Best;
The generous Olive, and the Vine,
And recompense with fruit their former rest;
Righteousness here shall make her constant stay,
Nor go to Heaven, till she prepare Our Way.
Psalm LXXXVI. Inclina Domine aurem tu am, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
O Thou, who do the Afflicted hear,
From Heaven, O God, bow down Thine Ear!
Never such need as Now,
Never was I so low,
Or Thou, though never out of call, less near!
II.
Preserve the Soul, which Thee adores,
And out that Soul unto Thee poures!
Thy Servant trusts in Thee,
In vain let it not be,
But let Thy Son, O God, break through these showers!
III.
Be Merciful to Me, O Lord,
For I depend upon Thy Word;
To Thee alone I cry,
To Thee for help I fly,
Rejoice Thy Servants Soul, and help afford!
IV.
I know, O Lord, that Thou art Good,
Thy Mercy is a plenteous Flood;
The dead Thou make to live,
And sinners do forgive,
May not Thy Power be by my Sin withstood!
V.
But to that Prayer, O God, attend,
Which from unfeigned lips I send!
When troubles compass me,
Then will I call on Thee,
For Thou will to those troubles put an end.
VI.
I knew, Lord, Thou will answer Me,
And that none else can do but Thee;
Amongst the Gods there is none,
That one can trust upon,
Nor can their Works to Thine compared be!
VII.
Therefore to Thee all lands shall come,
And to Thy glorious Name fall down;
For Thou do wondrous things,
And art above their Kings,
Art God alone, and all must wait thy doom.
VIII.
Teach me the way, where I should go,
The Way of Truth unto me show!
To that unite my heart,
That it may never start
From Thee, Lord, as it is wont with me to do!
IX.
Then will I praises to Thee sing,
And to Thee all my service bring;
Thy Word for ever more,
Shall still supply new store,
Nor will I ever end, when I begin.
X.
Thy Mercy to me, Lord, is great,
For me from Hell it free has set;
That Hell, which lies so low*
Where I did have to go,
And did not Thou restrain me should do yet.
XI.
The Proud O God against me rise,
And I have many Enemies;
But be not Thou my Foe,
I fear not what they do,
Who never have set Thee before their eyes!
XII.
For of Compassion Thou art full,
Though I am heartless, Lord, and dull,
Gracious, Long-suffering
Whose Truth and Mercy Spring,
And with their Streams over flow my very Soul.
XIII.
Dear God, at length unto me turn,
Look, how I for Thy absence mourn!
Srengthen Thy servant Lord,
According to Thy Word,
To Thy Handmaid, and Thy Handmaids Son return!
XIV.
Show me some token of Thy love,
That shame may in my Enemies move!
Make have to succor me,
And comfort bring with Thee,
And of Thy servant, thus, my God approve.
Psalm LXXXVII. Fundamenta ejus in montibus, etc. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah,

I.
It Was God himself the ground surveyed,
Compassed the Mountains round about,
Among the Mountains chose This out,
In Holy Sion His Foundation laid,
And for His service took the Place His Pleasure made.
II.
Glorious City, Sacred Place,
Where God Himself delights to be,
Glorious things are told of Thee,
How much Thou do all Cities else surpass,
And how the Worlds Great God, Thy Mighty Founder was.
III.
Philistia to the Lord is known,
He reckons up, who was born there;
But none with Sion may compare,
Nor Ethiopia, Tire, nor Babylon,
For Sion God above all loved, and made His Own.
IV.
God has established Sion fast,
Himself is both Her Towers, and Wall;
Such and so strong as never shall fall,
Such and so strong, as none shall ever waste,
Till He, who was their Builder, throw them down at last.
And when the Grand Inquest is made,
And God shall write the Nations down,
First beginning with His Own,
"This Man was born at Sion, 't shall be sai'd,
"And for a Bearing to His other Honors laid.
VI.
"From Sion springs His Pedigree,
"I both His Name and Office know,
"What place He served me in below,
"But by His Birth place He shall numbered be.
Where e're mine was, let me, O Lord, belong to Thee!
Psalm LXXXVIII. Domine Deus salutis meae, etc. A Psalm of Heman the Ezrahite.

I.
GReat God, whence my Salvation comes alone,
And who that Great Salvation art
Thou day and night have heard me groan,
O, let Thine Ears at length affect Thine heart!
To Thee I pray, let my Prayer come to Thee,
Or if that cannot reach so high, stoop Thou to me!
II.
Hear me, my God for I am wondrous low,
And to the grave my life draws nigh;
Loaded with cares my Soul does go,
And in the Pit is ready down to lie:
Already I am numbered with the Dead,
And that small strength I had (Weakness at best) is fled.
III.
Free as the Dead, and like one long since slain,
Who is forgotten in the Grave,
And never shall return again,
Or, but upon his Tomb, Memorial have;
Low in the Pit I Am laid down in the Deep,
And its rough waves my head do under water keep.
IV.
Far from me Thou have put my Nearest Friends,
Who as forsaken look on me;
Because my God no succor sends,
They think me hated, or unknown to Thee:
As in a Pesthouse quite given over I Am laid,
And those, who pity me, are of my Sores afraid.
V.
My eyes with tears overcome yet look to Thee,
And for Thy help I daily cry:
When at night I cannot see,
With stretched out arms I feel if Thou art nigh:
"Will Thou, say I to th'Dead Thy wonders show,
"Let me but see them, Lord, and Thou do truly so!
VI.
"Shall the Dead rise, and praise Thee, or Thy love,
"Be in the Land of Darkness seen?
"Shall in the Grave Thy Praise improve,
"Sung there, where silence has for ever been?
"Where dark oblivion uncontrolled does reign,
"And dismal Horror riots over the empty Plain?
VII.
And then again I new Petitions make,
And would prevent Thee with my Prayer;
With Thee the Morning does partake,
And with my tears instead of dew looks fair:
But thou withdraw'st Thy self, and out of sight,
Hid'st in thick Clouds that Face, which gives me all my light.
VIII.
From my youth up I have Thy Terrors felt,
Ready with grief and pain to die;
Thy Wrath like fire my Soul does melt,
And quite consumes, what it should purify;
Or like a troubled Sea does over me roll,
And thus by several Deaths, or burns, or drowns my Soul.
IX.
Far from me Thou have put my Nearest Friend,
Whom Thou at first to me did give;
(Through Death Our Friendship cannot end,
For in the sad Survivour it shall live.)
My Dear Acquaintance in the grave is laid,
And Two, whom God made One, Death again Two has made.
P.M.O.C.

Psalm LXXXIX. Misericordias Domini in aeternum, etc.
IN flowing Numbers I resolve to sing A Psalm of Ethan the Ezrahite.

The Truth, and Mercies of the Eternal King:
That late posterity His love may know,
Both what He did, and what He Is sworn to do;
That Faithfullness, which He has said shall stand,
Like Heaven first made, and stablisht by His hand;
When thus He spoke, "I have to David past
My Word, and with an Oath have bound it fast,
Saying, Thy seed I Will bless, upon Thy Throne,
And make its rule Eternal like my own.
Angels for this Thy Wonders must declare,
Such praises too sublime for Mortals are,
Who only can below admire Thy love,
Not join with, but attend the Quire above;
For who in Heaven with Thee can be compared,
Whom all adore, as Thou by all art feared?
Or who among the mighty Sons of Earth,
Is like to Thee, who gav'st their Mother Birth?
Before whose Throne Blessed Saints, and Angels bow,
And cast those Crowns, which to Thy hand they owe.
Whose great Commands the Heavenly Host obey,
And execute the charge, which Thou do lay.
So Just, so True, so full of Majesty,
Lord, like Thy self Thou art, and none like Thee.
The Sea when it to Heaven in storms does rise,
At Thy Rebuke in Humble Valleys lies.
Asunder Thou did break the threatening Wave,
And in its bowels made Proud Pharaohs grave.
The Heaven with all its glorious Flames are Thine,
And with reflection from Thine eye they shine.
The Earth, and all the stores the Earth contains,
Of Thy first fullness are the Mighty Dreins.
Thou bid'st it stand unmoved above the Flood,
And saw, what er'e Thy hand had done was good.
The North and South and all its coasts around,
Thou for Thy Pleasure first did make, and bound.
Tabor, and Hermon in Thy Name rejoice,
And up to Thee the Valleys raise their Voice.
No Power can Thy All-conqu'ring Arm with-stand,
So strong is that, so high is Thy Right Hand.
Justice, and Faithfulness uphold Thy Throne,
Mercy and Truth's the Base it rests upon.
A thousand Graces round about Thee fly,
And take new life and vigor from Thine eye.
Thrice happy land, whose Sovereign Lord Thou art,
Who hear Thy Law, and to it yield their heart!
Who in Thy gracious Presence ever dwell,
And all the stories of Thy Power can tell!
Who have Thee for the subject of their Verse,
And every day can of Thy Truth rehearse!
Thine, Lord, who art their strength, their Fort and Tower,
And on their heads the Anointing Oil do pour.
Thou art Our God, and we Thy Praise will sing,
Who in Thy stead over us made David King.
(For thus His Will God to His Prophet told,
And in a Vision made Him it behold,
Saying,) "I searched the People all around,
And now to my Own Heart a Man have found:
David, on whom the Burden shall be laid,
Of ruling Israel, and their King be made.
I have anointed him, with Him my Hand
Shall both to conquer be, and to command.
I from Conspiracies his Crown will guard,
And all his gates shall be most surely barred.
Before His Face his Enemies shall fall,
And unto me in vain for succor call.
For down I Will tread them, but his head will raise,
And with my Truth and Love make plain His Ways*
His Empire to the River shall extend,
And only where the Earth finds hers, have end.
"All Lands, and Seas to him shall tribute yield,
"And of his conquests be the fruitful field.
"By Name of Father to Him I Will be known,
"Of God, and Rock, and he shall be My Son.
"My Firstborn, higher than the Kings of the Earth,
"With Rule, and Subjects worthy of his Birth.
"My Oath and Covenant shall with him stand fast,
"And I Will that Promise keep, which I have past.
"Nor shall it be confined to him alone,
"But his seed too shall have their Fathers Throne.
'Which as the days of Heaven shall constant be,
"And know no bounds but vast Eternity.
"If they my Statutes* and my Laws forsake,
"And break the Covenant, which this day I make,
"Then I their Sins will visit with a Rod,
"But never cease to be their King, and God.
'My Mercy and my Truth will never remove,
"Nor take away, though I may hide, My love.
"My Promise, and my Vow I Will never break,
"Nor change the Word, which once my Mouth did speak.
"For by my self I once to David swore,
"And by My Holiness confirme't once more.
"His seed and Throne like Heaven shall constant be,
"And know no bounds but Vast Eternity.
"Witness ye Heavens, which in my sight remain,
"And you, bright stars, that in your Courses reign;
"Both Sun and Moon against Me Witness be,
"If Time it self endures so long as He!
This Thou have said, O God, and thus have sworn,
How comes it then His Kingdom is all torn?
That Thou have cast off, and abhorred Thy King,
As if he never had anointed been?
Made voi'd Thy Covenant, and to the Earth flung down
(Snatched from His Royal Head) the Sacred Crown?
Destroi'd his Palace, and his ramparts broke,
And on his neck and Sions laid the yoke?
No more that Sion, which she was of old,
Who in her hands the reins of the Earth did hold;
Queen of all Cities, Glory of the World,
But in one ruin, with her Captives hurled;
Dismantled, sacked, with rubbish hid all over,
And now their scorn, whose fear she was before.
Our Sovereign too Himself is forced to fly,
Despoiled of all the Robes of Majesty.
Whilst his strong Enemies, by Thee made so,
Load him with fetters, and in Triumphs go.
In vain He conquest from his Sword expects,
When God the threat'ned head from harm protects.
And when it should most execution do,
Turns it on him, whose hand did make thee blow.
And back he yields, and all his Glories cease,
And with Him, fall Prosperity, and Peace.
In The midst of's days he does untimely fall,
By an inglorious Death, and Funeral.
Shall it be ever thus, and will Thine eyes,
Those Mis'ries, which they see us bear, despise?
For ever shall Thy Wrath devour like fire,
And in it is flames Thy ancient Love expire?
Remember, Lord, the Number of our days,
How few they are to celebrate Thy Praise!
Nor let it be in vain Thou life did give,
But whilst we have it, let us truly Live!
For no man long his ransomed head can save
From death, or the inexorable grave:
Where then are all Thy former Mercies, Lord,
And Oaths, whereby Thou did confirm Thy Word?
Behold our wrongs, and that reproach we bear,
For making Thee Our Trust, Thy Word Our care!
And what malignities Men on Thee throw,
Because Messiah's Coming is so slow!
But We believe, and in His day rejoice,
And whom We look for hasten with our voice.
Amen, and Amen.
The End of the Third Book of Psalms.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF PSALMS.
Psalm XC. Domine Refugium factus es, etc. A Prayer of Moses the Man of God.

I.
LOrd, We have been Thy ancient Care,
And Thy experienced helps all times have known;
Though Time it self to Thee no Age does bear,
And in comparison, would seem but Young:
For e're Thy Fertile Word, had made the Earth,
And the World travailed with the Mountains birth,
Thy Days, Lord, with Thy Being first begun,
With that which no Beginning had,
And when an end of all things shall be made,
Only with that, which has no end, shall they be done.
II.
Such is Thy Care, and such Thy Age,
Whilst on Thy breath, Poor Man hangs all his trust,
And soon has run his last, and longest stage,
If whence He rose Thou sentence him to Dust:
That fond thing life, which he by years does count,
(Should to a Thousand Suns the sum amount,
And all to come,) to Thee as yesterday,
When it is past and gone appears,
So looks the numerous train of coming years,
Or as a Watch, which on Sleeps Wings has flown away.
III.
In times swift torrent down they roll,
Whose stream no sluices spend, or banks can stay;
In vain by Art, we would its course control,
And stop that Flood, which shall bear all away:
Like a fleet aerie dream, Our Age does fly,
Which springs from Fancy, and deludes the eye:
Like Flowers, which in the Morning gay and fine,
Rise with the Sun and mount their heads,
But Noon once past, look down upon their Beds,
And towered the Earth, their grave with him at night decline.
IV.
Our very pleasures haste our end,
And with ten thousand snares beset us round;
But when to these Thou do Thy Armies send,
What scarce was felt, now gives a Mortal Wound:
Sickness and pains, the dire effects of Sin,
(Which makes their way,) at the wide breach rush in:
Our secret sins before Thee open lie,
And this Just punishment we bear,
The Tale of Life is done, e're we are aware,
And those Thy wrath consumed, in Thy displeasure dye.
V.
Our Life to seventy years we count,
And that he is Old, who thither does arrive;
But if through Strength it should to Fourscore mount,
Age is a Sickness, and it is Death to live:
The swift winged years will soon be numb'red over,
And overtake their fellows gone before;
Which though we see, and know, and each day hear,
As unconcerned we still look on,
Till in the Common ruin we fall down,
And find too late Thy Wrath is equal to Our Fear.
VI.
May We at last True Wisdom gain!
And having seen how much of life is spent,
And how uncertain's all that does remain,
Be on Eternity and Heaven intent!
Return, O Lord, for we have born Thy hand,
And Now expecting the dread Sentence stand!
Repent Thee then, Lo, how Thy Servants bow,
And to Thee all their sins confess,
Which more by tears than Words they would express;
And shall Thy Servants, Lord, repent, and wilt not Thou?
VII.
For all that we have undergone,
Those years of our few days in troubles past,
Now make Thy Mercy and Thy Power be known,
And let the Joy we wait for come at last!
Let it proportion to our sorrows bear,
As constant in its course, as e're they were!
Let us behold the beams of Love, and Grace,
Making our darkness disappear,
And having made Our Heaven with glory clear,
Their kindest Influence, Lord, bestow upon our Race!
VIII.
Let us uninterrupted see
On all Our ways Thy choicest blessings shine!
Make those our guides to bring us up to Thee,
And with Thy Holy Flame our dross refine!
To Thee we look and Heaven esteem Our Home,
But only through Thy Strength can thither come;
Thy Hand alone Our journeys must direct,
First show, then lead us in the Way,
Uphold us that we never fall, or stray,
And what Ours cannot, let Thy Hand for us effect.
Psalm XCI. Qui habitat in Adjutorio. etc. A Psalm of David. Gr. (...) apud Heb.

I.
HE, who does with the Almighty God reside,
And in His secret place abide,
Under those feathers safe shall lie,
With which he thither first did fly,
Where trouble dares not come near the Most High.
II.
Thither I Will fly, my God, I Will thither come,
No other place shall be my Home;
Thy Power I will my Bulwark call,
My Fortress, and my Brazen Wall,
Which shall unmoved remain, though Heaven should fall.
III.
Then fear not, Soul, for Thou preserved shall be,
From all the Snares designed for Thee;
The Plague that All-consuming ill,
Which does the Air with Poisons fill,
Near Thee shall lose its force, and cease to kill.
IV.
For as the Eagles wings protect her young,
Till they have pinnions of their own,
Under God's wings shall Thou abide,
And either there securely hide,
Or from Thy Fears away upon them ride.
V.
His Truth shall be Thy Battle-Ax, and Shield,
Both to maintain, and get the field;
Neither the Terrors of the Night,
Nor dangers of the Midday light,
Unseen shall touch, or seen shall thee affright.
VI.
The Pestilence, which in thick darkness walks,
And in the empty City stalks,
The Sword, which on whole Lands does prey,
And to bear witness calls the day,
When Thou appear'st, shall turn another way.
VII.
On Thy left hand it shall a thousand smite,
And kill ten thousand on Thy right;
But nigher shall not come to Thee,
Only Thine eyes with joy shall see,
What the Rewards of all the wicked be.
VIII.
Because Thou to my Rock for help did fly,
Above Thy fears, to the Most High,
There shall no evil Thee befall,
Near Thee shall come no Plague at all,
Who art beyond their reach, and lowdest call.
IX.
Around in Bands His Angels shall attend,
And guard Thee to Thy Journeys end;
To lead Thee some, and some to strew
Those ways with flowers, which others show,
And make the paths all smooth, where Thou shall go.
X.
Thou on the Basilisks proud neck shall tread,
The Lion shall bow down his head;
With them shall conquered Dragons meet,
And humbly stooping at Thy Feet,
Their Captive Chains unto each other greet.
XI.
"To Me, says God, he looked, and therefore I
"Will where he looked set him on high;
"I was the Object of his Love,
"For as his Prayers did upward move,
"It Was that they sounded in my ears above.
XII.
"To Me in all his troubles shall he cry,
"I Will answer him, and speedily:
"Will bring him out with songs of praise,
"Give him long life, and happy days,
"And after crown him with Eternal Bays.
Psalm XCII. Bonum est confiteri Dominum, etc. A Psalm for the Sabbathday.

I.
WHat Saints in Heaven and Angels do,
I Will count my Duty, and my Honor too:
Morning and Night, Great God, to raise
My Song as high as Thou have set Thy Praise;
With all the Numbers Music can invent,
My Voice, and Harp, and Ten-string'd Instrument,
That what from Thee first came, may back to Thee be sent.
II.
Thou have deserved it, and my Song
Shall tell abroad, what Thy great hand has done;
And in Thy wondrous Works I will rejoice,
And with the lofty subject fill my voice;
But Lord, what Verse can with thy Power compare,
And show Thy thoughts, or what Thy Counsels are,
Which Fools despise, and none can as they ought declare?
III.
For when like Grass the wicked spring,
And prosper for a season in their sin,
It Is that like Grass they may be mown,
And dung that Field, which they before did crown;
Thou, who on high do all their malice see,
And that less mine, than they were foes to Thee,
Have thus designed, that their eternal fall should be.
IV.
But Thou on high shall raise my head,
And on it make the Sacred Oil be shed;
And raise it as the Unicorn,
To guard his Empire, lifts his Sovereign Horn:
And then upon my bloody Enemies
My ears shall have their wish, and then my eyes.
Without regret their misery shall see, and hear their cries.
V.
Then like the Palm the Just shall grow,
And as if under weights, more beauteous show;
Like Cedars shall be ever green,
The World's renown, as they the Woods havebeen;
His hand, which planted them, shall make them thrive,
The Sacred Earth new roots and sap shall give,
Both in His Courts to flourish, and in His House to live.
VI.
There shall they live, and have a Spring,
As constant as the soil they are planted in;
Age shall but render them more fair,
More gay and fruitful than in youth they were;
That all the World Thy Power, O God, may know,
And to Thy Kingdom's Righteous Scepter bow,
Who make the Green Tree wither, and the Dry to grow.
Psalm XCIII. Dominus regnavit, decorem, etc.
I.
SUbmit your Crowns, O Kings, for God does reign,
And has Himself put on His Crown;
Throw at His Feet your Scepters down,
And pardon by your quick submission gain!
Unto your selves ascribe His Power no more,
But what He first gave you, to him again restore!
II.
Girt round with Majesty the Lord does reign,
His Kingdom is the World He made,
And on such sure Foundations laid,
That like his Word it shall unmoved remain;
It Is there he rules, but Heaven is fit alone
For our best Wishes, since He there has set His Throne.
III.
There as He sits, the Floods would to Him rise,
Their threatening heads on high they bear;
But hopeless ever to come near,
Roar, and send up their clamours to the skies;
Above He hears, and scorns them, stills their noise,
And in their loudest roaring, makes them hear His voice.
IV.
All things obey His Will, whose Law's so sure,
That all things by it firmly stand;
From Nothing that did first command
Their Beings, and now makes them to endure:
Thy Power, O God, does reach us every where,
But in Thy Temple does Thy Holiness appear.
Psalm XCIV. Deus ultionum Dominus, etc.
I.
JUdge of the Universe, Great Lord of All,
Equal Disposer of Rewards, and Punishments,
Arise, and to Thy Bar, the Nations call,
Both for their Actions to be judged, and their intents!
Arise, Great Judge, that by Thy Just Decree,
As are the Proud Man's Merits, his Reward may be!
II.
How long, my God, shall He unpunisht go,
And then most prosper, when he most does Thee offend?
Speaking hard things of what he does not know,
And make to patient Heaven his blasphemies ascend?
To Heaven he raises his exalted Crown,
And under-foot Heaven's Holy seed the while treads down.
III.
A Widow now, and then a Stranger slayes,
And with theirs drinks the blood of the murd'red Fatherless;
Has several baits to throw for several preys,
And several snares, which he can unsuspected dress,
So close he says, and from suspicion free,
That Jacob's God, though He stood by, should never see.
IV.
Can thou be then so brutish and unwise,
Fond Man, to think He sees not, or not hears,
Who made at first the light, and gave Thee eyes,
And formed for sounds the subtle windings of thy ears?
Or can the World's just Ruler partial be,
Or God Himself know nothing, who at first taught thee?
V.
He knows the Heart, and the most secret thought,
How vain are Our desires, Our hatred, love, and fears;
And happy Man, who has the skill been taught,
To know Himself, though he with chastening learned, and tears!
In trouble God will give him rest, and peace,
And by the wicked's fall his glory shall increase.
VI.
For the Wise God will not His choice forsake,
Nor His inheritance to strangers ever leave;
Justice, and Right again the Chair shall take,
And injured Innocence then cleared its Crown receive:
Never to be oppressed, or suffer more,
But have rewards above the wrongs it felt before.
VII.
"But whence, said I, shall come my present aid,
"Or who against my foes my Title will defend?
Had not Thou, Lord, my help, and shield been made,
The grave e're this had put to that, and me an end:
But when I slipped, Thy Mercies me sustained,
And in the tumults of my thoughts Thy Comforts reigned
VIII.
"For can God, said I, or the Holy One,
"Be joined with them, who set up mischief by a Law?
"Shall Justice, and Oppression share the Throne?
"Or rapine to its party conquered virtue draw,
"Against the Just together to conspire,
"And doom the Innocent, and guilty to one fire?
IX.
But God's my help; the Rock whereto I fly,
My Fortress, and high Tower, where darts in vain are sent,
Their feathers cannot bear them up so high,
But on the Caster they shall turn in punishment:
And falling thus in wrath be so hurled down,
That wounded, every man shall say, the Dart's his Own.
Psalm XCV. Venite exultemus Domino, etc.
I.
COme! let us sing unto the Lord,
And all His deeds with thankfulness record!
Unto Our God, Come, let us sing,
And to His Courts with shouts Our Presents bring!
He is Our Rock to Him Our Verse we'll raise,
And He, who heard Our Prayers, shall now attend Our Praise.
II.
Great is Our God, and rules over all,
Above all gods, who at His Footstool fall;
The Earth is His, and all its Deeps,
His Word the Hills on their Foundation keeps;
He made the Sea, and bounded it with Sand,
And bid the heavy earth above the waters stand.
III.
Come! let us worship and fall down,
And as we ought, Our Great Creator own!
He is Our God, His Flock we are,
The Sheep of's hand, the People of his Court:
Look, how He calls, look, how He bends His ear,
Thus by inclining His, to see if Ours will hear!
IV.
To day let us hear, nor be like them,
Who in the desert did His Power contemn!
That hardened there did God provoke,
And though He still kept His, their Covenant's broke!
"'It Was then, says God, they proved and tempted me,
"When all around I had my Wonders made them see.
V.
"Forty years long their sins I bore,
"And from destroying them as long forbore;
"Fond People, said I, thus to stray,
"And when I showed it, not to know my way!
"Therefore in wrath I did against them swear,
"Since they despised my Rest, they never should come there.
Psalm XCVI. Cantate Domino Canticum, etc.
I.
NEw Songs of Praise to the Almighty sing,
And to Him let the World their Offerings bring!
Sing to Our God, and bless His Holy Name,
From day to day His Acts declare,
How wondrous, and how great they are,
And let the Nations join to celebrate His Fame.
II.
Great is the Lord, and worthy of all Praise,
Above the Trophys we can to Him raise!
No Power like His we can adore, or fear,
For those to whom the Gentiles bow,
Are Idols, and an empty show,
But He made Heaven, and all the Hosts, which serve Him there.
III.
Honor and Majesty attend His Throne,
Beauty, and Strength His Temple's built upon;
Therefore to Him alone ye People bow,
His Praise with daily thanks renew,
Restore to Him, what is His due,
And at His Altar pay, what there you first did vow!
IV.
Let the Earth tremble, and its Kingdoms fear,
And all unto the Mighty Word give ear;
Among the Heathen say, That God does reign,
Who made the World, and bid it stand,
Till He shall judge it, whose Command
To its first Nothing shall return it back again.
V.
Be glad, O Heavens, and Thou O Earth rejoice,
And to your Consort take the Seas Deep Voice!
Let the huge Sea in dancing billows rise,
And though confined within its Shore,
By Sands which bar the Mighty Door,
Send up to Heaven its shouts, and force the yielding Skies!
VI.
Let joyful Songs be heard in every Plain,
And Hills reflect the Voices Face again!
Then let the Trees, the Glories of the Wood,
In mutual Murmurs all conspire,
And join with Birds to fill the Quire,
As if like Men they Parts, and Music understood!
VII.
At their Own Numbers let them come away,
And where their God shall pass, lead on the way;
He comes! But who His Presence can abide,
That the Great Judge of all shall be,
Yet who would not His Entrance see,
When He with equal Justice, shall each cause decide?
Psalm XCVII. Dominus regnavit, exultet Terra, etc.
THe Lord does reign, let the whole Earth rejoice,
The Isles be glad, and lift on high their voice;
Louder than Seas, which all around them roar,
And with their shouts shake Heaven, and rend the Shore!
In the thick darkness God His Glory shrouds,
And over His Brightness throws a veil of clouds:
Justice and Righteousness uphold His Throne,
And their firm Basis it does rest upon.
In vain for Him their Toils His Enemies lay,
That Fire consumes them, which prepares His Way.
For on the Nations He His Lightning threw,
And over the World the swift-wing'd Terror flew.
The Earth beheld it, and began to fear,
The Hills complained, that Heaven approached too near;
And melted with the heat, like Wax, flowed down,
Whilst in the Plains ran streams of burning Stone.
At the Almighty Presence they did flow,
Whose breath the Fire His eye had made did blow.
The Heavens His Justice, and His Power declare,
And to His Truth the Earth does witness bear.
May then all perish, who to Idols bow,
And boast of Gods, which they make only so!
Worship Him, all ye Gods, Angels fall down,
And at His Feet cast every One His Crown!
Sion with joy shall hear, Jerusalem
Shall send her Daughters to improve the Theme;
For He above all Gods is raised so high,
To Him we only by Our Praise can fly.
Praise Him, ye Righteous, who advanced above,
Would have you thus express, and send your Love!
Your Love upon Himself alone bestow,
And Hatred only to what is evil show.
So with deliverance He shall surely come,
And having here preserved you, take you home.
To Heaven, in whose large fields refined Light,
Sown for the Just, looks against Harvest white.
Harvests, which as they reap, the Righteous sing,
And with Eternal shoutings carry in;
Be glad, ye Righteous, and in God rejoice,
For what His hands have done deserves your Voice!
Psalm XCVIII. Cantate Domino Canticum novum, etc. A Psalm.

I.
NEw Songs of Praise to the Almighty sing,
Triumphall Songs to our Victorious King:
Whose own right Hand has got Him Victory,
And for us mighty Wonders done,
Has mighty Enemies overthrown,
And by its Holiness has made the Wicked fly!
II.
The Lord has saved us, and His Power displayed,
His Righteousness made all the World afraid;
The Amazed World stood, and admired His hand,
And when poor Israel seemed to be
Hopeless of ever getting free,
Wondered how He could then such miracles command.
III.
Praise Him, O World, and fear His Mighty Name,
From whence all that at which Thou wondrest came!
Call all Thy forces up the Song to raise,
With Trumpets, and with Harps rejoice,
The Sackbut, Clarion, and the voice,
And with shrill Cornets up to Heaven send all Thy praise!
IV.
Let the Sea roar, and all that dwells therein
Join in His praise, when thus the Shores begin!
Let the Floods too their parts in answering bear,
Lift up their heads, and clap their hands,
Rise, and look over their bounding sands,
And see what is done at Land, though they cannot come there!
V.
Let them see how the Mountains, glad as they,
Look from their tops, when God will come away!
He comes! But who His Presence can abide,
That the Great Judge of all shall be;
Yet who would not His entrance see,
When He with equal Justice shall each cause decide?
Psalm XCIX. Dominus regnavit, irascantur, etc. Versiculus.

I.
THE Lord does reign, let the Earth fear,
And tremble, till its old Foundations shake!
For though Mount Sion He His Court does make,
His Empire reaches every where;
Let the whole World before His Name fall low,
For it is Holy, and most raised when they do so!
II. Versus.

He Righteousness and Truth does love,
Is the Kings strength, as they His glory are;
Jacob His Judgments had, and was His Care;
Exalt our God, who reigns above,
The Holy God, and at His Footstool bow,
For then you raise Him most, when there you fall most low!
III.
Moses, and Aaron, and the Quire
Of Priests, which always in His Court attend,
Samuel, with those whose praises there ascend,
And from His Altar have their fire,
In their distress, when they did to Him fly,
He, who their troubles saw, as freely heard their cry.
IV.
He heard them, and that very Flame,
Which to His Presence did their Prayers conveigh,
No less for His return prepared the way,
Which through the Cloudy Pillar came;
He answered them, and as He heard forgave,
And though revenged the sin, yet did the sinner save.
V. Versus.

Thus He of old their Faith did prove,
And unseen by them, through the darkness saw
How they observed His Word, and kept His Law:
Exalt our God, who reigns above,
The Holy God, and in His Temple bow,
For then you raise Him most, when there you fall most low!
Psalm C. Jubilate Deo omnis terra!
I.
YOU, who thr^ughout the World that Power adore,
Which first made it, and then made you,
Give to the Lord, what is His due,
And what Man has usurpt, His Praise restore!
II.
It Is God alone, who by His Word made All,
And by His Word that All sustains;
And Nothing by the Wonder gains,
Except to save and hear us when we call.
III.
We are His People, He Our Maker is,
Our Shepherd He, and we His sheep,
Whom He secure does ever keep,
And praise is all that He expects for this.
IV.
Approach His Courts, and enter them with praise,
And of His Mighty Power rehearse!
Make that the subject of your Verse,
And up to Heaven with it His Goodness raise!
V.
Who most shall bless Him, let us together strive!
His Mercies have been ever sure,
His Truth for ever shall endure,
What can we less, when He so much does give?
Psalm CI. Misericordiam and Justitiam, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
I Will of Judgment, and of mercy sing,
The greatest Praises of the greatest King,
And since mine is nothing worth, His own unto Him bring.
II.
'Twas He discovered to me first the Way,
I Will follow where He showed the passage lay;
O, come, and lead me, Lord, that I may never stray!
III.
With my integrity I Will never part,
But be my Seed's as Thou my Pattern art,
And as Thy Way is perfect, so shall be my Heart.
IV.
No wicked thing will I with pleasure see,
My Innocent eyes no more shall guilty be,
Or look so low, since they have once been raised to Thee.
V.
I Will hate the work of him, who turns aside,
His way from life, and happiness lies wide,
And as he shuns me, from him I my face will hide.
VI.
The Privy slanderer I will ore'throw,
Reject the Proud, nor with the froward go,
Their great heights, when they fall, shall make them sink more low.
VII.
But he in mine shall be, as in Thy sight,
Whose heart, and ways Thy Laws have made upright,
To Thee a Servant, but my Friend and chief delight.
VIII.
He in my house shall dwell, but never there
Shall the deceitful, or false Man appear;
Destruction cannot be far of, when they are near.
IX.
Early I will destroy them, and my hand
Shall cut them off, and guiltless make the Land,
And on their spoils, Gods City shall triumphing stand!
Psalm CII. Domine exaudi orationem, etc. The V Penitential Psalm.

I.
MY dearest God, let my Prayer come to Thee,
Nor at my sighs, and cry offended be!
Dart through these pitchy clouds one ray Divine,
And make Thy glorious Face appear;
If Thou art pleased again to shine, A Prayer of the Afflicted when he is
overwhelmed and poures out his complaint before the Lord.

I will no longer fear,
But hope that He, who sees my Pain, will bend His ear.
II.
But hear me then, and answer speedily
'Ere it is too late, and I no more can cry!
For as dry wood does in the furnace burn,
And vanishes in smoke away,
So all my strength to smoke does turn,
And feels its own decay,
Whilst on my bones, and heart a fire unseen does prey.
III.
So fierce it rages, that I quite forget,
Through pain, and grief my very bread to eat;
The tears I shed do but the flame increase,
My bones. and flesh become more dry;
And all the while I held my peace,
Less burnt, then now I cry;
And grass the Sun has touched, is not so scorch't as I.
IV.
And as the solitary Pelican,
And widdow'd Turtle for their mates complain;
Just like the Owl, which does in deserts dwell,
Hating, and hated of the light,
That to the Rocks her moans does tell,
So shun I every sight
By day, and weary with my mournful cries the night.
V.
Both night, and day I Am made the common scorn,
And those, who hate me, are against me sworn;
Ashes and Tears have been my meat, and drink,
Whilst I continually did grieve,
Of Thy Just wrath, and hand to think,
What mortal wounds they give,
Lifting me up a greater fall but to receive.
VI.
And as the shadow with the Sun declines,
And disappears, when that no longer shines:
As with the Summer heat flowers pine away;
So pass my years e're well begun:
But an Eternal Now does tay
On Thine, never to be done,
When thousand Ages shall their several Race have run.
VII.
The mis'ries of Thy Sion Thou have seen,
How great Her Sorrows, what her Cares have been;
To save Thy Sion, Lord, at length arise!
Her mighty Jubilee is come,
And now her very dust we prize,
Her rubbish and Her lome,
And humbly beg Thou would return her captives home!
VIII.
So shall the heathen fear Thy Holy Name,
And all their Kings Thy Kingdoms rule proclaim:
When thus again Thou Sion shall rebuild,
And in Thy glory there appear,
When all Her Courts with Vows are filled,
And Thou inclin'st Thine Ear,
The Prayer of the Forsaken, and their groans to hear.
IX.
For the next age this story we'll record,
That they, as well as We, may praise the Lord,
Who from the height of Heaven, His Throne, looked down,
And did from thence the Earth behold,
Thence heard the dying Prisoners groan,
Saw Justice chained with gold,
And saved both Her, and them, for bribes unjustly sold.
X.
He saved them, that they might His Power declare,
And tell in Sion, what his Praises are;
When all the Nations there shall gathered be,
And to the Sacred Mount ascend;
When the whole World His Power shall see,
And all its Kings contend,
Who shall the lowest stoop, or richest presents send.
XI.
O might I live to see that happy day,
And not be cut off in the middle way!
"My God, what are my years to Thee, said I?
"Or what my age compared with Thine,
"If e're my Noon is reached I dye?
"For Thee no Times confine,
"Nor ages measure out Thy Days, as hours do mine.
XII.
Of old Thou have the Earth's Foundations laid,
Andon Thy Word the Heavens all times have staid;
Thy Word shall make them both fall down again;
Be like a Garment thrown aside,
A Vest with some great rent, or stain;
And all their Ancient pride
Or shall destroy, or under Forms more glorious hide.
XIII.
But Thou the same, which Thou have always been,
Shall never end, as Thou did never begin;
When Time itself shall dye, and be no more:
And as Thou art, O God, like Thee,
(Excepting what Thou were before)
Thy Servants Seed shall be,
And have for them, and their a Post-Eternity.
Psalm CIII. Benedic anima mea Domino, etc. A Psalm of David. Versiculus.

I.
ARise my Soul, and to The Almighty King,
Sprightly, and cheerful Hallelujahs sing!
Call all thy Forces up, thy, Love, thy Fear,
And every part completely fill,
Be sure no Idle Passion, Soul, be there,
But to them join thy Judgment, Fancy, and thy Will!
With every sense, and every power rejoice,
And add to all a well tuned voice;
Thus rise, my Soul, and to The Almighty King,
Sprightly, and cheerful Hallelujahs sing! Versiculus.

II.
Let thy Song be of what thy self has known,
And to the Worlds experience bring Thine own!
Sing of His Name, who cast thy sins away,
And made them all forgotten be,
And though His hand awhile upon thee lay,
'Twas only that restored thou might His Bounty see;
Who beyond Hope thy life from death did save,
When all had doomed it to the grave;
And for those thorny cares, which girt it round,
Thy head with love, and tender mercies, crowned.
III.
He Thy Old Age does with new favors bless,
And as thy years His kindnesses increase;
Thy years have not the Symptom; of decay;
For all the Eagle still grows young,
And moulting her old plumes again looks gay,
As youthful as she ever was, and full as strong,
After her prey as lustily can fly,
As e're she did, and soar as high,
He like the Eagles does Thy youth renew,
And gives Thee both its strength, and beauty too.
IV.
Those whom the Wicked with oppression grieve,
The Lord does or avenge, or else relieve.
Thus unto Moses He His Way made known,
And helpless Israel this did see,
When from the cruel chains, which kept them down,
But far more cruel Masters, He first set them free:
It Is not a little thing His wrath will move,
Inflame His rage, or quench His love;
Nor for Our Sins will He for ever chide,
But seeks them rather, than his Face to hide.
V.
Such are His Mercies, when we must confess
Our Sins might justly make their number less,
And him a sharper sentence to have past;
But when to be put far from Thee,
Behind Thy back we feared, Lord, to be cast,
Our Sins were only set, where we deserved to be:
And this alone for Thy dear Mercies sake,
Without the least claim we could make,
To which Our good no more proportion bears,
Than the small point of Earth to Heaven's vast Spears
VI.
How could it else be that they durst appear,
Whose guilt had added horror to their fear?
Love made Him break the knott, and set Our Sins
As far from us, but from Him more,
Than the bright East, where the young Sun begins
To take his Journey, is from the West where he gives over
The most indulgent Fathers tender Love
Is hate, compared to His above;
For none so well as He, who made, can spare,
Who both knows whence we came, and what we are.
VII.
From Earth Our mean Original we have,
A part of what must be e're long Our grave*
Frail Mortal Man, whose days are like the grass,
A Short-lived flower, which stands a while,
But like those blustering storms, that over it pass,
Flies with them, and is gone e're it began to smile:
But to Eternity Gods Love extends,
And all the blessings which He sends,
To Childrens Children, and their Seed endure,
To them, who keep it, like His Covenant sure,
VIII.
Above the Heaven God has prepared His Throne,
Heaven's but the Cloth of State He treads upon;
There does He rule, and Sovereign Laws dispense,
And Kingdoms where He please, bestow,
Scepters, and Crowns are all received from thence,
And Kings to Him their Thrones, as well as Beings ow:
The Angels are his Ministers of State,
And to observe His Pleasure wayt;
Bless Him ye Angels, who in strength excel,
And what His Will is, you who do it, tell!
IX. Versiculus.

You hear the Words, which from His Mouth do flow,
And having heard, strait to perform them go,
As swift, as you are ready at His call,
Praise Him, who made your place so high,
And let weak Mortals, who did lower fall,
To whom you often are sent, on your wings upward fly!
Praise Him His Works, it is all that you can do,
For Him, who did so much for you!
Praise Him, my Soul, and to the Almighty King,
Sprightly, and cheerful Hallelujahs sing!
Psalm CIV. Benedic anima mea Domino, etc. Versiculus.

I.
ARise, My Soul, and to the Almighty King,
Sprightly, and cheerful Hallelujahs sing!
To God, who over all gods renowned,
With Majesty, and Glory crowned,
Lets Thee His praise resound;
And though Thy flame can never equal rise
Unto His height, accepts Thy Sacrifice!
It Is He, who with Eternal Light
Obscures Himself, as we are hid in night;
Who in the clearest beams does cover
A more sublime, and piercing ray,
Making Our Heaven, and Common day,
But like a Curtain to be shifted over;
Who, as He is, to Blessed Souls is seen,
In glories far above the Sky,
Without the help of sight, or ey,
The only means we see Him by,
Who always see Him with the Veil of Heaven between.
II.
The Waters are to God as ground,
Who in their floods has His foundations laid,
Has all their Ebbs, and Flowings stayed,
And in their depth a bottom found;
Waters are solid, when He lays the Beams
Of'His Chambers in their swiftest streams;
He makes the Clouds His Chariots, Cloads which are
Envied by Angels waiting there,
That when they go before, the Clouds their God should bea.
The Ambitious Winds aside their blustering lay,
And strew their downy Feathers in His way;
The Heavenly Host before Him run,
Swift as the Air they tread upon;
Flames of fire His way prepare,
So bright, and yet so terrible His Servants are.
III.
Below the Center of the Mighty Deep,
Where undisturbed the Aged Waters keep,
And in Eternal Calms ly fast asleep,
There God the Piles for this huge World has laid,
And on their firm supporters bid it stand
Immovable, unmoved it rests at His command,
And one Vast Island of the whole Earth is made.
The Sea about it hovering stood,
As though it knew not what to do,
Would have some shore, yet would be wider too,
At last became a Mantle to the World,
And over its shoulders hurld,
Let its head stand secure above the Flood:
Secure it stands by the Almighty Word,
By Him, who spoke it, the Eternal Lord:
The Deep is to its service held,
Both to enrich, and to defend,
And though some times to Hills the struggling Billows Sweld,
Higher than steepest Hills, to Heaven their rage extend,
Let Him but speak, away they fly,
Affrighted at his Thunders noise,
Roaring Seas hearken to a Louder voice,
And hushed into a Calm with murmuring die.
IV.
Thou gates, and bars have to the Ocean placed,
Thus far to go, and at this bound,
Since move it must, again go round,
One foot beyond it cannot wast;
No, though it foam, and the next wave
Pressed forward by a greater force,
That by an inexhausted source,
Threatening to make the Earth one watery grave;
Let thousands then on one another crowd,
And of their Empire proud,
Exalt their Thrones above the Land,
When here Thy Hand
Moves a retreat, Hills into plains are tossed,
And mounts of Seas in humble Valleys lost:
To their own place they go, their rage give over,
And silent as they were before,
Only with trembling pay their Tribute to the shore.
V.
The other springs, those many veins
Which thou have scattred here, and there,
Over the Earth fresh nutriment prepare,
And in perpetual Circulation.
Into the Sea their mighty Cistern run,
Whence they refunded are again,
With new supply
Always to flow, and never be dry;
And in their streams have store of drink to give
The Beasts, which in the desert Live.
There the wild Asses their hot thirst allay,
By them the Fowls of Heaven delighted stay,
Making by every Rivers side
Sure habitations for their young,
Where all the Quire intend their Song,
And tune their notes to the bubling of the tide:
The craggy rocks, which have not equal need,
Thou do by other Conduits feed,
Rayning down showers; and with his dew
God does the dried up moisture of the Hills renew.
VI.
He the whole Earth does satisfy, and food
For all that live does from its bowels bring,
Causing the herbs to grow, and grass to spring,
(Roots of all sorts, which have the Name of Good)
And from this Common Parent gives us Life and Livelihood.
No short allowance, and what may suffice
Barely to keep up Life, but great Varieties;
Wine that makes glad the heart, and gives
New Spirits, and lost powers retrives;
The grape with which a nobler die
Stains all our cares, and makes them undistinguist ly;
And Oil to make Our faces shine,
And be without as gay, as we are smooth within;
Bread, Wine, and Oil without all measure
The Earth brings from her never failing Treasure.
VII.
Such is Our Mother Earth, on whose fair brow
The tall, and long-lived Cedars grow,
Trees which are full of Sap, whose heads defy
The Heavens, and near-approaching sky:
Cedars the glory of all Woods, and King of Trees;
In whose fair boughs the Eagle has her nest,
And undisturbed can rest,
None but the Sun her Airy Sees,
When in his purer flames she tryes
How her young brood can dare the Light,
And had they wings, in'his beams directly rise,
Able to blind another sight,
And hazard more their plumes than eyes;
The Stork a Story Lower takes her place,
And for an house the Firr-tree has,
Till an appointed Time
Recall her to some other Clime;
Whilst underneath the craggy clift
A Refuge for the Goat is left;
And weaker Conys by Gods Providence,
Have from strong rocks, more than their heels, a sure defense*
VIII.
In The Sky above the Power of God is seen,
Whether we view one single light,
The Empress of the silent night,
Or those innumerable flames between,
Which Heaven in one continued flame unite;
The Moon, whether a World, or Star,
Or only as we judge the other Luminaries are,
For times and seasons set, to tell the day,
Now it must spring, now it must post away;
The Sun no less the minute knows,
When to set, and when to rise,
When to withdraw, and when to cheer Our eyes,
Giving by his retreat the darkness way
To rule the Night, as he does guide the day.
Then from their denns the Savage Beasts walk out,
Fierce Lions roar, and for their prey beat all about;
Till at Cock-Crow,
Lions that men, and weapons scorn,
Alarmed at the approach of Morn,
Through some undiscovered Plain,
Steal to their Caves again;
And or for Work, or Pleasure leave the day to Man.
IX.
Eternal Mind, should we each Act of Thine
Recount, and mention every thing,
At which of Thy Great works should we begin?
Or what Almighty Numbers can confine
The Love, and Providence Divine?
Thy Works are like Thy Self sublime, and high,
The Power and Wisdom of the Deity,
More numerous than the sand,
Embracing in its Arms the Sea,
Though every sand should reckoned be,
And all in one long row like Ciphers stand,
The Sea at head, for a great figure to command.
In The Sea His mighty aids appear,
In all the Arms and armies there,
The Giant and the Pigmee fry,
Which in the Sounds, and Shallowsly,
And at His will or fight, or fly,
Where Great Leviathan Leads up the Vann,
Leviathan whom He made to play
In that great Waste, in that great Waste bear sway.
Scorning the rage of silly Man,
Leviathan, whom Seas, as He does Thee obey.
X.
There go the Ships those floting Isles,
Proud with the Lands, and Oceans spoils,
Advancing to Our Shore
The Silver Mine, and Golden Oar,
And in their passage through the deep their God adore.
On Him all Creatures wayt,
And at that Common Table, which His hands have spread
With Providence, and plenty, all are fed;
A Table to which none can ever come too late.
Thou feed'st the Wicked, and the Good,
To Thee they look, Thou giv'st them food;
From Thine Own self art full, and never drawn dry,
Caust all alone, as thou do all supply;
Hide but Thy Face and then this World
Has Horror and confusion over it hurld;
They dye, and hasten to their dust,
They dye, and make one Common rust,
In which when they have Ages buried lain,
Thy Spirit bestows another birth,
Breath's a new life, new stocks the Earth,
And to the World, the World returns again.
XI.
So shall alternate life, and death
Make way for them, who must hereafter live;
Leave one and give another breath,
And from its Fate the Aged World reprieve:
Till God enough have lived shall see,
Till for His Glory God command an end to be.
It Is Come -- See how the Earth does shake,
The Rocks bow down, and Mountains quake,
See how the Hills, all set on fire,
Are beacons to each other made,
One Hill is of another Hill afrai'd,
And melted in the All-consuming Flame expire.
Where are they? Just so shall the Sinner die,
Just so consumed; ever consumingly.
XII.
I the meanwhile will to my God sing praise,
Unsearchable in all His Ways;
My Meditation of Him shall be sweet,
And with my Praise I will His Wonders meet:
His who can Phoenexes from Our cold Ashes raise.
It Is God alone, whose Mighty Power
Shall, when the Wicked be no more,
Refine His Chosen by these flames,
Give then new and better Names,
And make them far more glorious than they were before!
Arise, my Soul, and to the Almighty King,
Sprightly, and Cheerful Hallelujahs sing! Versiculus.

Psalm CV. Confitemini Domino, and invocate, etc.
GIve thanks unto Our God, and let your Verse
Both of His wondrous Acts and praise rehearse!
Let them give life, and Numbers to your Song,
And count the Glorys, which to Him belong!
All you who fear His Name in it rejoice,
And show your heart is cheerful by your voice!
Seek ye the Lord, and seek His Mighty Power,
And never, till you see His Face, give over!
Remember all the Wonders He has done,
The Words He spoke, the Signs His hand has shone!
You, who of Abraham, the Almighties Friend,
And of His chosen Jacobs Seed descend!
He is the Lord His Judgments are abroad,
And all the World by them shall fear Our God;
The Word He past is ever in His mind,
To thousand Ages, which are yet behind:
The Faithful Covenant He with Abraham made,
And unto Isaac with an Oath conveyed,
Confirmed it then to Jacob for a Law,
From when now Israel their best Title draw,
Saying,
"To thee I Will Canaan give, that Happy land,
"And where Thou sojourn'st now, Thou shall command.
He said it when they were in number few,
Hardly a Number, were but only two;
Two, who were one, and strangers, forced to flee
Those Kingdoms, which their own should after be.
Yet then He suffered none to do them wrong,
Reproved Kings for them as they passed along;
"No hurt to my Anointed, said He, do,
"Nor vex my Prophets, least it fall on you.
Then on the Land He for a dearth did call,
To break that staff, whose prop before was small.
The staff of bread that they again might hold,
He that must sell them bread, was by them sold.
Sold for a Slave, and that, in Prison cast,
Where his bruised feet in fetters were kept fast.
But that He bore; the smart to his Soul did pass,
When he remembered by whose means it was.
Till the Word came, Joseph, good Word for Thee,
Which proved Thee guiltless and which made Thee free.
The King in haste to loose the Prisoner sent,
And though the Messengers too slowly went;
Made Him high Steward of his house, with Power
Greater than ever subject had before;
His Realms submitted to his ruling hand,
And that his will for Sovereign Law should stand.
Whether his Princes he in Chains would lay,
Or teach her wise Men how they should obey;
Pull down, set up, control things as he please,
Be King in all except the Name, and Ease.
'Twas then that Israel into Egypt came,
And Jacob sojourned in the Land of Ham,
Where He increased, and did a Nation grow,
More numerous than the slaves, which kept them so.
And by Gods blessing did so propagate,
That whom their Enemies could not hurt, they hate,
New taskes impose, and harder bonds contrive,
And plott their death whom He had said should live.
Hence as Ambassadors, before He went,
Moses and Aaron He to Egypt sent,
To make His wonders in their land be known,
Who were, and had so many of their own.
He to thick darkness turned their Noon day Light,
And made them feel, as well as see their night,
The Rivers did with Purple Streams abound,
And the true dye in every Fish was found.
The Land did princely Frogs unnumbred breed,
Which lay with Nobles, and with Kings did feed.
He spoke the Word, and there came Hosts of Flies,
Lice reigned below, and they usurpt the skies:
He gave them hail for rain, and fire for dew,
Both to overthrow, and to consume them too:
Smote all their vines, and with the Fatal Stroke,
What hail and Lightning spared, the Thunder broke:
Then came up armed Locusts, and their train,
In such great bands never to be seen again,
And what was left by all the plagues before,
Swept clean away and the whole Land run over.
At last the Almighty, when this would not do,
Came down Himself and Egypts Firstborn slew.
And for the Time that Israel there did stay,
They paid themselves, before they went away;
Took with them Egypts Silver, and its Gold,
By great, as it was Lent them, and untold;
A way they went more Lusty and more Strong,
Than when at first they came, Thousands for One.
And when they went, Egypt rejoiced to hear
Their parting whom She always saw with fear.
Thus freed a Cloud did their great journey show,
And in the Cloud which lead their way, they go.
A Cloud by day when all Heaven else was bright,
But that obscured a dancing Flame by night:
And as they passed, and murmured there for meat,
He gave them Quayles, and Angels bread to eat:
Opened the Rock which kept the Waters in,
And turned its flinty bowels to a spring;
A spring whose streams in Rivers did run over,
And followed close the Camp which marched before.
His servant Abraham to His Mind did come,
His Covenant, what it was, and made with whom;
So He their Hosts did out of Bondage bring,
Whilst by the Way they did His Praises sing;
Brought them to Labors which were not their own,
And Loaded Harvests, that they had not sown;
To Canaan, thence to be removed no more,
But hold of Him, who was their Lord before;
Keeping such Laws, such services to do,
As by His Covenants He had bound them to.
Hallelujah.
Psalm CVI. Confitemini Domino quoniam, etc.
SIng to the Lord, for He alone is Good, Hallelujah.

His mercies sure, for ever so have stood!
But who their Verse can to His Glory raise,
Or as His Acts deserve, show forth His Praise?
Thrice happy they, who His Commandments Love,
And by their Constancy their service prove!
On me, unworthy wretch, O God, look down,
And grant those favors, which Thou shewst Thine Own!
That I may taste how good it is to be Thine,
And in the Undersong to bless Thee join!
Lord, we have sinned, we, and Our Fathers too,
And what they vilely did, as vilely do.
In Egypt they could not Thy Wonders see,
As if its night had drawn a veil over Thee;
They minded not the signs Thou there did show,
And thence but to provoke Thee more did go;
Provoke Thee at the sea, the Red sea, where
Thou brought them down, to make Thy hand appear.
Yet then God saved them for His own Names sake,
That like their sins His Power He known might make.
He stroke the Sea, the Sea asunder broke,
Its Crystal could not bear the Almighty stroke.
And as it broken there in pieces lay,
Gods secret path was Isreal's Great High Way.
Through which, as through the Wilderness they pass,
Only these sands were walled about with glass.
Thus from their Enemies He set them free,
Whilst the admiring waves stood up to see.
But when the sacred Army was gone over,
The seas no longer owned their new made shore;
But over it leapt, as friends returned to greet
And in their old embraces have to meet;
The Egyptian Troops, which scattred lay between,
And thought to tell at home what they had seen,
Swift as that thought were buried in the waves,
And not one left to show their empty Graves.
Then Israel feared His Word, and sang His Praise,
But soon forgot that, and His Wondrous ways.
Did in the Wilderness His Power distrust,
And for full Tables in the Desert lust.
He gave it them, but therewith leaness sent,
Into their very Souls the Poison went.
Next against Moses they in tumults rise,
And Aaron the Almightys choice despise:
But God Himself from Heaven His Choice approved,
And from His sight the Murmurers removed.
The Sea before, the Earth does now obey,
And frighted at His presence ran away:
Loosned its hold, and as apart it fell,
Let Dathan and Abiran quick to Hell.
And those, who to the Priesthood did aspire,
And off'red Incense, were consumed by Fire.
At Horeb they had grieved him long before,
When there they did their molton god adore.
At Horeb where they that great Voice did hear,
Which filled the most rebellious breast with fear,
And struck the Soul, as it surpised the Ear.
Thus to an Ox their glory they compare,
And these, cry they, "Thy Gods O Israel are.
Not because they the true one did not know,
But their old love to Egypt thus would show;
Forgetting what in Egypt He had done,
Both for their Nations honor and His own.
And all His Wonders in the Mighty Deep,
Making a Causey there, that they their way might keep.
Wherefore about destroying them He spoke,
And that He Moses a great Name would make;
Moses, who in the breach before Him stood,
And would have given His Own to save their blood.
That passed; the Happy Canaan they contemn,
But more the God, who promised it to them.
To Egypt they again had rather go,
Than serve new Masters whom they did not know.
Therefore in wrath He raised His vengefull Hand,
To Strike, and swear they should not see the Land;
And that all those, who fell not by His own,
Should by their Enemies swords be overthrown.
Sure they will try it, and to Peor turned,
Before dumb Idols ate, and Incense burned;
Thus were they only constant in their sin,
And knew no measure till the Plague brake in.
Had some new solly to inflame His Ire,
And set the Mine He laid so deep a fire;
Till Phineas stood up, and with dextrous skill,
Three Enemies at one happy blow did kill,
Zimri, and Cosbi and the Plague did stay,
Which weltring in their gore, and breathless lay.
An Act, whose Memory God Himself would save,
And for reward to His House the Priesthood gave.
Another time at Meriba they strove,
And their meek Guide did with their murmurings prove.
Full ill it went with Moses for their sake,
Who unadvis'dly in His Passion spoke,
And with them both in sin, and judgment did partake.
The Nations, of which God in charge did give
Should be destroyed, they were resolved should live;
And come to Canaan, to preserve their seed,
Were mingled with them, and did by them breed.
Learned all their works, their Idols did adore,
Cursed to Them now, though for their sakes before:
Idols, that Devils were, yet unto whom
All smeared they in their Childrens blood must come.
No other Sacrifice but that will please;
Nor any blood, but the Innocent appease;
Their childrens blood, with which their Gods were stained,
They and their Gods, and with their own the land.
Thus justly plagued for their impiety,
That Gods of their own making should so cruel be!
This blew the Heavenly wrath up to a Flame,
Turned love to hatred, Mercy rage became;
Up to the Heathen He His People gave,
And Israel in His own land was a slave;
Those, who most hated them, for Lords did reign,
And those they conquered, conquered them again:
When God delivered them, they yet sinned more,
Tempting new plagues they never felt before;
Yet to their cry He gently bowed His Ear,
And though they would not Him, their groans did hear.
According to His Covenant Mercy sent,
And taught them by His often, once to Repent;
Made their proud Lords resent their Miseries,
And show less cruel hands, and more indulgent eyes.
Save us O God, and bring Thy Captives home,
That we with praise may to Thy Temple come!
To Isreal's King let thanks be ever paid,
And let Amen by all the World be said!
Hallelujah.
The end of the Fourth Book of Psalms.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF PSALMS.
Psalm CVII. Confitemini Domino quoniam, etc.
Chorus Omnium.
ALL you, who on the Almighty Love depend,
And by His liberal hand improve,
Let with your voice your thanks ascend, Chorus Omnium.

And here begin, what you shall do above!
His Mercy like His Truth is ever sure,
And so your Praise should be, as constant, and as pure.
Versus I.
Let His Redeemed say so, that Israel, whom Versus I.

Their Enemies Captive led, but He brought home!
Then brought them home, when from the farthest East
They were dispersed, and scattred to the West;
When North and South their weary steps did know,
But they, nor where they went, nor where to go;
Now in the Desert an untrodden way,
Where they could hardly pass, yet durst not stay;
Where they no City found, and none to tell
Which road to take, or in what Place to dwell;
Hungry and thirsty, doubtful in their mind,
Scarce knowing what they sought, or what they would wish to find.
Chorus Minor.
Then to the Lord in their distress they cried,
Chorus Minor.
They cried aloud, and He did hear;
And though His Face He seemed to hide,
By His great Hand declared that He was near;
For when in vain they had looked round about,
And saw no help, toward Him they looked, and were brought out.
Versus Respondens.
He led them forth Himself by the right way, Versus Respondens

Their passage made, as their great journey lay:
And City founded for them, and did tell
Not only where, but made them in it dwell.
Chorus Omnium.
Let all the Earth the Eternal Bounty praise,
And talk of all that He has done:
How Truth and Mercy are His ways Chorus O.

To the whole World, as well as to His Own;
For to the longing Soul He grants His Will,
And with that Goodness, which He is, does the hungry fill.
Versus. II.
Those who in darkness, and in Horror sit, Versus II.

And so near death, it is in the shade of it,
Bound in Affliction, and in heavy chains,
In prison, where there noise, and silence reigns,
Feeling their sins in all they suffer there,
Whose weight more rings ^han the Irons, which they bear,
Their hearts sink lower than their bodies ly,
And there is as little hope, as in their eye.
Chorus M.
Then to the Lord in their distress they cried,
They cried aloud, and he did hear; Chorus M,

And though His Face He seemed to hide,
By His great hand declared that He was near;
For when in vain they had looked all about,
And saw no help, toward Him they looked, and were brought out.
Versus Resp.
He broke their Chains asunder, set them free,
And made their Irons a new Bearing be; Versus R.

From darkness freed them, where they once did sit,
Not from Death only, but the shade of it.
Chorus Omnium.
Let all the Earth the Eternal Bounty praise,
And talk of all that He has done;
How Truth and Mercy are His Ways Chorus O.

To the whole World, as well as to His Own!
For gates of Bars against Him could not stand,
But open fell, Iron proved stubble to His Hand.
Versus III.
Those Foolish sinners, who in sottish Love
Consume their Age, neglecting that above, Versus III.

Are justly punished for their fond disdain,
And have for all their love, no love again:
How do they pine away, and loath their meat,
Feeding their passion more, the less they eat?
To sullen rocks lament, as if the groans
Which tear their breasts, would pierce the senseless stones
But all in vain, those means but fruitless prove,
One Death alone can end their Lives, and Love.
Chorus M.
Then to the Lord, in their distress they cried
They cried aloud, and he did hear;
Chorus M.
And though His Face He seemed to hide.
By His great hand declared that He was near:
For when in vain they had looked all about,
And saw no help, toward Him they looked, and were brought out.
Versus Resp.
He sent His Word which did refine their love,
Versus R.
No more on Earth, but placed it all above;
'Twas a disease no longer, knew no pain,
But for the love it gave, had love again.
Chorus Omnium.
Let all the Earth the Almighty Bounty praise,
Chorus O.
And talk of all that He has done;
How Truth, and Mercy are His Ways
To the whole World, as well as to His Own!
And let all those, who by His Goodness live,
The hearts He thus has changed an Offering to Him give!
Versus IV.
They who into the Sea in Ships go down,
Versus IV.
And seek by Ways they know not, lands unknown,
Who make the untrac'd Ocean be their Road,
Which with their keels they tear, and burdens load,
They in the Deep His dreadful Wonders see,
(Of which themselves as great as any be)
How He commands the storms, and does unbinde
The airy fetters of the struggling Wind;
Out they all tumble and the rough Sea invade,
Which now their scorn, as much as sport is made;
To Heaven lift up its floods, as if to call
Help thence, but e're it is come, down let them fall,
Low as their depth, whiles the scared passingers
Look every wave should drown them, and their fears;
Stagger like drunken Men, reel to, and fro,
Their feet less steady than their Vessels go;
And in their teeth the Winds their sighs do send,
Making them e're the storms, at their Wits end.
Chorus M.
Then to the Lord, in their distress they cried,
They cried aloud, and He did hear; Chorus M.

His Face the Tempest could not hide,
Nor raging Seas or dull, or stop His Ear:
For when in vain they had looked round about,
And saw no help, toward Him they looked and were brought out.
Versus Resp.
He bid the Sea be calm, the Winds be still,
And only with brisk gales their canvass fill; Versus R.

Then brought them smooth and calmy as the Sea,
To the wished Haven, where they longed to be.
Chorus Omnium.
Let all the Earth the Eternal Bounty praise,
And talk of all that He has done;
How Truth, and Mercy are His Ways Chorus O.

To the whole World, as well as to His Own!
And let all those, who on the Seas have been,
Sing in His Church His praise, and tell what they have seen.
Versus.
When for their sin God does chastize a land,
Their springs He turns into a Parched sand;
A Wilderness, which drinks their Rivers up, Versus.

And not a Rose budd yields to crown the Cup;
But barren as the salt, which is sown there,
Nor herb for man, nor grass for beast does bear.
Resp.
The Wilderness He turns into a Pool,
And fills the parched sand, with springs brim full; Resp.

Resp:
There for the hungry Soul provides His meat,
And for the Colonys He leads, a seat:
With corn they sow their fields, new Vineyards plant,
And neither Citizens, nor Cities want;
He blesses them, and makes them so increase,
Their very Cattle feel the fruits of Peace.
Versus.
Again to punish them they are brought low,
Versus.
That hand destroys them, which first made them grow;
For He on mighty Kings contempt does lay,
And those, who His forsake, lose their own way.
Resp.
But He the Poor from trouble sets on high,
Resp.
Whence He may see His long Posterity.
Chorus Omnium.
Let all the Righteous in their God rejoice,
But the Unjust, with envy break!
Chorus O.
Those show their triumph by their voice,
While these have neither Will, nor power to speak!
Thrice happy Man, who treasuring in his mind
These several Mercies, some one for his Use canfinde.
Psalm CVIII. Paratum est Cor meum, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
IT is resolved, nor will I any more
Distrust my God, as I have done before;
No! I will praise Him, and my heart,
Which has so often betrayed me into fear,
Its burden in the song shall bear,
And, when my Harp begins, shall sing the highest Part.
II.
Awake, my Harp, it is time for thee to'awake,
Prevent the day, and Thy great subject take!
Put all Thy strings on, show Thy skill;
God and my soul are ready, be not slow,
For if we should before Thee go,
Thy strings would never half way reach up Heavens high (Hill.
III.
We come, O God, and with us up will raise,
High as Thy Love, and Truth, to Heaven Thy praise.
The World shall hear what Thou have done,
How signally Thou have appeared for me,
By Thy great Power have set me free,
And for Thy works praise Him, whose Name they have not (known.
IV.
Then with Thy Mercy to the Clouds we'll fly,
And take new wing to mount to the Most High:
Above the Clouds exalted be,
Lord set Thy gloryfar above the skies.
And if so high we cannot rise,
From Heaven do Thou descend, when we look up to Thee
V.
Descend, and by the way Thy Name make known,
What Thou will do, by what Thy hand has done;
Hear me -- My God has heard my Cry,
Has past His Word, and in it I rejoice,
Has given me of all lands my Choice,
And on my Gods Almighty promise I rely.
VI.
Sechem is Mine, I will divide its Plain,
And over the Vale of Succoth throw my Chain;
The Tribes of Israel shall obey,
Those which ly farthest off, or nearer stand,
Shall yield themselves to my Command,
Shall serve, whilst Judah gives them laws, and holds the sway.
VII.
Moab's my Wash pot, and shall sue to be
A vassal to my basest drudgery;
Philistia shall my Chariot meet,
Honored enough, if she may bear the yoke
Proud Edom has so often broke,
And Edom shall submit her neck and take my Feet.
VIII.
But who to Edom will direct my course,
And entrance for Me into Bozra force?
God shall direct me to the Town;
God, who of late has seemed to disappear,
And when He comes, viewing Him there,
The Walls to make Him Way shall open, or fall down.
IX.
Help usO God, for we in vain implore,
A foreign aid, which wants Our succor more!
Thou art my help, through Thee my head
With Laurel shall be crowned, and in my Ways
Some Enemies necks the ground shall raise,
So that my feet shall triumph too, and on them tread.
Psalm CIX. Deus laudem meam ne tacueris, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
Guard of my Life, and God of all my Praise,
Who see the Outrage off'red me,
Thy self, and Power for my just sentence raise,
Nor let the wrongs I bear reflect on Thee!
Thou hear'st what cruel Words the wicked speak,
Let not them only, and not Thou Thy Silence break!
II.
With words of hatred I am girt around,
And from all parts they with me fight:
So hard, that I am all but one great wound,
And the whole cause I give them is my Right,
With prayers for them their malice would reprove,
But those with Scorn, with hatred they reward my Love.
III.
Let him some Tyrant serve, be made a Slave;
And Satan place at his right hand;
No other pity find than what he gave,
And at his Enemies tribunal stand!
Let him be judged, condemned, and all his prayers
Be made in vain to deaf, or else to stubborn ears!
IV.
Let sudden death his wretched life attend,
His office to another give!
Let on his wife and seed the curse descend,
They Fatherless and she a Widow live!
Let them be vagabonds, and beg their bread,
And have have no certain place to hide, or rest their head?
V.
Let the Extortioner catch all he has,
And strangers to his labors come!
Let him find none, who will resent his case,
But with new miseries increase the sum!
None who will to him any Mercy show,
Or on his Fatherless one friendly look bestow!
VI.
Let them be all cut off, and their cursed Name
In the next age be quite forgot!
Or if they be remembered, let their shame
On their Atchievments be a constant blot!
Let his Forefathers Sins be in Thine ey,
And all his Mothers lusts afresh for vengeance cry!
VII.
Let silence or reproach upon him rest,
And as it never was in his mind,
Either to favor, or relieve the oppressed,
Neither relief, nor favor let him find!
But as the Needy he with wrongs persu'd,
On his own head, Let them be all again renewed!
VIII.
As he Loved cursing, let him still be cursed!
And hated blessing seek in vain!
With envy, which first swelled him, let him burst,
And then like water, on him turn' it again;
Like Oil let it to' his very marrow pierce,
And like those flames, which boil it be, but far more fierce!
IX.
Give him no other garment for his pride,
Than this, with which he was arrayed;
Close with his girdle let his loins be tied,
To all a terror, of himself afraid!
And executed by the hand Divine,
Let this his ruin be, who only plotted mine!
X.
But, Lord my God, for thine own great Names sake,
And for I hy Mercy rescue me!
Thou, who the poor man's cause do undertake,
As ready to assist the helpless be!
Look how I stooping go, and bowed to the ground,
But there no herb can find to ease, or heal my wound!
XI.
My days, and age are like a shadow gone,
That when the Sun withdraws is lost;
And as the locust driven up and down,
From field, to field, from land to land I Am tossed:
My knees and flesh of strength through fasting fayl,
And those, who wounded me with scorns, my life assail.
XII.
But, Lord my God, for Thine Own great Names sake,
And for Thy Mercy rescue me!
That all may know the care Thou' art pleased to take,
And in my sure deliverance honor Thee!
Bless Thou, and let them curse, confound their noise,
And make them all ashamed, whilst I in Thee rejoice!
XIII.
Shame, and confusion to my Enemies,
Let it their Vest and Portion be!
Whilst I to Heaven in tuneful Numbers rise,
And tell abroad what God has done for me!
How from Oppession he the Poor did save,
And what his judges had denied, just sentence gave!
Psalm CX. Dixit Dominus Domino meo, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
THE Lord said to my Lord,
The Mighty God to the Eternal Word,
"Sit Thou at my Right hand,
"Till I Thine Enemies command
"To be the Footstool to Thy Throne,
"And freely yield their necks for Thee to tread upon!
II.
Sion's that glorious Throne.
Whence with disdain Thy foes Thou look upon,
Thence Thou around shall reign,
And by Thy Power new subjects gain;
Thy Enemies shall They obey,
And once returned, none shall more Loyal be than they.
III.
And as the Summer Sun,
When Winters past, and all its rage is done,
Does every Morning view
His way all strewn with pearly dew,
Whose Numbers cannot reck'ned be,
It Is a faint Emblem of Thy long Posterity.
IV.
His Oath God will not break,
But King and Priest Thou' art like Melchisedoc:
The Lord at Thy Right hand
Shall let no Proud Usurper stand,
But Kings shall bow, and in Thy Train,
Be captive led, whilst there is made Trophies of the slain.
V.
He the Great Head shall wound,
When it shall Queeen of all the World be crowned:
Drink of the brook in the way,
And follow, till He gives the day;
But when His Cross shall death strike Dead,
The Eternal God Himself shall raise, and crown His head.
Psalm CXI. Confitebor tibi Domine, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
WIth my whole heart I Will praise the Lord, (Word,
And where He chose to honor it, exalt His
In the Assemblies of the just,
There will I all His noble Works disclose,
His Famous Acts, sought out of those,
Who them their pleasure make, and Him their Trust.
II.
His glorious Works are great, and high,
No more to be conceived than seen by mortal eye,
And shall for ever so remain
Eternity it self is scarce enough
To praise His Mercy, and His Love,
And what we now unknown admire, make plain.
III.
He for His People did provide,
And never broke His Word, or Covenant denied;
They saw His Signs beheld His hand,
How for their sake He made His power appear,
Prepared them conquests by the fear,
Which He sent first into their Enemies land,
IV.
Justice, and Truth are all His Ways,
And on Eternal Faithfulness His Promise stays:
Beyond all ages they shall last,
And when Old Time it self away shall flee,
Remain as firm as now they be,
And on their own great Basis fixed, stand fast.
V.
Deliverance He for Israel wrought,
And to save them His greatest plagues on Egypt brought:
'Twas then they saw He was the same,
Which to their Fathers He was wont to be;
When He so strangely set them free,
The Holy God, and Reverend is His Name.
VI.
To worship Him true Wisdom is,
And to observe His Laws the only way to bliss:
No guide to knowledge like His fear,
For all beside, what e're they may pretend,
Through a bad way reach a worse end,
But His Praise ever lasts, and every where.
Psalm CXII. Beatus Vir qui timet, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
THat Man is truly blessed, who fears the Lord,
And with delight His Praecepts hears,
Who therefore loves, because He fears,
Loves, and yet trembles at the Sacred Word:
His seed upon the Earth renowned shall be,
And he himselfblest in his seed shall see:
Riches and Wealth, a full increase,
No fear of ever being Poor,
Desires contented, and a lasting Peace,
Always unto his house are sure,
And ever constant, as his Righteousness endure.
II.
Clear day at night does on the Just arise,
Some gleames His Spirit to sustain,
Some cheerful hopes amids his pain,
And what he gave, he finds in others eyes:
That mercy which inclined His heart to lend,
In all his wants supplies does ever send,
His works with Prudence managed are,
Nothing his foot shall ever move;
Both of his ways and him God takes the Care,
And though he may his Servant prove,
He will reward his Righteousness, and Crown his love.
III.
How do the wicked tremble, when the Just
Secure in all his Fears is made?
In The midst of fears is not afraid,
But has his heart as fixed as his Trust?
Fixed on his God, nothing shall make him fear,
Though all around he should see ruin near:
For, lo, even then his just desire
Shall be fulfilled on'his Enemies,
When in their own wild flames they all expire,
And he behold the sacrifice
To Heaven in fire, and clouds of pitchy smoke arise.
IV.
His arms shall be, what he has given away,
Or lent at any time the poor,
Whose Memory ever shall endure,
And with no fretting rust of age decay:
How he with Honor gained the Victory,
On Heavens Arch shall with' his Name be engraved on high.
Whereas it stand in sight of all,
The Wicked at it shall repine,
Shall see it fixed, when they must lower fall:
And those, who did before combine
Against him, from their depth shall see it brighter shine.
Psalm CXIII. Laudate pueri Dominum, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
PRaise Him, ye Servants of the Heavenly King,
And to His Name your grateful Praises sing:
That Name, which is so full of Power,
And from Eternity was so,
Let the whole World before it bow,
And to Eternity that Name adore!
Praise Him, for since at first the World He made,
It Is fit this Chief-Rent to Him, should by All be pai'd!
II.
Above the Heavens He God over all does reign,
Nor can the Heaven of Heavens His power contain:
His glory, far above the sky,
Exceeds the Compass of frail sight,
Invisible by Mortal light,
(Those too weak means we view his greatness by)
Our eyes to Him we never can hope to raise,
For they will come short, but we may reach Him with our praise
III.
Above He dwells, yet sometimes does He bend,
And stoop to hear the praise we upward send.
Humbling Himself sometimes to see
Those beauties, which in the Heavens are,
And at this distance look so fair,
Which of his Word the great Creation be;
Nay lower, to the Earth He often draws near,
And with His Presence makes it Heaven, when He comes there
IV.
In Heaven and Earth all things obey His Will,
And though to them it be unknown, fulfill:
At pleasure He bestows the Crown,
Honor and Wealth are in His hand,
And to the poor He gives Command,
Exalting him, but throws the Mighty down:
Makes barren wombes with joy their fruit to bear,
And that which as the grave was deaf, His voice to hear.
Psalm CXIV. In exitu Israel de Egypto, etc.
I.
WHen Israel had thrown off the Egyptian yoke,
And all the Chains of servitude,
A speech like them, who used it, rude,
And had their tongues unloos'd, and fetters broke;
The Almighty Power, who did that Wonder show,
Conducting by His mighty hand
His People to the Promised land,
Did greater Wonders do,
Not only told them whether, but which way to go.
II.
The Sea far off the Marching Camp beheld,
Saw how the Sacred Fire made way,
Yet knew not where their journey lay,
And to look round in higher billows swelled:
But when to' its shore it saw the Host draw nigh,
The mighty Sea began to fear,
And backward bid its floods to bear,
And those, which could not fly,
Stand up in ranks, and let the Israelites pass by.
III.
Jordan fell back, and to his Spring did have;
Alarmed at His scare'd Floods retreat,
The Aged Spring lost all his heat,
And boiled no more, but fainting swoon'd at last:
The mountains saw the flood, and they ran too;
The little Hills, for Company,
Followed to see the Mountains flee,
Like frighted Lambs, which go
(Though unpersu'd) those ways their trembling Mothers show.
IV.
What ailed the Sea, that it should backward start?
Or what made frighted Jordans Spring
Swoone and keep all his waters in,
Like spirits scarce able to secure the Heart?
Why ran the Hills? Why did the mountains fly?
Tremble, O Earth, Thy God is near,
God, who can make deaf Rocks to hear,
And when Thy Springs are dry,
From out their flinty Bowels fetch a new supply!
Psalm CXV. Non nobis Domine, Non nobis, etc.
I.
NOT unto us, Lord, not to us,
But to Thy Name give all the praise!
Thou Worthy art to be exalted thus,
For Truth and Mercy are Thy Ways:
Why should the World deride Our trust,
And ask, "Where is the God whereof you boast?
Our God in Heaven does reign, and what is His Will,
Both Heaven, and Earth obey, and Seas fulfill.
II.
The Heathen Idols rule not so,
Nor by their own power can they stand;
Themselves do not their mean Original know,
Not how made Gods, nor by what hand;
And though their Votaries them adore,
They are the same vile clay they were before;
Or if of Gold, debased, and more can do
In The Ingot, e're it is a God, then once made so.
III.
'T has mouth indeed, and eyes, and ears,
And the feigned organs of quick sense,
But the dull thing nor speaks, nor sees, nor hears:
And what good can be looked for thence?
'T has feet, it is true, and golden hands,
That never gave bribe, but to receive them stands:
And nose, that though the flames to it aspire,
Cannot the Incense smell, nor scent the Fire.
IV.
They and their Framers are alike,
And neither sense, nor reason have;
But if they 'are gods, let us see them any strike,
Or from the curse their makers save!
Blind Deities, but blinder they,
Who knowing it, to their own work will pray!
Or think the stock, which does its titles ow
To them, can any thing they want bestow.
V.
But on Thy God, O Israel trust!
He only is Thy help, and shield;
O house of Aaron flee to Him that is Just!
For He is Thine, and help will yield.
All you, who fear the Almighty Lord,
Upon Him trust, and flee unto His Word!
For He Is your help, and He will be your shield,
And though you flee, it is to gain the field!
VI.
The Lord has mindful of us been,
And He will all Our joys restore;
The house of Israel have His blessing seen,
And He will bless them more and more:
The house of Aaron He will bless,
And all who fear Him shall by' His love increase:
'Twixt rich, and poor He does no difference know,
But by His blessing both in numbers grow.
VII.
Blessed of that God, who all things made,
Both Earth, and Sea and glorious Heaven:
High Heaven's His seat, and of Him is afraid,
But He to Man the Earth has given:
It Is there that we admire His Ways,
Before the grave shut us up, and His Praise;
There will we bless the God, in whom we live,
And as He life to us, Him praises give.
Hallelujah.
Psalm CXVI. Delexi quoniam exaudivit, etc.
I.
I Love Thee, Lord, with my whole heart,
For Thou do my petitions hear;
Because Thou to me have inclined Thine ear.
And thus propitious to Thy servant art,
With new requests I Will ever prove Thee,
And show by that I love Thee
II.
The pains of death enclosed me round,
Grief held my heart, and tears my eyes;
My grave stood open, and death thence did rise,
Trouble and Horror, on all sides I found;
Death it self waited underneath,
Above the pains of Death.
III.
Yet to the Lord I cried, and said,
My God Thy help I now implore,
Deliver me, as Thou have done before,
When in my trouble I unto Thee prayed!
Though I deserved to be denied,
Yet to the Lord I cried.
IV.
To wrath He Is slow, abounds in love,
Our sins most ready to forgive;
The Innocent upon His bounty live,
In Him they live, who reigns their God above:
He helped me, when I was brought low,
For He to wrath is slow.
V.
Then to Thy rest, my Soul, return!
For God has kindly dealt with Thee;
Thy feet from sliding, life from death set free,
Nor shall Thy failing eyes in sorrow mourn.
Thy days to praise Him are increased,
Return, Soul, to Thy rest!
VI.
Lord, I believe, and therefore speak,
I knew I should Thy Mercy praise;
Though when afflicted, and in rugged ways,
One sorrow did my heart and silence break:
Then I all flesh the ly did give,
And yet, Lord, I believe.
VII. Versus.

What shall I bring and yield the Lord,
For all His Favors shown to me?
A thankful heart my sacrifice shall be.
I Will praise Him, and rely upon His Word.
New songs of thanks, I Will to Him sing,
And this at least will bring.
VIII.
My Vows, which in distress I made,
Before His People will I pay:
His People shall rejoice that solemn day,
Whilst those, who are His Enemies be afraid:
When He His plagues upon them throws,
And does accept My Vows.
IX.
Dear in His sight His servants are,
He will Himself repay their wrong;
Though in forbearing He may seem too long,
It is more deep to strike, and not to spare:
Nor is the death of the upright,
Less precious, in His sight.
X.
Lord, I am Thine, and thine will be,
Thy Handmaids Son, whom Thou did save;
My God Himself a ransom for me gave,
And to a nobler service set me free:
Thou brake'st my bonds. and made'st me mine,
And now, Lord, I am Thine.
XI. Versus.

This will I bring, and yield the Lord,
For all His Favors shown to me,
A thankful heart my sacrifice shall be,
I Will praise Him, and rely upon His Word:
New songs of thanks I Will to Him sing,
And this at least will bring.
XII.
My Vows, which in distress I made,
Before His People will I pay:
His People shall rejoice that solemn day,
And where I made them, there shall see them pai'd:
Within the Courts of the Lord's House,
There will I pay my Vows.
Hallelujah
Psalm CXVII. Laudate Dominum Omnes, etc.
I.
ALL you, who to the Lord, your Beings ow,
All Nations, with His blessings crowned,
All people through the World renowned,
Sing praises to that God, who made you so!
II.
To God, whose Mercy does to all extend,
Is great to us, and good to you,
And with His Truth does still renew,
But like Himself, knows neither bound nor end!
Hallelujah.
Psalm CXVIII. Confitemini Domino quoniam, etc. The People.

I.
TO God's Almighty Name sing praise,
And you, who know how good He is,
Resign to Him, what is truly His,
And Arches of His own great Mercies raise!
For like His Word they have been sure, Versus.

And to Eternity endure!
II. Versiculus.

Israel, the great Jehova's choice,
Who all His fearful Works have seen,
Who His great Care have always been,
Let Israel now confess with thankful voice,
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure!
III. Versiculus.

Let those, who by their place attend,
And at His Altar daily wait,
Their own experiences relate,
Sing as they see the sacred flame ascend,
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
IV. Versiculus.

And to advance the Blessed King,
Let all the Righteous with them join,
And in a service thus Divine,
Bear their part too, and in the Chorus sing,
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure!
V. The King.

To God on high for help I cried,
Who from His Temple answered me,
Both heard my prayers and set me free,
The Lord of Host Himself was on my side;
I will not fear, what man can do,
Since I Have a God to flee unto.
VI.
With those, who helped me, He was seen,
His Presence brought my greatest aid,
Nothing shall make me now afraid,
He Will be my sword, who has my Buckler been:
And when my Foes shall be o'rethrowne,
I Will boast of what His hand has done.
VII. Versiculus.

Those, who their Care on God do cast,
And know no other will but His,
Of sure recruits shall never miss,
But as a Rock, in the midst of storms, stand fast;
On God it is more secure to trust,
Than man, who must return to dust.
VIII. Versiculus.

He never yet did any fail,
Most sure, when most reli'd upon;
And though His Power subscribes to none,
He lets weak prayers over Heaven, and Him prevail
On God it is more secure to trust,
Than Princes, who must turn to dust.
IX.
Let Barbarous Nations girt me round,
And for my ruin all engage,
My trust is placed above their rage,
And stands unshaken on the higher ground;
For on the Lord of Hosts I Will call,
And in His Name destroy them all. Versiculus

X. Verse.

Round let them compass me, and round,
And for my ruin all engage,
My Trust is placed above their rage,
And stands unshaken, on the higher ground;
For on the Lord of Hosts I Will call,
And in His Name destroy them all.
XI. Verse.

Let them like Bees about me swarm,
And all to be my death engage,
Like fire in Thorns or stubble rage,
My head shall be defended by this Charm,
For on the Lord of Hosts I Will call,
And in His Name destroy them all.
XII.
The bloody Man thrust at me hard,
And hoped at length to see me fall,
But when I on the Lord did call,
That sword brought death to him, which me had spared:
God, who is my strength shall be my song,
And whom I called, I Will stay upon.
XIII. Versiculus.

The voice of Triumph, and of praise,
The just man's mouth does ever fill,
His voice is like his trumpet shrill,
When up to Heaven Thy Vict'ries he does raise:
'Twas thou the Conquest did obtain,
And Thy Right hand the day did gain.
XIV. Versiculus.

The Lords right hand did mighty things,
No power before His power could stand;
For when He made bare His Right hand,
Armies before Him fled, and Potent Kings;
'Twas That the Conquest did obtain,
And His Right hand the day did gain,
XV.
Empty Thy Quiver, Death, else where,
Be gone, and pierce some softer heart,
For I defy Thy sharpest dart,
Am both above Thy malice, and Thy fear!
I know I shall not die, but live,
And praise Him, who my Life did give.
XVI.
Low as the dust I was brought down,
To the dark Suburbs of the grave,
But He was pleased my life to save,
And what He up had raised, my Head did crown:
Open the Gates of Righteousness,
For, lo, I am returned in Peace!
XVII.
Blessed gates of the Divine abode,
Which to the Holy Place let in,
Where all the just their Offerings bring,
And haste into the Presence of their God:
There, Lord, I Will praises sing to Thee,
For Thou have bowed Thine ear to me.
XVIII. Priests.

The stone the Builders did refuse,
Had often tried, often thrown away,
Is now the Mighty Fabrics stay,
God chose it for the Noblest place, and use;
This is His doing, and when thus
God builds, His Work is mavelous.
XIX.
This is the day, which He has made,
Hosannas now befit our voice;
Come, let us in Our God rejoice,
And in the day which He has made, be glad!
That He Prosperity may send,
And to Our troubles put an end.
XX.
Sacred Ambassador of God,
Who hither in His Name does come,
We in His Temple make Thee room,
And bless Our King from His Divine aboade!
He is Our Savior, Come away!
The Victims at the Altar stay.
XXI. King.

Bind them with cords, and tie them fast,
To the Altars horns, and make them bleed,
Then let the Flame upon them feed,
And in thick clouds to Heaven ascend at last!
My God I will sing praise to Thee,
Who art my God, and song shall be.
XXII. Versus.

To God's Almighty Name sing praise,
And you, who know how Good He is,
Resign to Him, what 's truly His,
And Arches of His Own great Mercies raise!
For like His Word they have been sure,
And to Eternity endure!
Psalm CXIX.
I. Part. Beati immaculati in via, etc.
Aleph. I.
THrice happy Men, who pure, and undefiled,
By the great Rule direct their Way;
Walk where that points, and never go astray,
But to Gods Law sincere obedience yield;
Who search for that with their whole heart,
And keep His Testimonies as their better part!
II.
To no iniquity they turn aside,
So plain His Ways before them ly;
And if through ignorance they step awry,
His spirit, which guides, will hold them when they slide*
That I Thy Praecepts, Lord, fulfill,
Is Thy desire, and Mine, but first to know Thy Will.
III.
Teach me Thy Will, the Way where I should go,
How I Thy Statutes may observe;
Order my paths, that I may never swerve,
And what is Thy Righteous Pleasure to me show!
That shame may blush to follow me,
Who Thy Commands pursue, and follow none but Thee!
IV.
And when Thy Judgments I shall thus be taught,
With upright heart, I Will sing Thy Praise;
The dull thing I as yet can hardly raise,
So low with former griefs it has been brought:
Then all Thy Statutes I Will obey,
And Thou with me for ever shall delight to stay.
II. Part. Beth. In quo corriget, etc.
I.
BUT how shall Youth this Wisdom, Lord, attain,
Unbridled Youth to choose His Way?
Youth that persues new follies every day,
Will in Thy Word find both a bit, and rein:
With all my heart I have sought Thee,
That I never stray, make Thy Commandments known to me.
II.
Within my Heart Thy sacred Word I laid,
I laid it up, and hid it there,
And to its counsel gave my willing ear,
And thence took heart of Sin to be afraid;
Lord Thou art worthy of all praise,
Teach me Thy Statutes that I may Thy glory raise!
III.
This my desire has been, and still shall be;
Of all Thy Judgments to recount;
The sum to which Thy Testimonies mount,
Is infinite, and only like to Thee:
Riches, of which the World does dream,
Are piercing cares, and emptiness compared with Them.
IV.
Of all Thy Praecepts will I meditate,
And have respect to all Thy Ways;
Thy Statutes my delight, and love shall raise,
And at Thy Oracle I Will ever wait:
Within my heart Thy love shall gain,
Such conquests, that the Trophies shall like Heaven remain.
III. Part. Gimel. Retribue Servo tuo, etc.
I.
OF May Thy Servant of Thy love partake;
And what Thou' have sworn of old, fulfill!
That He may keep Thy Word, and do Thy Will,
And pay the vows He heretofore did make!
Yet nearer, Lord, unto Him draw,
And clear his sight to view the wonders of Thy Law!
II.
I am a stranger, and the rule I have
Over Nations, only comes from Thee;
I give them Laws, but Thou must give them me,
From Thy Commandments I assistance crave;
My Soul is wasted with desire,
And with the Love Thy Judgments kindled, all a fire.
III.
The proud, who from Thy just Commandments err,
Are cursed because from Thee they go;
Curse great enough, if it were only so,
But all their ways are girt around with fear:
Reproach, which they for me have laid,
Send them, for I Thy Testaments my guard have made!
IV.
Kings too, as they in judgment on me sat,
Derided me for that great Love
I bore Thee, Lord, invisible above,
But on Thy Statutes I did meditate;
Thy Testimonies in my need
Were my best Counselors, and taught me how to plead.
IV. Part Daleth. Adhaesit pavimento, etc.
I.
DOwn to the Earth my humbled soul is cast,
Raise me according to Thy Word!
No power but Thine can any help afford,
For where it is thrown, it to the Earth cleaves fast;
My ways I have declared to Thee,
Teach me Thy Statutes, and show Thine to me!
II.
Make me Thy Ways and Praecepts understand,
So shall I all Thy Works relate,
How Thou in me a new heart did create,
And help'dst me do, what Thou did first command;
My Soul for grief does melt away,
Strengthen me with Thy Word, and bid the stream to stay!
III.
Lying, and every false desire remove,
And freely to me grant Thy law!
Thus my Affections Thou will to Thee draw,
And keep them in that Way of Truth I love;
Thy Judgments I before me laid,
And what is Thy Pleasure, the just rule of mine have made.
IV.
Close to Thy Testimonies have I cleav'd,
And there to rest resolved I am;
O let me never, Lord, be put to shame,
Or when to Thee I fly, not be received!
Thus when Thy Will is on me done,
The Ways of Thy Commandments I Will delight to run.
V. Part. He. Legem pone mihi, etc.
I.
TEach me, my God, and show me how I may
Up to Thy Sacred height ascend!
How all Thy Statutes I may keep to the end,
Direct me with Thy Spirit, and point the Way;
Let me Thy Laws but understand,
My heart as firmly shall obey them, as my hand!
II.
In The paths of Thy Commandments make me go!
For there is placed my chief delight,
Since't will conduct me to Thy glorious sight,
Where constant joys, and lasting pleasures flow:
And to Thy Testaments incline
My heart, which covets nothing more, than to be Thine.
III.
From Vanity, and Folly turn my eyes!
Let them be only fixed on Thee!
And in Thy ways such beauteous objects see,
That I my race may quicken by the prize!
Perform Thy Word, which Thou have past,
And let it like Thine Own Love, and my fear stand fast!
IV.
My fear of Thee, for which I Will ever pray,
Though I by it reproach should gain;
Thy Righteous Judgments shall its rage restrain,
Or turn the Fatal pile some other way:
Look how Thy Praecepts I desire,
O, let the Righteousness, which made it, stir the Fire!
VI. Part. Vau. Ut veniat super me, etc.
I.
LOrd, Let Thy Mercies on my Soul shower down!
And as Thy Word my hope has fed,
May Thy Salvation rest upon my head,
And be the fairest Jewel in my crown!
So when I shall derided be,
That Word I trust, shall with an Answer furnish me!
II.
Then take not, Lord, the Word of Truth away,
But let Thy Promise rest secure,
Firm, and unshaken, like the World endure,
For I have made Thy Judgments all my stay!
And when the graving is thus deep,
Thy Laws, which are so plain, I shall for ever keep.
III.
Then will I feareless walk at liberty,
And for Thy Praecepts Waves enquire,
Follow them hard, and in the persuit expire,
When by their Conduct I am brought to Thee:
Thy Testaments I will proclaim,
Send them, for I Thy Testaments my guard have made!
IV.
Then in Thy great Commandments I Will delight,
For they have been my dearest Love:
By keeping them my fear of I he I Will prove,
And thus before Thee walk, and be upright:
Will of Thy Statutes meditate,
And Them the more I love, the deadlier Sin will hate.
VII. Part. Zain. Memor esto Verbi tui, etc.
I.
REmember, Lord, Thy Word of old to me;
Which hitherto has been my Trust,
Wherein I hope, though humbled to the dust,
And in my griefs let it my comfort be!
On that alone my Soul relies,
And fetches thence in all its troubles fresh supplies,
II.
A Byword to the Proud, and scorn I Am made,
Yet I Will nor break, nor leave Thy Law:
But from Thy Judgments will new arg'ments draw,
To make me more of Thy great hand afraid:
Nor shall this interrupt my joys,
But make them greater, since that fear has been my Choice.
III.
For them I Will tremble, who Thy Laws despise,
And leave the pleasant roads of Peace;
Their surer condemnation to increase,
Nor thither will be guided by their eyes:
But Lord, Thy Statutes are my song,
And make that journey short, which else would seem too long.
IV.
And when the night does the whole Earth enfold,
And all but I enjoy their rest,
At thought of Thee, new day springs in my breast,
And up I rise of Thy Law to take hold,
Which may direct my Way to Thee;
For whilst I keep Thy Precepts, it is still day with me.
Part. VIII. Cheth. Portio mea Domine, etc.
I.
"LET who 's will take the World for me, I said,
"Thou only art my Portion, Lord!
Above all riches let me keep Thy Word,
Who that before all wealth my love have made!
It Is for Thy Favor that I sue,
And hastening of that Promise, which Thy Word makes due.
II.
On my past wanderings I with horror thought,
And for their stains in secret mourned;
But into joy my tears were quickly turned,
And by Thy Testaments I home was brought
Then did I grieve my former waste
Of Time, and Thy Commandments to observe made have.
III.
Thy Ways scarce entered, bands of theives I met,
And to their rage became a prey;
Yet spoiled of all I still would keep my way,
Thy Laws made me account the loss not great:
Thy Judgments it to mind did bring,
And of Thy Mercies I at midnight rose to sing!
IV.
Those, who love Thee, my God, are my delight,
And more my boasting than my Crown;
For to Thy Praecepts we subjection own,
And seek a greater Kingdom in Thy sight:
Thou, who the Earth with good do fill:
Teach me Thy Statutes, that I may perform Thy Will!
Part. IX. Teth. Bonitatem fecisti cum, etc.
I.
THou for Thy Servant wondrous things have done
And all the effects of love IN have felt;
To my sins just desert Thou have not dealt,
But after Thine own Word to me made known:
Sound Judgment to these blessings give,
Those just Commands to keep, which now, Lord I believe!
II.
In my Prosperity I went astray,
And to Bypath was turned aside;
But when Affliction came to be my guide,
I kept Thy Word, and found again Thy Way:
With goodness Thou do ever flow,
That I may do so too, Thy Statutes to me show*
III.
The proud against my fame have forged base lies,
But I Thy Praecepts will obey;
A plenteous state has made them lose their way,
As it did me, and all Thy Laws despise:
Against them, and Heaven they boldly fight,
Whilst I reclaimed, have treasured there my best delight.
IV.
I am the Man, who have afflictions seen,
And happy me, who thus was taught!
Thy Statutes, and from all my wanderings brought!
Mercy to me, not judgments have they been,
Thy Laws they taught me to esteem,
And, think, that gold no luster has, compared with Them.
X. Part. Jod. Manus tuae fecerunt, etc.
I.
THY hands, O God, first made, and fashioned me,
And by Thy Power it is I live;
Good Understanding to Thy Servant give,
That by Him Thy Commands observed may be!
That those, who fear Thee may rejoice,
To see Thy Word performed, and add to mine their voice.
II.
I know, my God, Thy Judgments all are right,
And that my felf I must condemn,
E're I Unfaithfulness can charge on them,
My sorrows, with my sins compared, are light;
But as Thou thus have wounded me,
According to Thy Word, let me Thy Comforts see!
III.
Upon me let Thy Grace, and love descend,
That I may yet before Thee live!
And to Thy Laws, my life's Remainder give!
Whilst constant shame, and scorn the proud attend.
Me without any cause they hate,
But to Thy Praecepts that shall never my love abate.
IV.
Let those, who have Thy Testimonies known,
And all, who truly worship Thee,
Hither turn in, and join themselves with me;
To tell abroad, what thou for us have done!
Nor let me ever be ashamed
To keep Thy Statutes, or for love to Thee be blamed!
XI. Part. Caph. Defecit in salut are tuum anima, etc.
I.
MY Soul, O God, for Thy Salvation faints;
Yet in Thy Word my hope I place;
For that I languish, show at length Thy Face,
Nor let me weary Thee with my Complaints!
Or say "When shall these troubles end,
"And God, or give deliverance, or some comfort send!
II.
My flesh is shrivel'd. and my bones are dry,
Smoked by that fire, with which I burn;
Yet from Thy Statutes will I never turn,
But its worst rage courageously defy:
Say, Lord, how long, how many days,
Are yet behind, e're Thou Thy self to Judgment raise?
III.
The proud for me deep pitts and snares have laid,
But not according to thy Law;
From Thy Commands, they strange Conclusions draw'
As if to reach me only they were made:
But they all Faithful are, and right,
Preserve Thou him, whose Justice is opposed by Might!
IV.
My life through care is almost brought to the grave,
And all as dying on me look;
Yet I Thy Praecepts never yet forsook,
From Thee, and Them a new life let me have!
So in Thy sight I still shall live,
And full Obedience to Thy Testimonies give.
Part. XII. Lamed. In aeternum Domine, etc.
I.
FOR ever, Lord, Thy Word in Heaven remains,
In that almighty Frame set fast;
'Its Faithfulness has reached all ages past,
And, what at first it made, the Earth sustaines:
And as it has been ever sure,
Like the great speaker, it for ever shall endure.
II.
All things the Order Thou first gav'st obey,
And on Thy mighty Will depend;
All are Thy Servants, and on Thee attend,
And shall continue firm, as to this day:
These Works of Thine my Soul affright,
But with Thy Law consid'red, fill me with delight.
III.
That, and Thy Praecepts, will I never forget,
For by Them Thou have quickened me;
Save me, my God, for I belong to Thee,
And for Thy sake, on Them my love have set!
To Them that I am Thine I ow,
May They be always Mine, that I be always so.
IV.
The wicked plot how I may be betrayed,
But I Thy Testimonies love;
My Care, and Hope are surely fixed above,
And where nor they, nor Time can hurt them, laid:
There Is no True Happiness below,
But where the Way to' it lies Thy Just Commandments show
Part. XIII. Mem. Quomodo dilexi Legem tuam, etc.
I.
LOrd, how I love Thy Law! it is my delight,
My Meditation all day long,
By which I Am wiser made, and much more strong
Than all those Enemies, with whom I fight;
All Thy Commands, with me abide,
And in my Heart, to keep them safe, Thy Laws I hide.
II.
With me compared my Teachers all are dull,
Thy Testimonies my best love
Have given me of that Wisdom from above,
Which with Its floods has filled my Soul brim full;
Age less experience has then I,
Who always have Thy Praecepts, in my heart, or eye.
III.
By these to guide my feet I have been brought,
That I Thy Word might always keep;
And from Thy Righteous Judgments never slip,
But firm abide in what I first was taught:
From them I never did depart,
But like Thy self they freely did Command my heart.
IV.
So sweet Thy Words are, and so full of grace,
And all so pleasant to my Taste,
That honey which from flowing Hives makes haste,
Insipid to them is, and yields its place;
I through Thy Praecepts knowledge get,
And hate all ways, that may decline, or stray from it.
XV. Part. Nun. Lucerna pedibus, etc.
I.
IN all my Ways Thy Word directs my feet,
And as a lamp does give them light;
What I have sworn, since what I swore is right,
The just performance, with my Vows shall meet:
To keep Thy Judgments I have sworn,
That I may keep Them, may Thou never from me turn!
II.
With sharp Afflictions, down to the Earth I Am cast,
But let Thy Word my life restore!
That in Thy Church I may Thy Power adore,
And of the Rivers of Thy Pleasure taste;
Lord by Thy Judgments make me wise,
And what Thou me have given, accept for sacrifice!
III.
Those dangers, which have compassed me around,
Where I saw only Care, and Fear,
Ready exposed, my life have made me bear,
Yet through Thy Law I kept it, and my ground:
Snares, and a trap the Wicked laid,
But I shunned both, for I my guide Thy Praecepts made.
IV.
Thy Testimonies are my Heritage,
And shall my double Portion be;
My joy, for They alone conduct to Thee,
And to observe Them I Will my heart engage:
My heart I Will to Thy Statutes join,
And make Thy glory, which is Their Chief end, be mine.
XV. Part. Samech. Iniquos odio habui, etc.
I.
VAin thoughts, and all their follies I abhor,
But for Thy Law preserve my Love;
Thou art my hiding place, and from above
My help shall come, since I Thy Power implore:
Thou art my shield, defend me, Lord,
For I all times, have only trusted in Thy Word!
II.
Avoid Profane, far hence Profane depart,
For I my God's Commands will keep!
Uphold me, Lord, that I may never slip,
And to Thy Word both give my life, and heart!
So far from shame to call Thee Mine,
That I will all my glory count it, To be thine.
III.
If Thou upholdst me, then shall I stand fast,
And to Thy Statutes homage yield;
Whose false despisers Thou with shame have filled,
And of the cup they others gave, made taste;
Deceit and guile are in their ways,
And only him they would throw down, they load with praise.
IV.
But Thou all such shall from the Earth destroy,
Whilst as Refiners purg their dross,
And by pure metal recompense the loss,
Thine shall be such without the least alloy:
My self that Inquisition fear,
Yet in my Soul it truly by Thy Judgments bear.
Part. XVI. Ain. Feci judicium, etc.
I.
JUstice, my God, has been my chiefest care,
To those who hate me, leave me not!
Let not my ancient service be forgot,
Nor those, who justly suffered be my fear!
Let not Oppressors trouble me,
But save Thou Him, who often has the Oppressed set free!
II.
My eyes expecting Thy Salvation fail,
And for Thy Righteous Word I wait;
At last Thy Mercy grant, it is never too late,
And let my importunity prevail!
Thy Promises to me fulfill,
And to Thy Statutes both my ear incline, and Will!
III.
I am Thy Servant and Thy Handmaids Son,
That I Thy Testaments may know,
True Wisdom, and good Understanding show,
And now appear, as thou of old have done!
It Is Time for Thee, Lord, now to rise,
For those who should obey Thy Law, its rule despise.
IV.
But I disvalue gold, with it compared,
And Thy Commandments more than gold,
And all its chains me in Obedience hold,
For much above 'it Thou know I Them preferred;
Thy Praecepts above All I love,
And this blessed Passion by my flight from sin will prove.
Part. XVII. Pe. Mirabilia Testimonla, etc.
I.
THY Testimonies Lord are wonderful,
Therefore I make Them all my Care;
The very entrance of Thy Word is fair,
And with its beams inlightens my dark Soul:
If such the Porch, and Entrance be,
What Wonders may we in Thy Sanctuary see!
II.
I longed for Thy Commandments, and the air
Breathed thence, into my Soul I drew;
Me thoughts it did my Spirit again renew,
And cleared the stoppages, which pressed me there:
Look down, and to me be the same
As Thou art used to be to them who love Thy Name!
III.
According to Thy Word my steps direct,
Nor let me be by Sin overthrown,
Who just Allegiance to Thy Praecepts own,
And from sure ruin the Oppres'd protect!
Let me no more a Captive be
To lust, since Thou have broke my Chains, and set me free
IV.
Lord, on Thy Servant make Thy Face to shine,
And me Thy Righteous Statutes teach,
That I to others may Thy Goodness preach,
And how like me, they too may be made Thine!
For floods of tears run down my eyes,
And for Thy Broken Laws Seas from those Fountains rise.
XVIII. Part. Tsaddi. Iustus es Domine, etc.
I.
AS Thou art, such, my God, Thy Judgments are,
Thou Righteous, and They all upright;
Thy Testimonies govern less by Might,
Than Justice, wherewith Thou have made Them fair:
And those, who to Thy Scepter bow,
Which is so right, and faithful, are themselves made so.
II.
My Zeal has burnt me up, and all on fire
I faint to see Thy Word forgot;
Thy Word that is tried, and from the Furnace hot
In sacred flames of love makes me expire;
And wonder, who through cold can die,
Who has so hot and pure a fire to warm him by.
III.
Thou know I Am poor, despised, and wondrous low,
Yet will I not Thy Praecepts leave,
But even thence hope new vigor to receive,
How poor and low so e're I may be now;
Thy Laws and Truth so certain be,
That what Thou once has promised, from all change stands free.
IV.
This only was my Comfort in my grief,
When anguish fast hold of me took,
That I Thy just Commandments never forsook,
And they, which were my love brought me relief;
That I may ever with Thee live,
Sound knowledge of Thy Testimonies to me give!
XIX. Part. Coph. Clamavi in toto cord, etc.
I.
WIth my whole heart, in my distress I cried,
Aloud I cried, but more for fear
To break Thy Statutes, than my Pains to bear,
"O let me never, said I, be denied!
"But rise my God to rescue me,
"And I Will Thy Testimonies kcep, and honor Thee!
II.
The Morning, with my Prayer I did prevent,
For in Thy Word my hope I placed;
The Morning, with my cry I bid make haste,
But e're it came my Vows I up had sent:
'Twas then a pleasure not to sleep,
For all the while Thy word with me the watch did keep.
III.
Lord for Thy Mercy sake, to me give ear,
And in Thy Justice visit me!
May, they agreed, my Mighty Saviors be,
And as I Thine, make Th^e my Voice to hear!
O be not far off from my cry,
When those, who hate Thy Law, and Me, are come so nigh!
IV.
But cheer up, Soul, see where Thy God does stand,
Thy God, whose just Commands are True,
Who with a Word can all Thy Foes subdue,
And publish His great Victories in all lands!
Whose Testimonies Thou have found,
Eternity alone in its vast Space can bound.
Part. XX. Resh. Vide humilitatem, etc.
I.
COnsider my affliction and my Pain,
And save Me, for I keep Thy law!
Defend my cause, and from my Weakness draw
Such arguments, as may Thy Power maintain!
For Thy Words sake deliver me,
The safety, like redemption from the grave shall be!
II.
Salvation from the proud is far away,
So much they on themselves d^pend,
But never to Thy Statutes Voice attend,
Which only are my Prop, and mighty stay;
Thy Mercies great and wondrous be,
Yet, Lord, according to Thy Judgments quicken me!
III.
Many my Foes, against me thousands rise,
Yet I Thy Testaments obey;
And others would persuade to take Thy Way,
Who only are for that my Enemies:
For them I Am sure I truly grieve,
Because they Thy Almighty Word will not believe.
IV.
For my own part like Thee I nothing love,
Thy Praecep^s are my chief delight,
That I may always think them so, let light,
And an Eternal day break from above!
Thy Word for ever True has been,
Nor have Thy Righteous Judgments any variance seen.
Part. XXI Schin. Principes persecuti, etc.
I.
PRinces without cause are my Enemies,
But of Thy Word I stand in aw;
Lying I hate, but have observed Thy Law,
And so their threats, and malice can despise;
And if for them I have a fear,
Into my heart I look, and see a greater there.
II.
Thy Word, which is at once my fear, and trust,
Makes me in mighty shouts rejoice,
As one that finds great spoil, or has His Choice,
For it will make me, Lord, as Thou art, Just;
For that seven times a day I Will praise,
And with Thy righteous Judgments, my small Numbers raise.
III.
Great peace to them, who love Thy Laws, belongs,
And nothing shall their rest off^nd,
But all their lives they shall in pleasure spend,
And thence take lofty Subjects for their songs;
In Thee, my God, I, trust alone,
And those Commands Thou gav'st me to observe, have done.
IV.
My Soul has all Thy Testimonies kept,
And they have been my purest love,
I by their conduct did my journies move,
Nor from the Way, which they first showed me, stepped:
They and Thy Praecepts were my guide,
Nor did I strive my paths from thy bright face to hide.
XXII. Part. Tau. Appropinquet deprecatio, etc.
I.
LOrd, let my cry at length approach Thine ear,
And Understanding to me give,
To know Thy Word, and by its rule to live,
And all the prayers, which here I 'have made Thee hear!
Lord, for Thy Word to save me rise,
And then I may be confident Thou hear'st my cries!
II.
Then shall my song of all Thy Power rehearse,
And of the Change Thy Statutes wrought;
How by Thy Word I home to Thee was brought,
And by those steps to Heaven I Will raise my Verse!
For Thy Commandments righteous are,
And those, who make them theirs, shall be themselves Thy Care!
III.
May I be so, for they have been my Choice,
And in Thy Praecepts I delight;
Thy Law's my Meditation day and night,
And all times does my heart employ, or voice,
For Thy Salvation, Lord, I wait,
Make have and come away, before it be too late!
IV.
Like a lost sheep from Thee I went astray,
Nor to the fold again should come,
But seek me, Lord, and bring Thy Servant home,
For He does yet Thy great Commands obey!
Around me let Thy Judgments shine,
And thus from danger saved, the Praise shall all be Thine!
Psalm CXX. Ad Dominum cum tribularer, etc. A song of Degrees.

I.
IN my distress unto the Lord I cried,
And though my troubles made me fear,
That God His Face would from me hide,
Even then my God was pleased to hear,
And then inclined His Willing ear,
And answered me, when I most looked to be denied.
II.
Thou heardst me, and Thy self did set me free,
My Enemies saw their swords were vain,
And with their tongues did strike at me,
With lies my Innocence sought to stain;
Lord, on them turn their lies again,
And let their tongues, weak as their swords, to hurt me be
III.
But what reward, false tongue, do Thou desire,
Or who to give't Thee dares come nigh?
Thou woundest, when Thou do retire,
As Parthians fight most when they fly,
Thy Words then kill, when thou runn'st by,
Like Juniper Coals are sweet, but burn worse than their fire.
IV.
Unhappy Man, who thus am forced to stay,
Exiled from Him I love most dear!
From Thee, my God, O Come away!
Let me not be without Thee here!
But where Thou art let me appear!
Any where Lord, so Thou will but Thy self display.
V.
Than Mesech can a place more savage be,
Where all to Peace sworn Enemies are,
And for Her sake are so to me?
Kedar with Mesech may compare,
I cry up Peace, They call for War;
Yet that were nothing, Lord, could I but there have Thee.
Psalm CXXI. Levavi oculos meos in Montes, etc. A song of Degrees. II.

I.
UNto the Hills I raised my drooping eyes,
And looked if any help were there,
Loaded with tears I made them rise,
To watch, and give the sign, when help drew near;
I raised them up but all in vain,
I could not keep them so,
Their own weight pressed them to the Earth again,
On high they would not be, when I was sunk so low!
II.
Up to your tops* O Hills, I Will look no more,
An unexpected help is nigh;
I overlooked this help before,
Looked, when I thought not high enough, too high;
For, lo, my God my part does take,
On my side does appear;
God whose great word, both Heaven and Earth did make,
And what need other help, when the Almighty's near!
III.
Thy Foot, He said it, all times fixed shall stand,
And He shall watch about Thee keep;
The Lord shall lead Thee by the hand,
And never, though thou slumbrest, fall asleep:
For Israel He is still awake,
His eyes still open be;
And He, who of an Israel care can take,
Fear not, but He can well enough provide for Thee!
IV.
Twixt Him, and Thee no cloud shall interpose,
But He shall be Himself Thy shade;
To break the Malice of Thy Foes,
The Eternal God, shall be Thy refuge made:
The Lord shall be Thy sure defense,
Thy guard both night, and day,
Shall sweeten every Planets influence,
And to serve Thee, make both the Sun, and Moon obey.
V.
God shall defend Thee, and Thy life shall be
Secured from danger by His love;
And all things, which belong to Thee,
The Care, which He has of Thy Soul shall prove:
Without, He shall direct Thy Way,
Within, shall bless Thy store;
And all the while from Him Thou 'rt forced to slay,
Shall what Thou have make serve Thy turn, or give Thee more!
Psalm CXXII. Laetatus sum in his qua, etc. A song of Degrees of David. III.

I.
It Was the best news I wish to hear,
My very Soul stood ravished at my ear,
Let Us go, they said; Come! Let Us away!
Already we have tarried long enough,
Now let our speed declare Our love;
Why should we thus from Sion stay,
And only be unhappy by our Own delay?
II.
Let Us go; see at the City gates
How God Himself to greet Our coming waits!
We Come, O God, nor will we rest,
Till we the place have in Jerusalem found,
Till we have trod that Holy ground,
Which Thou of all the World love best,
Which Thou of all the World have with Thy Presence blessed
III.
Jerusalem is strong, and fair,
Glorious above what other Cities are;
The Seat of the Eternal King,
Whose lofty Palaces approach the skies,
And to be near their God to 'Heav'n rise;
Thither the Tribes their Offerings bring,
And from their scattred Cities come His Praise to sing.
IV.
There are the Thrones of Judgment set,
Her Power is large, and Her Dominion great;
The Thrones of David there stand fast,
The Lord Himself in Sion founded them,
Has fixed them in Jerusalem,
Subject to neither change, or Wast,
But such, as shall by Him upheld, for ever last.
V.
Triumphant City; May Thou be
Happy like Him, who first established Thee!
May He from Wars Thy gates secure,
And like Thee Thy well-wishers ever bless,
Give Thee a long, and certain peace,
Make all His blessings to Thee sure,
And may Thy Peace, as constant as His Power endure!
VI.
For Isreal's sake Thou have my love,
Second to none but His who rules above;
For Sions sake I Will happiness
On all Thy Palaces, and Borders pray;
Thy Palaces shall never decay,
Within Thy Borders War shall cease,
For He, who is Thy Guardian, is the God of Peace.
Psalm CXXIII. Ad te Levavi oculos meos, etc. A song of Degrees. IV.

I.
TO Thee, O Lord, I lift my careful eyes,
To Heaven, where Thou sitst clothed with light,
And though I hopeless am to reach Thy sight,
I cannot choose but let them thither rise;
Toward Heaven they look, and seek Thee every where,
And though they see Thee not, know Thou art there.
II.
As Servants on their Masters sign depend,
Know what to do, what to forbear,
From thence, though they no other language hear,
And with quick eyes unto their hands attend:
Waiting on Thee, we more dependence show,
And though Thou art in visible, do so.
III.
We wait, and waiting never will give over,
Till Thou to us Thy Mercy show;
O, on us Now Thy Mercy, Lord bestow,
And what we long have lost, again restore!
Thy Mercy, Lord; and since Thou 'rt Just, and strong,
Repeal Our miseries, and revenge Our wrong!
IV.
Revenge the wrong, which we endure from those,
Who at us scoff, because We 're Thine,
Against us only for Thy sake combine,
And are Our envious and malicious foes!
Their sloth, and ease make them Our pains deride,
And all Our grief's the Triumph of their pride.
Psalm CXXIV. Nisi quia Dominus, etc. A song of Degrees of David. V.

I.
"HAD not the Lord our Cause maintained
"The Lord Himself, may Israel say,
"Had not the Lord the Victory for us gained,
"Instead of getting, We had lost the day,
"And Captives been to them, who now are made Our prey.
II.
On us they came, and like a flood,
Which would within no banks be held,
They fiercer grew, the more they were withstood,
Increased in rage, when we their force repelled,
And by Our opposition higher only swelled.
III.
God on the banks in view did stand,
And when the floods did Lowdest rore,
Moved over the floods His All-commanding hand,
They stood awhile and gazed, then backwards bore,
And chid their fellow waves, which came too slow before.
IV.
The Lord Himself has made Our Way,
And from their snares has set us free;
The snares are broke, which they for us did lay,
And when they looked that we should taken be,
God who first loosed the net, did give us wings to flee.
V.
God is Our refuge, and in vain
Frail Man against Him thinks to stand;
His Word made all things, all things does sustain,
And He deliverance for us will command,
Has past His Word to do it, and will use his Hand!
Psalm CXXV. Qui confidunt in Domino, etc. A song o^ Degrees. VI.

I.
ALL those, who on the Almighty God rely,
On God, who does over all command,
Unmoved shall like Mount Sion stand,
Shall stand as firm, and bear their heads as high;
And what Mount Sion's to Jerusalem,
The Rock of Ages shall Himself be made to Them.
II.
Thrice happy City, girt with Mountains round,
On whom, acknowledging Thy state,
The lesser Hills rise up, and wait,
By God Himself Queen of all Cities crowned,
Impregnable, and steep rocks defend Thy Coasts,
But would prove vain, were not their guard The Lord of Hosts!
III.
He only is Thy Strength, and not those Hills,
Yet as those Hills girt Thee about,
The Lord surrounds, and finds His out,
Is always near, since every Place He fills;
God shall fight for them make their Enemies fly,
Lest seeing them still prosper, They should Him deny.
IV.
Arise, O God, and show Thy Mighty hand,
Let not the Righteous be oppres'd!
Do good to Them, but for the rest,
Let them Thy Wrath by bearing understand!
On Israel Peace, and Thy Chief Blessings shower,
But on their Enemies floods of Fire, and Brimstone pour
Psalm CXXVI. In convertendo Dominus. A song of Degrees. X.

I.
WHen God a Miracle for Sion wrought,
And home Her exiled Captives brought,
(Exiles, whose long Captivity
Made them forget they e're were free,
And almost wish, but as they were to be)
The Almighty did the Work so fast,
We thought it but a pleasant dream,
Yet wished that dream might ever last,
It did so pleasant to us seem;
A Dream, which though we did not homewards go,
Made us believe we did, and hope 'twas so.
II.
But when Fruition had Our hopes overcome,
And we indeed awaked at home,
A Dream Our sufferings then seemed more,
Than Our deliverance did before,
A Dream we thought what we in bondage bore;
And cheered at Our arrival there,
Like men roused by some sudden fright,
Who in suspense 'twixt joy, and fear,
Wake and speak of it, when it is light,
We whom Our fears struck dumb His praises spoke,
Who first Our chains, and then Our silence broke.
III.
The very heathen, as We past along,
Joined with us in Our cheerful song,
"The Lord has done great things, they sai'd,
"Great things for us, we answer made
The Lord has done great things, whereof we are glad!
Like us may He the Remnant bring,
Bring back the whole Captivity,
And since there is Water in the Spring,
O, may not long the streams be dry!
But, Lord, like Rivers in the parched South,
Make these overflow, as Thou suppli'st their drougth!
IV.
He, who his future hopes in grief does sow,
And makes them with his tears to grow,
With joy shall see a fruitful spring,
With joy His harvest home shall bring,
And all his sheaves with showting carry in:
As when the Careful Husbandman,
His seed into the ground has thrown,
Rejoices at a soaking rain,
To water that, which he has sown,
Plenty distills from Heaven with every drop,
And a moist Seed-Time makes the fairest crop.
Psalm CXXVII. Nisi Dominus aedificaverit, etc.
I.
DOwn to the very Center of the Earth,
Let the foundations sink as low, A song of Degrees of Solomon. VIII.

As its proud Towers in height do go,
To Heaven above, and touch Hell underneath,
If God the Mighty Pile does not sustain,
The weaker buttresses are all in vain:
Either an Earthquake to the ground
Shall overthrow, and level all;
Or God Himself the Babel shall confound,
And then the difference is but small,
Whether it stand a Babel, or a Palace fall,
II.
Bring all the Forces of the City out,
Guard every port, and every street,
A double guard upon them set,
And girt the Walls as they girt you about!
Yet after all to Heaven you open ly,
(Heaven the best friend, but the worst Enemy)
No guarding against that can save,
But without help from thence is lost,
And those, who would from Heaven protection have,
Must keep their hearts, more than their Coasts,
Must keep there, what must them preserve, the Lord of Hosts.
III.
"The Sun's already up, and I must rise,
"How soon the day has chased the night!
But when that has expelled the light,
"How soon it is Night! the painful labourer cries!
With care he rises, and with care lies down,
Another makes the profit, Care his Own:
This though unbid, is his sure guest,
Unseen into his bed does slide,
And always hinders, or else breaks his rest;
Poor Man, who thinks by this false guide,
To find that Ease, which God from all but His does hide
IV.
God ease, and Children to His Own does give,
Crowns all their Cares with this increase,
Makes their great care their greatest ease,
Children, in whose Posterity they live;
For by these shafts beyond the grave they fly,
And triumph over their greatest Enemy.
The Man, whose quiver loaded is
With such as these, need fear no shame,
Some may reach home, though some fall short, or miss;
Happy Man, who has to guard His Fame,
More than great Kings a lifeguard of his blood, and Name!
Psalm CXXVIII. Beati omnes qui timent, etc. A song of Degrees IX.

I.
Blessed is the Man, whose fear does prove
Only his guide in the Right Way,
Whose fear makes him the Lord obey,
And is the best incentive to his love:
He of the Labor of his hands shall eat,
The Lord shall always bless his store,
His blessings always shall flow over,
And God, who makes him good, will make them great.
II.
His Wife, like to a fruitful Vine,
Shall into breadth and clusters run,
To him shall look, as to her Sun,
And still have fruit on which that Sun may shine:
Like Olive plants his children round his board,
With spreading branches garnished,
Shall with their blossoms crown his head;
And thus shall he be blessed, who fears the Lord.
III.
The Lord shall bless Thee, show Thee good,
And all Thy days shall let Thee see
Jerusalems Prosperity,
And wonder how so long unmoved it stood:
Thou into Childrens Children shall increase,
Shall see them into Children grow;
And, what will make it Heaven below,
Shall Israel all the while behold in Peace!
Psalm CXXIX. Saepe expugnaverunt, etc. A song of Degrees VII.

I.
UP from my Youth may Israel say,
From my Youth up I have great troubles seen,
Trouble, and life did at a time begin,
Bear date from the same place, and day,
Together came, together stay,
Scarce any joy appears between,
Yet through that God, who helps me, I have Conqueror been
II.
My Enemies came, and with their plough
My tender back did cruelly run over,
My tender back with cruel furrows tore,
They plowed, but nothing hoped would grow,
But then God did the furrows sow,
From my fresh wounds new arms I bore,
And over them brought the wheel, who plowed over me before.
III.
The Righteous God has struck in two,
And broke those snares, which for Our feet they made;
Has all their plots, and mischiefs open laid,
And though they thought He did not know,
Discovered what they thought to do,
Made them of their own snares afraid,
May Sions foes with their own wrongs thus be repai'd!
IV.
May God upon their glory blow,
And like the grass, which on some aged Wall,
Looks fresh, and gay, and almost out of call,
With scorn beholds the fields below,
So may they flourish, wither so,
So may they stand, so may they fall,
Till in one ruin perish grass, and mound, and all.
V.
The Reaper cannot fill his hand,
In vain the husband man does give it rest,
In vain expects with sheaves to fill his breast,
It thrives not like his other land,
That grows, but this is at a stand,
That by each passenger is blessed,
But none for this does ever put up one request.
VI.
There stirrs not as you pass a prayer,
But all struck silent, as they there go by,
First look up, if their prayers will reach so high,
And think them better used else where;
Nor like these shall you wishes hear,
"The Almighty grant prosperity,
"And what Our blessings want, may His to Thee supply!
Psalm CXXX. De profundis clamavi, etc. VI. Penitential Psalm of Degrees. XI.

I.
OUT of the depths unto the Lord I cried,
Deep Seas of Misery Where I lay,
But over my soul the waves did ride,
And louder roared, when I began to pray,
Ah! still their noise, and be not, Lord, as deaf as they!
II.
I know I have deserved these miseries,
And greater plagues might justly fear;
And if Thou should to judgment rise,
Indeed despair of ever coming near,
For those great sins, which harden mine, may stop Thy ear.
III.
But, Lord, there is forgiveness still with Thee,
Thou wait'st Thy Favors to bestow,
I wait when Thou will gracious be,
My hope alone does from Thy Mercy flow,
And since Thou wait'st, Lord, to be gracious, Ah, be so!
IV.
For as the Watchman, who has stood all night,
Upon the guard does long for day,
Looks when the Sun will make it light,
Just so attending on the Lord We stay,
Till the bright Sun of Righteousness His beams display.
V.
Hope in Thy God; O Israel, and Thy trust
All times upon His Mercy place;
He who has promised Thee is just,
And if with confidence Thou seek His Face,
Thy sins He Will take away, and freely give His Grace.
I.
Plunged in the depths of sin and misery,
Where I could nothing see but Death
Ready to stifle my complaining breath,
With which to Thee my God I sent my Cry,
Hoping at length to reach Thine ear,
And by my often calls get Thee to hear,
Hear me, I said, let not my Cries be vain,
Lest I no strength should have to Cry again.
II.
Eternal God, should Thy all-seeing eye
Severely mark Our often strayes;
Our wanderings in the forbidden dangerous ways,
Of basest sin, and fond Iniquity,
Who then could in Thy presence stand,
Or bear the weight of Thy enraged hand?
But Thou art mighty in Thy Pardoning love,
O let us fear that we may grateful prove.
III.
Wherefore I Will wait for Thee, my gracious Lord,
Till Thou Thy Favors shall dispense,
And make me feel their powerful influence,
My Soul for this shall hope in Thy sure word:
For Thee I Will wait with more desire
Than they, who for the Morning light enquire,
That from their weary watch they may be freed;
Yea more than they, wherefore my God make speed!
IV.
Let Israel on the Lord repose His trust,
With whom both Mercy is and love,
The constant streams that flow from Him above:
Like whom there is none so good, yet none so just:
For though He did a ransom find,
'Twas such as through't His Justice brighter shined:
From Him Redemption shall to Israel come,
Which to their land and Him shall bring them home.
Psalm CXXXI. Domine not est exaltatum, etc. A song of Degrees of David. XII.

I.
NO, Lord, Thou know I am not so,
And yet Thou all my soul do know;
Alike before Thee open ly
My Innocent heart, and humble eye,
Which have no pride, but from the malice of my Foe.
II.
I do not to the Crown aspire,
Nor what is my Sovereigns, Lord, desire;
Such thoughts beyond m' ambition go,
Too high for me, who am so low,
And yet my humble Soul, beneath the Crown, looks higher.
III.
To Thee I look, on Thee attend,
Hoping Thou will my Right defend,
The Crown is but an empty thing,
And what it has not cannot bring,
Not after that but Thee O God my prayers I send!
IV.
For I restrain my self in this,
Just like a child that new weaned is,
From 'his Mothers breast, who though he cry,
And grieves at first those streams are dry,
Forgets it, and straight loathes what he was wont to kiss.
V.
As I have done may Israel do,
And weaned from all things here below,
Unto their God alone attend,
And only on His help depend,
On God, who greater things than Kingdoms can bestow!
Psalm CXXXII. Memento Domine David. A song of Degrees. XIII.

I.
LORD.
REmember David, and His vow,
And all the troubles He did undergo,
Whilst for Thy Ark He sought a Resting place:
Abroad He suffered, and at home,
But when He thought the worst was overcome,
This still remained, and His great trouble was.
II.
Remember, Lord, the Oath He made,
And how solicitous to see it pai'd!
Within my house, said He, I Will come no more,
Nor on soft couches wait for sleep,
My very Bed shall watch against it keep,
Girt round with Pious Cares, and armed all over.
III.
I Will search till I the place shall find,
Which God Himself has for His Rest designed:
We know it, Lord, and to it each remove,
How first at Shilo Thou did reign,
Then in a grove, and unfrequented plain,
Places still innocent, because once Thy love.
IV.
Look how Thy Courts we reach with praise,
And as We bow Our knees, Our voices raise!
Arise, O God, and Thy great journey take,
Thou, and Thy Ark together rise,
Before Thee scatter all Thine Enemies,
And Sion, Thy delight, Thy Residence make!
V.
Let all Thy Priests Their praises sing,
And with loud shouts Thy Saints their Offerings bring
Let Thy Anointed in the Roll be one,
And for Thy Servant David's sake,
To whom Thou freely did Thy Promise make,
This Happiness confirm unto His Son!
VI.
In Truth Thou did to David swear,
(Witness Thy self) "Thou shall not want an heir,
But of Thy seed I on Thy Throne will set;
And if Thy Children Faithful be,
And keep the Laws transmitted here to Thee,
Their Throne like Thine shall stand, and be as Great.
VII.
For I have Sion made my Rest,
The place, which I of all the World love best,
My house for ever, where I choose to dwell,
All Her Provisions I will bless,
And thence Her poor shall look for their increase,
And when they see it, wonder how it fell.
VIII.
There shall her Priests my Praises sing,
And with Loud Shouts My Saints their Offerings bring*
The Horn of David there I Will make to bud,
An Horn of Plenty, full, and green,
Where some New blossoms ever shall be seen,
Whose fruit's as generous, as the root is good,
IX.
There for my King I Will set a light,
My eye shall make it burn, and keep it bright;
Obscurity shall on His Foes be cast,
Covered with shame they shall ly down,
But on His head I Will put a glorious Crown,
And I, who put it on, will hold it fast.
Psalm CXXXIII. Ecce quam bonum, and quam, etc. A song of Degrees of David. XIV.

I.
Blessed day! wherein I live to see
The Tribes, like Brethren, all agree,
Like Brethren striving, who shall my best Subjects be.
II.
God has by them restored my Crown,
And they secured what was their Own,
For what on me they poured, upon themselves fell down.
III.
The Anointing Oil, they on me spent,
On them in Acts of Favor went,
As if for them, as much as me, the Oil was meant.
IV.
Like that, which on the High Priest shed,
At first it only wet His head,
But then over beard, and clothes, and all was quickly spread.
V.
Or like those mists, which from the Main
The sun draws up, to send again,
In dews, first on the Hills, and then the humble Plain.
VI.
With such the Almighty loves to dwell,
And Souls agreed His Praise can tell,
How on them blessings, when on others vengeance fell.
Psalm CXXXIV. Ecce nunc benedicite, etc.
I.
PRaise Him, Ye Servants of the Eternal King, A song of Degrees. XV.

Who always in His Temple stay,
Till your loud songs the cheerful Morning bring,
And having chased the Night away,
Call to attend your Sacrifice the rising day!
II.
And as you praise Him, let your thankful hands
Their part in all the Service bear,
They have their language, which He understands,
Though none beside their voice does hear,
For them reserves His eye, and for your lips His Ear!
III.
The Lord from Sion on Thy Borders reign
Showers, like that Heaven which sends them, free!
Return Thy Blessings on Thee back again;
Let them Thine own, and greater be,
That Gods, who Heaven and Earth did make, and all for Thee!
Psalm CXXXV. Laudate nomen Domini, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
YE Servants of The Immortal King,
His Masters of request below,
To whom, when We our just Petitions bring,
Immediately to Heaven they go;
And by your means, who there attend,
In The flames which burn the Sacrifice, ascend,
To His Great Name, which He delights to raise,
Though far above your reach, direct your Praise!
II.
There Is none like Him, so full of love,
On whom you can your praise bestow;
And if great Goodness can affection move,
Then praise His Name for that is so!
For Jacobs seed He gave His voice,
And placed His Treasure, where He made His choice;
So great that none can contradict His will,
But when they most resist it, most fulfill.
III.
His Pleasure Heaven, and Earth obey,
And Laws which He first gave them keep;
He chains the Sea, and bounding sands does lay,
For mighty fetters on the Deep;
Causes thick vapors to ascend,
And in one cloud moist Hail, and fire does blend;
Out of His Treasures brings the unruly wind,
And Captive Tempests with strong Cords does bind.
IV.
In Egypt, when He did begin,
Thus He their First Born would not spare;
The Beasts were punished for their Masters sin,
Under the Curse because they were;
His Wonders God before Him sent,
And thither afterward in Person went;
Egypt, Thou saw His hand in the midst of Thee,
When Pharaoh, who did bear it, Would not see.
V.
He mighty Kingdoms overthrew,
Scattred their Forces, slew their Kings,
And Victory, which abroad at Pleasure flew,
Made serve at home without her wings;
Sehon and Ogg before Him fell,
In whose Possessions Faithful Israel dwell;
That Promised Land, which He their Fathers gave,
Who from that gift their surest Title have.
VI.
Eternal God, like Thee Thy Name
Endures to all Eternity,
And as Its Power is constantly the same,
So shall Its just Memorial be;
For Thou will for Thy People rise,
Subdue, and Scatter all their Enemies,
That under yoaks they shall no more remain,
But to Thy House, and City be restored again.
VII.
Dumb Idols shall not Thee withstand,
Nor thousand Gods fond men adore;
For all, though fashioned by the Workmans hand,
Remain the Clay they were before;
Dull Clay, which neither sees, nor hears,
Though Art has given them eyes, and made them ears,
Most Easy Gods to whom when any cry,
They therefore grant because they cannot deny.
VIII.
Without or Speech, or breath, or sense,
Though they of All the Organs have;
In vain is help to be expected thence,
Where Is not enough themselves to save:
Blind Deities, but blinder they,
Who knowing it, to their own Work will pray;
Never thinking that it cannot to them turn,
And that one fire will god, and Incense burn.
IX.
But Thou, O Israel, Bless Thy Lord!
O House of Aaron, bless His Name!
And you, who serve at the Altar by His Word,
With coals from thence increase your Flame!
Let joy in every Face appear,
And bless the Lord, whom you have made your Fear!
From Sion bless Him, who reigns King above,
But at Jerusalem is The God of Love!
Psalm CXXXVI. Consitemini Domino Quoniam, etc.
I.
OPraise The Lord, for He is Good,
And let the World His love adore,
For though His Power may aw them more,
His Love guards those, who are by that withstood,
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
II.
Praise Him, who over all gods does reign,
The God of Gods, of Kings the King,
To whom all Thrones this Homage bring,
What He first gave them, to resign again!
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
III.
All that We see His hand has done,
Who makes His Mighty Power appear,
With wonder strikes us, and with fear,
For His own sake He did it, and alone:
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
IV.
He made the Heavens, that glorious space,
Which has no bound, and knows no end,
Whose greatness man can comprehend
As little, as that God, who made the Place;
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
V.
The Flood at first hid all the Land,
Till He raised it above the Flood,
Where it unmoved e're since has stood,
He stretched it out, by reaching out His hand,
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
VI.
The Lamps of Heaven ow all their light
To Him, who caused them first to shine,
He on them looked, they like a Mine,
From thence took fire, and ever since are bright:
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
VII.
He charged the Sun to rule the day,
Gave him His beams and influence,
Laws how he should his Flames dispense,
And when he rules, then does he most obey;
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
VIII.
The Moon and stars at night attend,
And on the guard in turns all wait;
Some go of sooner, some more late,
And to relieve them God does others send;
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
IX.
Praise Him, who for their Fathers sin,
Smote Cham's first born, did none pass over,
Sent death to look on every door,
Who frighted at no blood without, went in.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
X.
Who with strong hand, and out-stretch'd Arm,
Delivered Israel from the Yoke;
Who all the Egyptian fetters broke,
And made His Isreal's March, be their Al-arm.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XI.
Who all times did His Promise keep,
The Red Sea for them did divide;
And what the Waves before did hide,
Made them His Ways see truly in the Deep.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XII.
The liquid Deep in Walls did stand,
Of purest Crystal, through whose glass
The Floods behind saw Israel pass,
And there, as in themselves, admired His hand.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XIII.
But when the army was gone over,
God took His rein from of the Wave,
And Jacobs way was Egypts grave,
Was Sea again, and washed its ancient shore.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XIV.
God did Himself direct their Way,
A fiery Pillar was their Moon;
Night followed close, when they were gone,
And from their Foes hid where their journies lay.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XV.
He potent Kings did overthrow,
Their Forces scattred, scorned their rage,
Himself did for His Flock engage,
And made them conquer, when He bid them go.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure,
XVI.
Sehon, who did their Way deny,
Found all His Troops to be but vain;
When God their Battles did maintain,
Instead of stopping them, himself did fly.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XVII.
Ogg heard his fall, but would come out,
Thinking a double Victory,
Would raise his glory to the sky;
But God, who Sehon slew, against him fought.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XVIII.
God to the Conquest waved His hand,
Descending in the Sacred Flame,
Weak Israel by His Power, o'recame,
And they, who asked but passage, shared the Land.
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XIX.
Praise Him, who in Our low estate
Did many Victories for us gain,
Unseen Our weakness did sustain,
Redeemed us, when we thought is was too late!
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XX.
Who for all Creatures does provide,
Of His Own fullness gives them food,
Feeds both the Wicked, and the Good,
Who from His Treasures always are supplied!
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
XXI.
Who to frail Man the Earth has given,
And made Him King, and God below,
Where all things to His Scepter bow,
But is Himself Man's King, and God of Heaven!
His Mercies have been ever sure,
And to Eternity endure.
Psalm CXXXVII. Super flumina Babylonis, etc.
I.
AS on the banks of Chebar we state down,
Lamenting Sions Miseries,
At Sions Miseries we forgot our own,
And wished for her such Rivers in our eyes:
We envied there the rolling tide,
That at Our feet did gently slide,
That at our feet more streams, than from our eyes did glide
II.
The Willows to our plaints bowed down their ear,
And did in hollow murmurs groan;
The Willows bowed as though they longed to hear
Again those griefs, which they before had known:
They bowed, and on their heads we hung
Our Harps untuned, Our Harps unstrung,
Sorrow their strings unloos'd, but faster tied Our tongue.
III.
'Twas then we suffered double misery,
When to us Our rude spoilers came,
And to deride our sad Captivity,
Imbittred it with Captive Sions Name:
Our selves we only grieved before,
But when Their scorns just Sion bore,
At Her great sufferings, of our own we thought no more.
IV.
"One of your songs let us hear, they proudly cried,
"And one of Sions Anthems play,
"Your griefs and pensive cares now throw aside,
" Sion is here, since we brought you away!
As if we, at their base Commands,
Could sing, forgetful of our bands,
Could play, when they who stopped our mouths, had tied our hands
V.
No! No! in foreign Lands if we do thus,
For Sion thus forget to grieve,
Let Her God too forget to pity us,
And these foud tongues close to their palats cleave!
Her Praises first our mouths did fill,
From Her Our hands first learned their skill,
No wonder then, if Sion mourns, that they lie still!
VI.
Remember Edom, Lord, who in the day
Jerus'lem was a Captive made,
Joined with Her Enemies, and shared the prey,
And made us more than Babylon afraid!
"Raze it, they cried, down with the Wall,
"To the foundations Level all,
"She that to Babylon will not stoop, it is fit She fall!
VII.
Hold Babylon -- where will thy rage extend?
God has enough to Sion done,
Hold, and prepare Thee Babylon for Thy end,
What may Thou fear, if thus He serves His Own?
May Thou in Thine Our miseries see,
And all the wrongs we bore from Thee,
And know, that less than what Thou have deserved, they be!
VIII.
May Thy own Mercies on Thy head return,
Those Mercies which are Cruelties,
May Thou in flames of Thy own kindling burn,
And send in vain to Heaven Thy fruitless cries!
And Happy He, who on the stones,
On Flints shall dash Thy little ones,
And have than flints less bowels for their dying groans!
Psalm CXXXVIII. Confitebor tibi Domine in toto cord, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd, I will bless Thee, and my cheerful voice
Before the gods shall tell my joies:
Those glorious Powers, to whom Thou do impart
Thy Name, and Office here below,
Shall see me pay the praise I ow,
And as I had Thy ear, return my Heart.
II.
Then to Thy Sacred Hill my eyes I Will raise,
And fetch new subjects for my Praise:
My Song shall count of what Thou did for me,
Of Mercy, and of Truth I Will sing;
And when I'have wearied out that string,
Thy Faithfulness another ground shall be.
III.
Thou have exalted it, and why not I?
For when to Thee I Loud did cry,
To Thee, my God, and mourned in my distress,
My doleful groans Thy heart did move,
Thou did refresh me from above,
And answer gav'st of Thine Own Faithfulness.
IV.
The heathen Kings, when they Thy Wonders hear,
Shall both rejoice and serve with fear;
By My example in Thy Ways shall sing,
Ascribe to Thee what is Thine Own,
Cast at Thy Feet their Scepters down,
And do their homage to Thee, as their King.
V.
God over all, whose Throne is set on high,
Above the Circle of the sky,
The humble, and their proud Oppressors knows;
The difference only lies in this,
Though well known to Him either is,
When He delivers those, He these o'rethrows.
VI.
No! I Will never fear, though trouble me surround,
Most fixed when I shall feel no ground:
Thou will revive me, and with Thy Right hand,
Thy poor afflicted Creature save,
My Enemies wrath an end shall have,
And on his ruin I shall firmer stand.
VII.
The Lord will perfect what He has begun,
And finish what is yet undone;
Thou, whose Compassions all Thy Works transcend,
Care of the Issue also take,
Nor me Thy Handiwork forsake,
But with eternal Triumphs crown the end!
Psalm CXXXIX. Domine probasti me, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
IN vain, O God, my folly, and my pride
Make me in vain persume to be,
By all my shifts, concealed from Thee,
When from my self, my self I cannot hide;
Thy day still breaks into my night,
Still gives me of my self the sight,
For Thee to see me by, shall it not be more bright?
II.
Thou 'hast searched me, Lord, and all my life have known,
Know every Action of my life,
When with my self or Thee at strife,
Thou know my rising up, and lying down:
My thoughts, and heart, to Thee are clear,
Thou art their Judge, and always near,
Do see, and sentence both, before I know what is there,
III.
Where e're I go, in what place e're I stay,
Whether I wake, whether I sleep,
Thy Spirit by me watch does keep,
Is my Companion in the closest way;
If I but whisper, that stands by,
And though unseen by Mortal eye,
Takes from my Lips the word, and to Thine ear does fly,
IV.
There Is no avoiding Thee, behind, before,
On all sides Thou have girt me round;
My God, Thy Wisdom's too profound,
Too deep to fathom, higher than I can soar;
Thy hand first made, and fashioned me,
Thy Will commands me now to be,
Being or life I cannot have, unless in Thee.
V.
Then whither shall I from Thy Presence fly?
If up to Heaven my Way I take,
Thou Heaven Thy Residence do make,
And to get further off I come more nigh;
If down to Hell, the Devils there,
Tell me Thou 'rt present by their fear,
They tell me what I merit; by the pains they bear.
VI.
Quick as my thought, could I remove me hence,
And in the furthest East remain,
Below the Sea some covert gain,
Thy Sun would show me as he rises thence:
If I say darkness, and the night,
Which shut out all, shall bar Thy sight,
That Darkness, which is so to me, to Thee is light.
VII.
Thou art within me too, close as my heart,
Within my heart, unknown to me,
For when that first was made by Thee,
Thy breath, Lord, was my best, and chiefest part:
Thou threw'st Thy self in, and in vain,
To fly from Thee, my self I pain,
For ever since Thou do within my heart remain.
VIII.
I know I am Thy Masterpiece, and all
I in the greater World admire,
Find in my self, and something higher,
Am Heaven in Perspective, and Earth in small:
By Thee was wonderfully made,
Nor is Thine Image so decayed,
But when I view my self, I am of Thee afraid.
IX.
Nothing of me, not my least part's unknown,
Then, when I first was wrought below,
Thy eyes, and hands disposed me so,
My Members in Thy book were entered down;
Entered before all time they were,
When none of them did yet appear,
And what Thou then design'dst them, now in time they are.
X.
This as I thinkof, and what Thou have done.
The wondrous pledges of Thy love,
By whom I live, in whom I move,
My heart is struck as silent, as my tongue;
They pass the Sands upon the Shore,
And had I told their Number over,
Those would more numerous seem, than they appeared before.
XI.
But as Thou 'rt gracious, Thou art also just,
And wilt the Wicked Man overthrow,
Teaching him by Thy Power to know,
How great that God is, which he would not trust:
Down with them, Lord, destroy them all,
Let their own Curses on them fall,
Who on Thy Name, but in their Oaths, did never call!
XII.
Do not I hate them, Lord, those who hate Thee,
And are not they my Enemies,
Who in their rage against Thee rise?
Thou know I hate them, and they 're so to me:
Search me, and try me, sound my heart,
Its most retired, and deepest part,
And lead me to that life, whose Way and Guide Thou art!
Psalm CXL. Eripe me Domine ab, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
LOrd, from the evil man my life defend,
Nor let his Treasons, or his violence,
His open force, or close pretense,
Work ill to him, who does on Thee depend!
His thoughts Thou know are ever set on War,
And now to give me battle ralli'd are.
II.
Instead of sword he sharpens a false tongue,
More venomous than that, which serpents bear;
The poison from an Adders spear,
Wounds not so mortally, nor kills so long:
O, by Thy Power may I his plots withstand,
For if his tongue's thus cruel, what is his hand?
III.
The ginns are laid, and all the toiles are set,
They are resolved my Footsteps to overthrow;
And where they guess I needs must go,
In the midway the proud have spread their net;
"Most Holy Lord, Thou art my God, I said,
"And now is Thy time to help, since I have prayed!
IV.
When thousand dangers had begirt me round,
And all my Foes were ready in the field,
Thou were my helmet, and my shield,
And sav'dst that head, which Thou before had crowned
May the desires of all the Wicked fail,
Lest when I slip, they think their hand prevail!
V.
Let them not by my ruin higher rise,
And judge by the success their cause is good!
But stain their swords with their own blood,
And be avenged on Thy false Enemies!
Let burning coals fall on them in Thine Ire,
And let their own lips help to blow the Fire!
VI.
Then throw them down into the Flame, nor more,
Unless it be to Judgment, may they rise!
And after bear fresh miseries,
Sharper than all, which they endured before!
Let vengeance hunt the violent man to' his grave,
And so much earth may he for 'his portion have!
VII.
I know the Lord will to the poor do right,
And plead Himself, as well as judge their cause,
Trying them by such equal laws,
That their cleared Innocence shall look more bright!
So that the Righteous on their God shall stay,
And in His sight enjoy Eternal Day.
Psalm CXLI. Domine clamavi ad te, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
MY God, when in distress I cry,
And on my long-wing'd sighs unto Thee fly,
Make haste to meet me, Come away,
Ah, do no longer from me stay,
But by Thy Presence show, Thou hearst me, when I pray!
II.
Let my requests like incense rise,
Not to o're-cloud, but to perfume the skies!
And when the day resigns to night,
Let it again receive new light,
And by my Sacrifices Flames become more bright!
III.
Before my mouth, Lord, set a guard,
And let its double gates be always barred!
Keep my heart too, and be its guide,
That to no ill it turn aside,
And lest I for them long, sins flattring pleasures hide!
IV.
The just man's check I can endure,
His stroke wounds not, but does advance the cure;
Let him smite me, 't shall be instead
Of Ointment, to refresh my head,
Ointment which cheares the living, and preserves the Dead
V.
For him I Will pray, as he for me,
His blows were balm, and so my Words shall be;
When his cursed judges overthrown
From their great heights shall be cast down,
And in the plagues they bear see all the wrongs they 'have done.
VI.
Our scatted bones no burial have,
Nor know the kind Corruption of the Grave;
Like the arms of some great tree they ly,
Which while its head was raised on high,
Stood the woods glory, now the scorn of all pass by.
VII.
But still my eyes are up to Thee,
Thou art my Trust, and shal't my refuge be;
Let not my Soul of succor fail,
And though the Wicked me assail,
Let not his open force, or hidden plots prevail!
VIII.
Break all the snares, which he has made,
Or let them only for himself be laid!
Down in his own pits Let him fall,
In vain for help, or succor call,
Whilst I, for whom he made them, have no hurt at all!
Psalm CXLII. Voce mea ad Dominum, etc. A Prayer of David When He was in the
Cave.

I.
MY heart just broke, and only strength enough
Left to discharge my debt of grief, and love,
Aloud I to the Almighty cried;
My Lips performed the chiefest part,
For I before had sent my heart,
And where this first was gone, thither I those did guide.
II.
Before my God I empti'd out my prayer,
And dropped for every word I spoke a tear;
My griefs I did before Him lay,
And when I knew not what to do,
Which way I went, or where to go,
He knew my Actions then, and did direct my Way.
III.
Better than I, He knew what plots were laid,
And all the snares, which for my feet they made;
On my right hand I looked, but there
No man my just desires would own,
On me they looked as one unknown,
So far from lending me an hand, they stopped their ear.
IV.
Then to the Lord, to Thee again I prayed,
And in the dolor of my spirit said;
"Thou my Salvation art below,
"Even here Thou do my cause defend,
"Even here Thy aids my prayers transcend,
"And, Lord, though none else will, Thou do my trouble know.
V.
"Hear me, my God, and from my Enemies hand,
"Deliverance, which Thou only giv'st, command!
"Thou see they are too strong for me,
"How daily they increase in power,
"But I Thy wonted helps implore,
"For yet, my God, they cannot be too strong for Thee.
VI.
"From prison bring me, that I may declare,
"How ready for Thine Own Thy Mercies are!
God will deliver me, and I,
Who now unjustly suffer wrong,
Shall make His praises be my song,
And all the Just shall triumph in my Victory.
Psalm CXLIII. Domine exaudi orationem meam, etc. VII Penitential Psalm of
David.

I.
GReat Savior, to my mournful Prayer give ear,
And of Thy Mercy pity me!
O Thou, who see my troubles hear,
And as they need, so let Thy answer be!
I know Thou can do this, and more,
For Thou have done it heretofore!
II.
Behold my troubles, Lord, but not my Sins!
For if Thou once should be severe,
What heart quakes not, when God begins,
To judge, and sets up His Tribunal there?
What Flesh can in His sight be just,
Or to His breath expose its dust?
III.
See how the Enemy my Soul persues,
And how no safety can be found,
Whilst he his daily wrongs renewes,
Unless I, with the dead, dwell under ground,
Unless a wretched life to save,
I enter quick into the grave.
IV.
This grieves my heart, nor would it longer hold,
But that on Thee I meditate,
Remembering what Thou did of old,
How Nothing was too hard, no time too late:
I think of what Thy hand has done,
And take Thy Arm to lean upon.
V.
The thirsty earth, with drought consumed, and heat,
Does not more gape, and long for rain,
Than I whose thirst is full as great,
Am restless grown till I see Thee again;
Hear me my God, hear speedily!
The Earth Thou hear'st and why not me?
VI.
No longer turn Thy glorious Face away!
Or if I must in darkness sit,
Let it be such, as brings the day,
And not eternal, like that in the pit!
At night, my God, give me Thine ear,
And in the morning let me hear!
VII.
Let me Thy Mercies hear, for, Lord, on Thee
Alone for Mercy I rely;
Thy way be pleased to show to me,
And give me wings that I to Heaven may fly!
There I secure shall be at rest,
Nor of my Trust be dispossessed.
VIII.
Teach me to do Thy Will, for Thou art Mine;
And lead me to Thy Sacred land!
Ah, quicken me, for I am Thine,
And by Thy strength alone must firmly stand:
And would Thy Spirit but guide my Way,
I should not care, Lord, where it lay.
IX.
Now for Thy Mercies sake, my troubles end,
For only Thou know what I bear!
Let on my Foes Thy wrath descend,
And Thine eye be like theirs, too fierce to spare!
Let them Thy Indignation know,
But to Thy Servant favor show!
Psalm CXLIV. Benedictus Dominus Deus, etc. A Psalm of David.

I.
Supreme Commander of the Sacred bands,
Strength of my heart, Instructor of my hands,
Who first did for me all the Rules of War lay down,
And made'st that Victory mine, which truly was Thine own,
My shield, my Tower, and ever Good,
The Rock, where I secure from danger stood,
Who up on high my head did raise,
And at my feet did for me Mighty Kings subdue,
Made'st my Own people serve anew,
Thou, who have all these Wonders done, take all the praise!
II.
Lord, what is Man, that Thou should mindful be
Of one, who does so seldom think of Thee?
Or what am I Thou on me set'st so great a price,
But little in my Own, and less in others eyes?
Frail Man, whose days away do fly,
And like Himself are spent in Vanity;
Man, whom one scarce can give a Name,
So light the Subt'lest vapor, which the Sun exhales,
A Dream, or Shadow turns the scales,
Man, who yet impudently to the World lays claim!
III. Versiculus.

Lord, bow Thy Heaven, and in bright Flames come down,
The smoking Hills with dreadful thunder crown!
There take Thy standing, and on my Proud Enemies throw
Destroying lightnings, and make seen Thy bloody bow!
Extend Thy Arm, my Savior be,
And from the Mighty floods deliver me!
From Strangers, who that love pretend,
Which I dare never trust, their mouths so proudly speak;
Whose right hands faith they plighted break;
And swords, which they have drawn, into their bowels send!
IV. Versiculus.

Then will I to Thy glorious Name sing praise,
And in my Song recount of all Thy Ways:
More tunefull Measures will invent; new strings put on,
And raise my Harp with the great Subject to Thy Throne:
For God Salvation gives to Kings,
And David out of all His troubles brings;
From strangers, who that love pretend,
Which He dares never trust, their mouths so proudly speak,
Whose right hands faith they plighted break;
And swords which they have drawn, into their hearts shall send.
V.
He makes Our sons like Fruitful plants to grow,
And their increase to Him alone we owe;
Our daughters to be Corner stones, polisht, and fair,
Which different Houses join, and their supporters are:
From Him alone comes all Our store,
And that Our presses with new Wine run over;
That Our full Barnes no want have known,
Our stacks no emptiness, but with those sheaves are crowned,
With which He first did load the ground,
And now them so, that with the mighty weight they groan.
VI.
He to ten thousands multiplies Our sheep,
More than our folds can pin, or pastures keep;
Our Oxen fat, and strong, not it as labor know,
But freely yield their necks to the Service of the Plow;
Down at Our Gates no Enemy sits,
There Is no Al'arm, or mourning in our streets;
Thrice happy lands which thus can say,
And undisturbed can thus enjoy the fruits of Peace,
(If there be any lands like these)
Yet those, whose God's the Lord are happier far than They.
Psalm CXLV. Exaltabo te Deus meus Rex, etc.
MY God, My King, I will sing praise to Thee,
Till like Thy Name, my songs Eternal be!
Every day, Lord will I sing praise to Thee,
Till like Thy Name, my songs Eternal be!
Great is the Lord, and worthy of all Praise,
And as Himself, Unsearchable His Ways!
One age to count His Works will never suffice,
Their number to so great a sum does rise;
The next shall take it, and the next from them,
And in their songs improve the lofty Theme.
Sing of the Honor of His Majesty,
How far He is exalted, and How high;
Speak of His Reverend Acts, His greatness show,
Above how full of Love, of dread below;
Of all His Goodness, and what He has done,
Both for His Peoples Glory and His Own.
The Lord is gracious, does with Love overflow,
Plenteous in Mercy, and to anger slow;
Kind as a Father, over whose Works there shine
Glories of Mercy, mixed with rays Divine.
All Thy Works praise Thee, and Thy power proclaim.
Thy Kingdoms beauties, and Thy Holy Name.
Thy Saints shall bless Thee, and Thy Acts make known,
And to Posterity continue down,
How to Eternity Thy Rule extends,
And that Thy Empire, Lord, knows neither bounds nor ends.
The Lord upholds all those, who fall, does raise
The Poor on high, that they may see His Ways.
On Him the eyes of all His Creatures wait,
To Him they look, and He provides them meat;
Opens His Hand, does their desires fulfill,
And as He answers theirs, performs His Will.
So Just is He, so Righteous in His ways,
That were We silent, stones would speak His Praise;
And to 'His afflicted Peoples Prayers so near
That their requests e're finished, granted are;
And when to Him for help they send their cries,
His Truth prevents them oftener than denies.
For the desires of such, who Him do fear,
Shall be fulfilled and He their groans will hear;
Will crown their Love, and with His Own right hand
Destroy their Foes, and on their ruins make them stand!
Let the whole World, O God, sing praise to Thee,
And like Mine, may their songs Eternal be!
Psalm CXLVI. Lauda anima mea Dominum, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
ARise my Soul, and Thy great subject take,
The Worlds Creators praises sing!
That Ground Thy Numbers will more flowing make,
And fill with spirit the heaviest string;
He is my song, and He my Verse shall raise,
And only with my life, shall end my Praise.
II.
Trust not in Princes, for their strength is vain,
In Kings place not your confidence!
The greatest King cannot himself maintain,
But lives himself at Gods expense;
Is Earth, and when He but His breath recalls,
Into that Earth, whence he was taken, falls.
III.
Death lays him level with his vilest Slave,
No more his Acts remembered are;
Though his Achievements follow to the Grave,
And deck his Hearse, they leave him there:
With his last breath to air his Counsels go,
And his high thoughts ly with his Carcass low.
IV.
But happy he, who has his trust in store,
And does on Jacobs God depend!
He need no foreign succor to implore,
But up to Heaven his wishes send,
And of his certain aids he never shall miss,
For the true God his mighty keeper is.
V.
He Heaven and all the glories of it made,
Those beauteous fires we see above;
Where greatness makes His Enemies afraid,
But in His Saints, enflames their love;
Who on the floods commands the Earth to stand,
And holds them in the hollow of His hand.
VI.
To Him for Justice the Oppres'd do cry,
Who all their groans and plaints does hear;
And to His great Tribunal when they fly,
He on their Judges turns their fears:
With His good things the hungry Soul does fill,
And makes deaf chains hear, and obey His Will.
VII.
He made the eye, and gave it all its light,
Lifts from the dust the poor man's head;
Renews each morning, both their life, and sight,
Whom sleep had numbered with the dead:
His Common Providence is over all,
But His Choice blessings on the Righteous fall!
VIII.
The unreguarded stranger is his care,
And He for the Orphan does provide;
Himself comes down, and hears the Widows prayer,
When her deaf Friends are turned aside:
The inexorable Wicked man o'rethrowes,
And makes him feel the weight of his own blows.
IX.
Such is Thy King, O Sion, whose Command
Being, and life gives every thing;
Exempt from his Dominion is no land,
Thy God, O Sion, is Thy King;
His Powerful influence does around extend,
And as His Rule, Thy Praise should know no end!
Hallelujah.
Psalm CXLVII. Laudate Dominum quoniam, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
YOU, who the Almighty God adore,
To His great Name sing praise!
His Power you cannot honor more,
Nor more advance your lays!
This is the Service, which to Him you owe,
And this of all he best accepts below.
II.
Jerusalem, the Great, the Fair,
It Is God who made Her so;
Her People, though they scattred are,
He like Her stones does know:
And both will gather, both in 'His hand will take,
His City One, the Other His Temple make.
III.
The troubled heart, with care deprest,
He up on high does raise;
Refreshes weary Souls with rest,
And sinners shows His Ways:
And like a Friend, who all their miseries feels,
Binds up the broken, and the wounded heales.
IV.
Those rich Enamels of the sky,
The Stars, which shine above,
Have several Names He knows them by,
And at His Will they move:
To Him they look, and looking, only thence
Have all their luster, Forms, and Influence.
V.
Great is our God, of great renown,
Whose Wisdome's infinite;
To the Earth He casts the Wicked down,
And raises the upright:
Sing Praises to His Name, with thanks rejoice,
And make the Consort perfect with your Voice!
VI.
The Heavens with clouds He covers over,
And all their beauty hides;
Yet thence the Earth has its best store,
Rain which He there provides:
Whence Plenty comes, but less from what is sown,
Than from the Faithful seasons He pours down.
VII.
Mountains, those Pillars of the Air,
On which Heavens Fabrique lies,
Whose verdant Chapiters are fair,
And in mixed Orders rise,
With Frutages He covers, and with showers
Allaies their heat, and crowns them all with flowers,
VIII.
To Him all Creatures look, and live,
All at His Table eat;
He to bruit-beasts their food does give,
And to young Ravens meat:
An horse to Him, and all his strength, is vain,
And in his sight as poor as this is Man.
IX.
In neither can He Pleasure take,
But does in the Just delight;
And they who Him their refuge make,
Shall flourish in His sight;
Then to Thy God, Jerusalem, sing praise,
Sion, exalt Him, who Thee first did raise!
X.
It Is He who does Thy Walls defend,
And all Thy Gates make strong;
Who does Thy Colonies extend,
And keeps Thee always young:
Who with a numerous offspring does Thee bless,
And gives Thy Land the Happy fruits of Peace.
XI.
And this, because it is His Will,
Whose Pleasure all obey;
Both Heaven and Earth His Word fulfill,
And at it haste away:
On the cold Rocks He His Frost-Mantle throws,
And clothes the naked Hills with woolly snows.
XII.
When on the streams He lays His Chain,
And Captive Floods does bind,
What Power can set them free again,
Till He send out His Wind?
But when on them He causes it to blow,
The melted glass in streams begins to flow,
XIII.
These Works of His by all are seen,
But Jacob has His Word;
No Land beside so blessed has been,
Or favored by the Lord:
For He to Israel has His Judgments shown,
When His displeasure all Lands else have known.
Hallelujah.
Psalm CXLVIII. Laudate Dominum de Coelis. Hallelujah.

I.
YOu blessed Souls, who stand before
The Eternal King, and so long see*
His glory that you changed be
Into that glory you adore,
Praise your great Founder, and above
Admire His Power, and bless His Love!
II.
You, who when Lucifer did fall,
Kept your first standing, and remain
Commanders of that mighty Train,
Of which the Lord is General:
Angels, extol the Almighty King,
And Songs of Triumph to Him sing.
III.
Praise Him from whom Thy light does flow,
Thou, whom as God the World adore,
Renounce that honor, and no more
Usurp a service Thou do ow!
Praise Him, O Sun, when Thou 'rt most bright,
Whose beams to darkness turn Thy light.
IV.
Thou too, who with a borrowed ray,
When all the Lamps of Heaven hang out,
In the Nights silence walk'st about,
And with Thy torch restor'st the day:
Fair Moon and Stars exalt Gods Name,
And in your dance His Power proclaim.
V.
Ye Heavens, whom none can comprehend,
Infinite Waters, where the sky
As if beyond it self 'twould fly
Exceeds all thought, yet finds no end,
Praise Him, who farther does out go
Your height, than you what ere's below.
VI.
He spoke the Word, and you were made,
His first Decree has bound you fast,
Appointed you how long to last,
The Almighty Word your wanderings stayed;
Praise Him whose Word so much can do,
And as it made, destroy you too!
VII.
Let from the Earth His Praises rise,
All Creatures, whom He placed below,
Let them their grateful praises show,
And in that service reach the skies!
Dragons and Whales in the consort move
A tunefull Bass to the Quire above!
VIII.
Sea praise Him, when Thy billows roar!
And mustring up the force of the Main,
The once drowned World assault again,
And seek in the Heavens alone a shore:
Praise Him, who when He moves His hand,
Both stills, and chains Thy waves with sand.
IX.
All Meteors praise the Name of God,
Vapors, and Winds that nothing spare,
But of His Wrath the Armies are,
Lightning's His Scepter and His Rod;
Ice praise Him, who makes Thee a rein
To curb swift streams, and back the Main.
X.
Mountains at His great Name rise up,
Who so ordained by His command,
All in your ranks and orders stand,
Like Piles Heavens Arch to underprop:
Praise Him who your raised heads did crown,
And low as Hell, not throw you down!
XI.
Cedars, who one loft higher go,
And Natures Vanes to Mountains are,
Knowing no other motion there,
Than what the amorous Zephyrs blow:
Plants and Fruit Trees, the pride of the Field,
In generous stores your praises yield.
XII.
Beast and all Cattle, creeping things,
Insects unminded, the great care
Of Him by whom you formed were,
And Birds who with your downy wings,
Cut the soft air, your Presents bring,
And in wild notes His Praises sing!
XIII.
Kings, to whom God His Name does give,
And as Vice-gods has set on high,
True Portraicts of the Deity,
Praise Him in whom your selves do live,
And who, though Homage is your due,
First made the Right, then gave it you.
XIV.
Praise Him all People, every state
And Sex, and Age, Virgins, and Youth
With all the beauteous trains of both,
Or long since born, or born of late;
Praise Him old Men, and since again
Age speaks you Children, show you are Men.
XV.
Let the whole World His Praise restore,
And lift above the Firmament,
That Name He counts so excellent,
And what none fully know, adore:
For from the Deep it all things fills,
Up to the Everlasting Hills.
XVI.
Israel praise Him, Israel for whom
He made all these, and greater things,
The Land subdued, and Potent Kings,
Bringing them thousand Vict'ries home,
Such wonders wrought, and more than this,
Whom He redeemed, and so made His.
Hallelujah.
Psalm CXLIX. Cantate Domino Canticum, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
NEw Songs of Praise to Great Jehovah sing,
And in His Temple let His Name resound;
This small return his Saints may bring,
For all those favors wherewith they are crowned;
Let Israel in His Makers Love rejoice,
And Sion crown again Her Sovereign with Her Voice.
II.
In the High Dance His great Name let them praise,
And that it may approach His Throne above,
The service with shrill Trumpets raise,
And send up Theirs, as He showers down His Love:
They are His Pleasure, and His chiefest Prize,
And though in others mean, yet beauteous in His eyes.
III.
Let the Saints praise Him, who their Glory is;
And on their beds, when they no Comfort see,
Then let them sing, for they are His,
And of salvation confident may be!
He Will raise them up, and by His Powerful Word,
Put in their mouths His Praise, and in their hands a Sword.
IV.
Thus shall they fight, and conquer, throw down all,
Who dare oppose, and to resist them stand;
The Heathen shall before them fall,
And in that ruin feel His vengefull Hand:
Their Captive Kings they shall in fetters bind,
And make their stoutest Princes walk in Chains behind.
V.
That Wrath which was denounced, to execute,
And all the long since written Doom fulfill,
When their fierce Enemies all struck mute,
Shall yield their Lives to the Pleasure of their Will;
Such Glorious Freedom follows Their Restraints,
And this great Honor, after suffering, have the Saints.
Hallelujah.
Psalm CL. Laudate Dominum, etc. Hallelujah.

I.
THe Holy God in His Sanctuary praise!
There where He loves Himself to show;
And having sung His Praise below,
From thence to Heaven, that, and your voice together raise.
II.
In Heaven He makes His Mighty Power be seen,
Praise Him, who makes it there appear!
For if that Greatness awe us here,
What would it do, came not so vast a space between?
III.
Together strive, who shall exalt Him most,
What Instruments the fittest are,
Whether of Love, whether of War,
Shrill Trumpets, or soft Harps to praise the Lord of Host*
IV.
Trumpets, and Harps shall in one Consort move,
The Cornet, and the Amorous Lute,
The Cymbal, and the Warlike Flute,
For He who is the Lord of Host, is God of Love.
V.
Let the whole Earth their praises to Him bring;
Whatever has being, life, or breath;
Angels above, and Men beneath,
And all, whom He has Voices given, His Praises sing!
S. Woodford. At Albrook Hants, 7 Martii, 1665/6

Hallelujah.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PSALMS.
Psalm. Page A. 120 AD Dominum cum tribularer IN my distress unto the Lord 373
28 Ad te Domine clamabo To thee O Lord my Rock 69 25 Ad te Domine levavi To
thee O God my 62 123 Ad te levavi oculos meos To thee O Lord I lift 376 29
Afferte Domino Filii Dei You whom your birth for 71 78 Attendite popule Israel
Gods own inheritance 216 49 Audite haec omnes gentes Attend O World and bid 129
B. 119 Beati immaculati Thrice happy men, who 351 128 Beati omnes qui Blessed is
the man whose 386 32 Beati quorum remissae He whose iniquities are 79 41 Beatus
qui intelligit Blessed is that man who 108 1 Beatus vir qui non Thrice happy man
who 1 112 Beatus vir qui timet That man is truly blessed 334 34 Benedicam Dominum
Lord I will bless Thee 84 104 Benedic anima mea Arise my soul and to the 303
103 Benedic anima mea Arise my soul and to the 300 144 Benedictus Dominus
Supreme Commander of the 419 85 Benedixisti Domine terram At length O God thy
People 236 92 Bonum est confiteri Domino What Saints in Heaven and 278 C 149
Cantate Domino New songs of Praise 433 96 Cantate Domino canticum New songs of
Praise 285 98 Cantate Domino New songs of Praise 289 19 Caeli enarrant gloriam
That boundless space 47 75 Confitebimur tibi Deus Lord we will praise thee 209
9 Confitebor tibi Domine Lord I will praise thee 17 111 Confitebor tibi Domine
With my whole heart I Will 332 138 Confitebor tibi Domine Lord I will bless thee
406 105 Confitemini Domino and Give thanks unto our God 310 106 Confitemini
Domino quoniam Sing to the Lord for 314 107 Confitemini Domino All you who on
the Almighty 319 118 Confitemini Domino To Gods Almighty Name 346 136
Confitemini Domino O praise the Lord for He 399 16 Conserva me Domine Preserve
me Lord for 34 4 Cum invocarem exaudivit Thou who have heard me 6 D 130 De
profundis clamavi Out of the depths unto 389 44 Deus auribus nostris Great God
we often have 115 50 Deus Deorum Dominus It Is past and by irrevocable 132 63 Deus
Deus meus ad te Early my God before 167 22 Deus Deus meus quare My God, My God
why art 54 70 Deus in adjutorium My God, why dos my 189 54 Deus in nomine tuo O
Thou, who Isreal's Savior 148 72 Deus judicium tuum Great God thy judgments
196 109 Deus laudem meam ne Guard of my life and God 327 67 Deus misereatur
nostri Save us O God and 178 46 Deus noster refugium To Armies some for 122 83
Deus quis similis erit tibi Enough my God Thou have 231 60 Deus repulisti nos
Lord thou have smote us 162 82 Deus stetit in Synagoga You judges of the World
229 79 Deus venerunt gentes Lord see the miseries which 222 94 Deus ultionum
Dominus Judge of the Universe 281 116 Dilexi quoniam exaudivit I love thee Lord
342 18 Diligam te Domine Lord I will love thee 39 39 Dixi custodiam vias Let
him go on for me 101 110 Dixit Dominus Domino The Lord said to my Lord 330 36
Dixi injustus ut delinquat Base hypocrite, think 89 14 Dixit insipiens in
cord There is no God the 30 53 Dixit insipiens There is no God the Fool 146
141 Domine clamavi ad te My God when in distress 413 7 Domine Deus meus in te
Almighty God to thee for 12 88 Domine Deus salutis meae Great God whence my 243
8 Domine Dominus noster Sole Monarch of the World 15 102 Domine exaudi
orationem My dearest God let my 296 143 Domine exaudi orationem Great Savior
to my 417 21 Domine in virtute tua Great God who wonders for 51 6 Domine ne in
furore tuo Lord in thy wrath rebuke 10 38 Domine ne infurore tuo Lord in thy
wrath 98 131 Domine non est exaltatum No Lord thou know 391 139 Domine
probasti me In vain O God my 408 3 Domine quid multiplic: Lord how are they
increast 5 15 Domine quis habitabit My God who shall Thy Holy 32 90 Domine
refugium factus Lord we have been Thy 251 24 Domini est terra and The Earth and
all the Earth 60 27 Dominus illuminatio mea When in the silence of the 66 23
Dominus regit me and The Mighty God, who all 58 93 Dominus regnavit decorem
Submit your Crowns O Kings 280 97 Dominus regnavit exultet The Lord dos reign
let the 287 99 Dominus regnavit irascantur. The Lord dos reign let the 291 E.
134 Ecce number benedicite Praise him ye Servants 395 133 Ecce quam bonum Blessed
day wherein I live 394 59 Eripe me de inimicis Preserve me Lord and by 160 140
Eripe me Domine Lord from the evil 411 45 Eructavit Cor meum A thousand fancies
from 118 145 Exaltabo te Deus My God, my King I will 421 30 Exaltabote Domine
My God I will to Thee 73 20 Exaudiat te Dominus So may thy God be 49 61 Exaudi
Deus deprecationem Hear me my Savior 164 55 Exaudi Deus orationem Lord to my
Prayer 150 64 Exaudi Deus orationem Lord to my voice incline 170 17 Exaudi
Domine justitiam Great God of all the 36 40 Expectans expectavi In my great
trouble 104 81 Exultate Deo adjutori To God our strength let 227 33 Exultate
justi in Domino Rejoice ye Righteous and to 81 68 Exurgat Deus and dissip.
Great leader of the 179 F. 87 Fundamenta ejus in 'Twas God himself the 241 I.
86 Inclina Domine aurem O Thou who do the 238 126 In convertendo Dominus When
God a Miracle for 382 11 In Domino confido I know my trust on whom 23 114 In
exitu Israel de When Israel had thrown 338 31 In te Domine speravi Thou art my
hope O God 76 71 In te Domine speravi Thou art my hope O God 193 66 Jubilate
Deo omnis terra Rejoice O World and to 175 100 Jubilate Deo omnis terra You who
throughout the 293 35 Judica Domine nocentes Great God and judge to 86 26
Judica me Domine quoniam Judge me O God for I 64 43 Judica me Deus and Thou who
art judge of all 114 L. 122 Laet atus sum in his quae 'Twas the best news I 377
146 Lauda Anima mea Arise my Soul and Thy 423 148 Laudate Dominum de You
blessed Souls who 429 150 Laudate Dominum in The Holy God in His 435 117
Laudate Dominum omnes All you who to the Lord 345 147 La^^^^^ Dominum quoniam
You, who the Almighty 426 135 Laudate nomen Domini Ye servants of the Eternal
396 113 Laudate pueri Dominum Praise Him ye servants 336 121 Levavi oculos meos
in Unto the Hills I raised 375 M. 48 Magnus Dominus Great is our God and 127
132 Memento Domine David Remember David and 392 57 Miserere mei Deus miserere O
Thou on whom my Soul 155 56 Miserere mei Deus quoniam Mercy my God on me 153 51
Miserere mei Deus secundum Thou who art full of 138 101 Misericordiam and
justitiam I will of judgment and 294 89 Misericordias Domini in In flowing
Numbers I 246 N. 127 Nisi Dominus aedificet Down to the very Center 384 124
Nisi quia Dominus Had not the Lord Our 380 37 Noli emulari in malignum Fret not
Thy self to see 92 62 Nonne Deo subjecta erit On God alone my Soul 165 115 Non
nobis Domine non Not unto us Lord not to 340 76 Notus in Judaea Dominus The
true the only God 211 O. 47 Omnes gentes plaudite Rejoice O world and you 125
P. 108 Paratum Cor meum It is resolved nor will I 325 Q. 73 Quam bonus Israel
Deus It is enough nor will I 201 84 Quam dilecta tabernacula Triumphant General
of 233 2 Quare fremuerunt What makes this stir 3 42 Quemadmodum desiderat Look,
as the Heart by 111 125 Qui confidunt in Domino All those who on the 381 52 Quid
gloriaris in malitia In humane Beast 141 91 Qui habit at in adjutorio He who
dos with the Alm. 255 80 Qui regis Israel intend Great Shepherd of 224 S. 129
Saepe expugnaverunt Up from my youth may 387 69 Salvum me fac Deus Save me O
God for 185 12 Salvum me fac Domine Arise O God and save 25 58. Si vere utique
justitiam Are you as by your place 158 137 Super flumina Babylonis As on the
banks of 404 T. 65 Te Decet hymnus Deus Praises for thee in 172 V. 95 Venite
exultemus Come let us sing unto 283 5 Verbamea auribus Lord to my earnest
prayers 8 77 Voce mea ad Dominum In my great trouble to 213 142 Voce mea ad
Dominum My heart just broke and 415 13 Usquequo Domine How long my God will Thou 27 74 Ut quid Deus repulisti Shall we for ever then be 206 10 Ut quid
Domine recessisti My God why do thou 20

FINIS.

