Domus orationis
Bonum est confiteri Domino et psallere tuo nomini Altissime.

Te decet Hymnus.

Gloria Miserere Confiteor



THE PSALTER OF DAVID: WITH Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
PSALM.

Whereunto is added, DEVOTIONS For the help and assistance of all Christian
People, in all occasions and necessities.

The third EDITION.

LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1647.

THE PREFACE.
IT is natural for all men when they are straightened with fears, or actual
infelicities, to run for succor, to what their fancy, or the next opportunity
presents, as an instrument of their ease and remedy. But that which
distinguishes men in these cases, is the choice of their Sanctuary: for to rely
upon the Reeds of Egypt, or to snatch at the Bul-rushes of Nilu^, may well
become a drowning man, whose Reason is so wholly invaded and surpriz^d by Fear,
as to be useless to him in that confus^on: But he whose condition (although it
be sad) is still under the Mastery of Reason, and has time to deliberate,
unless he places his hopes upon something that is likely to cure his misery,
or at least to ease it, by making his affliction less, or his patience more,
does deserve that misery he groans under. Stripes and remediless miseries are
the lot of Fools, but Afflictions that happen to w^se men, or good men,
represent indeed the sadnesses of mortality, but they become Monuments and
advantages of their Piety and Wisdom.

In this most unnatural War ^ommenced against the greatest solennities of
Christianity, and all that is called, God, I have been put to it to run
somewhither to Sanctuary; but whither, was so great a question, that had not
Religion been my guide, I had not known where to have found rest or safety,
when the King and the Laws, who by God and Man respectively are appointed the
Protectors of Innocence and Truth, had themselves the greatest need of a
Protector. And when in the beginning of these troubles I hastened to His
Majesty, the case of the King and His good Subjects, was something like that of
Isaac, ready to be sacrificed, the wood was prepared, the fire kindled, the
knife was lift up, and the hand was striking, that if we had not been something
like Abraham too, and against hope have believed in hope, we had been as much
without comfort as we were in outward appearance without remedy.

It was my custom long since to secure my self against the violences of
Discontents abroad, as Gerson did against temptations, in angulis and libellis,
in my books and my retirements: But now I was deprived of both them, and driven
to a public view and participation of those dangers and miseries which
threatened the Kingdom, and disturbed the eavennesse of my former life. I was
therefore constrained to amasse together all those arguments of hope and
comfort, by which men in the like condition were supported; and amongst all the
great examples of trouble and confidence, I reckoned King David one of the
biggest, and of greatest consideration. For considering that he was a King,
vexed with a Civil War, his case had so much of ours in it, that it was
likely the devotions he used might fit our turn, and his comforts sustain us.

And indeed when I came to look upon the Psalter with a nearer observation, and
an eye diligent to espy my advantages and remedies there deposited, I found
very many Prayers against the enemies of the King and Church, and the miseries
of War. I found so many admirable promises, so rare variety of expressions of
the mercies of God, so many consolatory hymns, the commemoration of so many
deliverances from dangers, and deaths, and Enemies, so many miracles of mercy
and salvation, that I began to be so confident as to believe there could come
no affliction great enough, to spend so great a stock of comfort as was laid up
in the treasure of the Psalter: the saying of S. Paul was here verified, if
sin [and misery] did abound, then did grace superabound: and as we believe
of the Passion of Christ, it was so great as to be able to satisfy for a
thousand Worlds; so it is of the comforts of David's Psalms, they are more then
sufficient to repair all the breaches of Mankind. But for the particular
occasion of creating confidences in us that God will defend his Church and his
Anointed, and all that trust in him, against all their Enemies, (which was our
case, and contained in it all our needs for the present) I found so abundant
supply, that of 150. Psalms, some whereof are Historical, many
Eucharisticall, many Prophetical, and the rest Prayers for several occasions,
34. of them are expressly made against Gods and our enemies; Eleven expressly for
the Church, four for the King; that is, a third part of the Psalms relate
particularly to the present occasion, beside many clauses of respersion in the
other, which if collected in one, would of themselves, be great arguments of
hope to prevail in so good a cause.

This which experience taught me now, I was promised before by a frequent
testimony of the Doctors of the Church, who give the Psalter such a Character
as is due to the best and most useful book in the whole World, viz. The most
profitable of books: the treasure of Holy instructions, consummationem totius
paginae Theologicae, the perfection of the whole Scripture; so the ordinary
Gloss calls it; arma juvenum, parva Biblia, tribulatorum solatia, the young
man's armory, the little Bible, the comfort of the distressed, so others; to be
said by all men upon all occasions, is the counsel of the most devout amongst
them. But concerning the Psalter there are good words enough, and real
observation of advantages in the several prefaces before the Commentaries upon
the Psalms, set forth by the Fathers, and Writers of the first and middle ages.
I leave the particular enumeration of them, to the learned Divines of our
Church, to whom it is more proper; the sum of them is this, which Tertullian
alone has expressed in his Apology against the Gentiles, Omnes Bibliothecas,
and omnia monumenta unius Prophetae scrinium vincit, in quo videtur thesaurus
collocatus esse totius Judaici Sacramenti, and inde etiam nostri, this book
alone of the Prophet David, has in it some excellencies beyond all the
monuments of Learning in any Library whatsoever, and is the storehouse both of
the Jewish and Christian Religion.

But that which pleases me most is the fancy of S. Hilary, expounding the
Psalter to be meant by the Key of David, spoken of by S. John in his
Revelation: And properly enough; for if we consider how many mysteries of
Religion are opened to us in the Psalter, how many things concerning Christ,
what clear vaticinations concerning his Birth, his Priesthood, his Kingdom,
his Death, the very circumstances of his Passion, his Resurrection, and all the
degrees of his Exaltation-more clearly and explicitly recorded in the Psalter,
then in all the old Prophets besides, we may easily believe that Christ with a
Key of David in his hand, is nothing else but Christ fully opened and
manifested to us in the Psalms in the whole mystery of our Redemption. Omnes
pene Psalmi Christi personam sustinent, says Tertullian. Almost all the
Psalms represent the Person of Christ. Now this Key of David, opens not only
the Kingdom of Grace, by Revelation of the mysteries of our Religion, but the
Kingdom of Heaven too, it being such a Collection of Prayers, Eucharist, acts
of hope, of love, of patience, and all other Christian virtues, that as the
everlasting Kingdom is given to the Heir of the House of David, so the Honor
of opening that Kingdom is given to the first Prince of that Family; the
Psalms of his Father David are one of the best inlets into the Kingdom of the
Son. Something to this purpose is that saying of one of the old Doctors, Vox
psalmodiae si recto cord dirigatur, in tantum omnipotenti Deo aditum ad animum
aperit, ut intentae animae vel Prophe^iae mysteria, vel compunctionis spiritum
insundat. The saying or singing of Psalms opens a way so wide for God to enter
into the heart, that a devout soul does usually from such an employment
receive the grace of compunction and contrition, or of understanding Prophecies.

Upon such premises as these, or better, the Church of God in all ages has
made David's Psalter the greatest part of her public and private devotions;
sometimes dividing the Psalter into seven parts, that every weeks devotion
might spend it all.

Sometimes decreeing that it should be said day and night. Otherwhile enjoined
the recitation of the whole Psalter before the celebration of the blessed
Sacrament; and after some time it was made the public office of the Church.

It was the general use of Christendom, to say the Psalms Antiphonatim, by
way of verse and answer, says Suidas; and so ancient, that the Religious of S.
Mark in Alexandria used it, says Philo the Jew; and S Ignatius, or else
Flavianus and Diodorus brought it first into the Church of Antioch.

And for the private Devotions, that they chiefly consisted of the Psalms we
have great probability from the strict requiring it of the Clergy, and
particularly from them who came to be ordained, great readiness of saying the
Psalter by heart. It was S. Hieroms counsel to Rusticus, and when S. Gregory
was to ordain the Bishop of Ancona, his inquiry concerning his Canonical
sufficiency was, if he could say David's Psalms without book; and for a
disability of doing it, John the Priest was rejected from the Bishopric of
Ravenna. But this I conceive more relates to their private, then to their
public devotions, for I cannot think but that in respect of the public
Liturgy, it was enough for Bishops and Priests to read the Psalm; the requiring
ability to remember them was to engage them to a frequent use of so admirable
devotions, in their private offices.

But the Psalms were not only of use to the Church, as they lay in their own
position and form, but the devout men of several ages drew them into Collects,
Antiphonaries, Responsories, and all other parts of their devotions. They made
their Prayers out of the Psalms, their conf^ssions, their doxologies, their
ejaculations for the most part were clauses or periods of the Psalter. S.
Hierome made a collection of choice versicles, and put them together into their
several classes, and that was much of his devotion; the Collection is still
extant under the Name of S. Hierome's Psalter. S. Athanasius made an Index of
the several occasions and matters of prayer and Eucharist, and fitted Psalms
to each particular, that was his devotion, the Psalms entire as they lay, only
he made titles of his own. I have seen of latter time a short hymn of some
eight verses, which are indeed very choice sentences out of several Psalms set
together to make a compendium of Liturgy of Breviary of our necessity, and
devotions, collected by S. Bernardine, it is a very good Copy to be followed.
But if we look into the old Liturgies of the Eastern and Western Churches, and
where we will almost into the the private devotions of the old Writers, we may
say of them in the expression of the Prophet, Hauriebant aquas e sontibus
Salvatoris, they drew their waters from the fountains of our Blessed Savior,
but through the limbecks of David.

But the practice of this devotion I derived from a higher precedent, even of
Christ and his Apostles: for before the passion immediately, they sung a Psalm,
says the Scripture, Hymno dicto, says the vulgar Latin, having recited or
said a Psalm. But however it was part of David's Psalter that was sung, it was
the great Allelujah, as the Jews called it, beginning at the 113. Psalm, to
the 119. exclusively, part of that was sung. But this devotion continued with
our Blessed Savior as long as breath was in him, for when he was upon the
Cross, he recited the 22. Psalm ad verbum, says the Tradition of the Church,
and that he began it, says the Scripture, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? The whole Psalm is rather a history then a prediction of the
Passion; and what Tertullian says of the whole Psalter is particularly
verified of this, Filium ad Patrem, id est, Christum ad Deum verba facientem
repraesentat, it represents the Sons address to his Father, that is, Christ
speaking to God. Against the example of Christ if we confront the practice of
Antichrist, nothing can be said greater in commend^tion of this manner of
devotion: for B. Hippolytus, in his Oration of the end of the world, says,
that in the days of Antichrist, Psalmorum decantatio cessabit, they shall then
no more use the singing or saying of the Psalms; which when I had observed,
without any further deliberation I fixed upon the Psalter, as the best weapon
against him, whose coming we have great reason to believe is not far off, so
great preparation is making for him.

From the example of Christ this grew to be a Practice Apostolical, and their
devotion came exactly home to the likeness of the design of this very Book:
they turned the Psalms into Prayers.

Thus it was said of Paul and Silas, Act. 16. They prayed a Psalm, so it is in
the Greek; and we have a Copy left us of one of the Prayers or Collects which
they made out of the bowels of the second Psalm, it is in the fourth Chapter
of the Acts, beginning at the 24. verse, and ends at the 31. And now I have
shown the reasons of my choice, and the precedents that I have followed. This
last comes home to every circumst^nce of my Book. I only add this, that since
according to the instruction of our blessed Savior, God is to be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth; no worshipping can be more true, or more spiritu^ll then
the Psalter said with a pure mind and a hearty devotion. For David was Gods
instrument to the Church, teaching and admonishing us (as our duty is to each
other) in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, an^ the Spirit of Truth was
the Grand Dictator of what David wrote; so that we may confidently use this
devotion as the Church of God ever did, making her addresses to God most
frequently by the Psalms: so Prudentius reports the guise of Christendom: Te
mente pura, simplici,
Te voce, te cantu pio,
Rogare curvato genu,
Flendo and canendo discimus.
Hymn. 2. Cathemer.

The Prayers which I have collected out of the Psalms, are nothing else, but
the matter of the Psalms put into another mood, and fitted to the necessities
of Christendom, and of our selves in particular, according to the first
designation or secondary intention of the blessed Spirit: for the use of them
could not expire in the person of David, though first occasioned (many of them)
by his personal necessities: for all Scripture was written for our learning
upon whom the ends of the world are come, (says the Apostle) and Christ, and
his Apostles, and the Church of all ages, has taught us by their example and
precepts, that the purposes of the holy Ghost were of great extent, and the
profits universal both for times and occasions: so also were the Prayers which
the Church made out of the Psalms, and sung them in her public offices. S.
Austin found great advantages by such devotions, as himself witnesses; Cum
reminiscor lachrymas meas quas fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae in primordiis
recuperatae fidei meae, magnam instituti hujus utilitatem agnosco. When I call
to mind the many tears I shed when I heard the Hymns and Psalms of the
Church, I cannot but acknowledge the great benefit of this institution.

And yet besides, the spiritual sense of an actual devotion, which is sooner
had in this use of the Psalms then of other Prayers, I have had a meditation
that this manner of devotion might be a good Symbol and instrument of Communion
between Christians of a different Persuasion: For if we all would communicate
in the same private devotions, it were a great degree of Peace and Charity. The
Nicen^ Fathers in their zeal against Heresy, forbad their people to be
present at the Prayers of Heretics; and they had great reason so long as they
derived their Heresy into their Liturgy, into their very forms of Baptism:
But I am much scandalized, when I see a man refuse to communicate with me in my
Prayers, even such as are in his own Breviary or Manual. For me thinks it is
strange that the Lords Prayer it self should be unhallowed in the mouth of a
Protestant, and yet the whole office from the mouth of one of their Priests,
though never so wicked, though a Necromancer, a secret Jew, or any thing, so of
their Communion, shall lose no title of its sanctity and value. So long as
nothing of controversy is brought into our Prayers (and certainly we may very
well pray to God without disputing) and Devotion is not made a party, he that
refuses to join with me in what himself confesses true and holy, upon pretense
I am a heretic, will certainly prove himself a Schismatic. For true it is, a
Heretic is to be avoided, that is in his temptation and in his heresy, just
as a notorious Fornicator, an Adulterer, a sentenced drunkard, and no more, the
Apostles rule excommunicates all alike, with such men no not to eat, and this
rule cannot with so much ease and certainty be put to practice in the case of
heresy, as in the case of drunkenness, because heresy is as much harder to
be judged, as the soul is more invisible then the body, especially if we make
heresy to be an error, not in the great articles of faith only, but to consist
in minutes also, as all they do who refuse to communicate with Persons
disagreeing even in the smallest article.

But he that is ready to join with all the societies of Christians in the
world, in those things which are certainly true, just and pious, gives great
probation that he has at least, animum Catholicam, no Schismatic soul,
because he would actually communicate with all Christendom, if bona fides in
falso articulo, sincere persuasion (be it true or false) did not disoblige him,
since he clearly distinguishes persons from things, and in all good things
communicates with persons bad enough in others. This is the Communion of
charity, and when the Communion of belief is interrupted by misperswasion on
one side, and too much confidence and want of charity on the other, the erring
party has humane infirmity to excuse him, but the uncharitable nothing at all.
This therefore is the best and surest way, because we are all apt to be
deceived, to be sincere in our disquisitions, modest in our determinations,
charitable in our censures, and apt to communicate in things of evident truth
and confessed holiness. And such is this devotion; the whole matter whereof is
the Psalms of David, and the prayers Symbolicall, and alike in substance, and
of the same expression throughout, where it is not altered by circumstances.

So that I thought I might not imprudently intend this Book as an instrument of
public charity to Christians of different confessions. For I see that all
sorts of people sing or say David's Psalms, and by that use, if they understand
the consequences of their own Religion, accept s^t forms of prayer for their
Liturgy, and this form in special is one of their own choyces for devotion; so
that if all Christians, that think David's Psalms lawful devotion, and shall
observe the Collects from them to be just of the same Religion, would join in
this or the like form, I am something confident the product would be charity,
besides other spiritual advantages. For my own particular, since all
Christendom is so much divided, and subdivided into innumerable Sects, I knew
not how to give a better evidence of my own belief, and love of the Communion
of Saints, and detestation of Schism, then by an act of Religion, whose
consequence might be (if men please) the advancement of an universal
Communion. For in that which is most concerning, and is the best preserver of
charity, I mean practical devotion and active piety, the differences of
Christendom are not so great and many, to make an eternal disunion and
fracture; and if we instance in Prayer, there is none at all abroad (some
indeed we have commenced at home, but) in the great divisions of Christendom,
none at all but concerning the object of our prayers and adorations. For the
Socinian shuts the Holy Ghost from his Letanies, and places the Son of God in
a lower form of address. But concerning him I must say, as S. Paul said of the
unbeleevers, What have I to do with them that are without?

For this very thing that they disbeleeve the article of the holy Trinity, they
make themselves incapable of the communion of other Christian people of the
Nicene Faith, and we cannot so much as join with them in good prayers, because
we are not agreed concerning the persons to whom our devotions must be
addressed; and Christendom never did so lightly esteem the article of the holy
Trinity, as not to glory in it, and confess it publicly, and express it in
all our offices. The holy Ghost together with the Father and the Son must be
worshipped and glorified.

But since all Christians of any public confession and government, that is,
all particular and national Churches, agree in the matter of prayers, and the
great object, God in the mystery of the Trinity, if the the Church of Rome
would make her addresses to God only, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and leave
the Saints in the Calendar, without drawing them into her offices (which they
might do without any prejudice to the suits they ask, unless Christ's
intercession without their conjuncture were imperf^ct) that we might all once
pray together, we might hope for the blessings of peace and charity to be upon
us all. I am sure they that have commenced this war against the King and the
Church, first fell out with our Liturgy, and refused to join with us in our
prayers: I have therefore a strong persuasion, that if we were joined in our
prayers, we should quickly be united in affections: and to this purpose I have
some reason to believe this Psalter may do good service.

For I have seen an Essay of this design made by that prudent and pious
Moderator of Controversies, George Cassander, who did much for the peace of
Christendom, when disagreeing interests and opinions made the great Schism in
the Western Churches, he puts forth Devotions, and with them Collects for each
Psalm. But I said, it was a mere Essay, they are short of what he could have
done: but when I saw his name at them, I guessed what every man else would have
guessed concerning him, it was a pursuance of his great design for peace and
charity.

I have se^n three more, the first by an old Saxon Priest or Bishop, in which
there is nothing of offense, nothing but pious and primitive for the matter,
but the Collects so short, that the Psalm did scarce pass through the Prayer,
so little of the relish is left, that the percolation is scarce discernable.

A second was printed at Lions, 1545. without the Authors name, with a
complying design of avoiding all offense, and a not engaging God in our
scholasticall wranglings, but quite contrary to the Saxon; the Prayers are so
full of Paraphrase, that I resolved to go further, and see if I could speed
better, and at last met with a Psalter printed lately at Antwerp by Command,
very fairly indeed, with a Title and a Collect to every Psalm, all free from
dispute, and partaking in the questions of C^ristendome, not so much as a gust
or relish of his own party till the Psalter be done, the Prayers all good, and
here I had fixed, but that I had found them very often to be impertinent. But
that which I observed in all these, is, that the design seems alike, and they
are a form of devotion made for no private Sect, but for the benefit of all
Christian people, which the Author of the Antwerp Psalter declines in his
Additionall Devotions, where he brings in Letanies to Saints as grossly as he
had before avoided it with discretion.

If any man's piety receives advantage by this intendment, it is what I wish;
but I desire that his charity might increase too, and that he would say a
hearty Prayer, when his Devotion grows high and pregnant, for me and my family;
for I am more desirous my Posterity should be pious then honorable. I have no
ends of my own to serve, but to purchase an interest of Prayers; for I would
fain have these Devotions go out into a blessing to all them that shall use
them, and yet return into my own bosom too: and if I may but receive the
blessings of the Psalter, even the sure mercies of David, it will be like the
reward of five Cities for the improvement of a few talents; I shall venture
again in a greater negotiation, and traffic for ten talents; for there is no
honor so great as to serve God in a great capacity; and though I wait not at
the Altar, yet I will pay there such oblations of my time and industry, as I
can redeem from the services of His Majesty, and the impertinences of my own
life.

PSALMI.
Dies. Ad Matutinas. Ad Vespertinas. j 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. ij 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. iij 15, 16, 17, 18. iv 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. v 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29. vj 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. vij 35, 36, 37. viij 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. ix 44,
45, 46, 47, 48, 49. x 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. xj 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. xij
62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67. xiij 68, 69, 70. xiv 71, 72, 73, 74. xv 75, 76, 77, 78.
xvj 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. xvij 86, 87, 88, 89. xviij 90, 91, 92, 93, 94.
xix 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101. xx 102, 103, 104. xxj 105, 106. xxij 107,
108, 109. xxiij 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115. xxiv 116, 117, 118, 119, Inde
quatuor periodi. xxv Inde quinque periodi ejusd. Inde quatuor periodi ejusd.
xxvj Inde quinque periodi ejusd. Inde quatuor ultimi ejusd. xxvij 120, 121,
122, 123, 124, 125 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131. xxviij 132, 133, 134, 135,
136, 137, 138. xxix 139, 140, 141; 142, 143. xxx 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149,
150.

THE INDEX SERVING TO direct the Readers devotion upon all emergent occasions
to the several matters comprised in the PSALMS and Collects of the whole Book.
Petitions.
FOr grace to love Gods Law, Psalm. 19, 119. For preservation from sin, Ps. 19,
40. and Collect p. 228 For preservation from the punishment of sin and Gods
Judgments, ps. 25, 28, 75, 76. For pardon for our sins, ps. 6, 25, 32, 38, 40,
41, 51, 65, 130, 143. Col. p. 212. For propagation of the Gospel, ps. 47, 68,
72, 145. Col. p. 232. For Gods Providence and Protection, ps. 4, 16, 17, 23,
86, 91, 121. For protection against malicious and wicked persons, ps. 5, 70,
94, 109, 140. Col. p. 251, 255. For the Church and all faithful people, ps.
5.10, 45, 48, 53, 68, 70, 74, 79, 80, 93, 94, 112, 132, 237, Col. p. 217. For
defense against all Enemies ghostly and bodily, public and private, ps. 3, 5,
7, 11, 13, 17, 18, 27, 31, 35, 40, 54, 55, 59, 70, 108, 109, 135, 141. Col. p.
235, 252, 295. For a holy life, sanctity and innocence, ps. 1, 15, 23, 24, 25,
50, 84, 85, 101, 119, 126. Col. p. 22, 114, 165, 187, 228. For salvation and
eternal joys, ps. 16, 24, 28, 36, 50, 75, 84, 87, 97, 126. Col. p. 114, 133,
204, 215, 225, 299. For defense of our innocence, ps. 7. For a blessed and holy
death, ps. 1, 33, 36, 50, 88, 90, 102, 142. For deliverance from treason and
private conspiracies, ps. 41, 55, 109. For the King, ps. 21, 61, 89, 352. For
deliverance from death and damnation, ps. 28, 30, 102, 125. Col. p. 250. For
health, ps. 91, 102. For all Christian Princes and Judges, ps. 82. For
advancement of Religion, Col. p. 272. and 275. For deliverance from power of
the devil, ps. 57. Col. p. 226 For peace, 46, 122, 133, 144. Col. p. 257, 269.
For comfort in sadness, ps. 101, 102, 142. Col. p. 226, 283 For spiritual
blessings, ps. 65, 73. For fruitfulness of the Earth, ps. 65. For co^petency
of living, ps. 127. Col. p. 119, 133, 297, 299 For tranquillity of spirit, Col.
p. 143, and 144. For Victory, ps. 144. For comfort of Gods Spirit, ps. 34, 42,
43, 51, 61, 102, 142 Col. p. 226, 239.
Prayers for particular graces.
FOr Repentance, Col. p. 243, 275. For Mortification, ps. 131. Col. p. 275. For
humility, ps. 131. Col. p. 253. For patience, ps. 94. For perseverance, Col. p.
165, and 166, 248, 249, and 250. For Devotion and Religion, ps. 27, 33, 42, 43,
99, 119, 141. Col. p. 285. For charity, ps. 41, 112. For liberality and
contempt of riches, ps. 4, 49, 73. Col. p. 114, 240. For hope and trust in God,
ps. 33, 37, 46, 49* 56, 57, 62, 77, 115, 125, 146. Col. p. 138, 242. For
reverence and fear of God, ps. 2, 33, 112, 128. Col. p. 271, and 272. For
watchfulness over our ways, ps. 56. For zeal, ps. 119. Col. p. 238, 241.246,
and 247. For health and newness of life, Col. p. 170, 171.
Prayers for several times and occasions.
IN time of sadness, ps. 61, 102, 142, Col. p. 226, 283. In time of
persecution and oppression, ps. 7, 9, 10, 52, 53, 58, 64, 69, 63, 137, 142,
Col. p. 279. In time of War, ps. 18, 44, 46, 60, 89, 108. In time of slander,
ps. 52, 57, 64, 120. In time of temptation, ps. 13, 19, 60, Col. p. 191, and
192, 235, 239. In time of sickness, ps. 30, 31, 88, 90, 102, 142. In time of
public calamity and distraction, ps. 46, 89, 91. In time of spiritual
desertion, ps. 34, 42, 43, 51, 61, 102. Col. p. 239. In time of after lapse
into sin, ps. 51, Col. p. 258. In time of solemn devotion, ps. 20, 81. On Good
Friday, ps. 22. On Ascension day, ps. 24.
Prayers preparatory,
TO the Sacrament, ps. 23, 26, 111, Col. p. 151. To death, ps. 26, 30, 31, 39,
71, 88, 90, 142, viz. to be said in sickness or old age.
Deprecations,
AGainst Atheism and Irreligion, ps. 14. Against Idolatry, ps. 115. Against
Heretics and Heresy, ps. 59. Against danger of evil company, ps. 1, 12, 120.
Against Sacrilege, and sacrilegious persons, ps. 74, 83. Against fearfulness
and doubting, ps. 77. Against covetousness, ps. 4, 37, Col. p. 240. Against
enemies of the Church, ps 59, 68, 74, 83, 199, 129 Against death, ps. 88.
Meditations,
ON the day of Judgment, ps. 50, 97 On the Passion of Christ, ps 22. On the
joys of Heaven, ps. 126, 149. On the perfections and excellencies of God
manifested in his creatures, ps. 8, 104. On Gods providence over his people,
and mercy to the penitent, ps. 74, 105, 92, 106, 147. On Gods Justice and
Judgments on sinners, ps. 78, 92. On his Omnipotence and Omnipresence, ps.
139.
Acts of Virtue.
ADoration of God, ps. 8, 29, 67, 95, 96, 145. Col. p. 22. Adoration of the
second Person in the Trinity, ps. 2, 4^, 72, 110. Acts of hope in God, ps. 4,
11, 18. Acts of Religion, ps. 134. Acts of praise to God, ps. 17, 135, 148,
150. Acts of love to God, ps. 116. Desire after God and heavenly things, ps.
63, 84, 87. Of Election, or preferring spiritual blessings before temporal,
ps. 37, 73.
Thanksgivings,
FOr all Gods mercies, ps. 103, 136, 138. For his mercy and truth, ps. 100. For
delivering from sickness and all other dangers, ps. 40, 107, 114, 116. For
delivering from enemies and all other troubles, ps. 81, 107, 124, 144. For
pardon of our sins, ps. 85, 106, 116. For redemption by Christ, ps. 98, 118.
For the blessings of the Gospel, ps. 111. For Acts of Gods Providence, and
particular care over us, ps. 113, 121. For Victory, ps. 144.
THE PSALTER of DAVID, With Titles and Collects fitted to each Psalm, etc.
The j day.
Morning Prayer.
PSALM 1.
A Prayer that we may continually meditate in Gods law, and have no fellowship
with wicked persons in the manner of their living or dying.
BLessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners: and has not sit in the seat of the scornful

2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: and in his Law will he exercise
himself day and night.

3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the water side: that will bring forth
his fruit in due season.

4 His leaf also shall not wither: and look whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper.

5 As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chafe,
which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth.

6 Therefore the ungodly shall not be able to stand in the judgment: neither
the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous.

7 But the Lord knows the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

The Prayer.
O Holy Jesu, fountain of all blessing, the word of the Eternal Father, be
pleased to sow the good seed of thy word in our hearts, and water it with the
dew of thy divinest Spirit, that while we exercise our selves in it day and
night, we may be like a tree planted by the water side, bringing forth in all
times and seasons the fruits of a holy conversation, that we may never walk in
the way of sinners, nor have fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but that when this life is ended, we may have our portion in the
congregation of the righteous, and may be able to stand upright in judgment,
through the supporting arm of thy mercy, O blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesu.
Amen.

PSALM 2.
A Prayer to promote Christ's Kingdom, and for grace to serve him with fear
and reverence.
WHy do the heathen so furiously rage together: and why do the people imagine
a vain thing?

2 The Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together:
against the Lord, and against his Anointed.

3 Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us.

4 He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn: the Lord shall have
them in derision.

5 Then he shall speak unto them in his wrath: and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

6 Yet have I set my King: upon my holy hill of Sion.

7 I will preach the law whereof the Lord has said unto me: Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee.

8 Desire of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance: and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

9 Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron: and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel.

10 Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be learned, ye that are judges of the
earth.

11 Serve the Lord in fear: and rejoice unto him with reverence.

12 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and so he perish from the right way: if
his wrath be kindled (yea but a little) blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, into whose hands is committed all dominion and power in the
Kingdoms and Empires of the world, out of whose mouth goes a sharp sword,
that with it thou might smite the Nations and rule them with a rod of iron,
on whose vesture and on whose thigh a name is written, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, we adore thee in thy infinite excellency and most glorious
exaltation, beseeching thee to reveal thy name and the glory of thy Kingdom
to the Heathen which know thee not, and to the uttermost parts of the earth
which are given thee for thy possession, and inheritance. And to us give thy
grace to serve thee in fear, and plant the reverence of thy law and of thy name
in our hearts, lest thy wrath be kindled against us, and thou break us in
pieces like vessels of dishonor. Have mercy on us, O King of Kings, for we
have put our trust in thee, thou art our Savior and Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

PSALM 3.
A Prayer for defense against all our Enemies, Bodily and Ghostly.
LOrd how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise against
me.

2 Many one there be that say of my soul: There is no help for him in his God.

3 But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and the lifter up of
mine head.

4 I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill.

5 I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me.

6 I will not be afraid for ten thousands of people: that have set themselves
against me round about.

7 Up Lord, and help me, O my God: for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the
check-bone, thou have brok^n the teeth of the ungodly.

8 Salvation belongs unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon thy people.

The Prayer.
O Lord our defender have pity upon us, behold, the armies of the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil fight against our Souls, and multiply against us every
day temptations, and disadvantages. We are not able of our selves, as of our
selves, to think a good thought, much less to put to flight the armies of them
that have set themselves against us round about. But thou, O Lord, art our
defender, thou art our worship and the lifter up of our heads. Up Lord and help
us, arm us with the shield of faith, and the sword of the Spirit, and in all
times of temptation and battle cover our heads with the helmet of Salvation,
so shall we not be afraid for ten thousands of our enemies, for salvation
belongs unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 4.
A Prayer in which we exercise an act of hope in God, and desire his providence
over us.
Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: for thou have set me at
liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my prayer.

2 O ye sons of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor: and have such
pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasing?

3 Know this also, that the Lord has chosen to himself the man that is godly:
when I call upon the Lord, he will hear me.

4 Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart, and in your
chamber, and be still.

5 Offer the sacrifice of righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.

6 There be many that say: Who will show us any good?

7 Lord, lift thou up: the light of thy countenance upon us.

8 Thou have put gladness in my heart: since the time that their corn, and
wine, and oil increased.

9 I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety.

The Prayer.
O God who art the author of all righteousness, from whom all grace, and
safety, and glory does proceed, hear the prayers of thy humble servants
whenever we call upon thee in our trouble, for our trust is in thee alone,
and no creature can show us any good unless it derives from thee; show the
light of thy countenance upon us, let thy providence guide all our actions and
sufferings to thy glory, and our spiritual benefit, and consigne us to the
blessedness of thy Kingdom by the testimony of thy holy Spirit, that we may
not place our joys and hopes upon the good things of this life which perish
and cannot satisfy, but in the eternal fountain of all true felicities, that
thou being our treasure, our hearts may be fixed upon thee by the bands of
Charity and Obedience, that thou may make us to dwell in safety here, and
when our days are done, we may lay us down in peace and take our rest in thy
arms, expecting the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 5.
A prayer for blessing upon all pious people, and for protection against the
malice of wicked men.
POnder my words, O Lord: consider my meditation.

2 O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King and my God: for unto
thee will I make my prayer.

3 My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

4 For thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.

5 Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hate all them
that work vanity.

6 Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor both the
blood thirsty and deceitful man.

7 But as for me, I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

8 Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies: make thy way
plain before my face.

9 For there is no faithfulness in his mouth: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

10 Their throat is an open sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

11 Destroy thou them, O God, let them perish through their own imaginations:
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness for they have rebelled
against thee.

12 And let all them that put their trust in thee, rejoice: they shall ever be
giving of thanks, because thou defendest them, they that love thy name shall be
joyful in thee.

13 For thou Lord wilt give thy blessing unto the righteous: and with thy
favorable kindness will thou defend him, as with a shield.

The Prayer.
O Most holy and blessed Lord God, who can take no pleasure in wickedness,
neither can evil come nigh thy dwelling, defend us and all thy holy Church
from the fraud and malice of blood-thirsty and deceitful men, and from the
crafty insinuations of all them that work vanity: but let thy blessings be
upon the righteous, and let thy favorable kindness defend thy whole Church as
with a shield, that all those who put their trust in thy mercy may be ever
giving of thanks, and may be joyful in thee. O lead us in thy righteousness
that we become not a rejoicing to our enemies, but that we may worship thee in
fear, and come into thy house to make our prayers unto thee, and to give thee
thanks for the multitude of thy mercies which thou have given us in our Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 6.
A Prayer of a penitent person for remission of his sins.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

3 My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou punish me?

4 Turn thee O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

5 For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?

6 I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couch
with my tears.

7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

8 Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

9 The Lord has heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer.

10 All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vered: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful God, whose property is always to have mercy and to forgive,
behold with the eyes of thy pity and compassion the estate of thy humble
servants, made most miserable by reason of our sins. Hear the voice of our
weeping, pity our groaning, strengthen us, for we are weak, heal us, for our
bones are vexed, and deliver our souls from death, that being saved from the
bottomless pit, we may give thanks to thy holy Name. O turn from the severity
of thy displeasure, and visit us with thy mercy and salvation. For all our
sins give us a great sorrow and contrition, and in our sorrows let thy
comforts sustain us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 7.
A prayer for defense of our Innocence against the unjust molestation of our
enemies.
O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me.

2 Lest he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces: while there is
none to help.

3 O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing: or if there be any wickedness
in my hands.

4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that dealt friendly with me: yea, I have
delivered him that without any cause is mine enemy.

5 Then let mine enemy persecute my soul, and take me: yea, let him tread my
life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust.

6 Stand up, O Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy self: because of the
indignation of mine enemies, arise up for me in the judgment that thou have
commanded.

7 And so shall the congregation of the people come about thee: for their sakes
therefore lift up thy self again.

8 The Lord shall judge the people, give sentence with me, O Lord: according to
my righteousness, and according to the innocence that is in me.

9 O let the wickedness of the ungodly come to an end: but guide thou the just.

10 For the righteous God: tries the very hearts and reins.

11 My help comes of God: which preserves them that are true of heart.

12 God is a righteous Judge, strong and patient: and God is provoked every day.

13 If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow and
made it ready.

14 He has prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordains his arrows
against the persecutors.

15 Behold, he travaileth with mischief: he has conc^ived sorrow, and brought
forth ungodliness.

16 He has graven and dug up a pit: and is fallen himself into the
destruction that he made for other.

17 For his travel shall come upon his own head: and his wickedness shall
fall on his own pate.

18 I will give thanks unto the Lord, according to his righteousness: and will
praise the name of the Lord the most High.

The Prayer.
O God from whom comes our help, thou art a righteous Judge and preservest
all that are true of heart, deliver us from our persecutors who travel with
mischief against us, and have dug a pit for our destruction. O let their
wickedness and malicious devices against thy servants come utterly to an end
for evermore. Thou, O Lord, art strong and able to take vengeance, and yet
being provoked every day still art patient toward us and compassionate.
Deliver us from their wrath to whom we have done no injustice or displeasure:
pardon our offenses against thee, and protect our innocence against them, that
we may praise thy name and give thanks unto thee for thy righteousness and
s^lvation, who art blessed for evermore. Amen.

PSALM 8.
A contemplation of the Divine beauty and excellency manifested in his
Creatures.
O Lord our governor, how excellent is thy name in all the world: thou that
have set thy glory above the heavens!

2 Out of the month of very babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies: that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

3 For I will consider the heavens, even the works of thy fingers: the moon and
the stars which thou have ordained.

4 What is man that thou art mindful of him: and the son of man that thou
visitest him?

5 Thou made him lower then the angels: to crown him with glory and worship.

6 Thou make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou have
put all things in subjection under his feet.

7 All sheep and oxen: yea, and the beasts of the field.

8 The fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea: and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas.

9 O Lord our governor: how excellent is thy name in all the world!

The Prayer.
O Lord God, Father of men and Angels, God of all the Creatures, who have
created all things in a wonderful order, and have made them all conveyances of
thy mercies to mankind, give us great and dreadful apprehensions of thy glory
and immensity, thy Majesty and mercy, that we may adore thee as our Creator,
love thee as our Redeemer, fear thee as our God, obey thee as our Governor,
and praise thee as the author and fountain of all perfections, and all good
which thou have communicated to thy creatures, that they may all in their
proportions do thee service, who have to that end made the world, and redeemed
us by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 9.
A Prayer of poor and oppressed people against their persecutors.
I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will speak of all
thy mavelous works.

2 I will be glad and rejoice in thee: yea, my songs will I make of thy name, O
thou most Highest.

3 While mine enemies are driven back: they shall fall and perish at thy
presence.

4 For thou have maintained my right, and my cause: thou art set in the throne
that judge right.

5 Thou have rebuked the heathen, and destroyed the ungodly: thou have put out
their name for ever and ever.

6 O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: even as the cities
which thou have destroyed, their memorial is perished with them.

7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he has also prepared his seat for
judgment.

8 For he shall judge the world in righteousness: and minister true judgment
unto the people.

9 The Lord also will be a defense for the oppressed: even a refuge in due time
of trouble.

10 And they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord
have never failed them that seek thee.

11 O praise the Lord which dwells in Sion: show the people of his doings.

12 For when he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them: and
forgets not the complaint of the poor.

13 Have mercy upon me, O Lord: consider the trouble which I suffer of them
that hate me: thou that liftest me up from the gates of death.

14 That I may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: I
will rejoice in thy salvation.

15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the same net which
they hid privily, is their foot taken.

16 The Lord is known to execute judgment: the ungodly is trapped in the work
of his own hands.

17 The wicked shall be turned into hell: and all the people that forget God.

18 For the poor shall not always be forgotten: the patient abiding of the meek
shall not perish for ever.

19 Up Lord, and let not man have the upper hand: let the heathen be judged in
thy sight.

20 Put them in fear (O Lord:) that the heathen may know themselves to be but
men.

The Prayer.
O Lord God who art a defense for the oppressed, and a refuge in due time of
trouble, have mercy upon us thy servants, who are violently assaulted by
enemies without, and weaknesses and temptations within. Thou never failest them
that seek thee, but love to hear the poor make their complaint unto thee in
their trouble, and art known to execute judgment upon them that oppress them.
Pity us, and look upon the trouble we suffer of them that hate us: deliver us
from the strivings of our adversaries, lift us up from the gates of death, that
being safe under thy mercies and protection, we may give thanks unto thee with
our spirits and voices, we may embrace thee with a lively faith, fear thee with
all our hearts, serve thee with all our powers and faculties both of soul and
body, all the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 10.
A Prayer to God in times of Persecution and War against the Church.
WHy stand thou so far off (O Lord:) and hidest thy face in the needful
time of trouble?

2 The ungodly for his own lust does persecute the poor: let them be taken in
the crafty wiliness that they have imagined.

3 For the ungodly has made boast of his own hearts desire: and speaks good
of the covetous whom God abhors.

4 The ungodly is so proud that he cares not for God: neither is God in all
his thoughts.

5 His ways are always grievous: thy judgments are far above out of his sight,
and therefore defieth he all his enemies.

6 For he has said in his heart, Tush, I shall never be cast down: there shall
no harm happen unto me.

7 His mouth is full of cursing, deceit, and fraud: under his tongue is
ungodliness and vanity.

8 He sits lurking in the theevish corners of the streets: and privily in
his lurking dens does he murder the innocent, his eyes are set against the poor.

9 For he lies waiting secretly, even as a lion lurketh he in his den: that he
may ravish the poor.

10 He does ravish the poor: when he gets him into his net.

11 He falls down and humbles himself: that the congregation of the poor may
fall into the hand of his Captains.

12 He has said in his heart, Tush, God has forgotten: he hides away his
face, and he will never see it.

13 Arise (O Lord God) and lift up thine hand: forget not the poor.

14 Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme God: while he does say in his heart,
Tush, thou God carest not for it?

15 Surely thou have seen it: for thou beholdest ungodliness and wrong.

16 That thou may take the matter into thine hand: the poor commits
himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the friendlesse.

17 Break thou the power of the ungodly and malicious: take away his
ungodliness, and thou shall find none.

18 The Lord is King for ever and ever: and the heathen are perished out of the
land.

19 Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their heart,
and thine ear hearkneth thereto.

20 To help the fatherless and poor unto their right: that the man of the
earth be no more exalted against them.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who beholdest all the actions of men, and see all the
ungodliness of sinners, and the wrong they do unto thy servants, we fly unto
thee for succor and defense in this our needful time of trouble. Behold, O
Lord, how the Enemies of thy Church have set their eyes against her, and use
all violences and arts that thy poor servants may fall under the hands of their
Captains. Thou see their malice and their confidences, they fear thee not,
neither art thou, O God, in all their thoughts. But thou art our King for ever
and ever, and the helper of the friendlesse. We commit our selves wholly to thy
mercy and providence, take the matter into thine own hand, let them perish out
of the land that are exalted against thee, and against thy Church, that we
being delivered from fear of our enemies, may serve thee with constant and
regular devotions all the days of our life, through Jesus our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 11.
An address to God by way of hope and confidence in him, and a prayer against
our secret enemies.
IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul, that she should flee
as a bird unto the hill?

2 For lo, the ungodly bend their bow, and make ready their arrows within the
quiver: that they may privily shoot at them which are true of heart.

3 For the foundations will be cast down: and what has the righteous done?

4 The Lord is in his holy temple: the Lords seat is in heaven.

5 His eyes consider the poor: and his eyelids tries the children of men.

6 The Lord allows the righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delights in
wickedness does his soul abhor.

7 Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and
tempest: this shall be their portion to drink.

8 For the righteous Lord loves righteousness: his countenance will behold
the thing that is just.

The Prayer.
O Lord who art our hope and our refuge, and the exceeding great reward of all
that trust in thee, have mercy upon us thy servants, who have no confidences
but upon thy mercies and infinite loving kindness. Defend us from all secret
Plots and designs, intended against our peace and securities by them that
privily shoot at us, and would overthrow the foundations of our repose and
safety. And that we may be better entitled to thy protection and care over us,
make us to love righteousness, and to follow the things that are just, that by
thy grace we being defended from taking delight in wickedness, may also be
delivered from the portion of the ungodly, which thou give them to drink,
upon whom thou rainest snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest. Deliver
us, O Lord, from the eternal pressure of thy wrath, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 12.
A prayer for defense against the dangers of evil Company.
HElp me, Lord, for there is not one godly man left: for the faithful are
minished from among the children of men.

2 They talk of vanity every one with his neighbor: they do but flatter with
their lips, and dissemble with their double heart.

3 The Lord shall root out all deceitful lips: and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

4 Which have said, With our tongue we will prevail: we are they that ought to
speak, who is Lord over us?

5 Now for the comfortless troubles sake of the needy: and because of the deep
sighing of the poor.

6 I will up (says the Lord:) and will help every one from him that I welleth
against him, and will set them at rest.

7 The words of the Lord are pure words: even as the silver which from the
earth is tried, and purified seven times in the fire.

8 Thou shall keep them, O Lord: thou shall preserve him from this generation
for ever.

9 The ungodly walk on every side: when they are exalted, the children of men
are put to rebuke.

The Prayer.
O Most blessed Jesu, who in thy eternal providence do suffer the tares and
the wheat to grow together until the harvest, permitting heretics and vicious
persons to communicate in the external society of thy people, grant us thy
grace, that we may so believe, and heartily obey all thy pure words and
dictates, which thou have taught us in thy holy Gospel, that we may be kept
unspotted of the world, and although* the ungodly walk on every side, yet we
may persevere in the ways of righteousness, and increase the number of the
godly, that at last we may be admitted into the glorious fellowship of Saints
and Angels, who behold thy face and the glories of thy Kingdom, where thou
live and raignest with the Father and the holy Ghost, Eternal God world
without end. Amen.

PSALM 13.
A Prayer in time of temptation.
HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever: how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

2 How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart: how
long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

3 Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in
death.

4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: for if I be cast down,
they that trouble me will rejoice at it.

5 But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is joyful in thy salvation.

6 I will sing of the Lord, because he has dealt so lovingly with me: yea, I
will prais^ the name of the Lord most Highest.

The Prayer.
O God the giver of all grace, the author of all Ghostly strength, look with
compassion upon our infirmities, and how unequally we are assaulted by many, by
powerful, by malicious adversaries. How long, O Lord, how long shall we seek
for rest and find none? O give us either peace or victory, and preserve us
that we sleep not in the death of sin, lest our grand enemy the Devil, say, he
has prevailed against us. Our trust is in thy mercy, and thy delight is in it;
strengthen us so with thy grace that we may fight a good fight, and conquer,
and be crowned with a crown of righteousness, which we beg we may receive
from the hands, and by the mercies of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Psalm 14.
A Prayer against Atheism and irreligion.
THe fool has said in his heart: There is no God.

2 They are corrupt and become abominable in their doings: there is not one
that does good, (no not one.)

3 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there
were any that would understand, and seek after God.

4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is none that does good, no not one.

5 Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues have they deceived:
the poison of asps is under their lips.

6 Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed
blood.

7 Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace have
they not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes.

8 Have they no knowledge, that they are all such workers of mischief: eating
up my people as it were bread?

9 And call not upon the Lord, there were they brought in great fear (even
where no fear was:) for God is in the generation of the righteous.

10 As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsel of the poor: because he
puts his trust in the Lord.

11 Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion: when the Lord turns the
captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, Creator of the world, conserver of the Creatures, whose
essence and goodness and perfections are infinite, and made so manifest in the
creation, order, protection, and disposition of thy creatures, that without the
greatest sin and folly in the world, we cannot but acknowledge thee, and adore
thee with the lowest adorations of soul and body, and with the most profound
humility. Preserve us, O Lord, in great Religion, Veneration, and reverence of
thy Divine perfections. Keep us from all distrust of thy providence, all
doubtings of thy infiniteness, or of any other article of our faith, and grant
that we confessing thee before all the world, may be acknowledged for thy
children, and rewarded among thy servants, not for our righteousness, but
through the merits and mercies of our dearest Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 15.
Which is a short rule of a good life, and a desire of innocence and sanctity.
LOrd, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: or who shall rest upon thy holy hill?

2 Even he that leads an incorrupt life: and does the thing which is right,
and speaks the truth from his heart.

3 He that has used no deceit in his tongue, nor done evil to his neighbor:
and has not slandered his neighbor.

4 He that sets not by himself, but is lowly in his own eyes: and makes
much of them that fear the Lord.

5 He that swears unto his neighbor, and disappointeth him not: though it
were to his own hinderance.

6 He that has not given his money upon usury: nor taken reward against the
innocent.

The Prayer.
O Lord let thy mercy preserve us in holiness and innocence, or if through
infirmity we fall, make us to rise again by penitence, that we may lead an
incorrupt life with humility, and truth, and justice, not slandering our
neighbor, not invading his right, not breaking our trust, not oppressing the
indigent and necessitous, but doing good to all, and especially making much of
them that fear the Lord; that we may never fall from thy favor, but at the end
of our weary pilgrimage we may take our rest upon thy holy hill, and dwell in
thy tabernacle where thou raignest with infinite glory and felicities, God
eternal, world without end. Amen.

PSALM 16.
A Prayer for the blessings of Gods providence and preservation in this life,
and for glory hereafter.
PReserve me, O God: for in thee have I put my trust.

2 O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord: Then art my God, my goods are
nothing unto thee.

3 All my delight is upon the Saints that are in the earth: and upon such as
excel in virtue.

4 But they that run after another god: shall have great trouble.

5 Their drink offerings of blood will I not offer: neither make mention of
their names within my lips.

6 The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou
shall maintain my lot.

7 The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground: yea, I have a goodly heritage.

8 I will thank the Lord for giving me warning: my reins also chasten me in the
night season.

9 I have set God always before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore I
shall not fall.

10 Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiced: my flesh also shall
rest in hope.

11 For why? thou shall not leave my soul in hell: neither shall thou suffer
thine Holy one to see corruption.

12 Thou shall show me the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of
joy: and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

The Prayer.
O God, who art the portion of our inheritance, our God, and our preserver,
preserve and maintain all those good things which thou have wrought in us, and
for us; and that we may never fall, give us thy grace, that we may set thee
always before us, rejoicing in thee, and delighting in the Saints that are upon
the earth, that when our flesh shall see corruption, our Souls may not be left
in hell, but may walk in the paths of life; and in the day of restitution of
all things, both bodies and souls may have a goodly heritage, even the lot of
thy right hand, where there is pleasure for evermore, and where we may see thy
face, and the glory of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 17.
A Prayer for protection against the injuries of our Enemies, Bodily and
Ghostly.
HEar the right, O Lord, consider my complaint: and hearken unto my prayer,
that goes not out of feigned lips.

2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: and let thine eyes look upon
the thing that is equal.

3 Thou have proved and visited mine heart in the night season, thou have tried
me, and shall find no wickedness in me: for I am utterly purposed, that my
mouth shall not offend.

4 Because of men's works that are done against the words of my lips: I have
kept me from the ways of the destroyer.

5 O hold thou up my goings in thy paths: that my footsteps slip not.

6 I have called upon thee, O God, for thou shall hear me: incline thine ear to
me, and hearken unto my words.

7 Show thy mavelous loving kindness, thou that art the Savior of them
which put their trust in thee: from such as resist thy right hand.

8 Keep me as the apple of an eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

9 From the ungodly that trouble me: mine enemies compass me round about, to
take away my soul.

10 They are enclosed in their own fat: and their mouth speaks proud things.

11 They lie waiting in our way on every side: turning their eyes down to the
ground.

12 Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey: and as it were a lions whelp
lurking in secret places.

13 Up Lord, disappoint him, and cast him down: deliver my soul from the
ungodly, which is a sword of thine.

14 From the men of thy hand, O Lord, from the men, I say, and from the evil
world: which have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with
thy hid treasure.

15 They have children at their desire: and leave the rest of their substance
for their babes.

16 But as for me, I will behold thy presence in righteousness: and when I
awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful Jesu, thou that art the Savior of them that put their trust
in thee, defend us, and deliver us from the hands of all our Enemies, and
although they are a sword of thine, and an instrument sent from thee, to
chastise us for our sins; yet arise, O Lord, in mercy and strength, disappoint
them and cast them down, lest they destroy our souls, that when thou have
visited us with thy fatherly correction, and tried us like as silver is tried,
thou may find no wickedness in us. Sanctify our hearts and lips, that we
may not think a thought displeasing unto thee, and that our mouth may not
offend: Keep us as the apple of an eye, hide us under the shadow of thy wings
of mercy and providence: keep us from the ways of the destroyer, and hold up
our goings in thy paths, that we may persevere in righteousness, and our
footsteps may not slip: that in the day of the resurrection of the Just, we
may behold thy presence, and receive infinite satisfactions in the vision
beatificall. Grant this O merciful Savior and Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 18.
A prayer for strength and Victory in War, temporal or spiritual, together
with an act of hope and confidence in God.
I Will love thee (O Lord) my strength, the Lord is my stony rock and my
defense: my Savior, my God, and my might, in whom I will trust, my buckler,
the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge.

2 I will call upon the Lord, which is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe
from mine enemies.

3 The sorrows of death compassed me: and the overflowings of ungodliness made
me afraid.

4 The pains of hell came about me: the snares of death overtook me.

5 In my trouble I will call upon the Lord: and complain unto my God.

6 So shall he hear my voice out of his holy temple: and my complaint shall
come before him, it shall enter even into his ears.

7 The earth trembled and quaked: the very foundations also of the hills shook
and were removed, because he was wroth.

8 There went a smoke out of his presence, and a consuming fire out of his
mouth, so that coals were kindled at it.

9 He bowed the heavens also and came down: and it was dark under his feet.

10 He rode upon the cherubims, and did fly: he came flying upon the wings of
the wind.

11 He made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him, with dark
water, and thick clouds to cover him.

12 At the brightness of his presence, his clouds removed: hailstones and
coals of fire.

13 The Lord also thundered out of heaven, and the highest gave his thunder:
hailstones and coals of fire.

14 He sent out his arrows and scattered them: he cast forth lightnings and
destroyed them.

15 The springs of waters were seen, and the foundations of the round world
were discovered at thy chiding, O Lord: at the blasting of the breath of thy
displeasure.

16 He shall send down from the high to fetch me: and shall take me out of many
waters.

17 He shall deliver me from my strongest enemy, and from them that hate me:
for they are too mighty for me.

18 They prevented me in the day of my trouble: but the Lord was my upholder.

19 He brought me forth also into a place of liberty: he brought me forth, even
because he had a favor unto me.

20 The Lord shall reward me after my righteous dealing: according to the
cleanness of my hands shall he recompense me.

21 Because I have kept the ways of the Lord: and have not forsaken my God as
the wicked does.

22 For I have an eye unto all his laws: and will not cast out his
commandments from me.

23 I was also incorrupt before him: and eschewed mine own wickedness.

24 Therefore shall the Lord reward me after my righteous dealing: and
according unto the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.

25 With the holy thou shall be holy: and a with a perfect man thou shall be
perfect.

26 With the clean thou shall be clean: and with the froward thou shall learn
frowardness.

27 For thou shall save the people that are in adversity: and shall bring down
the high looks of the proud.

28 Thou shall also light my candle: the Lord my God shall make my darkness to
be light.

29 For in thee I shall discomfit an host of men: and with the help of my God I
shall leap over the wall.

30 The way of God is an undefiled way: the word of the Lord also is tried in
the fire, he is the defender of all them that put their trust in him.

31 For who is God but the Lord: or who has any strength except our God?

32 It is God that girdeth me with strength of war: and makes my way perfect.

33 He makes my feet like Hearts feet: and sets me up on high.

34 He teaches mine hands to fight: and mine arm shall break even a bow of
steel.

35 Thou have given me the defense of thy salvation: thy right hand also shall
hold me up, and thy loving correction shall make me great.

36 Thou shall make room enough under me for to go: that my footsteps shall
not slide.

37 I will follow upon mine enemies, and overtake them: neither will I turn
again till I have destroyed them.

38 I will smite them, that they shall not be able to stand: but fall under my
feet.

39 Thou have girded me with strength unto the battle: thou shall throw down
mine enemies under me.

40 Thou have made mine enemies also to turn their backs upon me: and I shall
destroy them that hate me.

41 They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: yea, even unto the
Lord shall they cry, but he shall not hear them.

42 I will beat them as small as the dust before the wind: I will cast them
out as the clay in the streets.

43 Thou shall deliver me from the strivings of the people: and thou shall make
me the head of the heathen.

44 A people whom I have not known: shall serve me.

45 As Soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: but the strange children
shall dissemble with me.

46 The strange children shall fail: and be afraid out of their prisons.

47 The Lord lives, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of
my salvation.

48 Even the God that sees that I be avenged: and subdueth the people unto me.

49 It is he that delivers me from (cruel) enemies, and sets me up above
mine adversaries: thou shall rid me from the wicked man.

50 For this cause will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the Gentiles:
and sing praises unto thy name.

51 Great prosperity gives he unto his King: and shows loving kindness unto
David his anointed, and unto his seed for evermore.

The Prayer.
O God our Savior, the rock upon whom all our hopes are built, our strength
and defense, our salvation and our refuge; hear our voice out of thy holy
temple, let our complaint come before thee, and enter even into thy Ears. The
sorrows of death compass us, and we are afraid, because of the overflowings of
ungodliness: Our enemies are strong, yea, they are too mighty for us, and we
have no hope to escape, unless thou preventest them in the day of our trouble,
and deliverest us from the strivings of our enemies. But in thee, O Lord, is
our hope, do thou teach our hands to fight, and gird us with strength unto the
battle: Make us to have an eye unto all thy laws, that we may eschew our own
wickedness, and be incorrupt before thee, then shall thou give us the defense
of thy salvation, and we shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and sing praises
unto thy name, who art become our strong helper, and the God of our Salvation,
which thou have given unto us in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 19.
A prayer for preservation from sin, and for love of Gods law.
THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament shows his handy work.

2 One day tells another: and one night certifieth another.

3 There is neither speech nor language: but their voices are heard among them.

4 Their sound is gone out into all lands: and their words unto the ends of the
world.

5 In them has he set a tabernacle for the sun: which comes forth as a
bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his course.

6 It goes forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and runs about unto
the end of it again: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

7 The Law of the Lord is an undefiled law converting the soul: the testimony
of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

8 The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment
of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

9 The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are true, and righteous altogether.

10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweeter
also then honey, and the honey comb.

11 Moreover by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is
great reward.

12 Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

13 Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offense.

14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart: be always
acceptable in thy sight.

15 O Lord: my strength, and my Rede^mer.

The Prayer.
O Most blessed Jesu, thou Sun of righteousness, who came forth from the
bosom of thy eternal Father, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, be pleased
to plant in our hearts the fear of the Lord, and in our bodies the purity and
cleanness of chastity, and make them to abide there for ever: Lighten our eyes
with the light of thy Gospel, and the bright revelation of thy whole will and
pleasure, that so being guided by thy grace, we may be cleansed from all our
secret sins, and preserved from presumptuous and great offenses, so shall the
thoughts and meditation of our heart, the words of our mouth, and all our
actions be always acceptable in thy sight, O Lord our Savior, our strength, and
our Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

PSALM 20.
A Prayer that God would hear our petitions, which we make to him in times of
trouble.
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

2 Send thee help from the sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion.

3 Remember all thy offerings: and accept thy burnt-sacrifice.

4 Grant thee thy hearts desire: and fulfill all thy mind.

5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the name of the Lord our
God: the Lord perform all thy petitions.

6 Now know I that the Lord helps his anointed, and will hear him from his
holy heaven: even with the wholesome strength of his right hand.

7 Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God.

8 They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright.

9 Save Lord, and hear us, O King of heaven: when we call upon thee.

The Prayer.
O king of heaven, who art the health and strength of our right hand, have
mercy upon us, and hear us when we call upon thee; let our prayers come into
thy presence like a burnt offering of a sweet savor: for in all our troubles
we disclaim all confidences in any of thy creatures, and remember thy name
only, O Lord our God. Teach us what to ask, and how to come into thy presence,
that we may never beg of thee any thing but what is agreeable to thy will,
and may then promote thy glory when thou suppliest our necessities, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 21.
A Prayer for the King.
THe King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of
thy salvation.

2 Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request
of his lips.

3 For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a
Crown of pure gold upon his head.

4 He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever and
ever.

5 His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay
upon him.

6 For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

7 And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of
the most Highest he shall not miscarry.

8 All thine enemies shall feel thine hand: thy right hand shall find out them
that hate thee.

9 Thou shall make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall
destroy them in his displ^^ sure, and the fire shall consume them.

10 Their fruit shall thou root out of the earth: and their seed from among the
children of men.

11 For they intended mischief against thee: and imagined such a device as
they are not able to perform.

12 Therefore shall thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow shall
thou make ready against the face of them.

13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise
thy power.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have mercy upon thy servant
the King; as thou have set a Crown of gold upon his head, and given him power
and command to rule thy people with justice and piety, so do thou hear the
request of his lips, grant him the desire of his heart, and prevent both his
desires and requests with the blessings of thy goodness: give him great honor
and reverence in the sight of his People, and of all the Nations round about:
let all his enemies feel thine hand, and put them to flight that rise up
against him, that when thou have given him the blessings of a long life and
prosperous, and made him glad with the joy of thy countenance, at last he may
be crowned with everlasting felicity, and reign with thee in thy eternal
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 22.
A meditation upon the Passion of our Blessed Savior.
MY God, my God, (look upon me) why have thou forsaken me: and art so far
from my health, and from the words of my complaint?

2 O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and in the night
season also I take no rest.

3 And thou continuest holy: O thou worship of Israel.

4 Our fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

5 They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

6 But as for me, I am a Worm, and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast
of the people.

7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out their lips, and
shake their heads, saying,

8 He trusted in God, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, if he
will have him.

9 But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope when
I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

10 I have been left unto thee ever since I was born: thou art my God, even
from my mothers womb.

11 O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand: and there is none to help
me.

12 Many oxen are come about me: fat bulls of Basan close me in on every side.

13 They gape upon me with their mouths: as it were a ramping and roaring lion.

14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart
also in the midst of my body is even like melting wax.

15 My strength is dried up like a potshard, and my tongue cleaves to my
gummes: and thou shall bring me into the dust of death.

16 For (many) dogs are come about me, and the coun^ell of the wicked lays
siege against me.

17 They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones: they stand
staring and looking upon me.

18 They part my garments among them: and cast lots upon my vesture.

19 But be not thou far from me, O Lord: thou art my succor, haste thee to
help me.

20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.

21 Save me from the lions mouth: thou have heard me also from among the horns
of the unicorns.

22 I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee.

23 O praise the Lord ye that fear him: magnify him all ye of the seed of
Jacob, and fear him all ye seed of Israel.

24 For he has not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the poor, he has
not hid his face from him: but when he called unto him, he heard him.

25 My praise is of thee in the great congregation: my vows will I perform in
the sight of them that fear him.

26 The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the Lord, shall
praise him, your heart shall live for ever.

27 All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and be turned unto the
Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him.

28 For the Kingdom is the Lords: and he is the governor among the people.

29 All such as be fat upon earth: have eaten and worshipped.

30 All they that go down into the dust shall kneel before him: and no man has
quickened his own soul.

31 My seed shall serve him: they shall be counted unto the Lord for a
generation.

32 They shall come, and the heavens shall declare his righteousness: unto a
people that shall be born, whom the Lord has made.

The Prayer.
O Merciful Jesu, who for our sakes did suffer thy self to be betrayed,
tormented, spit upon, crucified, and to die, that thou might purchase for us
redemption from the sting of death, the miseries of hell, the malice and power
of the Devil, deliver our souls from the sword of thy Vengeance, cut us not off
by untimely death, free our darling from the power of the dog, our souls
from being a prey unto the devil, snatch us out of the Lions mouth, who goes
up and down seeking whom he may devour. O Jesu, be a Jesus unto us, and let
those victories which thou have obtained over Satan, and Hell, and the grave,
bring us Peace and Righteousness, and a Crown of glory in the Heavens where
thou live and reignest, in the great congregation of Saints and Angels, one
God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 23.
A prayer that God would guide, and feed, and support us as a Shepherd does
his flock.
THe Lord is my shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing.

2 He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth beside the waters of
comfort.

3 He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of righteousness
for his names sake.

4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

5 Thou shall prepare a table before me against them that trouble me: thou have
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.

6 But thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, thou great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, let thy grace
convert us, let thy mercies guide us in the paths of righteousness: feed us
with thy Word and Sacraments, refresh us with the comforts of thy Holy Spirit,
and in the whole course of our life, which is nothing else but a valley of
miseries, and a shadow of death, let thy rod correct us like a father when we
do amiss, and thy staff support us in all our troubles and necessities. O let
thy loving kindness and mercy follow us all our days, that after this life we
may dwell in thy house for ever, where thou have prepared a Table, and a full
cup of blessing for thy People, and shall anoint their heads with the oil of
an eternal gladness in the fruition of thy glories, o blessed Savior and
Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 24.
A Meditation upon the ascension of our Blessed Savior, and a prayer for
Sanctity, that we may ascend where he is.
THe earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compass of the world,
and they that dwell therein.

2 For he has founded it upon the seas: and prepared it upon the floods.

3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord: or who shall rise up in his holy
place?

4 Even he that has clean hands, and a pure heart: and that has not lift up
his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor.

5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.

6 This is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek thy
face, O Jacob.

7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors: and
the King of glory shall come in.

8 Who is the King of glory: it is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord
mighty in battle.

9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors: and
the King of glory shall come in.

10 Who is the King of glory: even the Lord of ho^ts, he is the King of glory.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, King of glory, Lord of Hosts, and King of all the Creatures,
to whom the everlasting doors were opened, that thou might enter into thy
Kingdom, which thou did open to all believers, after thou had overcome the
sharpness of death: give us clean hands and a pure heart: teach us to follow
thy innocence, to imitate thy sanctity, that we may receive from thee our Lord
the eternal rewards and blessings of righteousness, and ascend thither
whither thou, o God of our salvation, art gone before, who live and reignest
with the Father and the Holy Ghost eternal God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 25.
A penitential Psalm, or a prayer for deliverance from Sin and Punishment.
Unto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul, my God, I have put my trust in
thee: O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me.

2 For all they that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but such as
transgress without a cause, shall be put to confusion.

3 Show me thy ways, O Lord; and teach me thy paths.

4 Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou art the God of my
salvation, in thee has been my hope all the day long.

5 Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindness
which has been ever of old.

6 Oh remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon me (O Lord) for thy goodness.

7 Gracious and righteous is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the
way.

8 Them that be meek shall he guide in judgment: and such as be gentle, them
shall he learn his way.

9 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.

10 For thy names sake, O Lord: be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

11 What man is he that fears the Lord: him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose.

12 His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the land.

13 The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant.

14 Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

15 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and in misery.

16 The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles.

17 Look upon mine adversity and misery: and forgive me all my sin.

18 Consider mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous hate
against me.

19 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

20 Let perfectness and righteous dealing wait upon me: for my hope has been
in thee.

21 Deliver Israel, O God: out of all his troubles.

The Prayer.
O Gracious and Righteous Lord God, who art the guide of the meek, and teach
the humble and gentle in thy way, forgive the sins and offenses of our youth,
and although by them we have deserved thy wrath, and that we be put to
confusion, yet be pleased to think upon us for thy goodness, and according to
thy mercy, that when thou have forgiven us all our sin, and taken away our
adversity and all our misery, thou may keep our souls in per^ectnesse and
righteous dealing, that at last we may dwell at ease, free from trouble, and
safe from all our enemies, even when we shall inherit the land of everlasting
rest, where thou live and raignest eternal God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 26.
A Prayer of preparation to the holy Sacrament, and to death.
BE thou my judge, O Lord, for I have walked innocently: my trust has been
also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall.

2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my reins and my heart.

3 For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes: and I will walk in thy
truth.

4 I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship with the
deceitful.

5 I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the
ungodly.

6 I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: and so will I go to thine altar.

7 That I may show the voice of thanksgiving: and tell of all thy wondrous
works.

8 Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house: and the place where thine
honor dwells.

9 O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the bloodthirsty.

10 In whose hands is wickedness: and their right hands are full of gifts.

11 But as for me, I will walk innocently: O Lord deliver me, and be merciful
unto me.

12 My foot stands right: I will praise the Lord in the congregations.

The Prayer.
O Lord our Judge, whose loving kindness is great, and always before our eyes
manifested in the abundant acts of thy grace and providence, make us to love
and frequent all the actions, ministeries, and conveyances of thy graces to us,
especially thy holy Sacraments. O dear God, endue our Souls with faith and
charity, and holy penitence, that our hands and hearts, our Souls and bodies,
being washed in innocence and penance, we may go to thy holy Table, and may in
the whole course of our life, walk righteously and in obedience to thee, that
in this world hating the congregation of the wicked, and the fellowship of the
deceitful and vain persons, at last our Souls may not be shut up with
sinners, nor our lives with the bloodthirsty, but we may have our portion in
the eternal habitation of thy house, where thine honor dwells and reigns
world without end. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 27.
A Prayer, that being freed from our Enemies, we may attend the services of
Religion, and serve God in his holy Temple.
THe Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid?

2 When the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me to eat up my
flesh: they stumbled and fell.

3 Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid: and though there rose up War against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea, in the
secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of
stone.

6 And now shall he lift up mine head: above mine enemies round about me.

7 Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladness: I
will sing and speak praises unto the Lord.

8 Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

9 My heart has talked of thee, seek ye my face: thy face Lord will I seek.

10 O hide not thou thy face from me: nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

11 Thou have been my succor: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

12 When my father and my mother forsake me: the Lord takes me up.

13 Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in the right way, because of mine
enemies.

14 Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries: for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

15 I should utterly have fainted: but that I believe verily to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.

16 O tarry thou the Lords leisu^^; be strong, and he shall comfort thine
heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou have been our succor, our light and salvation, leave us not,
neither forsake us when we are assaulted by enemies without, and by temptations
from within, but lead us in the right way which thou have appointed for us to
walk in: and when thou have lift up our heads above our enemies round about us,
grant that we may spend our days in prayer, and giving praises to thee, and in
all other actions of holy Religion, visiting thy temple with frequent addresses
of devotion, and contemplating, and admiring the fair beauty of the Lord, and
that being secure in such employments, being hid in thy Tabernacle, and taking
Sanctuary within the secret place of thy dwelling, we may at last come unto thy
heavenly Jerusalem, where the gates of thy Temple are open day and night, there
seeing the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, praising thee to
all eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 28.
A prayer for deliverance from death and damnation.
Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest if thou
make as though thou hear not, I become like them that go down into the pit.

2 Hear the voice of my humble petitions when I cry unto thee: when I hold up
my hands toward the mercy-seat of thy holy temple.

3 O pluck me not away (neither destroy me) with the ungodly and wicked doers:
which speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts.

4 Reward them according to their deeds: and according to the wickedness of
their own inventions.

5 Recompense them after the work of their hands: pay them that they have
deserved.

6 For they regard not in their mind the works of the Lord, nor the operation
of his hands: therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up.

7 Praised be the Lord: for he has heard the voice of my humble petitions.

8 The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart has trusted in him, and I
am helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise him.

9 The Lord is my strength: and he is the wholesome defense of his anointed.

10 O save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed them,
and set them up for ever.

The Prayer.
O Lord my strength and confidence, my shield and the defense of all that hope
in thee, hear the voice of our humble petitions: We hold up our hands to thy
mercy-seat, praying thee for pity, and pardon of our sins: reward us not
according to our deeds, nor according to the wickedness of our inventions; for
if thou should deal with us according to the operation of our hands, we
should be like them that go down into the pit, and our inheritance would be
death and destruction. But our heart has trusted in thee, and thou have helped
us; continue thy loving kindness to us, and pluck us not away, neither destroy
us with the ungodly and wicked doers, but magnify thy mercies in the salvation
of our souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 29.
In which God is adored, and the mightiness of his power and voice is
celebrated.
BRing unto the Lord (O ye mighty) bring young Rams unto the Lord: ascribe unto
the Lord worship and strength.

2 Give the Lord the honor due unto his Name: worship the Lord with holy
worship.

3 It is the Lord that commands the waters: it is the glorious God that
makes the thunder.

4 It is the Lord that rules the Sea, the voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation: the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

5 The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedar trees: yea, the Lord breaks the
Cedars of Libanus.

6 He made them also to skip like a calfe: Libanus also and Sirion like a young
Unicorn.

7 The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord
shakes the wilderness: yea the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades.

8 The voice of the Lord makes the Hindes to bring forth young, and
discovers the thick bushes: in his Temple does every man speak of his honor.

9 The Lord sits above the water flood: and the Lord remains a King for
ever.

10 The Lord shall give strength unto his people: the Lord shall give his
people the blessing of peace.

The Prayer.
O Most glorious God who make the thunder, thy voice is mighty in operation,
and is a glorious voice, give us grace that we may hear thy voice, and obey it
with reverence and humility. Thou that breakest the Cedar trees, let thy word
rend our hearts with sorrow and contrition for our sins, that so we may feel
the power and the mercy of thy voice, and may ascribe unto thee worship and
strength, worshipping thee with a holy worship all the days of our life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 30.
A Prayer for deliverance from sickness and death and damnation.
I Will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou have set me up: and not made my foes to
triumph over me.

2 O Lord my God, I cried unto thee: and thou have healed me.

3 Thou Lord have brought my soul out of hell: thou have kept my life from them
that go down to the pit.

4 Sing praises unto the Lord (O ye Saints of his:) and give thanks to him for
a remembrance of his holiness.

5 For his wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is
life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be removed: thou Lord of thy
goodness had made my hill so strong.

7 Thou did turn thy face (from me:) and I was troubled.

8 Then cried I unto thee, O Lord: and gat me unto my Lord right humbly.

9 What profit is there in my blood: when I go down to the pit?

10 Shall the dust give thanks unto thee: or shall it declare thy truth?

11 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper.

12 Thou have turned my heaviness into joy: thou have put off my sackcloth,
and g^rded me with gladness.

13 Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my
God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God whose mercy is infinite, but thy wrath endures but the
twinkling of an eye, and even in this short time of thy wrath thou remembrest
mercy, we cry unto thee, and address our selves unto thee right humbly: O turn
not thy face away from us; keep our life from them that go down into the pit,
and preserve our souls from hell; and although thou sometimes sendest
heaviness unto us, and trouble upon our loins, yet let it be but as for a
night, let thy mercy dawn upon us, and shine as in a glorious morning; for thou
art more pleased in demonstrations of thy mercy, then in showing thy
displeasure. O Lord heal us, and be merciful unto us, and save us, turn our
heaviness into joy, and gird us with gladness, so shall we give thanks unto
thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 31.
A prayer for protection against our enemies and all dangers of soul and body,
and specially at the hour of death.
IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion,
deliver me in thy righteousness.

2 Bow down thine ear to me: make haste to deliver me.

3 And be thou my strong rock, and the house of defense: that thou may save
me.

4 For thou art my strong rock, and my castle: be thou also my guide, and lead
me for thy names sake.

5 Draw me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my
strength.

6 Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of truth.

7 I have hated them that hold of superstitious vanities: and my trust has
been in the Lord.

8 I will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my
trouble, and have known my soul in adversities.

9 Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: but have set my feet in
a large room.

10 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: and mine eye is consumed
for very heaviness: yea, my soul and my body.

11 For my life is waxen old with heaviness: and my years with mourning.

12 My strength fails me, because of mine iniquity: and my bones are consumed.

13 I became a reproof among all mine enemies, but specially among my
neighbors: and they of mine acquaintance were afraid of me, and they that did
see me without, conveyed themselves from me.

14 I am clean forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am become like a broken
vessel.

15 For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude: and fear is on every
side, while they conspire together against me, and take their counsel to take
away my life.

16 But my hope has been in thee, O Lord: I have said, Thou art my God.

17 My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies: and from
them that persecute me.

18 Show thy servant the light of thy countenance: and save me for thy mercies
sake.

19 Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the
ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the grave.

20 Let the lying lips be put to silence: which cruelly, disdainfully, and
despitefully speak against the righteous.

21 O how plentiful is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee: and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee,
even before the sons of men!

22 Thou shall hide them privily by thine own presence, from the provoking of
all men: thou shall keep them secretly in thy tabernacle from the strife of
tongues.

23 Thanks be to the Lord: for he has showed me mavelous great kindness in
a strong city.

24 And when I made haste, I said: I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes.

25 Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my prayer: when I cried unto thee.

26 O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves them that are
faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

27 Be strong, and he shall stablish your heart: all ye that put your trust in
the Lord.

The Prayer.
O God our rock and the house of our defense, let us be glad and rejoice in thy
mercies and salvation. Consider, O Lord, our trouble, and in thy pity know our
souls beset round about with enemies and adversities: Shut us not up into the
hands of our enemies, nor our lives within the grave. Our time, O Lord, is in
thy hand, to thee pertain the issues of life and death, and though our strength
has failed us because of our iniquity, and our bones are vexed by reason of
our sins, yet our hope is in thee, O Lord, we have said, Thou art our God:
deliver us from all our enemies bodily and ghostly: turn our sadness into joy,
and our mourning into gladness, lest our bodies and souls be consumed for
very heaviness. Let us not be put to confusion nor to silence in the grave,
but let us see thy mavelous loving kindness, and partake of thy plentiful
goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, even before the
sons of men. O let us never be cast out of the sight of thine eyes, but deal
with us in mercy and loving kindness. Into thy hands we commend our spirits,
resigning our selves up to thy providence and disposition, either to life or
death, as thou in thy infinite wisdom shall find most proportionable to thy
glory, and our eternal good, beseeching thee to be our guide to death, and to
lead us for thy Name sake to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 32.
A confession of sins, and a prayer for pardon.
BLessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin: and in whose spirit
there is no guile.

3 For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily
complaining.

4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the
drought in Summer.

5 I will knowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not
hid.

6 I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin.

7 For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time
when thou may be found: but in the great water-flouds they shall not come
nigh him.

8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

9 I will enform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

10 Be ye not like to Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: whose
mouths must be holden with bit and bridle, left they fall upon thee.

11 Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whosoever puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye
that are true of heart.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, eternal Judge of men and Angels, whose property is always to have
mercy and to forgive, have mercy upon us who confess our sins unto thee to be
so great and many, that were not thy mercy infinite, we might despair of having
our unrighteousness forgiven, or our sins covered. O dear God, preserve us
from the great plagues that remain for the ungodly, and let thy mercy embrace
us on every side. Impute not unto us the sins we have multiplied against thee,
and against all the world; for we have been like to a Horse and Mule without
understanding, brutish in our passions, sensual in our affections, of
unbridled heats, and distemperatures. But thy mercy is as infinite as thy self;
O let not thy hand be heavy upon us, but forgive the wickedness of our sin,
and compass us about with songs of deliverance, then shall we be glad and
rejoice in thee, O Lord, who art become our mighty Savior and most merciful
Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

PSALM 33.
A prayer to God for the graces of fear, hope, and Religion.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes well the just to be
thankful.

2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing psalms unto him with the lute and
instrument of ten strings.

3 Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises lustily (unto him) with a good
courage.

4 For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithful.

5 He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness
of the Lord.

6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by
the breath of his mouth.

7 He gathers the waters of the Sea together, as it were upon an heap: and
lays up the deep as in a treasure house.

8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in
the world.

9 For he spoke, and it was done: he com^^^ded, and it stood fast.

10 The Lord brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught: and makes the
devices of the people to be of none effect, and casts out the counsels of
Princes.

11 The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his
heart from generation to generation.

12 Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Jehovah: and blessed are the
folk that he has chosen to him to be his inheritance.

13 The Lord looked down from Heaven, and beheld all the children of men: from
the habitation of his dwelling he considers all them that dwell in the earth.

14 He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and understands all their works.

15 There is no King that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is
any mighty man delivered by much strength.

16 An Horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he
deliver any man by his great strength.

17 Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that
put their trust in his mercy.

18 To deliver their souls from death: and to feed them in the time of dearth.

19 Our soul has patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our
shield.

20 For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have hoped in his holy name.

21 Let thy merciful kindness (O Lord) be upon us: like as we do put our
trust in thee.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who love righteousness and judgment, who fillest the earth
with thy goodness, and look down from Heaven upon the children of men:
Consider us, O Lord, and let thy grace fashion our hearts, and produce in our
souls such forms and impresses, as may bear thy Image, and seem beauteous in
thy eyes, that thou may be our God, and choose us for thine inheritance. Let
thy mercy feed us, thy hands deliver us from death, and snatch us from the jaws
of hell: teach us to fear thee, to put our trust in thy mercy, patiently to
tarry for thee, and the revelation of thy loving kindnesses, to hope in thy
holy Name, and to rejoice in thy salvation, giving thee thanks and praise with
a good courage, with humble and religious affections, all the days of our life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 34.
A Prayer, that we being disposed by holy living, may receive and have a sense
and taste of the Divine goodness.
I Will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

2 My soul shall make her boast of the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof and
be glad.

3 O praise the Lord with me: and let us magnify his name together.

4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of all my fear.

5 They had an eye unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed.

6 Lo, the poor cries, and the Lord hears him: yea, and saves him out of
all his troubles.

7 The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him: and
delivers them.

8 O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts
in him.

9 O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him lack nothing.

10 The lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they which seek the Lord, shall
want no manner of thing that is good.

11 Come ye children and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

12 What man is he that lusts to live, and would fain see good days: keep
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

13 Eschew evil, and do good: seek peace and ensue it.

14 The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous: and his ears are open unto
their prayers.

15 The countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil: to root out the
remembrance of them from the earth.

16 The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them: and delivers them out of
all their troubles.

17. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save
such as be of an humble spirit.

18 Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of
all.

19 He keeps all his bones: so that not one of them is broken.

20 But misfortune shall slay the ungodly: and they that hate the righteous,
shall be desolate.

21 The Lord delivers the souls of his servants: and all they that put their
trust in him shall not be destitute.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful and gracious Lord, whose eyes are over the righteous, and
thine ears are open unto their prayers, give us, we beseech thee, a contrite
heart, and an humble spirit, a fear of thy Name, a watchfulness over our
tongue, that we speak no guile, a care of our actions that we eschew all evil,
and a zeal of thy Name that we may do good; that being thus prepared with holy
dispositions, we may be delivered out of all our troubles by the hands of thy
mercy, we may be defended against our enemies by the custody of Angels, we may
be provided for, so as to want no manner of thing that is good, by the
ministration of thy providence, that so in all the whole course of our life, we
may feel the goodness of the Lord, seeing and tasting the sweetnesses of thy
mercy, which may be to us an antepast of eternity, and as an earnest of the
Spirit to consigne us to the fruition of the glories of thy Kingdom, who
live and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 35.
A Prayer to be delivered from our Enemies.
PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou
against them that fight against me.

2 Lay hand upon the shield and buckler: and stand up to help me.

3 Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them
be turned back, and brought to confusion, that imagine mischief for me.

5 Let them be as the dust before the wind: and the Angel of the Lord
scattering them.

6 Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

7 For they have privily laid their net to destroy me without a cause: yea,
even without a cause have they made a pit for my soul.

8 Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares: and his net that he has
laid privily, catch himself: that he may fall into his own mischief.

9 And my soul be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.

10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the
poor from him that is too strong for him: yea, the poor and him that is in
misery, from him that spoileth him?

11 False witness did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not.

12 They rewarded me evil for good: to the great discomfort of my soul.

13 Nevertheless, when they were sick, I put on sackcloth, and humbled my soul
with fasting: and my prayer shall turn into mine own bosom.

14 I behaved my self as though it had been my friend, or my brother: I went
heavily as one that mourns for his mother.

15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered them together: yea, the
very abjects came together against me unawares, making mowes at me, and cea^ed
not.

16 With the flatterers were busy mockers: which gnashed upon me with their
teeth.

17 Lord, how long will thou look upon this: O deliver my soul from the
calamities which they bring on me, and my darling from the lions.

18 So will I give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee
among much people.

19 O let not them that are mine enemies triumph over me ungodly: neither let
them wink with their eyes that hate me without a cause.

20 And why? their communing is not for peace: but they imagine deceitful
words against them that are quiet in the land.

21 They gaped on me with their mouths: and said, Fie on thee, fie on thee, we
saw it with our eyes.

22 This thou have seen, O Lord: hold not thy tongue then, go not far from me,
O Lord.

23 Awake and stand up to judge my quarrel: avenge thou my cause, my God, and
my Lord.

24 Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness: and let them not
triumph over me.

25 Let them not say in their hearts, There, there, so would we have it:
neither let them say, we have devoured him.

26 Let them be put to confusion and shame together that rejoice at my trouble:
let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonor that boast themselves against me.

27 Let them be glad and rejoice that favor my righteous dealing: yea, let
them say always, Blessed be the Lord, which has pleasure in the prosperity of
his servant.

28 And as for my tongue it shall be talking of thy righteousness: and of thy
praise all the day long.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God, who art the shield of the oppressed, and the Buckler of all
that trust in thee, deliver us from all the assaults and intendments of our
enemies against us, who without cause make pits for our souls: let the Angel of
the Lord scatter all their mischievous imaginations, lest they triumph over us,
and say, we have devoured them: strive thou with them that strive with us, and
fight against them that fight against us. Preserve us in innocence, that we
neither sin against thee, nor do injustice to them, and restore us to our
Peace, so shall we talk of thy righteousness, and thy praise all the day long,
and give thee thanks in the great congregation of Saints, because thou have
pleasure in the prosperity of thy servants, and have redeemed them from the
hands of their enemies through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 36.
A Prayer desiring the joys of Heaven, the blessings of Eternity.
MY heart shows me the wickedness of the ungodly: that there is no fear of
God before his eyes.

2 For he flattereth himself in his own sight: until his abominable sin be
found out.

3 The words of his mouth are unrighteous, and full of deceit: he has left off
to behave himself wisely, and to do good.

4 He imagines mischief upon his bed, and has set himself in no good way:
neither does he abhor any thing that is evil.

5 Thy mercy (O Lord) reaches unto the heavens: and thy faithfulness unto the
clouds.

6 Thy righteousness stands like the strong mountains: thy judgments are
like the great deep.

7 Thou Lord shall save both man and beast, how excellent is thy mercy, O God:
and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

8 They shall be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thy house: and thou shall
give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the river.

9 For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light shall we see light.

10 O continue forth thy loving kindness unto them that know thee: and thy
righteousness unto them that are true of heart.

11 O let not the foot of pride come against me: and let not the hand of the
ungodly cast me down.

12 There are they fallen (all) that work wickedness: they are cast down, and
shall not be able to stand.

The Prayer.
O God whose mercy reaches unto the Heavens and thy righteousness unto the
clouds, teach us to abhor every thing that is evil, and to set our selves in
every good way, that thy fear being always before our eyes, and our trust being
under the shadow of thy wings, thou may continue forth thy loving kindness
to us, all the days of our life, that at last we may be satisfied with the
plenteousnesse of thy house, and may drink down rivers of pleasures, deriving
from thee the eternal fountain and well of life, and in the light of thy
countenance, may see everlasting light, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 37.
A Prayer that we may trust and delight in God, and that our lot may be amongst
the godly, and not in the seeming prosperity of the wicked.
FRet not thy self because of the ungodly: neither be thou envious against the
evil doers.

2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grass: and be withered even as the
green herb.

3 Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good: dwell in the land, and
verily thou shall be fed.

4 Delight thou in the Lord: and he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

5 Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him: and he shall bring
it to pass.

6 He shall make thy righteousness as clear as the light: and thy just dealing
as the noon day.

7 Hold thee still in the Lord, and abide patiently upon him: but grieve not
thy self at him whose way does prosper, against the man that does after evil
counsels.

8 Leave off from wrath, and let go displeasure: fret not thy self, else shall
thou be moved to do evil.

9 Wicked doers shall be rooted out: and they that patiently abide the Lord,
those shall inherit the land.

10 Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shall look
after his place, and he shall be away.

11 But the meek spirited shall possess the earth: and shall be refreshed in
the multitude of peace.

12 The ungodly seeks counsel against the just: and gnasheth upon him with
his teeth.

13 The Lord shall laugh him to scorn: for he has seen that his day is
coming.

14 The ungodly have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow: to cast down
the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right conversation.

15 Their sword shall go through their own heart: and their bow shall be
broken.

16 A small thing that the righteous has: is better then great riches of the
ungodly.

17 For the arms of the ungodly shall be broken: and the Lord upholdeth the
righteous.

18 The Lord knows the days of the godly: and their inheritance shall endure
for ever.

19 They shall not be confounded in the perilous time: and in the days of
dearth they shall have enough.

20 As for the ungodly, they shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall
consume as the fat of lambs: yea, even as the smoke shall they consume away.

21 The ungodly borrows, and pays not again: but the righteous is merciful
and liberal.

22 Such as be blessed of God shall possess the land: and they that be cursed
of him shall be rooted out.

23 The Lord orders a good man's going: and makes his way acceptable to
himself.

24 Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord upholdeth him with
his hand.

25 I have been young and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.

26 The righteous is ever merciful, and lends: and his seed is blessed.

27 Flee from evil, and do the thing that is good, and dwell for evermore.

28 For the Lord loves the thing that is right: he forsakes not his that be
godly, but they are preserved for ever.

29 The righteous shall be punished: as for the seed of the ungodly, it shall
be rooted out.

30 The righteous shall inherit the land: and dwell therein for ever.

31 The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom: and his tongue will be
talking of judgment.

32 The law of his God is in his heart: and his goings shall not slide.

33 The ungodly sees the righteous: and seeks occasion to slay him.

34 The Lord will not leave him in his hand: nor condemn him when he is judged.

35 Hope thou in the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote thee, that
thou shall possess the land: when the ungodly shall perish, thou shall see it.

36 I my self have seen the ungodly in great power: and flourishing like a
green bay tree.

37 And I went by, and lo he was gone: I sought him, but his place could no
where be found.

38 Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right: for that shall
bring a man peace at the last.

39 As for the transgressors, they shall perish together: and the end of the
ungodly is, they shall be rooted out at the last.

40 But the salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord: which is also their
strength in the time of trouble.

41 And the Lord shall stand by them and save them: he shall deliver them from
the ungodly, and shall save them, because they put their trust in him.

The Prayer.
O God Almighty, who never forsakest the godly, but preservest them for ever,
let thy Law be in our hearts, fixed and grounded, that we may keep innocence,
and take heed to the thing that is right: order our goings, and make thy way
acceptable to thy self, that we delighting in thee alone, committing our ways
wholly to thy providence, and putting our trust in thy mercies, we may not be
confounded in the perilous times, but may be refreshed in the multitude of
peace, having peace all our days, and peace at the last, in the inheritance of
Saints, who have refused the gilded glories of this world, which is the lot of
the wicked and ungodly people, and are satisfied with the expectation of true
joys, and the rewards of innocence, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 38.
A Prayer for remission of sins.
PUt me not to rebuke (O Lord) in thine anger: neither chasten me in thine
heavy displeasure.

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

3 There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

4 For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear.

5 My wounds stink and are corrupt: through my foolishness.

6 I am brought into so great trouble and misery: that I go mourning all the
day long.

7 For my loins are filled with a sore disease: and there is no whole part in
my body.

8 I am feeble and sore smitten: I have roared for the very disquietnesse of my
heart.

9 Lord, thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

10 My heart pants, my strength has failed me: and the sight of mine eyes is
gone from me.

11 My lovers and my neighbors did stand looking upon my trouble: and my
kinsmen stood afar off.

12 They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that went
about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and imagined deceit all the day
long.

13 As for me, I was like a deaf man, and heard not: and as one that is dumb,
which does not open his mouth.

14 I became even as a man that hears not: and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

15 For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shall answer for me, O Lord
my God.

16 I have required that they (even mine enemies) should not triumph over me:
for when my foot slipped, they rejoiced greatly against me.

17 And I truly am set in the plague: and my heaviness is ever in my sight.

18 For I will confess my wickedness: and be sorry for my sin.

19 But mine enemies live and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully, are
many in number.

20 They also that reward evil for good, are against me: because I follow the
thing that good is.

21 Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou far from me.

22 Haste thee to help me: O Lord God my salvation.

The Prayer.
O Lord who know all our desires, and from whom our groaning is not hid, we
confess before thee our many wickednesses, and are truly sorry for our sins;
our wickednesses are gone over our head, and are a sore burden too heavy for us
to bear, our enemy the Devil is malicious and mighty, our weaknesses many, our
temptations strong, our consciences do busily accuse us. Where shall we appear
in the day of Judgment? How shall we stand upright in the eternal scrutiny?
Our trust is in thy merits. O blessed Jesu, thou art our Judge and our
Advocate, thou shall answer for us, O Lord our God. Put us not to rebuke, O
Lord, in thine anger, for it is insupportable, neither let thy whole
displeasure arise, for that is vast and mountainous as our sins, and will
break us in pieces. O let not the arrows of thy vengeance stick fast in us, for
our sins are wounds enough, and make us restless and miserable. Touch our
sores gently, and let not thy hands press us, unless to drive forth our
corruption, then shall we follow the thing that good is, and rejoice greatly in
thy mercies, O Lord God of our salvation, who have redeemed us, and saved us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 39.
A meditation of the shortness and vanity of our life, and a prayer
preparatory to death.
I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue.

2 I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my
sight.

3 I held my tongue, and spoke nothing: I kept silence, yea, even from good
words, but it was pain and grief to me.

4 My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled:
and at the last I spoke with my tongue.

5 Lord let me know mine end, and the number of my days: that I may be
certified how long I have to live.

6 Behold, thou have made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even
as nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

7 For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

8 And now Lord, what is my hope: truly my hope is even in thee.

9 Deliver me from all mine offenses: and make me not a rebuke unto the
foolish.

10 I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing.

11 Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand.

12 When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is
but vanity.

13 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears.

14 For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner: as all my fathers were.

15 O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength^ before I go hence,
and be no more seen.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, who art without beginning or end of days, thou have given us a
short portion of time in the generations of this world; our condition is vain,
unsatisfying, and full of disquiet, and we have no hope but in thee, O Lord. O
teach us to number our days, to remember and to know our end, that so we may
never sin against thee; and grant that we may live as always dying, being of
mortified souls and bodies, of bridled tongues and affections, and that in
stead of heaping up riches, we may strive for a treasure of good works, laying
up in store against the time to come, that having recovered our strength, lost
by the commission of sins, when we go hence, and are no more seen, we may have
a residence in those mansions which are prepared for the Saints, by our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 40.
A thanksgiving to God for his deliverances, and a prayer for redemption from
sins, and defense against our enemies.
I Waited patiently for the Lord: and he inclined unto me, and heard my calling.

2 He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and clay: and
set my feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings.

3 And he has put a new song in my mouth: even a thanksgiving unto our God.

4 Many shall see it, and fear: and shall put their trust in the Lord.

5 Blessed is the man that has set his hope in the Lord: and turned not unto
the proud, and to such as go about with lies.

6 O Lord my God, great are thy wondrous works which thou have done: like as be
also thy thoughts which are to usward, and yet there is no man that orders
them unto thee.

7 If I would declare them and speak of them: they should be more then I am able
to express.

8 Sacrifice and meat offering thou would not have: but mine ears have thou
opened.

9 Burnt-offerings and sacrifice for sin have thou not required: then said I,
Lo, I come.

10 In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy
will, O my God: I am content to do it, yea, thy Law is within my heart.

11 I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I will
not refrain my lips, O Lord, and that thou know.

12 I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart: my talking has been of
thy truth, and of thy salvation.

13 I have not kept back thy loving mercy and truth: from the great
congregation.

14 Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness and
thy truth always preserve me.

15 For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea, they are more in number then the
hairs of mine head, and my heart has failed me.

16 O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make ha^te (O Lord) to help
me.

17 Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul to
destroy it: let them be driven backward and put to rebuke that wish me evil.

18 Let them be desolate and rewarded with shame, that say unto me: Fie upon
thee, fie upon thee.

19 Let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let such as
love thy salvation, say always, The Lord be praised.

20 As for me, I am poor and needy: but the Lord cares for me.

21 Thou art my helper and redeemer: make no long tarrying, O my God.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God whose works are wondrous, and thy thoughts which are to usward
full of mercy and admirable in wisdom; we adore and worship thy infinite
perfections, and thy providence in the disposing of all thy creatures, and the
effects of all causes, which in an infinite variety thou orderest to thy glory,
and the good of all faithful people. Thou have dealt with us in mercy; and
although our sins are so multiplied that they are more in number then the hairs
of our head, yet thou have not suffered us to fall into the horrible pit of
eternal misery and destruction, but have set our feet upon the Rock Christ
Jesus, and by his graces and holy Laws have ordered our goings. Let it be thy
pleasure still to deliver us, for we are not able of our selves to look up, and
our enemies still seek after our souls to destroy us. Make no long tarrying, O
God, show thy self our helper and redeemer, so shall we talk of thy truth and
of thy salvation, in the assemblies of thy servants in this life, hoping that
we shall hereafter declare thy righteousness in the great congregation of
Saints and Angels, singing eternal praises to God the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 41.
A Prayer for the grace of charity, for pardon of sins, and for deliverance
from false friends and Traitors.
BLessed is he that considers the poor (and needy:) the Lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble.

2 The Lord preserve him and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon earth:
and deliver not thou him into the will of his enemies.

3 The Lord comfort him when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou all his bed
in his sickness.

4 I said, Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against
^hee.

5 Mine enemies speak evil of me: when shall he dye, and his name perish?

6 And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity: and his heart conceives
falsehood within himself, and when he comes forth, he tells it.

7 All mine enemies whisper together against me: even against me do they
imagine this evil.

8 Let the sentence of guiltiness proceed against him: and now that he lies,
let him rise up no more.

9 Yea, even mine own familiar friend whom I trusted: which did also eat of my
bread, has laid great wait for me.

10 But be thou merciful unto me, O Lord: raise thou me up again, and I shall
reward them.

11 By this I know thou favourest me: that mine enemy does not triumph against
me.

12 And when I am in my health, thou upholdest me: and shall set me before thy
face for ever.

13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: world without end. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, Savior of the world, be merciful unto us, and heal our sins,
for we have sinned against thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy
children, but yet make us thy servants, and give us testimony that we are
translated from death to life, by charity and love to all our brethren. O make
our bowels yearn with pity and compassion over the necessities of the poor and
needy, and give us grace and power to help them and relieve their miseries,
that we being merciful as our Heavenly Father is, may receive such blessings
and assistances as thou have provided for the charitable, deliverance from our
open enemies, safety from private treachery and conspiracies, comfort in our
sicknesses, health of body and pardon of our sins, through thy mercies and
blessed charity, O most merciful Savior and Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

PSALM 42.
A Prayer for comfort in spiritual desertion, and dryness of affection, and
that we may long and sigh after God.
LIke as the heart desires the water brooks: so longs my soul after thee, O
God.

2 My soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God: when shall I come
to appear before the presence of God?

3 My tears have been my meat day and night: while they daily say unto me,
Where is now thy God?

4 Now when I think thereupon, I pour out my heart by my self: for I went wit
the multitude, and brought them forth into the house of God.

5 In the voice of praise and thanksgiving: among such as keep holy day.

6 Why art thou so full of heaviness (O my soul:) and why art thou so
disquieted within me?

7 Put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his
countenance.

8 My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember thee
concerning the land of Jordan, and the little hill of Hermon.

9 One deep calls another, because of the noise of the water-pipes, all thy
waves and storms are gone over me.

10 The Lord has granted his loving kindness on the day time: and in the
night season did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the God of my life.

11 I will say unto the God of my strength, Why have thou forgotten me: why go
I thus heavily while the enemy oppresses me?

12 My bones are smitten asunder as with a sword: while mine enemies (that
trouble me) cast me in the teeth.

13 Namely, while they say daily unto me: Where is now thy God?

14 Why art thou so vexed, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me?

15 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet thank him which is the help of my
countenance, and my God.

The Prayer.
O Eternal and living God, thou art the help of our countenance and our God,
thou art the thing that we long for, and our hearts are vexed within us, and
disquieted when we feel not the comforts of thy Spirit, and those actual
exultations, and that spiritual gust, which thou do often give to thy
people, as earnests of a glorious immortality. O Lord pity our infirmities, and
give us earnest longings for the fruition of thee our God in the actions of
holy Religion: Grant unto us vivacity of spirit, unweariednesse in devotion,
delight and complacency in spiritual exercises, that when our souls are vexed
with temptations and sadnesses, we may remember thee concerning the land of
promise, and be comforted and encouraged in our duties, by the expectation of
those glories which thou have laid up for them that love the appearing of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 43.
A Prayer for cheerfulness of spirit in our devotions.
GIve sentence with me, O God, and defend my cause against the ungodly people:
O deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man.

2 For thou art the God of my strength, why have thou put me from thee: and why
go I so heavily while the enemy oppresses me?

3 O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me: and bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy dw^lling.

4 And that I may go unto the altar of God, even unto the God of my joy and
gladness: and upon the harp will I give thanks unto thee, O God my God.

5 Why art thou so heavy, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me?

6 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks, which is the help of
my countenance, and my God.

The Prayer.
O God our defender and deliverer, thou art the God of our strength, and our
ghostly confidence: let the light of thy countenance produce the beams of
spiritual joy in our souls, and let thy truth lead us in the way of thy
salvation, that when we go unto thy dwelling places where thou manifestest thy
presence, we may approach unto thee with joy and gladness, rejoicing in
nothing more then in doing thee service, and singing praises to thy name for
the help of thy countenance, which thou give us in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 44.
A Prayer in time of War.
WE have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us: what thou have
done in their time of old.

2 How thou have driven out the Heathen with thy hand, and pl^nted them in: how
thou have destroyed the Nations, and cast them out.

3 For they gat not the Land in possession through their own sword: neither was
it their own arm that helped them.

4 But thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance: because
thou had a favor unto them.

5 Thou art my King (O God:) send help unto Jacob.

6 Through thee will we overthrow our enemies: and in thy name will we tread
them under that rise up against us.

7 For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword that shall help me.

8 But it is thou that savest us from our enemies: and put them to
confusion that hate us.

9 We make our boast of God all day long: and will praise thy name for ever.

10 But now thou art far off, and put us to confuson: and go not forth
with our Armies.

11 Thou make us to turn our backs upon our en^mies: so that they which hate
us spoil our goods.

12 Thou let us to be eaten up like sheep: and have scattered us among the
Heathen.

13 Thou sell^st thy people for nou^ht: and tak^st no money for them.

14 Thou make us to be rebuked of our neighbors: to be laughed to scorn, and
had in derision of them that are round about us.

15 Thou make us to be a byword among the heathen: and that the people shake
their heads at us.

16 My confusion is daily before me: and the shame of my face has covered me.

17 For the voice of the slanderer and blasphemer: for the enemy and avenger.

18 And though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget thee: nor behave
our selves frowardly in thy covenant.

19 Our heart is not turned back: neither our steps gone out of thy way.

20 No not when thou have smitten us into the place of Dragons: and covered us
with the shadow of death.

21 If we have forgotten the name of our God, and holden up our hands to any
strange God: shall not God search it out? for he knows the very secrets of
the heart.

22 For thy sake also are we killed all the day long: and are counted as sheep
appointed to be slain.

23 Up Lord, why sleep thou: awake, and be not absent from us for ever.

24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face: and forgettest our misery and trouble?

25 For our soul is brought low even unto the dust: our belly cleaves unto the
ground.

26 Arise and help us: and deliver us for thy mercy sake.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of hosts, who for our sins have suffered the sword to take
vengeance upon us, and to plead thy cause against us, O hide not thy face from
us, and forget not our misery and trouble. We are killed all day long, and are
accounted as sheep appointed to be slain, we are covered with the shadow of
death, and they which hate us, spoil our goods. Deal with us in pity, and as
thou have done to our Fathers of old time, when they called upon thee in their
trouble, so deal with us: thou overthrewest their enemies, and did tread them
under that arose up against them. Arise, and help us, and deliver us also for
thy mercy sake: our own sword cannot help us, but let thy right hand, and thine
arm, and the light of thy countenance work deliverance and salvation for us. Go
forth with our Armies, O thou God of Hosts, do thou fight our Battles, that we
may not turn our backs upon our enemies, but crown us with Victory and Peace,
that we may make our boast of thee all day long, and praise thy Name for ever,
who art holy, and just, and merciful, the great God of Battles and
recompenses. From thee let mercy now and ever proceed, and to thy Name let
honor be for ever ascribed of all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth, world without
end. Amen.

PSALM 45.
A Prayer for the conversion of the Heathen, and prosperity of the Church.
MY heart is enditing of a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made
unto the King.

2 My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

3 Thou art fairer then the children of men: full of grace are thy lips,
because God has blessed thee for ever.

4 Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty: according to
thy worship and renown.

5 Good luck have thou with thine honor: ride on, because of the word of
truth, of meekness and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things.

6 Thy arrows are very sharp, and the people shall be subdued unto thee: even
in the midst among the Kings enemies.

7 Thy seat (O God) endures for ever: the scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
scepter.

8 Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: wherefore God (even thy
God) has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

9 All thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia: out of the ivory
palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

10 Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did
stand the Queen in a vesture of gold (wrought about with diverse colou^s.)

11 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, incline thine ear: forget also thine
own people, and thy fathers house.

12 So shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty: for he is thy Lord (God) and
worship thou him.

13 And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift: like as the rich also
among the people shall make their supplication before thee.

14 The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.

15 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: the virgins
that be her fellows shall bear her company, and shall be brought unto thee.

16 With joy and gladness shall they be brought: and shall enter into the
Kings Palace.

17 In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children: whom thou may make
Princ^s in all Lands.

18 I will remember thy name from one generation unto another: therefore shall
the people give thanks unto thee world without end.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, Prince of the Catholic Church, thou art fairer then the
children of men, thy lips are full of grace, thine Armies mighty, thy head is
Crowned with Majesty, and clothed with worship and renown: have mercy upon thy
holy Church, bless her for ever with righteousness, and let the oil of
gladness refresh her amidst the multitude of her sorrows and afflictions: And
because she is the daughter of a King, and thou take pleasure in her beauty,
let her not always be clothed in mourning garments, but let her be decked with
exterior Ornaments and secular advantages, such as may truly promote the
interests of holy Religion. Let Kings and Queens be nursing Fathers, and
nursing Mothers unto her, and so let the sound of thy Gospel go into all the
Earth, that her children may be Princes in all Lands, and Ministers of thy
Kingdom, advancing thy honor, and furthering the salvation of all men, for
whom thou did give thy precious blood, that all people may worship thee, and
give thee thanks for ever, who together with the Father and the holy Ghost,
live and reignest one God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 46.
A Prayer for protection, and for confidence in God in times of public
distractions, and for the peace of Christendom.
GOD is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.

2 Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved: and though the hills
be carried into the midst of the Sea.

3 Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountains shake at
the tempest of the same.

4 The rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the City of God: the holy
place of the tabernacle of the most Highest.

5 God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall
help her, and that right early.

6 The Heathen make much ado, and the Kingdoms are moved: but God has showed
his voice, and the earth shall melt away.

7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

8 O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he has
brought upon the earth.

9 He makes Wars to cease in all the World: he breaks the bow, and knappeth
the spear in sunder, and burns the Chariots in the fire.

10 Be still then, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the
Heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth.

11 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful Savior Jesu, Prince of Peace, at whose birth all the
Kingdoms of the World were in peace and tranquillity, bethou in the midst of
us for our refuge and present help in times of trouble and public calamities,
when the Kingdom is moved, and the hearts of men shake at the tempest of the
same. Dear God, unite all the parts of Christendom with the union of Faith and
Charity, and the fruits of them, a blessed and universal Peace. Break the bow
of the mighty, knappe the spear of the Warrior in sunder, and burn the
Chariots in the fire, that Wars may cease in all the World, and we all may
feel the promised blessing of the Gospel, that our Swords may be converted into
plowshares, and our Spears into pruning hooks, that thy Name and thy Kingdom
may be exalted among the heathen, and in all the Nations of the earth, who
live the reignest over all, in the unity of the blessed Trinity, God
eternal, world without end. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 47.
A Prayer for the exaltation of Christ's Kingdom, and that all the Princes of
the world may jointly adore Jesus reigning in the Heavens.
O Clap your hands together (all ye people:) O sing unto God with the voice of
melody.

2 For the Lord is high, and to be feared: he is the great King upon all the
earth.

3 He shall subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet.

4 He shall choose out an heritage for us: even the worship of Jacob whom he
loved.

5 God is gone up with a merry noise: and the Lord with the sound of the trump.

6 O sing praises, sing praises unto (our) God: O sing praises, sing praises
unto our King.

7 For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.

8 God reigns over the hea^hen: God sits upon his holy seat.

9 The Princes of the people are joined unto the people of the God of Abraham:
for God (which is very high exalted) does defend the earth as it were with a
shield.

The Prayer.
O Lord God King of Heaven, who raignest a great King in all the Earth; thou
art high above all creatures, and art to be feared in all the Kingdoms of the
earth, let the seed of thy Gospel be disseminated in all the corners of the
habitable World: let thy grace break down all the strong holds of sin and
Satan, subduing all people under thee, and the Nations under thy feet, that the
Princes of the Nations, that have not known thy Name, may be joined to thy
people, the people of the God of Abraham, becoming one sheepfold under one
Shepherd, Jesus Christ our blessed Lord, our Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

PSALM 48.
A Prayer for the prosperity of the Church.
GReat is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in the City of our God, even upon
his holy hill.

2 The hill of Sion is a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth: upon the
north side lies the City of the great King, God is well known in her palaces
as a sure refuge.

3 For lo, the Kings of the earth are gathered, and gone by together.

4 They marvelled to see such things: they were astonished and suddenly cast down.

5 Fear came there upon them, and sorrow: as upon a woman in her travel.

6 Thou shall break the ships of the sea: through the east wind.

7 Like as we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts, in
the City of our God: God upholdeth the same for ever.

8 We wait for thy loving kindness (O God:) in the midst of thy temple.

9 O God, according unto thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end: thy
right hand is full of righteousness.

10 Let the mount Sion rejoice, and the daughters of Juda be glad: because of
thy judgments.

11 Walk about Sion, and go round about her: and tell the towers thereof.

12 Mark well her bulwarks, set up her houses: that ye may tell them that come
after.

13 For this God is our God for ever and ever: he shall be our guide unto death.

The Prayer.
O Great God, who art highly to be praised, who have manifested thy power and
thy mercy in the constitution, propagation, and defense of thy Holy Church, by
the miraculous assistances and effects of thy Holy Spirit, insomuch that the
Kings of the earth marvelled to see such things, and were astonished and suddenly
cast down, acknowledging the powers of thy Kingdom, and submitting to thy laws
with faith and obedience: be pleased, according to thy gracious promise, to
uphold the same for ever, let not the gates of hell prevail against thy Church,
be thou known in her palaces as a sure refuge, make her the joy of the whole
earth, and let her be glad and rejoice because of thy judgments: so shall we
praise thee in the midst of thy Temple, waiting for thy loving kindness, that
according as thy Name is, so may thy praise be, infinite, and eternal, world
without end. Amen.

PSALM 49.
A Prayer that we may despise perishing riches, and put our trust in God only.
O Hear ye this, all ye people: ponder it with your ears all ye that dwell in
the world.

2 High and low, rich and poor: one with another.

3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom: and my heart shall muse of understanding.

4 I will incline mine ear to the parable: and show my dark speech upon the
harp.

5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of wickedness: and when the wickedness
of my heels compass me round about?

6 There be some that put their trust in their goods: and boast themselves in
the multitude of their riches.

7 But no man may deliver his brother: nor make an agreement to God for him.

8 For it cost more to redeem their souls: so that he must let that alone for
ever.

9 Yea, though he live long, and see not the grave.

10 For he sees that wise men also die, and perish together: as well as the
ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other.

11 And yet they think that their houses shall continue for ever: and that
their dwelling places shall endure from one generation to another, and call the
lands after their own names.

12 Nevertheless, man will not abide in honor: seeing he may be compared unto
the beasts that perish, this is the way of them.

13 This is their foolishness: and their posterity praise their saying.

14 They lie in the hell like sheep, death gnaweth upon them, and the righteous
shall have domination over them in the morning: their beauty shall consume in
the sepulcher out of their dwelling.

15 But God has delivered my soul from the place of hell: for he shall receive
me.

16 Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glory of his house be
increased.

17 For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies: neither shall his
pomp follow him.

18 For while he lived, he counted himself an happy man: and so long as thou
do well unto thy self, men will speak good of thee.

19 He shall follow the generation of his fathers: and shall never see light.

20 Man being in honor has no understanding: but is compared unto the beasts
that perish.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesus, thou only Redeemer of souls, who by thy death and passion have
delivered us from the place of Hell, give us grace to put our whole trust in
thee, and in the riches of thy mercy and loving kindness, always remembering
our end, the vanity and shortness of our lives, the certainty of our departure:
Teach us to despise the world and worldly things, and to lay our treasure up in
heaven by charity and actions of religion, that while we live here, we may
have our conversation in heaven, by love, by hope, and by desires, that when
our beauty shall consume in the sepulcher out of our earthly dwellings, we may
be received into everlasting habitations, always to enjoy thee, who live and
reignest eternal God world without end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 50.
A Prayer that we may lead a holy life, and find mercy in the day of judgment.
THe Lord, even the most mighty God has spoken: and called the world, from the
rising up of the sun, unto the going down thereof.

2 Out of Sion has God appeared: in perfect beauty.

3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence^^ there shall go before him
a consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him.

4 He shall call the heaven from above: and the earth, that he may judge his
people.

5 Gather my Saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me,
with sacrifice.

6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is Judge himself.

7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak: I my self will testify against thee, O
Israel, for I am God, even thy God.

8 I will not reprove thee because of thy sacrifices, or for thy
burnt-offerings: because they were not always before me.

9 I will take no bullock out of thine house: nor hee-goats out of thy folds.

10 For all the beasts of the forest are mine: and so are the cattels upon a
thousand hills.

11 I know all the fowls upon the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field
are in my sight.

12 If I be hungry I will not tell thee: for the whole world is mine, and all
that is therein.

13 Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh: and drink the blood of goats?

14 Offer unto God thanksgiving: and pay thy vows unto the most Highest.

15 And call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou
shall praise me.

16 But unto the ungodly said God: Why do thou preach my Laws, and take my
Covenant in thy mouth?

17 Whereas thou hate to be reformed: and have cast my words behind thee.

18 When thou saw a Thief, thou consentedst unto him: and have been partaker
with the Adulterers.

19 Thou have let thy mouth speak wickedness: and with thy tongue thou have
set forth deceit.

20 Thou satest and spakest against thy brother: yea, and have slandered thine
own mothers son.

21 These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest
wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and
set before thee the things that thou have done.

22 O consider this, ye that forget God: lest I pluck you away, and there be
none to deliver you.

23 Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honors me: and to him that
orders his conversation right, will I show the salvation of God.

The Prayer.
O Most mighty God, who art more pleased with the sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and the oblation of our souls in the vows of obedience and a holy life, then
with the burnt-offerings and sacrifices of Bullocks and Goats: let thy grace
reform our lives and manners: keep our mouth from slander and obloquy, from
guile and deceit: let us never consent to actions of injustice or uncleanness,
that we partake not with Thieves or with Adulterers, either in their sin or
punishment, that when thou shall appear in perfect beauty with a consuming fire
before thee, and a tempest round about thee, with terrors and glorious Majesty,
calling the heavens and the earth together, that thou may judge all thy
people, thou may gather us among thy Saints, and give us the mercies and the
portion of thine inheritance, that so we may honor thee by an eternal
oblation of praise and thanksgiving in the Heavens, where thou, O God,
declarest thy salvation to all thy elect people, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PSALM 51.
A Prayer for pardon of sins, and the restitution of Gods favor.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

2 Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

4 Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that
thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

5 Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived
me.

6 But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

7 Thou shall purge me with hyssope, and I shall be cle^n: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter then snow.

8 Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones that thou have
broken may rejoice.

9 Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

10 Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

12 O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free
Spirit.

13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

14 Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God, thou that art the God of my
health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

15 Thou shall open my lips (O Lord:) and my mouth shall show thy praise.

16 For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings.

17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrite heart (O
God) shall thou not despise.

18 O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt-offerings, and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful God, whose goodness is great, and the multitudes of thy
mercies are innumerable, have mercy upon us, for our sins are ever before us
presented, by the continual accusations of a troubled conscience. We have
sinned against thee, and done evil in thy sight, and yet because thou art the
God of mercy, and fountain of eternal purity, delighting in the conversion and
salvation of a sinner, we present unto thee the sacrifice of a troubled spirit,
of broken and contrite hearts, bese^ching thee to let the dew of thy favor,
and the fire of thy love wash away our sins, and purify our souls. Make us
clean hearts, O God, and pure hands: though our sins be as scarlet, yet make
them like wool, though they be as purple, yet make them as white as snow.
Restore the voice of joy and gladness to us, let us not be for ever separate
from the sweet refreshings of thy favor and presence, but give us the comforts
of thy help again, and let thy free Spirit loose us from the bondage of sin,
and establish us in the freedom and liberty of the Sons of God, so shall we
sing of thy righteousness, and our lips shall give thee praise in the
congregation of thy redeemed ones, now, henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

PSALM 52.
A Prayer for deliverance from tyranny, oppression, and slander.
WHy boastest thou thy self, thou ^yrant: that thou can do mischief?

2 Whereas the goodness of God: endures yet daily.

3 Thy tongue imagines wickedness: and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
rasour.

4 Thou have loved unrighteousness more then goodness: and to talk of lies
more then righteousness.

5 Thou have loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue.

6 Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: he shall take thee, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living.

7 The righteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to scorn.

8 Lo, this is the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

9 As for me, I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: my trust is in
the tender mercy of God for ever and ever.

10 I will always give thanks unto thee for that thou have done: and I will
hope in thy name, for thy Saints like it well.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, whose goodness endures daily, extend this thy goodness
toward us thy servants, and defend us from the tyranny and malice of all our
Enemies, who boast themselves in mischief: keep us from the obloquy of false
tongues, and from the slander of lying persons, who talk of lies more then
righteousness, that we being nourished by thy goodness, and watered with the
dew of divine blessings, may flourish like a green olive in the house of God,
bringing forth the fruits of tender mercy, and abounding in peace, and that we
may by the suffusion of anointing of the holy Ghost, be consigned to thy
everlasting Kingdom, there to reign with thee, who reignest eternally, one God
world without end. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 53.
A Prayer for Redemption of the Church from the persecution of Atheists, and
persons irreligious.
THE foolish body has said in his heart: There is no God.

2 Corrupt are they and become abominable in their wickedness: there is none
that does good.

3 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were
any that would understand and seek after God.

4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is also none that does good, no not one.

5 Are not they without understanding that work wickedness: eating up my
people as if they would eat bread? they have not called upon God.

6 They were afraid where no fear was: for God has broken the bones of him
that besieged thee: thou have put them to confusion, because God has despised
them.

7 Oh that the salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion: oh that the Lord
would deliver his people out of captivity!

8 Then should Jacob rejoice: and Israel should be right glad.

The Prayer.
O Lord God who dwell in heaven, and look down from thence upon the
children of men, be pleased to give salvation to thy people out of Sion thy
holy habitation, and preserve thy Church from the malice of such persons as
have not called upon thee, but would eat up thy people, as they would eat
bread: that we being delivered from the captivity of sins and miseries, may
serve thee with freedom of spirit, in joy and spiritual rejoicing, all the
days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 54.
A prayer for deliverance from our Enemies.
SAve me, O God, for thy names sake: and avenge me in thy strength.

2 Hear my prayer, O God: and hearken unto the words of my mouth.

3 For strangers are risen up against me: and tyrants (which have not God
before their eyes) seek after my soul.

4 Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth.

6 An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy name (O Lord:)
because it is so comfortable.

7 For he has delivered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, our God and our helper, whose Name is comfortable, the hope of
all that are miserable, and the relief of the oppressed, hearken unto our
prayers, and for thy Names sake, save us from the tyranny of those that are
risen up against us, and seek after our souls. Give us thy grace, that we may
set thee always before our eyes, to obey thy Laws, to follow thy example, to
trust in thy protection, to give praises unto thy holy Name, who live and
reignest with the Father and the holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 55.
A Prayer for deliverance from treachery, and the conspiracies of our secret
Enemies.
HEar my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my petition.

2 Take heed unto me, and hear me: how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed.

3 The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast: for they are minded
to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me.

4 My heart is disquieted within me: and the fear of death is fallen upon me.

5 Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me: and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

6 And I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for then would I fly away, and
be at rest.

7 Lo then would I get me away afar off: and remain in the wilderness.

8 I would make haste to escape: because of the stormy wind and tempest.

9 Destroy their tongues (O Lord) and divide them: for I have spied
unrighteousness and strife in the City.

10 Day and night they go about within the walls thereof: mischief also and
sorrow are in the mids of it.

11 Wickedness is therein: deceit and guile go not out of their streets.

12 For it is not an open enemy that has done me this dishonor: for then I
could have born it.

13 Neither was it mine adversary that did magnify himself against me: for
then (peradventure) I would have hid my self from him.

14 But it was even thou my companion: my guide and mine own familiar friend.

15 We took sweet counsel together: and walked in the house of God as friends.

16 Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

17 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me.

18 In the evening, and morning, and at noon day will I pray, and that
instantly: and he shall hear my voice.

19 It is he that has delivered my soul in peace, from the battle that was
against me: for there were many with me.

20 Yea, even God that endures for ever, shall hear me, and bring them down:
for they will not turn, nor fear God.

21 He laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him: and he brake his
covenant.

22 The words of his mouth were softer then butter, having war in his heart:
his words were smoother then oil, and yet be they very swords.

23 O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: and shall not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

24 And as for them: thou, O God, shall bring them into the pit of destruction.

25 The bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days:
nevertheless, my trust shall be in thee, O Lord.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, who have promised to nourish and defend all them that cast
their burden upon thee, deliver the souls of thy servants in peace from the
battle that is against us: Fearfulness and trembling are come upon us, and
the fear of death is fallen upon us, for our Enemies are maliciously set
against us, and minded to do us mischief, and we know not whither to flee away
or be at rest, for mischief and sorrow are round about us. O rescue us from the
public enmity of our open adversaries, and from the secret conspiracies of all
our private Enemies, so shall we pray unto thee, and that instantly, and praise
thy N^me, in the Evening, in the Morning, and in the noon day, dedicating to
thy honor and worship, the beginning, the growth, and the decrease of our
life, even all our days, because thou have not suffered us to fall for ever,
but have brought us from the pit of destruction, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 56.
A Prayer that we may trust in God, and have such carfulness over our ways,
that we give our Enemies no advantage.
BE merciful unto me, O God, for man goes about to devour me: he is daily
fighting and troubling me.

2 Mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up: for they be many that fight
against me, O thou most Highest.

3 Nevertheless though I am sometime afraid: yet put I my trust in thee.

4 I will praise God because of his word: I have put my trust in God, and will
not fear what flesh can do unto me.

5 They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine is to do me evil.

6 They hold all together, and keep themselves close: and mark my steps when
they lay wait for my soul.

7 Shall they escape for their wickedness: thou (O God) in thy displeasure
shall cast them down.

8 Thou tell^st my flittings, put my tears into thy bottle: are not these
things noted in thy book?

9 Whenever I call upon thee, then s^all mine enemies be put to flight: this
I know, for God is on my side.

10 In Gods word will I rejoice: in the Lords word will I comfort me.

11 Yea, in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto
me.

12 Unto thee (O God) will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

13 For thou have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling: that
I may walk before God in the light of the living.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, in whom we have trusted, have mercy upon us, who are daily
troubled with sadnesses in the world, temptations of the Devil, weaknesses of
the flesh, malicious surmisings and mistakings of our Enemies, and whatsoever
may make us miserable, and disturb our peace: give us great assistances of thy
grace, that we may walk without scandal, resist and overcome the Devil,
despise the things of this world, and be strengthened in our spirits with
ghostly confidence, that whenever we call upon thee, we may have thee on our
side, and our enemies be put to flight; that our souls being delivered from
death, and our feet from falling, we may at last be admitted into the light of
the living, there to walk eternally before thee our God, who live and
reignest in the Unity of the blessed Trinity, world without end. Amen.

PSALM 57.
A Prayer to be delivered from the power of the Devil, and slander of men, and
that we may put our confidence in God.
BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in
thee: and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge until this tyranny
be overpast.

2 I will call unto the most high God: even unto the God that shall perform the
cause which I have in hand.

3 He shall send from heaven: and save me from the reproof of him that would
eat me up.

4 God shall send forth his mercy and truth^: my soul is among Lions.

5 And I lie even among the children of men (that are set on fire:) whose teeth
are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

6 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and (...) glory above all the
earth.

7 They have laid a net for my feet, and pressed down my soul: they have dug
a pit before me, and are fallen into the midst of it themselves.

8 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.

9 Awake up my glory, awake lute and harp: I my self will awake right early.

10 I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing
unto thee among the Nations.

11 For the greatness of thy mercy reaches unto the Heavens: and thy truth
unto the Clouds.

12 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the
earth.

The Prayer.
O Most high and mighty God, who have set thy self above the heavens, and thy
glory above all the earth, do thou send from heaven and save us from the
reproof of all our ghostly Enemies, who would eat us, for our soul is among
Lions, and the Devil is busy seeking to devour us. O send out thy mercy and
truth, deliver us from the malicious slander of men, and from the dreadful
accusations of the Devils at the day of judgment, who are set on fire against
us, and their teeth are spears and arrows, gnashing at us to tear us in pieces.
Let thy mercy sustain us, let thy righteousness be interposed in answer for
us, that as our enemies accuse us, thy mercies may acquit us, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 58.
A Prayer that Gods people may be delivered from the malice of wicked men.
ARE your minds set upon righteousness, O ye congregation: and do ye judge
the thing that is right, O ye sons of men?

2 Yea, ye imagine mischief in your heart upon the earth: and your hands deal
with wickedness.

3 The ungodly are froward even from their mothers womb: as soon as they be
born, they go astray, and speak lies.

4 They are as venomous as the poison of a serpent: even like the deaf adder
that stops her ears.

5 Which refuses to hear the voice of the charmer: charm he never so wisely.

6 Break their teeth (O God) in their mouths, smite the jaw-bones of the
Lions, O Lord: let them fall away like water that runs apace, and when they
shoot their arrows, let them be rooted out.

7 Let them consume away like a snaile, and be like the untimely fruit of a
woman: and let them not see the sun.

8 Or ever your pots be made hot with thorns: so let indignation vex him even
as a thing that is raw.

9 The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his
footsteps in the blood of the ungodly.

10 So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous:
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

The Prayer.
O Almighty Lord, thou God that judge the earth, who preparest rewards for
the righteous, and executest vengeance against the ungodly, deliver all thy
chosen people from the peevishness of froward and ungodly men, whose hands
deal with wickedness, and they imagine mischief in their hearts. And to thy
servants give thy grace, that our minds may be set upon righteousness, that we
may judge the thing that is right, never refusing to hear thy voice, or
stopping our ears like the deaf adder against thy holy precepts, that we may
have no iniquity in our mouths, nor unrighteousness in our actions, and at
last we may have the reward of the righteous, the inheritance of thy Kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 59.
A Prayer against Heretics, and all other Enemies of the Church.
DEliver me from m^ne enemies, (O God:) defend me from them that rise up
against me.

2 O deliver me from the wicked doers: and save me from the bloodthirsty men.

3 For lo, they lie waiting for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against
me, without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.

4 They run and prepare themselves without my fault: arise thou therefore to
help me, and behold.

5 Stand up (O Lord God of hosts) thou God of Israel, ^o visit all the heathen:
and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness.

6 They go to and fro in the evening: they grin like a dog, and run about
through the city.

7 Behold, they speak with their mouth, and swords are in their lips: for who
does hear?

8 But thou, O Lord, shall have them in derision: and thou shall laugh all the
heathen to scorn.

9 My strength will I ascribe unto thee: for thou art the God of my refuge.

10 God shows me his goodness plenteously: and God shall let me see my
desire upon mine enemies.

11 Slay them not, lest my people forget it: but scatter them abroad among the
people, and put them down, O Lord our defense.

12 For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips, they shall be
taken in their pride: and why? their preaching is of cursing and lies.

13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they may perish: and know that
it is God which rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world.

14 And in the evening they will return: grin like a dog, and will go about
the City.

15 They will run here and there for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied.

16 As for me, I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy betimes in
the morning: for thou have been my defense and refuge, in the day of my trouble.

17 Unto thee (O my strength) will I sing: for thou, O God, art my refuge, and
my merciful God.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of Israel, visit us with thy salvation, and deliver us from the
malice of wicked doers, and the violences of blood-thirsty men. Let not them
prosper, O Lord, in their machinations, whose preaching is of cursing and lies,
and who offend of malicious wickedness: show us thy goodness plenteously,
that we may never forget thy mercies or thy Laws, for thou art our defense and
refuge, and our merciful God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 60.
A Prayer in time of War, or Temptation.
O God, thou have cast us out, and scattered us abroad: thou also have been
displeased, O turn thee to us again.

2 Thou have moved the land, and divided it: heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes.

3 Thou have showed thy people heavy things: thou have given us a drink of
deadly wine.

4 Thou have given a token for such as fear thee: that they may triumph because
of the truth.

5 Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me with thy right hand, and hear
me.

6 God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice and divide Sichem: and mete
out the valley of Succoth.

7 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of my
head, Judah is my lawgiver.

8 Moab is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia be thou
glad of me.

9 Who will lead me into the strong city: who will bring me into Edom?

10 Have thou not cast us out, O God: wilt not thou, O God, go out with our
hosts?

11 O be thou our help in trouble: for vain is the help of man.

12 Through God will we do great acts: for it is he that shall tread down our
enemies.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who for our sins have showed us heavy things, and given us a drink
of deadly Wine, and yet have never failed them that fear thee, but have given
them a token that they may triumph because of thy truth and mercy, consigning
them to redemption and deliverance by the testimony and comforts of the holy
Spirit: O be thou our help in trouble, for all our hope is in thee, and we
disclaim all confidence in our selves, or in the arm of flesh, praying thee for
aid, that in thy strength we may tread down our enemies, and give thee thanks
who art the fountain of strength, and the disposer of Victories, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 61.
A Prayer for the King, and for comfort in sadness.
HEar my crying, O God: give ear unto my prayer.

2 From the ends of the earth will I call unto thee: when my heart is in
heaviness.

3 O set me up upon the rock that is higher then I: for thou have been my hope,
and a strong tower for me against the enemy.

4 I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the
covering of thy wings.

5 For thou, O Lord, have heard my desires: and have given an heritage unto
those that fear thy name.

6 Thou shall grant the King a long life: that his years may endure throughout
all generations.

7 He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and
faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

8 So will I always sing praise unto thy name: that I may daily perform my vows.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, thou that art the rock higher then all the world, upon whom
thy Church is built, and all our hopes rely: be merciful unto us, and give ear
unto our prayers, be unto us a fountain of comfort whenever our heart is in
heaviness, for under the covering of thy wings there is joy, and health, and
safety: save all those that fear thy name, and give thy blessing to thine
heritage; and that the blessings of thy people may be lasting, and perpetual,
give unto thy servant the King long life, let thy loving kindness and
faithfulness always preserve him, be a strong tower for him against all his
enemies, and at last bring him to an eternal Kingdom, where no enemies shall
assault or disturb his Peace, that he may dwell before thee for ever, and
rejoice in the participation of the blessings of thy kingdom, who live and
reignest ever one God world without end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 62.
A Prayer that we may trust in God only in all our troubles.
MY soul truly waits still upon God: for of him comes my salvation.

2 He verily is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall
not greatly fall.

3 How long will ye imagine mischief against every man: ye shall be slain all
the sort of you, yea, as a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge.

4 Their device is only how to put him out whom God will exalt: their delight
is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their heart.

5 Nevertheless, my soul, wait thou still upon God: for my hope is in him.

6 He truly is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall
not fall.

7 In God is my health and my glory: the rock of my might, and in God is my
trust.

8 O put your trust in him always (ye people:) pour out your hearts before him,
for God is our hope.

9 As for the children of men, they are but vain: the children of men are
deceitful upon the weights, they are altogether lighter then vanity it self.

10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity: if
riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

11 God spoke once and twice: I have also heard the same, that power belongs
unto God.

12 And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every man according to
his work.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of whom comes our salvation, thou art our defense and strength,
our health and our glory, give us thy grace, that we may put our whole trust in
thee always, that we may pour out our hearts before thee in all our troubles,
that we may wait still upon thee for the performance of our expectation in all
our longings and desires. Be thou our defense, uphold us that we may not fall
into those great sins, which lay waste our consciences, or into such miseries
as make us without hope or remedy, the miseries of despair, obstinate malice,
or the woes of a sad eternity. Teach us to despise riches, to disclaim all
trust in the creatures, not to delight in lies, or vanity, not to multiply
wrongs and robbery, that when thou shall come with power and great glory, to
reward every man according to his work, thou may be merciful unto us,
pardoning our sins, and accepting us to life eternal, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 63.
A Prayer for deliverance from the miseries of our pilgrimage; with longing and
desires after God, and the joys of Heaven.
O God, thou art my God: early will I seek thee.

2 My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee: in a barren
and dry land where no water is.

3 Thus have I looked for thee in holiness: that I might behold thy power and
glory.

4 For thy loving kindness is better then the life it self: my lips shall
praise thee.

5 As long as I live will I magnify thee on his manner: and lift up my hands
in thy name.

6 My soul shall be satisfied even as it were with marrow and fatness: when my
mouth praises thee with joyful lips.

7 Have I not remembered thee in my bed: and thought upon thee when I was waking?

8 Because thou have been my helper: therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice.

9 My soul hangs upon thee: thy right hand has upholden me.

10 These also that seek the hurt of my soul: they shall go under the earth.

11 Let them fall upon the edge of the sword: that they may be a portion for
foxes.

12 But the King shall rejoice in God, all they also that swear by him shall be
commended: for the mouth of them that speak lies, shall be stopped.

The Prayer.
O Merciful and dear God, whose loving kindness is better then the life it
self, defend us against the malice and designs of all them, that seek the hurt
of our souls, and make us to rejoice in thy help, and under the shadow of thy
wings. O let the dayspring of thy favor visit us from on high, that we may
seek thee with an early devotion, pursue after thee with a constant, and an
active industry, and at last possess thee with the firm comprehensions of love
and charity; that in this world, we looking for thee in holiness of living,
longing and thirsting after thee with fervent desires, may for ever hereafter
behold thy power and glory, and our souls be eternally satisfied, even as with
marrow and fatness, when our lips and hearts shall praise thee to all
eternity. Grant this, for the love and honor of Jesus Christ, our only
Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

PSALM 64.
A Prayer for deliverance from the slander and mischiefs of all wicked persons.
HEar my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy.

2 Hide me from the gathering together of the froward: and from the
insurrection of wicked doers.

3 Which have whet their tongue like a sword: and shoot out their arrows, even
bitter words.

4 That they may privily shoot at him that is perfect: suddenly do they hit
him, and fear not.

5 They courage themselves in mischief: and commune among themselves how they
may lay snares, and say that no man shall see them.

6 They imagine wickedness, and practice it: that they keep secret among
themselves, every man in the deep of his heart.

7 But God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow: that they shall be
wounded.

8 Yea, their own tongues shall make them fall: insomuch that whosoever sees them
shall laugh them to scorn.

9 And all men that see it, shall say, This has God done: for they shall
perceive that it is his work.

10 The righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and put his trust in him: and all
they that are true of heart shall be glad.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou that hear the voice of our prayers, and considerest the
cries of them that fly unto thee for succor, deliver us and all thy whole
Church from the gathering together of the froward and from the insurrection of
wicked doers. Disappoint their snares, infatuate their Counsels, distract their
consultations, and blast all their designs; let the swords and arrows of their
tongues be shot in vain, that they may never hit any of thy servants, nor wound
him that is perfect. Make them to fall (O God) in their hopes whereby they
courage themselves in mischief and fear not, and do thou laugh them to scorn,
that we who have put our trust in thee, may rejoice in thee, and confess, that
it is thy work, to give salvation and deliverance to thy people whom thou
love in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 65.
A Prayer for spiritual blessings, and for fruitfulness of the earth.
THou, O God, art praised in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed in
Jerusalem.

2 Thou that hear the prayer: unto thee shall all flesh come.

3 My misdeeds prevail against me: O be thou merciful unto our sins.

4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee: he shall
dwell in thy Court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house,
even of thy holy temple.

5 Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O God of our
salvation: thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that remain in the broad sea.

6 Which in his strength sets fast the mountains: and is girded about with
power.

7 Which stilleth the raging of the sea: and the noise of his waves, and the
madness of his people.

8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth, shall be afraid at
thy tokens: thou that make the outgoings of the morning and evening to
praise thee.

9 Thou visitest the earth, and blessest it: thou make it very plenteous.

10 The river of God is full of water: thou preparest their corn, for so thou
providest for the earth.

11 Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little valleys
thereof: thou make it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the increase
of it.

12 Thou crownest the year with thy goodness: and thy clouds drop fatness.

13 They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness: and the little hills
shall rejoice on every side.

14 The folds shall be full of sheep: the valleys also shall stand so thick
with corn, that they shall laugh and sing.

The Prayer.
O God the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remain in the
broad sea, be thou merciful unto our sins, and let not our misdeeds prevail
against us, so as either to make us habitually sinful, or endlesly miserable,
but give us the blessings of thy chosen; let us receive the influences of thy
graces and benediction, by the participation of thy Word and Sacraments in thy
holy temple. And as thou embracest us with thy right hand, showing us
wonderful things in thy righteousness and salvation, so let thy left hand be
under our heads, and give us such a portion of temporal blessings, as shall be
necessary for us. Make the earth plenteous, and bless the increase of it,
crown the year with goodness, and let the clouds drop fatness, that the
valleys standing thick with corn, may laugh and sing thy praises, and that we
being refreshed with the multitude of thy blessings, may praise thee in Sion,
and at last be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house in the celestial
Jerusalem, where thou live and reignest, one God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 66.
A Prayer that God would support us in times of trouble and deliver us.
O Be joyful in God all ye lands: sing praises unto the honor of his name,
make his praise to be glorious.

2 Say unto God, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: through the greatness
of thy power shall thine enemies be found liers unto thee.

3 For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy name.

4 O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is in his
doing toward the children of men.

5 He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on
foot, there did we rejoice thereof.

6 He rules with his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: and such as
will not believe, shall not be able to exalt themselves.

7 O praise our God (ye people:) and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

8 Which holds our soul in life: and suffers not ou^ feet to slip.

9 For thou (O God) have proved us: thou also have tried us, like as silver is
tried.

10 Thou broughtest us into the snare: and layedst trouble upon our loins.

11 Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

12 I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings: and will pay thee my vows
which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth when I was in trouble.

13 I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rams: I
will offer bullocks and goats.

14 O come hither and hearken all ye that fear God: and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul.

15 I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue.

16 If I incline unto wickedness with my heart: the Lord will not hear me.

17 But God has heard me: and considered the voice of my prayer.

18 Praised be God, which has not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy
from me.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who art wonderful in thy works, and in thy doings, toward the
children of men, thou chastisest every one who^ thou receivest, proving us and
trying us, like as silver is tried, let thy merciful hands lead us through the
fire of afflictions, and the waters of temporal chastisements, so as we may
not be consumed with the flames of thy wrath, nor the waters go over our souls,
but that we being sustained by the comforts of thy Spirit, and refreshed with
the dew of thy graces, we may at last be brought out into a wealthy place, even
the place of eternal treasures. O give us thy grace, that our hearts incline
not to wickedness, and that our feet slip not, that so we regarding thy laws,
and having respect to obey thy holy will and pleasure, thou may hear our
prayers, the greatness of thy power may cast down all our enemies, that they
may never be able to exalt themselves; that while thou hold our souls in
life, we may never cease praising thee, who have never turned thy mercy from
us, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

PSALM 67.
A prayer that all men may bless God, and God may bless all men.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

2 That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all Nations.

3 Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

4 O let the Nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the Nations upon earth.

5 Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

6 Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God even our own God
shall give us his blessing.

7 God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou Governor of all Nations, and the righteous Judge of the
whole earth, be merciful unto us and bless us. Thou make the Sun to shine
upon all the corners of the habitable world, giving his light both to the good
and bad; let the light of thy countenance diffuse it self to all Nations, and
to all men. Lighten all our darknesses with the beams of thy divine favor,
teach thy ways unto all the people of the earth, and give thy saving health to
all Nations, that while all join with one consent to fear thee, and to give
thee praises, thou may govern us all in peace and righteousness, and when
tho^ shall come to judge us, we may receive thy everlasting mercies. Grant
this, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 68.
A Prayer for defense and propagation of the Catholic Church.
LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him
flee before him.

2 Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away: and like as wax
melts at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God.

3 But let the righteous be glad and rejoice before God: let them also be merry
and joyful.

4 O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name: magnify him that rides
upon the Heavens, as it were upon an horse, praise him in his name, yea, and
rejoice before him.

5 He is a father of the fatherless, and defends the cause of the widows:
even God in his holy habitation.

6 He is the God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, and brings
the prisoners out of captivity: but lets the runnagates continue in
scarceness.

7 O God, when thou wentest forth before the people: when thou wentest through
the wilderness.

8 The earth shook, and the heavens dropped at the presence of God: even as
Sinai also was moved at the presence of God, which is the God of Israel.

9 Thou, O God, sentest a gracious rain upon thine inheritance: and refreshedst
it when it was weary.

10 Thy congregation shall dwell therein: for thou, O God, have of thy
goodness prepared for the poor.

11 The Lord gave the word: great was the company of the preachers.

12 Kings with their Armies did flee and were discomfited: and they of the
household divided the spoil.

13 Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove:
that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold.

14 When the Almighty scattered Kings for their sake: then were they as white
as snow in Salmon.

15 As the hill of Basan, so is Gods hill: even an high hill, as the hill of
Basan.

16 Why hop ye so ye high hills? this is Gods hill, in the which it pleases him
to dwell: yea, the Lord will abide in it for ever.

17 The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: and the
Lord is among them as in the holy place of Sinai.

18 Thou art gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men: yea, even for thine enemies, that the Lord God may dwell among
them.

19 Praised be the Lord daily: even the God which helps us, and pours his
benefits upon us.

20 He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord by
whom we escape death.

21 God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such a one
as goes on still in his wickedness.

22 The Lord has said, I will bring my people again, as I did from Basan: mine
own will I bring again, as I did sometime from the deep of the sea.

23 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies: and that the
tongue of thy dogs may be red through the same.

24 It is well seen, O God, how thou go: how thou my God and King go in
the s^nctuary.

25 The singers go before, the Minstrels follow after: in the midst are the
damsels playing with the timbrels.

26 Give thanks, O Israel, unto God the Lord, in the congregations: from the
ground of the heart.

27 There is little Benjamin their ruler, and the Princes of Judah their
counsel: the princes of Zabulon, and the Princes of Nephthali.

28 Thy God has sent forth strength for thee: stablish the thing, O God, that
thou have wrought in us.

29 For thy temples sake at Jerusalem: so shall Kings bring presents unto thee.

30 When the company of the Spear-men, and multitude of the mighty, are
scattered abroad among the beasts of the people (so that they humbly bring
pieces of silver:) and when he has scattered the people that delight in war.

31 Then shall the Princes come out of Egypt: the Morians land shall soon
stretch out her hands unto God.

32 Sing unto God, O ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord.

33 Which sits in the heavens over all from the beginning: lo, he does send
out his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice.

34 Ascribe ye the power to God over Israel: his worship and strength is in the
clouds.

35 O God, wonderful art thou in thy holy places: even the God of Israel, he
will give strength and power* unto his people, blessed be God.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, mighty and merciful, thou ridest upon the heavens, as it were
upon an horse, thou art the father of the fatherless, and defendest the cause
of the widow; have mercy upon thy holy Church; and since her Lord and Spouse is
gone up on high, even to his holy habitation, leave us not comfortless, but
send the holy Ghost in assistances and gifts to dwell amongst us; that by his
aid, we may escape death spiritual, and the bitterness of the temporal. Send
a gracious rain, even the dew of thy divine favors upon thine inheritance, to
refresh us in our weariness and sadnesses. Make thy people innocent and chaste
as the dove; and besides the beauty of internal sanctity, let thy Church be
covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold, decked and assisted with
exterior advantages, as may best promote thy honor and the services of
religion. Let all the Princes and lands of the earth, stretch their hands out
unto thee, O God, and confess thy mightiness and thy honor; that thy Gospel
going forth into all lands, peace and all thy blessings may follow it, and thy
praise be multiplied from generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 69.
A prayer in times of persecution for the cause of Religion.
SAve me, O God: for the wat^rs are come in, even unto my soul.

2 I stick fast in the deep mire where no ground is: I am come into deep
waters, so that the floods run over me.

3 I am weary of crying, my throat is dry: my sight fails me for waiting so
long upon my God.

4 They that hate me without a cause, are more then the hairs of my head: they
that are mine enemies, and would destroy me guiltless, are mighty.

5 I paid them the things that I never took: God thou know my simpleness,
and my faults are not hid from thee.

6 Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my
cause: let not them that seek thee, be confounded through me, O Lord God of
Israel.

7 And why? for thy sake have I suffered reproof: shame has covered my face.

8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren: even an aliant unto my mothers
children.

9 For the zeal of thy house has even eaten me: and the rebukes of them that
rebuked thee, are fallen upon me.

10 I wept and chastned my self with fasting: and that was turned to my reproof.

11 I put on sackcloth also: and they jested upon me.

12 They that sit in the gate speak against me: and the drunkards make songs
upon me.

13 But Lord, I make my prayer unto thee: in an acceptable time.

14 Hear me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy
salvation.

15 Take me out of the mire that I sink not: oh let me be delivered from them
that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

16 Let not the water-floud drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

17 Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable: turn thee unto me
according to the multitude of thy mercies.

18 And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: oh haste thee,
and hear me.

19 Draw nigh unto my soul, and save it: oh deliver me, because of mine enemies.

20 Thou have known my reproof, my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries
are all in thy sight.

21 Thy rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness: I looked for some
to have pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me.

22 They gave me gall to eat: and when I was thirsty, they gave me vinegar to
drink.

23 Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withal: and let the
things (that should have been for their wealth) be unto them an occasion of
falling.

24 Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and ever bow down their backs.

25 Pour out thine indignation upon them: and let thy wrathful displeasure
took hold of them.

26 Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwell in their tents.

27 For they persecute him whom thou have smitten: and they talk how they may
vex them whom thou have wounded.

28 Let them fall from one wickedness to another: and not come into thy
righteousness.

29 Let them be wiped out of the book of the living: and not be written among
the righteous.

30 As for me, when I am poor and in heaviness: thy help (O God) shall lift me
up.

31 I will praise the name of God with a song: and magnify it with
thanksgiving.

32 This also shall please the Lord: better then a bullock, that has horns and
hoofs.

33 The humble shall consider this, and be glad: seek ye after God, and your
soul shall live.

34 For the Lord hears the poor: and despises not his prisoners.

35 Let heaven and earth praise him: the sea, and all that moves therein

36 For God will save Sion, and build the Cities of Juda: that men may dwell
there, and have it in possession.

37 The posterity also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his
name, shall dwell therein.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, whose loving kindness is comfortable, who for our sakes did
taste vinegar and gall that thou might redeem us from the bitterness of
death and sin, and establish to thy self a Church in holy Religion, and defend
it with thy favor and power: have mercy upon thy servants, who suffer from the
hands of their enemies, for the testimony of a good conscience, and the
doctrines of a Cath^like faith. Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of
hosts, be ashamed, but let them, who for thy sake have suffered reproof, be
delivered from them that hate them, and from the deep waters of persecutions
and discomforts, that we and all thy faithful people, being saved from our
enemies, may praise thee and thy faithfulness in this world, and may finally
inherit the land of promise, which thou have made to all that suffer
persecution for a cause of righteousness, even the possession of thine
inheritance, thy Kingdom in Heaven, where thou live and reignest ever one
God world without end. Amen.

PSALM 70.
A prayer to God for blessings upon faithful people, and deliverance from our
enemies.
HAste thee, O God, to deliver me: make haste to help me, O Lord.

2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be
turned backward and put to confusion, that wish me evil.

3 Let them (for their reward) be soon brought to shame: that cry over me,
There, there.

4 But let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all
such as delight in thy salvation, say always, The Lord be praised.

5 As for me, I am poor and in misery: haste thee unto me (O God.)

Thou art my helper and my redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying.

The Prayer.
O Lord God our Helper and Redeemer, have mercy upon us, and all thy faithful
people: make haste and help us, O God, against all those that seek after our
souls to do us mischief: make us to delight in thee, to wait for thy salvation,
to trust in thy mercies, to rejoice in thy excellencies and perfection: that
our feet being directed by thy guidance, our weaknesses strengthened by thy
power, our sins pardoned by thy mercies, and our souls justified by thy free
grace, we may always give thee praise with the humble addresses of devotion and
thankfulness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 71.
A Prayer for the continuance of Gods favors to us, even to our old age, and a
longing for a happy departure.
IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: but
rid me and deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear unto me, and
save me.

2 Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense, and my castle.

3 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

4 For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even
from my youth.

5 Through thee have I been holden up ev^r since I was born: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

6 I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

7 O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: (that I may sing of thy glory) and
honor all the day long.

8 Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength
fails me.

9 For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take
their counsel together, saying: God has forsaken him, persecute him, and take
him, for there is none to deliver him.

10 Go not f^rre from me, O God: my God haste thee to help me.

11 Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

12 As for me, I will patiently abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

13 My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know
no end thereof.

14 I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of
thy righteousness only.

15 Thou, O God, have taught me from my youth up until now: therefore will I
tell of thy wondrous works.

16 Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am gray headed: until I
have shown thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to all them that
are yet for to come.

17 Thy righteousness, O God, is very high: and great things are they that
thou have done, O God, who is like unto thee?

18 O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me, and yet did
thou turn and refresh me: yea, and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again!

19 Thou have brought me to great honor: and comforted me on every side.

20 Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness (O God) playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

21 My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom thou
have delivered.

22 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they
are confounded and brought unto shame that seek to do me evil.

The Prayer.
O Lord God our house of defense and our Castle, who by thy mercies and thy
loving Spirit, have taught us and led us in thy ways, from our first years
until now, thou have brought us to great honor, even the honor of being
Christians, the honor of adoption to be thy Children, and heirs of thy
glorious promises, coheirs with thy Son Jesus Christ, and have comforted us on
every side, with a continual stream of thy mercies and refreshments: give us
thy grace that we may love thee, and long for thee above all the things of this
World: and as thou have holden us up ever since we were born, so let thy mercy
go along with us all our days. Cast us not away in the time of age, and give us
grace that we may never cast thee or thy Laws from us. Let not thy grace, and
the ghostly strength we derive from thee, forsake us when our natural strength
fails us, but let our spirit grow upon the disadvantages of the flesh, and
begin to receive the happiness of eternity, by an absolute conquest over the
weakened and decaying body; that after we have by thy aid passed through the
great troubles and adversities thou show unto all thy Children in this
world, we may lie down in righteousness and with thy favor: that when thou
bring us out from the deep of the earth again, we may have a joyful
resurrection to the society of Saints and Angels, and the full fruition of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 72.
A Prayer for the exaltation and propagation of Christ's Kingdom.
GIve the King thy judgments (O God:) and thy righteousness unto the Kings
son.

2 Then shall he judge the people according unto right: and defend the poor.

3 The mountains also shall bring peace: and the little hills righteousness
unto the people.

4 He shall keep the simple folk by their right: defend ^he children of the
poor, and punish the wrong doer.

5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endures, from one
generation to another.

6 He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wool: even as the drops
that water the earth.

7 In his time shall the righteous flourish: yea, and abundance of peace, so
long as the moon endures.

8 His dominion shall be also from the one sea to the other: and from the flood
unto the worlds end.

9 They that dwell in the wilderness shall kneel before him: his enemies shall
lick the dust.

10 The kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall give presents: the kings of
Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts.

11 All kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall do him service.

12 For he shall deliver the poor when he cries: the needy also, and him that
has no helper.

13 He shall be favorable to the simple and needy: and shall preserve the
souls of the poor.

14 He shall deliver their souls from falsehood and wrong: and dear shall
their blood be in his sight.

15 He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gold of Arabia: prayer
shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised.

16 There shall be an heap of corn in the earth high upon the hills: his fruit
shall shake like Libanus, and shall be green in the city, like grass upon the
earth.

17 His name shall endure for ever, his name shall remain under the sun among
the posterities: which shall be blessed through him, and all the heathen shall
prais^ him.

18 Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel: which only does wondrous
things.

19 And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his majesty. Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, who did descend from heaven into the womb of the blessed
Virgin, like rain into a fleece of wool, thou that punishest the wrong doer,
and defendest the children of the poor, and them that have no helper; have
mercy upon thy Holy Church, be pleased by her ministry to extend thy blessings
and thy dominion from the one Sea to the other, even unto the worlds end, that
all Kings of the earth may fall down before thee, and all Nations may do thee
service. Make thy righteous people to flourish, and so subdue their enemies
under them, delivering them from falsehood and wrong, that they may be blessed
with abundance of Peace, and be satisfied with thy righteousness and salvation
through thy mercies, O blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 73.
A Prayer that we may have our portion in God, and not in the good things of
the men of this world.
TRuly God is loving unto Israel: even unto such as are of a clean heart.

2 Nevertheless my feet were almost gone: my treadings had welnigh slipped.

3 And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I do also see the ungodly in such
prosperity.

4 For they are in no peril of death: but are lusty and strong.

5 They come in no misfortune like other folk: neither are they plagued like
other men.

6 And this is the cause that they be so holden with pride: and overwhelmed
with cruelty.

7 Their eyes swell with fatness: and they do even what they lust.

8 They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blasphemy: their talking is against
the most Highest.

9 For they stretch forth their mouth unto the heaven: and their tongue goes
through the world.

10 Therefore fall the people unto them: and thereout suck they no small
advantage.

11 Tush (say they) how should God perceive it: is there knowledge in the most
Highest?

12 Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the World, and these have
riches in possession: and I said, Then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence.

13 All the day long have I been punished: and chastened every morning.

14 Yea, and I had almost said even as they: but lo, then should I have
condemned the generation of thy children.

15 Then thought I to understand this: but it was too hard for me.

16 Until I went into the sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of these
men.

Namely, how thou do set them in slippery places: and castest them down, and
destroyest them.

18 Oh how suddenly do they consume: perish, and come to a fearful end!

19 Yea, even like as a dream when one awaketh: so shall thou make their image
to vanish out of the City.

20 Thus my heart was grieved: and it went even through my reins.

21 So foolish was I and ignorant: even as it were a beast before thee.

22 Nevertheless I am always by thee: for thou have holden me by my right hand.

23 Thou shall guide me with thy couns^ll: and after that receive me with glory.

24 Whom have I in heaven but thee: and there is none upon earth that I desire
in comparison of thee.

25 My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

26 For lo, they that forsake thee, shall perish: thou have destroyed all them
that commit fornication against thee.

27 But it is good for me to hold me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord
God: and to speak of all thy works (in the gates of the daughter of Sion.)

The Prayer.
O Lord God who art loving unto all thy Church, even unto all such as are of a
clean heart, give unto us hearts humble and merciful, that we may never be
holden with pride, nor overwhelmed with cruelty; and sanctify our words and
lips, that we may never blaspheme thy holiness, nor our talking be ever
against thee, or thy honor. O God most Highest, give unto us such religious
and mortified affections, that we may never thirst after the temporal
advantages and prosperities of the wicked: set not our feet in slippery places,
lest we be suddenly cast down, and have our portion in the lot of the wicked,
who perish and come to a fearful end: guide us with thy ^ounsell, that we
holding us fast by thee, and putting our trust in thee, o God, thou may be
the strength of our hearts, the hope of our souls, and the ground of all our
confidence and content in this life, and after this life is ended, thou may
receive us with glory, and be our portion for ever, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

PSALM 74.
A Prayer against Sacrilegious persons, and all the Enemies of the Church.
O God wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

2 O think upon thy congregation: whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old.

3 Think upon the tribe of thy inheritance: and mount Sion wherein thou have
dwelt.

4 Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy every enemy: which has
done evil in thy sanctuary.

5 Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy congregations: and set up their
banners for tokens.

6 He that hewed timber before out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to
an excellent work.

7 But now they break down all the carved work thereof: with axes and hammers.

8 They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dwelling place
of thy name, even unto the ground.

9 Yea, they said in their hearts, Let us make havoc of them altogether: thus
have they burnt up all the house^ of God in the land.

10 We see not our tokens, there is not one Prophet more: no not one is there
among us that understands any more.

11 O God, how long shall the adversary do this dishonor: how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever?

12 Why withdrawest thou thy hand: why pluckest not thou thy right hand out of
thy bosom to consume the ^nemy?

13 For God is my King of old: the help that is done upon earth, he does it
himself.

14 Thou did divide the sea through thy power: thou brakest the heads of
the dragons in the waters.

15 Thou smotest the heads of leviathan in pieces: and gave him to be meat
for the people in the wilderness.

16 Thou broughtest out fountains and waters out of the hard rocks: thou
driedst up mighty waters.

17 The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the sun.

18 Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and
winter.

19 Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked: and how the foolish
people have blasphemed thy name.

20 O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto the multitude of the
enemies: and forget not the congregation of the poor for ever.

21 Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darkness, and cruel
habitations.

22 Oh let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and needy give
praise unto thy name.

23 Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish man
blasphemeth thee daily.

24 Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the presumption of them that hate
thee, increases ever more and more.

The Prayer.
O Lord God Blessed Jesu, who with thy precious blood have purchased to thy
self, and redeemed a Church, that it should serve thee in holiness and
righteousness, being delivered from fear of all their adversaries, forget not
the congregation of thy poor people for ever, maintain thine own cause, deliver
the soul of thy Turtle dove from the multitude of her enemies. Preserve with
thy right hand all the places appointed for thy public service, let a guard of
flaming Cherubins (as at the gate of Paradise) stand sentinel, and keep from
the invasions of sacrilegious persons, and the pollutions of all impure
Church-robbers, all thy dwelling places, that thou may for ever dwell among
us, defending the poor, bringing help to all thy people, and particular
blessings and assistances to the tribe of thine own inheritance, which thou
have sanctified to thy worship and service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 75.
A Prayer against the terrors of the day of Judgment.
Unto thee (O God) do we give thanks: yea, unto thee do we give thanks.

2 Thy name also is so nigh: and that do thy wondrous works declare.

3 When I receive the congregation: I shall judge according unto right.

4 The earth is weak, and all the inhabiters thereof: I bear up the pillars of
it.

5 I said unto the fools, Deal not so madly: and to the ungodly, Set not up
your horn.

6 Set not up your horn on high: and speak not with a stiff neck.

7 For promotion comes neither from the East nor from the West: nor yet from
the South.

8 And why? God is the judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.

9 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
mixed, and he pours out of the same.

10 As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them,
and suck them out.

11 But I will talk of the God of Jacob: and praise him for ever.

12 All the horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

The Prayer.
O Lord God the Judge of all the world, from whom comes all promotion and all
punishment, have mercy upon us now, at the hour of death, and in the day of
Judgment, when thou shall judge all the congregations of men and Angels
according unto right: O give us grace to expect thy coming in humility and
charity, that we be not stiff-necked and exalted in our own opinions and
conceptions, but may submit to thy yoke with meekness and obedience, that when
thou shall pour forth the cup of thy vengeance upon the ungodly, we may not
drink or taste of the dregs of it, but may sit down at thy Table in the Supper
of the Lamb, and be satisfied with the blessings of eternity, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 76.
A prayer that we may fear Gods Judgments, and be freed from the terrors of
men.
IN Jury is God know: his name is great in Israel.

2 At Salem is his tabernacle: and his dwelling in Sion.

3 There brake he the arrows of the bow: the shield, of sword, and the battle.

4 Thou art of more honor and might: then the hills of the robbers.

5 The proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep: and all the men (whose
hands were mighty) have found nothing.

6 At thy rebuke (O God of Jacob:) both the chariot and horse are fallen.

7 Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when thou
art angry?

8 Thou did cause thy judgment to be heard from heaven: the earth trembled
and was still.

9 When God arose to judgment: and to help all the meek upon earth.

10 The fierceness of man shall turn to thy praise: and the fierceness of
them shall thou refrain.

11 Promise unto the Lord your God, and keep it, all ye that be round about
him: bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

12 He shall refrain the spirit of Princes: and is wonderful among the Kings
of the earth.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, whose dwelling is in heaven, and thy Name is great in all the
world, plant the dread and reverence of thee and thy power in our hearts: let
thy threatenings and thy judgments which are heard from heaven, and executed
upon disobedient and gainsaying people, make us to tremble at the remembrance
of our sins, and in the consideration of our weaknesses and demerits: and let
thy mercies and the remembrance of thy infinite loving kindnesses make our
hearts still, full of eavennesse and tranquillity, that we may not fear the
fierceness of man, or the wrath of those, whose spirits thou can refrain,
lest we be disturbed in our duties toward thee, but let us so fear thee, that
we may never offend against thee, but may pass from fear to love, from
apprehensions of thy wrath, to the sense and comforts of thy mercies, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 77.
A Prayer that the experience of Gods goodness may produce hope in us, and
remove from us all fearfulness and doubting.
I Will cry unto God with my voice: even unto God will I cry with my voice, and
he shall hearken unto me.

2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not, in
the night season my soul refused comfort.

3 When I am in heaviness I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I
will complain.

4 Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so feeble that I cannot speak.

5 I have considered the days of old: and the years that are past.

6 I call to remembrance my song: and in the night I commune with mine own
heart, and search out my spirits.

7 Will the Lord absent himself for ever: and will he be no more entreated?

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever: and is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore?

9 Has God forgotten to be gracious: and will he shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure?

10 And I said, It is mine own infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most highest.

11 I will remember the works of the Lord: and call to mind thy wonders of old
time.

12 I will think also of all thy works: and my talking shall be of thy doings.

13 Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God (as our God?)

14 Thou art the God that does wonders: and have declared thy power among the
people.

15 Thou have mightily delivered thy people: even the sons of Jacob and Joseph.

16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid: the
depths also were troubled.

17 The clouds poured out water, the air thundered: and thine arrows went
abroad.

18 The voice of thy thunder was heard round about: the lightnings shone upon
the ground, the earth was moved, and shook withal.

19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters: and thy footsteps
are not known.

20 Thou leddest thy people like sheep: by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

The Prayer.
O God who do wonders, and have declared thy power amongst all people, let
the observation of thy mercies, and loving kindnesses, make such deep
impression in our hearts and memories, that when we are in heaviness, we may
remember the years of thy right hand, and call to mind the wonders of old time,
that although thou sometimes withdrawest the brightness of thy countenance from
us, and shuttest up thy loving kindness in a short displeasure, yet the
experience of thy old mercies, which never fail, may sustain our infirmities,
and the expectation of thy loving kindnesses, may cure all our impatience, till
in thy due time, the sense of thy favors may actually relieve all our
distresses, and thy right hand lead us like sheep into the folds of eternal
rest and security, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 78.
A Commemoration of Gods blessings to his Church of old, of his Judgments upon
sinners, and his mercies to the penitent.
HEar my law, O my people: incline your ears unto the words of my mouth.

2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will declare hard sentences of old.

3 Which we have heard and known: and such as our fathers have told us.

4 That we should not hide them from the children of the generations to come:
but to show the honor of the Lord, his mighty and wonderful works that he
has done.

5 He made a covenant with Jacob, and gave Israel a law: which he commanded our
forefathers to teach their children.

6 That their posterity might know it: and the children which were yet unborn.

7 To the intent that when they came up: they might show their children the
same.

8 That they might put their trust in God: and not to forget the works of God,
but to keep his Commandments.

9 And not to be as their forefathers, a faithless and stubborn generation: a
generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit cleaved not
steadfastly unto God.

10 Like as the children of Ephraim: which being harnessed and carrying bows,
turned themselves back in the day of battle.

11 They kept not the covenant of God: and would not walk in his law.

12 But forgot what he had done: and the wonderful works that he had showed
for them.

13 Mavelous things did he in the sight of our forefathers in the land of
Egypt: even in the field of Zoan.

14 He divided the sea, and let them go through: he made the waters to stand
on a heap.

15 In the day time also he led them with a cloud: and all the night through
with a light of fire.

16 He clave the hard rocks in the wilderness: and gave them drink thereof,
as it had been out of the great depth.

17 He brought waters out of the stony rock: so that it gushed out like the
rivers.

18 Yet for all this they sinned more against him: and provoked the most
Highest in the wilderness.

19 They tempted God in their hearts: and required meat for their lust.

20 They spoke against God, also, saying: Shall God prepare a table in the
wilderness?

21 He smote the stony rock indeed, that the water gushed out, and the streams
flowed withal: but can he give bread also, or provide flesh for his people?

22 When the Lord heard this he was wroth: so the fire was kindled in Jacob,
and there came up heavy displeasure against Israel.

23 Because they believed not in God: and put not their trust in his help.

24 So he commanded the clouds above: and opened the doors of heaven.

25 He rained down Manna also upon them for to eat: and gave them food from
heaven.

26 So man did eat Angels food: for he sent them meat enough.

27 He caused the east wind to blow under heaven: and through his power he
brought in the south-west-winde.

28 He rained flesh upon them as thick as dust: and feathered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.

29 He let it fall among their tents: even round about their habitation.

30 So they did eat and were well filled, for he gave them their own desire:
they were not dissapointed of their lust.

31 But while the meat was yet in their mouths, the heavy wrath of God came
upon them, and slew the wealthiest of them: yea, and smote down the chosen men
that were in Israel.

32 But for all this they sinned yet more: and believed not his wondrous works.

33 Therefore their days did he consume in vanity: and their years in trouble.

34 When he slew them, they sought him: and turned them early, and enquired
after God.

35 And they remembered that God was their strength: and that the high God was
their Redeemer:

36 Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their mouth: and dissembled
with him in their tongue.

37 For their heart was not whole with him: neither continued they steadfast in
his covenant.

38 But he was so merciful, that he forgave their misdeeds: and destroyed
them not.

39 Yea many a time turned he his wrath away: and would not suffer his whole
displeasure to arise.

40 For he considered that they were but flesh: and that they were even a wind
that passes away, and comes not again.

41 Many a time did they provoke him in the wilderness: and grieved him in the
desert.

42 They turned back and tempted God: and moved the holy One in Israel.

43 They thought not of his hand: and of the day when he delivered them from
the hand of the enemy.

44 How he had wrought his miracles in Egypt: and his wonders in the field of
Zoan.

45 He turned their waters into blood: so that they might not drink of the
rivers.

46 He sent lice among them and devoured them up: and frogs to destroy them.

47 He gave their fruit unto the caterpiller: and their labor unto the
grasshopper.

48 He destroyed their vines with hailstones: and their mulberry trees with the
frost.

49 He smote their cattle also with hailstones: and their flocks with hot
thunderbolts.

50 He cast upon them the furiousness of his wrath, anger, displeasure, and
trouble: and sent evil Angels among them.

51 He made a way to his indignation, and spared not their soul from death: but
gave their life over to the pestilence.

52 And smote all the firstborn in Egypt: the most principal and mightiest in
the dwellings of Ham.

53 But as for his own people, he led them forth like sheep: and carried them
in the wilderness like a flock.

54 He brought them out safely that they should not fear: and overwhelmed their
enemies with the sea.

55 And brought them within the borders of his sanctuary: even to his mountain,
which he purchased with his right hand.

56 He cast out the heathen also before them: caused their land to be divided
among them for an heritage, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their
tents.

57 So they tempted and displeased the most high God: and kept not his
testimonies.

58 But turned their backs, and fell away like their forefathers: starting
aside like a broken bow.

59 For they grieved him with their hill altars: and provoked him to
displeasure with their images.

60 When God heard this, he was wroth: and took fore displeasure at Israel.

61 So that he forsook the tabernacle in Silo: even the tent that he had
pitched among them.

62 He delivered their power into captivity: and their beauty into the enemies
hand.

63 He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritance.

64 The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to
marriage.

65 Their Priests were slain with the sword: and there were no widows to make
lamentation.

66 So the Lord awaked as one out of sleep: and like a Giant refreshed with
wine.

67 He smote his enemies in the hinder parts: and put them to a perpetual
shame.

68 He refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim.

69 But chose the tribe of Juda: even the hill of Sion, which he loved.

70 And there he builded his temple on high: and laid the foundation of it like
the ground which he has made continually.

71 He chose David also his servant: and took him away from the sheepfolds.

72 As he was following the ewes great with young ones, he took him: that he
might feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

73 So he fed them with a faithful and true heart: and ruled them prudently
with all his power.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of our Fathers, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thou that leddest
thy people through the Wilderness with a light and with a cloud, and with thy
bright Angel, for their sakes turning rocks into a springing well, and making
the Sea and the River become dry land, so making demonstration of the
greatness of thy mercy, by the greatness of thy miracles, and did still go
on to make all thy creatures leave their natures to serve them, even then when
they tempted and provoked thee ten times in the desert: O be pleased to do unto
us as thou did to them: lead us through the desert of this World with the
light of thy holy Spirit; and from the rock, which for our sakes thou did
smite with thy heavy rod, the rock Christ Jesus, let water and blood stream
forth, to cleanse and to refresh us. Give us of the bread that came down from
heaven, the flesh of thy dear Son to eat, that we being purified by his blood,
and nourished by that celestial Manna, our hearts may be set aright, and our
spirits may cleave steadfastly unto thee, O God, that we may remember thy works,
and trust in thy mercies, and may keep thy Commandments. O never let the fire
of thy wrath be kindled toward us, nor thy heavy displeasure come up against
us; let us not consume our days in folly and vanity, lest our years be spent in
trouble, but when through infirmity we fall, let thy gentle correction call us
home, that we may turn us early, and seek after thee our God, who art our
strength and our merciful Redeemer, that we may never feel the furiousness of
thy eternal wrath, nor have our portion amongst the evil Angels, but may be
conducted by thy mercies and providence, to the border of thy sanctuary, and to
the mountain where thou reignest over all the creatures, one God world without
end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 79.
A Prayer that God would deliver his Church from the cruelty of all her
persecutors.
O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones.

2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of
the air^: and the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the ^and.

3 Their blood have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem: and there
was no man to bury them.

4 We are become an open shame to our enemies: a very scorn and derision unto
them that are round about us.

5 Lord, how long will thou be angry: shall thy jealousy burn like fire for
ever?

6 Pour out thine indignation upon the heathen that have not known thee: and
upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

7 For they have devoured Jacob: and laid waste his dwelling place.

8 O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for
we are come to great misery.

9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us,
and be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake.

10 Wherefore do the heathen say: Where is now their God?

11 O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed: be openly showed
upon the heathen in our sight.

12 O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee: according
to the greatn^sse of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

13 And for the blasphemy wherewi^h our neighbors have blasphemed thee: reward
thou them (O Lord) seven fold into their bosom.

14 So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever: and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of thine inheritance, who conveyest many blessings to the children
of men, by the prayers and ministry of thy Church, let our prayers obtain of
thee mercies and deliverances for her. O Lord thou have planted thy Church in
the humility, and poverty, and death of thy Son, thou have watered it with the
blood of thy Apostles and Martyrs, thou have made it flourish, and spread forth
its branches, by the warmth, and heat, and graces of thy holy Spirit, and have
according to thy promise, still preserved it in the midst of all enmities and
disadvantages. Thy Laws and righteous Commandments have been a scorn and
derision to Jews and Gentiles, the flesh of thy servants have been meat for the
beasts of the Land, and still she wears the purple robe of mockery, and the
crown of thorns which at first she took from the head and side of her dearest
Lord: At last, O Lord, be gracious unto thine inheritance, help us, o God of
our salvation, for the glory of thy Name, let not thine enemies devour the
Church, and lay waste her dwelling places: be merciful unto our sins, preserve
all those that by malice of their enemies are appointed to death, or prison, or
any other misery: let us still enjoy the freedom of thy Gospel, the food of thy
word, the sweet refreshings of thy Sacraments, public Communions in thy
Church, and all the benefits of the society of Saints, and let not our sins
cause thee to remove the Candlestick from us, but make thy people and the sheep
of thy pasture secure and glad in thy salvation, that we may show forth thy
praise in this world, and in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PSALM 80.
A Prayer for the Church.
HEar me, O thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep:
show thy self also thou that sit upon the cherubims.

2 Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses: stir up thy strength, and come and
help us.

3 Turn us again, O God: show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

4 O Lord God of hosts: how long will thou be angry with thy people that
prays?

5 Thou feedest them with the bread of tears: and give them plenteousnesse
of tears to drink.

6 Thou have made us a very strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh
us to scorn.

7 Turn us again thou God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and we
shall be whole.

8 Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen, and
planted it.

9 Thou made room for it: and when it had taken root, it filled the land.

10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly cedar-trees.

11 She stretched out her branches unto the sea: and her boughs unto the river.

12 Why have thou then broken down her hedge: that all they that go by, pluck
off her grapes?

13 The wild bore out of the wood does ro^t it up* and the wild beasts of the
field devour it.

14 Turn thee again, thou God of hosts, look down from heaven: behold, and
visit this vine.

15 And the place of the vineyard that thy right hand has planted: and the
branch that thou made so strong for thy self.

16 It is burnt with fire, and cut down: and they shall perish at the rebuke of
thy countenance.

17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man
whom thou made so strong for thine own self.

18 And so will not we go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon
thy name.

19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole.

The Prayer.
O Thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that fittest upon the Cherubims, stir up
thy strength, and come and help thy people that prays unto thee for mercy and
protection. Thou have made affliction the portion of thy children in this life,
thou feedest them with bread of tears, and give them plenteousnesse of tears
to drink; yet be pleased to show the light of thy countenance upon us, to
lighten our darknesses, to relieve ou^ miseries, to heal our sicknesses, and
let not thy Church become a strife unto her neighbors, but reunite her
divisions, and make her not a prey to them that would devour her, and then
laugh her to scorn. O Lord fiedge her about with thy mercies, with the custody
of Angels, with the patronage of Kings and Princes, with the hearts and hands
of Nobles, and the defense of the whole secular arm, lest the wild beasts of
the field pluck off her grapes, destroy the vintage, and root up the vine it
self: but let her so flourish under the beams of thy favor and providence,
that it may take root and spread and fill all lands, that the name of the man
of thy right hand, the God and Man Christ Jesus may be glorified, thy Church
enlarged and defended, and we blessed with thy health and salvation. Grant
this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

PSALM 81.
A Festival song, and a Prayer for the grace and blessings of obedience to
Gods Laws.
SIng we merrily unto God our strength: make a cheerful noise unto the God of
Jacob.

2 Take the psalm, bring hither the tabret: the merry harp with the lute.

3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: even in the time appointed, and upon
our solemn feast day.

4 For this was made a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob.

5 This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony: when he came out of the land of
Egypt, and had heard a strange language.

6 I eased his shoulder from the burden: and his hands were delivered from
making the pots.

7 Thou calledst upon me in troubles, and I delivered thee: and heard thee what
time as the storm fell upon thee.

8 I proved thee also: at the waters of strife.

9 Hear, O my people, and I will assure thee, O Israel: if thou will hearken
unto me.

10 There shall no strange god be in thee: neither shall thou worship any other
god.

11 I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open
thy mouth wide, and I shall fill it.

12 But my people would not hear my voice: and Israel would not obey me.

13 So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and let them follow their own
imaginations.

14 O that my people would have hearkened unto me: for if Israel had walked in
my ways,

15 I should soon have put down their en^mies: and ^urned my hand against their
adversaries.

16 The haters of the Lord should have been found liers: but their time should
have endured for ever.

17 He should have fed them also with the finest wheatfloure: and with honey out
of the stony rock should I have satisfied thee.

The Prayer.
O Lord God our strength, whose mercies are infinite, whose Majesty is
glorious, whose goodness is amiable above all the excellencies in the world,
enlarge our hearts with joy and rejoycings in thy glories, open our mouths
wide, and fill our lips with thy praises, that upon the solemn feast days we
may commemorate thy excellencies and mercies, and the great mysteries of our
redemption and Religion, adoring thee with thanks and joyfulnesse, who art
mysterious in thy words, and mavelous and merciful in all thy works: and
that we may in the best manner express our thankfulness to thee, give us thy
grace that we may hear thy voice, that we may obey thee and walk in thy Laws,
that we follow not our own imaginations, nor be given to our own hearts lusts,
but that we resigning our selves only to thy holy will and pleasure, thou
may hear our prayers when ever any storm of trouble falls upon us, and turn
thine hand against our adversaries, and that we being delivered from the burden
of our sins, may be fed with the choicest of thy viands, and with food from the
Rock Christ Jesus, even his most precious body and blood, nourishing us up to
life eternal, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 82.
A prayer for the Princes and Judges of the world, that they may do right
judgment.
GOd stands in the congregation of Princes: he is a Judge among gods.

2 How long will ye give wrong judgment: and accept the persons of the ungodly?

3 Defend the poor and fatherless: see that such as be in need and necessity,
have right.

4 Deliver the outcast and poor: save them from the hand of the ungodly.

5 They will not be learned, nor understand, but walk on still in darkness:
all the foundations of the earth be out of course.

6 I have said, ye are gods: and ye all are children of the most Highest.

7 But ye shall die like men: and fall like one of the Princes.

8 Arise, O God, and judge thou the earth: for tho^ shall take all the heathen
to thine inheritance.

The Prayer.
O Almighty Judge of Men and Angels, thou God of Gods, and Prince of Princes,
let thy Spirit of anointing rest upon the Princes and Rulers within the pale of
the Universal Church, and let thy righteousness and judgments guide all
those that sit in the seat of the Judges, that they may minister justice and
true judgment unto the people, defending and promoting the interests of true
Religion, relieving the oppressed, encouraging virtue, and dishonouring vicious
persons, delivering the poor, and saving them from the hand of the ungodly,
that men may not walk on still in darkness, but their evil deeds may be
discovered and brought to light, that we may all live before thee in
righteousness, expecting the great day of righteous judgment, which we ^egge
we may all behold with confidence, receiving thy mercies, and beholding thy
face in glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 83.
A Prayer against the enemies of the Church, particularly, sacrilegious persons.
HOld not thy tongue, O God, keep not still silence: refrain not thy self, O
God.

2 For lo, thine enemies make a murmuring: and they that hate thee have lift up
their head.

3 They have imagined craftily against thy people: and taken counsel against
thy secret ones.

4 They have said, Come, and let us root them out, that they be no more a
people: and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

5 For they have cast their heads together with one consent: and are
confederate against thee.

6 The tabernacles of the Edomites, and the Ismaelites: the Moabites and
Hagarenes.

7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek: the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire.

8 Assure also is joined unto them: and have helped the children of Lot.

9 But do thou to them as unto the Madianites: unto Sisera, and unto Jabin, at
the brook of Kison.

10 Which perished at Endor: and became as the dung of the earth.

11 Make them and their Princes like Oreb and Zeb: yea, make all their Princes
like as Zeba and Salmana.

12 Which say, Let us take to our selves: the houses of God in possession.

13 O my God, make them like unto a wheel: and as the stubble before the wind.

14 Like as the fire that burns up the wood: and a^ the flame that consumes
the mountains.

15 Persecute them even so with thy tempest: and make them afraid with thy
storm.

16 Make their faces ashamed, O Lord: that they may seek thy name.

17 Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to
shame and perish.

18 And they shall know that thou (whose name is Jehovah:) art only the most
highest over all the earth.

The Prayer.
O Lord God who were known to thy people Israel by thy name Jehovah, thou art
only the highest over all the earth, arise and defend thy people, and deliver
thy secret ones from the murmurings, councels, and crafty imaginations of thine
enemies against them. Fix the foundations of the Church upon a Rock, and
preserve thine inheritance in peace and safety. Infatuate the counsels,
restrain the sacrilegious appetites of all such persons who would rob all thy
houses, and take them to their own possession, and make their faces so ashamed
and their hearts afraid, that they may return from covetousness and impiety,
and seek thy Name, repenting of all their sins, and living in justice and
religion, that at last they may come into an everlasting possession of thy
house, and of thy Temple where thine Honor dwells and reigns eternally
world without end. Amen.

PSALM 84.
A Prayer of desire and longings after the joys of Heaven.
O How amiable are thy dwellings: thou Lord of hosts!

2 My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

3 Yea, the sparrow has found her an house, and the swallow a nest, where she
may lay her young: even thy altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God.

4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be always praising thee.

5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are thy ways.

6 Which going through the vale of misery, use it for a well: and the pools are
filled with water.

7 They will go from strength to strength: and unto the God of gods appears
every one of them in Sion.

8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: hearken, O God of Jacob.

9 Behold, O God, our defender: and look upon the face of thine Anointed.

10 For one day in thy courts: is better then a thousand.

11 I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God: then to dwell in the
tents of ungodliness.

12 For the Lord God is a light and defense: the Lord will give grace and
worship, and no good thing shall he withhold ftom them that live a godly life.

13 O Lord God of hosts: blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of ^^sts, who dwell in the heavens, seated in essential and
eternal felicities; fill our hearts with desires and longings to enter into
those Courts where thou sit, attended with the beauteous orders of Angels,
and millions of beatified spirits; and that our desires may receive infinite
satisfactions, give us thy help, that we going through the vale of misery; the
pools may be filled with water, our hearts and eyes may run over with tears of
repentance, and overflow with sorrow and contrition for our sins, that we
living a godly life, going from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue, at
last we may appear in Sion unto the God of gods, beholding the face of thine
Anointed, thy Christ, and our Jesus, and may dwell one day in thy Courts, even
all the long day of eternity, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 85.
A thanksgiving for Gods free mercy in the pardon of our sins, and a prayer
for the continuance and increase of his mercies to us.
LOrd, thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou ha^t turned away the
captivity of Jacob.

2 Thou have forgiven the offense of thy people: and ^overed all their sins.

3 Thou have taken away all thy displeasure: and tur^ed thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

4 Turn us then, O God our Savior: and let thine ^nger cease from us.

5 Will thou be displeased at us for ever: and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another?

6 Will thou not turn again and quicken us: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

7 Show us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation.

8 I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me: for he shall speak
peace unto his people, and to ^is saints, that they turn not again.

9 For his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our
land.

10 Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kiss^d each
other.

11 Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousness has looked down
from heaven.

12 Yea, the Lord shall show loving kindness: and our land shall give her
increase.

13 Righteousness shall go before him: and he shall direct his going in the
way.

The Prayer.
O Most gracious God, who art reconciled unto us in our Savior Jesus, having
for his sake forgiven the offenses of thy people and covered all their sins
with the robe of his most immaculate sanctity and righteousness, let thy grace
convert and quicken us, that we may rejoice in thee and thy salvation, in faith
of thy promises, in the hope of actual communication of thy mercies to us, and
in love to thee for so great blessings and redemption; and when thou have
spoken peace unto our souls and reconciled us to thy self in the blood of thy
Son, give us the grace of perseverance that we may never turn again to folly,
but may follow mercy and truth all our days, and at last be satisfied with thy
righteousness and peace eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 86.
A Prayer for sanctity and preservation.
BOw down thine ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and in misery.

2 Preserve thou my soul, for I am holy: my God save thy servant that puts
his trust in thee.

3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I will call daily upon thee.

4 Comfort the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up my soul.

5 For thou Lord art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto all them that
call upon thee.

6 Give ear, Lord, unto my prayer: and ponder the voice of my humble desires.

7 In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hear me.

8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord:) there is not one that
can do as thou do.

9 All nations whom thou have made, shall come and ^orship thee, O Lord: and
shall glorify thy Name.

10 For thou art great, and do wondrous things: ^^ou art God alone.

11 Teach me thy way (O Lord) and I will walk in ^hy truth: O knit my heart
unto thee, that I may fear thy Name.

12 I will thank thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy
Name for evermore.

13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell.

14 O God, the proud are risen against me: and the congregations of naughty men
have sought after my soul, and have not set thee before their eyes.

15 But thou (O Lord God) art full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

16 O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto
thy servant, and help the son of thine handmaid.

17 Show some good token upon me for good, that they which hate me, may see
it, and be ashamed: because thou Lord have helped me, and comforted me.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call upon
thee, give ear unto our prayers, and ponder the voice of our desires when ever
we call upon thee in our trouble. Let the souls of thy servants be refreshed
with thy comforts, and defend us from the congregations of proud and naughty
men. Turn thee unto us with mercy, give thy strength unto us, teach us thy
laws, make us to walk in thy truth, give us the fear of thy Name, and knit our
hearts to thee with the indissoluble bands of charity and obedience, that our
souls being saved from the nethermost hell, we may worship thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy name, who art full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering and
plenteous in goodness and truth, which thou have manifested to us in our
deliverance and redemption, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 87.
A contemplation of the excellencies of Sion, or the celestial Jerusalem.
HEr foundations are upon the holy hills: the Lord loves the gates of Sion more
then all the dwellings of Jacob.

2 Very excellent things are spoken of thee: thou city of God.

3 I will think upon Rahab and Babylon: with them that know thee.

4 Behold ye the Philistines also: and they of Tire, with the Morians, lo,
there was he born.

5 And of Sion it shall be reported, that he was born in her: and the most High
shall stablish her.

6 The Lord shall rehearse it, when he writes up the people: that he was born
there.

7 The singers also and trumpeters shall be rehearse: all my fresh springs
shall be in thee.

The Prayer.
O Lord God who dwell in Sion, and delightest to have thy habitation in the
hearts of men, thou have built the Church as a City upon a hill, and laid the
foundation of it upon the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief
Cornerstone, make us to be a spiritual building fit for thy habitation, and a
residence for thy holy Spirit, grounding us in faith, building us up in hope,
and perfecting us in charity, that we being joined in the communion of Saints,
in the union of the holy Catholic Church militant on earth, may all partake
of the blessings of thy Church triumphant in the City of thee our God, in the
celestial Jerusalem, where thou live and reignest ever one God world without
end. Amen.

PSALM 88.
A Prayer in time of sickness and danger of death.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee: O let my
prayer enter into thy presence, incline thine ear unto my calling.

2 For my soul is full of trouble: and my life draws nigh unto hell.

3 I am counted as one of them that go down into the pit: and I have been even
as a man that has no strength.

4 Free among the dead, like unto them that be wounded and lie in the grave:
which be out of remembrance, and are cut away from thy hand.

5 Thou have laid me in the lowest pit: in a place of darkness, and in the
deep.

6 Thine indignation lies hard upon me: and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms.

7 Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: and made me to be abhorred
of them.

8 I am so fast in prison: that I cannot get forth.

9 My sight fails for very trouble: Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I
have stretched out my hands unto thee.

10 Do thou show wonders among the dead: or shall the dead rise up again and
praise thee?

11 Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave: or thy faithfulness in
destruction?

12 Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark: and thy righteousness in
the land where all things are forgotten?

13 Unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and early shall my prayer come before thee.

14 Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul: and hidest thou thy face from me?

15 I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to die: (even from
my youth up) thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind.

16 Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me: and the fear of thee has undone
me.

17 They came round about me daily like water: and comp^ssed me together on
every side.

18 My lovers and friends have thou put away from me: and hid mine acquaintance
out of my sight.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of our salvation, who for our sakes were wounded and did die and
lie in the grave, but yet alone of all that ever died were free among the dead,
and by thine own power did arise again with victory and triumph; have mercy
upon thy servant, for thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed
me with all thy storms; my soul is full of trouble by reason of my sins, and my
life draws nigh unto the grave; restore me unto thy favor, and let me not go
down into the dark, nor my life into the place where all things are forgotten,
but let me show forth thy loving kindness amongst thy redeemed ones in the
land of the living: for the living, the living he shall praise thee and
confess the holiness and the mercies of thy holy Name. O hide not thou thy
face from me, but give me health of body, and restore and preserve me in the
life of righteousness, and so bless me with opportunities of doing thee
service, that I may redeem the time past, and by thy grace may grow rich in
good works, always abounding in the work of the Lord, that when thou shall
demand my soul to be rendered up into thy hands, my soul may not be abhorred of
thee, nor suffer thy terrors, but may feel an eternity of blessings in the
resurrection of the just, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 89.
A Prayer for the King in time of Wars or any public calamity.
MY song shall be always of the loving kindness of the Lord: with my mouth will
I ever be showing thy truth from one generation to another.

2 For I have said, mercy shall be set up for ever: thy truth shall thou
stablish in the heavens.

3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant.

4 Thy seed will I stablish for ever: and set up thy throne from one generation
to another.

5 O Lord, the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous works: and thy truth in
the congregation of the saints.

6 For who is he among the clouds: that shall be compared unto the Lord?

7 And what is he among the gods: that shall be like unto the Lord?

8 God is very greatly to be feared in the counsel of the Saints: and to be
had in reverence of all them that are round about him.

9 O Lord God of hosts, who is like unto thee: thy truth (most mighty Lord) is
on every side.

10 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: thou stillest the waves thereof when
they arise.

11 Thou have subdued Egypt, and destroyed it: thou have scattered thine
enemies abroad with thy mighty arm.

12 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou have laid the
foundation of the round world, and all that therein is.

13 Thou have made the North and the South: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in
thy Name.

14 Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

15 Righteousness and equity is the habitation of thy seat: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

16 Blessed is the people (O Lord) that can rejoice in thee: they shall walk in
the light of thy countenance.

17 Their delight shall be daily in thy Name: and in thy righteousness shall
they make their boast.

18 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy loving kindness thou
shall lift up our horns.

19 For the Lord is our defense: the holy one of Israel is our King.

20 Thou spakest sometimes in vision unto thy Saints, and saidest: I have laid
help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people.

21 I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.

22 My hand shall hold him fast: and my arm shall strengthen him.

23 The enemy shall not be able to do him violence: the son of wickedness
shall not hurt him.

24 I shall smite down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate him.

25 My truth also and my mercy shall be with him: and in my Name shall his horn
be exalted.

26 I will set his dominion also in the sea: and his right hand in the floods.

27 He shall call me, Thou art my Father: my God, and my strong salvation.

28 And I will make him my firstborn: higher then the Kings of the earth.

29 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast
with him.

30 His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of
heaven.

31 But if his children forsake my law: and walk not in thy judgments.

32 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: I will visit
their offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges.

33 Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor
suffer my truth to fail.

34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips: I have sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail David.

35 His seed shall endure for ever: and his seat is like as the sun before me.

36 He shall stand fast for evermore as the moon: and as the faithful witness
in Heaven.

37 But thou have abhorred and forsaken thine anointed: and art displeased at
him.

38 Thou have broken the covenant of thy servant: and cast his crown to the
ground.

39 Thou have overthrown all his hedges: and broken down his strong holds.

40 All they that go by spoil him: and he is become a rebuke to his
neighbors.

41 Thou have set up the right hand of his enemies: and made all his
adversaries to rejoice.

42 Thou have taken away the edge of his sword: and give him not victory in
the battle.

43 Thou have put out his glory: and cast his throne down to the ground.

44 The days of his youth have thou shortened: and covered him with dishonor.

45 Lord, how long will thou hide thy self, for ever: and shall thy wrath burn
like fire?

46 Oh remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men for
naught?

47 What man is he that lives, and shall not see death: and shall he deliver
his soul from the hand of hell?

48 Lord, where are thy old loving kindnesses: which thou swarest unto David in
thy truth?

49 Remember (Lord) the rebuke that thy servants have: and how I do bear in my
bosom the rebukes of many people.

50 Wherewith thine enemies have blasphemed thee, and slandered the footsteps
of thine anointed: praised be the Lord for evermore. Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of hosts, thou art greatly to be feared in the council of the
saints, and to be had in reverence of all the world, let thy strong hand and
thy mighty arm bl^sse and preserve thine Anointed the King; as thou have
exalted thy chosen from among the People, so let the greatness of thy
blessings and assistances distinguish him from all the world: make his throne
as the days of heaven, smite down his enemies before his face, let thy hand
hold him fast that the enemy may not be able to do him violence, and let thine
arm strengthen him that the sons of wickedness may not hurt him. O do thou
never put his glory out, nor cover him with dishonor, but give him victory in
battles, honor and rejoicing in time of peace, confidence in thee, reverence
amongst his people, and continual defense in thy salvation, that when thou
have finished his days in peace and honor, his seed may be established in his
throne and endure for ever like as the sun before thee. Grant this, O King of
Kings, for his sake to whom thou have given all power and dominion in heaven
and earth, even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 90.
A meditation of death, and a prayer preparatory to it.
LOrd, thou have been our refuge: from one generation to another.

2 Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world
were made: thou art God from everlasting, and world without end.

3 Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, Come again ye children
of men.

4 For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday: seeing that is past
as a watch in the night.

5 As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away
suddenly like the grass.

6 In the morning it is green, and grows up: but in the evening it is cut
down, dried up, and withered.

7 For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation.

8 Thou have set our misdeeds before thee: and our secret sins in the sight of
thy countenance.

9 For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told.

10 The days of our age are threescore years and ten, and though men be so
strong that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but labor
and sorrow, so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

11 But who regards the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure.

12 O teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

13 Turn thee again (O Lord) at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants.

14 O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be
glad all the days of our life.

15 Comfort us again now after the time that thou have plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

16 Show thy servants thy work: and their children t^y glory.

17 And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the
work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handy work.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, whose being was before the mountains were brought forth,
before the earth and the world were made, even from everlasting and world
without end, have mercy upon us weak and impotent people, the children of men,
who fade away suddenly like the grass: remove our misdeeds from before thee,
and our secret sins from the sight of thy countenance: be not angry with us,
neither consume us in thy displeasure; teach us to number all the days of our
life, and to reckon on still to the day of death, that when our days are gone,
and our years are brought to an end like a tale that is told, thou may turn
unto us at the last, and be gracious unto us in the pardon of our sins, in the
restraining the power and malice of all our ghostly enemies, in giving us
opportunity of all spiritual assistances and advantages, that our lamps being
trimmed and burning bright with charity and devotion, we may enter into the
bride-chamber, there for ever to behold the glorious majesty of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 91.
A Prayer for protection in all dangers.
Whosoever dwells under the defense of the most High: shall abide under the
shadow of the Alm^ghty.

2 I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my hope and my strong hold: my God, in
him will I trust.

3 For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter: and from the noisome
pestilence.

4 He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his
feathers: his faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

5 Thou shall not be afraid for any terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day.

6 For the pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the sickness that
destroys in the noon day.

7 A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come nigh thee.

8 Yea, with thine eyes shall thou behold: and see the reward of the ungodly.

9 For thou Lord art my hope: thou have set thine house of defense very high.

10 There shall no evil happen unto thee: neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling.

11 For he shall give his Angels charge over thee: to keep thee in all thy ways.

12 They shall bear thee in their hands: that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone.

13 Thou shall go upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet.

14 Because he has set his love upon me, therefore shall I deliver him: I
shall set him up, because he has known my name.

15 He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble,
I will deliver him, and bring him to honor.

16 With long life will I satisfy him: and show him my salvation.

The Prayer.
O Lord God our hope and our strong hold, have mercy upon us, and defend us
under the shadow of thy wings, that we trusting under thy defense, may by thy
faithfulness and truth be covered as with a shield and buckler. Give thy
Angels charge concerning us and our habitations, that we may be preserved and
kept in all our ways that no evil happen unto us, no plague come nigh our
dwelling, no terrors of the night, no arrows of thy vengeance by day may
disturb our peace or safety. Let thy ministering Spirits bear us in their hands,
and keep us from precipice, from fr^cture of bones, from dislocations, noisome
(...) sharp diseases, stupidities, and deformities, that we may tread under our
feet all the snares of the roaring lion and the great dragon the Devil, who
seeks our bodily and ghostly hurt. Do thou set thy love upon us, and deliver
us from all our troubles, and at the end of our days show us thy salvation, and
satisfy us with long life, even of a blessed eternity in thy Kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 92.
A meditation of the great works of God in the destruction of the wicked, and
the preservation of the godly.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy
name, O most Highest.

2 To tell of thy loving kindness early in the morning: and of thy truth in
the night season.

3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the lute: upon a loud
instrument, and upon the harp.

4 For thou Lord have made me glad through thy works: and I will rejoice in
giving praise for the operations of thy hands.

5 O Lord, how glorious are thy works: and thy thoughts are very deep.

6 An unwise man does not well consider this: and a fool does not understand it.

7 When the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of
wickedness do flourish: then shall they be destroyed for ever, but thou Lord
art the most highest for evermore.

8 For lo, thine enemies (O Lord) lo thine enemies shall p^rish: and all the
workers of wickedness shall be destoyed.

9 But mine horn shall be exalted like the horn of an unicorn: for I am
anointed with fresh oil.

10 Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine enemies: and mine ear shall hear
his desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

11 The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree: and shall spread abroad like
a cedar in Lebanus.

12 Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts
of the house of our God.

13 They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and
well liking.

14 That they may show how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is no
unrighteousness in him.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou art the most highest for evermore, thy works are glorious,
and thy thoughts are very deep, make our hearts and tongues loud instruments of
thy praises, that we may tell of thy mercy in the morning, of thy truth in the
night, and that we may rejoice in giving thee thanks for the operations of thy
hands all the days and nights of our life. Let thy merciful kindness descend
evermore upon the righteous, that they may flourish like a palm tree being
continually watered with the dew of temporal and spiritual blessings, and may
bring forth fruits of a holy conversation; and grant that we thy servants,
being planted in the house of God, and firmly fixed in the blessed communion of
Saints, may flourish in the Courts of thy house, thy celestial temple to all
eternity. O let not our portion be amongst the ungodly and unrighteous: make
us, not to communicate in their wickedness, so much as by consent or
approbation, that we may never perish and be destroyed in the furiousness of
thine anger, which thou treasurest up against the day of vengeance, and
righteous judgment, even the day of the appearing of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 93.
A Prayer that God would preserve his Church against the storms and floods of
persecution.
THE Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel: the Lord has put on his
apparel, and girded himself with strength.

2 He has made the round world so sure: that it cannot be moved.

3 Ever since the world began has thy seat been prepared: thou art from
everlasting.

4 The floods are risen (O Lord) the floods have lift up their voice: the
floods lift up their waves.

5 The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier.

6 Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very sure: holiness becomes thine house for
ever.

The Prayer.
O Lord our King, who art girded with strength, and have prepared thy seat from
everlasting, establish thy testimonies in our hearts, as a sure foundation of
temporal and eternal happiness. Preser^e thy house, the holy Catholic
Church in peace and holiness which is its defense and ornament; and although
the floods of persecution and secular disadvantages have lift up their waves to
overthrow it, yet because it is built upon a rock, the rock Christ Jesus, make
it to stand firm and sure against all the malice of hell and earth, and all the
powers of them both; for thou, o Lord, art mightier the^ all the waves and
storms of her enemies: To thee, O Lord, who dwell on high, and art mightier,
be all honor, and glory now and for ever. Amen.

PSALM 94.
A Prayer for patience, comfort, and assistance to the godly, and that God
would disappoint the designs of the wicked.
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs: thou God to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self.

2 Arise thou judge of the world: and reward the proud after their deserving.

3 Lord, how long shall the ungodly: how long shall the ungodly triumph?

4 How long shall all wicked doers speak so disdainfully: and make such proud
boasting?

5 They smite down thy people, O Lord: and trouble thine heritage.

6 They murder the widow and the stranger: and put the fatherless to death.

7 And yet they say, Tush, the Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it.

8 Take heed ye unwise among the people: O ye fools, when will ye understan^?

9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear: or he that made the eye,
shall he not see?

10 Or he that nurtureth the heathen: it is he that teaches man knowledge,
shall not he punish?

11 The Lord knows the thoughts of man: that they are but vain.

12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest (O Lord:) and teach him in thy
law.

13 That thou may give him patience in time of adversity: until the pit be
dug up for the ungodly.

14 For the Lord will not fail his people: neither will he forsake his
inheritance.

15 Until righteousness turn again unto judgment: all such as be true of
heart, shall follow it.

16 Who will rise up with me against the wicked: or who will take my part
against the evil doers?

17 If the Lord had not helped me: it had not failed but my soul had been put
to silence.

18 But when I said, My foot has slipped: thy mercy (O Lord) held me up.

19 In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart: thy comforts have
refreshed my soul.

20 Will thou have any thing to do with the stool of wickedness: which
imagines mischief as a law?

21 They gather them together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn
the innocent blood.

22 But the Lord is my refuge: and my God is the strength of my confidence.

He shall recompense them their wickedness, and destroy them in their own
malice: yea, the Lord our God shall destroy them.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, Judge of the world, to whom vengeance belongs and the execution
of righteous judgments, have mercy upon us, chasten us with thy gentleness
and fatherly correction when we sin against thee, teach us in thy law, be our
refuge and our confidence in our troubles, and give us patience in times of
adversity, that in the multitude of sorrows thy comforts may refresh us, thy
mercies may relieve us, thy grace may pardon and confirm us, that our feet slip
not, and our souls be not put to silence. Have pity upon all distressed and
miserable people, do justice upon all that murder the widow, that put the
fatherless to death, that grind the face of the poor. Fail not thy people, O
Lord, and forsake not thine inheritance, but destroy the devices of all them
that imagine mischief as a law, and are confederate against the righteous, to
condemn the innocent, to discountenance Religion, to disadvantage thy worship
and service, that in the day of eternal vengeance when thou shall reward the
proud after their deserving, and the pit be dug for the ungodly, we may have
the lot of thine inheritance, and reign in the fellowship of Saints who give
honor and praise to thee, O Lord God Almighty, world without end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 95.
A Hymn invitatory to the worship of God, and a prayer for obedience to his
will.
O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our salvation.

2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and show our selves glad
in him with psalms.

3 For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.

4 In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

5 The sea is his and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

6 O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our maker.

7 For he is (the Lord) our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

8 To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

9 When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

10 Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

11 Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

The Prayer.
O Great God the Lord our Maker, who art a King above all gods, give us the
graces of humility and holy religion, that we may worthily praise and worship
thy glories, and perfections infinite. We are the people of thy pasture, let
thy mercies lead us, and feed and refresh our souls with the divine nutriment
of thy Word and Sacraments: we are the sheep of thy hands, do thou guide us
that we may never go astray; or if we do, bring us home into the sheepfold of
our great Shepherd, that we hearing his voice may not harden our hearts,
neither tempting thy mercies, nor provoking thy wrath; that our hearts being
preserved from error, and our ways from obliquity and crookedness, we may at
last enter into thy eternal rest, through the merits and guidance of our great
Shepherd Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

PSALM 96.
A hymn of adoration, and magnifying the glories of God.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the whole earth.

2 Sing unto the Lord, and praise his name: be telling of his salvation from
day to day.

3 Declare his honor unto the heathen: and his wonders unto all people.

4 For the Lord is great, and cannot worthily be praised: he is more to be
feared then all gods.

5 As for all the gods of the heathen, they be but idols: but it is the Lord
that made the heavens.

6 Glory and worship are before him: power and honor are in his sanctuary.

7 Ascribe unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people:) ascribe unto the Lord
worship and power.

8 Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his name: bring presents, and come
into his courts.

9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: let the whole earth stand in
awe of him.

10 Tell it out among the heathen, that the Lord is King: and that it is he
which has made the round world so fast that it cannot be moved, and how that
he shall judge the people righteously.

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a
noise, and all that therein is.

12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is in it: then shall all the trees
of the wood rejoice before the Lord.

13 For he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: and with righteousness to
judge the world, and the people with his truth.

The Prayer.
O Lord God in whose sanctuary is power and honor, before whose presence is
glory and worship, fill our lips and souls with great devotion and reverence
toward thee our God: Make us to love thy goodness, to adore thy omnipotency,
to reverence thy justice, to fear thy Majesty, to admire and tremble at thy
omniscience and omnipresence, and to contemplate with the greatest zeal and
affections all those glories which thou communicatest to the sons of men, in
the revelations of thy gospel, of thy creatures, and of thy miracles, that we
may tell of thy greatness, and declare thy salvation from day to day; and when
thou come with righteousness to judge the earth, and all people with thy
truth, we may rejoice in thee everlastingly, and sing an eternal Allelujah to
thee in thy sanctuary: Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only
Savior. Amen.

PSALM 97.
A meditation upon the day of Judgment, and a prayer for mercy and salvation.
THE Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the multitude of the
Isles may be glad thereof.

2 Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are
the habitation of his seat.

3 There shall go a fire before him: and burn up his enemies on every side.

4 His lightnings gave shine unto the world: the earth saw it, and was afraid.

5 The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the
Lord of the whole earth.

6 The heavens have declared his righteousness: and all the people have seen
his glory.

7 Confounded be all they that worship carved images, and that delight in vain
gods: worship him all ye gods.

8 Sion heard of it, and rejoiced: and the daughters of Judah were glad,
because of thy judgments, O Lord.

9 For thou, Lord, art higher then all that are in the earth: thou art exalted
far above all gods.

10 O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is evil: the Lord
preserves the souls of his Saints, he shall deliver them from the hand of the
ungodly.

11 There is sprung up a light for the righteous: and joyful gladness for
such as be true hearted.

12 Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous: and give thanks for a remembrance of his
holiness.

The Prayer.
O Lord our King, Lord of the whole earth, have mercy upon us, and sanctify us
with thy grace, that we may hate every thing that is evil, that we may love
thee, give thanks unto thy name, and rejoice in remembrance of thy holiness,
that in the day of judgment and great terrors, when thou shall fit in thy seat
supported with righteousness and judgment, and a fire shall go forth from thy
presence, to burn up thy enemies on every side, thou may preserve our souls
in safety from the hand of our enemies, and a light may spring up unto us to
preserve us from eternal darkness and the want of the light of thy
countenance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 98.
A thanksgiving for the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done mavelous things.

2 With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

3 The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the heathen.

4 He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all
the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

5 Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoice, and
give thanks.

6 Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a psalm of
thanksgiving.

7 With trumpets also and shawmes: O show your selves joyful before the Lord
the King.

8 Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

9 Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together
before the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

10 With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

The Prayer.
O Most glorious and powerful Jesu, who with thine own right hand, and with
thy holy arm have gotten to thy self on our behalf the victory over sin, hell,
and the grave, remember this thy mercy and truth which thou have promised to
all that believe on thee, give us pardon of our sins sealed unto us by the
testimony of the holy Spirit, and of a good conscience, and grant that we by
thy strength may fight against our ghostly enemies, and by thy power may
overcome them, that we may rejoice in a holy peace, and sing, and give thee
thanks for our victory and our crown. Extend this mercy, and enlarge the effect
of thy great victories to the heathen, that all the ends of the world may sing
a new song unto thee, and see the salvation of God, that when thou come to
judge the earth, we may all find mercy, and be joyful together before thee in
the festivity of a blessed eternity, through thy mercies, O blessed Savior and
Redeemer Jesu. Amen.

PSALM 99.
A Prayer for the virtue of religion and devotion in holy places.
THe Lord is King, be the people never so unpatient: he sits between the
Cherubims, be the earth never so unquiet.

2 The Lord is great in Sion: and high above all people.

3 They shall give thanks unto thy Name: which is great, wonderful, and holy.

4 The kings power loves judgment, thou have prepared equity: thou have
executed judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

5 O magnify the Lord our God: and fall down before his footstool, for he is
holy.

6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among such as call upon his
Name: these called upon the Lord, and he heard them.

7 He spoke unto them out of the cloudy pillar: for they kept his testimonies,
and the law that he gave them.

8 Thou heardest them (O Lord our God:) thou forgavest them, O God, and
punishedst their own inventions.

9 O magnify the Lord our God, and worship him upon his holy hill: for the
Lord our God is holy.

The Prayer.
O Great God, and King of Heaven and earth, thou that sit between the
Cherubims unmoved in the center of thy own felicity and essential
tranquillity, undisturbed in the great concussions and unquietness of the
earth: give unto us thy servants venerable and dreadful apprehensions of the
sanctity and perfections of thy Name and Nature, which is great, wonderful,
and holy. Teach us in all the addresses of our devotion, and in all places
appointed for thy service, by all reverence and holiness of soul and body, to
express the greatness of thy power, and our weakness, the majesty of thy
glory, and the unworthiness of our persons, the distance of God and man, of
finite and infinite, of Lord and Servant, that the awfulnesse of thy dread
majesty may check every unreverent gesture and thought in us, and teach us to
make approaches of humility, and fear, that we calling upon thy Name according
to our duties, and by the fear of thee being taught to keep thy testimonies,
and never to forget the Law thou give us, we may be delivered from thy wrath
and punishment, and at last praise thee upon thy holy hill in thine everlasting
habitation through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 100.
A Psalm of praise to God for his mercy and truth:
O Be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and
come before him presence with a song.

2 Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

3 O go your way into his gates with thanskgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

4 For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God who have created us out of nothing, and have redeemed us from
misery and death when we were thine enemies, showing great expresses of thy
loving kindness when we were vessels of wrath, and inheritors of perdition,
revealing thy truth unto us in the Sermons of the Gospel: teach us to walk as
thou have commanded us, to believe as thou have taught us, that we may inherit
what thou have promised us, for thou art the way, the truth, and the life: we
are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, thou art our guide and our
defense; let thy grace teach us to serve thee, and thy holy Spirit assist and
promote our endeavors with the blessings of gladness and cheerfulness of
Spirit, that we may love to speak good of thy Name, and at last may go into the
courts of thy Temple with praise and a song in our mouths, to thy honor and
eternal glory, whose mercy and truth is everlasting and revealed unto the
Church in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 101.
A Prayer for a holy life.
MY song shall be of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

2 O let me have understanding: in the way of godliness.

3 When will thou come unto me: I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

4 I will take no wicked thing in hand, I hate the sins of unfaithfulness:
there shall no such cleave unto me.

5 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

6 Who so privily slandereth his neighbor: him will I destroy.

7 Whosoever has also a proud look, and high stomach: I will not suffer him.

8 Mine eyes look unto such as be faithful in the land: that they may dwell
with me.

9 Whosoever leads a godly life: he shall be my servant.

10 There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house: he that tells lies
shall not tarry in my sight.

11 I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land: that I may root
out all wicked doers from the City of the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of eternal purity, who art of pure eyes, and can behold no
unrighteousness or impurity: enlighten our understandings, that we may have
knowledge in the way of godliness; make our paths straight, and our hearts
perfect, take from us the sins of unfaithfulness, correct and mortify in us
all froward and peevish dispositions, let us love the society of the Saints,
and hate the fellowship of the wicked, that we may not be destroyed with the
ungodly, nor be rooted out from the City of the Lord, and banished from the
sweetness of thy presence, for with thee is light, and health, and salvation,
to thy Name be all honor, and glory, and praise ascribed, world without end.
Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 102.
A Prayer for comfort in sadness, anxiety of spirit, sickness, or any other
affliction.
HEar my prayer, O Lord: and let my crying come unto thee.

2 Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: incline thine ears unto
me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

3 For my days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are burnt up as it
were a firebrand.

4 My heart is smitten down, and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat
my bread.

5 For the voice of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

6 I am become like a pelican in the wilderness: and like an owl that is in
the desert.

7 I have watched, and am even as it were a sparrow: that sits alone upon
the house top.

8 Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me.

9 For I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drink with weeping.

10 And that because of thine indignation and wrath: for thou have taken me up,
and cast me down.

11 My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grass.

12 But thou (O Lord) shall endure for ever: and ^hy remembrance throughout all
generations.

13 Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea, the time is come.

14 And why? thy servants think upon her stones: and it pi^ieth them to see her
in the dust.

15 The heathen shall fear thy Name, O Lord: and all the kings of the earth thy
majesty.

16 When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glory shall appear.

17 When he turns him unto the prayer of the poor d^sti^ute: and despises
not their desire.

18 This shall be written for those that come after: and the people which shall
be born, shall praise the Lord.

19 For he has looked down from his sanctuary: out of the heaven did the Lord
behold the earth.

20 That he might hear the mournings of such as be in captivity: and deliver
the children appointed unto death.

21 That they may declare the Name of the Lord in Sion: and his worship at
Jerusalem.

22 When the people are gathered together: and the kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.

23 He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.

24 But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy
years, they endure throughout all generations.

25 Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth: and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.

26 They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they all shall wax old as does a
garment.

27 And as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

28 The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand
fast in thy sight.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, who endurest for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all
generations, have pity upon us according to the infinite treasures of thy
loving kindness, hear the voice of our groaning, for thy indignation and thy
wrath lies hard upon us, and our sins have put an edge upon thy sword, and a
thorn into our wounded consciences. O build up the ruins of our souls, repair
the breaches of our comforts and our hopes, and let thy glory now appear, for
that shines brightest in the beams of thy mercy, and when thou turnest unto the
prayer of poor wretched destitutes, it becomes an eternal monument and a
record of thy honor, and all generations which shall be born shall praise
thee. Look down, O Lord, from thy Sanctuary, hear the mournings of us and of
all distressed people; send us health an^ life so long as it may be a blessing,
and do no^ shorten our days in wrath, but give us grace so to spend all our
time in the works of repentance and holiness, that when our years fail, and
our change is come, we may be translated to the new heavens which shall never
perish and wax old, there to continue and stand fast in thy sight for ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 103.
A thanksgiving to God for all his benefits and mercies.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

2 Praise the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits.

3 Which forgiveth all thy sin: and heals all thy infirmities.

4 Which saves thy life from destruction: and crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness.

5 Which satisfies thy mouth with good things: making thee young and lusty as
an eagle.

6 The Lord executes righteousness and judgment: for all them that are
oppressed with wrong.

7 He showed his ways unto Moses: his works unto the children of Israel.

8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering, and of great
goodness.

9 He will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
wickedness.

11 For look how high the heaven is in comparison of ^he earth: so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him.

12 Look how wide also the east is from the west: so far has he set our sins
from us.

13 Yea, like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord
merciful unto them that fear him.

14 For he knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but dust.

15 The days of man are but as grass: for he flourishes as a flower of the
field.

16 For as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone: and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

17 But the merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, upon
them that fear him: and his righteousness upon childrens children.

18 Even upon such as keep his covenant: and think upon his commandments to do
them.

19 The Lord has prepared his seat in heaven: and his kingdom rules over all.

20 O praise the Lord, ye angels of his, ye that excel in strength: ye that
fulfill his commandment, and hearken unto the voice of his words.

21 O praise the Lord all ye his hosts: ye servants of his that do his pleasure.

22 O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his, in all places of his
dominion: praise thou the Lord, O my soul.

The Prayer.
O Most merciful God, whose mercy is as high as the heavens, as great and many
as the moments of eternity, thou have opened thy hand wide to fill us with
blessings, and the sweet effects of thy loving kindness, thou art pitiful as
a Father, tender as a Mother, careful as a guardian, and exceeding merciful
to all them that fear thee: we pray thee to fill our souls with great
apprehensions and impresses of thy unspeakable mercies, that our thankfulness
may be as great as our needs of mercy are, and let thy merciful loving
kindness endure for ever and ever upon us all. Keep no anger in store for us,
chide us not in thy displeasure, satisfy our mouths with good things, remove
all our sins from us as far as the east is from the west, heal all our
infirmities and save our lives from destruction, for these are mercies thou
delightest in: and because we cannot praise thee accordingly to thy
excellencies, take our souls in thy due time, into the land of everlasting
praises, that we may spend a whole eternity in ascribing to thy name, praise,
and honor, and dominion. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and
only Savior. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 104.
A contemplation of the wisdom and goodness of God, manifested in his
creatures.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art become exceeding glorious,
thou art clothed with majesty and honor.

2 Thou deckest thy self with light as it were with a garment: and spreadest
out the heavens like a curtain.

3 Which lays the beams of his chambers in the waters: and makes the clouds
his chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind.

4 He makes his angels spirits: and his ministers a flaming fire.

5 He laid the foundations of the earth: that it never should move at any time.

6 Thou coveredst it with the deep like as with a garment: the waters stand in
the hills.

7 At thy rebuke they flee: at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid.

8 They go up as high as the hills, and down to the valleys beneath: even unto
the place which thou have appointed for them.

9 Thou have set them their bounds which they shall not pass: neither turn
again to cover the earth.

10 He sends the springs into the rivers: which run among the hills.

11 All beasts of the field drink thereof: and the wild asses quench their
thirst.

12 Beside them shall the fowls of the air have their habitation: and sing
among the branches.

13 He waters the hills from above: the earth is filled with the fruit of thy
works.

14 He brings forth grass for the cattle: and green herb for the service of
men.

15 That he may bring food out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the
heart of man: and oil to make him a ch^erful countenance, and bread to
strengthen man's heart.

16 The trees of the Lord also are full of sap: even the Cedars of Libanus
which he has planted.

17 Wherein the birds make their nests: and the sirretrees are a dwelling for
the stork.

18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats: and so are the stony rocks
for the conies.

19 He appointed the moon for certain seasons: and the sun knows his going
down.

20 Thou make darkness that it may be night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do move.

21 The lions roaring after their prey: do seek their meat at God.

22 The sun arises, and they get them away together: and lay them down in
their dens.

23 Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor: until evening.

24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works: in wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches.

25 So is the great and wide sea also: wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts.

26 There go the ships, and there is that Leviathan: whom thou have made to
take his pastime therein.

27 These wait all upon thee: that thou may give them meat in due season.

28 When thou give in them, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand,
they are filled with good.

29 When thou hidest thy face they are troubled: when thou take away their
breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust.

30 When thou let thy breath go forth, they shall be made: and thou shall
renew the face of the earth.

31 The glorious majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall
rejoice in his works.

32 The earth shall tremble at the look of him: if he do but touch the hills,
they shall smoke.

33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will praise my God while I
have my being.

34 And so shall my words please him: my joy shall be in the Lord.

35 As for sinners, they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the ungodly
shall come to an end: praise thou the Lord, O my soul, praise the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God who art exceeding glorious, who art clothed with majesty and honor,
thou have created all things with admirable wisdom, established them with
excellent order, and have provided for them with mercy and singular providence,
be pleased to give us grace that we may remember thou have created us all for
thy glory, that thou have planted thine image on us, and have crowned all our
years with thy mercies and loving kindness; let us never disobey thy will,
forget thy mercies, or deface thine image in us, but when all thy creatures
praise thee in their manner, let not us whom thou have made in dignity next to
Angels disturb the blessed order of Creation by our sins and irregular
disobedience. Open thy hand, O Lord, and fill us with good things both
spiritual and temporal, that when thou take away our breath that we die,
and turn again to our dust, thou may not hide thy face away from us, but
communicate to us the light of thy countenance and the glories of thy Kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 105.
A commemoration of Gods care of his Church and blessings to his people.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name: tell the people what
things he has done.

2 O let your songs be of him, and praise him: and let your talking be of all
his wondrous works.

3 R^joyce in his holy Name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

4 Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.

5 Remember the mavelous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.

6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant: ye children of Jacob his chosen.

7 He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the world.

8 He has been always mindful of his covenant and promise: that he made to a
thousand generations.

9 Even the covenant that he made with Abraham: and the oath that he swear unto
Isaac.

10 And appointed the same unto Jacob for a law: and to Israel for an
everlasting testament.

11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your
inheritance.

12 When there were yet but a few of them: and they strangers in the land.

13 What time as they went from one nation to another: from one kingdom to
another people.

14 He suffered no man to do them wrong: but reproved even Kings for their
sakes.

15 Touch not mine Anointed: and do my Prophets no harm.

16 Moreover, he called for a dearth upon the land: and destroyed all the
provision of bread.

17 But he had sent a man before them: even Joseph which was sold to be a
bond-servant.

18 Whose feet they hurt in the stocks: the iron entered into his soul.

19 Until the time came that his cause was known: the Word of the Lord tried
him.

20 The King sent and delivered him: the Prince of the people let him go free.

21 He made him Lord also of his house: and ruler of all his substance.

22 That he might inform his Princes after his will: and teach his senators
wisdom.

23 Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob was a stranger in the land of Ham.

24 And he increased his people exceedingly: and made them stronger then their
enemies.

25 Whose heart turned so, that they hated his people: and dealt untruly with
his servants*

26 Then sent he Moses his servant: and Aaron whom he had chosen.

27 And these showed his tokens among them: and wonders in the land of Ham.

28 He sent darkness, and it was dark: and they were not obedient unto his
Word.

29 He turned their waters into blood: and slew their fish.

30 Their land brought forth frogs: yea, even in their Kings chambers.

31 He spoke the word, and there came all manner of flies: and lice in all
their quarter.

32 He gave them hailstones for rain: and flames of fire in their land.

33 He smote their vines also and fig trees: and destroyed the trees that were
in their coasts.

34 He spoke the word and the grasshoppers came, and caterpillars innumerable:
and did eat up all the grass in their land, and devouted the fruit of their
ground.

35 He smote all the firstborn in their land: even the chief of all their
strength.

36 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: there was not one feeble
person among their Tribes.

37 Egypt was glad at their departing: for they were afraid of them.

38 He spread out a cloud to be a covering: and fire to give light in the night
season.

39 At their desire he brought quails: and he filled them with the bread of
heaven.

40 He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that the rivers
ran in dry places.

41 For why? he remembered his holy promise: and Abraham his servant.

42 And he brought forth his people with joy: and his chosen with gladness.

43 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they took the labors of the
people in possession.

44 That they might keep his statutes: and observe his laws.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who art always mindful of thy covenant and promise to a thousand
generations, and did deliver the seed of Abraham the children of Jacob thy
chosen from the slavery of Egypt, from the waves of the sea, from the rage of
Pharaoh, from the thirst and famine of the wilderness, continue the like
mercies to all Christian people; deliver us from the bondage of our sins,
preserve us in the Ark of the Church, that we perish not in the waves of this
troublesome world; save us from the fury of all our temporal and ghostly
enemies, feed us with food from heaven, and give us competency of good things
on earth, that we may keep thy statutes, and observe thy Laws, and at last
receive the promises of a blessed eternity, which in the covenant of thy Gospel
thou have made unto all that believe in thee, and are obedient to thy Word.
Grant this, O blessed Jesu, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all
honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

^vening Prayer.
PSALM 106.
A commemoration of Gods frequent pardons and mercies to the penitent.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

2 Who can express the noble acts of the Lord: or show forth all his praise?

3 Blessed are they that always keep judgment: and do righteousness.

4 Remember me, O Lord, according to the favor that thou bear unto thy
people: O visit me with thy salvation.

5 That I may see the felicity of thy chosen: and rejoice in the gladness of
thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance.

6 We have sinned with our fathers: we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly.

7 Our fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypt, neither kept they thy great
goodness in remembrance: but were disobedient at the sea, even at the Red sea.

8 Nevertheless, he helped them for his names sake: that he might make his
power to be known.

9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the
deep, as through a wilderness.

10 And he saved them from the adversaries hand: and delivered them from the
hand of the enemy.

11 As for those that troubled them, the waters overwhelmed them: there was not
one of them left.

12 Then believed they his words: and sang praise unto him.

13 But within a while they forgot his works: and would not abide his counsel.

14 But lust came upon them in the wilderness: and they tempted God in the
desert.

15 And he gave them their desire: and sent leanness withal into their soul.

16 They angered Moses also in the tents: and Aaron the saint of the Lord.

17 So the earth opened and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the congregation
of Abiram.

18 And the fire was kindled in their company: the flame burnt up the ungodly.

19 They made a calf in Horeb: and worshipped the molten image

20 Thus they turned their glory: into the similitude of a calf that eats hay.

21 And they forgot God their Savior: which had done so great things in Egypt.

22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and fearful things by the Red sea.

23 So he said he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the gap: to turn away his wrathful indignation lest he should
destroy them.

24 Yea, they thought scorn of that pleasant land: and gave no credance unto
his word.

25 But murmured in their tents: and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.

26 Then lift he up his hand against them: to overthrow them in the wilderness.

27 To cast out their seed among the nations: and to scatter them in the lands.

28 They joined themselves unto Baal-peor: and ate the offering of the dead.

29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their own inventions: and the plague
was great among them.

30 Then stood up Phineas, and prayed: and so the plague ceased.

31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness: among all posterities for
evermore.

32 They angered him also at the waters of strife: so that he punished Moses for
their sakes.

33 Because they provoked his spirit: so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips.

34 Neither destroyed they the heathen: as the Lord commanded them.

35 But were mingled among the heathen: and learned their works.

36 Insomuch that they worshipped their idols, which turned to their own decay:
yea, they offered their sons and daughters unto devils.

37 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters: whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan, and the land was defiled
with blood.

38 Thus were they stained with their own works: and went a whoring with their
own inventions.

39 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: insomuch
that he abhorred his own inheritance.

40 And he gave them over into the hand of the heathen: and they that hated
them were Lords over them.

41 Their enemies oppressed them: and had them in subjection.

42 Many a time did he deliver them: but they rebelled against him with their
own inventions, and were brought down in their wickedness.

43 Nevertheless, when he saw their adversity: he heard their complaint.

44 He thought upon his covenant, and pitied them according unto the multitude
of his mercies: yea, he made all those that had led them away captive, to pity
them.

45 Deliver us (O Lord our God) and gather us from among the heathen: that we
may give thanks unto thy holy Name, and make our boast of thy praise.

46 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and world without end:
and let all the people say, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, full of mercy and pity, who did many times deliver thy people
from their adversity, when thou for their rebelling against thee with their
inventions had given them into the hand of the heathen: Remember us O Lord,
according unto the savor thou bear unto thy people, and visit us with thy
salvation, that though we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly against thee and
against thy covenant, yet be pleased to help us for thy Name sake, and make thy
power to be known in the mighty deliverance and redemption of us from so great
danger and misery. Give us grace to believe thy words, to abide thy counsels,
to walk in thy Laws, to relinquish our own sinful and vain desires, to obey
our Governors Ecclesiastical and Civil, that we may not have the lot of
Dathan and Abiram, but at last may receive our portion in the felicity of thy
chosen, giving thee thanks with thine inheritance, for that thou have turned
from us thy wrathful indignation, pitying us, and saving us according to the
multitude of thy mercies. Thy Name be blessed, O Lord God, everlastingly, and
world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 107.
A thanksgiving for deliverance from miseries and dangers.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

2 Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed: and delivered from the
hand of the enemy.

3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West: from
the North, and from the South.

4 They went astray in the wilderness out of the way: and found no city to
dwell in.

5 Hungry and thirsty: their soul fainted in them.

6 So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered them from
their distress.

7 He led them forth by the right way: that they might go to the city where
they dwelt.

8 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

9 For he satisfies the empty soul: and fills the hungry soul with goodness.

10 Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death: being fast bound in
misery and iron.

11 Because they rebelled against the word of the Lord: and lightly regarded
the counsel of the most High.

12 He also brought down their heart through heaviness: they fell down, and
there was none to help them up.

13 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

14 For he brought them out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death: and
brake their bonds in sunder.

15 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

16 For he has broken the gates of brass: and smitten the bars of iron in
sunder.

17 Foolish men are plagued for their offense: and because of their wickedness.

18 Their soul abhorred all manner of meat: and they were even hard at deaths
door.

19 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

20 He sent his word and healed them: and they were saved from their
destruction.

21 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

22 That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and tell out
his works with gladness.

23 They that go down to the sea in ships: and occupy their business in great
waters.

24 These men see the works of the Lord: and his wonders in the deep.

25 For at his word the stormy wind arises: which lifts up the waves
thereof.

26 They are carried up to the heaven, and down again to the deep: their soul
melts away because of the trouble.

27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wits
end.

28 So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he deliv^reth them out of
their distress.

29 For he makes the storm to cease: so that the waves thereof are still.

30 Then are they glad, because they be at rest: and so he bri^geth them unto
the haven where they would be.

31 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

32 That they would exalt him also in the congregation of the people: and
praise him in the seat of the elders.

33 Which turns the floods into a wilderness: and dries up the water
springs.

34 A fruitful land makes he barren: for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

35 Again he makes the wilderness a standing water: and water springs of a
dry ground.

36 And th^re he sets the hungry: that they may build them a City to dwell
in.

37 That they may sow their land, and plant vineyards: to yield them fruits of
increase.

38 He blesses them, so that they multiply exceedingly: and suffers not
their cattle to decrease.

39 And again, when they are minished and brought low: through oppression,
through any plague or trouble.

40 Though he suffer them to be evil entreated through tyrants: and let them
wander out of the way in the wilderness.

41 Yet helps he the poor out of misery: and makes him households like a
flock of sheep.

42 The righteous will consider this, and rejoice: and the mouth of all
wickedness shall be stopped.

43 Who so is wise will ponder these things: and they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, gracious and good, whose mercy endures for ever, have mercy upon
us when in our trouble we cry unto thee; for when our hearts are brought down
through heaviness there is none to help us up, or to deliver us out of our
distress, but only thou, o Lord. We have sinned, we have rebelled against thee,
and lightly regarded thy counsels, we have walked and sat in darkness and in
the shadows of death, being fast bound in the captivity and misery of sin. O
bring us out of darkness, and break our bonds asunder; guide us through the
desert of this world, in which grows nothing but sadness and discontent; still
the tempests, and smooth the floods of misery which are ready to overwhelm us,
and in thy due time bring us to eternal rest, and to the haven where we would
fain be, that in the congregation of thy holy people, we may praise thee for
thy goodness, and declare the wonders thou have done for us in delivering us
from sin and misery, and death, and bringing us to a City to dwell in, where
there is life, and light, and joy eternal in the beholding the face of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 108.
A Prayer for victory against our Enemies.
O God, my heart is ready, (my heart is ready) I will sing and give praise with
the best member I have.

2 Awake thou lute and harp: I my self will awake right early.

3 I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing praises
unto thee among the nations.

4 For thy mercy is greater then the heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.

5 Set up thy self (O God) above the heavens: and thy glory above all the
earth.

6 That thy beloved may be delivered: let thy right hand save them, and hear
thou me.

7 God has spoken in his holiness: I will rejoice therefore, and divide
Sichem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

8 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head.

9 Juda is my lawgiver, Moab is my washpot: over Ed^m will I cast out my
shoe, upon the Philistines will I triumph.

10 Who will lead me into the strong city: and who will bring me into Edom?

11 Have not thou forsaken us, O God: and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with
our hosts?

12 O help us against the enemy: for vain is the help of man.

13 Through God we shall do great acts: and it is he that shall tread down our
enemies.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, whose mercy is greater then the Heavens, and thy glory is above
all the earth, be thou exalted in thine own strength, and magnify thy power
and thy mercy in defending us, and all thy holy Church, against all our enemies
temporal and spiritual. Forsake us not O God our defense, for vain is the
help of man, do thou strengthen us and go forth with our hosts to battle, that
we being defended and armed by thee, may do acts great and good, fighting thy
battles, and putting our confidence in thy righteousness only, and salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 109.
A Prayer against Gods enemies, and especially Traitors, prophetically intended
against the person of Judas.
HOld not thy tongue, O God of my praise: for the mouth of the ungodly, yea,
and the mouth of the dec^itfull is opened upon me.

2 And they have spoken against me with false tongues: they compassed me about
also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause.

3 For the love that I had unto them, lo, they take now my contrary part: but I
give my self unto prayer.

4 Thus have they rewarded me evil for good: and hatred for my good will.

5 Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler over him: and let Satan stand at his
right hand.

6 When sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned: and let his prayer be
turned into sin.

7 Let his days be few: and let another take his office.

8 Let his children be fatherless: and his wife a widow.

9 Let his children be vagabonds, and beg their bread: let them seek it also
out of desolate places.

10 Let the extortioner consume all that he has: and let the stranger spoil
his labor.

11 Let there be no man to pity him: nor to have compassion upon his
fatherl^sse children.

12 Let his posterity be destroyed: and in the next generation let his name be
clean put out.

13 Let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of
the Lord: and let not the sin of his mother be done away.

14 Let them always be before the Lord: that he may root out the memorial of
them from off the earth.

15 And that because his mind was not to do good: but persecuted the poor
helpless man, that he might slay him that was vexed at the heart.

16 His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him: he loved not
blessing, therefore shall it be far from him.

17 He clothed himself with cursing like as with a raiment: and it shall come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

18 Let it be unto him as the cloak that he has upon him: and as the girdle
that he is always girded withal.

19 Let it thus happen from the Lord unto mine enemies: and to those that speak
evil against my soul.

20 But deal thou with me (O Lord God) according unto thy name: for sweet is
thy mercy.

21 O deliver me, for I am helpless and poor: and my heart is wounded within
me.

22 I go hence like the shadow that departs: and am driven away as the
grasshopper.

23 My knees are weak through fasting: my flesh is dried up for want of
fatness.

24 I became also a rebuke unto them: they that looked upon me shaked their
heads.

25 Help me (O Lord my God:) Oh save me according to thy mercy.

26 And they shall know how that this is thy hand: and that thou Lord have done
it.

27 Though they curse, yet bless thou: and let them be confounded that rise up
against me, but let thy servant rejoice.

28 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion, as with a cloak.

29 As for me, I will give great thanks unto the Lord with my mouth: and praise
him among the multitude.

30 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save his soul from
unrighteous judges.

The Prayer.
O God of our praise, who wast contented that thy Son Jesus Christ should be
betrayed into the hands of sinners by one of his own Apostles, the Traitor
Judas, and in punishment of so great impiety did suffer Satan to stand at his
right hand tempting him to despair, and to give sentence upon himself to
condemn himself, and to execute his own judgment, and gave his Bishopric
to another: let thy righteous judgments find out all those that are Traitors
to their Prince, enemies to the Church, Apostates from Religion, Hypocrites
under specious pretenses, and beauteous titles; that they may be clothed with
shame, and may cover themselves with their own confusion as with a cloak; that
by thy punishments in this life, they may be driven to a sharp and salutary
repentance, and may be saved in the life to come. Deal thou with us, O Lord,
according to thy mercy, take away thy curse, and let not thy blessing be far
from us; let not our wickedness, nor the wickedness of our fathers be had in
remembrance in thy sight, let our minds be always to do good, and our hearts and
lips be given unto prayer, and our prayers so guided by thy assistances, that
they be not turned into sin; that when we go hence like the shadow that
departs, and are driven away like the grasshopper, when the days of our vanity
and rejoicing are past, we may stand at thy right hand, and our souls be saved
from the lot and portion of the unrighteous, through the righteousness and
passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 110.
A Hymn in the honor of Christ's Kingdom, and Priesthood, and exaltation.
THe Lord said unto my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion: be thou ruler even in
the midst among thine enemies.

3 In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee free-will-offerings with
an holy worship: the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning.

4 The Lord swear and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedek.

5 The Lord upon thy right hand: shall wound even kings in the day of his wrath.

6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies: and smite in sunder the heads over diverse countries.

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up his head.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who when thy Son had drank of
the brook in the way to the grave and to our redemption, (beginning his passion
by the brook Cedron, and tasting the waters of bitterness till he had drunk
off the whole chalice of thy wrath upon the Cross) did lift up his head, and
set him at thy right hand till thou shall make all his enemies his footstool:
fill our hearts with his love and praises, that we may pay him the offerings of
our souls and bodies in an holy worship, and joyful thanksgiving for all the
parts and mysteries of our redemption, for his birth in the womb of his holy
Mother, pure and virginal, like the morning dew, for his Death and Passion,
and for his continual mediation and intercession by which he does officiate in
his eternal Priesthood, which is after the order of Melchisedek. Remember us,
blessed Jesu, in the Day of thy power, when thou shall come to judge the world,
and the places filled with dead bodies shall give up their dead, that we may
sit at thy right hand to magnify and behold the glories of thy Kingdom for
ever and ever. Amen.

PSALM 111.
An Eucharisticall Hymn for the benefits of the holy Gospel, particularly of
the blessed Sacrament.
I Will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart: secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation.

2 The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

3 His work is worthy to be praised and had in honor: and his righteousness
endures for ever.

4 The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works: that they
ought to be had in remembrance.

5 He has given meat unto them that fear him: he shall ever be mind^ull of his
coven^n^.

6 He has showed his people the power of his works: that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen.

7 The works of his hands are verity and judgment: all his commandments are
true.

8 They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and equity.

9 He sent redemption unto his people: he has commanded his covenant for ever,
holy and reverend is his Name.

10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have
all they that do thereafter, the praise of it endures for ever.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, whose righteousness endures for ever, thy work is worthy to
be praised and had in honor, for that thou have been merciful and gracious to
us, and have given meat, even the food of the blessed Sacrament unto them that
fear thee, that by participation of thy holy Communion we should have thee in
remembrance, and ever be mindful of thy covenant: plant thy fear in our
hearts, give us wisdom and good understanding, and make us to have pleasure in
thee, and all thy works, that we obeying the precepts of thy holy Gospel, and
performing the conditions of thy covenant, which thou have established for ever
in truth and equity, in verity and judgment, we may worthily praise and adore
thy reverend and holy Name among the faithful in this life, and in the great
congregation of saints in the life to come, through thy mercies, O blessed
Jesu, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory now
and for ever. Amen.

PSALM 112.
A Prayer for the fear of the Lord, for charity, and the blessings of the
righteous.
BLessed is the man that fears the Lord: he has great delight in his
commandments.

2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the faithful shall
be blessed.

3 Riches and plenteousnesse shall be in his house: and his righteousness
endures for ever.

4 Unto the godly there arises up light in the darkness: he is merciful,
loving, and righteous.

5 A good man is merciful, and lends: and will guide his words with
discretion.

6 For he shall never be moved: and the righteous shall be had in an
everlasting remembrance.

7 He will not be afraid for any evil tidings: for his heart stands fast,
and believes in the Lord.

8 His heart is stablished and will not shrink: until he see his desire upon
his enemies.

9 He has dispersed abroad and given to the poor: and his righteousness
remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.

10 The ungodly shall see it, and it shall grieve him: he shall gnash with his
teeth, and consume away, the desire of the ungodly shall perish.

The Prayer.
O Lord God who art to be feared in the generations of the world, teach us the
fear of thy Name, that we may fear to offend thee, and that delighting in thy
Commandments, we may serve thee without fear of our enemies in holiness and
righteousness all our days. Let thy light rise upon the darkness of our
understandings; let thy mercies and gentleness cure all thoughts of
unmercifulness in us, and make us charitable, of tender bowels, yearning with
pity over the needs of the poor. Teach us to guide our words with discretion,
make us never to be moved from our purposes of holy living, stablish our hearts
in thy love, that in the day of restitution of all things, thou may give us
the portion of the charitable, the rewards of thy right hand, and when the
wicked shall gnash with their teeth, and consume away in a sad eternity, we may
be satisfied with the riches and plenteousnesse of thy house for ever, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 113.
A thanksgiving to God for his acts of providence, and particular care over the
poor and humble.
PRaise the Lord (ye servants:) O praise the Name of the Lord.

2 Blessed be the name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

3 The Lords name is praised: from the rising up of the sun, unto the going
down of the same.

4 The Lord is high above all heathen: and his glory above the heavens.

5 Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling so high: and yet
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth?

6 He takes up the simple out of the dust: and lifts the poor out of the
mire.

7 That he may set him with the princes: even with the princes of his people.

8 He makes the barren woman to keep house: and to be a joyful mother of
children.

The Prayer.
O Lord God whose dwelling is on high, and yet thou humblest thy self to behold
the things that are in Heaven and earth, have mercy upon us thy humble
servants, and lift us up from the gates of death, take us out of the mire that
we sink not into the bottomless pit of misery and infelicity, and when for our
sins thou humblest us as low as the dust, let thy mercy exalt us and restore
us to the light of thy countenance, and the joy of thy salvation; that when
thou shall call all the world to judgment from the rising of the Sun to the
going down thereof, we may be set with the Princes of thy people, with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in thine eternal Kingdom, to sing praises to thy Name from
this time forth for evermore. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 114.
A thanksgiving to God for the deliverance of his people from bondage and
misery.
WHen Israel came out of Egypt: and the house of Jacob from among the strange
people.

2 Juda was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion.

3 The sea saw that and fled: Jordan was driven back.

3 The mountains skipped like rams: and the little hills like young sheep.

5 What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest: and thou Jordan, that thou
wast driven back?

6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hills like young
sheep?

7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God
of Jacob.

8 Which turned the hard rock into a standing w^ter: and the flint stone into a
springing well.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, at whose presence the earth trembles, who workest salvation and
deliverance for thy Church in all ages, and did deliver thy people from the
bondage of Egypt with a mighty hand, and an arm stretched out in miraculous
effects, deliver us from the bondage of sin, from the tyranny of the devil,
from the Empire and Dominion of the flesh, that our bodies and souls being
mortified, our flesh brought under subjection of the spirit, our appetites made
subordinate to reason, and our souls wholly conformable to thy will, our hard
stony hearts may be converted into hearts of flesh, and into a springing well
bringing forth the waters of repentance, and fruits springing up to life
eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 115.
A Prayer against idolatry, and for confidence in the true God.
NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise: for thy
loving mercy, and for thy truths sake.

2 Wherefore shall the heathen say: Where is now their God?

3 As for our God, he is in heaven: he has done whatsoever pleased him.

4 Their idols are silver and gold: even the work of men's hands.

5 They have mouths and speak not: eyes have they and see not.

6 They have ears and hear not: noses have they and smell not.

7 They have hands and handle not, feet have they and walk not: neither speak
they through their throat.

8 They that make them are like unto them: and so are all such as put their
trust in them.

9 But thou house of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their succor and
defense.

10 Ye house of Aaron, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and
defender.

11 Ye that fear the Lord, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and
defender.

12 The Lord has been mindful of us, and he shall bless us: even he shall
bless the house of Israel, he shall bless the house of Aaron.

13 He shall bless them that fear the Lord: both small and great.

14 The Lord shall increase you more and more: you and your children.

15 Ye are the blessed of the Lord: which made heaven and earth.

16 All the whole heavens are the Lords: the earth has he given to the
children of men.

17 The dead praise not thee, O Lord: neither all they that go down into the
silence.

18 But we will praise the Lord: from this time forth for evermore. Praise the
Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God omnipotent, whose seat is in Heaven, and thou have done whatsoever
pleased thee in Heaven and earth, give us thy grace, that in all our troubles
we may make thee our Succor and Defense, and put our trust in thee only, that
we receiving thy mercies and the satisfaction of all our hopes from thy
plenteousnesse and loving kindness, we may give praise unto thy Name, never
ascribing to our selves any honor, or the glory and thanks of any good action
or prosperous success, but to thee who art the Author and Giver of all good
things. Preserve us from all dangers of idolatry, from worshipping or loving
any vain imaginations, and making any thing to be our confidence besides thee
our God, that so thou may be mindful of us, and bless us in all our ways,
and when we die and go down into the silence, we may have our portion amongst
the blessed of the Lord, in the inheritance of thy Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 116.
An act of love and thanksgiving to God, for deliverance from sin and death.
I Am well pleased: that the Lord has heard the voice of my prayer.

2 That he has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

4 The snares of death compassed me round about: and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me.

4 I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I shall call upon the name of the
Lord: O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul.

5 Gracious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.

6 The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me.

7 Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has rewarded thee.

8 Any why? thou have delivered my soul from death: mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

9 I will walk before the Lord: in the land of the living.

10 I believed, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in
my haste, All men are liars.

11 What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefits that he has
done unto me?

12 I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the name of the Lord.

13 I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

14 Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the son
of thine handmaid, thou have broken my bonds in sunder.

I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and will call upon the
name of the Lord.

16 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the sight of all his people: in the
courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the
Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of eternal mercies, Gracious and Righteous, give unto us hearts
filled with love and praises to thy holy Name; for thou hear our prayers,
thou breakest asunder the bonds of our sins, thou deliverest our souls from
trouble and heaviness, and snatchest us from the snares of death, and savest
us from the pains of hell. O merciful God, let our souls rest in thee, and be
satisfied in the pleasures of thy mercy, that we may receive the cup of
blessing and salvation, and celebrate the Eucharist in honor of thy name, and
in remembrance of thy infinite benefits which thou have done unto us, and at
last may pay our great Allelujah to the Lord in the courts of the Lords house,
in the midst of the celestial Jerusalem, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 117.
An invitation to all people to praise Gods mercy and truth.
O Praise the Lord all yea heathen: praise him all ye Nations.

2 For his merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us: and the truth
of the Lord endures for ever. Praise the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu who art not only the glory of thy people Israel, but the light
of the Gentiles, let thy merciful kindness be ever more and more toward the
sons of men, that the nations which have not known thee may ^ear thy truth, and
feel thy mercies, and call upon thy Name, and thy grace may be confirmed upon
us, till we receive the fullness and perfection of thy graces in the full
fruition of the glories of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 118.
A Psalm of thanksgiving for the mercies and salvation which are given us in
Jesus Christ.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: because his mercy endures
forever.

2 Let Israel now confess that he is gracious: and that his mercy endures for
ever.

3 Let the house of Aaron now confess: that his mercy endures for ever.

4 Yea, let them now that fear the Lords confess: that his mercy endures for
ever.

5 I called upon the Lord in trouble: and the Lord heard me at large.

6 The Lord is on my side: I will not fear what man does unto me.

7 The Lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon mine enemies.

8 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in man.

9 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in Princes.

10 All nations compassed me round about: but in the name of the Lord will I
destroy them.

11 They kept me in on every side, they kept me in (I say) on every side: but
in the name of the Lord will I destroy them.

12 They came about me like bees, and are extinct even as the fire among the
thorns: for in the name of the Lord will I destroy them.

Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Lord was my help.

14 The Lord is my strength and my song: and is become my salvation.

15 The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous: the right
hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass.

16 The right hand of the Lord has the preeminence: the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass.

17 I will not die, but live: and declare the works of the Lord.

18 The Lord has chastened and corrected me: but he has not given me over
unto death.

19 Open me the gates of righteousness: that I may go into them, and give
th^nks unto the Lord.

20 This is the ga^e of the Lord: the righteous shall enter into it.

21 I will thank thee for thou have heard me: and art become my salvation.

22 The same stone which the builders refused: is become the head stone in the
corner.

23 This is the Lords doing: and it is mavelous in our eyes.

24 This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it.

25 Help me now, O Lord: O Lord send us now prosperity.

26 Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord: we have wished you good
luck, ye that be of the house of the Lord.

27 God is the Lord which has showed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords,
yea, even unto the horns of the altar.

28 Thou art my God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise
thee.

29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

The Prayer.
O Most gracious Lord, our strength and our song, thou art become our
salvation, and thy mercy endures for ever, be thou on our side, take part with
them that help us, let the voice of joy and health be within our dwellings, and
when thou chastenest and correctest us for our sins, give us not over unto
death, but fix our faith and hopes upon the head stone in the corner, even our
Lord Jesus Christ, that in all the assaults made against us by our ghostly
enemies, the right hand of the Lord may have the preeminence, and bring mighty
things to pass, even victory and deliverance unto thy servants, that we
putting no confidence in the best of men, may trust in thee, O Lord, till at
last, when thou openest the everlasting gates of righteousness, we may enter
in and give thee thanks and praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 119.
A Prayer for Religion, zeal, love of the law of God, and meditation in it.
BL^ssed are those that are undefiled in the way: and walk in the Law of the
Lord.

2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies: and seek him with their whole
heart.

3 For they which do no wickedness: walk in his ways.

4 Thou have charged: that we shall diligently keep thy commandments.

5 O that my ways were made so direct: that I might keep thy statutes!

6 So shall I not be confounded: while I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

7 I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart: when I shall have learned the
judgments of thy righteousness.

8 I will keep thy ceremonies: O forsake me not utterly.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Lord God, whose words are light and life to the obedient and
believing soul, let thy grace so purify our hearts and actions, that we may be
undefiled in thy way, keeping thy testimonies and seeking thee with our whole
heart; that our ways being made direct without wandering into bypath, we may
go into our country, the land of eternal and glorious promises, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way: even by ruling himself after
thy word.

2 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments.

3 Thy words have I hid within my heart: that I should not sin against thee.

4 Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

5 With my lips have I been telling: of all the judgments of thy mouth.

6 I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies: as in all manner
of riches.

7 I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect ^^to thy ways.

8 My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy word.

The Prayer.
GRant, O Lord, that our affections and endeavors be not divided between thee
and the world, but that we may seek thee with our whole heart, cleansing our
ways from all impurity, giving to thy service our youth, and more perfect age,
even all our days, and all our powers, taking more delight in the way of thy
testimonies then in all manner of riches and fading pleasures; that we
delighting in thee, and the ways that lead to thee, may be beloved of thee with
an eternal love, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III.
O Do well unto thy servant that I may live: and keep thy word.

2 Open thou mine eyes: that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.

3 I am a stranger upon earth: O hide not thy commandments from me.

4 My soul breaks out for the very fervent desire: that it has always unto
thy judgments.

5 Thou have rebuked the proud: and cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments.

6 O turn from me shame and rebuke: for I have kept thy testimonies.

7 P^inces did also sit and speak against me: but thy ser^ant is occupied in
thy statutes.

8 For thy testimonies are my delight: and my counselors.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, our Father and our Guardian, we are strangers upon the earth,
far removed from our country, and we are in darkness and walk in the shadow
of death, let not this darkness seize upon our souls, hide not thy
commandments from us, but open our eyes with the light of thy holy Spirit,
that we may see the wondrous things of thy law, and admire thy glories, and
adore thy might, and obey all thy righteous precepts: and although our hearts
be already enkindled with the love of thy law, yet make our desires to serve
thee more fervent, that our lukewarmnesse may arise up to the flames and ardors
of a Cherubim, that while we are busied in thy statutes, making them our
delight and our counselors, shame and rebuke may always be turned from us, and
we ever rejoice with hope and confidence in thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

IV.
MY soul cleaves to the dust: O quicken thou me according to thy word.

2 I have knowledged my ways, and thou heardest me: O teach me thy statutes.

3 Make me to understand the way of thy commandments: and so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

4 My soul melts away for very heaviness: comfort thou me according unto thy
word.

5 Take from me the way of lying: and cause thou me to make much of thy law.

6 I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid before me.

7 I have sticken unto thy testimonies: O Lord confound me not.

8 I will run the way of thy commandments: when thou have set my heart at
liberty.

The Prayer.
WE have chosen the way of thy truth, O Lord, and laid thy judgments before
us, and yet through our infirmities, and the disadvantages of the flesh, we are
in heaviness, and drive on slowly like Pharaoh's chariots with the wheels off;
our souls and our desires cleave unto the dust, and to things below, and we are
not active in thy services: O quicken us according to thy word, refresh our
weariness, comfort our sadness, take from us the way of lying and vanity, set
our hearts at liberty from the bondage of sin, from the fetters of temptation,
form the encumbrances of the world, and then we shall run the way of thy
^ommandments, never ceasing to run till we arrive at the land of eternal rest
and righteousness, where thou live and reignest, world without end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
V.
TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the end.

2 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: yea, I shall keep it with
my whole heart.

3 Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein is my desire.

4 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.

5 O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in thy
way.

6 O stablish thy word in thy servant: that I may fear thee.

7 Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgments are good.

8 Behold, my delight is in thy commandments: O quicken me in thy
righteousness.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who art of infinite Sanctity, and have given us thy Law, that we
walking in so divine a rule, may imitate the perfection of thy holiness, make
us to go all our days in the path of thy Commandments: take from us all greedy
and inordinate appetite of the creature, let not our hearts be incli^^d to
covetousness, nor our eyes wander after vanity, but grant, that we being
establis^ed in thy Law, and walking in thy fear, may persevere in the ways of
righteousness, keeping the way of thy Statutes even unto the end* that the
rebuke which for our sins we may justly fear, may by thy mercies and pardon be
taken away from us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VI.
LEt thy loving mercy also come unto me, O Lord* even thy salvation, according
unto thy word.

2 So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word.

3 O take not the word of thy truth utterly out of m^ mouth: for my hope is in
thy judgments.

4 So shall I always keep thy law: yea, for ever and ever.

5 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy commandments.

6 I will speak of thy testimonies also, even before kings: and will not be
ashamed.

7 And my delight shall be in thy commandments: which I have loved.

8 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments* which I have loved: and
my study shall be in thy Statute^.

The Prayer.
LEt thy loving mercy come unto us, O Lord, and thy salvation, for thou always
keep promise, and never disappointest the hopes of them that trust in thee.
Give us confidence and boldness in thee, that we may never fear or blush to
confess thee before men, but may speak of thy testimonies even before Kings,
and may never be ashamed of thy Word, which is the ground of our hope, but that
our hands may be lift up to perform thy Law, and our study, our love, and our
delight may be in it, even for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

VII.
O Think upon thy servant, as concerning thy word: wherein thou have caused me
to put my trust.

2 The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy word has quickened me.

3 The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not shrinked from
thy law.

4 For I remembered thine everlasting judgments, O Lord: and received comfort.

5 I am horribly afraid: for the ungodly that forsake thy law.

6 Thy Statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage.

7 I have thought upon thy name, O Lord, in the night season: and have kept thy
law.

8 This I had: because I kept thy commandments.

The Prayer.
THink upon us, O Lord, in all our desires, in all our fears, in all our
troubles; let thy Law give us comfort, redress, and satisfaction; that in our
trouble we may thence derive comfort, in our fears we may there fix our anchor
of hope, and from thence we may get defense against the derisions and
insolences of the proud; and grant that thy grace may reward thy grace in us,
and a further degree of sanctity may crown the first beginnings; and when by
thy assistances we think upon thy Name, and keep thy Law, we beg this only,
that our reward may be still to keep thy Commandments. Grant this for Jesus
Christ his sake, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

VIII.
THou art my portion, O Lord: I have promised to keep thy law.

2 I made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be
merciful unto me according to thy word.

3 I called mine own ways to remembrance: and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies.

4 I made haste, and prolonged not the time: to keep thy commandments.

5 The congregation of the ungodly have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy
law.

6 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

7 I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and keep thy commandments.

8 The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy Statutes.

The Prayer.
O Dear God, be thou our portion and the lot of our inheritance, and be
merciful unto us when ever we make our humble petition in thy presence, and
above all the desires of our souls let us receive satisfaction in this request:
give us repentance and thy holy Spirit, that we calling our own ways to
remembrance, may be truly sorrowful for our past sins, and may make haste,
prolonging not the time, but early and instantly turn our feet unto thy
testimonies, that we being companions of all that fear thee, may be partakers
of all the blessings in the communion of Saints, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

IX.
O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy servant: according unto thy word.

2 O learn me true understanding and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.

3 Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now have I kept thy word.

4 Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy statutes.

5 The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy commandments
with my whole heart.

6 Their heart is as fat as brawn: but my delight has been in thy law.

7 It is good for me that I have been in trouble: that I may learn thy Statutes.

8 The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me: then thousands of gold and silver.

The Prayer.
THou, O Lord, art gracious even in the execution of thy judgments and
displeasure against sinners, and thou sendest chastisement and correction to us
when we go wrong, that thou may chide us into obedience, and the blessings
of eternity: let not idleness and sensuality make us remiss in our duty, nor
our own vanity and the sense of thy favor make us proud, nor the want of holy
discipline make us impudent and refractory, but let thy mercies and judgments
learn us thy statutes, and make them dearer to us then thousands of gold and
silver, that while we make thy statutes to be our treasure, our heart may be
fixed on them in a continual meditation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
X.
THy hands have made me and fashioned me: O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments.

2 They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have put my
trust in thy word.

3 I know (O Lord) that thy judgments are right: and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

4 O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort: according to thy word unto thy
servant.

5 O let thy loving mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.

6 Let the proud be confounded, for they go wickedly about to destroy me: but I
will be occupied in thy commandments.

7 Let such as fear thee, and have known thy testimonies: be turned unto me.

8 O let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.

The Prayer.
O Lord our Maker, thy hands have made us and fashioned us, let thy holy Spirit
regenerate us, and thy grace form us anew, that the old man being destroyed,
the new man may be produced in righteousness and sanctity; that our hearts may
be sound in thy statutes without hypocrisy, and inordinate ends, full of candor
and ingenuity; that thy loving mercies coming unto us in a full stream, we may
live in them, and be turned unto thee, never to be removed from thy law and
love. Grant this for the love of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

XI.
MY soul has longed for thy salvation: and I have a good hope because of thy
word.

2 Mine eyes long sore for thy word: saying, O when will thou comfort me?

3 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes.

4 How many are the days of thy servant: when will thou be avenged of them
that persecute me?

5 The proud have dug pits for me: which are not after thy law.

6 All thy commandments are true: they persecute me falsely, O be thou may help.

7 They had almost made an end of me upon earth: but I forsook not thy
commandments.

8 O quicken me after thy loving kindness: and so shall I keep the testimonies
of thy mouth.

The Prayer.
O Lord our helper, teach us to remember our end, to consider our years that
are past, that we in consideration how few the days of thy servants are which
are yet to come, may quicken our industry and affections to thy law, that by a
double and more active endeavor in the ways of thy Commandments, we may redeem
the time, and by thy mercy being delivered from all them that trouble and
persecute us, we may be refreshed in thy eternal comforts, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

XII.
O Lord, thy word endures for ever in heaven.

2 Thy truth also remains from one generation to another: thou have laid the
foundation of the earth, and it abides.

3 They continue this day according to thine ordinance: for all things serve
thee.

4 If my delight had not been in thy law: I should have perished in my trouble.

5 I will never forget thy commandments: for with them thou have quickened me.

6 I am thine, oh save me: for I have sought thy commandments.

7 The ungodly laid wait for me, to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.

8 I see that all things come to an end: but thy commandment is exceeding broad.

The Prayer.
O Lord our Guide, thou have laid the Foundation of the earth sure, and it
abides, but thy Word endures for ever in Heaven, and though Heaven and earth
shall pass away, yet one title of thy Word shall never pass in vain and
unaccomplished; teach us to obey thee with a regular obedience, that since all
the creatures continue according to thine ordinance and serve thee, we only may
not disobey thee and disturb the order of Creation by a rebellion of creatures
against their Maker, lest thy wrath arise upon us, and we perish in our
trouble. Have mercy upon us, and deliver us from thy wrath, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

XIII.
LOrd, what love have I unto thy Law: all the day long is my study in it.

2 Thou through thy commandments have made m^ wiser then mine enemies: for
they are ever with me.

3 I have more understanding then my teachers: for thy ^estimonies are my study.

4 I am wiser then the aged: because I keep thy commandments.

5 I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word.

6 I have not shrunk from thy judgments: for thou teach me.

7 O how sweet are thy words unto my throat: yea sweeter then honey unto my
mouth.

8 Through thy commandments I get understanding: therefore I hate all wicked
ways.

The Prayer.
O Lord our Governor, who art the Fountain of all wisdom and understanding, and
have commanded that all that lack wisdom should ask it of thee who give
liberally; make us wise and understanding in the observation of thy
Co^mandments, that we may refrain our feet from every evil way, and never
shrink from thy judgments, but may delight and study in all the expresses of
thy will which thou have revealed to us by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Morning Prayer.
XIV.
THy word is a lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths.

2 I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed: to keep thy righteous judgments.

3 I am troubled above measure: quicken me (O Lord) according to thy word.

5 Let the free will offerings of my mouth please thee, O Lord: and teach me
thy judgments.

5 My soul is always in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.

6 The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swerved not from thy
commandments.

7 Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are
the very joy of my heart.

8 I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always: even unto the end.

The Prayer.
O Sun of righteousness, that came to bring light unto the world by thy
word, and example, and illumination of thy holy Spirit; let thy Spirit lead us,
thy example guide us, thy word teach us, that we may not love darkness more
then light, but may keep thy righteous judgments according to our many purposes
and our vow of baptism: keep us from the snare of the ungodly, and from our
own selves, the dangers of our own concupiscence, and the miseries of our
infirmity; leave not our souls in our own hands, but keep them under thy
protection and government, lest we swerve from thy commandments, but that
applying our hearts always to fulfill thy statutes even unto the end, we may
possess thy law as our portion and inheritance for ever. Grant this, O blessed
Jesu, for thy promise and for thy mercies sake, that we may glorify thee in
the unity of the most mysterious Trinity now and for evermore. Amen.

XV.
I Hate them that imagine evil things: but thy law do I love.

2 Thou art my defense and shield: and my trust is in ^hy word.

3 Away from me ye wicked: I will keep the commandments of my God.

4 O stablish me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
disappointed of my hope.

5 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: yea, my delight shall be ever in thy
statutes.

6 Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for they
imagine but deceit.

7 Thou put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross: therefore I love
thy testimonies.

8 My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments.

The Prayer.
O God our defense and shield, thou that treadest down all them that depart
from thy law, and put away the ungodly of the earth like dross, let thy
mercies hold us up, that we may be safe from sin and death eternal: make us to
hate all evil things, all evil imaginations, that we being stablished with a
trust in thee? and building our expectations* upon thy mercies and promises, we
may not be disappointed of our hope, but may live with thee eternally, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XVI.
I Deal with the thing that is lawful and right: O give me not over unto mine
oppressors.

2 Make thou thy servant to delight in that which is good: that the proud do me
no wrong.

3 Mine eyes are wasted away with looking for thy health: and for the word of
thy righteousness.

4 O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy: and teach me thy
Statutes.

5 I am thy servant, O grant me understanding: that I may know thy testimonies.

6 It is time for thee, Lord, to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy
law.

7 For I love thy commandments: above gold and precious stone.

8 Therefore hold I straight all thy commandments: and all false ways I
utterly abhor.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou see with what miseries and dangers we are encompass^d, our
ghostly enemies seek to do us wrong, and to oppress our souls; give us not
over unto their malice, but arm us against their pride and insolency by faith
in thy word, by hope of thy mercies, and looking for thy health, and by love
unto thy commandments, that so in this world, and in the eternal retribution
of the Saints, thou may deal with thy servants according to thy loving mercy.
Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

XVII.
THy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.

2 When thy word goes forth: it gives light and understanding unto the simple.

3 I opened my mouth and drew in my breath: for my ^elight was in thy
commandments.

4 O look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as ^hou usest to do unto
those that love thy name.

5 Order my steps in thy word: and so shall no wicked^esse have dominion over.

6 O deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men: and so shall I keep thy
commandments.

7 Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy
statutes.

8 Mine eles gush out with water: because men keep not thy law.

The Prayer.
O Just and dear God, show the light of thy countenance upon thy servants, and
let this light give unto us understanding in thy law, that our steps being
ordered in thy word, thou may deliver us from the wrongful dealings of men,
and from the malicious enmities of our Ghostly adversaries, that by their
temptations, and our own weakness, we may never be brought under the dominion
of sin and wickedness, that when thy word goes forth to call to judgment all
people, quick and dead, thou may be merciful unto us, and save us, as thou
usest to do unto those that love thy name. Grant this for the merits and
mercies of our dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

XVIII.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord: and true is thy judgment.

2 The testimonies that thou have commanded: are exceeding righteous and true.

3 My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.

4 Thy word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loves it.

5 I am small, and of no reputation: yet do I not forget thy commandments.

6 Thy righteousness is an ev^rlasting righteousness: and thy law is the
truth.

7 Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me: yet is my delight in thy
commandments.

8 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: O grant me
understanding, and I shall live.

The Prayer.
O Righteous Lord God, whose judgments are true, and thy testimonies exceeding
righteous, enkindle our souls with zeal to thy Laws and service, that the
continual remembrance of thy Commandments may so enable our souls, as to give
a greatness and reputation to us in thy estimation, even the greatness of
humility and obedience, which are more honorable in thy eyes then all the
pomps and vanities of this world. Grant this for his sake, who for our sakes
humbled himself to the form of a servant, and became obedient to the death of
the Cross, even Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy
Spirit be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
XIX.
I Call with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy statutes.

2 Yea, even upon thee do I call: help me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

3 Early in the morning do I cry unto thee: for in thy word is my trust.

4 Mine eyes prevent the night-watches: that I might be occupied in thy words.

5 Hear my voice (O Lord) according unto thy loving kindness: quicken me
according as thou art wont.

6 They draw nigh that of malice persecute me: and are far from thy law.

7 Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true.

8 As concerning thy testimonies, I have known long since: that thou have
grounded them for ever.

The Prayer.
O Lord God of eternal mercy and truth, give us hearts fixed upon thy divine
beauties, and an actual intention in our prayers, that we may call upon thee
with our whole hearts, and do thou hear in heaven when we call upon thee:
deliver us from all them that of malice draw nigh to persecut^ and afflict us,
be thou also nigh at hand, and nothing can disturb our safety. Make us to seek
to thee early in the morning; let our eyes and our prayers prevent the
night-watches, that we may be safe in our conversation with thee, and our daily
approaches to thy Mercy-seat, where thou sit attended with Cherubims and
Seraphims, glorious in thy self, incomprehensible in thy Attributes, and
infinitely rejoicing in thy mercies which thou show unto us in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

XX.
O Consider mine adversity, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.

2 Avenge thou my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according unto thy word.

3 Health is far from the ungodly: for they regard not thy statutes.

4 Great is thy mercy, O Lord: quicken me as thou art wont.

5 Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me: yet do I not swerve from
thy testimonies.

6 It grieveth me when I see the transgressors: because they keep not thy law.

7 Consider, O Lord, how I love thy commandments: O quicken me according to
thy loving kindness.

8 Thy word is true from everlasting: all the judgments of thy righteousness
endure for evermore.

The Prayer.
O Lord thy mercy is great, thy Word is true from everlasting, and in the truth
of thy Word, and in the mercies of thy promises and loving kindness thou
love to be known to the sons of men; O give us thy health and salvation, that
our souls being delivered from the heavy pressure of sin, and quickened in thy
Word, thou may avenge us of all our ghostly enemies, and deliver us in thy
righteousness in the day of thy eternal vengeance upon the ungodly, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XXI.
PRinces have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in aw of thy
words.

2 I am as glad of thy word: as one that finds great spoils.

3 As for lies, I hate and abhor them: but thy law do I love.

4 Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.

5 Great is the peace that they have which love thy law: and they are not
offended at it.

6 Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy commandments.

7 My soul has kept thy testimonies: and loved them exceedingly.

8 I have kept thy commandments and testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

The Prayer.
ALL our ways (O God) are before thee; let all our ways be directed by thee,
and teach us to walk as in thy presence. Make us to hate and abhor lies and
vanity, and give us so much love, and so much zeal of thy Name and honor, that
we may make it a business to give thee praises with a frequent and daily
devotion, that we standing in awe of thy Word and holy Laws, and doing after
thy Commandments, our expectations may be satisfied with thy saving health,
and we may at last enjoy the peace which they have that love thy Law, even the
peace of a good conscience here, and of a blessed eternity hereafter, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XXII.
LEt my complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to
thy word.

2 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.

3 My lips shall speak of thy praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes.

4 Yea, my tongue shall sing of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteous.

5 Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy commandments.

6 I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy law is my delight.

7 O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help
me.

8 I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: Oh seek thy servant, for I do
not forget thy commandments.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, we have gone astray from thy Commandments, and been like lost
sheep, thou art our Shepherd and our merciful Guide; O seek thy servants, let
thy hand help us, let thy care and providence reduce us into the way of thy
statutes; that we being delivered according to thy Word from thy wrath, and
from our own corruptions and irregularities, may at last be satisfied with thy
saving health, and our lips may speak of thy praise in the quire of Saints and
Angels, singing glorious Anthems to all eternity, to the honor of thee, O Lord
God eternal, who live and reignest world without end. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 120.
A Prayer to be delivered from false tongues, and cohabitation with wicked
persons.
WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord: and he heard me.

2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips: and from a deceitful tongue.

3 What reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue: even mighty
and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals.

4 Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have my
habitation among the tents of Cedar.

5 My soul has long dwelt among them: that be enemies unto peace.

6 I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them ready
to battle.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who hear the prayers of them that call upon thee in their
calamities and distresses, have mercy upon us thy servants, who live in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, whereof we our selves make too
great a part; we beseech thee so to order the circumstances and opportunities
of our life, that we may live in the society of holy people, whose example and
conversation may be a continual incentive to the ways of peace and
righteousness; and deliver us from a necessity of conversing with turbulent
spirits, angry, and unpeacefull dispositions, who upon all occasions make
themselves ready to battle. Sanctify our hearts and lips with a burning coal
from thy altar, that our words may be holy and profitable, and keep us from all
slander and scandal, and the rewards of both, the sharp arrows of thy
vengeance, the hot burning coals of thy wrath. Grant this for Jesus Christ his
sake, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

PSALM 121.
A Prayer for Gods protection over us.
I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence comes my help.

2 My help comes even from the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee, will not
sleep.

4 Behold, he that keeps Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.

5 The Lord himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defense upon thy right hand.

6 So that the Sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon by night.

7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea, it is even he that shall
keep thy soul.

8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time
forth for evermore.

The Prayer.
O Lord God our keeper, who dwell upon the eternal hills from whence comes
all our help, let thy mercies and thy providence watch over us by day and
night, that neither the vanities of the one, nor the terrors of the other may
disturb our peace or safety. Let not our feet be moved, but be fixed upon the
Rock Christ Jesus, and so order our goings, making us to walk in the way of thy
Commandments, that thou may go in and out before us, till at last we come
into thy presence to dwell with thee for evermore, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

PSALM 122.
A Prayer for the peace and prosperity of the Church.
I Was glad when they said unto me: We will go into the house of the Lord.

2 Our feet shall stand in thy gates: O Jerusalem.

3 Jerusalem is builded as a city: that is at unity in i^ self.

4 For thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes of the Lord: to testify unto
Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

5 For there is the seat of judgment: even the seat of the house of David.

6 O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee*

7 Peace be within thy walls: and plenteousnesse within thy palaces.

8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I will wish thee prosperity.

9 Yea, because of the house of the Lord our God: I will seek to do thee good.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, who did descend according to thy humane Nature from the
house of thy servant David, and have planted a Church, and defended it with a
mighty hand and great assistances be pleased to preserve peace within her walls,
and send plenteousnesse within her palaces, that all that love her peace may
prosper, and receive the blessings which thou give to thy faithful people in
the communion of Saints. Take from her all schisms and divisions, that she may
be like a city that is at unity within it self, strong in faith, abounding in
hope, and rich in the treasures of charity, that at last she may be removed to
a fellowship of all those joys and felicities which are laid up for the
inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem which is from above, and is the mother of
us all. Grant this, O blessed Jesu, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

PSALM 123.
An ejaculation, or a lifting up our souls to God for help in trouble.
Unto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwell in the heavens.

2 Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters,
and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: even so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised.

4 Our soul is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy: and with the
despite fullness of the proud.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, that dwell in the heavens, have mercy upon us in all our
troubles, in contempt, in our poverty, and when ever we are oppressed by any
injurious practices of the proud. Thou art our Lord and Master, we are thy
servants, our eyes wait upon thee till thou have mercy upon us: let us not be
ashamed of our hope, nor unfaithful in our services, nor distrustful of thy
providence, but make us diligent laborers in our calling, good husbands of our
talents, and faithful in all thy house, that we first se^^ing thee may at last
sit down at meat with thee at thy table in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 124.
A thanksgiving for our deliverance from the power of all our enemies, and a
confessing God to be the Author of it.
IF the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Israel say:) if the Lord
himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us.

2 They had swallowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at
us.

3 Yea, the waters had drowned us: and the stream had gone over our soul.

4 The deep waters of the proud: had gone even over our soul.

5 But praised ^e the Lord: which has not given us over for a prey unto their
teeth.

6 Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the
snare is broken, and we are delivered.

7 Our help stands in the Name of the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, which have made Heaven and Earth, in whose Name our help stands,
we praise and bless thy Name, that in our troubles and temptations thou have
stood on our side, and pleaded for us against them that rose against us. It was
thy hand (O Lord) and the help of thy mercy that relieved us: the waters of
affliction had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul, if the Spirit
of the Lord had not moved upon the waters: Thou (O Lord) did blast the
designs of our enemies with the breath of thy displeasure, and to thee (O Lord)
we ascribe the praise and honor of our redemption. Perpetuate thy mercies to
us, let us never be given over as a prey to our ghostly enemies, but break
their snares, discover and weaken all their temptations by which they would
destroy our souls, that we being delivered from sin, may be preserved from thy
wrath, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 125.
A Prayer for confidence in God, and for deliverance from the portion of the
wicked.
THey that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the mount Sion: which
may not be removed, but stands fast for ever.

2 The hills stand about Jerusalem: ^ven so stands the Lord round about his
people, from this time forth for evermore.

3 For the rod of the ungodly comes not into the lot of the righteous: lest
the righteous put their hand unto wickedness.

4 Do well, O Lord: unto those that be good and true of heart.

5 As for such as turn back unto their own wickedness: the Lord shall lead
them forth with the evil doers, but peace shall be upon Israel.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, our Trust and Confidence, in whom whosoever trusts shall never
be removed, but stands fast for ever: let thy mercies and the guard of holy
Angels stand round about us, and about all thy holy people, like the hills for
our defense and safety, that we may be inaccessible by all the intendments of
our enemies. O let us not put our hands to wickedness, neither let our portion
be in the lot of the ungodly, whom thou leadest forth to destruction, but let
us receive the blessing which our Lord Jesus left unto his Church, even the
peace of God the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; to whom be all
honor and glory ascribed of men and Angels, now and for ever. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 126.
A contemplation of the joys and blessings of them that depart hence in the
Lord.
WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion: then were we like to them
that dream.

2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter: and our tongue with joy.

3 Then said they among the heathen: The Lord has done great things for them.

4 Yea, the Lord had done great things for us already: whereof we rejoice.

5 Turn thou our captivity, O Lord: as the rivers in the south.

6 They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy.

7 He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed: shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who have promised salvation to thy people, and have done great
things for us already, deliver us from the captivity and bondage of sin and
misery. Fill our hearts with holy sorrow and compunction when ever we trespass
against thee, and teach us so to deny our selves, to mortify our affections,
to crucify our lusts and all the temptations of the flesh, that we going on
our way with mourning and weeping, despising the pleasures of this life, may
when thy great harvest shall come, and thy reapers the Angels shall separate
the wheat from the tares, come before thee with joy, and bring our sheaves with
us to be laid up in thy granary, that so we may escape the everlasting burning,
through the mercies of Jesus Christ. Amen.

PSALM 127.
A Prayer for Gods blessing to go along with the temporal good things he
gives us.
EXcept the Lord build the house: their labor is but lost that build it.

2 Except the Lord keep the city: the watchman waketh but in vain.

3 It is but lost labor that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest,
and eat the bread of carfulness: for so he gives his beloved sleep.

4 Lo, children and the fruit of the womb: are an heritage and gift that
comes of the Lord.

5 Like as the arrows in the hand of the giant: even so are the young children.

6 Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not be
ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, without whose blessing all our labors are vain and unprofitable,
and our possessions are but bitter and unpleasant: let thy blessing be upon our
labors and our substance, our children, and our dwelling, that the good things
of this life may be an heritage and gift from thee, issues of thy favor, and
an earnest of a greater blessing: make our souls diligent in thy service, not
importunate and greedy for the increase of riches: let our dwellings be safe
and peaceable, and our families increase in thy blessings, that we feeling the
comforts of thy favor here, may be stirred up to great desires after the
blessings of eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 128.
A Prayer for the fear of God, and the blessings of the godly.
BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways.

2 For thou shall eat the labors of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy
shall thou be.

3 Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thine house.

4 Thy children like the olive-branches: round about thy table.

5 Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

6 The Lord from out of Sion shall so bless thee: that thou shall (...)
Jerusalem in prosperity all thy life long.

7 Yea, that thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who have promised to multiply thy blessings upon them that fear
thee; teach us the fear of the Lord, and let thy Spirit so assist us, that we
may walk in thy ways with great observation of all our actions, and much
diligence to perform thy holy will, that we may receive the blessings of the
righteous, blessings of the right hand, and of the left hand, and may rejoice
in the blessing and peace of thy Church, waiting for the consummation of all
blessing and peace in thy eternal Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

PSALM 129.
A Prayer against the enemies of the Church.
MAny a time have they fought against me from my youth up: (may Israel now say.)

2 Ye^, many a time have they vexed me from my youth up: but they have not
prevailed against me.

3 The plowers plowed upon my back: and made long furrows.

4 But the righteous Lord: has hewn the snares of the ungodly in pieces.

5 Let them be confounded and turned backward: as many as have evil will at
Sion.

6 Let them be even as the grass growing upon the house tops: which withers
before it be plucked up.

7 Whereof the mower fills not his hand: neither he that binds up the
sheaves, his bosom.

8 So that they which go by, say not so much as the Lord prosper you: we wish
you good luck in the name of the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Most blessed Jesus, who for our sins did suffer the plowers to plow upon
thy back, and make long furrows, suffering shame and whipping for our sakes,
and all the contradictions of sinners, and did leave sorrows and afflictions
intailed upon thy Church, that by suffering with thee, she might at last reign
with thee in glory: Deliver us and all thy holy Church, from all that fight
against us; hew the snares of the ungodly in pieces, let the designs of them
that have evil will at thy Church, be like the grass growing upon the house
tops, withered and blasted before it comes to maturity; and make us to prosper
under thy mercies, and in the good wishes and devout prayers of holy people,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 130.
A penitential Psalm, or a prayer for pardon and redemption from sins.
OUt of the deep have I called unto thee (O Lord:) Lord hear my voice.

2 Oh let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaint.

3 If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O Lord, who may
abide it?

4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

5 I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust.

6 My soul flees unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say, before the
morning watch.

7 O Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him
is plenteous redemption.

8 And he shall redeem Israel: from all his sins.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, blessed Jesus, with whom is mercy and plenteous redemption, who
did redeem thy people from all their sins, paying the ransom of thine own
blood to purchase us freedom and salvation: let the height of thy mercy take
us up from the deep abyss of sin and misery. O be not extreme to mark what we
have done amiss, for it is impossible we should abide the extremity of thy
severest judgments: and as thy mercy pardons what is past, so let the
sweetness of it beget thy fear in our hearts, that we may not dare to offend so
gracious, so merciful a God, but that trusting in thy Word, and flying unto
thee for succor, we may wait for thee till our change comes, looking for
thee in holiness and righteousness all our days. Grant this for thy mercies and
compassion sake, O blessed Jesu, our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

PSALM 131.
A Prayer for the graces of humility and mortification.
LOrd, I am not high minded: I have no proud looks.

2 I do not exercise my self in great matters: which are too high for me.

3 But I refrain my soul, and keep it low, like as a child that is weaned from
his mother: yea, my soul is even as a weaned child.

4 O Israel trust in the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, before whom the humble Publican (who durst not lift up his eyes to
Heaven, but with confusion of face begged pardon) was justified and acquitted:
give unto us thy servants humility of soul, and modesty in our behavior, that
our looks be not proud, nor our thoughts arrogant, nor our designs ambitious:
but that our souls being refrained from all vanity and pride, our affections
weaned from great opinions and love of our selves, we may trust in thee, follow
the example of our blessed Master, and receive thy promises which thou have
made unto us, in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 132.
A Prayer for the Church, for the promotion of Religion, for the King, and for
the Clergy.
LOrd remember David: and all his trouble.

2 How he swear unto the Lord: and vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of Jacob.

3 I will not come within the tabernacle of my house: nor climb up into my bed.

4 I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber: neither
the temples of my head to take any r^st,

5 Until I find out a place for the temple of the Lord: an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob.

6 Lo, we heard of the same at Ephrata: and found it in the wood,

7 We will go into his tabernacle: and fall low on our knees before his
footstool.

8 Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou and the ark of thy strength.

9 Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints sing with
joyfulnesse.

10 For thy servant David's sake: turn not away the presence of thine anointed.

11 The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David: and he shall not shrink
from it.

12 Of the fruit of thy body: shall I set upon thy seat.

13 If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimonies that I shall learn
them: their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore.

14 For the Lord has chosen Sion to be an habitation for himself: he has
longed for her.

15 This shall be my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein.

16 I will bless her victuals with increase: and will satisfy her poor with
bread.

17 I will deck her Priests with health: and her saints shall rejoice and sing.

18 There shall I make the horn of David to flourish: I have ordained a lantern
for mine anointed.

19 As for his enemies, I shall clothe them with shame: but upon himself shall
his crown flourish.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who dwell not in Temples made with hands, and yet have been
pleased to manifest thy presence by special blessings and assistances, in
places set apart for thy worship, be pleased to hear our prayers, and accept
our services when ever we make our addresses to thee in the house of prayer,
and fall down low on our knees before thy footstool: let thy Priests be clothed
with righteousness, and let thy Saints sing with joyfulness, and let all those
that make their approaches unto thee purify their hearts and hands, that they
may offer to thee a pure sacrifice, even the sacrifice of obedience and
holiness, and the expresses of true Religion. Bless (O Lord) thy servant the
King, whom thou have made the Patron and Defender of the Church, make his horn
to flourish and be exalted above all his enemies, and let thy Word be as a
lantern for thine Anointed, to show him thy holy will and pleasure, that he
seeking thy honor and glory, thy Church may flourish under the covert of his
shield and patronage, her victuals may be blessed with increase, her poor
satisfied with bread, her Priests decked with health, her Saints with joy, and
himself with honor and great renown, and a flourishing diadem, while his
enemies sit clothed in shame and misery. Grant this, O blessed God, for Jesus
Christ his sake, our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

PSALM 133.
A Prayer for unity in the Church, in a Kingdom, or family.
BEhold how good and joyful a thing it is: breth^en to dwell together in unity.

2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the
beard: even unto Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing.

3 Like as the dew of Hermon: which fell upon the hill of Sion.

4 For there the Lord promised his blessing: and life for evermore.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Jesu, in whose garment was variety but no rent or seam, have mercy
upon thy holy Catholic Church, and all Christian Kingdoms and Families; and
so unite all our hearts and affections by the union of Faith and Charity, that
we be not torn into Factions and Schisms, but being anointed with the precious
ointment, even the anointing of thy Spirit from above, we may keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace; and grant that this holy ointment may so knit
together the Guides of thy Church, the Rulers of Kingdoms, the Princes of the
Nations, that the blessings of it may descend to the skirts of the people, and
that thou may bless us with thy graces here and hereafter, give us life for
evermore in the participation of thy glorious Kingdom, where thou live and
reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

PSALM 134.
An invitation to the Clergy to be diligent in singing Gods praises publicly.
BEhold (now) praise the Lord: all ye servants of the Lord.

2 Ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord: even in the courts of the
house of our God.

3 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and praise the Lord.

4 The Lord that made heaven and earth: give thee blessing out of Sion.

The Prayer.
O Lord, Creator and Governor of all the world, thou that made Heaven and
Earth, that all should celebrate thy praise and the glory of thy Name, give
great Religion and devout affections to thy Ministers, that by frequent
elevation of their hands and hearts in thy Sanctuary, in behalf of themselves
and all the people, thy honor may be exalted among all thy servants, Religion
may be advanced, and the love of thy Name increased, and thy blessings may
descend upon us in a plentiful proportion, to supply all our necessities,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 135.
A Prayer that God would avenge his People of their Enemies, and an invitation
of them to praise his Name.
O Praise the Lord, laud ye the Name of the Lord: praise it, O ye servants of
the Lord.

2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts of the house of our
God.

3 O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: O sing praises unto his name,
for it is lovely.

4 For why? the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself: and Israel for his own
possession.

5 For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is above all gods.

6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth: and in the
sea, and in all deep places.

7 He brings forth the clouds from the ends of the world: and sends forth
lightnings with the rain, bringing the winds out of his treasures.

8 He smote the firstborn of Egypt: both of man and beast.

9 He has sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O thou land of
Egypt: upon Pharaoh and all his servants.

10 He smote diverse Nations: and slew mighty Kings.

11 Sehon king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basan: and all the kingdoms
of Canaan.

12 And gave their land to be an heritage: even an heritage unto Israel his
people.

13 Thy Name, O Lord, endures for ever: so does thy memorial, O Lord, from
one generation to another.

14 For the Lord will avenge his people: and be gracious unto his servants.

15 As for the images of the heathen, they are but silver and gold: the work of
men's hands.

16 They have mouths and speak not: eyes have they, but they see not.

17 They have ears, and yet they hear not: neither is there any breath in
their mouths.

18 They that make them are like unto them: and so are all they that put their
trust in them.

19 Praise the Lord, ye house of Israel: praise the Lord, ye house of Aaron.

20 Praise the Lord, ye house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, praise the Lord.

21 Praised be the Lord out of Sion: which dwells at Jerusalem.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, in whose sight the death of all the Saints is precious, and to
whom the souls of the Martyrs from under the Altar call to avenge their blood
that is shed like water upon the earth; be gracious unto us thy servants,
avenge all thy people of their enemies, that all that hate and persecute thy
Church, being either brought to repentance or confusion, thy Name and thy
memorial may be celebrated to all generations, thy Kingdom and thy coming
may be hastened, that the Saints may receive the consummation of their glories,
by resurrection of their bodies, and receiving the crown of righteousness
which thou have prepared for all that put their trust in thee, and that we all
standing in the house of the Lord, even in the courts of the house of our God
for ever, may praise thy Name which is gracious and lovely, even for ever and
ever. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 136.
A Prayer of thanksgiving to God for his eternal mercies.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

2 O give thanks unto the God of all gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

3 O thank the Lord of all lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

4 Which only does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.

5 Which by his excellent wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endures for
ever.

6 Which laid out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endures for ever.

7 Which has made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.

8 The sun to rule the day: for his mercy endures for ever.

9 The moon and the stars to govern the night: for his mercy endures for
ever.

10 Which smote Egypt with their firstborn: for his mercy endures for ever.

11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.

12 With a mighty hand and a stretched out arm: for his mercy endures for ever.

13 Which divided the Red sea in two parts: for his mercy endures for ever.

14 And made Israel to go through the midst of it: for his mercy endures for
ever.

15 But as for Pharaoh and his host, he overthrew them in the Red sea: for his
mercy endures for ever.

16 Which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures for
ever.

17 Which smote great kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

18 Yea, and slew mighty kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

19 Sehon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever.

20 And Og the king of Basan: for his mercy endures for ever.

21 And gave away their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for ever.

22 Even for an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for
ever.

23 Which remembered us when we were in trouble: for his mercy endures for ever.

24 And has delivered us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever.

25 Which gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.

26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.

27 O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

The Prayer.
O God of Heaven, and Lord of lords, who by thy excellent wisdom have made the
Heavens, and only do great wonders in Heaven and Earth, making all thy
creatures to be expresses of thy power, and of thy loving mercy, let thy mighty
hand and stretched out arm lead us through the midst of this world, and the
throng of all our enemies, giving us food for the sustenance of our bodies, the
light of the sun of righteousness to lead us in our goings, and great
apprehensions of thy mercy to excite in us devotion and true Religion, that we
praising thy mercies, and being relieved and sustained by thy loving kindness,
may at last come to the land of promise which thou give for an heritage to
thy people, and may receive the mercies of thy Kingdom, which endure for ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 137.
A Prayer for redemption of the Church from captivity and persecution.
BY the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept: when we remembered (thee) O Sion.

2 As for our harps, we hanged them up: upon the trees that are therein.

3 For they that led us away captive, required of us then a song and melody in
our heaviness: sing us one of the songs of Sion.

4 How shall we sing the Lords song: in a strange land?

5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning.

6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth:
yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem in my mirth.

7 Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem: how they
said, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

8 O daughter of Babylon, wasted with misery: yea, happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us.

9 Blessed shall he be that takes thy children: and throws them against the
stones.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God, thou have placed us in this world like pilgrims and strangers
far from our Country, far from rest; give us souls and desires so abstract, so
religious and contemplative, that all our hopes, our joys, and longings may be
to enjoy thee and thy glories in the celestial Jerusalem: and let thy comforts
refresh us in this our captivity and exile, that in our heaviness thou may
be our joy, our songs and melody may be the songs of Sion, the praises of thy
Name, that when thou have delivered us from the wrath and malice of our
enemies, and dashed all their wickedness (which they have conceived and would
bring forth to our destruction) against the Rock Christ Jesus, we may be
blessed amongst thy children, and be carried into our Country the Land of
glorious promises, there to reign with thee, who live and governest all
things, world without end. Amen.

PSALM 138.
A Prayer and a thanksgiving for Gods mercies.
I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: even before the
gods will I sing praise unto thee.

2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, because of thy
loving kindn^sse and truth: for thou have magnified thy name and thy word above
all things.

3 When I called upon thee, thou heardest me: and enduedst my soul with much
strength.

4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: for they have heard
the words of thy mouth.

5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: that great is the glory of the
Lord.

6 For though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: as for the
proud, he beholds them afar off.

7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, yet shall thou refresh me: thou shall
stretch forth thine hand upon the furiousness of mine enemies, and thy right
hand shall save me.

8 The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me: yea, thy mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever, despise not then the works of thine own hands.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who have magnified thy Name and Word above all things, make good
thy loving kindnesses toward us, and endue our souls with much strength, that
thine hand being stretched forth upon the furiousness of all our ghostly
enemies, and we being saved by thy right hand, may praise thee, and all thy
glories, serving thee here with a lowly mind, and a great industry, that at
last we may worship thee in thy holy Temple, in the midst of all the Myriads of
Angels, where thy glory is great and far exalted above all gods. Grant this
for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 139.
A meditation of the omnipresence of God, and a prayer that we may always walk
as in his sight.
O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me: thou know my
down-sitting, and mine up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts long before.

2 Thou art about my path, and about my bed: and spiest out all my ways.

3 For lo, there is not a word in my tongue: but thou, O Lord, know it
altogether.

4 Thou have fashioned me behind and before: and laid thine hand upon me.

5 Such knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me: I cannot attain unto
it.

6 Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit: or whither shall I go then from thy
presence?

7 If I climb up into heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art
there also.

8 If I take the wings of the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of the
sea,

9 Even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

80 If I say, Peradventure the darkness shall cover me: then shall my night be
turned to day.

11 Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as
the day: the darkness and light (to thee) are both alike.

12 For my reins are thine: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

13 I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

14 My bones are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth.

15 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect: and in thy book were
all my members written.

16 Which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them.

17 How dear are thy counsels unto me, O God: O how great is the sum of them!

18 If I tell them, they are mo in number then the sand: when I wake up, I am
present with thee.

19 Will thou not slay the wicked, O God: depart from me ye blood-thirsty men.

20 For they speak unrighteously against thee: and thine enemies take thy Name
in vain.

21 Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee: and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

22 Yea, I hate them right fore: even as though they were mine enemies.

23 Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart: prove me and examine my
thoughts.

24 Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.

The Prayer.
O Lord our God, who art infinite in wisdom, and present in all places, filling
heaven and earth and hell with the effects of thy mighty power, and
communications of thy glorious essence: let thy hand lead us, and thy right
hand hold us in all our ways, always considering that thou art present,
understanding our thoughts and words, even long before they are, and seeing our
most secret ways as clearly as in the sight of the sun: print thy fear mightily
upon our souls, that we may be as fearful of committing sins in secret, as in
the eyes of all the world, that we hating all iniquity, and loving thy counsels
as our dearest treasures and guide, may, by the paths of a holy life, be
conducted into the way everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 140.
A Prayer for deliverance from the mischief of all wicked persons.
DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: and preserve me from the wicked man.

2 Which imagine mischief in their hearts: and stir up strife all the day
long.

3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under
their lips.

4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the ungodly: preserve me from the wicked
men, which are purposed to overthrow my goings.

5 The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net abroad with cords: yea,
and set traps in my way.

6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord.

7 O Lord God, thou strength of my health: thou have covered my head in the day
of battle.

8 Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous
imaginations prosper, lest they be too proud.

9 Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them: that compass
me about.

10 Let hot burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire and
into the pit, that they never rise up again.

11 A man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth: evil shall hunt the
wicked person to overthrow him.

12 Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poor: and maintain the cause of the
helpless.

13 The righteous also shall give thanks unto thy name: and the just shall
continue in thy sight.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou strength of our health, thou that avengest the poor, and
maintainest the cause of the helpless, deliver us, O Lord, and preserve us
from the evil and wicked man, that neither his example may corrupt us, nor his
counsels mislead us, nor his prosperity scandalize us, nor his strife disquiet
us, nor his mischief disturb our safety; but do thou cover our heads in the day
of battle and contestation against all our bodily and ghostly enemies, that
although they hunt us to overthrow us, yet we may prosper upon earth under thy
favor and protection, and at last being removed from all fears, and sadness,
and dangers, may continue in thy sight, amongst the congregation of the just
for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 141.
A Prayer for the virtue of religion, for holiness of life, and for
deliverance from the snares of our enemies.
LOrd, I call upon thee, haste thee unto me: and consider my voice, when I cry
unto thee.

2 Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight, as the incense: and let the lifting
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice.

3 Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips.

4 O let not mine heart be inclined to any evil thing: let me not be occupied
in ungodly works, with the men that work wickedness, lest I eat of such things
as please them.

5 Let the righteous rather smite me friendly: and reprove me.

6 But let not their precious balms break mine head: yea, I will pray yet
against their wickedness.

7 Let their Judges be overthrown in stony places: that they may hear my words,
for they are sweet.

8 Our bones lie scattered before the pit: like as when one breaks and heweth
wood upon the earth.

9 But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God: in thee is my trust, O cast not
out my soul.

10 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me: and from the traps of
the wicked doers.

11 Let the ungodly fall into their own nets together: and let me ever escape
them.

The Prayer.
O Lord, our trust and confidence, haste thee unto us, and consider our voice
when we call upon thee in our trouble and necessity; let our prayers ascend up
unto thee as incense, and be as the savor of the evening and the morning
sacrifice. We beg of thee nothing but grace and power to fulfill thy will;
let not our hearts be inclined to any evil: set a watch O Lord, before our
mouth, and keep the door of our lips, let us not be busied in ungodly works,
that we may never offend in our thoughts, or words, or actions; and when we do
amiss, do thou smite us friendly, and reprove us with the checks of a tender
conscience, that thy fatherly correction may like precious balm cure all the
wounds made by our own infirmities: that we escaping all the snares of
wickedness, may for ever hear and obey thy sweet words, and our souls may
never be cast out of thy presence, but for ever may rejoice in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 142.
A Prayer in all sadness, and in the hour of death.
I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: yea, even unto the Lord did I make my
supplication.

2 I poured out my complaints before him: and showed him of my trouble.

3 When my spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my path: in the way wherein I
walked have they privily laid a snare for me.

4 I looked also upon my right hand: and saw there was no man that would know
me.

5 I had no place to flee unto: and no man cared for my soul.

6 I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said: Thou art my hope and my portion in the
land of the living.

7 Consider my complaint: for I am brought very low.

8 O deliver me from my persecutors: for they are too strong for me.

9 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name: which
thing if thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, thou art our hope, and our portion in the land of the living,
consider our complaint and misery, thou art our place to flee unto, thou only
art our sanctuary; O hide us under the covert of thy wings, keep us from all
the dangers which multiply upon us when our spirits are in heaviness, and our
bodies pressed with infirmities: be thou always at our right hand, and assist
us so with the strength of thy grace, that our temptations, and our enemies not
being above our strength derived from thee, our soul may with confidence go
forth of prison, and give eternal thanks unto thy Name, in the companies of
the Righteous, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 143.
A Prayer that God would pardon our sins, and direct us in the way of
righteousness.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy truth
and righteousness sake.

2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

3 For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

4 Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

5 Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty
land.

7 Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

8 O let me hear thy loving kindness betime^ in the morning, for in thee is my
trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto
thee.

9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I flee unto thee to hide me.

10 Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: and for thy righteousness sake
bring my soul out of trouble.

12 And of thy goodness slay mine enemies: and destroy all them that vex my
soul, for I am thy servant.

The Prayer.
O Lord our Judge, and our Redeemer, hearken unto us for thy truth and
righteousness sake; deliver us from the guilt of all our sins, and those
great punishments which are due to us for the same. Enter not into judgment
with us, for in thy sight no man can be justified by any worthiness of his
own. Endue our souls with the righteousness of a holy faith, living and
working by charity. Show us the way that we should walk in, teach us to do
whatsoever pleases thee, quicken our souls in the paths of life, and so
continue the conduct of thy Spirit to us, that it may never leave us till we be
brought forth of this world, into the land of righteousness to dwell with thee
eternally, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Morning Prayer.
PSALM 144.
A thanksgiving for Victory, and a prayer for the blessings of Peace.
BLessed be the Lord my strength: which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.

2 My hope and my fortress, my castle and deliverer, my defender, in whom I
trust: which subdueth my people that is under me.

3 Lord, what is man that thou have such respect unto him: or the son of man
that thou so regardest him?

4 Man is like a thing of naught: his time passes away like a shadow.

5 Bow the heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke.

6 Cast forth thy lightning, and tear them: shoot out thine arrows, and consume
them.

7 Send down thy hand from above: deliver me and take me out of the great
waters, from the hand of strange children.

8 Whose mouth talks of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
wickedness.

9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a
ten-stringed lute.

10 Thou have given victory unto kings: and have d^livered David thy servant
from the peril of the sword.

11 Save me and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth
talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.

12 That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may
be as the polished corners of the Temple.

13 That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that
our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

14 That our oxen may be strong to labor, and there be no decay: no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

15 Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea, blessed are the people
which have the Lord for their God.

The Prayer.
O Lord our strength, our hope and fortress, our castle and deliverer, our
defender in whom we trust; bow the heavens, O Lord, come down and save us, send
down thine hand from above, deliver us, and take us from the great waters, from
those miseries and afflictions which come upon us by reason of our sins, from
the condition of mortality, and from the hand of strange children, whose right
hand is a right hand of wickedness. Give us, O Lord, victory and peace, and
all the blessings of thy peace, with which thou usest to adorn and beautify
the dwellings of the righteous, that we may be happy in the continual descent
of thy favors, but above all, our happiness may consist in being thy people,
and thou being our God, that we may be blessed for ever in so blessed a
relation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 145.
A meditation of the glory and Majesty of God, and the mightiness of his
kingdom.
I Will magnify thee, O God, my King: and I will praise thy Name for ever and
ever.

2 Every day will I give thanks unto thee: and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

3 Great is the Lord, and mavelous worthy to be praised: there is no end of
his greatness.

4 One generation shall praise thy works unto another: and declare thy power.

5 As for me, I will be talking of thy worship: thy glory, thy praise, and
wondrous works.

6 So that men shall speak of the might of thy mavelous acts: and I will also
tell of thy greatness.

7 The memorial of thine abundant kindness shall be showed: and men shall
sing of thy righteousness.

8 The Lord is gracious and merciful: long-suffering, and of great goodness.

9 The Lord is loving unto every man: and his mercy is over all his works.

10 All thy works praise thee, O Lord: and thy saints give thanks unto thee.

11 They show the glory of thy Kingdom: and talk of thy power.

12 That thy power, thy glory, and mightiness of thy Kingdom: might be known
unto men.

13 Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: and thy dominion endures
throughout all ages.

14 The Lord upholdeth all such as fall: and lifts up all those that be down.

15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord: and thou give them their meat in
due season.

16 Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things living with plenteousnesse.

17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works.

18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: yea, all such as call
upon him faithfully.

19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will help them.

20 The Lord preserves all them that love him: but scatters abroad all the
ungodly.

21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh give thanks
unto his holy name for ever and ever.

The Prayer.
O God our King, thou art mavelous worthy to be praised, and there is no end
of thy greatness; give us enlarged and sanctified hearts, and lips, that we
may sing of thy righteousness, and magnify thy glory, thy worship, and
wondrous works. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy saints give thanks
unto thee. Make us holy and righteous in thy sight, we are already the works of
thine hands, and then, we have a double title to praise thee. Uphold us, O
Lord, that we fall not, and lift us up when we are down; give us me^t in due
season for our souls, and for our bodies, that we being filled with the
plenteousnesse of thy mercies here, may have our best, and all our desires
fulfilled and satisfied hereafter, amongst such as fear thee, and give thanks
unto thy holy name for ever. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with
thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory now and for ever.
Amen.

PSALM 146.
A Prayer that we may trust in God only, and not in an arm of flesh.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord: yea, as long
as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God.

2 O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no
help in them.

3 For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth:
and then all his thoughts perish.

4 Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

5 Which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is: which keeps
his promise for ever.

6 Which helps them to right that suffer wrong: which feeds the hungry.

7 The Lord loses men out of Prison: the Lord gi^eth sight to the blind.

8 The Lord helps them that are fallen: the Lord cares for the righteous.

9 The Lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherless and widow:
as for the way of the ungodly, he ^urneth it upside down.

10 The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be King for evermore: and throughout all
generations.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who reignest a King for evermore, give us grace that we may make
thee our help, and fix our hopes in thee, for thou only art able to give
deliverance. Feed our souls, O Lord, and satisfy us with thy salvation when we
hunger and thirst after righteousness; help us to right when we suffer wrong,
heal our backslidings, raise us when we are fallen enlighten the eyes of our
souls that we walk not in darkness and the shadow of death, and do thou take
care for us in all our ways, and in all our necessities, that when our breath
goes forth, and we turn again to our earth, we may reign with thee in Sion,
thy celestial habitation, for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Evening Prayer.
PSALM 147.
A celebration of Gods wisdom and providence in the ministration of the things
of this world, and of his goodness toward them that fear him.
O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea, a
joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful.

2 The Lord does build up Jerusalem: and gather together the outcasts of Israel.

3 He heals those that are broken in heart: and gives medicine to heal their
sickness.

4 He tells the number of the stars: and calls them all by their names.

5 Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite.

6 The Lord sets up the meek: and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

7 O sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praises upon the harp unto our
God.

8 Which covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth: and
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the use of men.

9 Which gives fodder unto the cattle: and feeds the young ravens that call
upon him.

10 He has no pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delights he in
any man's legs.

11 But the Lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his
mercy.

12 Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.

13 For he has made fast the bars of thy gates: and has blessed thy children
within thee.

14 He makes peace in thy borders: and fills thee with the flower of wheat.

15 He sends forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runs very
swiftly.

16 He gives snow like wool: and scatters the hoar frost like ashes.

17 He casts forth his ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost?

18 He sends out his word, and melts them: he blows with his wind, and
the waters flow.

19 He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel.

20 He has not dealt so with any nation: neither have the heathen knowledge of
his laws.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, whose power is great, and thy wisdom infinite, give us broken and
contrite hearts, meek spirits, a fear of thy Name, and a trust in thy mercy,
that thou may arise upon us with healing in thy wings, giving us medicine to
heal all our ghostly sicknesses, and thy delight may be in us, delighting to
do us good, to feed us when we call upon thee, to set us above our enemies, to
give us knowledge of thy Laws, to build up Jerusalem, and to repair the
breaches of thy Church, that we may sing praises unto thee, O God, and be
thankful to all eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 148.
An invitation of all the creatures of the world, to praise God.
O Praise the Lord of heaven: praise him in the height.

2 Praise him all ye angels of his: praise him all his host.

3 Praise him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars and light.

4 Praise him all ye heavens: and ye waters that be above the heavens.

5 Let them praise the Name of the Lord: for he spoke the word, and they were
made: he commanded, and they were created.

6 He has made them fast for ever and ever: he has given them a law which
shall not be broken.

7 Praise the Lord upon earth: ye dragons and all deeps.

8 Fire and hail, snow and vapors: wind and storm, fulfilling his word.

9 Mountains and all hills: fruitful trees, and all cedars.

10 Beasts and all cattle: worms and feathered fowls.

11 Kings of the earth, and all people: princes and all judges of the world.

12 Young men and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the Lord:
for his name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth.

13 He shall exalt the horn of his people, all his saints shall praise him:
even the children of Israel, even the people that serves him.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, whose Name only is excellent, and thy praise above heaven and
earth, we adore and bless thy mercy and thy power for creating us after thine
own Image: thou spakest the word, and we were made: thou commandedst, and we
were created: and as thou have established thy Creation with a Law for ever,
that all should minister to thy praises in their several proportions; so give
us grace that the laws of sanctity, of faith, and obedience, which thou have
given to us, may never be broken, that we serving thee not only in the order
of thy creatures, but in the capacity of thy children, may sing thy praises
amongst the Angels and the numerous host of Saints reigning in thy Kingdom for
ever and ever. Amen.

PSALM 149.
A meditation of the joys of Heaven prepared for the Saints.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: let the congregation of saints praise him.

2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: and let the children of Sion be
joyful in their King.

3 Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
tabret and harp.

4 For the Lord has pleasure in his people: and helps the meek hearted.

5 Let the saints be joyful with glory: let them rejoice in their beds.

6 Let the praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword in their
hands.

7 To be avenged of the heathen: and to rebuke the people.

8 To bind their kings in chains: and their nobles with links of iron.

9 That they may be avenged of them, as it is written: Such honor have all his
Saints.

The Prayer.
O Lord our King, in whose honor and salvation all thy Saints rejoice, give
unto thy holy Gospel a free passage in all the world, that Kings and Nobles may
be bound with the chains of obedience, discipline, and subordination to all thy
holy Laws; and grant to us thy servants that thy Laws may be so fixed in our
hearts, and thy praises in our mouths, and righteousness in all our actions,
that we may be written among the righteous, and have our portion with the
Saints, who rejoice in their beds of eternal rest, and are joyful in the
glories of thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PSALM 150.
An invitation to praise God with all our faculties and powers.
O Praise God in his holiness: praise him in the firmament of his power.

2 Praise him in his noble acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

3 Praise him in the sound of the trumpet: praise him upon the lute and harp.

4 Praise him in the cymbals and dances: praise him upon the strings and pipe.

5 Praise him upon the well tuned cymbals: praise him upon the loud cymbals

6 Let every thing that has breath: praise the Lord.

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, thy holiness and power and excellent greatness are far
above all the praises of men and Angels, and yet thou art pleased in the
harmony and concent of a thankful heart, and a thanksgiving tongue; touch our
hearts with admirable apprehensions of thy Divine perfections, that our songs
of thy honor may be devout and illuminate to the height of ecstasies, and the
devotions of a Seraphim, for nothing is proportionable to thy glories but what
is infinitely beyond our infirmities. Make us to sing Thee and thy Name while
we have breath; and when we are breathless, let our hearts fill up the
harmony, and think thy praises so cordially, till our souls being separated
from the harsh sound of our bodily organs, we may praise thee when we are all
spirit in the state of separation, and in the reunion when our bodies shall be
made spiritual, singing to thee exalted praises for ever and ever. To thee O
blessed and glorious God be praises and honor and glory ascribed now, and to
all eternity. Amen. Amen.

DEVOTIONS FOR THE Help and Assistance OF ALL CHRISTIAN PEOPLE: In all
occasions and necessities.

The third EDITION.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston. 1647.

DEVOTIONS FOR SEVERAL OCCASIONS.
A Prayer against wandering thoughts, to be said at the beginning of our
devotions.
ALmighty God, who have commanded us to pray unto thee without ceasing, and
have added many glorious promises for our encouragement, let thy holy Spirit
teach me how to pray; give me just apprehensions of my wants, zeal of thy
glory, great resentment of thy mercies, love of all spiritual employments that
are pleasing unto thee; and do thou help mine infirmities, that the Devil may
not abuse my fancy with illusions, nor distract my mind with cares, nor
alienate my thoughts with impertinencies, but give me a present mind, great
devotion, a heart fixed upon thy divine beauties, and an actual intention and
perseverance in my prayers, that I may glorify thy Name, do unto thee true
and laudable service, and obtain relief for all my necessities. Hear me, O King
of Heaven, when I call upon thee, for thou have promised mercy to them that
pray in the Name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Penitential Prayers, and a Form of Confession of sins to God, to be said
upon days of public or private humiliation.
O Lord God of mercy and pardon, give me a just remembrance and sad
apprehensions of my sins; teach me to bewail them with as great an indignation
and bitterness, as I have committed them with complacency and delight. Let my
prayers and my confession come into thy presence, and obtain a mercy for me and
a pardon. Let not thy justice and severity so remember my sins, as to forget
thine own mercy; and though I have committed that for which I deserve to be
condemned, yet thou can not lose that glorious attribute whence flows comfort
to us and hopes of being saved. Spare me therefore, O merciful God; for to
give pardon to a sinner that confesses his sins, and begges remission, is
not impossible to thy power, nor disproportionate to thy justice, nor unusual
to thy mercy and sweetest clemency. Blessed Jesu, acknowledge in me whatsoever
is thine, and cleanse me from whatsoever is amiss. Have pity on me now in the
time of mercy, and condemn me not when thou come to judgment, for what
profit is there in my blood? Thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, but
in his conversion there is joy in Heaven; and when thou have delivered me from
my sins, and saved my soul, I shall praise and magnify thy Name to all
eternity, Mercy, sweet Jesu, Mercy: Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.



I am not worthy, O Lord, to look up to Heaven, which is the Throne of thy
purity; for my sins are more in number then the hairs upon my head, and my heart
has failed me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not lived according to thy will, but
in the vanity of mine own thoughts, in idle, sinful, and impertinent language,
in foolish actions, in blindness of heart, in contempt of thy holy Word and
Commandments; I have not loved thee my God with all my heart, nor feared thee
with all my soul, nor served thee with all my might according to thy holy
precept, nor loved my neighbor as my self.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have been unthankful to thy Divine
Majesty, forgetting that thou made me, and preservest me; to thy Son my
blessed Savior, forgetting the bitter pains he suffered for me; and to the
holy Ghost, forgetting how many gracious influences I have received from him
for my help, comfort, and promotion in the ways of holy Religion, but have
rebelled against thee my Maker, have sold my self to work wickedness, from
whence by the passion of thy holy Son I was redeemed, and have resisted the
holy Ghost.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have offended thee my God in an inordinate
estimation of my self, in vain complacencies, and desires to be esteemed as
much or more then others, in not suffering with meekness, indifference, and
obedience, the humiliations sent to me by thy divine providence, in haughty
deportment toward my superiors, equals, and inferiors, and in accepting such
honors as have been done to me without returning them to thee the Fountain.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have offended thee my God in impatience,
in anger intemperate in degree, inordinate in the object, growing peevish and
disquieted by trifling inadvertencies of others, and slight accidents about me.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have offended thee my God, by being
envious at the prosperous successes and advantages of my neighbors, and have
had resentments of joy at their displeasures and sadnesses.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have been negligent in performance of my
charge, idle in doing my duties, soft and effeminate in my life, indevout in my
prayers, slothful in the exercises of Religion, weary of their length,
displeased at their return, without advertency in the execution of them, and
glad at an occasion of their pretermission.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have been diligent and curious in pleasing
my appetite of meat, and drink, and pleasures, losing my time, pampering my
flesh, quenching the Spirit, making matter both for sin and sicknesses, and
have not been sedulous in mortifying my body for the subduing mine own
intemperances and inordination.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have been an unprovident steward of the
good things thou have given me, I have loved them inordinately, sought them
greedily, and unjustly, dispensed them idly, and parted with them
unwillingly: I have not been so charitable to the poor, or so pitiful to the
afflicted, or so compassionate to the sick, or so apt to succor and give
supply to the miseries of my neighbors as I ought, but have too much minded
things below, not setting mine affections upon Heaven and heavenly things, but
have been unlike thee in all things, I have been unmercifull and unjust.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Mine eyes, O Lord, have wandered after
vanity, beholding and looking after things unseemly without displeasure,
despising my neighbors, prying into their faults, but have been blind not
seeing mine own sins, and infinite irregularities.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have not with care kept the door of my
lips, nor bridled my tongue, but have been excessive in talking, immoderate in
dissolute and wanton laughter, apt to lie, to deny truth, to accuse others, to
scoff at them, to aggravate their faults, to lessen their worth, to give rash
judgment, to flatter for advantage, to speak of thy Name irreverently, and
without religious or grave occasions, our discourses have been allayed with
slander and backbiting, not apt to edify, or minister grace unto the hearers.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Mine ears have been greedy after vanity,
listening after things unprofitable, or that might tend to the prejudice of my
neighbors, and have not with holy appetite listened after thy holy words and
conveyances of salvation.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have offended thee by the entertainment of
evil thoughts, thoughts of uncleannes^e and impurity, and have not resisted
their first beginnings, but have given consent to them explicitly and
implicitly, and have brought them up till they have grown into idle words and
actions.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have made my self guilty of the sins of
others by consent, by approving, by not reproving, by cooperating, by
encouraging their ill actions, so making mine own heap greater by pulling their
deformities upon mine own head.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have employed all my members and faculties
both of soul and body in the ways of unrighteousness, I have transgressed my
duty in all my relations, and in all my actions and traverses of my whole life,
even where I might have had most confidence I find nothing but weakness and
imperfections.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I have broken my vows and purposes of
obedience, and holy life, I have been inconstant to all good, refractory to
counsels, disobedient to commands, stubborn against admonition, churlish and
ungentle in my behavior, mindful and revengefull of injuries, forgetful of
benefits, seeking my own ends, deceiving my own soul.

Lord be merciful to me a sinner. My secret sins, O Lord, are innumerable,
sins secret to my self through inadvertency, forgetfulness, wilful ignorance,
or stupid negligence; secret to the world, committed before thee only, and
under the witness of mine own conscience. I am confounded with the multitude of
them, and the horror of their remembrance. Oh Jesu God, be merciful unto me.

I.
SOn of David, Blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the
world have mercy upon me. O Jesu, be a Jesus unto me, thou that sparedst thy
servant Peter that denied thee thrice, thou that did cast seven Devils out of
Mary Magdalen, and forgavest the woman taken in adultery, and did bear the
convert thief from the Cross, to the joys of Paradise, have mercy upon me
also; for although I have amassed together more sins, then all these in
conjunction, yet not their sins, nor mine, nor the sins of all the world can
equal thy glorious mercy, which is as infinite, and eternal as thy self. I
acknowledge, O Lord, that I am vile, but yet redeemed with thy precious blood;
I am blind, but thou art the light of the world; I am weak, but thou art my
strong Rock; I have been dead in trespasses and sins, but thou art my
resurrection and my life. Thou, O Lord, love to show mercy, and the
expressions of thy mercy, the nearer they come to infinite, the more
proportionable they are to thy essence, and like thy self. Behold then, O Lord,
a fit object for thy pity: my sins are so great and many that to forgive me,
will be an act of glorious mercy, and all the praises which did accrue to thy
name, by the forgivenes of David, and Manasses, and S. Paul, and the
adulteress, and the thief, and the Publican, will be multiplied to thy honor,
in the forgiveness of me so vile, so unworthy a wretch, that I have nothing to
say for my self, but that the greatness of my misery, is a fit object for thy
miraculous and infinite mercy. Despise me not, O Lord, for I am thy creature,
despise me not, for thou did die for me, cast me not away in thine anger, for
thou came to seek me, and to save me. Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation;
let thy holy Spirit lead me from the errors of my ways, into the paths of
righteousness, to great degrees of repentance, and through all the parts of a
holy life, to a godly and a holy death. Grant this, O blessed Jesu, for thy
mercies, and for thy pity sake. Amen.

II.
O Lord God, blessed Jesu, Eternal Judge of quick and dead, I tremble with
horror at the apprehension when I call to mind with what terrors and Majesty
thou shall appear in judgment; a fire shall go out from thy presence, and a
tempest shall be stirred up round about thee, such a tempest as shall rend the
rocks, level the mountains, shake the earth, disorder and dissolve the whole
fabric of the heavens, and where then shall I, vile sinner, appear, when the
heavens are not pure in thy sight? Lord, I tremble when I remember that sad
truth, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where then shall the wicked and the
ungodly appear? I know, O Lord, that all my secret impurities shall be laid
open before all the Nations of the world, before all the orders and degrees of
Angels, in the presence of innumerable millions of beatified spirits. There
shall I see many that have taught me innocence and sanctity, many that have
given me pious example, many that have dyed for thee, and suffered tortures
rather then they would offend thee. O just and dear God, where shall I appear?
who shall plead for me that am so laden with impurities, with vanity, with
ingratitude, with malice, and the terrors of an affrighting conscience? Lord
what shall I do, who am straightened by my own covetousness, accused by my own
pride, consumed with envy, set on fire by lust, made dull with gluttony, and
stupid by drunkenness, supplanted by ambition, rent asunder with faction and
discord, made dissolute with lightness and inconstancy, deceived with
hypocrisy, abused with flattery, fooled with presumption, disturbed with
anger, and disordered by a whole body of sin and death? But thou shall answer
for me, O Lord my God, thou art my judge and my advocate, and thou art to pass
sentence upon me for those sins, for which thou diedst. O reserve not my sins
to be punished in the life to come, for then I die eternally, but bring me in
this world to a holy, a sharp and salutary repentance. Behold I am in thine
hands; grant I may so weep, and be contrite for my sins, that in the hour of my
death I may find mercy, and in the day of judgment I may be freed from all
the terrors of thy wrath, and the sentence of the wicked, and may behold thy
face with joy and security, being set at thy right hand, with all thy saints
and Angels to sing an eternal Hallelujah to the honor of thy mercies. Amen,
sweet Jesu. Amen.

III.
MOST merciful and indulgent Jesu, hear the complaint of a sad and miserable
sinner, for I have searched into the secret recesses of my soul, and there I
find nothing but horror, and a barren wilderness, a neglected conscience
overgrown with sins and cares and beset with fears and sore amazements. I find
that I have not observed due reverence toward my superiors, nor modesty in my
discourse, nor discipline in my manners. I have been obstinate in my vain
purposes, cosen'd in my own semblances of humility, pertinacious in hatred,
bitter in my jesting, impatient of Subjection, ambitious of power, slow to good
actions, apt to talk, ready to supplant my neighbors, full of jealousies and
suspicion, scornful and censorious, burdensome to my friends, ungrateful to
my benefactors, imperious to my inferiors, boasting to have said what I said
not, to have seen what I saw not, to have done what I did not, and have both
said, and seen, and done what I ought not, provoking thy divine Majesty with a
continual course of sin and vanity. And yet, O Lord, thou have spared me all
this while, and have not taken away my life in the midst of my sins, which is a
mercy so admirable and of so vast a kindness, as no heart or tongue can think,
or speak. If thou had dealt with me according as I had deserved, and might
justly have expected, I had been now, now at this instant sealed up to an
eternity of torments; hopelesly miserable, fearing the revelation of thy day
with an unsupportable amazement: and now under the sweet influences of thy
mercies, I am praying to thee, confessing my sins, with shame, indeed at my
baseness and ingratitude, but with a full hope and confidence in thy mercy. O
turn the eyes of thy divine clemency with a gracious aspect upon a wretched
sinner, open the bowels of thy mercy, and receive me into favor. O my dear
God, let thy grace speedily work that in me for which thou so long have spared
me, and to which thou did design me in thy holy purposes and mercies of
eternity, even a true faith, and a holy life, conformable to thy will, and in
order to eternal blessedness. I remember, O Lord, the many fatherly
expressions and examples of thy mercies to repenting sinners, thy delight in
our conversion, thy unwillingnes to destroy us, thy earnest invitation of us to
grace and life, thy displeasure at our dangers and miseries, the infinite
variety of means thou usest to bring us from the gates of death, and to make us
happy to eternity. These mercies, O Lord, are so essential to thee, that thou
can not but be infinitely pleased in demonstrations of them. Remember not, O
Lord, how we have despised thy mercies, slighted thy judgments, neglected thy
Commandments; but now at length establish in us great contrition for our sins,
lead us on to humble confession and dereliction of them, and let thy grace make
us bring forth fruits meet for repentance, fruits of justice, of hope, of
charity, of religion and devotion, that we may ^e what thou delightest in,
holy, and just, and merciful, vessels prepared for honor, temples of the holy
Ghost, and instruments of thy praises to all eternity, O blessed Jesu, who
live and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

O Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the eternal God, interpose thy holy Death, thy
Cross and Passion between thy judgment and my soul, now and in the hour of my
death, granting unto me grace and mercy, to all faithful people pardon and
peace, to the Church unity and amity, and to all sinners repentance and
amendment, to us all life and glory everlasting, who live and reignest ever
one God, world without end. Amen.

A Form of thanksgiving, with a particular enumeration of Gods blessings.
MOst glorious Lord God, infinite in mercy, full of compassion, long-suffering,
and of great goodness, I adore, and praise, and glorify thy holy Name,
worshipping thee with the lowliest devotions of my soul and body, and give thee
thanks for all the benefits thou have done unto me; for whatsoever I am, or
have, ^or know, or desire as I ought, it is all from thee, thou art the
Fountain of being and blessing, of sanctity and pardon, of life and glory.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Thou, O God, of thine infinite goodness have created me of nothing, and have
given me a degree of essence next to Angels, imprinting thine Image on me,
enduing me with reasonable faculties of will and understanding, to know and
choose good, and to refuse evil, and have put me into a capacity of a blessed
immortality.

O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his Name together.

Thou, O God, of thy great mercy have given me a comely body, a good
understanding, straight limbs, a ready and unloosed tongue, whereas with
justice thou might have made me crooked and deformed, sottish and slow of
apprehension, imperfect and impedite in all my faculties.

O give thanks unto the God of Heaven; for his mercy endures for ever.

Thou, O God, of thy glorious mercies, have caused me to be born of Christian
Parents, and did not suffer me to be strangled in the womb, but gave me
opportunity of holy Baptism, and have ever since blessed me with education in
Christian Religion.

Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God as our God?

Thou, O God, out of thine abundant kindness have made admirable variety of
creatures to minister to my use, to serve my necessity, to preserve and restore
my health, to be an ornament to my body, to be representations of thy power and
of thy mercy.

Unto thee, O God, will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

Thou, O God, of thine admirable and glorious mercy have made thine Angels
ministering spirits for my protection and defense against all the hostilities of
the devil; thou have set a hedge about me, and such a guard as all the power
of hell and earth cannot overcome: thou have preserved me by thy holy
providence and the ministry of Angels from drowning, from burning, from
precipice, from deformities, from fracture of bones, and all the snares of
evil, and the great violations of health, which many of my betters suffer.

I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; even before the
gods will I sing praise unto thee.

Thou, O most merciful God, have fed me and clothed me, have raised me up
friends and blessed them, have preserved me in dangers, have rescued me from
the fury of the sword, from the rage of pestilence, from perishing in public
distemperatures and diseases epidemicall, from terrors and affrightments of the
night, from illusions of the devil and sad apparitions; thou have been my guide
in my journeys, my refreshment in sadnesses, my hope and my confidence in all
my griefs and desolations.

O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

But above all mercies it was not less then infinite, whereby thou lovedst me
and all mankind when we were lost and dead, and rebels against thy Divine
Majesty; thou gave thine own begotten Son to seek us when we went astray, to
restore us to life when we were dead in trespasses and sins, and to reconcile
us to thy self by the mercies and the atonement of an everlasting covenant.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord by whom
we escape death.

O most blessed Jesu, I praise and adore thine infinite mercies, humility, and
condescension, that for my sake thou would descend from the bosom of thy
heavenly Father into the pure womb of an humble Maid, and take on thee my
nature, and be born, and cry, and suffer cold, and all the incommodities which
the meannesse of a stable could minister to the tenderness of thy first
infancy.

Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him: and the son of man that thou
so regardest him?

I adore thee blessed Jesu, and praise thee for thine immaculate sanctity, for
all thy holy precepts and counsels, for thy Divine example, for thy miracles
and mysterious revelations of thy Fathers will, for the institution of the holy
Sacraments, and all other blessings of thy Prophetical Office.

O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: sing praises unto his Name, for
it is lovely.

I adore and love thee, most blessed Jesu, for all the parts of thy most bitter
Passion, for thy being betrayed and accused, buffeted and spit upon,
blindfolded and mocked, crowned with thorns and scourged, for thine agony and
bloody sweat, for thy bearing the sad load of the Cross, and sadder load of
our sins, for thy Crucifixion three long hours, when the weight of thy Body was
supported with wounds and nails, for thy Death and Burial, for thy continual
intercession and advocation with thy heavenly Father in behalf of me and all
thy holy Church, and all other acts of mediation and redemption, the blessings
of thy Priestly Office.

O praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the wonders he has done for
the children of men.

I adore and magnify thy holy Name, O most blessed Jesu, for thy triumph over
death, hell, sin, and the grave, for thy opening the Kingdom of Heaven to all
believers, for thy glorious resurrection and ascension, for thy government over
all the creatures, for the advancement of thy holy Kingdom, for thy continual
resisting and defeating the intendments of thine enemies against thy Church, by
the strength of thine arm, by the mightiness of thy power, by the glories of
thy wisdom; for those blessed promises thou have made and performest to thy
Church of sending the holy Ghost, of giving her perpetuity of being in defiance
of all the gates and powers of Hell and darkness, and blessing her with
continual assistances, and all other glories of thy Regal Office and power.

O sing praises, sing praises unto our God; O sing praises, sing praises unto
our King; for God is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises with
understanding.

O most holy Spirit, Love of the Father, Fountain of grace, spring of all
spiritual blessings, I adore and praise thy divine excellencies which are
essential to thy glorious Self in the unity of the most mysterious Trinity,
and which thou communicatest to all faithful people, and to me thy unworthy
servant in the unity of the Catholic Church.

O magnify the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool: for he is
holy.

O blessed Spirit, I praise and magnify thy Name for thy miraculous descent
upon the Apostles in Pentecost in mysterious representments, for those great
graces and assistances coming upon their heads, and falling down upon us all
in the descent of all ages of the Church, for confirmation of our Faith, for
propagation of the Gospel, for edification and ornament of thy Family.

Thou, O God, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all
generations.

O most glorious Spirit, I praise and magnify thy Name for thy inspiration of
the Apostles and Prophets, for thy providence and mercy in causing holy
Scriptures to be written, and preserving them from the corruptions of
Heretics, from the violences of Pagans and enemies of the Cross of Christ.

I will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my
mouth.

I bless thy Name for those holy promises and threatenings, those judgments
and mercies, those holy precepts and admonitions which thou have registered in
Scriptures, and in the records and monuments of the Church, for all those
graces, helps, and comforts whereby thou promotest me in piety, and the ways of
true Religion, for baptismall and penitential grace, for the opportunities and
sweet refreshings of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, for all the advantages
thou have given me of good society, tutors, and governors, for the fears thou
have produced in me as deleteries and impediments of sin, for all my hopes of
pardon, and expectation of the promises made by our Lord Jesus Christ to
encourage me in the paths of life and sanctity, for all the holy sermons,
spiritual books, and lessons, for all the good prayers and meditations, for
those blessed waitings and knockings at the door of my heart, pitiently
tarrying for, and lovingly inviting me to repentance, without ceasing,
admonishing and reproving me with the checks of a tender conscience, with
exterior and interior motives, and for whatsoever other means or incentive of
holiness thou have assisted me withal.

I magnify, and praise, and adore thee and thy goodness. All Nations whom thou
have made and sanctified shall come and worship thee, O Lord, and shall glorify
thy Name, for thou art great and do wondrous things, thou art God alone, and
great is thy mercy toward me, thou have delivered my soul from the nethermost
Hell, therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my
God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever with Cherubims, and Seraphims, and
all the companies of the heavenly Host, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Sabbath, holy is our God, holy is the Immortal, holy is the Almighty, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all honor and glory and
dominion and power ascribed of all spirits, and all men, and all creatures, now
and for evermore. Amen.

I. Prayers preparatory to the receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
O Most immaculate and glorious Jesu, behold me miserable sinner, drawing near
to thee with the approaches of humility, and earnest desire to be cleansed fron
my sins, to be united to thee by the nearest and most mysterious union of
charity and Sacramental participation of thy most holy Body and Blood: I
presume nothing of mine own worthiness, but I am most confident of thy mercies
and infinite loving kindness. I know, O Lord, I am blind, and sick, and dead,
and naked, but therefore I come the rather: I am sick, and thou art my
Physician, thou arisest with healing in thy wings, by thy wounds I come to be
cured, and to be healed by thy stripes: I am unclean, but thou art the Fountain
of purity: I am blind, and thou art the great Eye of the world, the Sun of
righteousness, in thy light I shall see light: I am poor, and thou art rich
unto all, the Lord of all the creatures. I therefore humbly beg of thy mercy
that thou would be pleased to take from me all my sins, to cure my
infirmities, to cleanse my filthiness, to lighten my darkness, to clothe my
nakedness with the robe of thy righteousness, that I may with such reverence,
and faith, and holy intention receive thy blessed Body and Blood in the
mysterious Sacrament, that it may be unto me life, and pleasantness, and holy
nourishment, and that I may be firmly and indissolubly united to thy mystical
Body, and may at last see clearly and without a vail thy face in glory
everlasting, who live and reignest, ever one God world without end. Amen.

II.
I Adore and bless thy glorious Majesty, O blessed Jesu, for this great
dignation and vouchsafing to me, that thou art pleased for all the infinite
multiplication of my sins, and innumerable violations of thy holy Law, still to
give thy self unto me, to convey health, and grace, and life, and hopes of
glory in the most blessed Sacrament. I adore thee, O most righteous Redeemer,
that thou art pleased under the visible signs of Bread and Wine, to convey
unto our souls thy holy Body and Blood, and all the benefits of thy bitter
Passion. O my God, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, but
let thy holy Spirit with his purities prepare for thee a lodging in my soul.
Thou have knocked often, O blessed Jesu, at the door of my heart, and would
willingly have entered; behold, O Lord, my heart is ready to receive thee, cast
out of it all worldly desires, all lusts and carnal appetites, and then enter
in, and there love to inhabit, that the Devil may never return to a place that
is so swept and garnished, to fill me full of all iniquity. O thou lover of
souls, grant that this holy Sacrament may be a light unto mine eyes, a guide to
my understanding, and a joy to my soul, that by its strength I may subdue and
mortify the whole body of sin in me, and that it may produce in me constancy
in Faith, fullness of wisdom, perfection and accomplishment of all thy
righteous commandments, and such a blessed union with thee, that I may never
more live unto my self, or to the world, but to thee only, and by the
refreshment of an holy hope, I may be led through the paths of a good life, and
persevering piety to the communion and possession of thy Kingdom, O blessed
Jesu, who live and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

III.
O Lord God, who have made all things of naught, producing great degrees of
essence out of nothing, make me a new creature, and of a sinful man, make me
holy, and just, and merciful; that I may receive thy precious Body, devoutly,
reverently, with meekness, contrition, and great affection, with spiritual
comfort and gladness at thy mystical presence. Feed my soul with Bread from
Heaven, fill me with charity, conform me to thy will in all things, save me
from all dangers bodily and ghostly, assist and guide me in all doubts and
fears, prepare and strengthen me against all surreptions and sudden incursion
of temptations, cleanse me from all stains of sin, and suffer nothing to abide
in me but thy self only, who art the Life of souls, the Food of the Elect, and
the joy of Angels. Give me such a gust and an holy relish in this Divine
nutriment, that nothing may ever hereafter please me but what savours of thee
and thy miraculous sweetness. Teach me to loath all the pleasures and beauties
of this life, and let my soul be so inebriated with the pleasures of thy Table,
that I may be comprehended and swallowed up with thy love and sweetness: let
me think nothing but thee, covet nothing but thee, enjoy nothing but thee,
nothing in comparison with thee, and neither do not possess any thing but
what leads to thee, and is in order to the performance of thy will and the
fruition of thy glories. Transfixe my soul, O blessed Jesu, with so great love
to thee, so great devotion in receiving the holy Sacrament, that I may be
transformed to the Fellowship of thy sufferings, and admitted to a
participation of all the benefits of thy Passion, and to a communion of thy
graces and thy glories. I desire to be with thee, dissolve all the chains of my
sin, and then come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Let my soul feed on thee greedily,
for thou art the spring of light and life, the Fountain of wisdom and health,
a torrent of divine pleasure and tranquillity, the Author of peace and comfort:
enter into me, sweet Jesu, take thou possession of my soul, and be thou Lord
over me and all my faculties, and preserve me with great mercy and tenderness,
that no doubting or infidelity, no impenitence or remanent affection to a sin,
no impurity or irreverence may make me unworthy and incapable of thy glorious
approach. Let not my sins crucify the Lord of life again, let it not be said
concerning me, The hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the Table: that
this holy Communion may not be unto me an occasion of death, but a blessed
peace offering for my sins, and a gate of life and glory. Grant this, O blessed
God, for his sake who is both Sacrifice and Priest, the Master of the Feast,
and the Feast it self, even Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, O Father, and the
holy Spirit, be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

A Prayer after receiving the consecrated Bread.
I Give thanks unto thee Almighty and eternal God, that thou have not rejected
me from thy holy Table, but have refreshed my soul with the salutary refection
of the Body of thy Son Jesus Christ. Lord if I had lived innocently, and had
kept all thy Commandments, could have had no proportion of merit to so
transcendent a mercy; but since I have lived in all manner of sin, and
multiplied provocations against thy Divine Majesty, thy mercy is so glorious
and infinite, that I am amassed at the consideration of its immensity. Go on, O
my dear God, to finish so blessed a redemption, and now that thou have begun to
celebrate a marriage and holy union between thy self and my soul, let me never
throw off the wedding garment, or stain it with the pollutions of deadly sin,
nor seek after other lovers, but let me for ever and ever be united unto thee,
being transformed into thy will in this life, and to the likeness of thy
glories in the life to come, who live and reignest, ever one God, world
without end. Amen.

After receiving the Cup.
O Just and dear God, who out of the unmeasurable abysses of wisdom and mercy
have redeemed us, and offered life, and grace, and salvation to us by the real
exhibition of thy Son Jesus Christ in the Sacrifice of his Death upon the altar
of the Cross, and by commemoration of his bitter agonies in the holy
Sacrament; Grant that that great and venerable sacrifice which we now
commemorate sacramentally, may procure of thee for thy whole Church mercy and
great assistance in all trials, deliverance from all heresies, schisms,
sacrilege, and persecutions, to all sick people health and salvation,
redemption for captives, competency of living to the indigent and necessitous,
comfort to the afflicted, relief to the oppressed, repentance to all sinners,
softness of spirit and a tender consience to the obstinate, conversion to the
Jews, Turks, and remedy to all that are in any trouble or adversity: And grant
to us, O Lord, that this blessed Sacrament and sacrifice of commemoration in
virtue of that dreadful and proper Sacrifice upon the Cross may obtain for
me, and for us all who have communicated this day, pardon and peace; and that
we may derive from thee by this ministry grace to expel all our sins, to
mortify all our lusts, to exterminate all concupiscence, to crucify all
inordination and irregularity, to produce in us humility, and chastity, and
obedience, and meekness of spirit, and charity, and may become our Defense and
Armor against the violences and invasions of all our ghostly enemies, and
temporal disadvantages; and give us this grace and favor, that we may not die
in the guilt and commission of a sin without repentance, nor without receiving
the blessed Sacrament, but that we may so live and die, that we may at last
rest in thy bosom, and be embraced with the comprehensions of thy eternal
charity, who live and reignest, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

All blessing, and praise, and honor, be unto thee, O blessed Redeemer: to
thee we the banished and miserable sons of Adam, do call for mercy and defense,
to thee we sigh and cry in this valley of tears; O dearest Advocate, turn those
thy merciful eyes toward us, and show us thy glorious face in thy Kingdom,
where no tears, or sighing, or fears, or sadnesses can approach. Amen, sweetest
Jesu, Amen.

Prayers preparatory to death.
I. A Prayer for a blessed ending, to be said in time of health or sickness.
O Blessed Jesu, Fountain of eternal mercy, the Life of the soul, and glorious
Conqueror over Death and sin, I humbly beseech thee to give me grace so to
spend this transitory life in virtuous and holy exercises, that when the day of
my death shall come, in the midst of all my pains, I may feel the sweet
refreshings of thy holy Spirit comforting my soul, sustaining my infirmities,
and relieving all my spiritual necessities: and grant, that in the Unity of
the holy Catholic Church, and in the integrity of Christian faith, with
confidence and hope of thy mercy, in great love toward thee, in peace with my
Neighbors, and in charity with all the world, I may through thy grace depart
hence out of this vale of misery, and go unto that glorious country, where thou
have purchased an inheritance for us, with the price of thy most precious
blood, and raignest in it gloriously, in the Unity of thy Father and ours, of
thy holy Spirit, and our Ghostly Comforter, ever one God world without end.
Amen.

II. A Prayer to be said at the beginning of a sickness.
O Lord my God, who chastisest every one whom thou receivest, and with thy
Fatherly correction smitest all those whom thou consignest to the inheritance
of sons; write my soul in the book of life, and number me amongst thy children,
whom thou have smitten with the rod of sickness, and by thy chastisements have
brought me into the Lot of the righteous. Thou, O Blessed Jesu, art a helper in
the needful time of trouble; lay no more upon me then thou shall enable me to
bear, and let thy gentle correction in this life prevent the insupportable
stripes of thy vengeance in the life to come. Smite me now that thou may
spare me to all eternity: and yet, O blessed High Priest, who art touched with
a sense of our infirmities, smite me friendly, and reprove me with such a
tenderness as thou bear unto thy Children, to whom thou conveyest
suppletory comforts, greater then the pains of chastisement, and in due time
restore me to health, and to thy solemn assemblies again, and to the joy of
thy Countenance. Give me patience and humility, and the grace of repentance,
and an absolute dereliction of my self, and a resignation to thy pleasures and
providence, with a power to do thy will in all things, and then do what thou
please to me; only in health or sickness, in life or death, let me feel thy
comforts refreshing my soul, and let thy grace pardon all my sins. Grant this,
O Blessed Jesu, for my trust is in thee only, thou art my God, and my merciful
Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

III. A Prayer to be said in the progress of a sickness.
O Lord my God, Blessed Jesu, who by thy bitter death and passion have sweetened
the cup of death to us, taking away its bitterness and sting, and making it an
entrance to life and glory, have pity upon me thy servant, who have so deep a
share in sin, that I cannot shake off the terrors of death, but that my nature
with its hereditary corruption still would preserve it self in a disunion from
the joys of thy Kingdom. Lord, I acknowledge my own infirmities and beg thy
pity. It is better for me to be with thee, but the remembrance of my sins does
so depresse my growing confidence, that I am in a great straight between my
fears and hopes, between the infirmities of my nature, and the better desires
of conforming to thy holy will and pleasure. O my dear Redeemer, wean my soul
and all my desires from the flatteries of this world; pardon all my sins, and
consign so great a favor by the comforts, and attestation of thy divinest
Spirit, that my own fears being mastered, my sins pardoned, my desires
rectified, as the Heart thirst after the springs of water, so my soul may long
after thee, O God, and to enter into thy Courts. Heavenly Father, if it may be
for thy glory, and my ghostly good, to have the days of my pilgrimage
prolonged, I beg of thee health and life; but if it be not pleasing to thee,
to have this cup pass from me, thy will be done: my Savior has drunk off all
the bitterness. Behold, O Lord, I am in thine hands, do with me as seems
good in thine eyes; though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff comfort me. I
will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only who
shall make me to dwell in everlasting safety, and to partake of the joys of thy
Kingdom, who live and reignest eternal God, world without end. Amen.

IV. A Prayer for a sick person, in danger of death.
O Lord Jesus Christ, our health and life, our hope, and our resurrection from
the dead: I resign my self up to thy holy will and pleasure, either to life,
that I may live longer to thy service and my amendment; or to death to the
perpetual enjoyment of thy presence, and of thy glories. Into thy hands I
commend my spirit, for I know, O Lord, that nothing can perish, which is
committed to thy mercies. I believe, O Lord, that I shall receive my body again
at the resurrection of the just: I relinquish all care of that, only I beg
of thee mercy for my soul; strengthen it with thy grace against all
temptations, let thy loving kindness defend it as with a shield against all the
violences and hostile assaults of Satan: let the same mercy be my guard and
defense, which protected thy Martyrs, crowning them with victory in the midst
of flames, horrid torments, and most cruel deaths. There is no help in me, O
Lord, I cannot by my own power, give a minutes rest to my wearied body, but my
trust is in thy sure mercies, and I call to mind, to my unspeakable comfort,
that thou were hungry, and thirsty, and wearied, and whipped, and crowned with
Thorns, and mocked, and crucified for me. O let that mercy which made thee
suffer so much, make thee do that for which thou sufferedst so much, pardon me,
and save me. Let thy merits answer for my impieties, let thy righteousness
cover my sins, thy blood wash away my stains, and thy comforts refresh my soul.
As my body grows weak, let thy grace bestronger, let not my faith doubt, nor my
hope tremble, nor my charity grow cold, nor my soul be affrighted with the
terrors of death; but let the light of thy countenance enlighten mine eyes,
that I sleep not in death eternal; and when my tongue fails, let thy spirit
teach my heart to pray, with strong cryings and groans that are unutterable. O
let not the enemy do me any violence, but let thy holy mercies, and thy Angels
repel and defeat his malice and fraud, that my soul may by thy strength
triumph in the joys of eternity, in the fruition of thee, my life, my joy, my
hope, my exceeding great reward, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

V. For a dying Person in, or near the agonies of death.
MOst merciful and Blessed Savior, have mercy upon the soul of this thy
s^rvant; remember not his ignorances, nor the sins of his youth, but according
to thy great mercy remember him in the mercies and glories of thy Kingdom.
Thou, O Lord, have opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, let the
everlasting gates be opened, and receive his Soul; let the Angels, who rejoice
at the conversion of a sinner, triumph, and be exalted in his deliverance and
salvation. Make him partaker of the benefits of thy holy incarnation, life and
sanctity, passion and death, resurrection and ascension, and of all the prayers
of the Church, of the joy of the elect, and all the fruits of the blessed
communion of Saints; and daily add to the number of thy beatified servants
such as shall be saved, that thy coming may be hastened, and the expectation of
the Saints may be fulfilled, and the glory of thee, our Lord Jesu, be
advanced, all the whole Church singing praises to the Honor of thy Name, who
live and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen.

VI.
O Most merciful Jesu, who did die to redeem us from death and damnation,
have mercy upon this thy servant, whom thy hand has visited with sickness: of
thy goodness be pleased to forgive him all his sins, and seal his hopes of
glory, with the refreshments of thy holy Spirit. Lord give him strength and
confidence in thee, assuage his pain, repel the assaults of his Ghostly
enemies by thy mercies, and a guard of holy Angels: preserve him in the unity
of the Church, keep his senses entire, his understanding right, give him great
measure of contrition, true faith, a well grounded hope, and abundant charity,
give him a quiet and a joyful departure, let thy ministering spirits convey his
soul to the mansions of peace and rest, there with certainty to expect a
joyful resurrection to the fullness of joy at thy right hand, where there is
pleasure for evermore. Amen.

VII. A Prayer for the joys of Heaven.
O Most glorious Jesu, who art the portion and exceeding great reward of all
faithful people, thou have beautified humane Nature with glorious immortality,
and have carried the same above all Heavens, above the seat of Angels, beyond
the Cherubims and Seraphims, placing it on the right hand of thy heavenly
Father, grant to us all the issues of thy abundant charity, that we may live in
thy fear, and die in thy favor. Prepare our souls with heavenly virtues for
heavenly joys, m^king us righteous here, that we may be beautified hereafter.

A Morning Prayer. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
I.
O Eternal Sun of righteousness, who came from the bosom of thy Father,
the Fountain of glorious light, to enlighten the darknesses of the world; I
praise thy Name that thou have preserved me from the dangers of this night, and
have continued to me still the opportunities of serving thee, and advancing my
hopes of a blessed eternity. Let thy mercies shine brightly upon me, and
dissipate the clouds and darknesses of my spirit and understanding, rectify my
affections, and purify my will and all my actions, that whatsoever I shall do
or suffer this day, or in my whole life, my words and purposes, my thoughts and
my intentions may be sanctified, and be acceptable to thy divine Majesty. Amen.

II.
GRant that my understanding may know thee, my heart may love thee, and all my
faculties and powers may give thee due obedience and serve thee. Preserve me
this day from all sin and danger, from all violences and snares of mine
enemies, visible and invisible; let thy holy fear be as a bridle to my
distemperatures, and thy love so enkindle and actuate all mine endeavors, that
no pleasure or allurements of the world may draw me from thy service, nor any
difficulty or temptation may be my hinderance: let the profound humility and
innocence of my blessed Savior keep from me all pride and haughtiness of
mind, all self-love and vainglory, all obstinacy and disobedience, all
fraudulency and hurtful dissimulation, and let the graces of the holy Ghost
take so absolute possession and seizure of my soul, and all its faculties, that
I may tread down and cast out the spirit of intemperance and uncleanness, of
malice and envy, of idleness and disdain, that I may never despise any of thy
creatures, but my self; that so being little in mine own sight, I may be great
in thine. Amen.

III.
CLothe my soul with the Wedding garment, the habits of supernatural Faith,
and Charity, that I may believe all thy holy promises and revelations without
all wavering, and love thee my God with so great devotions and affections, that
neither life nor death, prosperity nor adversity, temptations within, nor
without, may ever dis-unite me from the love of thee; but that I may have the
most intimate adhesion to thy glories and perfections, of which my condition in
this world is capable. Make me to choose virtue with the same freeness of
election, entertain it with as little reluctance, keep it with as much
complacency, actuate it with as many faculties, serve it with as much industry,
as I have in time past my vices and pleasures of the world; and grant that all
inordinate affection to the transitory things of this life may daily decay in
me, and that I may grow in spirit and ghostly strength, till I come to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus. Amen.

IV.
GIve unto thy servant true humility, great contrition, a tender conscience, an
obedient heart, an understanding always busied in honest and pious thoughts, a
will tractable and ever prone to do good, affections eaven and moderate, a
watchful custody over my senses, that by those windows sin may never enter
in, nor death by sin. Make me to watch over my tongue, and keep the door of my
lips, that no corrupt or unseemly communication proceed out of my mouth, that I
may never flanner, calumniate or detract from the reputation of my neighbor;
that I be not busy in the faults of others, but careful to correct mine own,
being gentle and merciful to others, and severe toward my self, that I may
speak much of thy praises, and what I can for the edification of my brethren.
Amen.

V.
GIve me understanding in thy Law, that I may know thy will; and grace, and
strength faithfully to fulfill the same. Give me a fear of thy Name, and of thy
threatenings, and a love and hope of thy promises, let me daily feel thy
mercies, and remove thy judgments far from me. Imprint in my heart a filial
reverence and awfulness toward thy Divine Majesty, that I may study to please
thee with diligence, to worship thee with much devotion, to submit to the
disposition of thy providence with thankfulness; and that in conscience of my
duty toward thee I may honor the King, obey Magistrates under him, love the
Saints, and do all acts of charity according to my opportunity and ability,
directing all my actions and intentions, not according to custom, or in
pursuance of mine own ends, and temporal advantages, but in thy fear and in
holy religion to the advancement of thy honor and glory. Amen.

VI.
GIve me a soul watchful in the services of Religion, constant in holy
purposes, ingenuous and free from sordid ends or servile flattery, a modest
gravity in my deportment, affability and fair courteous demeanor toward all
men, austerity in condemning mine own sins, sweetness in fraternall correction
and reprehending others, mature judgment, a chaste body and a clean soul,
patience in suffering, deliberation in my words and actions, good counsels in
all my purposes: make me just in performing promises, and in all my duties,
sedulous in my calling, profitable to the Commonwealth, a true Son of the
Church, and of a disposition meek and charitable toward all men. Amen.

VII.
LEt this be my portion, and the comfort of my pilgrimage, so long as I am
detained in the condition of mortality, and exiled from my heavenly Country,
that being free from all fear of mine enemies, and from vexations, cares and
sollicitudes of this life, I may be wholly devoted to thy service, that I may
attend thee only, and what tends to thee, that I may rejoice only in thee,
and my soul may rest in thee; that without distractions I may entertain thy
heavenly Doctrine, and the blessed motions of thy holy Spirit, spending my time
in the duties of necessity, in the works of charity, and the frequent office of
Religion, with diligence, and patience, and perseverance, and hope, expecting
the accomplishment of my days in peace; that when I go unto my dust, I may be
reckoned amongst those blessed souls, whose work it is to give thee praise, and
honor, and glory, to all eternity. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore. Amen.

An Evening Prayer. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
I.
O Lord God, who art the light and splendor of souls, in the brightness of
thy countenance is eternal Day that knows no night, in thy arms, and in thy
protection is all quietness, tranquillity, and everlasting repose, while the
darkness covers the face of the earth, receive my body and soul into thy
custody; let not the spirits of darkness come near my dwelling, neither suffer
my fancy to be abused with illusions of the night. Lord, I am thy servant, and
the sheep of thy pasture, let not the devil, who goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour, abuse my body, or make a prey of my soul, but defend me from all
those calamities which I have deserved, and protect my soul, that it consent
not to any work of darkness, lest mine enemy say, he has prevailed over me,
or do mischief to a soul redeemed with thy most precious Blood. Amen.

II.
PArdon and forgive me all the sins and offenses of my youth, the errors of
mine understanding, the inordination of mine affections, the irregularity of
all mine actions, and particularly whatsoever I have transgressed this day in
thought, word, or deed. Lord, let not thy wrath arise, for although I have
deserved the extremest pressure of thine indignation, yet remember my
infirmity, and how thou have sent thy Son to reveal thy infinite mercies to us,
and convey pardon and salvation to the penitent. I beseech thee also to accept
the heartiest devotion and humblest acknowledgement of a thankful heart, for
thy blessing and preservation of me this day, for unless thy Providence and
Grace had been my Defense and Guide, I had committed more and more grievous
sins, and had been swallowed up by thy just wrath, and severest judgments.
Mercy sweet Jesu.

III.
LOrd, let thy grace be so present with me, that though my body sleep, yet my
soul may for ever be watchful, that I sleep not in sin, or pretermit any
opportunity of doing thee service; let the remembrances of thy goodness and
glories be first and last with me, and so unite my heart unto thee with
habitual charity, that all my actions and sufferings may be directed to thy
glory, and every motion and inclination either of soul or body, may in some
capacity or other, receive a blessing from thee, and do thee service; that
whether I sleep or wake, travel or rest, eat or drink, live or die, I may
always feel the light of thy countenance shining so upon me, that my labors
may be easy, my rest blessed, my food sanctified, and my whole life spent with
so much sanctity and peace, that escaping from the darknesses of this world, I
may at last come to the land of everlasting rest in thy light, to behold light
and glory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and for evermore.

Another Prayer for Evening.
I.
VIsit we beseech thee, O Lord, this habitation with thy mercy, and us thy
servants with thy salvation, and repel far from us all the snares of the
Enemy. Let thy holy Angels dwell here to keep us in peace and safety, and thy
blessing be upon us for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II:
O Lord Jesu Christ, the lively Image of thy Fathers mercies and glories, the
Savior of all them that put their trust in thee; we offer and present to thee
all our strengths, and powers of our souls and bodies, and whatsoever we are,
or have, to be preserved, governed, and possessed by thee. Preserve us from all
vicious, vain, and proud cogitations, unchaste affections, and from all those
things which thou hate. Grant us thy holy charity, that we may love thee
above all the world, that we may, with sincerity of intention and zealous
affections, seek thee alone, and in thee only take our rest, inseparably
joining our selves unto thee, who art worthy to be beloved and adored of all
thy creatures with lowest prostrations, and highest affection, now and for
evermore. Amen.

III.
O Father of mercies, and God of all comforts, let this blessing be upon us,
and upon all the members of thy holy Church: all health and safety both of body
and soul, against all our enemies, visible and invisible, now and for ever.
Send us a quiet night, and a holy death in the actual communion of the
Catholic Church, and in thy charity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Now, and in all dangers and afflictions
of soul and body, in the hour of death, and in the day of Judgment, save us
and deliver us, O sweet Savior and Redeemer Jesu.

Collects to be added upon Various Occasions.
I. For the Church:
ALmighty and everlasting God, who have revealed thy glory to Jews and Gentiles
in our Lord Jesus Christ, extend thy hand of mercy over all the world, that thy
Church may spread like a flourishing vine, and enlarge her borders to the
uttermost parts of the earth, that all Nations partaking of the sweet
refreshings of thy Gospel, thy Name may be glorified, the honor of our Lord
Jesus advanced, his prophecies fulfilled, and his coming hastened. Bless, O
Lord, thy holy Church with all blessings of comfort, assistance, and
preservation; extirpate heresies, unite her divisions, give her patience and
perseverance in the faith, and confession of thy name, in despite of all
enmities, temptations, and disadvantages; destroy all wicked counsels intended
against her, or any of her children, by the Devil or any of his accursed
instruments. Let the hands of thy grace and mercy lead her from this vale of
misery, to the triumphant throne of her Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

II. For the King.
O Lord our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of Kings, who in thy hands
have the hearts of Kings, and can turn them as the rivers of water, send the
light of thy countenance, and abundance of blessings upon thy servant, our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, make him as holy, valiant, and prosperous as King
David, wise and rich like Solomon, zealous for the honor of thy Law and temple
as Josiah; and give him all sorts of great assistances, to enable him to serve
thee, to glorify thy name, to protect thy Church, to promote true Religion, to
overcome all his enemies, to make glad all his liege people, that he serving
thee with all diligence and the utmost of his possibility, his people may serve
him with honor and obedience, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed
word and ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III. For the Queen.
O God of heaven, Father of mercies, have mercy upon our most gracious Queen,
unite her unto thee with the bands of faith and love, preserve her to her lives
end in thy favor, and make her an instrument of glory to thy Name, of
refreshment to the Church, of joy to all faithful people of this Kingdom, of
a plenteous and blessed Issue to his Majesty, and Crown her with an eternal
weight of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV. For the Prince of Wales.
O Most blessed Jesu, Son of God, who came from thy Fathers bosom with
myriads of blessings to the sons of men; bless us all by thy especial care
and providence over the body and soul of the most illustrious Prince, CHARLES.
Prepare him with plenty of thy grace, and with great abilities to succeed his
Royal Father, in the service of thy Majesty, in defending the Catholic
Faith, in comforting thy holy Church, in governing all the people prudently,
justly, and religiously, that being partaker of all thy mercies here, in
proportion to his necessity and capacity, he may enjoy a fullness of thy glory
hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

V. For the Bishops.
O Thou great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, most glorious Jesu, bless all
holy and religious Prelates, especially the Bishops of our Church. O God let
abundance of thy grace and benediction descend upon their heads, that by a holy
life, by a true and Catholic belief, by a confident confession of thy Name,
and by a Fatherly care, great sedulity and watchfulness over their flock, they
may glorify thee our God, the great lover of Souls, and set forward the
salvation of their people, and of others by their example, and at last after a
plentiful conversion of souls, they may shine like the Stars in glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VI. For our Parents.
O Almighty God, and merciful Father, who from the loins of our first Parents,
Adam and Eve, have produced mankind, and have commanded us to honor our
Parents; in pursuance of thy holy Commandment, and of our duty to thee our God,
and in thee to them, we do with all humility beg a blessing of thee for our
Parents, who from thy mercy and plenty have conveyed many to us; pardon and
forgive all their sins and infirmities, increase in them all goodness, give
them blessings of the right hand, and blessings of the left; bless them in
their persons, in their posterity, in the comforts of thy holy Spirit, in a
persevering goodness, and at last in an eternal weight of glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII. For our Children.
O Father of Heaven, God of all the Creatures, by whose Providence mankind is
increased, I bless thy Name for bestowing on me that blessing of the righteous
man, the blessing of children. Lord bless them with health, with life, with
good understanding, with fair opportunities and advantages of education,
society, tutors, and governors; and above all with the graces of thy holy
Spirit, that they may live and be blessed under thy protection, grow in grace,
and be in favor with God and Man, and at last may make up the number of thine
elect children, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VIII. For our Patron, our Friends, and Benefactors.
O Almighty God, thou Fountain of all good, of all excellency both to Men and
Angels, extend thine abundant favor and loving kindnesses to my Patron, to all
my Friends and Benefactors; reward them and make them plentiful compensation
for all the good which from thy merciful Providence they have conveyed unto
me. Let the light of thy countenance shine upon them, and let them never come
into any desertion, affliction, or sadness, but such as may be an instrument
of thy glory and their eternal comfort, in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

IX. A Prayer of a Wife for her Husband.
O My God, who have graciously pleased to call me to the holy state of
Matrimony, bless me in it with the grace of chastity, with ^oyalty, obedience,
and complacency to my Husband; and bless him with long life, with a healthful
body, with an understanding soul, with abundance of all thy graces, which may
make him to be and continue thy servant, a true son of the Church, a supporter
and a guide to me his wife, a blessing and a comfort to his children, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

X. Of a Husband for his Wife.
O Merciful God, who art a Father to us thy children, a Spouse to thy holy
Church, a Savior and Redeemer to all mankind, have mercy upon thy handmaid my
wife, endue her with all the ornaments of thy heavenly grace, make her to be
holy and devout as Hester, loving and amiable as Rachel, fruitful as Leah,
wise as Rebeccah, faithful and obedient as Sarah, that being filled with thy
grace and benediction here, she may be partaker of thy glory hereafter, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

XI. For a Curate to say in behalf of his Parish.
O Blessed Jesus, thou that art an eternal Priest, an universal Bishop, and
the Fountain of all ghostly good, have mercy upon this Parish which thou have
cencredited to my charge. Lord, I am unfit for so great a burden, but by thy
aid and gracious acceptance I hope for mercy, pardon, and assistance. O Lord,
send thy holy Spirit to dwell amongst us: let here be peace and charity, and
true Catholic Religion, and holy Discipline. Comfort the comfortless, heal
the sick, relieve the oppressed, instru^t the ignorant, correct the refractory,
keep us all from all deadly sin, and make them obedient to their superiors,
friendly to one another, and servants of thy Divine Majesty, that so from thy
favor they may obtain blessings in their bodies, in their souls, in their
estates, and a supply to all their necessities, till at last they be freed from
all dangers and necessities in the full fruition of thy everlasting glories, O
blessed Savior, and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

XII. For a Parishioner to say in behalf of his Curate.
O God Almighty, who art pleased to send thy blessings upon us by the
Ministration of the Bishops and Priests of thy holy Church, have mercy upon thy
servant, to whom is committed the care of my soul, that he, by whose means thou
art graciously pleased to advance my spiritual good, may by thy grace and
favor be protected, by thy providence assisted, by thy great mercies comforted
and relieved in all his necessities bodily and ghostly, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

XIII. For safe Childe-birth.
O Blessed Jesus, Son of the eternal God, who according to thy humanity were
born of a holy Maid, who conceived thee without sin, and brought thee forth
without pain, have mercy upon me thy humble servant, and as by thy blessing I
have conceived, so grant that by thy favorable assistance I may be safely
delivered. Lord, grant me patience, and strength, and confidence in thee, and
send thy holy Angel to be my guardian in the hour of my travel. O shut not up
my soul with sinners, nor my life with them that go down into the pit. I humbly
also beg mercy for my child, grant it may be born with its right shape, give
it a comely body, and an understanding soul, life, and opportunity of Baptism,
and thy grace from the cradle to the grave, that it may increase the number of
Saints in that holy Fellowship of Saints and Angels, where thou live and
reignest eternal God, world without end. Amen.

XIV. Before a Journey.
O God, who did preserve thy servants Abraham and Jacob, thy People Israel,
thy servant Tobias, and the wise men of the East in their several journeys, by
thy providence, by a ministry of Angels, by a pillar of fire, and by the
guidance of a Star, vouchsafe to preserve us thy servants in the way we are now
to go. Be (O Lord a guide unto us) in our preparation, a shadow in the Day,
and a covering by Night, a rest to our weariness, and a staff to our
weakness, a patron in adversity, a protection from danger, that by thy
assistance we may perform our journey safely to thy honor, to our own comfort,
and with safety may return; and at last bring us to the everlasting rest of our
heavenly Country, through him who is the way, the truth, and the life, our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

XV. For afflicted persons.
O Lord God, merciful and gracious, whose compassion extends to all that are
in misery and need, and take delight in the relieving the distresses of the
afflicted, give refreshment to all the comfortless, provide for the poor, give
ease to all them that are tormented with sharp pains, health to the diseased,
liberty and redemption to the captives, cheerfulness of spirit to all them
that are in great desolations. Lord, let thy Spirit confirm all that are
strong, strengthen all that are weak, and speak peace to afflicted consciences,
that the light of thy countenance being restored to them, they may rejoice in
thy salvation, and sing praises unto thy Name, who have delivered their souls
from death, their eyes from tears, and their feet from falling. Grant this for
the honor of thy mercies, and the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

XVI. For our Enemies.
O Blessed Jesu, who were of so infinite mercies, so transcendent a charity,
that thou did descend from Heaven to the bowels of the earth, that thou
might reconcile us who were enemies, to the mercies of thy heavenly Father;
and in imitation of so glorious example have commanded us to love them that
hate us; and to pray for them that are our enemies; I beseech thee of thine
infinite goodness, that thou would be pleased to keep me with thy grace in
so much meekness, justice, and affable disposition, that I may, so far as
concerns me, live peaceably with all men, giving no man occasion of offense,
and to them who hate me without a cause, I beseech thee give thy pardon, and
fill them with charity toward thee and all the world, bless them with all
blessings in order to eternity, that when they are reconciled to thee, we also
may be united with the bands of Faith, and Love, and a common Hope, and at last
we may be removed to the glories of thy Kingdom, which is full of love and
eternal charity, and where thou live and reignest, ever one God, world
without end. Amen.

XVII. A Prayer to be said upon Ember-dayes.
O Merciful Jesu, who have promised perpetuity to the Church, and a permanency
in defiance of all the powers of darkness, and the gates of hell, and to this
purpose have constituted several orders, leaving a power to the Apostles, and
their Successors, the Bishops, to beget Fathers of our souls, and to appoint
Priests and Deacons for the edification of the Church, the benefit of all
Christian people, and the advancement of thy service: have mercy upon thy
Ministers the Bishops, give them for ever great measure of thy holy Spirit, and
at this time particular assistances, and a power of discerning and trying the
spirits of them who come to be ordained to the Ministry of thy Word and
Sacraments; that they may lay hands suddenly on no man, but maturely,
prudently, and piously, they may appoint such to thy service and the Ministry
of thy Kingdom, who by learning, discretion, and a holy life are apt
instruments for the conversion of souls, to be examples to the people, guides
of their manners, comforters of their sorrows, to sustain their weaknesses, and
able to promote all the interests of true Religion. Grant this, O great
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, Blessed Jesus, who live and reignest in
the Kingdom of thine eternal Father, one God, world without end. Amen.

Sanctus Deus.
Sanctus Fortis.
Sanctus Immortalis.
FINIS.

