BABYLON BLAZOND, OR, THE JESUIT JERKD:

A Satyr.

Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira Dei Stygiis sese extulit undis.
Virgil. Aenead. Lib. 3. LONDON, Printed for William Leach, at the Crown in
Cornhil, MDCLXXXI.

AScend, Alecto, from thy Den, One of the Furies of hell. Ovid.
and come
Just as thou look in that Infernal Home,
Fell Fury fire my Fancy, for I have
More Cause than Poet e're had yet, to Rave:
Thou art my Muse, thy Snakes my Laurels are,
Inspired by thee, I Will Rome's Intrigues declare:
Then to thy intermitted Task retire,
And pay the Jesuits their Arrears of Fire,
A Jesuit old Satan's Envoy is,
Sent to succeed the Snake of Paradise;
For when the fatal stroke of Adam's Loss,
Was healed by the Great Theanthropos, God and Man.

And that first Argument of hellish Power,
Was quite Confuted by a Savior;
Then baffled Lucifer no answer had,
Till he a Jesuit his Rejoinder made,
By whom he hopes completely to renew
The Battle, and once more Mankind undo;
Plotting his old Dominion to make good
By false Implicit Faith, or Fire and Blood:
That catches Fools, and these destroy the Wise,
Thus all Mankind are equally his Prize.
'Shut your Eyes close, believe me, and you will see,
'Th' Ignatian cries the way to Eternity:
'Deny all Reason, misbelieve your Sense,
'Church cannot err, be that your Confidence:
'Pin on your Sleeve your Faith, and though you are blind,
'Take but fast hold, and follow us behind;
'Our open Eyes the way for both will find.
This Wine and Wafer now are common Food,
But a few words shall make 'em Flesh and Blood;
And though they still the self same things appear,
Yet is Christ's very Blood and Body here:
Such plain Impostures, such bold Cheats as these,
Can surely none but Fools or Madmen please,
The Snake of Paradise played fairer far
With Adam's Wife, and more upon the square;
He called an Apple, Apple, bid her see
How fair the Fruit, desirable the Tree:
The Jesuit's tricks would never have taken with Eve,
She saw and felt before she did believe:
Besides he told her that 'twould make her wise,
But these the grossest Ignorance advise.
And thus we lose our selvesb' a greater cheat,
Than what the Devil used in Eve's Defeat:
Thus we our Sense and Reason lay aside,
To take an old Ambitious Pope for Guide.
Thus we turn Stocks and Idiots, and then
Become good Cath'licks, ceasing to be men;
As if the only way to save our Souls,
Were to be easy Slaves, or senseless Fools.
To all this fond Credulity we are hurld,
By slavish Fears about a burning World; Purgatory.

So (to be sure) to feel no torment there,
First strip our selves of all our Senses here.
Now my Alecto, let us advance and view
The frauds that lurk under Religious show;
For though to Heaven their fair pretenses swell,
The root lies deep and dark, as is thy Cell:
No Heathen Lawgiver, no Pagan Priest,
Could er'e with such mysterious Wiles infest
The superstitious Multitude, for they
Are still most apt to fear they know not why;
No Cabalist of State could er'e trapan
With such firm subtlety as Rome's Divan.
And First, lest Holy Church should chance to float
Without a last Appeal in endless doubt;
You must with dumb Obedience still repair
Unto Rome's holy Apostolic Chair,
That, that is Infallible and cannot err,
This bold Assumption keeps more in awe, An Emperor of Rome, and a pretended
Goddess. Lucius Flor.

Than Numa with his feigned Egeria;
For though it seems at points of Faith to aim;
`Tis to be uncontroulably Supreme,
Get universal Def'rence, and Create
A close dependence on the Roman Seat:
Branding on all damnable Heresy,
That dare oppose the Apostolic See,
Or Rome's Political Divinity.
Rome's Doctrine is a secular Device,
Mere trick of State in reverend Disguise,
The ambitious Spawn of latter Centuries.
And though it proudly boast an ancient Line
From Peter, it is of basest Origin;
A Priestly Brat, by them Engendered on
Ignorance, Fear, and Superstition;
These three completely make the Triple Crown,
And still support old Rome's Imperial Throne.
How silly do the Priests by help of these
Make men believe, and then do what they please;
How solemnly they dazzle vulgar Eyes
With fine mysterious holy Vanities:
Whose Ceremonious Pomp strikes awful dread
In fools that by their Eyes and Ears are led:
But should I here endeavor to declare
The numerous Gimcracks of the Romish Fair,
Their mystic Idols, consecrated Bawbles,
Feigned Miracles, and monstrous holy Fables;
How dead Saints Relics cure the Gout and Ptisick,
And are like Aegypts Mummy, used for Physic,
How they can scare the Devil with a stench,
As young Tobias did to get the Wench. Tobit 8. 3.

In telling this I might as tedious be,
As the return of their next Jubilee;
But these are petty Trifles, pretty Toys,
Tricks to catch Women, gaping Fools, and Boys;
They have devices of a larger Size,
Traps to ensnare the Wary and the Wise.
And if you chance to boggle at the Bait,
They curse, and cry Damnation be your Fate,
And then you swallow it at any rate,
Oh! what a melancholy dismal Story
They roar in dying Ears of Purgatory;
That rather than the affrighted Wretch will burn
So long, he will all his Gold to Masses turn.
Thus Ecclesiastic Chemists (you would admire)
Make real Gold by a fictitious Fire.
Next extreme Unction comes from whence the Priest
Gets the most good by greasing in the Fist;
But of all Cheats that necessary are
Unto Salvation, Auricular
Confession bears the Bell, and seems to me
Next to Infallible Supremacy.
It wears a holy Vail, but underneath
Is Shame and Slavery far worse than Death:
The Priest may tyrannize without Control,
That knows the guilty secret of the Soul.
So when the Gentle Sex Confession makes
That they have often sinned upon their Backs,
How easily the Priest comes in for snacks,
And shrievs the pretty Pen'tent Alamode,
No trick like a Jure Divino Fraud.
Thus are their chiefest Doctrines plain Device,
Pimp to their Pride, their Lust and Avarice;
In Holy Apostolical Disguise
In short, the whole mysterious Cheat does lie,
In Superstition and Idolatry,
Two Spurious Graffs
Set in the Tree of Life, Religion,
By whose luxurious Branches it is o'regrown
To such a monstrous Disproportion;
That the first Planters would it quite disown,
Religion like a modest Rural Maid,
No artificial Dress, no Fucus had,
But was in Native Innocence clad.
Till in Rome's Court she ceased to be such,
Thence sprang her Infamy and first Debauch;
There laying plain simplicity aside,
She grew to lazy Wantonness and Pride:
Yet still some modesty confined her home,
Nor rambled she beyond the Walls of Rome:
Till proud of her successful Charms, she grew
Ambitious greatest Monarchs to subdue:
So by deceitful Arts sh'enlarg'd her Power,
And made them Slaves that she had served before:
Then wisely some the Vassalage forsook,
Others repined, as weary of the Yoke;
She jealous lest her Universal Sway
Should lessen, and her former Fame decay;
Amongst others, did the Schoolmens Pen employ
To vindicate her Truth and Honesty,
(Schoolmen who ransack Sciences and Arts,
To prove with pains that they are Fools of parts)
So these her Honor justified in Words,
As bully Jesuits plot to do with Swords;
But both in vain, for it is concluded on;
Their Mistress is the Whore of Babylon.
Shift, shift the Scene, Alecto, Fury, Fiend,
Wake all thy Snakes and make this Tragic End;
By Hellish Art raise up in dark Cabal,
The Pope, a Jesuit, and Cardinal;
Thy self place in the middle raving wood,
With Poisons, Pistols, Daggers, Fire and Blood.
Now let this Scene start into sudden sight,
By gloomy Flashes of sulphurous Light;
There let his Holiness's Face appear,
Full of deep Counsel, weighty thought, and care,
Whilst each of you in awful silence hears
The sacred Oracle with humble Ears.
Was it for this my ample Power was given,
For this have I the Keys of Hell and Heaven?
In vain I boast of a Supremacy,
And call my Chair the Universal See:
A little Nest of Heretics cut off
From Europe's Earth, at all my power does laugh:
Who though they kindly could decline to be
A Bar to balance Gallick Tyranny,
Yet still oppose my Holy Monarchy.
False Agents, Turning to the Jesuit.
heartless Traitorous, have you
So often sworn by Sacramental Vow,
Or to Convert this Island, or undo?
Was your Commission scant, did I deny
Plenipotentiary Villainy?
Have not I nulled Divine and Humane Laws,
That without Let, you might promote the Cause?
Heavens Laws, though fixed by an Eternal Seal,
Stoop and are liable to my Repeal.
Moses once broke these Tables, often I,
Not to prevent, but fix Idolatry.
Thus had your large Commission no restraint,
Nor did you Apostolic Blessing want;
Nay more the blackest Crimes in you were Merit,
For which all others endless Flames inherit:
So Treasons, Murders, Perjuries, became
Sure Monuments of your Eternal Fame;
So Nature's Course was changed, yet nothing's done
To Advance the Catholic Religion.
Be gone, Slave, fly, Delude with crafty Words,
If they prove vain, use Poison, Fire, and Swords;
Make better work on it, or I swear by th'Mass,
And the Divinity of holy Cross --
These chance unlucky Words broke all the Spell,
They vanished, and Alecto sunk to Hell.
FINIS.

