Mercy and Judgment. A SERMON, Preached at the Assizes held at LINCOLN; July
15. 1678. By Humfrey Babington, D. D. Rector of Boothby-Painel in the County of
LINCOLN.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University; for Henry
Dickinson, Bookseller in Cambridge. 1678.

Imprimatur.

Thomas Holbech Procan. John North. James Duport. Richard Minshull.


To the Worshipful THOMAS HARINGTON of Boothby-Painel Esquire; High SHERIFF of the
County of LINCOLN.
SIR,
THIS Sermon, which at first was the mere product of your earnest desires, and
then (for the greatest part of it,) the subject of your favorable and candid
attention at Lincolone; is now by your more earnest importunity, seconded with
the powerful request of the Honorable and Reverend Judges; (though not
without some timorous, and reasonable reluctance) presented to your hand. When
the Prophet Elijah was taken up into Heaven, there was a double portion of his
Spirit conferred upon Elisha, who succceded him in his Prophetical Office. Had
some such (though much inferion) measure of the Learning, Piety, and Spirit of
that Right Reverend Father in God, Robert, late Lord-Bishop of Lincoln, been
imparted to me, who, by his undeserved favor and choice, had the honor to
succeed him (when he was taken up into an higher Orb of the Church, and too
soon after, from us, into Heaven) in his care and charge at Boothby-Painel; I
should then with more cheerfulness and alacrity, have presumed to publish this
discourse; hoping it might find, a little of that acceptance and approbation;
which his most excellent Sermons, have justly merited amongst the best of
those, that have, for some years past, honored and enriched our English
Nation. But indeed, Sir, I am as far short of him in those his real
excellencies, as I am, in time and stature. A very stripling, and puny, to that
Man of Parts and Learning. He left me his Rectory, but not his Spirit, either
of Teaching, or Ruling: And though I have his Table, Stool, and Candlestick,
yet if I thought my self, one jot the more learned for them; I should be no
wiser than he was, who (as Lucian reports) that he might be taken for an
eminent Philosopher, bought the Earthen Lamp of Epictetus, at no less rate or
price than three hundred drams. I must therefore acknowledge, I am as
unworthy to write after him, as I was to succeed him; and beg your belief, that
the great reverence I have for his Name and Memory, and those many obliging
encouragements, he vouchsafed me, whilst he lived; have made me more unwilling
to appear in public; least I should derogate any thing, from that name and
honor, he has appropriated to Booth-by-Painel: Where you have an undoubted
right, to succeed in the possessions and patronage, of your honored Father,
and that worshipful and excellent Person, Thomas Harington Esquire, your
Religious Grandfather; as being the true Heir, not only of his Inheritance, but
(which is far better) of his Pious conformity and Loyalty. To him Doctor
Sanderson dedicated some of his Sermons, and was most affectionalty esteemed,
by him, for them. What protection and favor he vouchsafed to the Right
Reverend my Predecessor; I have good hopes you will not deny to his humble
successor, and that which he does now present unto you; especially since both
are your own, by a double right or obligation, of desire and service. Not to
detain you any longer with this mean address. May the God of Grace and Mercy,
replenish both your self and your truly Pious and Virtuous Consort; with all
spiritual and temporal blessings in this life; and Crown you with those which
are eternal in the life to come, is the earnest and daily prayer of,

Trin. Coll. Sept. 17. 1678. Sr, Your most faithful and obliged Orator,
Humfrey Babington.

Mercy and Judgment.
PSALM. CI.I. I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto thee, O Lord will I sing.


THIS Psalm presents you with a remarkable example, and pattern of a most
excellent Heroical King and Governor. Psalm. 78.70.
God had advanced his servant David from the sheepfold to the Throne; changed
his Crook into a Scepter; and he who before was but (...), a shepherd, or
feeder of sheep; was made (...), a feeder, or Ruler of his people. The same
word signifies both.

He being thus highly exalted, makes it his business, faithfully and wisely to
exercise that power, which God had entrusted him with, for the glory of his
great Name; the peace and happiness of the Jewish State and Nation; and here we
have a short, but an exact essay, or commentary, of his good Rule and
Government.

Now since he cannot well rule another, who is not Master of himself, nor
Govern a City or Kingdom, who cannot order his own Family; King David shows us
how skilful and well exercised he was in all these.

For here we have first his Ethics or Morals, as to himself.

Secondly, his Oeconomics, as to his Family.

Thirdly, his Politics, as to his Kingdom.

Lastly, his singular piety; as that which compleats, perfects, succeeds, and
blesses each of them.

First, i. e. to defend and assist him, if he did well; but to judge and punish
him if he did wickedly. Verse. 2.
When thou shall come unto me, I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

He will set no wicked thing, Verse. 3.
or word of Belial before his eyes; that is, he will not do, nor speak, nor so
much as behold, any thing that is sinful or profane.

He also hates the doing of them who turn aside, that is, of such who either
are Apostates, and turn aside from the service and worship of the true God, to
Idolatry; or else, of such who decline from the rules of Mercy and Judgment,
how plausible soever their pretenses be.

Then secondly as to his Family or Household; Chald. (...) Lingua tertia.
three forked tongue; a proud and lofty look; a light-fingred, pilfering,
deceitful hand; such an one he will either cast out, or cut off from it.

Thirdly,

His eyes are upon the faithful of the land, Verse. 6.
that they may dwell with him. He who walks in a perfect way shall serve him.
And surely such were most fit and likely to do him the best service. These he
loves, honors, defends, and prefers to the highest places of business and
trust under him. But as for the wicked of the land, those he will destroy
early, (...) in the mornings; which may either relate,

First, To the time when the Jews were wont to sit in Judgment, and that was
commonly in the morning; Jer. 21.12.
the fittest season for a business of such concern and moment: or, R.M. Nachm.
Gem. San. (...)


Secondly, To the sentence of the Judge, which should proceed from proofs and
testimonies, as clear as the day or morning light: or,

Lastly, To the speedy, and sudden execution of their Malefactors, which was,
for the most part, presently after the sentence of judgment, or condemnation
was passed upon them.

Fourthly, As for King David's piety, Psalm; that actuates and informs every
part of his Government, whether at home or abroad, the holiness and peace of
his Family and people, was his chiefest care and design. Indeed piety is the
best policy; the great preserver, and surest prop of all Governments; without
which, Policy will, at last, prove but dangerous craft; and power, degenerate
into barbarous cruelty.

It was reported to the commendation of Themistoeles, that though he could not
tune an instrument, yet he could well tune a Commonwealth. Of how much greater
commendation must good King David be accounted worthy, who was so excellent at
both? For having tuned the Commonwealth of Israel: He then tunes his Harp, and
plays or descants the harmony of his Government upon it. (...) I will sing of
Mercy and Judgment, viz. of that Mercy and Judgment, with which he Governed his
people. Indeed the Chaldee paraphrase gives us another exposition of this
verse, as though the Psalmist had meditated, or sung, of God's Mercy and
Judgment toward himself: It speaks thus, (...) Targ. etc.
Whether thou deal'st Mercifully with me, or do Judgment with me, for all, I
will sing a Psalm of praise before thee, O Lord. But this reading seems to be
contrary to the scope of the Psalm; and therefore is not followed, by many or
the most Learned Commentators, whether Jews or Christians, I have yet met with,
who take this Psalm, to be a song, or Meditation of holy David's care and piety
in Governing himself, his Family, and Kingdom, by enacting good Laws, and
distributing rewards and punishments, with such impartial Justice, that
holiness and virtue might be encouraged and advanced: but wickedness and vice,
chastised and suppressed.

Before the use of Letters was found out, the ancient Grecks were wont to sing
their Laws; which therefore were called Arist. Prob. Sect. 19. Quaest. 28. Nec
ante cantare destitit quam inchoatum absolveret (...). Suct. Nero. c. 20.
(...), as signifying both Laws and songs. So did the Bards and Druids, who
were an ancient Order of Priests and Poets in this Nation. The Philosopher
gives us the reason of this use or custom (...), that men might not forget them.

Indeed Music and Song, are a most sweet and effectual way, of conveighing to
the minds and memories of men, what they should both understand, and practice.
How often does the Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 20.7.22.27.31.97.12.78.7.35.105.5.
Psalm. 106.7.
sing of the divine Laws of God, in holy numbers; that they might be had in
remembrance? How often does his sweet, and harmonious notes, charm and compose
the wild affections of sinful men; and soften their hard and stubborn hearts,
to a willing submission unto those Laws.

With such Music, or with such a Song of Mercy and Judgment as this, (it may
well be supposed) he had before quieted the distemper of King Saul; and
dispossessed him of his evil spirit: a spirit (as all such wicked ones are)
full of presumption, and despair. Judgment, was fit to allay presumption; and
Mercy to drive away despair. I will sing of Mercy and Judgment.

This song consists of two parts, the highest or Cantus; and the lowest or
Bassus.

Mercy is the highest part, for it reaches, or rises, as high as heaven it
self. 1 King. 19.12. (...), Sept.
(...) A small soft voice, like to that by which God manifested himself to the
Prophet Elijah.

Judgment is the lowest part, Psalm. 36.6.
for it is (...) a great deep; reaching as low as hell; and making a deep
solemn sound, like the Angels last Trumpet. David most skilfully accords these
two together, and so makes perfect harmony.

Had he sung only of Mercy, though the ditty might have been very sweet and
pleasant, yet it would not have been full, and perfect.

Or had he sung of Judgment alone, the ground (though solemn and grave) would
have been but harsh and doleful: Mercy slatts, and softens Judgment; and
Judgment, excites, and sharpens Mercy. These sharps and flatts make the best
music, the excellent composition of both which in the Text will be well worth
your attention.

Mercy, and Judgment; are the harmony of the Universs; the two Poles upon which
the world turns; and those musical spears, which tune and time the praises of
the Almighty Creator, who made all things Wisd. 11.20.
in number weight and measure; the three well known proportions of order,
pulchritude and harmony.

Mercy and Judgment, are the brightest constellations in the firmament of
dominion and Government; The stability and strength of David's Person and
Throne. 1 King. 1.44. 2 Samuel 8.18. (...) Liberatores, a (...) Excisores, a
(...). Burgens.
The Pelethites and Cherethites which were appointed for his Royal Guard. The
Office of the Pelethites, as may be presumed from their names, was to defend
and free the innocent; But the Office of Cherethites, to cut off, and destroy
the guilty.

Mercy and Judgment the two Testaments; mount Sion, and mount Sinai; mount
Gerizim, and mount Ebal; the one for blessing and the other for cursing.

Mercy and Judgment, Zech. 11.7.
Zechariah's two staves, Beauty and Bands, the one to support and comfort, the
other to chastise and punish.

Mercy and Judgment; (...). Nazian.
that admirable pair of Sister virtues; which are as benign, and propitious to
a good Ruler; as Castor and Pollux (those twin-brother Stars) are feigned to be
to a fearful Mariner: who when they appear together, betoken a speedy and
prosperous voyage; but when they come single, portend nothing but storms and
loss: so Mercy and Judgment, when they go hand in hand together, betoken a good
and happy government: for when Mercy and truth meet together, Psalm. 85.10.
then Righteousness and peace kiss each other. But where they are alone, or
single; either only Mercy, or only Judgment; there is nothing but confusion and
mischief.

Mercy without Judgment is (...) indeed; but in the second or worse
signification, that is reproach or injury; or (if you will) foolish pity, which
destroys more than it saves, Sen. de Clem. Lib. 1. c. 2.
Omnibus ignoscere, crudelius est quam nulli. And Judgment without Mercy, is no
better than inhuman, and brutishcruelty.

The Jews have well observed, that God governs the world by a twofold (...) or
propriety, Targum.
that is to say (...) a propriety of Mercy, and (...) a propriety of Judgment.
These God has joined together in the Government of the world; and therefore
let no man separate them. His government is the best, which David was resolved
to imitate; and how exact He was in the composition of Mercy and Judgment, for
the happiness and prosperity of his Kingdom, is sufficiently made known unto
us, in holy Writ.

Yet there is one Nich. Matchiavell, that Florentine Politician, who in his
Book Il Principe, represents Holy David, as a Tyrant, and compares him with
Philip of Macedon, who was no better. For which profane boldness, (amongst
other dangerous and immemorable errors) he is (not without cause) censured by
Lorinus, Fitz-herbert, and other Writers. But if I do not mistake the
Politician, he rather acquaints us, what use Caesar Borgia made of David's
failings, to palliate and excuse his monstrous and abominable villainies; than
accuses that good King, of Tyranny or Misgovernment.

It Is well known how apt wicked men are to draw the failings of God's children
into example and practice, but they will not imitate them in their repentance.
Ambr. Apol. David. Lib. 1. c. 4.
Peccavit David quod solent Reges, sed poenitentiam gessit, flevit, quod non
solent Reges, etc. If David sinned like a King, he also repented like a King.
Great crimes require great contrition, a troubled spirit, a broken heart, which
holy David is most remarkable for; witness Psalm 51; which he composed that it
might remain a public and perpetual testimony of his true, and unfeigned
repentance.

And let all the Caesar's of the world make what use they can of his Errors, he
has set them here such a pattern of good, and wise Government; that did they
(or could they) but imitate him, they would not be Borgias, i. e. Tyrants.

As for these words of the Text, Mercy and Judgment; they must neither be
divided, nor separated, as you have heard. I shall therefore only treat of
them, as the harmonious parts of King David's Government; and a most proper
subject for this occasion.

First of Mercy, which indeed deserves the first place; because there is no
virtue more noble, or more becoming the nature of Man, than Mercy; Nec uila re
propius homines ad Deum accedunt quam salute hominibus danda. Cic. pro Ligar.
neither does he resemble God himself, in any thing more, than by showing
Mercy, and pity. Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father also is merciful.

God is good unto all, Psalm. 145.9.
and his tender Mercies are over all his works: Now Judgment is one of them;
though it be his strange work and his strange act, Isa. 28.21.
as the Prophet Isaiah emphatically notes. By which we may observe, that
Judgment is opus alienum a natura sua, a work not agreeable with his nature;
Lam. 3.33. S. Jam. 2.13.
that he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. And
therefore Mercy (...), rejoices over Judgment, like a conqueror; leads
Judgment captive, which follows her triumphant Chariot, bound with Adamantine
Chains, disarmed both of Lance, and Sword.

As Mercy has the pre-eminence, the first and chiefest place, amongst the
works, and attributes of God; so ought it to have the first, and chiefest
place, in the nature, and actions of men; Especially in the great affairs and
concerns of the chief Magistrate, who is God's Representative. He (if any)
should be plenteous in Mercy; by which he will not only gain, but force the
love and obedience of his subjects; and not so much rule over them, as in them,
that is, in their hearts; (...). Bias.
and they will not so much fear him, as fear for him; and be in pain, least
some unhappy mischief or disaster should snatch him away from their Government.
For what Loyal subject, would not much rather spend his dearest blood and life;
than that his mercisull and gracious Prince should be in danger, or miscarry?
Further, by Mercy he obtains true honor, and glory; and provides for his own
safety, and the security of his people.

Mercy was accounted a Goddess at Athens, had her altar and image; challenged
the knee, (as dedicated unto her) which she vouchsafed her suppliants to touch.
(...). Phocion.
And there it was accounted as great sacrilege, to take Mercy from humane
nature; as to steal an Altar from the Temple.

It was therefore a strange ill natured principle, or paradox of the Stoics;
Diog. Laert. Zeno. (...). ibid.
who taught (...), that merciful men were fools; that it is difficult to be
merciful and wise; Neminent misericordem esse nisi stultum and levem. Cic pro
Mur.
that Mercy is but the imperfection of a weak mind. They grant indeed, that it
is the part of a wise man to succor and relieve the necessities and
indigencies of those who are in want; but at no hand to pity them, because
(forsooth) he must not suffer any perturbation, or trouble in his affections.
But Cicero informs us that Philosophers of more moderate principles, than the
Stoics were, and as wise, did acknowledge, a good man should be both merciful
and gracious; and that he who is without pity and compassion, deserves not the
name of a man, but a Monster; and is no better than some wild, or ravenous
Brute. However, Stoicisme must not be the Rule or Measure of Christianity; nor
are we to learn, or judge of Mercy, from Illud satis est ad coarguendum hominis
errorem quod inter vitia and morbos misericordiam posuit. Lact. Inst. Lib, 3.
c. 22.
Zeno's Porch, but from Christ's School. A Christian without Bowels is a
contradiction in the Adject. Coll. 3.12.
We are commanded to put on bowels of mercy, these we are to put on, and wear,
as our richest robes, and ornaments. Our Blessed Savior took our nature upon
him, that he might be sensible of our infirmities, and a compassionate
Mediator. How merciful he was when he espoused our misery, and satisfied for
our sins; is beyond all example, or imitation. Yet he has left us a Precept
and Pattern, Matthew. 5.7.
which we should diligently express, and follow; and has assured us, that if
we be mercifnll we shall obtain mercy; Jam. 2.12.
but he shall have judgment without mercy who showed no mercy.

This word (...) signifies both piety, and pity. Mercy which consists of both,
is a sacred affection and compassion of the soul, whereby we are moved to do
good: Or else it may be defined, Clem. Alex. Strom. 2. (...). Arist. Rhet. Lib.
2. c. 10.
(...), a sorrow for a person who suffers wrongfully: suffering innocence is
the proper object of mercy; for no man pities a Traitor, or Murderer, when he
is deservedly punished.

Saint August thus defines it. De Civit. Dei. Lib. 9. Cap. 5. Misericordia est
aegritudo ex miscria alterius, injuria laborantis. Cic. Tus. 4.
Misericordia est alienae miseriae in cord nostro compassio. Mercy is that
compassion, we have in our hearts for another's misery.

Thus have we briefly seen the nature of this excellent virtue, described unto
us; and are informed how it softens and calms our spirits, and tempers them, to
a compassionate sense and feeling of our brethrens misery.

But as mercy respects the public, and is concerned with the great affairs of
the supreme Magistrate in his Government, so it exerts and shows it self in
these following particulars.

First in constituting,

Nothing is more necessary in the world than good Laws. Deuteronomy. 33.4.
They are the inheritance of God's people. Moses commanded a law, the
inheritance, or possession of the congregation of Jacob. An inheritance is that
which men commonly much esteem and value; and so they should good Laws. Now if
the Law be our inheritance? then as good no inheritance as no Law: For what
will our inheritance profit us, when there is no Law to secure us in the
possession of it?

Mercy was the first, and best Lawmakers; for the Law of nature, antecedent to
all positive Laws, was made by mercy; and then justice and judgment followed,
as necessary, for the due execution of that Law.

The design of mercy in making Laws, is the common good of mankind; not only to
defend the bodies and estates of men, from destruction, plunder and violence,
but their minds and souls from ignorance, error, atheism, evil customs,
debaucheries, and all profaneness. Mercy's Law, will teach the ignorant; reduce
the erroneous; admonish the negligent; quicken the remiss, and slow; resolve
the doubtful, and scrupulous; strengthen the weak; and confirm the strong.

Then is a Magistrate merciful, when he enacts good Laws, for the maintenance
of true Religion and virtue; when he honors them who honor God, and whom God
will honor; when he provides, and allows of such means and helps, as are
necessary for the increase, and encouragement, of faithful and able men, to do
him service both in Church and State. This mercy will certainly, support, and
establish his Throne, make his Government prosperous, and preserve his people
in peace and safety.

Secondly, Mercy takes care that her Laws be but few,

Laws are the Medicines of a State; the fewer, and simpler (I mean without
mixture) such medicines are, the better. There is much danger (you know) in too
much Physic, and so there is in too many Laws. The whole Moral-law is contained
in Ten Precepts; and those Ten are by our Savior reduced to Two; Matthew. 22.37,
38.
the love of God, and the love of our Neighbor. Zalcucus the Locrian Lawgiver
(as Strabo writes) made but few laws; which his successors (either by too much
subtilty, or folly,) augmented to such a multitude, that they became more
numerous than good; so many, that they could not be read; and so obscure, that
they could not be understood.

Corruptissima Repub. plurimae Leges. Tac. An. 4. (...). Plato.

Ut olim flagitiis, sic nunc Legibus laborari. An. 4.


Such a superfoetation of Laws is an evident sign of some corrupt distempers
and manners in the body politic. Too many Laws, beget too many Suits, Actions,
Pleadings; with much strife, debate, contention. For what Cause can be so
clear, and good; which may not be obscured, and baffled by the clashing, and
interfering of diverse Laws?

This made Tacitus complain, that whereas Rome (not long before his time) did
abound with many wicked and detestable vices; it was then pestered with more
mischievous and unnecessary Laws; which proved a remedy far worse than the
disease. Therefore the Magistrate should be advised to take care, least his
Government which is established by Laws, be not overthrown, by their
unreasonable number, or multitude.

Thirdly, Mercy endeavors to cut off, and shorten all tedious long-delayed
Suits, and Pleadings. These are the reproaches of all Laws. Short injustice is
better than long justice, says the Persian Proverb. And a poor Client is more
injured by the subtle delays, and falsehood of a perfidious Advocate; than by
the oppression, or malice of his cruel Adversary. There is nothing now more
common than to spin out Causes, and to frustrate the just proceedings of the
Law; but all such delays are no better than Concessum latrocinium. Lips. Pol.
And I pray, which are the worst thieves? Those that rob a Traveller by the
King's highway? Or they who pervert the Cause of their Clients before the
Judge; and pick their pockets at the King's Bar and Tribunal?

Fourthly, Mercy designs, by her Laws to defend, and relieve the oppressed; to
vindicate the righteous innocent person, from the power, and malice of his
unjust Adversary. By the wise care and providence of Almighty God, Mercy has
not wanted in all ages, some excellent Orators and Advocates to plead and
defend the Cause of her innocent Clients. How famous were both Athens and Rome,
for such Oracles of Law and Justice?

And still mercy takes care, and endeavors (especially in all Christian
States) that her Magistrates, and Judges, should be men of ability and truth,
Exodus 18.21.
fearing God and hating Covetousness. Her Patrons and Advocates, men of honor
and integrity, as well as Learning and Eloquence. That her Witnesses be of
known fidelity and justice; without all suspicion of malice, envy, or
partiality: Prove. 19.28.
for an ungodly witness scorneth judgment: That her Juries be discreet,
merciful men; well instructed, and skillful in the Laws; and not made up of
such, as can hardly tell the difference, or meaning of these two words,
Plaintiff and Defendant. If the Cause of a persecuted innocent, be not
examined, and determined by such worthy and judicious Patriots, men so well
qualified, and disposed as these; it may soon miscarry.

But the God of mercy be thanked; neither Athens nor Rome in the height of all
their flourish; could boast of more able, generous, upright, and eloquent,
Judges, Orators, and Lawyers; than our Nation does at this present enjoy: who
can, and do daily snatch the innocent Prey, from the devouring jaws of a
powerful Adversary, and may they still long be continued unto us.

Fifthly, Mercy will (if need be) mitigate the rigor, of some severe, yet
necessary, laws. It Is reason that in some particular cases, the Law should be
severe; 1 Timothy 1.9.10, etc.
because it was not made for the righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for
murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, and such like,
as the Apostle there further mentions. Now what man can deny but that such
Offenders, as these should suffer condign punishment? Or what (...), can be
hoped for, by such lawless Criminals? Yet because that (...), or summum jus,
that extremity, or rigor of the Law, is not always necessary, no, nor sometimes
safe; and because there is no Tenedia bipennis in mercy's court; therefore
mercy makes intercession, and deprecates;

First, That the sentence of the Law be not too (...) Estote tardi in judicio
Per. Avoth. c. 1.
suddenly executed upon such Malefactors, Mercy would have all justice done
unto them, before it be done upon them. And though the Law may require speedy
execution, yet mercy pleads; Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa.
Juven.
that the Magistrate in such a business of moment, as the death of a man is,
should not fear the blame, of convenient, or reasonable slackness. That
although the bodies of such Criminals be sentenced, and consigned, to a
deserved punishment; yet some care ought to be taken for their souls; and some
convenient time allowed them for ghostly advise, and counsel, that so (if
possible) they may be brought to a due, and true sense of their sin and misery;
and receive that charitable Office, which the Church has appointed for persons
in their condition.

Secondly, Mercy mediates, that the sentence of condemnation may be mitigated,
as to the kind, or manner of death which the Malefactor is to suffer. And it is
some mercy if it be neither so painful, or shameful, as the Malefactor
deserves. Thus mercy would mitigate the rigor of some severe, yet necessary
Laws.

Lastly, Mercy designs not the punishment, but the reformation of Offenders.
All penal censures are either

First, For the amendment of such as transgress the Law. Or,

Secondly, For their just satisfaction, and reparation, who are injured. Or,

Thirdly, For a discouraging example to others, lest they fall into the same
condemnation.

Lastly, For the peace, and utility of the Nation. Now if all these may be
effected without the death of the Malefactor, mercy has obtained her desired
end.

Therefore mercy abhors to be like Abimelech in making Bramble, and scratching
Laws, to rend and tear the flesh of her subjects; or with Draco to write her
Laws in blood; or with Domitian to weave subtil-poysonous-spider laws, to catch
only poor silly flies, (the weaker and more feeble sort of Offenders) and then
to stab, and tyrannize over them, like an Emperor: for which noble exploit, he
deserved (no doubt) as famous a Triumph at Rome; as his predecessor Caligula
required, for conquering the Belgic Cockles. Mercy hates the (...), Suet.
Calig. c. 30.
Barbarous cruelty of that bloody Monster, who in punishing his Offenders,
would have them so tormented, or handled, Ut sentirent se mori, That they might
feel their deaths. To delight in such inhumane butcheries, is abominable; and
he is no better than (...), a Cannibal Tyrant, Hom. Il. (...).
who either acts, or commands them.

It Is the chief end of mercy's Laws to destroy vices, but preserve men. In
doing this the Magistrate imitates God himself: who delights not in the death
of a sinner, Ezech. 33.11.
but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live. Therefore mercy
would incline the Magistrate to a reasonable, judicious Lenity; that so vice
may be corrected, but life preserved.

Yet notwithstanding; if after all her indulgence and pity; those Cuncta prius
tentanda; she finds some Malefactors to be incorrigible and past cure; then --
Immedicabile vulnus, Ovid. Met. Lib. 1.

Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
she compassionatly grants they should be cut off: lest the peace, and safety
of her innocent favourit's should be endangered.

Which brings me to the second or lowest part of King David's Song, (...) And
Judgment, which I call the Basso or ground of his well ordered Government. For
though the Song of Mercy may be sweet and pleasant, yet there can be no good
descant without Judgment. This composed with mercy, makes the harmony of his
government complete, and perfect.

In treating of this part of David's Song, I shall briefly present these
particulars to your consideration.

First, The meaning, or signification of this word Judgment.

Secondly, The great necessity of it, in all Governments.

Thirdly, What is required to the due Administration, or Execution of this
judgment.

Fourthly, Those great blessings and benefits, which will certainly follow the
due Administration, and Execution of it.

First, (...) Judgment signifies that Government, Rule, Authority, and Power,
with which the suprem Magistrate is invested, or inaugurated. Hence the first
Rulers amongst the Jews (next after their Lawgiver Moses and his successor,
Joshuah) were called A (...) from which root, the ancient Punic word Sufes the
chief Magistrate in Carthage is also derived. Vos. Etym.
(...) Judges. Judgment has it is Thrones, Psalm. 122.5.
even the thrones of the house of David; now 2 Samuel 8.16.
David reigned over all Israel; and executed judgment and justice to all his
people. So we read of Messiah the son of David. St Joh. 5.22, 27.
The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; and
has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man.
This is called judgment of jurisdiction, that is, that authority by which men
are governed.

Secondly, It signifies that Wisdom and Knowledge by which the Magistrate
discerns, and determins that which is just, or unjust. Arist. Eth. Lib. 4.
That (...), Science, or Skill, not only of making, but interpreting Laws.
Psalm. 72.1.
This is that judgment which David prays for his Son Solomon. Give the king thy
judgments O Lord, and thy righteousness to the kings son; that is, Dr Ham.
O Lord, I beseech thee, to pour out upon Solomon my Son, all the royal
virtues, and skill in Government, and all manner of justice and goodness, in
the administration of so sublime an Office. 1 Kings 3, 9.
And that which Solomon prays for himself. Give thy servant (...) an hearing
obedient heart, (which from the Chaldee (...) our Translation renders an
understanding heart) to judge thy people, Isa. 28.5.6.
and to discern between good and bad. This understanding heart is called the
spirit of judgment. In that day the Lord shall be for a spirit of judgment to
him that sits in judgment.

Thirdly, It signifies any Law, Decree, or Sanction, which is made by the
supreme Magistrate; and which is the rule, and measure of the obedience of his
subjects. These are the judgments thou shall set before them; Exodus 21.1.
the Statutes, and Judgments I have commanded my people.

Fourthly, Judgment signifies any judicial cause, controversy, or matter; that
is brought before the Magistrate. Thou shall not pervert the judgment of the
stranger, Deuteronomy. 24.17.
and the fatherless, that is, the cause of the stranger and the fatherless.
Deuteronomy. 27.19. Psalm. 140.12.
Cursed is he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger and fatherless: I
know the Lord will maintain the judgment of the afflicted (...) the cause of
the poor.

Fifthly, It signifies that definitive sentence, or award, which the
Magistrate passes upon a matter, or cause so brought before him. 1 Kings 3.28.
And all Israel heard of the judgment, i.e. the sentence, which the king had
judged; and they feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in
him to do judgment.

Lastly, It signifies the due execution of that sentence so given; whether it
be for the rewarding of the just and innocent; or the punishment of the wicked
and evil doers. Ezra. 7.26.
And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him; whether it be unto Deuteronomy. 21.22.
death, or to banishment, or to consiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. So
that under this one word judgment, is contained the whole process of the Law,
from the first to the last.

And we may further observe, that when ever these two words, (...) Judgment and
Justice, are joined together in holy writ; by Judgment that part of the Law is
understood, whereby notorious Malefactors, are punished: and by Justice, that
part, by which, the good and innocent, are defended, from the violence and
oppression of wicked men; both which are the Office of the Magistrate: and so
much for the signification of the word.

The second thing to be considered, is the great necessity of this Judgment in
all Governments.

Judgment is an act of Justice, not only lawful, but laudable, and necessary:
For without judgment and justice there can be no society. These are the bonds
of all communities, which knit, and keep the members of the Bodypolitic
together; making them obedient, and serviceable to their Head: That such as
will not be persuaded and allured by the sweet voice of Mercy, should be awed
and terrified, by the severe and harsher voice of Judgment.

Impunity is a great temptation to villainy. Remota justitia quid sunt regna
nisi magna latrocinia? S. Aug. de civit. Dei. Lib. 4. c. 4.
Without justice and judgment; what are kingdoms but so many dens of thieves
and robbers?

When Alexander the Great, had taken a pitiful poor Pirat, who was the Master
but of one small Ship, or Vessel; and had asked him, why he troubled the Sea?
The Pirat, with an undaunted confidence, answers his question by another, Why
he troubled the World? And whether it was not as lawful for him, to rob with
his one little Ship; as it was for him to plunder, and spoil the world, with
his great Navy? Here indeed lay the difference. He who had but one small Vessel
was a Pirat; but He who had a great Navy, was a famous Conqueror, and a most
renowned high and mighty Monarch.

Thus small misdeeds and peity Larcinies, which are committed by mean or single
persons, are taken for capital, and heinous crimes: He that steals a few sheep,
horses, or cows, must reckon for them at the Gallows. Poor Rogues must be made
examples of; and let them suffer as they have deserved. But Prodigious
Villainies, Murders, Rapes, Sacking and burning of Cities; destroying, and
laying wast whole Countries; torrents of Christian blood, spil'd for the bare
satisfaction of pride or lust; with all those horrid, unspeakable mischiefs,
which are the cursed effects of ambition, war, and cruelty; must lose their
names, forsooth, commence virtues, and glorious conquests; and (which is worst
of all,) obtain impunity, because abetted by power, and multitude.

If Great Alexander was -- Terrarum fatale malum, fulmenque quod omnes
Percuteret populos, pariterque and sidus iniquum
Gentibus. -- Luean. Phar. 10.

Earth's fatal mischief, lightning dire, which rent
All People, and a Star malevolent
To Nations --
It Is sadly to be lamented that any king who intitles himself Christian, should
account it his honor or glory to imitate Him. What a mischievous bloody Comet,
has for some years struck terror into our Neighbor Nations, threatening them
with Ruin and Destruction? God grant we may escape that danger it portends,
and in mercy to Christendom dissipate its fatal influence.

In the mean time. Where is Judgment? Where is Justice? Alas our Neighbors
only know the good of them by their want: -- Et virgo caede madentes Ovid. Met.
Lib. 1. Isa. 5.7.

Ultima Coelestum terras Astraea reliquit.


They look for judgment, but behold oppression, for righteousness, but behold a
cry. Judgment and Justice would rid the world of Tyranny, War, and confusion;
of the greatest and most powerful Thieves and Malefactors; without which
neither our Religion, Lives, nor Possessions can be safe.

In brief, Judgment and Justice are so necessary that (as the Orator speaks)
Malefactors themselves cannot live without them; and this benefit they have by
them, De Off. Lib. 1.
that they are reserved to a fair-legal-trial; that they are prevented in their
wicked courses, and restrained from the commission of more nefarious crimes.

It is not cruelty, but necessity, and right reason, to cut off that member
from the body, which would corrupt it.

Thirdly, what is required to the due administration of this Judgment. Which is
a copious subject, the very life and soul of Government, about which
Politicians have writ whole Volumes. But it may suffice for the present, to
acquaint you with three things, which seem to be most requisite, for the
exercise of true Judgment. 1. Lawful Authority. 2. Justice and Equity. 3.
Prudence.

First, Lawful Authority; Without which all Judgment is but mere usurpation;
and the execution of a Malefactor no better than murder. That Authority which
makes the law, must execute the law; and as the law cannot be made without
Lawful Authority; so neither can it be executed without Lawful Authority. In
this case, Matthew. 26.25.
He that takes the sword, shall perish by the sword. To. 12.19.
Vengeance belongs to God, and the supreme Magistrate, who is his
representative; no man therefore ought to avenge himself, or to usurp the
Office of a Judge, without lawful Authority, or a just deputation from God, or
his Vicegerent. He who thus offends is 1 Pet. 4.15.
(...), a busie-body in other men's matters, sins both against God and
against his neighbor. If he suffer for this bold usurpation, Exodus 2.14.
he may thank himself, and remember that sharp repoof, Who made thee (being but
a private man) a ruler and judge over us?

Secondly, Justice and equity, are necessary to the due execution of judgment:
without which judgment is but perverse and corrupt. There have been some, (and
still are) who turn judgment into wormwood and gall -- and the fruits of
righteousness (that is justice) into Aconite or Hemlock. Amos 5.7.6.12.
This perversion of judgment is bitter and deadly.

Now judgment may be perverted either, Anselmus de similitud.
First by fear, Secondly by covetousness, Thirdly by inordinate love and
partiality. Lastly by hatred.

First by fear, which (as the Author of the Book of Wisdom writes) is nothing
else, Wisd. 17.12.
but the betraying of the succors, which reason offers; and makes men
degenerate into poor, timorous, false-hearted Animals. A coward can neither be
wise nor just, but will at once condemn himself, and betray the cause of the
innocent. Therefore the Magistrate or Judge, must be courageous and stout; not
fearing the faces of men. He is in the place of God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
and judges for God, who will defend him; why then should he be afraid, of a
man that shall die, Isa. 51.12.
or of the son of man who shall be made as grass? Fiat justitia, ruat mundus,
the world should sooner be turned into its first Chaos, and confusion, than a
Magistrate or Judge from his courage and conscience.

Secondly, by covetousness. A fordid vice, neither becoming the person, nor
place of a Judge; he must scorn a bribe, ( 2 Pet. 2.15.
that wages, or reward, of iniquity) Deuteronomy. 16.19.
For a gift will blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the just.
The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted
after, they have erred from the faith; and then (by very good consequence) from
judgment and justice, the inseparable companions of faith and a good conscience.

It is reported to the perpetual shame of Demosthenes, by Noct. Alt. Lib. 11.
c. 9.
A. Gellius, that when he should have pleaded the cause of the Athenians,
against the Milesians, he was (...), and took a bribe to hold his peace. He
pretended indeed some disease or squincy in his throat; and therefore came
musled into the court; but, (as a witty Greek told him) it was not (...), but
(...), not the squincy, but the gold, in his throat, that stoped his mouth.
There was Bos in lingua, as the Proverb is. In good earnest, righteous
judgment, and a bribe, will no more agree together in the same mouth; than God,
and Mammon, in the same service and worship.

Thirdly, Judgment may be perverted, by love and partiality. Leges carent
affectibus.
Justice is represented unto us in picture, with a veil over her eyes, to
signify that both justice, and judgment, should be administered, without favor
or affection. Exuit personam judicis, quisquis amicum induit. So that a judge
must not be (...), Levit. 19.15.
a respecter of the persons of men; either by honoring the persons of the
mighty, or pitying the faces of the poor: because Prove. 18.5.
it is not good to accept the persons of the wicked; or to overthrow the
righteous in judgment. Not good? No, there is a (...) in that (...) to teach us
that it is abominable, and pernicious. God himself complains of it. Ps. 82.2.
How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? It
seems by this how long, that God is wearied and grieved with such kind of
judgment. Hence good King Jehoshaphat (according to his name, the Lord Judges)
thus strictly charge his judges. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.
Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with
you in the judgment. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it; for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts.

Lastly, judgment may be perverted by hatred. Now hatred is opposed to that
charitable pity, and compassion, which should be in one man toward another;
more especially in the chief Magistrate, or his representative the Judge. For
he is the head of the body Politic; and who ever hated his own body, (...). Ho.
Odys. (...).
or any member of it? He is the Father of his people; and cannot well hate his
own children. Hatred is a brutish affection, not only below, but against common
humanity. Timon surnamed the Man-hater was a Prodigy, and a reproach to
mankind. Our most gracious God forbids it, Levit. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart. Thy brother, that is any man,
although he be thine enemy: Thou may, nay must, reprove, rebuke, and
endeavor to reclaim him, from his evil conversation; and the Magistrate is to
correct, and punish him for his offenses; but hate him he must not. 1 John 3.15.
For he who hates his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him. So much for the second thing required to the due
administration of judgment.

Thridly, Prudence is necessary for the due administration of judgment; without
which it would be rash and unadvised. A Magistrate should be prudent. Job.
29.16.
And very aptly our English word King, is the same with the Saxon Cyning, which
is knowing or wise. The Egyptian Hieroglyphic for legislative power, was Oculus
in Sceptro, an eye in the top of a Scepter. An eye that could pierce into the
most dark and perplex recesses of a cause; that could find out every crooked
and blind corner in it. Prove. 20.8.
A king who sits in the throne of judgment, scatters away all evil with
his eyes: that is, no evil or mischief, can lie hid, so cunningly and close in
a matter or cause, but his eyes will find it out, and scatter it, as the bright
beams of the Sun do foggs and mists. As the King's eyes are quick and piercing
to discern what is obscure and intricate; Prove. 16.10.
so his lips are Oracles to determine what is lawful and right. A divine
sentence or oracle is in the lips of a king, and his mouth transgresses not in
judgment.

We cannot but take notice of that sagacity, subtilty, and accuteness of
judgment, which God (in whom are hid all the treasuries of wisdom and
knowledge) sometimes vouchsafes unto Kings (whether good or bad) for the
determining of such difficult and perplex causes, as are brought before them.

That sentence which wise King Solomon gave in the case between the two
harlots, is well known. 1 Kings c. 3.
Ariopharnes King of Thrace. Diod. Sic. Lib. 20. Claud. Caesar. vid. Suet. c.
15.
I could produce many more; but shall at present, only mention that famous
sentence which another Solomon (or Solomon the Magnisicent) gave in the case,
between a poor Christian and a cruel Jew.

The poor Christian, wanting a considerable sum of money, to redeem his son
from slavery; came to the Jew to borrow it of him, for such a time, and for so
much or more interest, than the Jew could reasonably require. But no interest
would satisfy that hard-hearted extortioner; but so many ounces of the
Christian's flesh. The Christian (in his great necessity) consents, receives
the money, redeems his son; and at the set time, brings the Jew his Principle,
but refuses to pay that unconscionable biting usury which the Jew demanded.
The Jew complains to the Emperor Solomon, he fourthwith commands the
Christian to be brought before him; calls for a rasour, and bids the Jew to cut
off so many ounces of the Christian's flesh, as he had bargained with him for;
but with all told him that if he cut off one dram more or less than his bargain
was, he should certainly die for it.

The Jew considering the danger of the sentence, thought it much better to lose
his interest than venture his life, and so the Christian escaped his cruelty.
Thus you see that prudence is necessary for the due administration of judgment,
especially in difficult, and intricate matters.

Fourthly, great blessings and benefits which will both accompany and follow
the due administration and execution of this judgment. Blessings so many,
great, and desirable, that they can neither be numbered nor expressed. For
whatsoever blessings either piety, or truth, or peace, or liberty, or
innocence, or wisdom and knowledge, or good government, and good laws, can
bestow upon a Nation, are all the happy effects of judgment.

Judgment advances piety; preserves truth; procures and setleth peace and
safety; boundeth, and sixeth prerogative and priveledge; asserts, and
vindicates our just liberty, and property; protects innocence; encourages
study, and learning; executes good laws; secures our persons from violence, and
our estates from plunder. In fine Prove. 19.4.
judgment establishes the land, and defends it against all foreign invasion,
all intestine conspiracy, and rebellion. Or if you would have more, The due
execution of judgment and justice, will divert God's judgments from us. Psalm.
106.30.
Phineas stood up and executed judgment, and the plague was stayed.

If judgment had been executed in the streets of Jerusalem; God would have
spared that City. Jer. 5.1.
So that if either we would obtain mercies, or remove judgments; the next, and
best way is, that the Supreme Magistrate, and all who are put in authority
under him, do truly and indifferently administer judgment and justice, to the
punishment of wickedness and vice; and to the maintenance of God's true
Religion and virtue.

I shall conclude, with a few notes, or points; which I have observed to be
most agreeable with, and consonant to this Song of Mercy and Judgment.

First, This right way of Government, namely, The due administration, or
execution of laws, in mercy and judgment; is a most fit and proper study, and
meditation, for all Kings and Magistrates. David here sings of mercy and
judgment. But the Hebrew word (...) is from (...) which does not only signify
to sing, but also to meditate, mind, and be intent upon a matter. So that David
studies and meditates, and is intent upon the laws of his Government.

It was God's command that the King, who was to be set over his people, Deuteronomy.
17.18.
should write for himself a copy of his law in a book, and that he should read
in it all the days of his life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God.
Thus to study and meditate upon the laws of God and the laws of his own
Government; should be the chiefest care and exercise of every good Magistrate.

Hence Kings are called (...), Hom. Il. (...).
that is such as are conversant and well versed in laws: A Magistrate may well
be ignorant of some Arts and Sciences; which are less necessary for his
Government; but by no means of those laws, by which he is to Govern his people.

Secondly, Monarchy (the first, and best of Governments in the world) whereby
Magistracy is preserved in its original power and dignity; and good laws are
enacted, and executed by mercy and judgment; is from God. This is clear from
the Text; I will sing of mercy and judgment. Here David as a Monarch sings,
that is studies, meditates, and is intent upon mercy and judgment, as the
proper business and employment of his Government. And then he adds (...) unto
thee O Lord will I sing a Psalm of praise and thanksgiving; who have not only
exalted me to the Throne and Scepter of Judah; but have also taught me, the
best way of Ruling thy people, by mercy and judgment.

Thus many both Jews and Christians interpret this verse, as being most
consonant to, and agreeable with the scope of the Psalm.

Monarchy then is from God, and not from the people, as those two grand
factions, of Popery, and Presbytery, would peswade their Proselytes. The one to
exalt the Pope above all that is called God; and the other to magnify
themselves. And we may observe, that how contrary soever, those two factions
are in other respects; yet they both agree in opposing the true original and
power of the supreme Magistrate.

Thus, that our Blessed Savior might be crucified, Pilate and Herod were made
friends; and that Monarchy may be suppres'd, or dethroned; these Pilats and
Herod's, Popes and Presbyterians, Romans and Jews, (as fitly matched and paired
as can be) Bithus cum Bachio; Sueton.
join hands and are agreed. I need not tell you what their designs and
practices have been or are, because they are of every days remembrance. If
nothing had been said, writ, or printed of what they have done, or this Nation
has suffered; yet those wounds and scars which their swords have made both in
Church and State, are still so visible, that he who runs may read them.

Certainly it must needs be something very excellent or divine which these men
hate and persecute. So indeed it is; no less than Sacrosancta Regum Majestas,
the sacred Majesty of Kings; which is acknowledged, by the Prove. 8.15. Dan.
4.25. Romans 13.1.
Scriptures, by Just. Mart. Tertul. Iron.
Christian Apologists, Fathers, Councils, nay even Hom. Hesiod. Eurip. Plat.
Heathen writers, to have a divine character, or stamp set upon it, which was
never profaned nor vilified in the world, until Pope Hildebrand, or Gregory
the seventh, sat down in that infallible chair, of the scornful, and
disobedient.

This sacred Majesty of Kings is a Chase, or prey, fit for these Nimrods to
hunt after and destroy; because they know that Monarchy is the best safeguard
to mankind, both against the great furious Bulls of Tyrannical Popery, and the
lesser giddy cattle of Schismatical Presbytery.

Kings are, by the Poet, truly called Hom. Il. ss. 445. (...)
(...), which very well agrees, with that of our Royal Prophet. b Sons of the
Most High. Psalm. 82.6.
And yet there are some other Diotrephees (not Sons of the Most High, but sons
of earth) who (as Saint Epist. 3.9.
John writes of them) are (...), lovers of supremacy. These proud ones, kick at
Monarchy; set their cloven feet upon the necks of Kings and Emperors: Whose
sacred Persons (in ordine ad spiritualia, that is, for the advancing of
spiritual wickedness, and the Kingdom of Antichrist) they most impiously
censure, excommunicate, depose and murder, which is most abominable downright
Sacrilege; and the cause of the greatest mischiefs and villainies that have been
committed hitherto in the Christian world; and God only knows what further
troubles and dangers these Pests may bring upon us.

Thirdly, That mercy and judgment that is, Lex Christi neminem private jure
dominioque suo.
the power of life and death, does of right belong to the supreme Christian
Magistrate, as well as to the Jewish, or Heathen. This truth we maintain
against a generation of unreasonable men; who have the face and confidence to
affirm, that it is not Pont. cont. Haer. Sleid. Com. Lib. 10.
lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, a King, or Prince; or to have the
power of the sword. That Christians should have no Courts of Judicature, no
Laws, Statutes, Pleadings; and that it is not lawful for them to take an Oath.
Non eripit mortalia qui regna dat caelestia.
As though that which is necessary to the well being of mankind, was not as
lawful for Christians, as for Jews or Heathens.

I would ask these grand Politicians, by what law are Christians exempt, from
Governing, or being governed! Let them tell us if they can. This I am sure of,
that Power and Jurisdiction, are founded upon the Law of Nature, for the
benefit of mankind; as may be proved, by a plain or manifest induction.

No man can live happily without the help of others in society; no society can
stand, without some Laws or Government; no Laws or Government can subsist
without Power to defend them, to reward the good, and punish evil doers. And
we are taught that the Magistrate bears not the sword (...) in vain, Romans
13.4.
or not without warrant or divine commission: for he is Gods Minister, a
revenger to execute wrath, upon him that does evil.

Those then (whosoever they be) whether in the number of Libertines, or
Anabaptists, or any other Name, or Sect; who deny the Christian Magistrate, his
just power and right to defend himself, his laws, and people, from contempt and
violence: do in effect destroy all Christian societies; and would introduce
Anarchy and Confusion both into Church and State. To these, I shall only
mention that of Saint Peter; 2. Pet. 2.19.
Whilst they promise men liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption or perdition.

Fourthly, I observe that the due administration, and especially to be regarded
by the Magistrate. Prove. 17.15.
For he who justifies, that is, acquits the wicked, and he who condemns the
just, are both of them abomination. God by his Prophets denounces woe against
them, Deuteronomy. 27.19. Isa. 5.23.10.1. Mic. 2.1. Hab. 2.12.
who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him. Who render those tribunals, from whence men expect a relief
for their injuries, the seats of violence and oppression.

Fifthly, I observe, that judgment,

Our present divisions and dissentions, are still (God knows) very sad and
great, Psalm. 57.4, 5.
our souls (as the Psalmist complains) are amongst Lions; and we lie in the
midst of the sons of men, who are (...)
Boutescus, and Incendiaries; whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongues sharp swords: who speak evil of Dignities; Jude 8. Psalm. 89.51.
reproach and slander the footsteps of Gods Anointed; hate and persecute that
very Government, and those laws, by which they live in peace and plenty. With
these our Ecclesiastical laws, are Antichristian; and our Civil laws,
Tyrannical. If the Magistrate deal merciful with them; they will tell you,
they are not beholding to him, because it is God, who restrains his power,
that he should not touch the Saints. But if the law have its due course against
them; then they cry out Persecution, Persecution. These are they, Qui nec
remedium far pessunt nec morbum: Whom neither mercy nor judgment will reclaim.

May not we very reasonably suspect, what it is they would be at? Or can we so
soon forget what we have felt, and still have just cause to fear? Psalm. 11.3.
If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? That is, if our
Government and Governors, if our Religion, Laws and Peace, (which are the
Foundations of our Nation) be destroyed? What can the Church of God (here
planted amongst us) do?

My Lords; and you the Worthies of the Honorable Bench: It is not only your
duty, but your interest, to endeavor the preservation, of these Foundations
unto us. For in their safty and peace, ye shall have comfort and peace; and
obtain that respect and honor, which your Piety, Wisdom, Justice and Care,
have merited both from our Church and State. For this you shall be called the
repairers of our breaches, Isa. 58.12.
and the restorers of peaceable paths for us to dwell in. And may the God of
Mercy and Judgment still prosper this good work under your hands, O let him
prosper this your handy work.

Lastly, I observe: That under a Government so well composed, and settled; where
Laws are Enacted, and executed by mercy and judgment; there the people are
happy; and have good cause of rejoicing and praising God, for that mercy and
judgment by which they are Governed.

And if ever Nation had cause to rejoice for such happiness, or to sing of
mercy and judgment, we now have.

Our gracious God has been pleased (even beyond our hopes) to loose the bands,
and break the yoke of that Rebellious Tyranny and oppression, under which our
Church and State (not long since) so miserably groaned. He has turned our
captivity as the rivers in the south: Psalm. 126.4.
and refreshed us with the delightful streams of peace and justice. He has
restored our gracious and merciful King unto us. Iia. 1.16.
He has given our Judges as at first, and our Counselors as the beginning,
and we no longer dwell Psalm. 137.4.
in a strange land, where we could not sing the Lord's song, even this song of
mercy and judgment.

What now can hinder, but that judgment should flow down like waters, and
righteousness be as a mighty stream? Nothing sure: unless our great
unthankfulness to God for these mercies; and our disobedience unto our lawful
Sovereign. O let not our ingratitude or perfidious disloyalty deprive us of
these blessings; but let our mouths be filled with the high praises of God, and
our hearts with duty that we may live worthy of that religious worship, truth,
peace and happiness we enjoy; and never forget those great deliverances, which
he has vouchsafed unto his King, and people.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness; and declare the
wonders he has done amongst us. Psalm. 107.31.32.
That they would exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in
the assembly of the elders, Psalm. 136.23.26.
who remembered us in our low estate and delivered us from our enemies, for his
mercy endures for ever.

And let us pray, that no jarring, harsh, untunable, discord, or division; may
ever discompose, that excellent harmony of Government which we have both in
Church and State; but that this Song, of Mercy and Judgment, may be heard in
our Land, from Generation to generation. Amen.

FINIS.

