THE PSALMS OF DAVID IN MEETER: With the Prose interlined.

By Mr. ZACHARY BOYD, Preacher of GODS Word.

PSALM. 119. verse. 54. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my
pilgrimage. PSALM. 34. verse. 2. (...) Printed at GLASGOW, by the Heirs of
GEORGE ANDERSON, Anno, 1648.

To the right Reverend, the faithful Ministers of Gods Word, of Britain, and
Ireland.
RIGHT REVEREND.
GRace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. At the direction of the General Assembly at Edinburgh, Anno 1644. I
put my hand to the work of the Psalms* whereof I give to you now this last
edition, The work is for the public service of God in his Church, and it
concerns you especially to endeavor by all means that this work may be done
for the glory of God, and edification of his people, whose souls are committed
to your charge. That this may be done worthily, diverse things in my judgment
are required.

First, That the interpretation approven, and received by our Church be not
changed in the verse, by any particular man's opinion; for the interpreters in
some dark places differ in opinions concerning the sense: If the verse follow
one interpretation, and the Text another, consider how impertinent that will
be.

Secondly, That all dfficile words be shunned, by reason, that many people and
children must sing that are unlearned.

Thirdly, That, so far as is possible, no words of the Text be wanting, for in
the Text there be no idle words or superfluities to be retrinched, as in men's
discourse.

Fourthly, If any words be added, that they be pertinent to make the sense
clear* as we see in the Text some words added. which are printed in smaller
letters. PSALM. 16. 2. PSALM. 27. 8. PSALM. 54. 17. etc.

Fifthly, A special care would be had that the verse be very clear, and easy
to be understood by the most ignorant, that unlearned people and children may
as Gods word directs, PSALM. 47. 7. Sing with understanding, It is better
pertinently to add some words for explication, as we see done in the Text it
self, then without them to leave the matter so obscure, that the people and
children should sing they know not what: ^ Cor. 14 (...). I, said the Apostle,
will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with understanding, and I will sing
with the spirit, I will sing with the understanding also: This above all must
be regarded, that the verse be very clear and easy to be understood: It is
far better without all controversy, that diverse words in a pertinent
paraphrase be added, that people may understand what they sing, then to want
one word of the Text, whereby the song is made obscure; The Apostle prefers
five words with understanding, to ten thousand obscure: 1 Cor. 14. 19. Saint
PAUL is a great enemy to obscurity, and all faithful Pastors must, and will
set their face against it in all things that concern the souls that their
Master has bought with his blood, and concredited to them: Let therefore all
difficle words be shunned that are not in the Bible; as for the words of the
Bible, all should understand them.

Sixthly, A special care would be had, that so far as may be, the words of the
Text be not changed with any other, that those that have their Bibles before
them may read the words of the text in the song* when other words are in the
verse, the Text seems uncouth to him that reads or sings: It greatly
edifies when the words of the Song are the words of the Text; and this would be
very carefully considered, and aimed at by all that meddle with the trial of
our labors, that most diligently they compare the words of the verse with the
words of the Text, that none thereof be wanting, nor any others put into their
place, so far as is possible to do the same; the Text must be the only
touchstone for trial.

Seventhly, He that medleth with such a work would have good understanding in
the Hebrew, which is the Original and fountain; The want of this, or the not
taking heed, has made all English verse that I have seen, make a very great
fault, in mistaking that which is said of God himself, in the PSALM. 82. 1.
where it is said, God stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges
among the gods; All the Psalms in English verse that I have seen, by the
mighty, there understand mighty men, which is a very great mistake; the
Original Hebrew clearly lets us see, that it is God himself that is there
called El: those be the words, Elohim nitsav bagnadath El, that is, is Piseator
in his version has very well* Deus stat in coetu Dei, which he interprets
thus, hoc est Deus stat in coetu suo, id est in coetu a se ordinato: Our
English version in this verse would be mended; where as it h^th God stands in
the Assembly of the mighty, it were better and more clear to put God stands
in the Assembly of God*

Now right Reverend, this is my last labor which I have set down with the Text
interlined, that the judicious reader may* have under his eye both the Text and
the verse, and may the^ more easily confer them together, and discern.

I desire that no man esteem that in a mercenary way I am seeking gain by those
my labors, though the work has been both painful and chargeable, I with a
most willing mind offer all in a free will offering to the Lord; seek gains
who will, I will have none, nor do I stand in need, praised be the Lord: I
hope the judicious Reader shall find this last edition mended in many things;
If any thing has been observed by any in the former editions, let them
consider if it be mended in this last, which, as I have hitherto done, I
submit in all humlity to the judgment of my Brethren in the Ministry. The
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: 1 Cor. 14. 32.

From GLASGOW; the day 1648. Your humble servant in the LORD, M. ZACHARY BOYD.

THE PSALMS OF DAVID.
PSALM I.
Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands
in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.

Blessed is the man that walks not in th'ungodlies counsel ill,
Nor stands in sinners way, nor does in scorners seat sit still.
2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate
day and night.

^. But in the Law of him that is the Lord, is his delight,
And in his Law he meditates both in the day and night.
3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in his season;

3 And he shall be like to a tree that by the water springs
Is planted* and that forth his fruit in his own season brings.
His leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.

4 The ungodly are not so: but are like the chafe which the wind drives away.

His leaf not wither shall, and what he does shall prosper ay:
4 The Ungodly are not so, but driven like chafe by wind away.
5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.

5* Therefore not in the judgment stand the ungodly shall at all:
Nor in the congregation of righteous, sinners shall.
6 For the Lord knows the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

6 For well the Lord the way does know of those that righteous be,
But of ungodly men the way shall perish utterlie.
PSALM II.
WHy do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

WHat is the cause that heathen men their rage do not restrain,
And that the people do a thing imagine that is vain?
2 The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together
against ^he Lord, and against his Anointed, saying,

2 Kings of the earth do set themselves, and Rulers thereupon
Against God together counsel take, and his Anointed One.
3 Let us break their bands asunder, and ^ast away their cords from us.

4 He that sits in the heavens shall laugh* ^he Lord shall have them in
derision.

3 Let us asunder break their bands, and cords cast from us all:
4 He that sits in the heaven shall laugh, the Lord deride them shall.
5 Then shall he speak unto them in his ^ath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

6 Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill^f Sion.

5. Then in his wrath he will speak to them, displeasd sore vex them will:
6 Yet have I set my King upon Sion my holy hill.
7 I will declare the decree; the Lord has said un o me, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee.

7 Now the decree declare I will, the Lord has said to me,
Thou art mine only Son, this day I have begotten thee.
8 ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

8 Ask me, and for thine heritage I Will heathen give to thee:
The utmost parts of earth they shall for thy possession be.
9 Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces
like a (...) vessel.

9 Thou with a rod of iron them shall break, and thou withal
Like to a potters vessel ^halt them dash in pieces small.
10 Be wise now therefore O ye Kings: be instructed* ye judges of the earth.

10 Now therefore O ye that are kings be wise in what ye do;
And ye the Judges of the earth instructed be also.
11 Serve ye the Lord with fear and rejoy^ with trembling.

12 Kiss the Son least he be angry.

11 Serve ye the Lord with fear, and als rejoice with trembling ye:
12 Do ye him kis^e that is the Son lest that he angry be.
And ye perish from the way, when his wra^h is kindled but a little: Blessed
are all they that out their trust in him.

And when his wrath but kindled is a little, from the way
Y^ perish; but who in him trust most blessed are all they.
PSALM. III.
LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me* many are they that rise up
against me.

LORD, how are they increased thus that now do trouble me?
They who against me do rise up in number many be.
2 Many there be which say of my ^oul, There is no help for him in God. Scl^h.

3 But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine
head.

^ Of my soul many say, for him in God's no help indeed.
3* But thou my shield and glory art, the uplifter of mine head.
4 I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill,
Selah.

5 I laid me down and slept: I awaked, for the Lord sustained me.

4 With voice I cried to God; out of his holy hill heard he:
5 I laid me down and slept; I waked, for GOD sustained me.
6 I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves
against me^ round about.

6 I surely will not be afraid of thousands ten most stout
Of people, that have set themselves against me round about.
7 Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God: for thou have smitten all mine enemies
upon the cheek bone: thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.

7 Arise, O Lord, save me, my God, for thou have smitten all
My foes on the cheek bone; thou have the ungodlies teeth broke small.
8 Salvation belongs unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.

8 Now unto him that is the Lord belongs salvation,
The blessing also which is thine thy* people is upon. Selah.
PSALM IV.
HEar me when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou have enlarged me when I
was in distress, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.

O Do thou hear me when I call God of my righteousness:
Have mercy, hear my prayer, thou have enlarged me in distress.
2 O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will
ye love vanity, and seek after leasiug? Selah.

2 O sons of men, how long will ye my glory turn to shame?
How long will ye love vanity, and leasing seek to frame? Selah.
3 But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: the
Lord will hear when I call unto him.

3 But know that for himself the Lord him that is godly here
Has set apart; the Lord when I unto him call will hear.
4 Stand in aw, and sin not; commune with your own heart upon your bed, and
(...) still. Selah.

4 Stand ye in aw, and do not sin, to commune have a will
With your own heart upon your bed, and be ye also still. Selah.
5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord.

5 The sacrifices offer up of righteousness that be,
And into him that is the Lord, your confidence put ye.
6 There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us.

6 Who will to us show any good, there many be that say*
Lord, of thy countenance the light lift up on us always.
7 Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn,
and their wine increased.

7 Thou have in mercy gladness put into this heart of mine,
More then in time increased were their corn and als their wine.
8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety.

8 I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep will also well,
For thou Lord only make me in safety for to dwell.
PSALM V.
GIve ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.

2 Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my king (...) my God, for unto thee will I
pray.

GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, my meditation weigh,
2 Hear of my cry the voice, my King, my God, for I Will thee pray.
3 My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

3 My voice shall thou at morning hear, at morning, Lord, will I
My prayer unto the direct, and will look up on hye,
4 For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness: neither shall
evil dwell with thee.

4 For thou art not a God that pleased with wickedness can be:
Nor any thing that evil is shall dwell at all with thee.
5 The foolish shall not stand in thy sight ^ thou hate all workers of
iniquity.

5 The foolish people in thy sight stand sted fast never shall,
The workers of iniquity thou surely hate all.
6 Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloody
and deceitful man.

6 Thou shall them that do leasing speak destroy for evermore,
The bloody and deceitful man the Lord he will abhor.
7 But as for me, I will come into thy house, in the multitude of thy mercy,
and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

7 But in thy mercies multitude, thy house I will come near*
Toward thy*holy temple I will worship in thy fear.
8 Lead me, O Lord in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies, make thy way
straight before my face.

8 Because of those mine enemies, Lord in thy righteousness
Do thou me lead, do thou thy way make straight before my face.
9 For there is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is very
wickedness: their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue.

9 For in their mouth's no faithfulness, their inward part's all wrong:
Their throat's an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue.
10 Destroy thou them, O God, let them fast ^y their own counsels: cast them
out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebel^ed against
thee.

10 Destroy thou them, O God, let them fall by their own counsel,
Cast them out in their many sins for against thee they rebel.
11 But let all those that put their trust in thee, rejoice: let them ever
shout for joy, because thou d^fendest them, let them also that love thy Name,
be joyful in thee.

11 But let all joy that in thee trust, still shout for joy let them:
For them thou sav'st; let them in thee rejoice that love thy Name.
12 For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous: with favor will thou compass
him, as with a shield.

12 For thou him that is righteous to bless, O Lord, wilt yield;
With favor thou will compass him about as with a shield.
PSALM. VI.
O LORD, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

O Lord, while thou in anger art, do thou rebuke me not:
O neither do thou chasten me in thy displeasure hot.
2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord, heal me, for my bones are
vexed.

2 O Lord, because that I am weak, have mercy upon me,
Heal me, O Lord, for that those bones of mine, now vexed be.
3 My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long?

4 Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

3 My soul als sore is vexed, but Lord how long stay will thou make;
4 Return, Lord, rid my soul, oh save me for thy mercies sake.
5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give
thee thank*s ^

5 For those that are in death, of thee do no remembrance have.
Who is he that uuto thee shall give thanks within the grave?
6 I am weary with my groaning* all the night make I my ^el to swim: I water my
couch with my tears.

6 I weary with my groaning am I all the night my bed
Make for to swim; I with my tears my couch have watered.
7 Mine eye is consumed because of grief: is waxes old because of all mine
enemies*

7 Because of grief that in me is, consumed is mine eye,
^t waxes old because of all that enemies are to me.
8 Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity: for the Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping.

9 The Lord has heard my supplication,

8 All workers of iniquity part from me, for the Lord
Has of my weeping heard the voice: 9 The Lord my prayer has heard
The Lord will receive my prayer.

10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return, and be
ashamed suddenly.

The Lord my prayer will receive, 10 Let enemies all to me
Be shamed, fore vexed; let suddenly them turn and shamed be.
PSALM. VII.
O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute
me, and deliver me.

O Thou that art the Lord my God, I put my trust in thee:
From all them that me persecute save and deliver me.
2 Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, renting it in pieces, while there is none
to deliver.

2 Lest like a Lion he my soul tear, and in pieces small
It rent; while to deliver me there is not one at all.
3 O Lord my God, if I have done this* if there be iniquity in my hands:

3 O Lord my God, if so be that this has been done by me,
Or if at all within my hands iniquity there be.
4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me, (yea, I have
delivered him that without cause is mine enemy.)

4 If him that was a peace with me, I ill rewarded so,
Yea, I have him delivered that is without cause my foe.
5 Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it, yea, let him tread down my
life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. Selah.

5 Let the enemy pursue my soul and take it, yea let him thrust
My life down on the earth, and lay mine honor in the oust. Selah.
6 Arise* O Lord, in thine anger lift up thy self because of the rage of mine
enemies, and awake for me to the judgment that thou have commanded.

6 Rise in thy wrath Lord lift thy self for my foes raging fast.
And for me to the judgment wake that thou commanded have.
7 So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes
therefore return thou on high.

7 So of the people thee about the congregation
Shall compass; for their sakes therefore, do thou on high return?
8 The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.

8 The Lord, he shall the people judge, a judge Lord to me be
After my righteousness, and mine integrity in me.
9 O let the wickedness of the wicked come (...) an end, but establish the
just: for the righteous God tri^th the hearts and reins.

9 Oh let the wickeds malice end, but stablish steadfastly
The just man; for the righteous God the hearts and reins does try.
10 My defense is of God, which saves the upright in heart

11 God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day.

10 Or God which saves (...) right in heart is my defense always:
11 The just God judges; with the bad God's angry every day.
12 If he turn not, he will wh^t his sword: he has bent his bow, and made it
ready

12 If that he does not turn again, his sword then whet will he,
He has his bow bent, and has it made ready for to be.
13 He has also prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordains his
arrows against the persecutors.

13 He has also prepared for him the instruments of death,
Against the persecutors he his arrows ord ^ineth.
14 Behold he trav^lleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and
brought forthfalshood.

14 Behold, he with iniquity does travel as in birth,
And he mischief conoeived has, and falsehood has broughr forth.
15 He made a pit, and dug it, and is fal^ into the ditch which he made.

15 He made a pit, and dug it, and he a fall did take
Even into that same very ditch which he himself did make.
16 His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come down upon his own pate.

16 Upon* his own head shall return mischief which is his own,
His dealing that is violent shall on his pate come down.
17 I will praise the Lord accordng to his righteousness: and will sing praise
to the Name of the Lord most High.

17 According to his righteousness the Lord now praise will I
And will sing praise unto the Name of God that is most hye.
PSALM VIII.
O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth who have set thy
glory above the heavens.

O Lord, our Lord, how excellent in all the earth does prove
Thy name! who thy great glory have. the heavens set above.
2 Out of the mouth of babes* and suckling^ have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

2 Thou have ordained strength out of babe^ and sucklings mouths also,
Because of thy foes that thou migh'st th'avnger still and foe.
3 When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon, and the
stars which thou have ordained;

3 When I thy heavens consider that work of thy fingers be
The moon and likewise all the stars that were ordained by thee.
4 What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him*

4 O what is man that thou of him should thus so mindful be?
And what man's son, that he should so be visited by thee?
5 For thou have made him a little lower then the Angels: and have crowned him
with glory and honor.

5 For then the Angels thou have him a little lower made:
With glory and with honor als thou crowned have his head.
6 Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands: thou have put
all things under his feet.

6 Thou madst him have dominion over the works of thy hand,
Under his feet thou also have put all things by command.
7 All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field.

8 The foul of the air, and the fish of the sea,

7 All sheep and oxen, yea and als beasts of the field that be.
8 The foul that is into the air and fishes of the sea.
And whatsoever passes through the paths of the seas.

9 O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!

And whatsoever through the paths does of the seas pass forth.
9 O Lord our Lord, how excellent's thy Name in all the earth!
PSALM IX.
I Will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will show forth all thy
mavelous works.

WIth my whole heart I will, O Lord, give praises unto thee,
Thy works all that are mavelous, shall be shown forth by me.
2 I will be glade and rejoice in thee: I will sing praises to thy Name, O thou
most High.

2 I will be very glade, and als rejoice in thee will I,
I will sing praise unto thy Name, O thou that art most hye.
3 When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy
presence.

4 For thou have maintained my right and my cause: thou satest in the throne
judging right.

3 When back my foes are turned, they will fall, and perish at thy sight:
4 For thou my right and cause maintaindst, in throne satst judging right.
5 Thou have rebuked the heathen, thou have destroyed the wicked; thou have put
out their name for ever and ever.

5 The heathen thou rebuked have, the wicked all about
Thou have destroyed; thou have their na^ for ever and ever put our.
6 O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou have
destroyed Cities* their memorial is perished with them.

6 O en'mie come destructions are to end perpetual;
Thou cities razed, perished with them* is their memorial.
7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he^ has prepared his throne for
judgment.

7 But he that is the Lord, he shall for evermore endure,
He has the throne that is his own prepared for judgment sure.
8 And he shall judge the world in righteousness: he shall minister judgment
to the People in uprightness.

8 And he the world all well shall judge* in perfect righteousness;
He shall to people minister judgment in uprightness.
9 The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed: a refuge in times of
trouble.

9 The Lord also will a refuge for the oppressed be:
And in the times of trouble great be a refuge will he.
10 And they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord,
have not forsaken them that seek thee.

10 And they all that thy Name do know will trusting in thee be,
For thou, Lord, not forsaken have them that seek after thee.
11 Sing praises to the Lord, which dwells in Sion: declare among the people
his doings.

11 Do ye Sing praises to the Lord, which does in Sion dwell:
Among them that the people are do ye his doings tell.
12 When he makes inquisition for blood* he remembers them; he forgets not
the cry of the humble.

12 When he makes inquisition* for blood, he will them remember;
And he of them that humble are the cry forgets never.
13 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble, which I suffer of them
that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:

13 Have mercy, Lord, my trouble weigh, which of them that me hate
I suffer, thou that do of death me lift up from the gate.
14 That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Sion:
I will rejoice in thy salvation.

14 That I in Sions daughters gates, the praise that is thine alone
May all show forth: I will rejoice in thy salvation.
15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they
hid, is their own foot taken.

15 The heathen are sunk down into the pit that they did make*
The net which they themselves did hide, their own foot it did take.
16 The Lord* is known by the judgment which he executes: the wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.

16 By judgemeut which he executes, the Lord is known in this,
Even in the work of his own hand^ the wicked snared is. Selah.
17 The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.

17 The wicked shall be into hell down turned from their seat,
And also all the Nations that do the Lord forget.
18 For the needy shall not always be forgotten* the expectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever.

18 For they that needy are shall not forgotten be always,
The expectation of the poor not perish shall for^ay.
19 Arise, O Lord* let not man prevail* let the heathen be judged in thy sight.

20 Put them in fear, O Lord: that the nations may know themselves to be but
men. Selah*

19 Arise, Lord, let not man prevail, judge heathens in thy sight:
20 That Nations may know themselves but men; Lord, them affright. Sclah*
PSALM. X*
WHy stand thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thy self in times of
trouble?

WHy is it that thou now, O Lord, thus stand off afar,
Why is it that thou hid'st thy self* when times of trouble are?
2 The wicked in his pride does persecuie the poor: let them be taken in the
devices that the^ have imagined.

2 The wicked in his pride the poor does persecute, let them
In their devices taken be that they themselves did frame.
3 For the wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous whom
the Lord abhors.

3 For even of his own hearts desire the wicked boasts, and more
Him that is covetous he does bless whom the Lord does abhor.
4 The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God: God
is not i^ all his thoughts

4 The wicked man he through the pride of countenance that is his
Will not seek after God; the LORD in all his thoughts not is.
5 His ways are always grievous, thy judgments are far above out of his
sight: as for all his enemies he puffs at them.

5 His ways they always grievous are, thy judgments where he goes
Are far above out of his sight, he puffs at all his foes.
6. He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in
adversity.

6 He has this said within his heart, not moved be shall I,
For I shall not at any time be in adversity.
7 His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit* and fraud under his tongue is
mischief and vanity

7 Of cursing, fraud, and of deceit his mouth is full surely,
And underneath his tongue there is mischief and vanity.
8 He sits in the lurking placos of the villages: in the secret places does
he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against the poor.

8 He lurking sits in villages: and secret places by
Kills the innocent: he against the poor his eyes sets privily.
9 He lies in wait secretly as a lion in his den, he lies in wait to catch
the poor. he does catch the poor when he draws him into his net.

9 In's den he as a lion lies secret, he lies in wait
To catch the poor, he poor does catch when he him draws in's net.
10 He croucheth and humbles himself, the the poor may fall by his strong ones.

10 He croucheth down unto the ground, himself he humbles all,
That by those that his strong ones are, they that are poor may fall.
11 He has said in his heart, God has forgotten: he hides his face* he will
never see it.

11 That this the Lord forgotten has said in his heart has he,
He hides so his countenance, he will it never see.
12 Arise, O Lord, O God, lift up thin^ hand: forget not the humble.

12 O Lord, O GOD, do thou arise, thy hand do thou up set,
And those in heart that humble are do thou not now forget.
13 Wherefore do the wicked contemn God ^ he has said in his heart, Thou will
not require it.

13 Wherefore does he that wicked is GOD to contemn desire?
He thus within his heart has said, thou will it not require.
14 Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite it with
thy hand: the poor commits himself unto thee:

14 Thou have it seen, for spite mischief thou see it to requite
With thine own hand; the poor he does himself to thee commit.
Thou art the helper of the fatherless.

15 Break thou the arm of the wicked, and the evil man: seek out his
wickedness till tho^ find none.

Of fatherless thou helper art, 15 of wicked and the will one
Break thou the arm; his wickedness seek out till thou find none.
16 The Lord is King for ever and ever* the heathen are perished out of his
land.

16 For ever and for ever als the Lord a King he is,
The heathen they are perished out of the land that is his.
17 Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble: thou will prepare their
heart, thou wile cause thine ear to hear:

17 O Lord of those that humble are thou the desire did hear,
Thou will prepare their hearts, and thou to hear wilt cause thine ear.
18 To judge the fatherless and the oppress (...) that the man of the earth
may no more oppress.

18 To judge him who opressed is, and that is fatherless,
That he who is the man of earth may thus no more oppress.
PSALM. XI.
IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your
mountain?

I In the Lord do put my trust, how is it thus that ye
Unto my soul say, as a bird unto your mountain flee?
2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the
string: that they way privily shoot at the upright in heart.

2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, their arrow ready right
Make on the string, to privily shoot at in heart th'upright.
3 If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

3 If so be the foundations destroyed be utterly,
What can the man then do at all, that lives righteously?
4 The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes
behold, his eyelids try the children of men.

4 God in his holy Temple is, the Lords Throne is in heaven:
His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of all men.
5 The Lord tries the righteous; but the wicked, and him that loves violence,
his soul ^ateth.

5 The Lord does try the righteous, but these that wioked prove:
His very soul does hate, and him that violence does love.
6 Upon the wicked he shall rain snares fir^ and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.

6 Upon the wicked snares and fire, and brimstone rain shall he,
And fearful tempest, of their cup this shall the portion be.
7 For the righteous Lord loves righteousness: his countenance does behold
the upright,

7 For that the righteous Lord he does in righteousness delight:
His countenance it does behold the man that is upright.
PSALM. XII.
HElp Lord, for the godly man cease: for the faithful fail from among the
children of men.

HElp, LORD, for that the godly man does cease at all to be,
For from among the Sons of men the faithful fail we see.
2 They speak vanity every one with his neighbor: with flattering lips, and
with a double heart do they speak.

2 They with his neighbor every one do speak but vanity,
With flattring lips, and with a heart that is double speak do they.
3 The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

4 Who have said, with our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own: who
is Lord over us?

3 God ^all all flattering lips cut off, tongues that speak proud things thus:
4 We Will with our tongues prevail, our lips are ours, who is Lord over us?
5 For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety, from him that puffs at him.

5 Now for the oppression of the poor, and needies sighing still,
I Will rise, says God; from him that puff* him safely set I will.
6 The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified ^even times.

6 Pure words are the words of the Lord, as silver that is tried
Within a furnace made of earth there sev'n times purified.
7 Thou shall keep them (O Lord) thou shall preserve them from this generation
for ever.

8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.

7 Lord, from this race for ever them keep and preserve thou shall:
8 On each side walk the wicked, when they vilest men exalt.
PSALM. XIII.
HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

HOw long, Lord, will thou me forget, for ever shall this be?
How long time shall it be that thou will hide thy face from me?
2 How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily?
how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

2 How long take counsel in my soul shall I, and daily be
In heart sad? how long shall my so exalted be over me?
3 Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God* lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the
sleep of death.

3 Consider thou, O Lord my God, and hearken to me now:
Lest that I sleep the sleep of death, mine eyes enlighten thou.
4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: and those that trouble
me, rejoice* when I am moved.

4 Lest I against him have prevailed my foe say, and the same
That do me trouble shoud rejoice when as I moved am.
5 But I have trusted in thy mercy, my hea^ shall rejoice in thy salvation.

5 But in thy mercy surely I have put my trust alone,
My heart within me shall rejoice in thy salvation.
6 I will sing unto the Lord, because he has ^alt bountifully with me.

6 I will sing praise unto the Lord, and that because that he
Most bountifully in all things has ever dealt with me.
PSALM. XIIII.
THe fool has said in his heart, There is n^ God, they are corrupt, they have
done abominable works, there is none that does good.

THe fool he has within his heart said, that God there is none;
They are corrupt, their works are vile, that does good there is not one.
2 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men; to see if there
were any that did understand and seek God.

2 The Lord from heaven looked down on men's children; to see
If any understood, and would of God the seekers be.
3 They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none
that does good no not one.

3 They all together filthy are, they all aside are gone,
And there is none that does good, yea surely no not one.
4 Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people, as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.

4 The workers of iniquity have they no knowledge all?
Who eat my people up as bread, and on the Lord not call.
5 There were they in great fear; for God is in the generation of the righteous.

5 There were they all in a great fear, for the Lord God is he
That in the generation is of those that righteous be.
6 You have shamed the counsel of the (...)* because the Lord is his refuge.

7 O that the salvation of Israel were come ^t of Sion!

6 The poors counsel you shamed, because God's his refuge alone:
7 O that come out of Sion were Isral's salvation!
When the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice,
and Israel shall be glade.

When of his people back the Lord* brings the captivity,
At that time Jacob shall rejoice and Israel glade shall be.
PSALM. XV.
LOrd, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? wh^ shall dwell in thy holy hill?

LOrd, who within thy tabernacle shall have abiding still?
Or who shall have his dwelling place within thy holy hill?
2 He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the
truth in his heart.

2 The man that walks uprightly, and works righteousness;
And as it is within his heart, the truth he does express.
3 He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

3 He that backbites not with his tongue, nor does his neighbor ill;
Nor against his neighbor a reproach to take up has a will.
4 In whose eyes a vile person is contemned: but he honors them that fear*
the Lord* he that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.

4 In whose eyes is a person vile contemned* but God who fear
He honors them, and changes not, though to his hurt he swear.
5 He that puts not out his money to usury, nor takes reward against the
innocent: he that does these things shall never be moved.

5 To usury puts not his coin, nor take reward will he
Against the innocent; who does these things shall never moved be.
PSALM. XV.
PReserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.

2 O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my goodness
extends no^ to thee.

LOrd save me, for in thee I trust, 2 To God my soul in me
Thou said, thou art my Lord, my good extends not to thee.
3 But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is
all my delight.

4 Their sorrow shall be multiplied that haste^ after another God:

3 To Saints on earth, to th'excellent, where my delight's all placed:
4 Their sorrows shall be multiplied ^'another God that have:
Their drink offerings of blood will I not off^* nor take up their names into
my lips.

Their drink offerings that are of blood I will not offer so,
Nor yet will I their names at all take up my lips into.
5 The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest
my lot.

5 The Lord of mine inheritance, he is the portion
And of my cup also; my lot thou do maintain alone.
6 The lines are fallen unto me in pleasa^ places. yea, I have a goodly
heritage.

6 In pleasant places are the lines now fallen unto me,
Yea I an heritage that is most goodly have from thee.
7 I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel: my reins also instruct
me in the night seasons.

7 I Will bless the Lord, who unto me has given counsel right,
My reins me also do instruct in seasons of the night.
8 I have set the Lord always before me* because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved.

8 I have the Lord before me set always, because that he
Is present still at my right hand, I shall not moved be.
9 Therefore my heart is glade, and my glo^ry rejoiceth: my flesh also shall
rest in hope.

9 Therefore my heart is in me glade, yea and my glory so
Rojoiceth greatly, and my flesh in hope shall rest also.
10 For thou will not leave my soul in hell; neither will thou suffer thine
holy One to see corruption.

10 For thou will not for ever leave my soul in hell to be;
Nor suffer wilt thine holy One corruption to see.
11 Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of joy at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

11 Thou will me show the path of life; in thy presence full store
Of joy there is; at thy right hand arc pleasures evermore.
PSALM. XVII.
HEar the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry* give ear unto my prayer that goes
not out of fained lips.

ATtend unto my cry, O Lord, and hear the right from me,
My prayer hear that go'th not out of lips that fained be.
2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: let thine eyes behold the
things that are equal.

2 And from thy presence do thou let my sentence forth proceed,
And let thine eyes behold the things that equal are indeed.
3 Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night, thou have
tried me, and shall find nothing: I am purposed that my mouth shall not
transgress.

3 Thou prov'dst my heart, thou visit'dst me and me in night did try
And nothing findst, my mouth shall not transgress, so purpose I.
4 Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from
the paths of the destroyer.

4 Concerning all the works of men, by thy lips words that be,
Of the destroyer from the paths I have preserved me.
5 Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

5 My goings every one do thou within thy paths hold up,
That so the footsteps that are mine away may never slip.
6 I have called upon thee, for thou will hear me O God: incline thine ear unto
me, and hear my speech.

6 I called have on thee, O God, for that thou will* me hear:
Hear thou my speech, and unto me do thou incline thine ear.
7 Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand
them which put their trust in thee, from those that rise up against them.

7 Thy marv'lous loving kindness show; thou that by thy right hand
Sav'st them that in thee trust, from those that up against them stand.
8 Keep me as the apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

8 O do thou me most safely keep, as the apple of the eye,
Under the shadow of thy wings most closely hide thou me.
9 From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who compass me
about.

10 They are enclosed in their own fat* with their mouth they speak proudly.

9 From wicked that m'oppresse, who me compass as deadly soes:
10 They with their mouth do proudly speak, their fat does them enclose.
11 They have now compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing
down to the earth.

11 Those men have us now in our steps compassed with deceit;
And bowing down unto the earth their eyes thus have they set.
12 Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion
lurking in secret places.

12 Like as a very Lion that is greedy of his prey,
A Lion young which lurking does in secret places stay.
13 Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the
wicked which is thy sword:

13 Arise, and him do disappoint, and cast him down, O Lord,
My soul do from the wicked man deliver, who is thy sword,
14 From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from the men of the world, which have
their portion in this life:

14 From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men that worldly be,
Which in this life that present is their portion have from thee.
And whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they are full of children,
and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.

Whose belly with thy treasure hid thou fillest of the best;
They full of children, to their babes leave of their wealth the rest.
15 As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied
when I awake with thy likeness.

15 But as for me in righteousness I thine own face will see,
Then with thy likeness when I wake I satisfied shall be.
PSALM. XVIII.
I Will love thee, O Lord, my strength.

2 The Lord is my rock, and my fortress and my deliverer,

O Lord, my strength, I will thee love, 2 my fortress is the Lord,
My rock, and he that does to me deliverance afford.
My God, my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my
salvation, and my high tower.

My God, my strength, in whom I Will trust, a buckler unto me,
The horn of my salvation, and my high tower is he.
3 I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved
from mine enemies.

3 Upon the Lord, who to be praised is worthy I will call,
And so I shall then saved be from these mine enemies all.
4 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me
afraid.

5 The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me.

4 Deaths sorrows compast me, floods of ill men'fraid made me be,
5 Hels sorrows compast me about, deaths snares prevented me.
6 In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my
voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even unto his ears.

6 I called on God in my distress, to my God cried I,
He from his Temple heard my voice, to his ears came my cry.
7 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundation also of the hills moved,
and were shaken, because he was wroth.

7 Then shook the earth, and trembled all the hills foundation both
Were moved, and als they shaken were, because that he was wroth,
8 There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured, coals were kindled by it.

8 Out of his nostrils in that place, a smoke went up on hye
And from his mouth a fire devoured, coals kindled were thereby.
9 He bowed the heavens also and came down: and darkness was under his feet.

9 The Heavens also did he bow, and came down as was meet,
And in that place a darkness thick was underneath his feet.
10 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of
the wind.

10 And he upon a cherub rode, and also fly did he
Yea of the wind upon the wings he did then swiftly flee.
11 He made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him, were
dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies.

11 He darkness made his secret place and his pavilion hye,
About him round, were waters dark, and thick clouds of the sky.
12 At the brightness that was before him, his thick clouds passed, hait-
stones and coals of fire.

12 By reason of the brightness which before him did appear,
His clouds that were so thick did pass, hailstones and coals of fire,
13 The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail
stones and coals of fire.

13 The Lord He in the heavens also did thunder in his ire;
And then the Highest gave his voice: hailstones and coals of fire.
14 Yea, he sent out his arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightnings,
and discomsited them.

14 Yea, he his arrows out did send, and he them scattered;
And he his lightnings did shoot out and them discomfited.
15 Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world
were discovered: at thy rebuke, O* Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils.

15 The waters channels then were seen, the worlds foundations fast
Discovered were at thy rebuke Lord, at thy nostrils blast.
16 He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.

16 He from above then down did send, and also took he me
And he me out of waters drew that very many be.
17 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for
they were too strong for me.

17 From him that was mine enemy strong me then delivered he,
And from them als which did me hate that were too strong for me.
18 They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my stay.

18 Of my calamity they did prevent me in the day
But he that is the Lord himself unto me was a stay.
19 He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he
delighted in me.

19 He also a large place into me brought forth by his might,
He did deliver me, because he did in me delight.
20 The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, according to the
cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me.

20 According to my righteousness The Lord rewarded me:
After the cleanness of my hands me recompensd has he.
21 For I have kept the ways of the Lord and have not wickedly departed from
my God.

21 For of the Lord I have the ways well kept with all my heart,
And from my God I wickedly did not at all depart.
22 For all his judgments were before me: and I did not put away his statutes
from me.

22 For all the judgments that are his before my face were they,
And I the statutes that his are put not from me away.
23 I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

23 I also ever was upright and that even him before,
And I from mine iniquity did keep my self therefore.
24 Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness,
according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.

24 Therefore God has me recompensd according to my right:
According to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight*
25 With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful: with an upright man
thou will show thy self upright.

With merciful thou will thy self show merciful to be,
Thou will thee show upright with him that is upright with thee.
26 With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward.

26 Thou with the pure thy self wilt show most pure in all thy ways,
And with the froward thou thy self, wilt froward show likewise.
27 For thou will save the afflicted people: but wilt bring down high looks.

28 For thou will light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness.

27 For thou afflicted folk wilt save, but bring down looks of hight:
28 My lamp thou wilt light; the Lord my God will make my darkness light.
29 For by thee I have run through a troup* and by my God have I leaped over a
wall.

29 For it is by thee that I have run through a troup not small,
And by my God also have I high leaped over a wall.
30 As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is a
buckler to all those that trust in him.

30 As for God, perfect is his way, the Lords word it is tried;
He to all those that trust in him a buckler does abide.
31 For who is God, save the Lord? or wh^ is a rock save our God?

32 It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect

31 For who is God save the Lord? or who say our God rock can be?
32 It Is God that makes my way perfect; and with strength girdeth me.
33 He makes my feet like hinds feet, and sets me upon my high places.

34 He teaches my hands to war, so that a ^owe of steel is broken by mine arms.

33 Like Hindes he makes my feet, me sets on my high places well:
34 To war he taught my hands, mine arms do break a bow of steel.
35 Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand
has holden me up, and thy gentleness has made me great.

35 The shield of thy salvation als to me is given from thee:
Thy right hand up me held, and great thy gentleness made me.
36 Thou have enlarged my steps under me; that my feet did not slip.

37 I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them:

36 Thou under me my steps inlargdst that my feet slipped not then;
37 I have pursued mine enemies, and them have overta^en.
Neither did I turn again till they w^ consumed.

38 I have wounded them that they were not able to rise, they are fallen under my
feet.

I turned not till they were consumed, 38 I wounded have them all,
That they could not arise, they get under my feet a fall.
39 For thou have girded me with strength unto the battle: thou have subdued
under m^ those that rose up against me.

39 For thou have girded me with strength to battel'gainst my foes:
Thou have subdued under me. those that up'gainst me rose.
40 Thou have also given me the necks of mine enemies: that I might destroy
them that hate me.

40 Thou have also the necks to me given of mine enemies great,
That by this means I might destroy all them that do me hate-
41 They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but he
answered them not.

41 They crl'd aloud; but there was none at all them for to save,
Even to the Lord, but unto them he then no answer gave.
42 Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast them
out as the dirt in the streets.

42 Then as the dust before the wind I thus did beat them small,
And as the dirt upon the streets I did cast out them all.
43 Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the people, and thou have made
me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known, shall serve me.

43 From peoples strivings thou me fredst, the heathens head thou me
Have made; a people shall me serve that not known to me be.
44 As Soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the stangers shall submit
themselves unto me.

44 As Soon as they shall hear of me, they shall obey me all,
The strangers unto me submit themselves most humbly shall.
45 The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places.

45 Those that be strangers from the Lord, right soon shall fade away,
And out of their close places all afraid then be shall they.
46 The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock* and let the God of my salvation be
exalted.

46 The Lord does live, blessed be the rock that does belong to me,
And let of my salvation the God exalted be.
47 It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

48 He delivers me from mine enemies:

47 God me avengeth, and subdues the people under me:
48 He does deliver me from those that to me enemies be:
Yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me: thou have
delivered me from the violent man.

Above those that against me rise up yea, thou upliftest me,
Thou also have me from the man that violent is set free.
49 Therefore will I give thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the heathen, and fing
praises unto thy Name.

49 Therefore among the heathen I will thanks unto thee bring,
And I unto thy Name, O Lord, will also praises sing.
50 Great deliverance gives he to his king, and shows mercy to his anointed,
to David and his seed for evermore.

50 He gives his King deliverance great: to his Anointed more,
To David mercy shows, and to his seed for evermore.
PSALM. XIX.
THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament shows his handy work.

THe glory of the mighty God the heavens do declare,
The firmament does also show his handiwork so rare.
2 Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows* knowledge.

3 There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

2 Day utters speech to day, and night to night shows knowledge here:
3 There is no speech, no language is where men their voice not hear.
4 Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of
the world: in them has ^e set a tabernacle for the sun:

4 Their line's gone out through all the earth, and als their words do run
Unto the worlds end, he in them a tent set for the Sun.
5 Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
strong man to run a race.

5 Which as a bridgroom is that comes out of his chambers place:
And as a man that strong is does rejoice to run a race.
6 His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends
o^ (...) and their is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

6 From heaven's end is his going forth, and als his circuit
Unto its end is; nothing is hid from thereof the heat.
7 The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

7 The Law of God it is perfect, converting souls likewise:
The testimony of the Lord is sure, makes simple wise.
8 The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure enlightening the eyes.

8 The statutes of the Lord are right, with joy the heart they please:
The Lords commandment is pure inlightning als the eyes.
9 The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord
are true, and righteous altogether.

9 The fear of God the Lord is clean, enduring fast for ever,
The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.
10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter
also then honey, and the honey comb.

10 Then gold, yea, much fine gold they more to be desired are;
Then honey and the honey comb they are even sweeter far.
11 Moreover by them is thy servant warned* and in keeping of them there is
great reward*

11 Moreover thy servant by them is warned to have regard,
And in the keeping of the same there is a great reward.
12 Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

13 Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins:

12 Who can ^is errors understand* from secret faults me cleanse:
13 Thy servant also do thou keep back from presumptuous sins.
Let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression.

And do thou not now let them have dominion over me,
Then upright, innocent, I shall from great transgression be.
14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable
in thy ^ight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

14 Let my mouths words, and of my heart the meditation ever
Be acceptable in thy sight, Lord my Strength and Redeemer.
PSALM. XX.
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

THe Lord God hear thee in the day when he does trouble send;
And let his name that is the God of Jacob thee defend.
2 Send thee help from the Sanctuary: and strengthen thee out out of Sion,

2 And from his holy Sanctuary a help send unto thee:
And that out of Zion by him thou may strengthened be.
3 Remember all thy offerings, and accept the burnt sacrifice. Selah.

4 Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel.

3 Thy offerings all remember, and burnt sacrifice accept* Selah.
4 Thy counsel all fulfill, and grant thee after thine own heart.
5 We will rejoice in thy salvation. and in the Name of our God we will set up
our banners; the Lord fulfill all thy petitions.

5 In thy salvation we will rejoice. in our Gods Name we will
Set up our banners, and the Lord thy prayers all fulfill*
6 Now know I, that the Lord saves his. anointed; he will hear him from his
holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand.

6 God his Anointed now I know saves, from his holy heaven,
He Will hear him, with the saving strength that is from his right hand given.
7 Some trust in charets, and some in horses: but we will remember the Name of
the Lord our God.

7 In charets some, and other some do trust in horses still,
But we all of the Lord our God the Name remember will.
8 They are brought down and fallo^: but we are risen, and stand upright.

9 Save, Lord, let the King hear us when we call.

8 They are brought down and fallen, but we rise, and stand upright all:
9 Lord do thou save, and let the King us hear when we do call.
PSALM. XXI.
THe King shall joy in thy strength O Lord, and in thy salvation how greatly
shall he rejoice.

THe king he in thy strength, O Lord, shall very joyful be;
And how in thy salvation greatly rejoice shall he?
2 Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not witholden the request of
his lips. Selah.

2 For of his own heart the desire unto him given thou have;
And also have not of his lips witholden the request. Selah.
3 For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou set a
crown of pure gold on his head

3 For thou with blessings him prevent'st of goodness that is great,
And thou a crown of gold that is pure upon his head do set.
4 He asked life of thee and thou gave it him: even length of days for ever
and ever.

4 He asked life of thee, and thou it unto him did give:
Even length of days, that so he might for ever and ever live.
5 His glory is great in thy salvation: honor and majesty have thou laid upon
him.

5 The glory that is his is great in thy salvation:
Honor and also majesty thou have laid him upon.
6 For thou have made him most blessed for ever: thou have made him exceeding
glade with thy countenance.

6 For thou even for evermore, most blessed have him made
And thou have with thy countenance him made exceeding glade.
7 For the king trusts in the Lord: and through the mercy of the most High.
he shall not ^e moved.

7 For in the Lord the king does trust, and through the mercy he
Of him that is the Lord most high shall never moved be.
8 Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find out
those that hate thee.

8 Thy hand it shall find out all those that to thee enmies be,
Thy right hand it shall those find out that haters are of thee.
9 Thou shall make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord
shall swallow them up in his wrath; and the fire shall devour them.

9 Thou as a fiery Ov'n in time of wrath shall make them all,
God shall them swallow in his wrath. the fire devour them shall.
10 Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among
the children of men.

10 Thou shall destroy from off the earth the fruit that does belong
Unto them, and the seed that is theirs from men's children among.
11 For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous device,
which they were not able to perform.

11 For they'gainst thee intended ill: a mischievous devise
They did imagine, but can not perform their enterprise.
12 Therefore shall thou make them turn their back, when thou shall make ready
thine arrows upon thy strings, against the face of them.

12 Therefore shall thou make them to turn their back when in that place
Thou shall thine arrows on thy strings make ready'gainst their face.
13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing, and praise
thy power.

13 In thine own strength be thou, O Lord exalted highly still:
So sing most thankfully will we, and praise thy power we will.
PSALM. XXII.
Mr. God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, and from words of my roaring.

MY God, my God, why have thou me forsaken? why so far
Art thou from helping me, and from my words that roaring are?
2 O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the night
seasom, and am not silent.

2 In day time, O my God, I cry, but thou not hear'st the same*
And in the season of the night, and I not silent am.
3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel

4 Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou did deliver them.

3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhabit'st Isreal's praise:
4 Our fathers trusted thee, and thou them trusting did release.
5 They cried unto thee, and were delivered they trusted in thee, and were not
confounded:

5 They cried unto thee, and then they were deliv'red there;
They did their trust into thee put, and not confounded were.
6 But I am a worm, and no man: a reproach of men, and despised of the people.

6 But as for me a worm I am, no man in any wise:
Yea I of men am a reproach, whom people do despise.
7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lips, they
shake the head, saying*

7 All they do laugh at me in scorn, that see me any way,
They also do shoot out the lip, they shake the head; and say.
8 He trusted on the Lord, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him
seeing he delighted in him.

8 He trusted on the Lord, that he would him deliver right;
Let him deliver him, since he had in him his delight.
9 But thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou did make me hope, when
I was upon my mothers breasts.

9 But thou art he that me out of the very womb did take;
When I was on my mothers breasts to hope thou did me make.
10 I was cast upon thee from the womb: tho^ art my God from my mothers belly.

10 When first I did come from the womb I was cast upon thee;
And from my mothers belly thou a God art unto me.
11 Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help.

12 Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.

11 Be not far off, for grief is near, for none to help I get:
12 Bulls many compast me, strong bulls of Bashan round beset.
13 They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion.

13 And then together with their mouths upon me gaped they;
Like to a Lion ravening, and roaring for his prey.
14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

14 Like water I Am powered out, my bones all out of joint do part:
Amid my bowels like the wax so melted is my heart.
15 My strength is dried up like a potsherd* and my tongue cleaves to my jaws;
and thou have brought me into the dust of death.

15 Like a potsheard my strength is dried, my tongue it cleaves fast
Unto my jaws; and to the dust of death me brought thou have.
16 For dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me:
they pierced my hands and my feet.

16 For dogs have compassd me about, the wicked that did meet
In an assembly me inclosd, they pierced my hands and feet.
17 I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.

18 They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.

17 I may tell all my bones, they look and me do stare upon:
18 They among them part my clothes, and lots do cast my vesture on.
19 But be not thou far from me, O Lord: O my strength have thee to help me.

20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.

19 But be not far, Lord; O my strength, have thee for help to me:
20 My soul from sword, from power of dogs my darling do thou free.
21 Save me from the lions mouth: for thou have heard me from the horns of the
unicorns.

21 O do thou from the lions mouth to save me have regard:
For from the horns of Unicorns by thee I have been heard.
22 I will declare thy Name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee.

22 Thy Name declare I will unto those that my brethren be,
Amid the congregation I will give praise to thee.
23 Ye that fear the Lord, praise him: all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him
and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.

23 Ye that the Lord do fear, him praise, ye seed of Jacob all
Him glorify and fear him ye the seed all of Israel.
24 For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted:
neither has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard.

24 For he despisd not, nor abhorred th'afflicteds misery:
Nor hid his face from him, but heard when he to him did cry.
25 My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows
before them that fear him.

25 In the great Congregation my praise shall be of thee:
My vows before them that him fear shall paid be by me.
26 The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek
him, your hearts shall live for ever.

26 The meek shall eat, and satisfied shall be; they praise shall give
Unto the Lord that him do seek; your heart for ay shall live.
27 All the ends of the world shall remember* and turn unto the Lord: and all
the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.

27 The worlds ends shall unto the Lord turn and remember all,
All kindreds of the Nations before thee worship shall.
28 For the kingdom is the Lords: and he is the governor among the nations.

28 For unto him that is the Lord the kingdom does belong*
And he als is the governor the Nations among.
29 All they that be fat upon earth, shall eat, and worship: all they that go
down to the dust, shall bow before him,

29 All they that fat be upon earth both eat and worship shall,
And they that go down to the dust shall bow before him all.
And none can keep alive his own soul.

30 A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.

None can his own soul keep alive, 30 A seed shall serve him so,
It for a generation shall be counted God unto.
31 They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that
shall be borne, that he has done this.

31 They shall come, and they shall declare the righteousness that is his,
Unto a people to be born that he has done all this.
PSALM. XXIII.
THe Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want,

2 He makes me to lie down in green pastures: he leads me beside the still
waters.

THe Lord's my shepherd, I Will not want 2 He makes me down to ly,
In pastures green, and he me does lead the still waters by.
3 He restoreh my soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake.

3 My soul likewise he does restore, and me to lead does take
Into the paths of righteousness, and that for his names sake.
4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me: thy rod, and thy staff, they comfort me.

4 Though through the valley of deaths shade I walk, I Will fear no ill,
Thou art with me; thy rod and staff, they do me comfort still.
5 Thou preparest a table before me, in the presence of mine enemies: thou
anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over.

5 Thou set'st in presence of my foes a table me before,
Mine head with oil thou do anoint, my cup it runs over.
6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

6 Goodness and mercy all the days of my life certainly
Me follow shall, and in Gods house for ever dwell will I.
PSALM. XXIV.
THe earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: the world, and they that
dwell therein,

2 For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.

EArth and its fullness is the Lords, the world and who there dwell,
2 For it he founded on the seas, on floods it stablishd well.
3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy
place?

Who is he that shall of the Lord ascend into the hill?
And who is he that in his place that is holy shall stand still?
4 He that has clean hands, and a pure heart who has not lift up his soul
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

4 He that clean hands has and pure heart* and unto vainity
Who has not lifted up his soul, nor sworn deceitfully.
5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.

5 That man shall from the Lord receive a blessing him upon,
And righteousness als from the God of his salvation.
6 This is the generation of them that seek* him: that seek thy face O Jacob.
Selah.

6 This is the generation of them that in their place
Do seek for him; that humbly do O Jacob seek thy face. Selah.
7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and
the king of glory shall come in.

7 Ye gates lift up your heads, and ye doors everlasting all
Be ye lift up, and then come in the king of glory shall.
8 Who is the King of glory? the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
battle.

8 Who is he that is of glory King? the Lord himself is this,
Both strong and mighty, the Lord who in battle mighty is.
9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates: even lift them up, ye everlasting doors, and
the king of glory shall come in.

9 Lift ye your heads up, O ye gates, doors everlasting all
Even lift them up, and then come in the king of glory shall.
10 Who is this king of glory? the Lord of hosts he is the king of glory. Selah.

10 But who of glory is this King? the Lord who has as his
Most mighty hosts, the same is he that King of glory is. Selah.
PSALM XXV.
UNto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

2 O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed: let not mine enemies
triumph over me.

TO thee I lift my soul, O Lord, 2 My God I trust in thee,
Let me not be ashamed; let not my foes triumph over me.
3 Yea let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which
transgress without cause.

3 Yea let thou none ashamed be that do wait upon thee:
They which transgress without a cause, let them ashamed be.
4 Show me thy ways, O Lord; teach me thy paths.

5 Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation, on
thee do I wait all the day.

4 Thy ways Lord show, teach me thy paths 5 lead in thy truth, teach me,
For of my safety thou art God, all day I wait on thee.
6 Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses: for they
have been ever of old.

6 Thy tender mercies, now, O Lord, do thou for me remember,
And loving kindnesses, for they have been of old for ever.
7 Remember not the sins of my youth, not my transgressions: according to thy
mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O LORD.

7 Let thou not of my youth the sins nor faults remembered be,
In mercy for thy goodness sake, O Lord remember me.
8 Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.

9 The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.

8 God's good, upright, he will therefore his way teach sinners still:
9 The meek in judgment he will guide, them teach his way he will.
10 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth; unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.

10 The paths all of the Lord our God both truth and mercy are
To such as do his Covenant keep, and Testimonies rare*
11 For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity! for it is great.

11 Even for the sake of thine own Name, O Lord, I thee entreat,
To pardon mine iniquity: for it is very great.
12 What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose.

13 His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the earth.

12 What man fears God? him shall he teach the way to choose in all,
13 His soul shall dwell at case, his seed the earth inherit shall.
14 The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him* and he will show them
his covenant.

14 The secret of the Lord is with all them that fear him still;
And als the covenant that is his unto them show he will.
15 Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the
net.

15 Toward the Lord these eyes of mine continually are set,
For he it is that now shall pluck my feet out of the net.
16 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and afflicted.

16 O do thou turn thee unto me, have mercy me upon,
Because that I am desolate and in affliction.
17 The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses.

18 Look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my sins.

17 Enlarged are troubles of my heart, me from distress relieve,
18 See mine affliction and my pain, and all my sins forgive.
19 Consider mine enemies: for they are many, and they hate me with cruel
hatred.

19 Consider thou* mine enemies, for that in number great
They are, and also they do me with cruel hatred hate.
20 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust
in thee.

20 O do thou keep this soul of mine, and do deliver me,
Let me not be ashamed, for I do put my trust in thee.
21 Let integrity and uprightness preserve me: for I wait on thee.

22 Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

21 Let uprightness, integrity me keep who on thee wait,
22 Redeem thou Israel, O God, from all his troubles great.
PSALM. XXVI.
Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in
the Lord, therefore I shall not slide.

JUdge me, O Lord for walked I have in mine integrity,
I trusted als have in the Lord, therefore slide shall not I.
2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart.

3 For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth.

2 Lord me examine and me prove, my reins try and my heart:
3 For thy love is mine eyes before, I in thy truth have walked.
4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.

4 With persons that are vain I have not ^at in company.
Nor with those that dissemblers are at all go in will I.
5 I have hated the congregation of evil doers: and will not sit with the
wicked.

5 Of doers ill I hated have the congregation great,
And with those that are wicked men, I in no place will sit.
6 I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar, O Lord:

6 In innocence, Lord I will wash clean my hands, and so
About the Altar that is thine I compassing will go.
7 That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous works.

7 That with of thanksgiving the voice I so may publish well,
And likewise I of all thy works that wondrous are may tell.
8 Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells.

8 The habitation of thy house, Lord, I have loved well*
And also the most holy place where does thine honor dwell.
9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men.

10 In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes.

9 With sinners gather not my soul, nor life with blood that spill:
10 In whose hand is mischief, and bribes even their right hand does fill.
11 But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and he merciful
unto me.

11 But as for me, I will walk on in mine integrity,
Do thou redeem me, and be thou now merciful to me.
12 My foot stands in an even place: in the congregation will I bless the
Lord.

12 Into a place that even is my foot it stands still:
Within the congregations the Lord God bless I will,
PSALM. XXVII.
THe Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

THe Lord is my salvation, and light, whom shall I fear?
God's of my life the strength, of whom afraid shall I be here!
2 When the wicked even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell.

2 When wicked men mine enemies, and foes to me so fell,
Came me upon to eat my flesh, they stumbled and they fell.
3 Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: though war
should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

3 Though against me should encampe an host, my heart shall fear no wise,
In this will I be confident, though against me war should rise.
4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after: that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,

4 One thing I of the Lord desired, seek after that I will,
That all days of my life I may dwell in the Lords house still.
To behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.

There of the Lord for to behold the beauty with desire;
And that within the Temple, I, that is his may enquire.
5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret
of his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a rock.

5 For he in his pavilion shall me hide in trouble great:
He Will hide me in his secret tent, he will on a rock me set.
6 And now shall my head be lifted up above ^ine enemies round about me:

6 And at this present time my head it shall uplifted be
Above those men that round about are enemies to me.
Therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy: I will sing, yea I
will sing praises unto the Lord.

Therefore I in his Tabernacle will sacrifice afford
Of joy, I will sing; yea, I will sing praises to the Lord.
7 Hear, O Lord when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer
me.

8 When thou said, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord
will I seek.

7 Lord, hear when with my voice I cry: me answer, grant me grace:
8 When thou said, Seek my face, my heart, said, Lord, I Will seek thy face.
9 Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: thou have
been my help.

9 Far from me hide thou not thy face, put not away from thee
Thy servant in thy wrath; thou have a help been unto me.
Leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

10 When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.

O God of my salvation, me leave not nor forsake:
10 When father, mother do me leave the Lord me up will take.
11 Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in a plain path, because of mine
enemies.

11 The way that is thine do thou me teach O Lord, and lead thou me
In a plain path, because of such as enemies to me be.
12 Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for falso witnesses are
risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.

12 To my foes will give me not over for witnesses that lie
Against me are risen up, and such as breath out cruelty.
13 I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living.

13 I fainted had, unless that I believed had to see
The Lords own goodness in the land of them that living be.
14 Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
wait I say on the Lord.

14 Wait on God, be of courage good, and he shall strength afford
Unto thy heart: yea, do thou wait, I say, upon the Lord.
PSALM. XXVIII.
UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock, be not silent to me: lest if thou be
silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.

O Lord, my rock, to thee I Will cry, not silent be to me;
Lest I like men gone down to pit be, if thou silent be.
2 Hear the voice of my suplications, when I cry unto thee: when I lift up my
hands toward thy holy Oracle.

2 Voice of my suplications hear when I unto thee cry,
When to thy holy Oracle my hands I lift on hy.
3 Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity: which
speak peace to their neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.

3 With wicked men and doers ill draw thou me not apart,
Which peace unto their neighbor speak, but mischief's in their heart.
4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their endeavors: give them after the work of their hands, render to them their
desert.

4 Give them according to their deeds, and wickedness of heart,
Give them after their handy work, them render their desert.
5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

5 Because Gods works they not regard, north operation all
Of his own hands; he them destroy, and not build up he shall.
6 Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.

6 For ever blessed be the Lord, and that because that he
Has of the supplications the voice heard made by me.
7 The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth,

7 The Lord's my strength and shield, my heart it is trust upon him laid,
And I am helped; therefore my heart to joy is greatly made*
And with my song will I praise him.

8 The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed.

And with my song him praise I will 8 The Lord their strength he is;
And he the saving strength is of the Anointed that is his.
9 Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance feed them also, and lift them
up for ever.

9 Thy people save and do thou bless thine heritage together,
Do thou them also feed, and the^ do thou lift up for ever
PSALM. XXIX.
GIve unto the Lord (O ye mighty) give unto the Lord glory and strength.

UNto the Lord now do ye give, (O ye that mighty be)
The glory and the strength also unto the Lord give ye.
2 Give unto the Lord the glory duc unto his Name: worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness.

2 Unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name afford,
And in the beauty of holiness, give worship to the Lord.
3 The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth, the
Lord is upon many waters.

3 The voice of him that is the Lord is on the waters gone,
The God of glory thundereth God's many waters on.
4 The voice of the Lord is powerful: the voice of the Lord is full of majesty.

4 The voice of him is powerful, that is the Lord most hy,
The voice of him that is the Lord, is full of majesty.
5 The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars: yea, the Lord breaks the cedars
of Lebanon.

5 Of the Almighty Lord the voice does break the cedars tall,
Yea of the Lebanon the Lord the cedars breaks small.
6 He makes them also to skip like a calf: Lebanon, and Sirion like a young
unicorn.

6 He makes them also like a calf to skipe; even Lebanon,
And like unto an Unicorh that is young, the Sirion.
7 The voice of the Lord devideth the flames of fire.

8 The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness; the Lord shakes the
wilderness of Kadesh.

7 Gods voice divides the flames of fire, 8 Gods voice does desert shake,
And of Kadesh the wilderness to shake the Lord does make.
9 The voice of the Lord makes the hindes to calve, and discovers the
forests: and in his temple does every one speak of his glory.

9 The Lord his voice makes Hinds to calve, discovers forests eke,
And in his Temple every one does of his glory speak.
10 The Lord sits upon the flood: yea, the Lord sits King for ever.

11 The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his
people with peace.

10 The Lord sits on the flood, yea, God sits King for ever still:
^1 The Lord will give his people strength, with peace God bless them will.
PSALM XXX.
I Will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my
foes to rejoice over me.

I Will extol thee Lord, for thou up high have lifted me,
And not over me have made my foes rejoiced for to be.
2 O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.

2 O thou who art the Lord my God, I even unto thee
On high my cry thus did lift up, and thou have healed me.
3 O Lord, thou have brought up my soul, from the grave: thou have kept me
alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

3 O Lord thou art h^ that has brought my soul up from the grave,
That I to pit should not go down, thou me alive did save.
4 Sing unto the Lord, (O ye saints of his) and give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness.

4 O ye that are the saints of his, sing ye unto the Lord:
And thanks at the rembrance of his holiness afford.
5 For his anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life; weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

5 For but a moment lasts his wrath, life in his favor is,
Endure may weeping for a night, at morn comes joy for this.
6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

7 Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong*

6 In my prosperity I said, I never moved shall be
7 Lord by thy favor thou madst stand, my mountain strong for me:
8 Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. I cried to thee, O Lord: and
unto the Lord I made my supplication.

8 Thou hidst thy face, I troubled was, I unto thee did cry,
O Lord: my supplication unto the Lord made I.
9 What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

9 What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to pit?
Shall unto thee the dust give praise? thy truth declare shall it?
10 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me Lord be thou my helper.

11 Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou have put off my
sackcloth, an^ girded me with gladness:

10 Lord hear, have mercy* Lord me help: 11 Thou turned for me my sadness
To dancing; thou my sack put off, and girded me with gladness.
12 To the end that my glory may sing pra^ to thee, and not be silent: O Lord
my God, will give thanks unto thee for ever.

12 That sing thy praise my glory may, and may not silent be:
O Lord my GOD, I will give thanks for ever unto thee.
PSALM. XXXI.
IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed: deliver me in
thy righteousness.

IN thee, O Lord, I put my trust, shamed let me never be:
And in thy righteousness also do thou deliver me.
2 Bow down thine ear to me, deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for
an house of defense to save me.

2 Bow down thine ear to me, with speed let me deliverance have:
For of defense, an house be thou my strong rock, me to save.
3 For thou art my rock and my fortress, therefore for thy Names sake lead me,
and guide me.

3 For thou art he whom I my rock and fortress als do make,
Therefore do thou me lead and guide even for thine own names sake,
4 Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my
strength.

4 Do thou me pull out of the net, that they in any part
So privily have laid for me, for that my strength thou art.
5 Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth.

5 Into thine hand I do commit my spirit which came from thee
O Lord, who art the God of truth thou have redeemed me.
6 I have hated them that regard lying vanities, but I trust in the Lord.

6 I unto them have hatred born, who to regard accord
The vanities that lying are, but I trust in the Lord.
7 I will be glade and rejoice in thy mercy for thou have considered my
trouble, thou ha^ known my soul in adversities:

7 I Will in thy mercy glade rejoice, for thou my miseries
Considered have, thou have my soul known in adversities.
8 And have not shut me up into the hand (...) the enemy: thou have set my
feet in a large room

8 And als into the enemies hand shut up thou have not me,
Thus by thee have my feet been set in a large room to be,
9 Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am (...) trouble: mine eye is consumed with
grief, ye^ my soul and my belly.

9 O Lord for I in trouble am, have mercy upon me;
Mine eye, my belly, yea my soul with grief consumed be.
10 For my life is spent with grief, and m^ years with sighing, my strength
saileth, because of mine iniquity, and my bones are cos^umed.

10 For thus my life with grief is spent, my years als with my groans;
My strength does fail, and for my sin consumed are my bones.
11 I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my
neighbors, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without fled
from me.

11 Among all my foes reproach I was, among neighbors specially,
To mine acquaintance fear; without who saw me fled from me.
12 I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind; I am like a broken vessel.

12 I am forgotten as a man that out of mind is dead,
And I like to a vessel am that broken is indeed.
13 For I have heard the slander of many* fear was on every side, while they
took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.

13 For slanders I of many heard, fear compast me while they
Against me took counsel, they devised to take my life away,
14 But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said Thou art my God.

14 But as for me, O Lord, my trust upon thee then I laid,
And unto me thou art a God unto thee then, I said:
15 My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and
from them that persecute me.

15 My times they are within thy hand: do thou deliver me
Both from mine enemies hand, and them that persecute do me.
16 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake

16 Thy countenance to shine do thou upon thy servant make,
Unto me give salvation, for thine own mercies sake.
17 Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the wicked
be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.

17 Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for on thee called I have;
Let wicked men be shamed, let them be silent in the grave.
18 Let the lying lips be put to silence: which speak grievous things proudly
and contemptu^ ously against the righteous.

18 The lying lips to silence put, which grievous things speak thus
Both proudly and contemtuously against the righteous.
19 O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee: which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of
m^n!

19 How great's the goodness thou laid up have for those that thee fear,
And wrought for them that in thee trust before men's children here!
20 Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man:
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues.

20 In secret of thy presence thou shall hide them from man's pride,
From strife of tongues thou secretly shall in a tent them hide.
21 Blessed be the Lord: for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in a
strong city.

21 For ever blessed be the Lord, for he to me so long
Has showed his kindness mavelous within a city strong.
22 For I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless
thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee.

22 For I said in my haste, cut off I Am from before thine eye,
Yet thou heard'st of my prayer the voice when I to thee did cry.
23 O love the Lord all ye his saints: for the Lord preserves the faithful,
and plentifully rewards the proud doer.

23 O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, for God the faithful guards;
And plentifully him that is the doer proud rewards.
25 Be of good courage and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in
the Lord.

24 Be ye now of a courage good, and he shall strength afford,
Unto your heart; even all ye that do hope in the Lord.
PSALM. XXXII.
BLessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.

THe man is blessed unto whom in mercy is remitted
All the transgression he has done, whose sin is also covered.
2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: and in whose
spirit the^ is no guile,

2 The man is blessed unto whom the Lord iniquity
Imputes not; and in whose sprite at all no guile there be.
3 When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long.

3 At what time I did silence keep, my bones that were once strong
Even through my roaring waxed old, and that all the day long.
4 For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned unto the
drought of summer. Selah.

4 For both by night and day thy hand was heavy upon me,
Which made into the summers drought my moisture turned to be. Selah.
5 I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid:

5 To thee the sin that I had done acknowledge then I did,
Likewise mine own iniuqitie from thee I have not hid.
I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin. Selah.

I my transgressions will confess unto the Lord, said I*
And then thou did of my sin forgive th'iniquity. Selah.
6 For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou
may be found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh
unto him.

6 For this in times thou may be found, each godly shall thee pray,
Surely in floods of waters great not near him come shall they.
7 Thou art my hiding place; thou shall preserve me from trouble, thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.

7 Thou art my hiding place, thou shall from trouble keep me free:
Thou with songs of deliverance about shall compass me. Selah.
8 I will iustruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I will
guide the with mine eye.

8 I will instruct thee, and I will now teach thee in the way
Which thou shall go: I will also thee guide with mine own eye.
9 Be ye not as the horse or as the mule which have no understanding: whose
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, test they come near ^to thee:

9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have no wit
Whose mouth lest they come near must be with bridle held and bit.
10 Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord,
mercy shall compass him about.

10 Unto the man that wicked is, much sorrows shall befall.
But he that trusts in the Lord, him mercy compass shall
11 Be glade in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye
that are upright in heart.

11 Ye righteous in the Lord be glade, in him rejoice do ye;
And do ye shout for joy, ye all in heart that upright be.
PSALM. XXXIII.
REjoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright.

O Ye that righteous are rejoice, into the Lord of might;
For praise it is a comely thing for them that are upright.
2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery, and an
instrument of ten strings.

2 Do ye the Lord praise with the harp* with psaltry to him sing,
And also with an instrument that has a tenfold string.
3 Sing unto him a new song: play skilfully with a loud noise.

4 For the word of the Lord is right: and all his works are done in truth.

3 Sing him a new song, skilfully do with a loud noise play:
4 For the Lords word is right; in truth his works all done are they.
5 He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness
of the Lord.

5 Both righteousness and judgment als he loves ever still,
The goodness likewise of the Lord the earth each where does fill.
6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by
the breath of his mouth.

6 Even by the Lords most powerful word the heavens created were,
And by the breath of his own mouth all hosts of them each where.
7 ^e gathers the waters of the sea together (...) ^eap* he lays up the
deepth in storehouses*

7 He gathreth waters of the sea together as an heap,
And as in store houses it were, he lays up the deep.
8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand
in aw of him.

9 For he spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and it stood fast.

8 Fear God all earth, in aw of him, let worlds all dwellers stand:
9 For he spoke, it was done, and it stood fast at his command.
10 The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: he makes the
devices of the people of none effect.

10 The Lord to naught the counsel brings which heathen men project,
Devices of the people he does make of none effect.
11 The counsel of the Lord stands for ever: the thoughts of his heart to
all generations.

11 But yet the counsel of the Lord for ever stands fast,
And of his heart the thoughts unto all generations last.
12 Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord: and the people, whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance.

12 O blessed is the Nation whose God even the Lord is;
And people whom he chosen has for heritage that is his.
13 The Lord looks from heaven: he beholds all the sons of men.

14 From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
earth.

13 The Lord from heaven looks, he beholds all sons of men right well:
14 He from his dwelling place looks on all that on earth do dwell.
15 He fashioneth their hearts alike: he considers all their works.

15 The hearts of every one of them alike he he fashioneth;
And all the works als that are theirs he well considers.
16 There is no King saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength.

16 There is no king whom of an host the multitude can save,
And by much strength a mighty man can no deliverance have.
17 An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by his
great strength.

17 For man's safety, a thing most vain an horse is seen at length,
Not any he deliver shall at all by h^ great strength.
18 Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them ^at fear him, upon them that hope
in his mercy.

18 Behold the eye even of the Lord on them that fear him is;
And upon them that also hope in mercy that is his.
19 To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

20 Our soul waits for the Lord: he is our help and our shield.

19 From death to save their soul, and life to them in famine yield:
20 Our soul it waits for the Lord, he is our help and shield.
21 For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have t^usted in his holy
Name.

22 Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us: according as we hope in thee.

21 Our heart in him shall joy, for trust in's holy Name did we
22 Lord let thy mercy be on us as we do hope in thee.
PSALM XXXIV.
I Will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my
mouth.

2 My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and
be glad.

I 'Le bless GOD all times, his praise still shall in my mouth be here.
2 My soul in God shall boast, and glad the humble it shall hear,
3 O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together.

4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and delivered me from all my fears.

3 O with me magnify the Lord, his name exalt together:
4 I sought God, he did hear, and me from all my fears deliver.
5 They looked unto him and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed.

6 This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out all his
troubles,

5 They looked to him, and lightened were, their faces were not shamed:
6 This poor man cried, God heard, and him from all his trouble saved.
7 The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

7 He that is the Angel of the Lord, encampeth round for ever
About all them that do him fear and he does them deliver,
8 O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusts in
him.

9 O fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.

8 O taste and see, that God is good he is blessed that trusts him here,
9 O ye his saints fear God: for they not want that do him fear.
10 The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord
shall not want any good thing.

10 Young lions suffer hunger great, and they have lack of food:
But they that seek the Lord shall not want any thing that is good.
11 Come ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

11 Ye who are children hither come, unto me give ye ear;
I will give teaching unto you how ye the Lord shall fear.
12 What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see
good?

12 What man is he that does desire his life preserved to be
And also loves many days that so he good may see?
13 Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

14 Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and pursue it.

13 From ill thy tongue keep; with thy lips from speaking guile eschew,
14 Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and it pursue.
15 The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous: and his ears are open unto
their cry.

16 The face of the Lord is against them that do evil:

15 Gods eyes are on the just, his ears are open to their cry:
16 The face of God it is against them that do wickedly.
To cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.

17 The righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

That he may from the earth cut off the remembrance they have,
17 The righteous cry, God hears, them does from all their troubles save.
18 The Lord is nigh^ unto them that are of a broken heart: and saves such as
be of a contrite spirit.

19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivers them out
of them all.

18 God's near to broken hearts, and saves such as have sprits contrite:
19 The just man's troubles many are, from all God does him quite.
20 He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.

21 Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.

20 He keeps all his bones, of them not broken there is one:
21 Ill shall the wicked slay; who hate the just, shall be undone.
22 The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in
him shall be desolate.

22 Of his own servants all the Lord the soul redeemeth he,
And none of them that trust in him as desolate shall be.
PSALM XXXV.
PLead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight against them that
fight against me.

2 Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.

PLead, Lord, with them that strive, and fight against them that fight with me:
2 Do thou the shield and buckler take, stand up mine help to be.
3 Draw out also the spear and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

3 Draw out also the spear, and do against them stop the way
That persecute me; to my soul I Am thy salvation say.
4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be
turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.

4 Let them confounded be that seek my soul, to shame them put;
Brought to confusion let thou them turn back that plot my hurt.
5 Let them be as chafe before the wind ^ and let the angel of the Lord chase
them.

6 Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the angel of the Lord persecute
them.

5 As chafe before the wind be they them let Gods angel chase
6 Dark, slippery, be their way, let them Gods Angel drive apace.
7 For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without
cause they have dug for my soul.

7 For without cause they for me have their net hid in a pit:
Without a cause from me have they for my soul dug it.
8 Let destruction come upon him at unawars, and let his net that he has hid,
catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.

8 Let ruin seize him unawars: his net he hid withal
Let it him catch, and in the same destruction let him fall.
9 And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.

10 All my bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee;

9 In God my soul shall joy, and glad in his salvation be:
10 Thus all my bones shall say, O Lord, who is like unto thee.
Which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor
and the n^edy from him that spoileth him?

Which do the poor release from him that is for him too strong,
Yea poor and needy from the man that spoiling does him wrong.
11 False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not.

12 They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul.

11 False witnesses rose, to my charge things I not knew they laid:
12 To spoiling of my soul they me did ill for good reward.
13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.

13 With fast my soul then humbled I, my clothing was of sack
When they were sick, my prayer returned to mine own bosom back.
14 I behaved my self as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down
heavilie, as one that mourns for his mother.

14 I did behave my self as he had been my friend or brother;
I heavily bowed down as one that mourns for his mother.
15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea,
the abjects gathred themselves together against me,

15 But in my trouble they rejoiced, gathring themselves together,
The abjects yea together did themselves against me gather.
And I knew it not, they did tear me, and ceased not.

16 With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.

I it not knew, they did me tear, they would not ceasing be.
16 With mockers hypocrites in feasts they gnasht their teeth on me.
17 Lord, how long will thou look on? rescue my soul from their destructions,
my darling from the lions.

17 O Lord how long will thou look on? my darling soul do thou
From their destructions, and from the lions young rescue.
18 I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee among
much people.

18 In the great Congregation I will give thanks to thee,
Among much people there thou shall be praised als by me.
19 Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let
them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

19 Let them not over me joy that are mine enemies wrongfully:
Nor who me hate without a cause let them wink with the eye.
20 For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful matters against them
that are quiet in the land.

20 For peace at all they do not speak but they do take in hand
Deceitful matters' against them that are quiet in the land.
21 Yea, they opened their moutb wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye
has seen it.

22 This thou have seen (O Lord) keep not silence: O Lord, be not far from me.

21 With mouths made wide they against me said, Ha, ha, our eye did see:
22 Lord thou this saw, not silence keep, LORD be not far from me.
23 Stir up thy self, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause my God and
my LORD.

23 Stir up thy self, and do awake, me judgment to assord,
Even to the cause that is mine own, my God and als my Lord.
24 Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not
rejoice over me.

24 O Lord my God do thou me judge after thy righteousness,
And do thou not let them at all now over me rejoice.
25 Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not
say, We have swallowed him up.

25 Let them not in their hearts say, Ah, we would it so to be,
Let them not have it for to say, him swallowed up have we.
26 Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that rejoice at mine
hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonor, that magnify themselves
against me.

26 Shamed and confounded be they all that joy my hurt to see,
Let shame, dishonor cloth them that them against me magnify.
27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous cause: yea,
let them say continually,

27 Let them for joy shout, and be glad, that favor lovingly
My cause that righteous is, yea let them say continually,
Let the Lord be magnified which has plea sure in the prosperity of his
servant.

Let him that is the mighty Lord, be magnified hye,
Which a great pleasure has in his servants prosperity.
28 And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and of thy praise all the
day long.

28 And of the righteousness that is thine I shall speak with my tongue.
And all the day long of the praise that does to thee belong.
PSALM. XXXVI.
THe transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear
of God before his eyes.

THe wicked man's transgression within my heart it says:
That of the Lord there is no fear at all before his eyes.
2 For he flattereth himself in his own cyes, until his iniquity be found to
be hateful.

2 For that even in his own eyes himself still flattereth he,
Until that his iniquity be hateful found to be.
3 The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to be wise,
and to do good.

3 Words of his mouth are all deceit and als iniquity
He to be wise, and to do good has left off utterly.
4 He devises mischief upon his bed, he sets himself in a way that is not
good: he abhors not evil.

4 He does on's bed mischief devise, himself he also still
Sets in a way that is not good he not abhors ill.
5 Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the heavens: and thy faithfulness reaches unto
the clouds

5 O Lord the mercy that is thine is in the heavens hy,
And so does als thy faithfulness reach to the cloudy sky.
6 Thy righteousness is like the great mou^tains; thy judgments are a great
deep; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.

6 Thy righteousness is like unto the mountains that are s^eep,
A great deep are thy judgments, Lord, thou man and beast do keep.
7 How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore the children of men
put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

7 How is thy loving kindness, Lord, excellent in all things!
Therefore men's children put their trust in shadow of thy wings.
8 They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

8 They with the fatness of thy house well satisfied i^ all be:
Thou shall make them of rivers drink of pleasures come from thee.
9 For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.

9 For that the fountain of all life is evermore with thee:
And in the light which is thine own we clearly light shall see.
10 O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee: and thy
righteousness to the upright in heart.

10 Thy loving kindness uuto them continue that thee know,
And to the men upright in heart thy righteousness allow.
11 Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the
wicked remove me,

11 Let not the foot of pride once come against me, me to move:
Let not the hand of wicked men me from my place remove.
12 There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not
be able to rise.

12 The workers of iniquity there fallen are; like wise
They are cast down, and they shall not be able to arise.
PSALM. XXXVII.
FRet not thy self because af evil doers, neither be thou envious against the
workers of iniquity.

FRet not thy self, because of those that evil do wickedly,
Nor be envious against them that work iniquity.
2 For they shall soon be cut* down like the grass, and wither as the green
herb.

2 For even like unto the grass, soon be cut down shall they:
And like unto the herb that is green, they wither shall away.
3 Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily
thou shall be fed.

3 Do thou thy trust put in the Lord, and do that which is good;
And so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily have food.
4 Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.

5 Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass.

4 Delight thy self in God, he will give thy hearts desire to thee.
5 Thy way to God commit, him trust* it bring to pass shall he.
6 And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment
as the noon day.

6 And as the light thy righteousness he shall bring forth always,
And als the judgment that is thine like unto the noonday.
7 Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently (...) him: fret not thy self because of
him who prospe^eth in his way, because of the man who bringe^ wicked devices to
pass.

7 In God rest, patient for him wait, at man's way prospering
Fret not, nor at him who to pass devices ill does bring.
8 Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise to do
evil

8 Do thou from anger cease, and wrath do thou forsake also,
Fret not thy self in any wise that evil thou should do.
9 For evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they
shall inheri^ the earth.

9 For those that evil doers be shall be cut off in all;
But those that wait upon the Lord the earth inherit shall.
10 For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.

10 For yet a little while, and then the wicked shall not be:
Thou diligently consider shall his place; none shall it see.
11 But the meek shall inherit the earth* and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace.

11 But who are meek they shall the earth inherit here by right,
And in the abundance of peace themselves they shall delight.
12 The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth.

13 The Lord shall laugh at him: for he sees that his day is coming.

12 The wicked plots against the just, on him does gnash his teeth:
13 The Lord shall laugh at him; for that his day he coming sees.
14 The wicked have drawn out the sword and have bent their bow, to cast down
the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

14 The wicked have drawn out the sword and bent their bow have they
The poor and needy to cast down, and upright men to slay.
15 Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be
broken.

16 A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many
wicked.

15 Their sword shall enter their own heart, broke shall their bows be then;
16 A just man's little is more then wealth of many wicked men.
17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the
righteous.

17 For of the wicked men the arms they shall be broken small:
But he that is the mighty Lord upholds the righteous all.
18 The Lord knows the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be
for ever.

18 The days of those that are upright the Lord himself does see;
And the inheritance that is theirs it shall for ever be.
19 They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine
they shall be satisfied.

19 They shall not be ashamed when they the evil time do see;
And in the days of famine they shall satisfied be.
20 But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the
fat of lambs: they shall consume: into smoke shall they consume away.

20 But wicked men, and foes of God as lambs fat perish they;
They shall consume, and into smoke they shall consume away.
21 The wicked borrows, and pays not again: but the righteous shows
mercy, and gives.

21 The wicked man he borrows, and not again does pay:
But he that is righteous mercy shows, and gives every way.
22 For such as be blessed of him, shall inherit the earth: and they that be
cursed of him, shall be cut off.

22 For such as of him blessed be the earth inherit shall;
And they that cursed be of him, shall be cut off in all.
23 The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delights in his
way.

23 The steps of every man that is good are ordered aright
Even by the Lord himself, and he does in his way delight.
24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand.

24 Although he fall, yet shall he not be utterly down cast,
For that the Lord him with his hand upholdeth ever fast.
25 I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

25 I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not indeed
The righteous forsaken seen, nor his seed begging bread.
26 He is ever merciful, and lends: and his seed is blessed.

27 Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell for evermore.

26 He Is ever merciful and lends, his seed is blessed therefore:
27 Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell for evermore.
28 For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his saints, they are
preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.

28 For God loves judgment, and his saints no way forsakes he,
Preserved still are* they, but cut off the wickeds seed shall be.
29 The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever

30 The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of
judgment.

29 The just inherit shall the land and ever therein dwell:
30 The righteous man's mouth wisdom speaks, his tongue does judgment tell;
31 The law of his God is in his heart: non his steps shall slide.

32 The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to stay him.

31 Within his heart is his Gods law, his steps slide not away,
32 The wicked does the righteous watch, and seeks him to slay.
33 The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

33 The Lord God will not in his hand thus leave him that i^ his:
Nor yet for wicked him condemn when as he judged is.
34 Wait on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the
land? when the wicked (...) off, thou sha^ see it.

34 Wait on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall thee exalt,
The land t'inherit; (...) cut off the wicked see thou shall*
35 I have seen the wicked in great power: and spreading himself like a green
bay tree.

36 Yet he passed away, and ^o, he was not: yea, I sought him* but he could not
be found.

35 I saw the wicked great in power and spread like green bay tree,
36 He past, ^o was not, him I sought, but found he could not be.
37 Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace.

37 Mark thou the man that is perfect, and upright in his place,
Do thou behold him, for the end of that man it is peace.
38 But the transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked
shall be cut off.

38 But those men that transgressors are shall be destroyed together,
The end of those that wicked be shall be cut off for ever.
39 But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their strength in
the time of trouble.

39 But of the Lord salvation is of them that righteous be,
And when the time of trouble is, their only strength is he.
40 And the Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them from
the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.

40 God shall help and deliver them, from men that are unjust
He shall deliver them, and save, because they in him trust.
PSALM XXXVIII.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

IN thy great wrath, O thou my Lord, do thou rebuke me not,
Nor do thou also chasten me, in thy displeasure hot.
2 For thine arrows stick ^ast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

2 For arrows that are thine do stick fast in me more and more;
Yea and thy hand which heavy is me presses very sore.
3 There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there
any rest in my bones because of my sin.

3 No soundness by thing anger great, there is my flesh within*
Nor in my bones is any rest by reason of my sin.
4 For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and as an heavy burden, they
are too heavy for me.

4 For mine iniquities they be mine head gone over far,
And as a heavy burden they too heavy for me are.
^ My wounds stink and are corrupt: because of my foolishness.

6 I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long.

5 My wounds do stink and are corrupt, it is for my folly so:
6 I Am troubled; I Am bowed greatly down all day I mourning go,
7 For my loins are filled with a loathsome discase: and there is no soundness
in my flesh.

7 For a disease does fill my loins that very loathsome is,
So that at all within my flesh no soundness is for this.
8 I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietnesse of
my heart.

8 I feeble am and broken sore; I have in this my smart
Even roared still by reason of disquietnesse of heart.
9 Lord, all my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

10 My heart pants, my strength fails me: as for the light of mine eyes, it
also is gone from me.

9 All my desire's before thee Lord, from thee not hid's my groan
10 My heart does pant, my strength me fails mine eyes light's from me gone.
11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore: and my kinsmen stand
afar off.

11 My lovers friends all from my sore aloof they standers are,
And who are kinsmen unto me they do stand off afar.
12 They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me: and they that seek my
hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.

12 Who seek my life lay snares for me, who seek my hurt even they
Mischievous things speak, and deceits imagine all the day.
13 But I as a deaf man, heard not: and I was as a dumb man that opneth not his
mouth.

13 But as a man that deaf is, I heard not what they did call,
And as one dumb I was, that his mouth op'neth not at all.
14 Thus I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

15 For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou will hear, O Lord my God.

14 Thus as one that not hears I was, whose mouth reproves no word:
15 For Lord in thee I hope, thou will me hear, O God, my Lord,
16 For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my
foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

16 For I said, Hear me, lest that they rejoice should over me;
They'gainst me when my foot does slip themselves do magnify.
17 For I am ready to halt: and my sorrow is continually before me.

18 For I will declare mine iniquity: I will be sorry for my sin.

17 For I am ready for to halt, my grief's before me still:
18 For I Will declare my fault, and for my sin be sorry will.
19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong; and they that hate me
wrongfully, are multiplied.

19 But those that are mine enemies are strong, and lively yet;
And they are likewise multiplied that wrongfully me hate.
20 They also that render evil for good, are mine adversaries; because I
follow the thing that good is.

20 They that for good do render ill, mine adversaries rude
They also are, because the thing I follow that is good.
21 Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God, be not far from me.

22 Make haste to help me, O Lord, my salvation.

21 Forsake me not O Lord my God far off from me not be,
22 O thou Lord my Salvation, make haste for help to me.
PSALM. XXXIX.
I Said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will
keep my mouth with a bridle* while the wicked is before me.

LEst with my tongue I sin, I said, I Will to my ways look still,
Before the wicked man my mouth with bridle keep I will.
2 I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good, and my sorrow was
stirred.

2 I being made with silence dumb, even from good held my peace;
And after that my sorrow thus was stirred in its place.
3 My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spoke I
with my tongue.

3 My heart within me then was hot, while I was musing long
The fire did burn, and then did I these words speak with my tongue,
4 Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: that
I may know how frail I am*

4 Lord make me for to know mine end, and measure of my days,
And what it is, that I may know how frail I am always
5 Behold, thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine ago is as
nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity.
Selah.

5 Lo thou my days as handbreadth madst, mine age before thine eye
As nothing is: Sure man at's best is wholly vainity. Selah.
6 Surely every man walks in a vain show: surely they are disquieted in vain:
he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them.

6 Each man sure walks in a vain show, disquieted in vain:
He heaps up riches, and not knows who gather shall that gain.
7 And now Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

8 Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of the
foolish.

7 And now, O Lord, what wait I for my hope it is in thee:
8 From all my sins me save; make not the fools reproach of me.
9 I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it.

10 Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.

9 I dumb my mouth not opened, because thou did the same,
10 Remove thy stroke from me, consumed by thy hands blow I am.
11 When thou with rebuke do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah.

11 When with rebukes thou do correct man for iniquity;
Thou wastes his beauty like a moath: sure each man's vainity. Selah.
12 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my
tears:

12 O Lord, do thou my prayer hear, and to my cry thine ears
Do thou incline, and do not hold thy peace at those my tears;
For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.

Because that I thus with thee am a stranger every where,
And a sojourner am also as all my fathers were.
13 O spare me, that I may recover strength: before I go hence, and be no more.

13 O spare thou me, that I my strength recover may, before
That I must go away from hence, and after be no more.
PSALM. XL.
I Waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.

FOr him that is the only Lord I waited patiently,
And unto me he did incline, and he did hear my cry.
2 He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set
my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.

2 Up from a fearful pit and clay that is miry brought he me,
And set my feet upon a rock, my goings stablish'd he.
3 And he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall
see it, and fear, and trust in the Lord.

3 A new song in my mouth he put, our Gods praise to record,
It many shall see, and shall fear, and shall trust in the Lord.
4 Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust: and respects not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

4 That man is blessed that does make the Lord his trust always,
And not respects the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.
5 Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are to usward:

5 O Lord my God right many are the works that thou have done
Most wonderful, and als thy thoughts which to usward are gone.
They cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare, and speak
of them, they are more then can be numbered.

In order none can reckon them to thee; if them declare
I would, and speak of them, they more then can be numbered are.
6 Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened:
burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not required.

6 Thou sacrifice and offering did not at all desire,
Mine ears thou peirc'dst, sin offerings thou and burnt did not require.
7 Then said I, Lo I come: in the volume of thy book it is written of me,

7 In that same very time I said, now lo I come to thee.
Even in the volume of thy book it written is of me.
8 I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is within my heart.

8 I take delight to do thy will O thou my God that art,
Yea and the law that thou have given it is within my heart.
9 I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord, thou know.

9 I righteousness have preached in the congregation great,
Lo, I have not refrained my lips: O Lord thou know it.
10 I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness and (...) salvation:

10 Within my heart I not at all have hid thy righteousness,
I thy salvation have declared and als thy faithfulnsse.
I have not concealed thy loving kindness, and thy truth from the great
congregation.

Thy kindness, which most loving is, concealed not have I
Nor from the congregation great have hid thy verity.
11 Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: letthy loving
kindness and thy truth continually preserve me.

11 Thy tender mercies from me Lord, withold not, let me have
Thy loving kindness, and thy truth for ever me to save.
12 For innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken
hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up:

12 For ills innumerable have me compassed about:
My sins have taken hold on me, so can I not look out.
They are mo then the hairs of mine head* therefore my heart fails me.

13 Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord; make haste to help me.

My heart me fails, for then the hairs of mine head more they be:
13 Be pleased me to deliver, Lord, have Lord for help to me.
14 Let them be ashamed and confounded together, that seek after my soul to
destroy it: let them be driven backward and put to shame that wish me evil.

14 Shamed and confounded be all they that seek my soul to kill;
Let them be backward driven, and put to shame that wish me ill.
15 Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame, that say unto me, Aha,
aha!

15 And of their shame for a reward let them be every way
Most desolate, that un to me Aha, aha do say!
16 Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glade in thee: let such as
love thy salvation* say co^inually, the Lord ^e magnified.

16 Let those that do thee se^k rejoice, and be all glade in thee:
Let such as thy salvation love, say still; God magnisie.
17 But I am poor and n^edy, yet the Lord thinks upon me: thou art my help
and my de^iverer, make no tarrying, O my God.

17 But I Am poor, needy, yet the Lord of me a care does take:
My help thou and deliv'rer art, my God no tarrying make.
PSALM. XLI.
BLessed is he that considers the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble.

HE is a blessed man that does him that is poor consider,
For when the time of trouble is the Lord will him deliver.
2 The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
earth; and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.

2 God will preserve and keep alive, and on earth bless him still:
And thou will not deliver him unto his enemies will.
3 The Lord will strengthen him upon the be^ of languishing: thou will make all
his bed in his sickness.

3 Upon the bed of languishing the Lord him strengthen shall,
Thou also wilt the bed that is his make in his sickness all.
4 I said, Lord, be merciful unto me ^ hea^ my so^ for I have sinned against
thee.

4 I then, O Lord, unto thee said, be merciful to me;
And do thou heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
5 Mine enemies speak evil of me: when shall he die, and his name perish?

5 Those that mine enemies are, of me that speak evil are the same
When shall he die and so away quite perish shall his Name?
6 And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity: his heart gathers iniquity
to it s^f when he go^th abroad, he tell^th it.

6 If me to see he comes, he speaks vain things; yea even his heart
Sin gathers to it self, he't tells when he abroad does part.
7 All that hate me, whisper together against me: against me do they devise my
hurt.

7 Those that me hate do whisper all together against me.
Against me also they dev^d what to my hurt can be.
8 An evil disease say they, cleaves fast unto him: and now that he lies, he
shall rise up ^o more.

8 An ill disease, say they, does cleave unto him fast, therefore
And now that he in bed does ly; he shall rise up no more.
9 Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
has lift up his heel against me.

9 Yea even mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted well,
Which of my bread did eat, has up against me lift his heel.
10 But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may require
them.

10 But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me every way,
And do thou also raise me up that them requite I may.
11 By this I know that thou favourest me: because mine enemy does not triumph
over me.

11 By this assuredly I know I favor have of thee,
Because he that mine en'mie is does not triumph over me.
12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity: and set me before
thy face for ever.

12 And as for me thou me upholdst in mine integrity
And thou before thy countenance setst me continually.
13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting, and everlasting, Amen,
and Amen.

13 From everlasting the Lord God of Israel blessed by men
And unto everlasting be; Amen, yea and Amen.
PSALM. XLII.
AS the heart pants after the water brooks: so pants my soul after thee, O
God.

EVen as the thirsty heart does pant at water brooks to be,
It is so that my soul O God still pants after thee.
2 My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before God?

2 My soul does thirst for God, for God that is living evermore:
When shall I come, that so I may appear my God before?
3 My tears have been my meat day and night: while they continually say unto
me, Where is thy God?

3 My tears they have been unto me my meat both night and day.
While unto me continually where is thy God? they say.
4 When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, for I had gone* with
the multitude,

4 My soul I do pour out in me when this I think upon,
For with those of the multitude together had I gone.
I went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and praise, with a
multitude that kept holy day.

With them unto Gods house I went, with voice of praise and joy,
Even with a multitude of them that did keep holy day.
5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him ^or the help of his countenance.

5 O why art thou cast down my soul? what does disquiet thee?
In God hope, for I Will yet him praise, for his face helps me.
6 O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee
from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Missar.

6 My God, my soul's cast down in me, therefore thee mind I will,
From Jordans and Hermonites land, and from the Missar hill.
7 Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts: all thy waves and
thy billows are gone over me.

7 At of thy water-spouts the noise deep unto deep does call,
Thy billows and thy waves also, gone over me are all.
8 Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the
night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

8 His loving kindness yet the Lord command will in the day:
His song all ^ght shall be with me, to my life's God I Will pray.
9 I will say unto God, My rock, why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning,
because of the oppression of the enemy?

9 I unto God will say, My Rock, why me forgetst thou so?
For the enemies oppression why mourning do I go?
10 As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me: while they say (...)
unto me, Where is thy God?

10 As with a sword within my bones mine enemies me reproach,
While unto me where is now thy God this is their daily speech.
11 Why art thou cast down, O my soul ^ and why art thou disquieted within me?
hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God.

11 Why art thou, O my soul, cast down? what does disquiet thee?
Trust God, I Will him yet praise; my GOD, and health of face is he.
PSALM. XLIII.
Judge me, O God and plead my cause against an ungodly nation; O deliver me
from the deceitful and unjust man.

AGainst the ungodly nation, Lord, my cause plead, judge thou me:
From the unjust and deceitful man let me deliv'red be.
2 For thou ar^ the God of my strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I
mourning, because of the oppression of the enemy?

2 For of my strength thou art the God, why me off casts thou so?
For the enemies oppression why mourning do I go?
3 O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me, let them bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.

3 O send thy light out, and thy truth, let them so lead me still
And to thy Tabernacles bring, and to thy holy hill.
4 Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God m^ exceeding joy: yea, upon
the harp will I praise thee, O God* my God.

4 Then will I to Gods altar go, to God my chiefest joy:
Yea, God my God, thee for to praise my harp I will employ.
5 Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?
hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance,
and my God.

5 Why art thou, O my soul, cast down? what does disquiet thee?
Trust God, I Will him yet praise; my GOD, and health of face is he.
PSALM XLIIII.
WE have heard with our ^ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou
di^st in their days, in the times of old.

WE with our ears have heard, O God, our fathers have us told,
What work thou have done in their days and in the times of old.
2 How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how
thou did afflict the people, and cast them out.

2 How that thy hand drove heathen out and planted them thou have,
How thou the people did afflict, and them thou out did cast,
3 For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them:

3 For they not in possession the land that now they have
Did get by their own proper sword, nor did their arm them save:
But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because
thou had a favor unto them.

But thy right hand and thine own arm and light of face also,
And that because thou had thus a favor them unto.
4 Thou art my King, O God: command deliverances* for Jacob.

5 Through thee will we push down our enemies:

4 Thou art my king, for Jacob, Lord, deliv'rances command:
5 We will through thee push down all those that'gainst us enemies stand.
Through thy Name will we tread them under that rise up against us.

6. For I will not trust in my ^ow: neither shall my sword save me.

We Will through thy Name tread under them that'gainst us risen have.
6 For I will not trust in my bow, nor shall my sword me save.
7 But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that
hated us.

8 In God we ^oast all the day long: and praise thy Name for ever. Selah.

7 But from our foes thou have us saved, and haters put to shame:
8 All the day long in God we boast, and ever praise thy Name. Selah.
9 But thou have cast off, and put us to shame: and go not forth with our
armies.

9 But thou have cast us off, and have us put to shame also,
And when our armies do go forth, thou do not with them go*
10 Thou make us to turn back from* the ^nemie: and they which hate us, spoil
for themselves.

10 From him that is the enemy thou makst us to turn back,
And they likewise that do us hate, spoil for themselves do take.
11 Thou have given us like sheep appointed for meat: and have scattered us
among the heathen.

11 Thou have us given like to sheep for meat appointed thus,
Among those that the heathen are thou have now scattred us.
12 Thou ^ellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by
their price.

12 The people that to thee belongs thou do them sell for naught,
And thou do not increase thy wealth, by what their price has brought*
13 Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and a derision to them
that are round about us.

13 Unto our neighbors a reproach a scorn thou se^st us out
And a derision unto them that are us round about.
14 Thou make us a byword among the heathen: a shaking of the head among the
people.

14 Thou among those that heathen are a byword us do make,
They that the people are among at us the head do shake,
15 My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my face has
covered me.

15 Before me my confusion it is continually,
The shame also of my face, it has me cov'red utterly.
16 For the voice of him that reproacheth, and blasphemeth: by reason of the
enemy and avenger.

16 Even for his voice that does reproach and does blaspheme also:
By reason of the man that is th'avenger and the foe*
17 All this is come upon us: ye^ have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy covenant.

17 All this is on us come, we yet have not forgotten thee;
Yea, neither in thy covenant thus falsely dealt have we.
18 Our heart is not turned back: neitheir have our steps declined from thy way.

18 Our heart in all this time once back not turned is away, ^
Nor have at all those steps of ours declined from thy way.
19 Though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us
with the shadow of death.

19 Though in the place where dragons are thou have us broken sore,
And also with the shadow have of death us cov'red over.
20 If we have forgotten the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a
strange god;

21 Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.

20 If we Gods Name forgot, or to a strange God stretched our hands,
21 Shall God not search this out? for he hearts secrets understands.
22 Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep
for the slaughter.

23 Awake, why sle^pest thou, O Lord ^ arise, ^ast us not off* for even.

22 Yea, for thee we all day are killed, counted as sheep for slaughter:
23 Awake, why sleepst thou, Lord, arise, cast us not off for ever.
24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face: and forgettest our affliction, and our
oppression?

24 Wherefore thus hidest thou thy face and our affliction
Why is it that thou do forget, and our oppression?
25 For our soul is bowed to the dust; our belly cleaves unto the earth.

26 Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake.

25 For down to dust our soul is bowed, to earth our belly cleaves,
26 Redeem us for thy mercies sake, and for our help arise.
PSALM. XLV.
MY heart is indi^ing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made
touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready vriter.

MY heart a matter good indites I speak of things which then
I of the King made; my tongue is a ready writers pen.
2 Thou art fairer then the children of men: grace is powered in thy lips:
therefore God has blessed thee for ever.

2 Thou fairer then men's children art, into thy lips in store
Grace powered is, for ever God has blessed thee therefore.
3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty: with thy glory and thy
majesty.

3 O thou that the most mighty art, thy sword gird on thy thigh:
Both with the glory that is thine and with thy majesty.
4 And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth* and meekness* and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things,

4 For truth, meekness, and righteousness, ride prosperously in state:
Thy right hand shall thee teach the things that are of terror great.
5 Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the kings enemies: whereby the people
sall under thee.

5 Thine arrows sharp are in the heart of the kings enemies all,
Whereby these that the people are down under thee do fall.
6 Thy throne (O God) is for ever, and ever* the scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter.I

6 For ever and for ever is. O God, thy throne of might,
The scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter that is right.
7 Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness: therefore God, thy God,
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy* fellows.

7 Thou hat'st ill, and love righteousness therefore God thy God he
With oil of gladenesse did anoint above thy fellows thee.
8 All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia: out of thh ivorie
palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

8 Of Aloes. Cassia, Mirrhe to smell, thy garments all are made;
Out of the yvory palaces, whereby they made thee glade.
9 Kings daughters were* among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did
stand the queen in gold of Ophir.

9 Among thy women hon'rable kings daughters were at hand:
Upon thy* right hand did the Queen in gold of Ophir stand.
10 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear: forget also thine
own people, and thy fathers house.

10 O daughter hear, consider thou and do thine ear incline,
Forget also thy fathers house, and people that is thine.
11 So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him.

11 So shall thy beauty by the King desired greatly be;
Therefore see that thou worship him, for thine own Lord is he.
12 'And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, even the rich among
the people shall entreat thy savor.

12 And there of Tire the daughter shall be with a gift that is* great:
Among the people even the rich thy favor shall entreat.
13 The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.

13 The daughter of the king within all glorious is to see:
Her clothings that she does put on, of fine wrought gold they be,
14 She shall be brought unto the King in ra^ meant of needle work: the virgin^
her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

14 In raiment she of needle work brought to the king shall be,
Her fellow-virgins following her shall be brought unto thee.
15 With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into
the Kings palace.

15 They shall be brought with gladness great and with rejoicing all.
And in the palace of the king they also enter shall.
16 In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou may make
Princes in all the earth.

16 In stead of those thy fathers shall thy children be to thee,
Whom thou may so in all the earth make princes for to be.
17 I will make thy Name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall
the people praise thee for ever and ever.

17 In generations all I Will make thy name remembered be:
Therefore for ever and for ay praise shall the people thee.
PSALM XLVI.
GOd is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.

2 Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be reinoved:

GOD's our refuge and strength, in straits a present help is he:
2 Therefore we will not fear although the earth removed be.
And though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea.

3 Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. Selah.

Though hills in midst of sea be cast, 3 Though its waves roriug make,
And troubled be, though mountains als with swelling thereof shake. Selah.
4 There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God: the
holy place of the tabernacles of the most High.

4 There is a river streams whereof shall make GODS city glad,
The holy place of the most High of tabernacles made.
5 God is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and
that right early.

5 GOD is within the midst of her, nothing shall make her move;
The Lord a helper to her shall and that right early prove.
6 The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth
melted.

6 The heathen people raged all, the kingdoms moved were,
His voice he also uttered, the earth it melted there.
7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah*

8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the
earth.

7 The Lord of hosts he is with us, Jacobs God's our refuge. Selah.
8 Come see Gods works what on earth he made desolations huge.
9 He makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the chariot in the fire.

9 He to earths end makes war to cease: he breaks the bow, and spear
He cuts in sunder, he does burn the chariot in the fire.
10 Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I
w^ll be exalted in the earth.

10 Be still, and know that I am God, exalted be will I
Among the heathen, in the earth I Will be exalted hy.
11 The Lord of hosts is with us* the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

11 He that of armies is the Lord, with us remains thus:
He that of Jacob is the God, is a refuge for us. Selah.
PSALM. XLVII.
OClap your hands (all ye people:) shout unto God with the voice of triumph.

2 For the Lord most high is terrible: he is a great King over all the earth.

ALL people clap your hands, to God with voice of triumph shout:
2 For God most high is terrible great King all earth throughout*
3 He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.

3 The heathen people under us subdue he surely shall,
Beneath our feet he shall likewise bring down the nations all.
4 He shall choose our inheritance for us* the excellency of Jacob whom he
lo^ed. Selah.

4 Of our inheritance he shall for us the chuser prove,
Of Jacob the excellency, whom he did dearly love. Selah.
5 God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.

6 Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises.

5 God's with a shout gone up, the Lord with trumpet sounding hie:
6 Sing praise to God, sing praise, sing praise praise to our King sing ye.
7 For God is the King of all the earth, sing ye praises with understanding.

7 Because that over all the earth the Lord he is the king;
The praises that to him belong with understanding sing.
8 God reigns over the heathen: God sits upon the throne of his holiness.

9 The princes of the people are gathered together.

8 Over heathen God reigns, on his thr one of holiness sits he:
9 Together of the people all the Princ^s gathered be.
Even the people of the God of Abraham: for the (...) of the earth belong unto
God: he is greatly exal^d.

Even the same people of the God of Abraham that be,
For sinelds of earth to God belong, exalted high is he.
PSALM. XLVIII.
GReat is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the
mountain of his holiness.

THe Lord is great, and greatly he for to be praised is*
In our Gods city, in the hill of his own holiness.
2 Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the
sides of the north, the city of the great King.

2 For situation beautiful the joy of all the earth
Mount Sion's, the Kings city great is on the sides of north.
3 God is known in her palaces for a refuge.

4 For lo, the Kings were assembled: they passed by together.

3 God in her palaces is known for a refuge for ever:
4 For ^o the kings assembled werd, they passed by together.
5 They saw it, and so they marvelled, the were troubled, and hasted away.

6 Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travel.

5 They saw it, so they marvelled, they troubled have did make,
6 As of a woman traveling fear, pain there did them take.
7 Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east-winde.

8 As we have heard, so have we scen in the city of the Lord of hosts,

7 With an Eastwind by thee the ships of Tarshish broken be:
8 In city of the Lord of hosts, we, as we heard, did see,
In the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah.

9 We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple.

In our Gods City: God himself for ay it stablish will:
9 We of thy loving kindness, Lord, thought in thy Temple still.
10 According to thy Name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth,
thy right hand is full of righteousness.

10 According to thy Name O God ends of the earth until,
So is thy praise; and righteousness, thy right hand it does fill.
11 Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy
judgments.

11 Of Sion let the mount rejoice, and glade the daughters be
Of Judah let, and that because of judgments done by thee.
12 Walk about Sion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.

13 Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces;

12 Walk about Sion, compass her, thereof the towers tell:
13 Consider ye her palaces, and mark her bulwarks well;
That ye may tell it to the generations following.

14 For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto
death.

To generations following that it so tell may ye.
14 For this God is our God for ay, our guide to death he will be.
PSALM. XLIX.
HEar this all ye people, give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world:

2 Both low and high, rich and poor together.

HEar this all people, give ye ear all in the world that dwell:
2 Both low and high both rich and poor together* weigh this well.
3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding.

3 My mouth of wisdom it shall speak, and of my heart in me
The meditation wholly shall of understanding be.
4 I will in^line mine ear to a parable, I will open my (...) dark saying upon
the harp.

4 And I mine ear will now incline a parable unto,
My saying dark I open will upon the harp also.
5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about?

5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, as in doubt,
When of my heels th'iniquity shall compass me about?
6 They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches:

6 They that here in their worldly wealth do wholly put their trust,
And do themselves in multitude of their great riches boast.
7 None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom
for him.

7 None of them all his brother can by any means redeem,
Nor can he unto God at all a ransom give for him.
8 For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease for ever.

9 That be should still live for ever, and not see corruption.

8 Their souls redemption precious for ay does cease to be,
9 That he should still for ever live, and not corruption see.
10 For he sees that wise men die, likewise the fool, and the brutish person
perish, and leave their wealth to others.

10 For that wise men, likewise the fool do die, he does perceive,
And brutish persons perishing, their wealth to others leave.
11 Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and
their dwelling places to all generations: they call their lands after their own
names.

11 Their inward thought's that ay their house and dwelling places shall
Last to all ages; they their lands by their own names do call.
12 Nevertheless man being in honor abides not: he is like the beasts that
perish.

13 This their ^ay is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings.
Selah.

12 Yet man in honor not abides: he is like the beasts that perish.
13 This their way is their folly; yet their race their sayings cherish. Selah.
14 Like sheep they are laid in the grave* death shall ^eed on them: and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning,

14 They in the grave like sheep are laid, death shall upon them feed,
The upright shall dominion have ov're them in morning tide;
And their beauty shall cousume in the grave from their dwelling.

15 But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall
receive me. Selah.

Their beauty from their dwelling place consume shall in the grave.
15 But God from grave will save my soul, for he shall me receive
16 Be not thou afraid* when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is
increased.

16 Be not afraid when one is made in riches plenteous,
When every way increased is the glory of his house.
17 For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend
after him.

17 For when he dies, he carry shall nothing away in end,
His glory shall not any way then after him descend.
18 Though whiles be lived he blossed his soul and men will praise thee, when
thou do we to thy self.

18 Although whiles that he lived here, his soul then blessed he*
And when thou well do to thy self, men will give praise to thee.
19 He shall go to the generations of his fathers, they shall never see light.

20 Man that is in honor, and understands uot is like the peasts that perish.

19 He shall go to his fathers race, light never see they shall.
20 Man honored and not knows, is like the beasts that perish all.
PSALM. L.
THe mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth, from the
rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof.

THe mighty God the Lord has spoke and called the earth anon,
Even from the rising of the sun unto his going down.
2 Out of Sion the perfection of beauty, God has shined

2 From out of his own Sion hill where the perfection
Of beauty is, the Lord himself has shined us upon.
3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before
him, and it shall very tempestuous round about him,

3 Our God shall come, and he shall not keep silence any more,
A fire tempestuous round about before him shall devore.
4 He shall* call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may
judge his people.

4 He to the Heavens from above, and to the earth shall call,
That he so may the judgment give unto his people all.
5 Gather my saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me
by sacrifice.

5 Together to me gather now my saints on earth that be,
Those that have made by sacrifice a Covenant with me.
6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.
Selah.

6 And so the righteousness that is his the heavens shall declare,
Because that God himself is he by whom all judged are. Selah.
7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak O Israel, and I will testisie against
thee: I am God, even thy God.

7 Hear, O my people, and I Will speak, and I will testify
Against thee, O thou Israel, GOD, even thy GOD am I.
8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices. or thy burnt-offerings to have
been continually before me.

8 For sacrifice or offerings burnt I will not less or more
Reprove thee, for continually to have been me before.
9 I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy folds.

10 For every beast of the forest is mine and the cattle upon a thousand hills.

9 I Will take no bullock, nor he goats from house nor folds of thine*
10 For beasts of forest, cattle all on thousand hills are mine.
11 I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field
are mine.

11 The fowls that on the mountains are are all unto me known;
The wild beasts also of the field they likewise are mine own.
12 If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and the
fullness thereof.

12 If I were hungry I the same would not tell unto thee,
For that the world and fullness all thereof belongs to me*
13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats,

14 Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High.

13 Will I even eat the flesh of bulls? or goats blood drink will I;
14 Thanks offer unto God, and pay thy vows to the most Hy.
15 And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

15 And in the day of trouble great do thou upon me cry
I thee deliver will; and then thou shall me glorify.
16 But unto the wicked God says, What ^st thou to do to declare my statutes,
or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth.

16 But God unto the wicked says, Why do thou mention make
Now of my laws? or in thy mouth should thou my covenant take?
17 Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee.

17 Since that thou from thy heart do hate instruction for thy mind;
And all the words that come from me thou castest thee behind.
18 When thou saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been
partaker with adulterers.

18 Then with a thief thou did consent, when as thou him had seen,
And also with adulterers a partaker have been.
19 Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit.

20 Thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou slanderest thine own
mothers son.

19 Thou unto ill thy mouth do give, thy tongue deceit does frame,
20 Thou sit'st and'gainst thy brother speakst thy mothers son to shame.
21 These things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.

21 These things thou did* I silence kept like thee thou thought me right:
I Will thee reprove, and will them set in order in thy sight.
22 Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver you.

22 Now ye that do the Lord forget do ye this thing consider,
Lest that I you in pieces tear, and none be to deliver.
23 Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him that orders his
conversation aright will I show the salvation of God.

23 Who offreth praise me glorifies; of God I the salvation
Will show to him that orders aright his conversation.
PSALM LI.
HAve morcy upon me, O God. according to thy loving kindness, according unto
the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

AFter thy loving kindness, Lord, have mercy me upon:
After thy tender mercies great blot out my sins each on.
2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.

2 Me cleanse from sin and thoroughly wash from mine iniquity.
3 For still my sin is me before my faults acknowledge I.
4 Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that
thou might be justified when thou speak,

4 Against thee, the^e only have I sinned, this evil was by me
Done in thy sight, that when thou speak thou justified might be,
And be clear when thou judge.

5 Behold. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.

And be made clear when thou do judge; 5 Lo in iniquity
I shapen was, my mother als in sin conceived me.
6 Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou
shall make me to know wisdom.

6 Behold within the inward parts the truth desire thou.
And in the hidden part thou shall me wisdom make to know.
7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow.

7 Do thou me with the hyssop purge, I shall be cleansed so:
Do thou me wash and then I shall be whiter then the snow.
8 Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice.

8 Of joy and gladness do thou make me for to hear the voice,
That so those bones of mine which thou have broken may rejoice.
9 Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

10 Create in me a clean heart, O God: and re^ew a right spirit within me.

9 All mine iniquities blot out, thy face hide from my sin.
10 Creat a clean heart, Lord renew a right sprit me within.
11 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

12 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free
spirit.

11 Cast me not from thy face, nor take thy holy Sprit from me:
12 Restore me thy salvations joy, uphold with thy Sprit free.
13 Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

13 Then will I teach thy ways unto such as transgressors be;
And they that sinners are then shall converted be to thee.
14 Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

14 O God of my salvation God do from blood guiltiness
Me save; then shall my tongue aloud sing of thy righteousness.
15 O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

15 Those lips of mine by thee, O Lord, let them now opned be,
And then my mouth it shall show forth the praise that is due to thee.
16 For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not
in burnt offering.

16 For thou desir'st not sacrifice, else would I give it right;
Likewise thou in burnt offering have not at all delight.
17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise.

17 Of God the sacrifices are a broken sprit always,
A broken and a contrite heart, Lord, thou will not despise.
18 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

18 In thy good pleasure do thou good unto thy Sion now,
And of Jerusalem the walls again build up do thou.
19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with
burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon
thine altar.

19 Right sacrifices, offerings burnt with whole burnt offerings all,
Then shall thee please; thine altars on they bullocks offer shall.
PSALM. LII.
WHy boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God
endures continually.

O Mighty man, why do thou boast in mischief wickedly?
The goodness of the Lord it does endure continually.
2 Thy tongue devises mischiefs: like a rasour working deceitfully.

2 Thy tongue that wicked is, mischiefs devises craftily,
Even like unto a rasour sharp, working deceitfully.
3 Thou love evil more then good: and lying rather then to speak
righteousness. Selah.

3 Thou evil surely more do love then good, which thou should seek,
And lying rather do approve then righteousness to speak. Selah.
4 Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.

5 God shall likewise destroy thee for ever,

4 Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue;
5 God shall likewise for ever thee destroy from men among.
He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root
thee out of the land of the living. Selah.

He shall thee take away, and thee pluck from thy dwelling place;
And from the land of living shall thee root out with disgrace.
6 The righteous also shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him.

7 Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength:

6 The righteous als shall see and fear, and at him laugh they shall:
7 Lo, this the man is that did not make God his strength at all.
But trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthed himself in his
wickedness.

But in the great abundance of his richesse trusted he,
And he in his own wickedness himself made strong to be.
8 But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy
of God for ever and ever.

8 But I am in the house of God like a green olive tree;
For ever and for ay my trust shall in Gods mercy be.
9 I will praise thee for ever, because thou have done it: and I will wait on
thy Name, for it is good before thy saints.

9 Because that thou thus have it done I Will praise thee evermore,
And on thy name I Will wait, for it is good thy saints before.
PSALM. LIII.
THe fool has said in his heart, There is no God: corrupt are they, and have
done abominable iniquity: there is none that does good.

THe fool in's heart said there is no God, corrupt they all have done
Iniquity abominable, that dorh good there is none
2 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any that did understand; that did seek God.

2 God looked down from heay'n upon men's children, for to see
If any understood, that would of God a seeker be.
3 Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether become filthy: there is
none that does good, no not one.

3 They altogether filthy are, each of them back is gone:
Yea of them truly none there is that good does, no not one.
4 Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge* who eat up my people as they eat
bread: they have not called upon God.

4 The workers of iniquity have they no knowledge all?
Who eat my people up as bread: on God they do not call.
5 There were they in great fear, where no feat was: for God has scattered the
bones of him that encampeth against thee,

5 In that place were they in great fear where no feat seemed to be,
For God his bones has scattered that encampeth against thee.
Thoulhast put them to sh^me, because Go has despised them.

6 O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion!

Because God has despised them, thou them to shame have put:
6 O that Isra'ls salvation of Sion were come out.
When God brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be glad.

When God shall back the bondage bring of his own people sad,
Then Jacob greatly shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glade.
PSALM LIIII.
SAve me, O God, by thy Name, and judge me by thy strength.

2 Hear my prayer, O God give ear to the words of my mouth.

LOrd by thy Name do thou me save, judge by thy strength me here,
2 My prayer, O God, hear, and unto words of my mouth give ear.
3. For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after my soul:
they have not set God before them. Selah.

3 For'gainst me strangers risen are, and this my soul to get
Oppressors seek; they God at all before them have not set. Selah.
4 Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy truth.

4 Lo, God's mine helper, God's with them that do my soul up put:
5 He to my foes shall ill reward, off in thy truth them cut.
6 I will freely sacrifice unto thee: I will praise thy Name, (O Lord) for it
is good.

6 I freely now will unto thee a sacrifice afford,
I will give praise unto thy Name, for it is good, O Lord.
7 For he has delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

7 For he has me delivered out of all miseries,
And his desire mine eye has seen upon mine enemies.
PSALM. LV.
GIve ear to my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my supplication.

2 Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise.

MY prayer Lord hear, hide thee not from my supplications voice,
2 Atend me, hear, in my complaint I mourn and make a noise.
3 Because of the voice of the enemy; because of the oppression of the wicked:
for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

3 Because of the enemies voice, and for the will man's oppression great:
For on me they iniquity cast, and in wrath me hate,
4 My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon
me.

5 Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me.

4 My heart sore pained within me is, deaths terrors on me falls
5 Fear, tremblings on me come, and dread has overwhelmed me all.
6 And I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for then would I flee away, and
be at rest.

6 And then I said, O like a Dove that I had wings for me,
For then I hence would flee away, and I at rest would be.
7 Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.

8 I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.

7 Lo, then far off I wander would in wilderness to be. Selah.
8 From windy storm and tempest I to escape would hasten me.
9 Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence and
strife in the city.

9 Do thou destroy, O Lord, and do divide their tongues in twain,
For violence and strife I have within the city seen.
10 Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof; mischief also and
sorrow are in the midst of it.

10 About it on the walls thereof they day and night do go,
Mischief even in the midst of it and sorrow are also.
11 Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guil depart not from her
streets.

12 For it was not an enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it:

11 Ill in its midst is; guile deceit from its streets do not go:
12 For not a foe did me reproach, I could have born it so,
Neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I
would have hid my self from him.

Nor was it he that did me hate, that magnify thus did
Himself against me, then I would my self have from him hid.
13 But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.

14 We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company.

13 But thou a man mine equal, guide, mine acquaintance it was:
14 We joined sweet counsel, to Gods house in comp'ny we did pass.
15 Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

14 Let death upon them seize, let them go quick down into hell:
For wickedness is them among and in the place they dwell.
16 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me

17 Evening, and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall
hear my voice.

16 On God I Will call, God will me, 17 At morn, noon, evening still,
Both pray I will, and cry aloud, my voice then hear he will.
18 He has delivered my soul in peace, from the battle that was against me:
for there were many with me.

18 He has my soul delivered, that it in peace might be
From battle that against me was, for many were with me*
19 God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abides of old, Selah:
because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.

19 God hear and them afflict shall he of old who has abode,
Because that they no changes have therefore they fear not God.
20 He has put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him; he has
broken his covenant.

20 Against such he has put forth his hands as at peace with him be,
The covenant that he has made now broken all has he.
21 The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his heart:
his words were softer then oil. yet were they drawn swords.

21 Then butter smoother were his words but in his heart was war,
His words were softer then the oil, and yet draw'n swords they are.
22 Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never
suffer the righteous to be moved.

22 Upon the Lord thy burden cast, and thee sustain shall he:
He surely never suffer shall the righteous moved to be.
23 But thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days: but I will trust in
thee.

23 Lord thou to deaths pit shall them bring, deceitful bloody men
Shall not half of their days live out, but I Will trust in thee then.
PSALM. LVI.
BE merciful unto me, O God, for man would swallow me up: he fighting daily
oppresses me.

BE merciful to me, O God, for man ^ould swallow me,
While he does daily'gainst me fight, me then oppresses he.
2 Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against
me, O thou most high.

2 They daily would me swallow up that enemies are to me;
For, O most high they that do fight against me many be.
3 What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee*

4 In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust,

3 What time I am afraid, on thee I trusting will rely.
4 In God I Will praise his word, in God my whole trust put have I.
I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.

5 Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil.

What flesh now can do unto me not fear at all I will;
5 Each day they wrest my words, their thoughts against me are all for ill.
6 They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps
when they wait for my soul.

6 Themselves together gather they, they hide themselves in hate,
They do my steps all mark, when as they for my soul lay wait.
7 Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God.

7 Shall they even by iniquity away escape at last?
O Lord down in thine anger now do thou the people cast.
8 Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not
in thy book?

8 My wanderings all what they have been thou tellest at a look,
Into thy bottel put my tears: are they not in thy book?
9 When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for
God is for me.

10 In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word.

9 My foes shall when I cry turn back: I know it; God's for me still:
10 In God his word I Will praise, his word praise in the Lord I will.
11 In God I have put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.

12 Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee.

11 I trust in God, not fear I will what man can do to me:
12 Thy vows upon me are, O God I Will render praise to thee.
13 For thou have delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet
from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?

13 For thou have freed my soul from death, from falls will thou not right
My feet save, that I God before may walk in livings light.
PSALM. LVII.
BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in
thee:

BE merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me,
And that because my soul it does her trust put into thee.
Yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge until these calamities
be over-past.

Yea, in the shadow of thy wings I Will my refuge make fast;
Until that those calamities be wholly overpast.
2 I will cry unto God most high: unto God that persormeth all things for me.

2 Unto the Lord that is most high, my cry shall raised be:
Even unto God himself that does perform all things for me.
3 He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would
swallow me up; Selah. God shall send forth his mer and his truth.

^ From heaven he shall send, and me from his reproach defend,
That me would swallow; God his truth, and mercy forth shall send. Selah.
4 My soul is among lions; and I lie even a mong them that are set on fire,
even the son of men whose teeth are spears and arrows, an^ their tongue a sharp
sword.

4 Among lions is my soul, I ly men set on fire among,
Men's sons, whose teeth are arrows, spears, and a sharp sword their tongue.
5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the
earth.

5 Be thou exalted very high above the heavens O God:
And, let thy glory be above even all the earth abroad.
6 They have prepared a not for my steps, (...) soul is bowed down: they have
dug a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fall themselves. Selah.

6 They for my steps a net prepared, my soul is bowed withal;
They dug have, for me a pit and in its midst did fall. Selah.
7 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.

8 Awake up my glory, awake psaltry and harp: I my self will wake early.

7 My heart's Lord fixed, my heart is fixed, I Will praise and singing make:
8 My glory wake, wake Psaltry, Harp, my self I Will early wake.
9 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among
the nations.

10 For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.

9 I Will praise thee, among the people, Lord, among Nations sing I will:
10 For unto heavens thy mercy's great, thy truth the clouds until.
11 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the
earth*

11 Be thou exalted very high above the heavens O God,
And let thy glory be above even all the earth abroad*
PSALM. LVIII.
DO ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge uprightly* O
^sons of men?

DO ye O congregation, indeed speak righteously?
O ye that are the sons of men do ye judge uprightly?
2 Yea, in heart ye work wickedness: you weigh the violence of your hands in
the earth.

2 Ye even within your heart you do work wickedness always,
And of your hands upon the earth the violence you weigh.
3 The wicked are estranged from the wom they go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies.

3 The wicked they are from the womb estranged all from thee;
They speaking lies do go astray as soon as born they be.
4 Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf adder
that stops her ear:

4 Unto a serpents poison like their poison it is near;
They like unto the adder are that deaf does stop her ear.
5 Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely.

5 Which will not hearken to the voice of them they charmers see,
Though never so wisely they appear in charming for to be.
6 Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the
young lions, O Lord.

6 O God, in pieces in their mouth break thou their teeth so strong,
The great teeth break thou out, O Lord, of lions that are young.
7 Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he bends his bow
to shoo^ his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

7 Let them as waters melt away continually that flow,
His arrows cut in pieces when to shoot he bends his bow.
8 As a snail which melts, let every one of them pass away: like the
untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.

8 As melts a snail, let every one of them so pass away,
Like woman's birth untimely, that the sun not see they may.
9 Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a
whirlewind, both living, and in his wrath.

9 Before your pots can feel the thorns them take away he shall,
Both living and als in his wrath as with a whirlwinde all.
10 The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked.

10 The righteous man he shall rejoice when he does vengeance see,
He shall his feet wash in the blood of those that wicked be.
11 So that a man shall say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous:
verily, he is a God that judges in the earth.

11 So verily a man shall say the just rewarded be:
Yea, verily that in the earth does judge, a God is he.
PSALM. LIX.
DEliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up
against me.

DEliver me O thou my God, from those mine enemies,
And do thou me from them defend that up against me rise.
2 Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.

2 From workers of iniquity do thou deliver me,
And do thou me in safety keep from men that bloody be.
3 For lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against me;
not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.

3 For lo, they for my soul ay wait, the mighty gathered be
Against me Lord, not for my fault, nor any sin in me.
4 They run and prepare themselves without my fault* awake to help me, and
behold.

4 They run and they without my fault prepare themselves so bold,
Do thou awake, me for to help and do thou als behold.
5 Thou therefore, O Lord God of bosts the God of Israel, awake to visit all
the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.

5 Lord God of hosts of Israel God to visit heathen lo
Therefore awake; not merciful be ill transgressors to.
6 They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog and go round about the
city.

6 They at the evening do return, and make a noising sound*
Like to a dog; and they do go about the city round.
7 Behold they belch out with their mouth, swords are in their lips: for who,
say they, does hear?

7 Behold they belch out with their mouth, within their lips are swords,
For who is he, this do they say, that hears these our words*
8 But thou; O Lord, shall laugh at them, thou shall have all the heathen in
derision.

9 Because of his strength will I wait upon thee; for God is my defense.

8 But thou O Lord shall at them laugh, and scorn all heathen hence.
9 I for his strength will wait on thee for God is my defense.
10 The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon
mine enemies.

10 He of my mercy that is God shall me prevent anon;
God shall let me lee my desire mine enemies upon.
11 Slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power, and bring
them down, O Lord, our shield.

11 Not s^ay them; lest my folk forget: them scatter by thy might,
And thou O Lord, who art ^ ^hield them down bring from their height.
12 For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even be
taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.

12 For of their mouth the sin, and for words of their mouth not meek,
Let them even in their pride be taken who cursing lying speak.
13 Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them
know that God rules in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth. Selah.

13 In wrath consume them, them consume that so they may not be,
That to earths ends the Lord does rule, in Jacob let them see. Selah.
15 And at evening let them ^eturn, and let them make a noise like a dog, and
go round about the city.

14 At evening let thou them return, let them a noising sound
Make like unto a dog, and go about the city round.
15 Let them wander up and down for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied.

15 And do thou let them up and down all wander for their meat,
And grudge, if they not satisfied be with the thing they eat.
16 But I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the
morning, for thou have been my defense; and refuge in the day of my trouble.

16 But of thy power yea mercy loud at morning sing I will:
For my defense thou and refuge have been in trouble still.
17 Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defense, and the God
of my mercy.

17 O thou who art my strength, I will unto thee sing for this;
For God is my defense, and he God of my mercy is.
PSALM. LX.
O God, thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased, O tu^ thy self to us again.

O God, thou now have have us off, thou have us scattred th^s:
Displeased have thou been, O turn thy self again to us.
2 Thou have m^e the earth to tremble; thou have broken it: h^al the breaches
thereon, for it shakes.

3 The earth to tremble thou have made, thou broken it did^ ^ake;
The breaches thereof do thou heal, because that it does shake.
3 Thou have showed thy people hard things: thou have made us to drink the wine
of astonishment.

3 Thou showed have hard things unto the people that is thine;
And of astonishment thou have made us to drink the wine.
4 Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee: that it may be displayed
because of the truth. Selah.

4 Thou have a banner given to them that have the fear of thee,
That it because even of the truth might ^o displayed be. Selah.
5 That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand, and hear me.

5 That those who thy beloved are delivered may be,
Now with thy right hand do thou save, and hearken unto me.
6 God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice: I will divide Schechem,
and m^te ou^ the valley of Succoth.

6 God in his holiness has said, I joyful will abide:
I Succoths valley will met out, and Shechem will divide.
7 Gilead is mine, and Manass^h is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of my
head, Judah is my lawgiver.

7 Mine Gilead, mine Manasses is. and Ephraim of my head
He is the strength, and Judah als my Lawgiver is made.
8 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia triumph
thou because of me.

8 Moab my washpot is, my shoe I Will out over Edom cast:
Philistia; because of me do thou triumph at last.
9 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

9 O who is he that will me bring into the city strong?
And who is he that now will me to Edom lead along?
10 Wilt not thou, O God, which hadest cast us off? and thou, O God, which
did not go out with our armies?

10 O God, which had us cast off, will thou the same not do?
And thou, O God, which did not out with our armies go?
11 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

12 Through God we shall do valiantly: for ^e it is that shall tread down our
enemies.

11 Help us from trouble, for the help of man is vain in all:
12 Through God we shall do valiantly our foes tread down he shall.
PSALM. LXI.
HEar my cry, O God: attend unto my prayer.

2 From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed:

O God, do thou now hear my cry, unto my prayer at^end,
2 When my heart's overwhelmed, I will cry to thee from earths end:
Lead me to the rock that is higher then I.

3 For thou have been a shelter for me, a strong tower from the enemy.

Do thou me lead unto the rock that higher is then I*
3 For thou my shelter and strong tower wast from the enemy.
4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I ^rust in the covert of thy wings.
Selah.

4 Within thy tabernacle I abide will ever still:
Into the covert of thy wings my whole trust put I will. Selah.
5 For thou, O God, have heard my vows: thou have given me the heritage of
those that fear thy Name.

5 Because that thou the vows O God, which I have made did hear,
Thou have given me the heritage of those thy Name that fear.
6 Thou will prolong the kings life: and his years as many generations.

6 The life of him that is the king thou surely wilt prolong,
As many generations his years thou will make long.
7 He shall abide before God for ever* O prepare mercy and truth, which may
preserve him.

7 He shall have his abiding still before our God for ay,
O mercy and als truth prepare, that him prserve they may:
8 So will I sing praise unto thy Name so ever, that I may daily perform my
vows.

8 So praises I unto thy Name will sing, and that for ay
That so the vows that I have made perform I daily may.
PSALM LXII.
TRuly my soul waits upon God: from him comes my salvation.

MY soul it truly in all things now waits God upon,
Because that unto me from him comes my salvation.
2 He only is my rock and my salvation he is my defense, I shall not be
greatly moved

2 He only my salvation is, my rock also is he:
Yea, he is my defense, I shall not greatly moved be.
3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be stain all of
you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.

3 How long mischief against a man imagine thus will ye?
Ye slain all, as a bowing wall, and tottring fence shall be.
4 They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in
lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.

4 They only plot to cast him down from his excellency,
They like in lies; with mouth they bless, but they curse inwardly. Selah.
5 My soul, wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him.

5 O thou my soul, with patience wait only God upon,
For that from him in all things is my expectation.
6 He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defense; I shall not be moved.

6 My rock and als salvation he only ^s to me;
Unto me a defense he is; I shall not moved be.
7 In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge
is in God.

7 My glory it is in the Lord, and my salvation,
In God the rock is of my strength and my refuge alone.
8 Trust in him at all times, ye people* pour out your heart before him: God is
a refuge for us. Selah.

8 Ye people at all times do ye your trust put in him thus,
Your heart pour ye out him before, God's a refuge for us. Selah.
9 Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to
be laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity.

9 Surely men low are vanity, men high they are a ly,
In balance laid they wholly are more light then vanity.
10 Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery: if riches increase,
set not your heart upon them.

10 In robbry be not vain, and not trust in oppression,
If that your richesse do increase, set not your heart there on.
11 God has spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto
God.

11 The Lord himself has spoken once, yea twice heard have I this,
That unto him that is our God great power belonging is.
12 Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy: for thou rendrest to every man
according to his work.

12 So also mercy does belong to thee, O Lord, alone,
For thou according to his work do render to each one.
PSALM LXIII.
O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee,
my flesh longs for thee,

O God, thou art my God, thou shall be early sought by me,
My soul for thee does greatly thirst, my flesh does long for thee,
In a dry and thirsty land where no water is:

2 To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.

In a most dry and thirsty land, wherein no waters be.
2 To see thy glory, power, as I in Sanctuary thee did see.
3 Because thy loving kindness is better then life: my lips shall praise thee.

4 Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy Name.

3 Since better is thy love then life, my lips they shall thee praise.
4 I Will while I live thee bless; I will my hands in thy name raise.
5 My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness: and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips:

5 My soul shall as with marrow all and fatness filled be:
And so my mouth with joyful lips shall praises give to thee*
6 When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night- watches.

6 When I laid down upon* my bed remember thee aright,
And also on thee meditate in watches of the night.
7 Because thou have been my help ^ therefore in he shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice.

8 My soul. follows hard after thee; thy right hand upholdeth me.

7 In shadow of thy wings I Will joy, for helped I was by thee,
8 My soul on thee does follow hard thy right hand holds me.
9 But those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of
the earth.

10 They shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.

9 Who seek my soul to spill, go to earths lower parts shall they:
10 They by the sword shall fall, they shall for foxes be a prey.
11 But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that swears by him shall
glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.

11 So shall the King in God rejoice, yea each one glory shall
That by him swears: but stopped shall be the mouth of liars all.
PSALM. LXIV.
HEar my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy.

O God when I my prayer make my voice then do thou hear;
Of him that is the enemy preserve my life from fear.
2 Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked: from the insurrection of the
workers of iniquity.

2 Me from their secret counsel hide, that do live wickedly
From insurrection of the men that work iniquity.
3 Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their
arrows, even bitter words:

3 Who thus in rage do whet their tongues and that like unto swords
And to shoot arrows* bend their bows even their most bitter words.
4 That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at
him, and fear not.

4 That they in secret then may shoot at him that is perfect here,
They suddenly do shoot at him, and not at all do fear.
5 They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying snarnes
privily; they say, Who shall see them?

5 Themselves they in a matter ill encourage; and to lay
Snares privily, they commune thus, who shall them see? they say.
6 They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search: both the
inward thoughts of every one of them, and the heart is deep.

6 They do search out iniquities accomplished they keep
A diligent search; the inward thought and heart of each is deep.
7 But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.

8 So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see
them shall flee away.

7 God shall an arrow at them shoot, and wound them suddenly:
Their own tongue they will make on them fall all that them see shall fly.
9 And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God: for they shall
wisely consider of his doing.

9 And in great fear all men shall be, and shall Gods work declare,
For wisely they consider shall what those his doings are.
10 The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him: and all
the upright in heart shall glory.

10 The righteous shall in God be glade, and in him trust they shall:
And they that are upright in heart shall also glory all.
PSALM. LXV.
PRaise waits for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be
performed.

2 O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

PRaise for thee waits in Sion Lord: vows to thee paid shall be:
2 O thon that do prayer hear, all flesh shall come to thee.
3 Iniquities prevail against me: as for o^ transgressions, thou shall purge
them away.

3 Iniquities they do prevail against me every way;
As for those our transgressions, thou shall them purge away.
4 Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee,
that he may dwell in thy courts:

4 The man is blessed whom thou do choose, and whom thou causest well
For to aproach to thee, that he within thy courts may dwell.
We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.

We with the goodness of thy house shall satisfied be.
Even of the Temple that is made a holy place for thee.
5 By terrible things in righteousness, will thou answer us, O God of our
salvation:

5 Thou by the things in righteousness that terrible are done
Wilt us an answer give, O God, of our salvation.
Who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are
afar off upon the sea*

Who art the confidence of all the ends of earth that be,
And of them that afar off are upon the raging sea.
6 Which by his strength sets fast the mountains, being girded with power.

7 Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the
tumult of the people.

6 Which being girt with power sets fast by his own strength the hills;
7 Which noise of seas, noise of their waves, and peoples tumult stills.
8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts, are afraid at thy tokens: thou
make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

8 Those in the utmost parts that dwell, als at thy tokens quake,
Th'outgoing of the Morn and Even thou to rejoice do make.
9 Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with
the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou
have so provided for it.

9 Thou visit'st earth and warrest it, make greatly rich also
With Gods full flood; thou corn prepar'st when thou provid'st it so.
10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou setlest the furrows
thereof, thou make it soft with showers,

10 The ridges thou abundantly thereof do water often,
The furrows thereof setlest thou, with showrs thou make it soft.
Thou blessest the springing thereof.

11 Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness.

The springing thereof thou do bless: 11 And with thy goodness crown
Thou do the year, and als thy steps, they fatness do drop down.
12 They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness; and the little hills rejoice
on every side.

12 They do upon the pastures drop of wilderness so wide,
And then the hills that little are rejoice on every side.
13 The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over
with corn: they shout for joy, they also sing.

13 The pastures clothed are with flocks, the valleys over so
With corn are covered; they for joy do shout; they sing also.
PSALM. LXVI.
MAke a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands.

2 Sing forth the honor of his Name: make his praise glorious*

O All ye lands do unto God a noise that is joyful raise:
2 Sing forth the honor of his Name, make glorious his praise.
3 Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works? through the greatness of
thy pow or shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.

3 Say unto God, how terrible art thou in works so great?
Through thy great power thine enemies shall themselves to thee submit.
4 All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee: they shall sing
to thy Name. Selah.

4 Here all the earths inhabitants shall worship to thee bring,
And unto thee all sing they shall, they to thy name shall sing. Selah.
5 Come and see the works of God: he ^errible in his doing toward the children
^ tmen.

5 Come ye, and see ye of the Lord the works done now and then,
He in his doing terrible is to the sons of men.
6 He turned the sea into dry land, they went through the flood on foot, there
did we rejoice in him.

6 Into dry land he turned the sea, and they who were his choice
On foot went through the flood, and we did there in him rejoice.
7 He rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations: let not the
rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.

7 He by his power for ever rules, his eyes the Nations see:
Let not those men themselves exalt that thus rebellious be. Selah.
8 O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard.

9 Which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved.

8 O bless our God ye people all, his praise voice heard make ye,
9 Which holds our soul in life, and lets our feet not moved be.
10 For thou, O God, have proved us: thou have tried us, as silver is tried.

11 Thou broughtest us into the net: thou layedst affliction upon our loins.

10 For Lord, as silver's tried thou have proved and tried us eachone,
11 Us in the net broughtst, on our loins thou laidst affliction.
12 Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and
through water; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place

12 Thou over our heads caused men to ride, we through the fire did pass
And water als; thou broughtst us out into a wealthy place.
13 I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my vows.

14 Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble.

13 I Will to thy house burnt-offrings bring, my vows I Will pay to thee:
14 Which my lips uttred, my mouth spoke when trouble was on me.
15 I will offer unto thee, burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of
rams: I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.

15 Of fatlings sacrifices burnt to offer thee I Will take:
Yea with rames incense, bullocks, goats an offering I will make.
16 Come and hear all ye that fear God; and I will declare what he has done
for my soul.

17 I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.

16 All that fear God come hear I Will tell what he did sor my soul:
17 Unto him with my mouth I cried, my tongue did him extol.
18 If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

19 But verily God has heard me: he has attended to the voice of my prayer.

18 If in my heart I sin regard, the Lord will not me hear:
19 But truly God me heard, and to my prayers voice gave ear:
20 Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

20 O blessed be my God for ay, for that my prayer he
Not turned has away, nor yet his mercy great from me.
PSALM. LXVII.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and cause his face to shine upon us.
Selah.

GOD unto us be merciful, and do us also bless,
And cause now for to shine on us the brightness of his face. Selah.
2 That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all Nations.

2 That thus thy way upon the earth to all men may be knwon,
And als among the nations all thy saving health be shown.
3 Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

4 O let the nations be glade, and sing for joy:

3 Let people praise thee, let thee praise the people all, O God:
4 O do thou let the Nations for joy sing and be glade:
For thou shall judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon
earth. Selah.

5 Let the people priase thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

For rightly thou shall people judge, and nations rule on earth:
5 Let people praise thee Lord, and let them all thy praise show forth.
6 Then shall the earth yield her increase: and God, even our own God shall
bless us.

7 God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

6 Earth then shall increase yield, and God our God shall bless us all;
7 God shall us bless, and of the earth the ends all fear him shall.
PSALM. LXVIII.
LEt God arise, let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him flee
before him.

LEt God arise, let those who are his enemies scattred be,
And let them all that do him hate before him also flee.
2 As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melts before the fire
so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.

2 As smoke is driven, drive them away, as wax melts fire before,
Let at Gods presence wicked men so perish evermore.
3 But let the righteous be glade: let them rejoice before God, yea let them
exceedingly rejoice.

3 But let the righteous men be glade; before God by and by,
Let them rejoice; yea let them all rejoice exceedingly,
4 Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name: extol him that rides upon the
heavens, by his Name, IAH, and rejoice before him.

4 Sing to God, to his Name sing praise, extol him with your voice
That rides on heavens, by his Name JAH, before him als rejoice.
5 A father of the fatherless, and a Judge of the widows is God in his holy
habitation.

5 A father of the fatherless, and of the widows case
The Lord he is a judge within his holy dwelling place.
6 God sets the solitary in families: he brings out those which are bound
with chains, but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.

6 The solitary in families God sets; those which are bound
With chains brings out, but rebels all do dwell in a dry ground.
7 O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people: wh^ thou did march
through the wilderness. Selah.

7 O God when as thou wentest forth before thy peoples face;
And when thou of the wilderness did march through all the place. Selah
8 The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, even Sinai
it self was moved at the presence of GOD, the God of Israel.

8 The heavens did at Gods presence drop, the earth was shaken als
Even at Gods presence Isreal's God, the Sinai moved was.
9 Thou, O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm thine
inheritance, when it was weary.

9 O God, to thine inheritance thou sendst a plenteous rain,
Whereby thou when it weary was did it confirm again.
10 Thy congregation has dwelt therein: thou, O God, have prepared of thy
goodness for the poor.

10 The congregation that is thine has had its dwelling there:
Of thine own goodness thou, O God, did for the poor prepare.
11 The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published it.

12 Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home, divided the
spoil.

11 God gave the word: the company that published it was great:
12 Apace fled kings of hosts; and she that kept home, spoils did part.
13 Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove,
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

13 Though ye have lien among the pots, as Doves wings be shall ye
With silver cov'rd, her feathers als with gold that yellow be.
14 When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was as white as snow in Salmon.

15 The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan, an high hill, as the hill of
Bashan.

14 It, when God in it scattred kings, as Salmons snow was white:
15 Gods hill is as the bashan hill as bash an hill in hight:
16 Why leap ye, ye high hills this is the hill which God desires to dwell in,
yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.

16 Why do ye leap ye hills so high? this is the only hill
Where God desires to dwell; yea there the Lord dwell ever will.
17 The charets of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord
is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place.

17 Gods charets twenty thousand are, of Angels thousand strong:
GOD in the holy place is as in Sinai them among.
18 Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for men: yea, for the rebellious also,

18 On high thou did ascend, thou ledst captive captivity,
Thou gifts receiv'dst for men, for them that lived rebelliously.
That the Lord God might dwell among them.

19 Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of
our salvation. Selah.

That among them, God the Lord might dwell 19 Blessed be God who does load
Us daily with his benefits, even our salvations God. Selah.
20 He that is our God, is the God of salvation: and unto God the Lord belong
the issues from death.

20 He of salvation is the God, that is our God so strong,
And unto God the Lord from death the issues do belong.
21 But God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairie scalp of such a
one as goes on still in his trespasses.

21 But God his enemies head shall wound; the hairie scalp also
Of such a one as does still on in his trespasses go.
22 The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again
from the depths of the sea.

22 I will again, the Lord has said, bring from the bashan hill,
And from the deepths of sea again, my people bring I will.
23 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue
of thy dogs in the same.

23 That so thy foot may dipped be in blood of all thy foes:
And of thy dogs the tongue also in the same blood of those.
24 They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King, in
the sanctuary.

24 O mighty God they have all seen thy goings that are hy,
The going of my God my King within the Sanctuary.
25 The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after; amongst
them were the damsels playing with timbrels.

25 Before went Singers, Players next on instruments made way,
Amongst them were the Damsels that did with timbrels play.
26 Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountain of
Israel.

26 Within the congregations God for to bless accord,
From Isreal's fountain do ye bless even him that is the Lord.
27 There is little Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah, and their
council, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali.

27 With their head's little Benjamin, there Judahs Princes be,
Their council als, with Zebulons Princes of Naphtalli.
28 Thy God has commanded thy steength: strengthen, O God, that which thou
have wrought for us.

29 Because of thy temple at Jerusalem, shall kings bring presents unto thee.

8 Thy God commands thy strength: make strong what thou wroughtst for us Lord,
29 At Salem for thy temple Kings shall presents thee afford.
30 Rebuke the company of spear-men, the multitudde of the bulls, with the
calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver:
scatter thou the people that delight in war.

30 The hosts of spear men, many bulls with peoples calves reprove;
Till all with* silver piece submit, folk scatter, war that love.
31 Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands
unto God.

31 Those that be Princes great shall then come out of Egypt lands,
And Ethiopia unto God shall soon stretch out her hands.
32 Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord.
Selah.

32 Ye kingdoms that are of the earth do ye all songs afford,
Unto the Lord; O praises now sing ye unto the Lord.
33 To him that rides* upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old: lo, he
does send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.

33 To him on heavens of heavens that rides which he of old did choice,
Lo, he his voice does thence send out, and that a mighty voice.
34 Ascribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his
strength is in the clouds.

34 Strength unto God do ye ascribe, for his excellency
Over Israel is, and als his strength is in the clouds most hy.
35 O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places* the God of Israel is he
that gives strength and power unto his people: blessed be God.

35 Thou from thy holy places Lord, art terrible to see:
He Is Isreal's God that gives his folk strength, power; God blessed be.
PSALM. LXIX.
SAve me, O God* for the waters are come in unto my soul.

O. Thou who art my God, do thou salvation send to me*
For that unto my very soul come in the waters be.
2 I sink in deep mire where there is no standing: I am come into the deep
waters, where the floods overflow me.

2 Into deep mire, I down do sink where there is no standing now,
I am into deep waters come where floods me overflow.
3 I am weary of my crying, my thagat is dried: mine eyes fail, while I walt
for my GOD.

3 I of my crying weary am and dried is my throat,
Mine eyes they also do me fail, while for my God I wait.
4. They that hate me without a cause, are more then the hairs of mine head:

4 Those men that do without a cause unto me hatred bear,
They then the the hairs upon my head in greater number are.
They that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I
restored that which I took not away.

Who being mine enemies wrongfully would me destroy, even they
Are mighty; then I that restord which I took not away.
5 O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee.

6 Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake:

5 My folly, Lord, thou know, my sins they are not hid from thee:
6 Let none be shamed that on thee wait Lord God of hosts for me,
Let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel.

O thou the God of Israel, let those that undertake
To seek for thee, not be at all confounded for my sake.
7 Because for thy sake I have born reproach: shame has covered my face.

8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mothers
children.

7* Because I bare reproach for thee, my face is cov'rd with shame:
8 Strange to my brethren, alient I to mothers children am.
9 For the zeal* of thine house has eaten me up: and the reproaches of them
that reproached thee, are fallen upon me.

9 For of the house that is thine the zeal it has up eaten me;
On me are their reproaches fallen that have reproached thee.
10 When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.

11 I made sackcloth also my garment: and I became a proverb to them.

10 I wept, and vexed my soul with fast reproached for the same;
11 I sackcloath als my garment made their porverb I became.
12 They that sit in the gate, speak against me: and I was the song of the
drunkards.

12 The men that in the gate do sit do speak against me wrong,
And I of those that drunkards are was made to be the song.
13 But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time: O
God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.

13 But in a time acceptable my prayer Lord is to thee:
In truth of thy salvation, Lord, and mercy great hear me.
14 Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink* let me be delivered from
them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

14 Deliver me out of the mire, and me from sinking keep:
Save me from those that do me hate, and out of waters deep.
15 Let not the water flood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up,
and let not the pit stut her mouth upon me.

15 Let not the water flood ov'rflow, nor deep let me devour:
And for to shut her mouth on me let not the pit have power
16 Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good* turn unto me according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

16 Do thou me hear, O Lord, even for thy loving kindness good,
Turn unto me according to thy mercies multitude.
17 And hide not thy face from thy servant* for I am in trouble: hear me
speedily.

18 Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies.

17 Thy face not from thy servant hide* in trouble: soon me hear.
18 Redeem and save me from my foes, unto my soul draw near.
19 Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor; my adversaries
are all before thee.

19 Thou my reproach and shame have known and my dishonor more:
Those that mine adversaries be are all now thee before.
20 Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: and I looked
for some to take pity, but there was none;

20 Reproach it broken has my heart, I Am full of heaviness:
I looked for some to pity me, but none at all there was.
And for comforters but I found none.

21 They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar
to drink.

And for comforters, but found none. 21 From them I did receive
Gall for my meat, and viniger to drink in thirst they gave.
22 Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been
for their welfare, let it become a trap.

22 Let their own table them before even for a snare be seen,
Let it become a trap which should have for their welfare been.
23 Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not: and make their loins
continually to shake.

23 That they not see let thou their eyes be darkened by and by,
And do thou also make their loins to shake continually.
24 Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold
of them.

24 Power out thine indignatation upon them manifold.
And let thy wrathful anger now of each of them take hold.
25 Let their habitation be desolate and (...) none dwell in their tents*

25 Let thou their habitation be desolate always;
And let thou none within their tents as in a dwelling stay.
26 For they persecute him whom thou have smitten; and they talk to the grief
of those whom thou have wounded.

26 For they do persecute him whom thou smitten have before,
And they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded sore.
27 Add iniquity unto their iniquity, and let them not come into thy
righteousness.

27 Add thou iniquity unto their former wickedness,
And let not such now come at all into thy righteousness.
28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with
the righteous.

28 Out of the livings book let them be blotted out by thee;
And with those men that righteous are let them not written be.
29 But I am poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation (O God) set me up on high.

30 I will praise the Name of God with a song, and will magnify him with
thanksgiving.

29 But Lord, poor sorrowful I am, let thy health set me hy:
30 I with a song Gods Name will praise, with thanks him magnify.
31 This also shall please the Lord better then an ox, or bullock that has
horns and hoofs.

32 The hum^le shall see this, and be glad: and your hearts shall live that
seek God.

31 Then bull or ^x with horns and hoofs this God more joy shall give,
32 The humble they this glade shall see, your hearts seek God and live.
33 For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.

34 Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moves
therein.

33 For God the poor hears, and he not his prisoners does despise,
34 Let heaven, earth, seas, and every thing that therein moves him praise.
35 For God will save Sion, and will (...) the cities of Judah, that they may
dwell there, (...) have it in possession.

35 For God will Judahs cities build, and he will Sion save,
That they may dwell therein, and so it in possession have.
36 The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his
Name, shall dwell therein.

36 Their seed that his own servants are, inherit shall the same,
And therein they a dwelling place shall have that love his Name.
PSALM LXX.
MAke haste, O God, to deliv^r me, make haste to help me, O Lord.

2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul.

HAste, Lord, make haste, Lord, me to help, and to deliver me:
2 Let them that for my soul do seek shamed and confounded be
Let them be turned back ward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.

3 Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha aha.

Who wish my hurt,, turned back, and to confusion put be they;
3 Turned back for to reward their shame be they, ^A, (...), that say.
4 Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee: and let such as
love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified.

4 Let those all that thee seek rejoice, and als be glad in thee;
Let such as love thy health, say still, God magnified be.
5 But I am poor and needy, make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help, and
my deliverer, O Lord, make no tarrying.

5 But I both poor and needy am, make haste, O God, to me:
My help thou and deliv'rer art, Lord, let no tarrying be.
PSALM. LXXI.
IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be put to confusion.

O Thou who art my Lord alone, I put my trust in thee:
Therefore unto confusion put let thou me never be.
2 Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear
unto me, and save me.

2 Let thou me in thy righteousness from thee deliverance have:
Cause me escape, incline thine ear unto me, and me save.
3 Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou have
given commandment to save me, for thou art my rock, and my fortress.

3 Be thou my habitation strong where still I may resort:
Thou gav'st commandment me to save who art my rock and fort.
4 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

4 Do thou out of the wicked^ hand my God deliver me;
Out of the hand of the unjust, and those that cruel be.
5 For thou art my hope, O Lord God* thou at my trust from my youth.

6 By thee have I been holden up from the womb:

5 For thou Lord God, my hope and trust art from my youth to me:
6 I still have from the very womb been holden up by thee,
Thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels, my praise shall be
coutinually of thee.

That of my mothers bowels out me took, thou even art he,
My praises they shall be therefore continually of thee.
7 I am as a wonder unto many: but thou art my strong refuge.

8 Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day.

7 To many as a wonder I Am, but thou my refuge strong,
8* Let with thy praise my mouth be filled* and honor all day long.
9 Cast me not off in the time of old age forsake me not when my strength
fails.

9 In time of old age let me not be then cast off by thee;
Do thou me not forsake, when as my strength all fails me.
10 For mine enemies speak against me: and they that lay wait for my soul, take
counsel together,

10 For those that are mine enemies against me thus they spoke,
And they that for my soul lay wait, together counsel take.
11 Saying, God has forsaken him: persecute and take him, for there is none to
deliver him.

11 God, say they, has forsaken him, him persecute and take;
For unto him there is none that deliverance can make.
12 O God, be not far from me: O my God* make haste for my help.

13 Let them be confounded and consumed, that are adversaries to my soul:

12 O God be thou not from me far my God have help to me,
13 Let adversaries to my soul consumed, confounded be.
Let them he covered with reproath and dishonor, that seek my hurt.

14 But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.

Let them dishonor and reproach that seek my soul cov'r over:
14 But I will hope continually and praise thee more and more.
15 My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the
day: for I know not the numbers thereof.

15 My mouth shall forth thy righteousness and thy salvation show
Even all the day, for I thereof the numbers do not know.
16 I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only.

16 In strength of God that is the Lord I will be going still,
Make mention of thy righte^nesse, even only thine I will.
17 O God, thou have taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous works.

17 O God, I even from my youth by thee so have been taught,
And hitherto I have declared the wonders thou have wrought.
18 Now also when I am old, and grayheaded, O God, forsake me not: until I
have showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that
is to come.

18 When I old and grayheaded am, Lord, me forsake not now,
Till to this age thy strength and power to all to come I show.
19 Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who have done great things: O
God, who is like unto thee?

19 Thy righteousness, O God, also is very high to see,
Who have so great things done: O God, who is like unto thee.
20 Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again,
and shall bring me up again from the deepths of the earth.

20 Thou which have troubles great and sore unto me showed forth,
Shall quicken and bring me again, up from deepths of the earth.
21 Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.

21 The greatness that is mine thou shall for to increase provide,
And thou shall also comfort give to me on every side.
22 I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God: unto
thee will I sing with the harp, O thou holy One of Israel.

22 My God thee, even thy truth I Will praise the psalterie upon,
I with the harp will sing to thee, O Isreal's holy One.
23 My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee: and my soul which
thou have redeemed.

23 My lips they greatly shall rejoice when I sing unto thee,
And this my soul which thou have made redeemed for to be.
24 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they
are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my hurt.

24 My tongue als of thy righteousness shall talk all the day long,
For they confounded are and shamed, that seek to do me wrong.
PSALM. LXXII.
GIve the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the kings son.

2 He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.

THy judgment give the king, O God, his son thy righteousness:
2 with right he shall thy people judge, thy poor with uprightnes.
3 The mountains shall bring peace to the people: and the little hills, by
righteousness.

3 The mountains then they shall bring forth unto the people peace,
And likewise shall the little hills, this do by righteousness.
4 He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the
needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

4 He Will of the people judge the poor, he of the needy shall
The children save, th'oppressour he shall break in pieces small.
5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all
generations.

5 Throughout all generations they shall thee fear most sure;
As long as shall the Sun and Moon still in their course endure.
6 He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass: as showers that water
the earth.

6 He shall most graciously come down like rain that is poured forth
On the mown grass, even as the showrs that water all the earth.
7 In his days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as
the Moon endures.

7 The righteous man he in his days on earth shall flourish sure,
And abundance of peace so long as does the Moon endure.
8 He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the
ends of the earth.

8 From sea to sea dominion he shall have by his great worth,
And from the river als unto the ends of all the earth.
9 They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him: and his enemies
shall lick the dust.

9 They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him thick,
And those that are his enemies, the very dust shall lick.
10 The kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents: the kings of
Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.

10 The Kings of Tarshish and of Isles shall bring him presents all,
Both Shebas and the Sebas Kings gifts to him offer shall.
11 Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: and all nations shall serve him.

11 Yea, all that are appointed Kings before him down shall fall;
And likewise all the Nations yield to him service shall.
12 For he shall deliver the needy when he cries: the poor also, and him that
has no helper.

12 For he the needy when he cries deliver safely shall,
The poor also, and him that here no helper has at all*
13 He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy.

13 The man that poor and needy is he shall in merey spare,
And also he shall save the souls of those that needy are.
14 He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall
their blood be in his sight.

14 Both from deceit and violence their soul redeem shall he,
And also in his sight their blood most precious shall be.
15 And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer
also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised.

15 To him shall Shebas gold be given, and so then live shall he:
For him als prayer shall be made still, he daily praised shall be.
16 There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the
mountains:

16 There shall of corn into the earth a little handful ^ye,
And that upon the very tops of mountains that are hye:
The fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the city shall
flourish like grass of the earth.

The fruit thereof like Lebanon shall shake, and flourish forth
They of the city shall like grass that is upon the earth.
17 His Name shall endure for ever: his Name shall be continued as long as the
sun: and men shall be blessed in him; all nations shall call him blessed.

17 For ever shall his Name endure last as the Sun it shall,
In him men shall be blessed, and him all Nations blessed shall call.
18 Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.

18 Now blessed be the Lord our God, the God of Israel,
Who only does the things perform in wonders that excel.
19 And blessed be his glorious Name for ever: and let the whole earth be
filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.

19 His glorious Name be blessed for ay^* and let the whole earth then
So with his glory filled be: Amen, yea, and Amen.
PSALM LXXIII.
TRuly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

2 But as for me, my feet were almost gone* my steps had well-nigh slipped.

Truly God's good t'Isra'l, to such, as clean in heart abide:
2 As for me, my feet near were gone, my steps well nigh did slide,
3 For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

3 For at those men that foolish are envious then was I,
When I of them that wicked are saw the prosperity.
4 For there are no bands in their death, but their strength is firm.

5 They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other
men.

4 For in their death no bands there are but firm their strength is then,
5 Not troubled they, nor plagued are like unto other men.
6 Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain: violence covers them as
a garment.

6 Therefore their pride, as does a chain, them compasses about,
And as a garment violence does cover them throughout.
7 Their eyes stand out with fatnes: they have more then heart could wish.

8 They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak
lostily.

7 Their eyes stand out with fat, they have more then their heart could wish:
8 Corrupt they ^ewdly speak t'oppresse: their speech it lo^ty is.
9 They set their mouth against the heavens; and their tongue walks through
the earth.

10 Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them.

9 They set their mouth against the heavens, through earth als walks their
tongue:
10 Thus turns his people; from full cup to them are waters wrung.
11 And they say, How does God know? and is there knowledge in the most High?

11 And thus they say, how does at all God know things certainly?
And is there knowledge to be had in him that is the most Hy?
12 Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world they increase in
riches.

12 Behold those the ungodly are and prosper at their will
Here in the world, they do also increase in riches still.
13 Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.

13 I verily my heart in vain have cleans'd as I perceive,
And in mine innocence als my hands I washed have.
14 For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastned every morning.

15 If I say, I will speak thus: bobold, I should offend against the generation
of thy children.

14 For all day long I plagued have been, each morn I chastened was:
15 If thus I say I Will speak, lo I offend thy childrens race.
16 When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me.

17 Until I went into the sanctuary of God, then understood I their end.

16 When I this thought to know, then it too painful was for me:
17 Till to Gods Sanctuary I went, then I their end did see.
18 Surely thou did set them in slipperie places: thou castedst them down
into destruction.

19 In slippry places surely thou them did set not fast,
And thou into destruction them also down did cast,
19 How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly
consumed with terrors.

19 How into desolation brought are in a moment they?
With terrors they even utterly consumed are away.
20 As a dream when one awaketh: so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall
despise their image.

20 As is a dream when one awakes, even so, O Lord, likewise
When thou awakest, thou of them the image shall despise
21 Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.

22 So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

21 Thus grieved was my heart in me, my reins were pricked sore:
22 So foolish I and ignorant a beast was thee before.
23 Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my right
hand.

23 Yet nevertheless continually I present am with thee:
By my right hand thou have, O Lord, most safely holden me.
24 Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

24 Thou with the counsel that is thine a guide shall make me have,
And afterward thou surely shall to glory me receive.
25 Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.

25 Who is he whom in Heaven I do have but thee alone?
And on the earth that I desire besides thee there is none.
26 My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strenth of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

26 My flesh me fails, and mine heart, but God the strength alone
Is of my heart, and als for ay he is my portion.
27 For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee.

27 For lo they that are far from thee most surely perish shall;
Them that a whooring from thee go thou have destroyed all.
28 But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord
God, that I may declare all thy works.

28 But it is good for me that I draw near to God always;
In God the Lord I trust, that all thy works declare I may.
PSALM. LXXIIII.
O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture?

O God why is it that thou have cast off for ever us?
Why smoaks thine anger against the sheep of thine own pasture thus?
2 Remember thy congregation which thou have purchassed of old:

2 The congregation that is thine in thy remembrance hold,
Which thou by thine almighty hand have purchassed of old:
The rod of thine inheritance which thou have redeemed: this mount Sion wherein
thou have dwelt.

The rod of thine inheritance which thou redeemed have:
This mount of Sion wherein thou have dwelt in time that is past.
3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations: even all that the enemy
has done wickedly in the sanctuary.

3 Thy feet to desolations lift that are perpetual,
That in the Sanctuary the foe has wickedly done all.
4 Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations: they set up their
ensigns for signs.

4 Amidst thy congregations thine enemies do roar;
They also do set up for signs their ensigns in great store.
5 A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees.

6 But now they break down the carved work thereof at once, with axes and
hammers.

5 A man was famous as he had on trees lift axes thick:
6 But now at once with hammer ax it is carved work down they break.
7 They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down
the dwelling place of thy Name to the ground.

7 They fire cast in the Sanctuary, and have defiled the same
By casting down into the ground the dwelling of thy Name.
8 They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burnt up
all the synagogues of God in the land.

8 Together them destroy let us they in their hearts did say,
The synagogues of God burnt up all in the land have they.
9 We see not our signs, there is no more any prophet, neither is there among
us any that knows how long.

9 Our signs at all we do not see, a prophet us among
There is no more; nor any is that knows well how long.
10 O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall tho enemy blaspheme thy
Name for ever?

10 How long shall th'adversarie thus, O God reproach with shame?
Shall he that is the enemy for ay blaspheme thy Name?
11 Why withdrawest thou thine hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy
bosom.

12 For God is my king of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.

11 Thy hand right hand why drawest thou back? it from thy bosom pluck,
12 For God's my King of old, who does on earth salvation work.
13 Thou did divide the sea by thy strongth: thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters.

13 The sea thou made by thy strength divided for to be,
And in the waters broken were the Dragons heads by thee.
14 Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to
the people inhabiting the wilderness.

14 The Leviathans heads thou brak'st in pieces, and did give
Him to be meat to people that in wilderness did live.
15 Thou did eleave the fountain and the ^oud: thou driest up mighty rivers.

16 The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the sun.

15 Thou clav'st the fountains, and the f^ood thou rivers dridst of might:
16 The day and night are thine, thou have prepared the Sun and light.
17 Thou have s^t all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and
winter.

17 The borders that are of the earth all have been set by thee,
The summer and the winter both thou have them made to be.
18 Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O Lord: and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy Name.

18 Lord, that the en'mie has reproached remember thou this same,
And that the foolish people als blasphemed have thy Name.
19 O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto the multitude of the wicked:
forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.

19 Not to the wicked multitude thy Turtles soul deliver,
The congregation of thy poor forget thou not for ever.
20 Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full
of the habitations of cruelty.

20 Unto the Covenant have respect, for habitations ill
Of cruelty, the places dark that are on earth do fill.
21 O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy
Name.

21 O let not the oppressed man return again with shame,
Let him that poor and needy is give praise unto thy Name.
22 Arise, O God, plead thine own cause, remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily.

22 Do thou arise, of thine own cause O God the pleader be,
Remember how the foolish man reprocheth daily thee.
23 Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up
against thee, increases continually.

23 Thine enemies voice forget thou not: the tumult of those hy
That up against thee rise, it does increase continually.
PSALM. LXXV.
UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy
Name is near, thy wondrous works declare.

TO thee, O God, do we give thanks, we do give thanks to thee:
For that thy wondrous works declare thy great name near to be.
2 When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly.

3 The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the
pillars of it. Selah.

2 When I the assembly shall receive, I Will judge uprightly here:
3 Earth and its dwellers all disolve, its pillars I up bear.
4 I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the wicked, Lift not up
thehorn.

4 Unto those that were fools I said, deal ye not foolishly;
And unto those that wicked are, lift not the horn on hy.
5 Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck,

6 For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south.

5 On high lift not ye up your horn, with stiff neck speak not ye;
6For not from East, nor from the West, nor South promotionsbe.
7 But God is the Judge: he puts down one, and strteth up another.

8 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red:

7 But God's the Judge, he down one puts, and sets another up,
8 For of the Lord within the hand of red wine is a cup.
It is full of mixture and he pours out of the same: but the dregs thereof
all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out and drink them.

It Is full of mixture, he it powers, but so the wicked all
That be on earth, the dregs thereof wring out, and drink them shall.
9 But I will declare for ever, I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.

10 All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

9 But I Will for ay declare; I will to Jacobs God sing praise;
10 The wickeds horns I Will all cut off, but horns of righteous raise*
PSALM. LXXVI.
IN Judah is God known: his Name is great in Israel.

2 In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion.

IN Judah God is known, great is his Name in Israel:
2 In Salem's als his Tabernacle, In Sion he does dwell.
3 There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the
battle. Selah.

4 Thou art more glorious and excellent then the mountains of prey.

3 There arrows of the bow he brake, the shield, sword, battell-ray, Selah.
4 More glorious thou and excellent art then the hills of prey.
5 The stout hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and none of the
men of might have found their hands.

5 They that stout hearted were are spoiled, their sleep they sleeped sound,
And none of all the men of might at all their hands have found.
6 At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a
dead sleep.

6 O thou that God of Jacob art, at thy rebuke at last,
Into a dead sleep both the horse and chariot are cast.
7 Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art angry?

7 Thou, even thou, art he that should be feared with the heart,
And who may stand into thy sight when once thou angry art?
8 Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven: the earth feared and was
still.

9 When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.

8 From heaven thou judgment caused be heard, earth feared and was still,
9 When God to save all meek of earth did judgment rise until. Selah.
10 Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: and the remainder of wrath shall
thou restrain.

10 Surely the very wrath of man, shall praise unto thee gain,
And the remainder of the wrath thou shall anon restrain.
11 Vow and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring
presents unhim that ought to be feared.

11 Vow to the Lord your God and pay: let to him presents bear
All they that are him round about, whom all men ought to fear.
12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he ^s terrible to the kings of the
earth.

^2 The sprit of them that Princes are cut off by him shall be;
unto the Kings upon the earth most terrible is he.
PSALM LXXVII.
I Cried unto God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear
unto me.

UNto the Lord I with my voice, to God I cried have,
Even with my voice, and so an ear unto me then he gave.
2 In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord my sore ran in the night, and
ceased not: m^ soul refused to be comforted.

2 In day of trouble God I sought; by night my sore in me
Ran and not ceasd; my soul refused comforted for to be.
3 I remembered God, and was troubled: complained, and my spirit was overwhelme^
Selah.

3 In my remembrance God I had and troubled did remain:
And overwhelmed was my sprit while I then did complain. Selah.
4 Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am troubled that cannot speak.

5 I have considered the days of old, years of ancient times.

4 Thou waking holdst mine eyes, I not can speak I Am troubled so:
5 I have considered days of old, years of times long ago.
6 I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart,
and my spirit made diligent search.

6 In time of night I do my song unto remembrance call,
I comune with my heart, my sprit made diligent search of all.
7 Will the Lord cast off for ever? and wi^ he be favorable no more?

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?

7 For ever will the Lord cast off and favor show no more?
8 For ay clean is his mercy gone fails his word evermore?
9 Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? Selah

9 Has God for to be gracious forgotten altogether?
Or has he in his anger great shut up his mercies tender? Selah.
10 And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand o I the most High.

10 Then said I my infirmity this is, but yet I still
Of his right hand that is most high the years remember will.
11 I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders
of old.

11 The works that by the Lord are done I Will in remembrance hold;
I surely will remember now thy wonders done of old.
12 I will meditate also of all thy works, and talk of thy doings.

13 Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as our God*

12 Of all thy works I Will meditate, and of thy doings talk*
13 What God so great as ours? O God, in Sanctuary thou do walk.
14 Thou art the God that do wonders thou have declared thy strength among
the people.

14 Yea thou art the Almighty God that do wonders strong,
Thy strength thou al^ declared have the people all among.
15 Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
Selah.

15 Thou have thy people with thine arm redemption made to see,
The sons of Jacob and als those that come of Joseph be. Selah.
16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid; the
depths also were troubled.

16 The waters did thee see, O God, the waters saw thee there,
They greatly were afraid also, the depths they troubled were.
17 The clouds poured out water* the skies sent out a sound, thine arrows also
went abroad.

17 The clouds then water poured out, the skies a sound out sent;
In a most fearful way abroad thine arrows also went.
18 The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the
world, the earth trembled and shook.

18 Thy thunders voice was in the heaven, the lightnings they did make
The world all lightened for to be; the trembling earth did shake.
19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters: and thy footsteps
are not known.

19 Thy way it is within the sea, the path that is thine own
Is in the waters great, and there thy footsteps are not known.
20 Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

20 By Moses thine own servants hand and Aarons hand also,
Thou even like unto a flock thy people leddest so.
PSALM. LXXVIII.
GIve ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.

O Ye my people, give ye ear unto the law that is mine,
And of my mouth unto the words do ye your ears incline.
2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:

3 Which we have heard and known: and our fathers have told us.

2 My mouth shall speak a parable, and sayings dark of old:
3 Which we have heard and also known, and us our fathers told.
4 We will not hide them from their children, showing to the generation to come
the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he
has done.

4 We from their race will not them hide, Gods praises making known
To age to come, and als his strength and wonders he has done.
5 For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel,
which he commanded our fathers; that they should make them known to their
children.

5 In Jacob he a testimony did fix, and set a law
In Israel, and our fathers bad them make their children know.
6 That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should
be born: who should arise and declare them to their children:

6 That them the generation that was to come might know,
Sons to be born, who should arise and to their sons them show.
7 That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God: but
keep his commandments:

7 That they in the almighty God their hope might only set,
And his commandments might keep, and not Gods works forget.
8 And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a
generation that set not their heart aright: and whose spirit was not sted. fast
with God.

8 And might not as their fathers be, a stubborn rebel race;
A race in heart not right, whose sprit with God not stedfait was.
9 The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the
day of battle.

9 Then Ephraims children being armed, who to them bows did take,
Did in the day of battle all together turn the back.
10 They kept not the covenant of God: and refused to walk in his law:

11 And forgot his works: and his wonders that he had showed them.

10 Gods Covenant they not kept, and in his law refusd to go:
11 His works and wonders they forgot that he to them did show.
12 Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers: in the land of
Egypt, in the field of Zoan.

12 Things mavelous he in the sight did of their fathers yield,
Within the bounds of Egypt land, within the Zoans field.
13. He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through: and he made the
waters to stand as an heap.

13 He did divide the sea, and them causd to pass through the same;
And he the waters made to stand, which as an heap became.
14 In the day time also he led them with a cloud: and all the night with a
light of fire.

15 He clave the rocks in the wilderness: and gave them drink as out of the
great depths.

14 With cloud by day, with light of fire he all the night them led:
15 In Desert rocks he clave, as from great depths drink furnished.
16 He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like
rivers.

17 And they sinned yet more against him: by provoking the most High in the
wilderness.

16 Streams from the rock he brought, like floods he waters caused run down:
17 Yet sinned they more, in Desert they provoked the Higiest One.
18 And they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust.

19 Yea, they spoke against God: they said, Can God furnish a table in the
wilderness?

18 And God they tempted in their heart for their lust asking meat:
19 Against God they spak, can God, they said, in desert table set?
20 Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams
overflowed: Can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people?

20 Lo, he the rock smot, waters gusht, the streams did overflow,
Can he give bread als? Can he flesh provide his people now?
21 Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled against
Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel.

21 Therefore God heard this, and was wroth: a fire against Jacob so
Was kindled, and'gainst Israel came anger up also.
22 Because they believed not in God: and trusted not in his salvation.

23 Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of
heaven.

22 For they believed not God, nor trust in his salvation laid:
23 Though clouds above he did command, and heavens doors opened.
24 And had rained down manna upon them to eat: and had given them of the corn
of heaven:

25 Man did eat angels food: he sent them meat to the full.

24 And Manna rained on them, and gave them corn of heaven to eat,
25 Man Angels food did eat; he them unto the full sent meat.
26 He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power brought in
the southwind.

26 Then in the heaven he did cause an east wind for to blo:
And by his power he did bring the south wind in also.
27 He rained flesh also upon them as dust: and feathered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.

28 And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their
habitations.

27 On them als rained he flesh as dust fouls feathered as sea sand:
28 He let it fall amid their camp round where their dwellings stand.
29 So they did eat and were well filled, for he gave them their own desire.

30 They were not estranged from their lust.

29 So they did eat and were well filled, he gave them their desire:
30 And they from that were not estranged which their lust did require.
But while their meat was yet in their mouths,

31 The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them: and smote
down the chosen men of Israel.

But while their meat was in their mouths,
31 Gods wrath came on them then*
And slew their fattest, and smot down Isreal's chosen men.
32 For all this they sinned still: and believed not for his wondrous works.

33 Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.

32 For all this sinned they still, and not believed his wonders then:
33 Therefore in vanity he consumed their days, and years in pain.
34 When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned, and enquired
early after God.

34 But in the time that he them slew, they sought him with desire:
And they returned, and after God they early did enquire.
35 And they remembered that God was their rock: and the high God their redeemer.

35 And that their rock was God, they did remember by and by,
And als that their redeemer was the God that is most ^y.
36 Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth: and they lied unto
him with their tongues.

36 Yet for all this they with their mouth spoke to him flattringly,
And likewise also with their tongues they unto him didly.
37 For their heart was not right with him: neither were they steadfast in his
covenant.

37 For their deceitful heart with him in no way right was there,
Nor yet they in his covenant together steadfast were.
38 But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them
not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his
wrath.

31 He merciful their sin forgave and them he not destroyed;
Yea, often his anger turned away, his wrath not at all employed,
39 For he remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes away and
comes not again.

39 For that they were but flesh he did in memory retain,
A wind that passing is away and comes not again.
40 How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the
desert?

40 How oftentimes did they provoke him in the wilderness?
And in the Desert also him grieve by their wickedness?
41 Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy one of Israel.

41 Yea to their sins they turned back, and tempted God anon,
And of Israel they limited him that is the Holy One.
42 They remembered not his (...), nor the day when he delivered them from the
enemy:

42 They did not his almighty hand remember thankfully,
Nor yet the day that he them all saved from the enemy.
43 How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of
Zoan.

43 How that he did within the land of Egypt also yield
To work his signs, and wonders great within the Zoan field.
44 And had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they could
not drink.

44 And how he had their rivers all thus turned into blood;
And that they could not drink, he did likewise with every flood.
45 He sent diverse sorts of flies among them, which devoured them: and frogs,
which destroyed them.

45 He diverse sorts of flies did send among them to devore*
And frogs which did upon them there bring a destruction sore.
46 He gave also their increase unto the caterpillar: and their labor unto the
locust.

46 Unto the caterpillar then their increase for to have,
And to the locust for to eat their labor als he gave.
47 He destroyed their vines with hail: and their Sycomore-trees with frost.

48 He gave up their cattle also to the hail: and their flocks to hot
thunderbolts.

47 Their vines with hail, their sycomores he did destroy with frost:
48 Their beasts to hail he gave: their flocks hot thunder bolts did roast.
49 He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and
trouble: by sending evil angels among them.

49 Fierce anger, wrath, he on them cast, and indignation strong,
And troubles als, by sending then ill angels them among.
50 He made a way to his anger, he spared not their soul from death: but gave
their life over to the pestilence.

50 He to his wrath made way, he not from death their soul did spare,
But he unto the pestilence their life gave over there.
51 And smote all the first born in Egypt: the chief of their strength in the
tabernacles of Ham:

51 And he in Egypt land did smite the first born all that came;
The chief of all their strength that were within the tents of Ham.
52 But made his own people to go forth like sheep: and guided them in the
wilderness like a flock.

52 But his own people like to sheep he did make forth to go,
And like a flock in wilderness he them all guided so.
53 And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed
their enemies.

53 And he them safely on did lead, so was no fear in them:
But these that were their enemies the sea did overwhelm.
54 And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary; even to this mountain
which his right hand had purchased.

54 And he of his own Sanctuary them to the border led,
Even to ^his holy mountain which his right hand purchased.
55 He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance
by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.

55 Before them heathens he cast out, by line them did divide
An heritage, and Isreal's Tribes made in their tents abide.
56 Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God: and kept not his
testimonies.

56 Yet did they tempt the Lord most high, and him provoked still:
His Testimonies that he gave to keep they had no will
57 But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were
turned aside like a deceitful bow.

57 But like their fathers turned back, and dealt unfaithfully;
They like a bow were turned aside, that shoots deceitfully.
58 For they provoked him to anger with their high place: and moved him to
jealousy with their graven images.

58 For unto anger they provokt him with their places hie:
And with their graven images him moved to jealousy.
59 When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel:

60 So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh: the tent which he placed among
men.

59 When God this heard, he greatly wroth abhorred Israel then:
60 So that he Shilo's tent forsook, the tent he placed with men.
61 And delivered his strength into captivity: and his glory into the enemies
hand.

61 And he his strength delivered into captivity,
And he his glory gave into the hand of the enemy.
62 He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritance.

62 He over his own people then did give the sword unto,
And he with his inheritance was very wroth also.
63 The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to
marriage.

64 Their Priests fell by the sword: and their widows made no lamentation.

63 The fire their young men did consume, their maids no marriage had:
64 Their priests did fall then by the sword, their wives no mourning made:
65 Then the Lord awaked as one out of ^p: and like a mighty man that shouteth
by reason of wine.

65 Then as one out of sleep the Lord did to awake incline,
And like a mighty man that shouts by reason of his wine.
66 And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual
reproach.

66 And he then in the hinder parts did smite his en'mie^ all;
Unto reproach he did them put that was perpetual.
67 Moreover, he refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of
Ephraim.

68 But those the tribe of Judah: the mount Sion which he loved.

67 He Joseph's tent refusd, and he not Ephraims tribe approved:
68 But he of Judah chose the tribe, mount Sion which he loved,
69 And he built his sanctuary like high palaces: like the earth which he has
established for ever.

69 Like palaces he builded high his Sanctuary to be,
Like to the earth for evermore which stablished has he.
70 He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheep-folds:

70 Of David that his servant was, he also choice did make,
And he him from the folds of sheep did by his favor take.
71 From following the ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Israel his inheritance.

71 Him from ews following great with young to feed he did advance
His people Jacob, and Israel his own inheritance,
72 So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by
the skilfulnesse of his han^s.

72 So he them fed according to his hearts integrity,
By of his hands the skilfullnesse, them also guided he.
PSALM. LXXIX.
O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy temple have they
desiled, they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.

LOrd heathens take thine heritage, desiled is by them
Thy holy temple, they on heaps have laid Jerusalem.
2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of
the heaven: the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.

2 The bodies of thy servants dead they have given to be meat
To fowls of heaven; flesh of thy saints to beasts on earth to eat.
3 Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem: and there was
none to bury them.

3 Their blood like water shed they have about Jerusalem,
And then there was not one at all there for to bury them.
4 We are become a reproach to our neighbors: a scorn and derision to them
that are round about us.

4 Unto our neighbors a reproach at last become are we,
A scorn derision unto them that round about us be,
5 How long, Lord, will thou be angry: for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like
fire*

5 How long will thou be angry, Lord, for ever shall this ^e?
Shall even like unto a fire, thus burn thy jealousy?
6 Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
kingdome^ that have not called upon thy Name.

6 Thy wrath out on the heathen power that never have thee known,
And on the kingdoms that thy Name not called have upon.
7 For they have devoured Jacob, and laid laid waste his dwelling place.

7 For those are they of Jacob that devoured have the race,
And they have caused for to be laid wast his dwelling place.
8 O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy ^ender mercies speedily
prevent us: for we are brought very low.

8 Against us m^de not former sins, thy tender mercies now
Let them prevent us speedily, for we are brought very low.
9 Help us; O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name: and deliver us,
and purge away our sins for thy Names lake*

9 O God our savior to us help for thy Names glory make:
Deliver, purge away our sins even for thine own Names sake.
10 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known
among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants
which is shed.

10 Why, where is their God, should heathen say? let him' among them be known,
Even by revenging in our sight the blood shed of thine own.
11 Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to the greatness
of thy power^ preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

11 According to thy power so great, let come before thine eye
The prisoners sighs: preserve those that appointed are to dye.
12 And render unto our neighbors seven fold into their bosom, the reproach
wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.

12 Into our neighbors bosom let so sev'n fold rendered be
Their own reproach, wherewith, O Lord, they have reproached thee.
13 So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for ever:
we will show forth thy praise to all generations.

13 So we thy folk and pasture sheep will thanks give to thee still,
Unto all generations thy praise show forth we will.
PSALM. LXXX.
GIve ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou
that dwell between the cherubims, shine forth.

O Isra'ls sheepherd, give thou ear, that Joseph that is thine
Leadst like a flock; that dwel'st between the Cherubims, forth shine.
2 Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come
and save us*

2 In Ephraims and Benjamins, and in Manasses sight
O do thou come and us to save do thou stir up thy might.
3 Turn us again, O God: and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

4 O Lord God of hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy
people.

3 Lord turn us, cause thy face to shine, and saved be shall we*
4 Against thy folks prayer, Lord God of hosts, how long wroth will thou be.
5 Thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in
great measure.

5 Thou with the bread that is of tear^ them feedest for their meat,
And thou unto them tears do give to drink in measure great.
6 Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh among
themselves.

6 Thou make us a strife to be our neighbors all unto,
And those that are our enemies laugh among themselves also.
7 Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved

7 O Lord, that art the God of hosts, turn us again to thee,
Cause thou thy face to shine on us and we shall saved be:
8 Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt? (...) cast out the heathen, and
planted it.

9 Thou preparedst room before it: and did, because it to take deep root and it
filled the land.

^ Thou plantd'st ^ vine from Egypt brought and cast out heathen men:
9 Thou room it made, deep root it gav'st the land it filled then.
10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly cedars.

11 She sent out her boughs unto the sea: and her branches unto the river.

10 Its shade the hills cov'rd, and its boughs were like the Cedars good.
11 Her boughs out to the sea she sent, her branches to the stood.
12 Why have thou then broken down her hedges: so that all they which pass by
the way do pluck her.

13 The boar out of the wood does waste it: and the wild beast of the field
does devour it.

12 Why brakst thou down her hedge that all which pass by pluck her sore?
13 The Boar from wood it wastes, wild beasts of field do it devore.
14 Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts^ look down from heaven, and behold,
and visit this vine:

14 O God of hosts, we thee beseech return thou unto thine:
Look down from heaven, and behold, and visit thou thi^ vine.
15 And the vineyard which thy right hand has planted* and the branch that
thou made strong for thy self.

15 And the vineyard which thy right hand has planted us among,
And als the branch that for thy self thou made to be strong.
16 It is burnt with fire, and it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.

16 It wholly is burnt up with fire, and als cut down is it,
When by thy face they are rebuked, they then do perish quite.
17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: upon the son of man* whom
thou made strong for thy self.

17 Upon the man of thy right hand O let thy hand now be,
On him that is the son of man whom thou madst strong for thee.
18 So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy
Name.

18 So will not we at any time go back from thee at all,
O do thou quicken us, and we upon thy Name will call.
19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine and we shall be
saved.

19 O Lord, who art the God of Hosts, turn us again to thee:
Do thou thy face cause for to shine, and we shall saved be.
PSALM. LXXXI.
SIng aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.

2 Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrell: the pleasant harp with the
psaltery.

TO Jacobs God make joyful noise, to God our strength loud sing:
2 Take psalm with psaltry, pleasant harp and timbrell hither bring.
3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: in the time appointed, on our solemn
feast day.

3 Do ye blow up in the new moon, the trumpet for to play,
Even in the time appointed thus on our feast solemn day.
4 For this was a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob.

4 For this for Israel was made a statute to endure;
Of him that God of Jacob is it was a law most sure.
5 This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land
of Egypt, where I heard a language, that I understood not.

5 This law in Joseph he ordained, when he through Egypt land
(...) out, where I a language heard I did not understand.
6 I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands wore delivered* from the
pots.

6 His shoulder from the burden great I then removed far:
And also from the pots by me his hands deliv'red were.
7 Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee, I answered thee in the
secret place of thunder* I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.

7 Thou call'dst in trouble, I thee saved, in secret place of thunder
I answered thee: I proved thee at of Meribah the water. Selah.
8 Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee, O Israel, if thou will
hearken unto me*

8 O thou my people, do thou hear, I Will testify to thee*
O Israel, if that thou will now hearken unto me.
9 There shall no strange God be in thee, neither shall thou worship any
strange god.

9 There shall not any god at all that strange is in thee be*
Nor shall there any god that is strange be worshipped by thee.
10 I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

10 I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of Egypt land:
Thy mouth wide open thou, and I will fill it with my hand.
11 But my people would not hearken unto my voice: and Israel would none of me.

11 But yet my people to my voice would not obedient be;
And they that are of Israel would then have none of me.
12 So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and they walked in their own
counsels.

12 Unto the lust of their own heart I did them give up so,
And after that in counsels they that were their own did go.
13 O that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had walked in my ways*

13 O that my people unto me had hearkened in their days,
And that the men of Israel had walked in my ways.
14 I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries

14 I should have soon their enemies* subdued that them withstand,
And against their adversaries I should have turned my hand.
15 The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him: but their
time should have endured for ever.

15 Who hate the Lord, should have themselves submitted him before:
But as for them, their time should have endured for evermore.
16 He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey
out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.

16 Them with the finest of the wheat fed also should have he;
With honey from the rock I should have satisfied thee.
PSALM. LXXXII.
GOd stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among the gods.

2 How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah.

IN Gods assembly God does stand, among gods judges he:
2 How long accepting persons vile unjustly judge will ye?
3 Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.

3 Defend those whom poor in the land and fatherless ye see,
Unto afflicted justice do, and those that needy be.
4 Deliver the poor and needy; rid them out of the hand of the wicked.

4 Deliver thou those that are poor, and in great need do stand;
Do thou them also safely rid out of the wickeds hand.
5 They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness: all
the foundations of the earth are out of course.

5 They know not, nor will understand, in darkness they walk on;
All the foundations of the earth out of their course are gone.
6 I have said, ye are gods: and all of you are children of the most High:

7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

6 I thus have said that ye are gods, the most Highs children all:
7 But ye shall die like men, and like one of the princes fall.
8 Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shall inherit all Nations

8 O God at last do thou arise, the earth to judgment call;
For those that are the Nations thou shall inherit all.
PSALM. LXXXIII.
KEep not thou silence, O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.

2 For lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lift up
the head.

LOrd keep not silence, hold not peace, Lord, be not still in need:
2 For lo, thine enemies tumult make, who hate thee lift the head!
3 They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against
thy hidden ones.

3 Against thy people counsel they that crafty is did take,
And they against thy hidden ones did consultations make.
4 They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation: that the
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

4 Come, let from being a Nation us cut them off, they said,
That of Israel the name no more be in remembrance had.
5 For they have consulted together with one consent they are confederate
against thee.

5 Together thus with one consent consulted have they all
Confederate they also are against thee great and small.
6 The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moab, and the Hagarens.

6 Of Edom there the Tabernacles and Ishmaelites were so,
And those that were of Moab come with Hagarens also.
7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek: the Phistines, with the inhabitants of Tire.

8 Assure also is joined with them, they have helped the children of Lot. Selah.

7 Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek, with Tire, Philistines plot:
8 With them is Assure also joined, they helped the sons of Lot.
9 Do unto them as unto the Midianites: as to Sisera, as to Iabin at the brook
of Kison:

10 Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.

9 Do to them as to Midlanites, Jabin at brook Kison:
10 And Sis'ra which at Endor fell: as dung they earth were on.
11 Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes as
Zebah, and as Zalmunna:

11 Like Oreb, and like Zeeb, make their nobles for to fall,
Yea, as Zebah, and Zalmunna, make thou their Princes all.
12 Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

13 O my God, make them like a wheel (...) the stubble before the wind.

12 Who said, let in possession us, to us Gods houses take,
13 My God them like a wheel, as straw before the wind them make.
14 As the fire burns a wood: and as the flamme sets the mountains on fir^.

15 So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.

14 As fire burns wood, and as a flame on fire does mountains set:
15 Them with thy tempest persecute, thy storm affright them let.
16 Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name, O Lord.

17 Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea, let them be put to shame
and perish*

16 O Lord, with shame their faces fill that they may seek thy Name:
17 Confound and trouble them for ay: them perish cause with shame.
18 That men may know that thou, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most High
over all the earth*

18 That men may know that thou, whose Name JEHOVAH is alone,
Art the most high, even over all that are the earth upon.
PSALM. LXXXIV.
HOw amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

O How the tabernacles are that unto thee belong
Most amiable, O thou that the Lord of Hosts art strong.
2 My soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and
my flesh cries out for the living God.

2 My soul does long, yea even does faint at the Lords courts to be:
My flesh and heart it cries out the living God to see.
3 Yea, the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young: even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my king and my
God.

3 The sparrow house, the swallow nest found where her young to lay;
Even thine own Altars Lord of hosts my King and God always.
4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee.
Selah.

5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the ways
of them:

4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they still will give thee praise.
Selah.
5 Blessed is the man whose strength's in thee in whose heart are their ways.
6 Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well: the rain also
fills the pools.

7 The go from strength to strength: every one of them in Zion appears
before God.

6 Who passing Bacas vale, make wells, rain fills the pools also*
7 To God in Sion each one appears, from strength to strength they go.
8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.

9 Behold, O God our shield: and look upon the face of thine anointed.

8 My prayer hear, Lord God of hosts, O Jacobs God give ear: Selah.
9 O God our shield look, see the face of thine Anointed dear.
10 For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

10 For then a thousand better is one day thy courts within:
My Gods house door I Will rather keep then dwell ^tends of sin.
11. For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory:
no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

11 For God the Lord's a Sun and shield, he will grace and glory give,
No good thing he will withhold from them that uprightly do live.
12* O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

12 O thou that art the Lord, by whom all hosts commanded be,
That man he truly blessed (...). that puts his trust in thee.
PSALM. LXXXV.
LOrd, thou have been favorable unto thy land: thou have brought back the
captivity of Jacob.

O Lord, thou have unto thy land been fav'rable always,

Of Jacob now thou have brought back the long captivity.

2 Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people: thou have covered all their
sin. Selah.

2 Th'iniquity even of all those that thine own people be
Thou have forgiven; their sin it has all covred been by the^. Selah*
3 Thou have taken away all thy wrath: thou have turned thy self from the
fierceness of thine anger.

3 Thou likewise now have taken all thy wrath away at last,
From fierceness of thine anger great thy self thou turned have.
4 Turn us, O God of our salvation: and cause thine anger toward us to cease.

4 O God of our salvation, turn us; let it thee please
To cause thine anger that is great now toward us to cease.
5 Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thy anger to all
generations?

5 And will thou even for evermore be angry so with us (...)
Will thou to generations all draw out thine anger thus?
6 Will thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

7 Show us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation.

6 That in thee may thy folk rejoice, will thou not us revive?
7* O Lord thy mercy to us show, us thy salvation give.
8 I will hear what God the Lord will speak* for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his saints: (...) let them not turn again to folly*

9 I Will hear what God the Lord will speak, he will to his people plain
And saints speak peace, but let them not to folly turn again.
9* Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in
our land.

9 Most surely his salvation is nigh to them at hand,
That do him* fear; that glory may so dwell within our land.
10 Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.

10 Both mercy now and also truth are jointly met together,
And righteousness and peace also have each one kissed other.
11 Truth shall spring out of the earth: and righteousness shall look down
from heaven.

12 Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good: and our land shall yield her
increase.

11 Truth from the earth springs, and from heaven look down shall
righteousness:
12 Yea, God shall give that which is good, our land shall yield increase,
13 Righteousness shall go before him: and shall set us in the way of his
steps.

13 And righteousness it shall likewise before his presence go,
And in the way of his own steps it shall us set also.
PSALM. LXXXVI.
BOw down thine ear, O Lord, hear me, for I am poor and needy.

DO thou bow down thine ear, O Lord* hear thou me by and by,

Because that I most needy am and very poor am I.

2 Preserve my soul, for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that
trusts in thee.

2 Because I Am holy let my soul by thee preserved be,
O thou my God, thy servant save that puts his trust in thee.
3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.

4 Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee (O Lord) do I lift up my soul.

3 Since Lord I to thee daily cry, be merciful to me:
4 Thy servants soul rejoice, for I do lift my soul to thee.
5 For thou, Lord, art good and, ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy (...)
alt them that call upon thee.

5 For thou, Lord, good, and to forgive art ready, and withal
In mercy plenteous to all them that do upon thee call.
6 Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer* and attend to the voice of my
supplications.

7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou will answer me.

6 Hear Lord my prayer, attend the voice of my requests to thee:
7 I Will on thee call in troublous day* for thou will answer me.
8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord) neither are there any
works like unto thy works:

8 Among the gods, Lord, there is none that like is unto thee:
Yea, neither are there any works like to thy works that be.
9 All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord,
and shall glorify thy Name.

9 All nations whom thou have made, shall come* Lord, and the same
Before the worship shall, and they shall glorify thy Name.
10 For thou art great, and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.

10 For thou exceedingly art great, and by thee als are done
Things that indeed most wondrous be, yea thou art God alone.
11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear
thy Name.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth sincere,
And do thou so unite my heart, that I thy Name may fear.
12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify
thy Name for evermore.

12 O Lord my God with all my heart, praise to thee give will I,
And I also for evermore thy Name will glorify.
13 For gerat is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.

13 For that thy mercy toward me in greatness does excel;
And thou my soul delivered have from the lowest hell.
14 O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men
have sought after my soul: and have not set thee before them.

14 The proud'gainst me are risen, Lord, of men assemblies great
Most violent sought my soul, and have not thee before them set.
15 But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious: long
suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

15 But thou Lord of compassion full art God, and gracious,
Long suffering, both in mercy great, in truth als plenteous.
16 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy servant,
and save the son of thy handmaid.

16 O do thou turn thy self to me, and on me mercy have:
Unto thy servant give thy strength, son of thy handmaid save.
17 Show me a token for good, that they which hate me, may see it, and be
ashamed: because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.

17 For good to me a token show, that who me hate may see,
And be ashamed, because, Lord, thou did help and comfort me.
PSALM. LXXXVII.
HIs foundation is in the holy mountains.

2 The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob.

IN mountains that most holy are is his foundation:
2 God more then Jacobs dwellings all the gates loves of Zion.
3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God Selah.

4 I will make mention of Rachab, and Babylon, to them that know me;

3 Of thee O city of our God things glorious spoken be: Selah.
4 I Will Babylon and Rachab name to them that do know me.
Behold Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia, this man was born there.

Behold ye Tire and also those that of Philistia were*
With those of Ethiopia this man he born was there.
5 And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the
Highest himself shall establish her.

5 And of Zion it shall be said this, that man, born was there;
And he that is the Highest one himself shall stablish her.
6 The Lord shall count them when he writes up the people: that this man was
born there. Selah.

7 As well the singers, as the players on instruments shall be there: all my
springs are in thee.

6 When God the people writs, he will count this man there born to be: Selah.
7 With singers players on instruments my springs are all in thee.
PSALM. LXXXVIII.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.

2 Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry.

LORD GOD, my Savior, day and night before thee cried have I:
2 Before thee let my prayer come, give ear unto my cry.
3 For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draws nigh unto the grave.

4 I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that has no
strength.

3 For troubles great do fill my soul, my life draws near the grave:
4 I Am counted with men down in pit, no strength at all I have.
5 Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.

5 Among the dead free, like the slain, that in the grave do ly,
Whom thou no more do mind; and from thy hand cut off are they.
6 Thou have laid me in the lowest pit in darkness, in the deeps.

7 Thy wrath lies hard upon me: and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves.
Selah.

6 In darkness in the lowest pit in depths me laid thou have,
7 Thy wrath lies hard on me, with all thy waves thou have me pressed. Selah.
8 Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: thou have made me an
abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.

8 Thou mine acquaintan^ have put far, abomination^ so
Thou madst me to them, I Am shut up and forth I can not go.
9 Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction: Lord, I have called daily upon
thee: I have stretched out my hands unto thee.

9 By reason of affliction, Lord, mine eye it mourns in me,
Upon thee daily have I called, and stretched mine hands to thee.
10 Will thou show wonders to the dead, shall the dead arise, and praise thee.
Selah.

10 Will thou to those that now are dead show wonders great that be?
Or shall the dead arise again, and praise give unto thee? Selah.
11 Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness
in destruction?

11 Thy loving kindness shall it be declared in the grave?
Or shall men in destruction thy faithfulness perceive?
12 Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land
of forgetfulness?

12 Shall thy great wonders in the dark, or yet thy righteousness
Be known to them that in the land are of forgetfulness.
13 But unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and in the morning shall my prayer
prevent thee.

14 Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?

13 But Lord to thee I cried, at morn my prayer prevent shall thee:
14 Why do thou Lord cast off my soul, and hidst thy face from me?
15 I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy
terrors, I am distracted.

15 Afflicted and up from my youth I ready am to die?
While I thy terrors suffer thus, distracted then am I.
16 Thy fieree wrath goes over me: thy terrors have cut me off.

17 They came round about me like water: they compassed me about together.

16 Thy terrors they have cut me off, thy fierce wrath goes me over:
17 Like water they me round enclosed, and compassd me together.
18 Lover and friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into
darkness.

18 My lover and my friend also far have thou put from me*
And into darkness them likewise that mine acquaintance be.
PSALM LXXXIX.
I Will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make
known thy faithfulness to all generations.

GOds mercies I will sing for ay, and with my mouth I shall
Thy faithfulness make to be known to generations all.
2 For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shall
thou establish in the very heavens.

2 For that still mercy shall be built, I did the same express,
Establish in the very heavens thou shall thy faithfulness,
3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant.

3 I with him that is my chosen one a Covenant did make:
I have to David sworn, whom I did for my servant take.
4 Thy seed will I establish for ever: and build up thy throne to all
generations. Selah.

4 Thy seed establish sure I will for ever not to fall,
And also will build up thy Throne to generations all. Selah.
5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord? thy faithfulness also in
the congregation of the saints.

5 The praises of thy wonders, Lord, the heavens shall express,
In congregations of the Saints also thy faithfulness,
6 For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord, who among the sons of
the mighty can be likened unto the Lord.

5 For that to God can be compared in heaven who is he?
And who among the Mighties sons to God can likened be?
7 God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him.

7 In the assembly of the Saints God's greatly feared to be:
Of all that are him round about he reverenced als should ^e.
8 O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?

8 Lord God of hosts, who is a Lord strong like to thee throughout ^
Or yet unto thy faithfulness that is thee round about*
9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them.

9 The raging that is of thee sea thou rulest at thy will:
When as the waves thereof arise, thou make them to be still.
10 Thou have broken Rachab in pieces, as one that is slain: thou have
scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.

10 Thou Rachab have in pieces broke as one that has been slain;
By thy strong arm thine enemies do scattred all remain.
11 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and the
fullness thereof, thou have founded them.

11 The heavens are thine, thine is the earth, as for the world that be,
And als the fulness all thereof, they founded were by thee.
12 The north and the south* thou have created them: Tabor and Hermon shall
rejoice in thy Name.

12 The northern part and als the south thou have created them,
The Tabor and the Hermon hills rejoice shall in thy Name.
13 Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

13 Thou have an arm that mighty is thy hand in all the land
It also is exceeding strong, and high is thy right hand.
14 Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

14 Justice and judgment of thy Throne are made the dwelling place,
Both mercy and the truth likewise, shall go before thy face.
15 Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord,
in the light of thy countenance.

15 Blessed is the people that does know the joyful sound aright,
Of thine own countenance, O Lord, they shall walk in the light.
16 In thy Name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall
they be exalted.

16 They in thy Name shall all the day for to rejoice agree,
And in the righteousness that is thine they shall exalted be.
17 For thou art the glory of their strength, and in thy favor our horn shall
be exalted.

17 For of the strength that is in them thou art the glory all:
And in thy favor high our horn exalted be it shall:
18 For the Lord is our defense: and the holy One of Israel is our King.

19 Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy One,

18 For God is our defense, our King is Isreal's holy One:
19 Unto thy holy One then thou did speak in vision.
And said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one
chosen out of the people.

And thus thou said, I have laid help upon one that is strong,
I also have exalted one from people chois'd among.
20 I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.

20 I have found David out my self, a servant unto me,
Him with my holy oil I made anointed for to be.
21 With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.

22 The enemy shall not exact upon him: nor the son of wickedness afflict him.

21 With whom my hand shall stablisht be* mine arm shall make him strong:
22 On him the foe shall not exact, nor son of malice wrong.
23 And I will beat down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate
him.

23 And ^ his foes before his face most fiercely down will beat:
Yea, I will bring my plagues on them that in their heart him hate.
24 But my faithfulness and my mercy shall ^e with him: and in my Name shall
his horn be exalted.

24 But with him shall my faithfulness, and als my mercy be,
And in my name the horn that is his shall be exalted hie.
25 I will set his hand also in the sea: and his right hand in the rivers.

26 He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation.

25 In sea his hand, and his right hand in rivers set will I,
26 My Father, God, Salvations rock thou art, he will to me cry.
27 Also I will make him my firstborn: higher then the kings of the earth.

28 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast
with him.

27 Him my firstborn I Will higher make then Kings of all the land:
28 My mercy I Will still keep for him, my covenant fast shall stand.
29 His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days
of heaven.

30 If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments:

29 I Will als his seed make still endure, and as heavens days his throne:
30 But if his seed my law forsake, and judgments walk not on.
31 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

32 Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes.

31 If they my statutes break, and not keep my commandments,
32 I Will visit then their sin with rods, their fault with chastisements.
33 Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

33 Nevertheless I not from him my loving kindness will
Take utterly, nor suffer so my faithfulness to fail.
34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips.

34 The Covenant that I have made I will not break to one;
Nor will I alter once the thing out of my lips that is gone.
35 Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.

35 Once even by my holiness I sworn have solemnly,
That unto David any way I would not make a ly.
36 His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.

36 His blessed seed it shall endure and that for evermore,
Yea and his throne as is the Sun, it shall be me before.
37 It shall be established for ever as the moon: and as a faithful witness
in heaven. Selah.

37 It as the Moon for evermore e^ablished stall be,
And as a faithful witness als, within the heavens hie. Selah.
38 But thou have cast off and abhorred: thou have been wroth with thine
anointed.

38 But thou displeased have cast off, yea and abhorred both;
With him that thine anointed is thou have been very wroth.
39 Thou have made void the covenant of thy servant: thou have profaned his
crown, by casting it to the ground.

39 Thou have thy servants covenant made void for to be found,
And thou his Crown profaned have, by casting it to ground.
40 Thou have broken down all his hedges: thou have brought his strong holds to
ruin.

41 All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbors.

40 Thou all his hedges have broke down, his strong holds razed thou have:
41 All that pass by the way him spoil, to neighbors he is a jest.
42 Thou have set up the right hand of his adversaries: thou have made all his
enemies to rejoice.

42 Thou have of his adversaries the right hand set up hie,
And thou have made his enemies all rejoiced for to be.
43 Thou have also turned the edge of his sword, and have not made him to stand
in the battle.

43 The edge thou also of his sword have turned in his hand,
And in the time of battle have not made him for to stand.
44 Thou have made his glory to cease: and cast his throne down to the ground.

45 The days of his youth have thou shortened: thou have covered him with
shame. Selah.

44 His glory thou have made to cease, to ground his throne have cast,
45 Shortened his days of youth, and him with shame thou cov'red have. Selah.
46 How long, Lord, will thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath burn like
fire?

46 How long, Lord, will thou hide thyself? for ever shall it be?
And shall the wrath that in thee is like fire thus burn in thee?
47 Remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men in vain.

47 Do thou remember how my time does here but short remain:
Yea, wherefore is it so that thou have made all men in vain?
48 What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his
soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

48 What man is he that lives here, and death shall never see?
His soul from power of the grave deliver then shall he? Selah.
49 Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which thou swarest unto David
in thy truth?

49 Where are thy former kindnesses most loving now, O Lord,
Which unto David in thy truth thou swarest by thy word?
50 Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servants: how I do bear in my bosom
the reproach of all the mighty people.

50 O Lord, remember the reproach of us thy servants here*
How all the mighty folks reproach I in my bosom bear.
51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproach^, O Lord, wherewith they have
reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.

52 Blessed be the Lord for evermore, Amen and amen.

51 Wherewith thy soes reproached whereof thine Anointed then
52 They steps reproached; Blessed be the Lord with for ay; Amen, Amen.
PSALM. XC.
LOrd, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations.

2. Before the mountains were brought forth,

LOrd, thou have been our dwelling place in generations all*
2 Before that thou the mountains high to be brought forth did call.
Or ever thou had formed the earth and the world: even from everlasting to
everlasting thou art God.

Or ever thou had formed the earth, and all the world abroad,
Even thou from everlasting art to everlasting God.
3 Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye children of men.

3 Thou do unto destruction man that is mortal turn,
And unto them thou do say, Ye sons of men return.
4 For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past. and
as a watch in the night.

4 Because that even a thousand years do seem but in thy sight
As yesterdey when it is past, and as a watch in night.
5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood* they are as a sleep: in the morning
they are like grass which grows up.

5 They are as sleep, as with a flood thou carriest them away;
And in the morning like to grass which grows up are they.
6 In the morning it flourishes, and grows up: in the evening it is cut down
and withers.

6 It in the morning grows up, and then it (...):
And in the evening tide it is cut down, and withers.
7 For we are consumed by thine anger: and by thy wrath are we troubled.

7 For we always consumed are by anger that is in thee;
And likewise by thy fear^ull wrath sore troubled all are we.
8 Thou have set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

8 Before thee our iniquities were also set by thee,
In light even of thy countenance our sins that secret be.
9 For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale
that is told.

9 For in thy wrath our days away are passd all to an end,
And like unto a tale that is told so we our years do spend.
10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years:

10 The days of all our years threescore and ten years are, we see:
And if by reason of great strength even fourscore years they be;
Yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we fly
away.

Yet is their strength both labor hard, and sorrow every way,
For it is very soon cut of, and we do sly away.
11 Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath.

12 So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

11 Who of thine anger knows the power? thy wrath is as thy fear:
12 Teach us to count our days, t'apply our hearts to wisdom near.
13 Return (O Lord) how long? and let it ^pent thee concerning thy servants.

^3 Do thou return to us, O Lord, how long to wrath so bent?
Concerning those thy servants all now let it thee repent.
14 O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our
days.

14 O with the mercies that are thine us early satisfy,
That we rejoice and glad also for all our days may be.
15 Make us glade according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us: and
the years wherein we have seen evil.

15 Make thou us glad according to the days we grieved have been:
And als according to the years wherein we ill have seen.
16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants: and thy glory unto their children.

17 And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us.

16 Thy servants and their children let thy work and glory see
17 And let even of the Lord our God the beauty on us be.
And establish thou the work of our hands upon us: yea, the work of our hands
establish thou it.

Do thou upon us of our hands the work establish now;
Yea and the work that is of our hands establish it do thou.
PSALM. XCI,
HE that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty.

HE that does in the secret place of the most high reside,
Under the shade of him that is the Almighty shall abide:
2 I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fo^tresse, my God, in him
will I trust.

2 I of the Lord my God will say, He my refuge is still,
He is my fortress and my God, in him put trust I will.
3 Surely, he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence.

3 Assure^ ^e unto thee shall give deliverence,
Both from the fowlers snare, and from the noisome pestilence.
4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust:
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

4 He with his feathers cov'r thee shall, thy trust shall surely be
Under his wings; a buckler shield his truth shall be to thee.
5 Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flies by day;

5 Thou shall in no way be afraid for terror that is by night,
Nor for the arrow that does fly by day while it is light.
6 Nor for the pestilenco that walks in darkness; not for the destruction
that wastes at noonday.

6 Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness every way.
Nor yet for the destruction that wastes at noon day.
7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come righ^hee.

7 A thousand at thy side shall fall, and also thousands ten
At thy right hand: but not at all it shall come nigh thee then.
8 Only with thine eyes shall thou behold: and see the reward of the wicked.

8 With thine own eyes thou only shall behold this thing to be,
And of the men that wicked are thou the reward shall see.
9 Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy
habitation.

9 Because thou, which is my refuge, have made the Lord alone,
Yea even him that is the most High thy habitation.
10 There shall no evil befall thee: neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways.

10 No plague thy dwelling shall come near, no ill shall thee befall:
11 For thee to keep in all thy ways his Angels charge he shall.
12 They shall bear thee up in their hands: lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.

12 Up in their hands in dangers great they shall thee bear anon,
Lest thou should dash at unawars thy foot against a stone.
13 Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon
shall thou trample underfeet.

13 Upon the Adder tread thou shall, and on the Lion strong:
The Dragon trample under feet thou shall and lion young.
14 Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my Name.

14 I him deliver will, because he set his love on me:
I will him set on high because, that known my name has he.
15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.

15 He Will call on me, I Will answer him, I will in trouble still
Be with him, I Will deliver him and honor him I will.
16 With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

16 Yea with a life that is prolonged I will him satisfy,
And also my salvation unto him show will I.
PSALM. XCII.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
Name, O most High:

TO render thanks unto the Lord it is a comely thing,
And to thy name O thou most High due praises for to sing.
2 To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning: and thy faithfulness
every night.

2 Thy loving kindness to ^ew forth even in the morning light,
And to declare the faithfulness that thine is every night.
3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery: upon the harp,
with a solemn sound.

3 Upon an instrument that has ten strings that do rebound,
And also on the psalterie and harp with solemn sound.
4 For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the
works of thy hands.

4 For thou, O Lord, now through thy work have made me to be glad:
And in the works triumph I will which by thy hands were made.
5 O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

6 A brutish man knows not: neither does a fool understand this.

5 Thy thoughts are very deep, how great are works done by thy hands?
6 A brutish man not knows this, a fool not understands.
7 When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity
do flourish;

7 When as those that are wicked men as grass do spring on hy,
And when they also flourish all that work iniquity.
It is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

8 But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore.

It is that they for ever shall destroyed be therefore:
8 But thou O Lord, art the most high, and that for evermore.
9 For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for lo, thine enemies shall perish: all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

9 For lo thine enemies Lord, For lo thine enemies perish shall:
The workers of iniquity they shall be scattred all.
10 But my horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be
anointed with fresh oil.

10 But like the horn of unicorne thou shall my horn for me
Exalt on high, and with fresh oil I shall anointed be.
11 Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear
my desire of the* wicked that rise up against me.

11 Mine eye shall also my desire see on mine enemies,
Mine ear of ill men my desire shall hear that against me rise
12 The righteous shall flourish like the palmtree, he shall grow like the
cedar in Lebanon.

12 The righteous like the palm tree then shall flourish forth anon,
He shall like to the Cedar grow that is in Lebanon.
13 Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
courts of our God.

13 They that within the Lord his house by him fast planted are,
Shall of our God within the courts for ever flourish fair.
14 They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing:

14 And in old age most pleasant fruit they also forth shall bring,
And furthermore they shall be fat and shall be flourishing.
15 To show that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.

15 To show that upright is the Lord, he is a rock to me:
And also no unrighteousness at all there in him be.
PSALM. XCIII.
THe Lord reigns, he is clothed with majesty: the Lord is clothed with
strength, wherewith he has girded himself:

THe Lord does reign, he clothed is with Majesty throughout,
The Lord is clothed with strength wherewith he girds himself about.
The world also is established, that it cannot be moved.

2 Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.

The world is also stablished that it can not depart:
2 Of old thy throne is fixed, and thou from everlasting art.
3 The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice:
the floods lift up their waves.

3 The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods they high their voice
Have lifted up; the floods their waves do list up with a noise.
4 The Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters: yea, then the
mighty waves of the sea.

4 Then many waters noise the Lord is mightier on hie,
Yea more then the most mighty waves that are within the sea.
5 Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for
ever.

5 The testimonies that are thine, are very sure together,
And holiness thy house, O Lord, becomes even for ever.
PSALM. XCIV.
O Lord God to whom vengeince belongs:

O God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self.

O Lord our God to whom belongs the vengeance as most due,
O Lord to whom the vengeance is, thy self now do thou show.
2 Lift up thy self thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud.

3 Lord, how long shall the wicked? how long shall the wicked triumph?

2 Lift up thy self Judge of the earth: reward the proud also.
3 How long, Lord shall ill men? How long shall ill men triumph so?
4 How long shall they utter, and speak hard things? and all the workers of
iniquity boast themselves?

4 How long time shall they utter thus, and speak things hard that be,
And all those likewise boast themselves that work iniquity?
5 They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.

6 They slay the widow and the stranger: and murder the fatherless.

5 Lord, they in pieces break thy folk and heritage distress:
6 The widow they and stranger slay, and murder fatherless.
7 Yet they say, The Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of Jacob regard
it.

8 Understand, O ye brutish among the people; and ye fools, when will ye be
wise?

7 Yet God shall not regard, say they, nor Jacobs God it see:
8 Ye brutish people understand, fools when wise will ye be?
9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he
not see?

9 Shall he that planted has the ear not hear how all things be?
And he that formed has the eye shall he himself not see?
10 He that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teaches man
knowledge, (...) not he know.

10 He that the heathen does chastise, correct shall he not now?
And he that knowledge teaches man, shall he himself not know?
11 The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord: and teach out of thy
law:

11 That thoughts of men are vanity the Lord himself he saw:
12 Blessed is the man thou chastnest, Lord, and teach from thy law.
13 That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit
be dug for the wicked.

13 That thou may give him rest from days of great adversity,
Until that for the wicked man the pit it dug be,
14 For the Lord will not cast off his people: neither will he forsake his
inheritance.

14 For sure the Lord will not cast off those that his people be,
Nor yet his own inheritance forsake at all will he.
15 But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the upright in
heart shall sollow it.

15 But judgment shall return again unto that which is right,
And all shall follow after it that are in heart upright.
16 Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? or who will stand up for
me against the workers of iniquity?

16 Who will for me against them rise up that doers are of ill,
Against them that work iniquity, who stand up for me will.
17 Unless the Lord had been my help: m^ soul had almost dwelt in silence.

17 Unless the Lord had been to me a help, as I have felt,
My soul with trouble vexed had almost in silence dwelt.
18 When I said my foot slippeth: thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

19 In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.

18 When, Lord, I said, my foot does slip, thy mercy held me right:
19 Thy comforts in my many thoughts they do my soul delight.
20 Shall the throne of iniquity have followship with thee, which frames
mischief by a law?

20 Shall thus of great iniquity the throne without all aw
Have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief, even by a law?
21 They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and
condemn the innocent blood.

21 Themselves together gather they against the souls of men
That righteous are; and they the blood that is innocent condemn.
22 But the Lord is my defense: and my God is the rock of my refuge.

23 And he shall bring upon them their own ini^uity.

22 But God is my defense, my God rock of refuge is hy,
23 And he upon them all shall bring their own iniquity.
And shall cut them off in their own wickedness: yea, the Lord our God shall
cut them off*

And als in their own wickedness he ^all cut off them all:
Yea, he that is the Lord our God them so cut off he shall.
PSALM. XCV.
O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of
our salvation.

COme let us sing unto the Lord, and let us make anon
A joyful noice unto the rock of our salvation.
2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and make a joyful noise
unto him with Psalms.

2 Let us before his presence come with thanksgiving, and take
Unto us Psalms, that unto him we joyful noise may make.
3 For the Lord is a great God: and a great king above all gods.

4 In his hands are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is
his also.

3 For God a great God, and great King above all gods he is,
4 The depths of earth are in his hand, strength als of hills is his.
5 The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.

6 O come, let us worship, and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.

5 The sea is his, hee't made, his hands the dry land formed well,
6 Come let us worship, let us bow, to God our Maker kneel.
7 For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of
his hand: to day if ye will hear his voice.

7 For he is our God, the people we are of his pasture choice,
And of his hand the sheep, if ye to day will hear his voice.
8 Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness:

8 Your hearts not harden ye, as in the provocation,
And as in desert in the day of the temptation.
9 When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.

10 Forty years long was I grievd with this generation,

9 When me your fathers tempted proved, and als my work did see:
10 I with this race long forty years was grieved made to be.
And said, it is a people that do err in their hearts: and they have not known
my ways.

11 Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

I said, this people erres in heart, they have not known my way:
11 To whom I swear in wrath that in my rest not go should they.
PSALM. XCVI.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the earth.

2 Sing unto the Lord, bless his Name: show forth his salvation from day to
day.

O Sing a new song to the Lord, to God sing all the earth:
2 To God sing, bless his Name, his health from day to day show forth.
3 Declare his glory among the heathen: his wonders among all people.

3 Among the heathen nations ye declare his glory ^all,
His wonders likewise that he does among the people all.
4 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above
all gods.

4 For he that is the Lord is great, and greatly he for this
Is to be praisd; above all gods he to be feared is.
5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the heavens.

5 For all the gods of nations they do but idols prove:
But by his mighty hand the Lord has made the Heavens above.
6 Honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.

6 Before him there is honor great, and also majesty,
And strength, and likewise beauty rare are in his Sanctuary.
7 Give unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people) give unto the Lord glory
and strength.

7 O kindreds of the people ye unto the Lord afford:
Both glory and als strength do ye now give unto the Lord.
8 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: bring an offering, and come
into his court^.

8 Unto the Lord the glory give which to his Name is due:
Come ye into his Courts, and do an offering bring with you.
9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him all the earth.

9 In beauty of his holiness O do the Lord adore,
Let all indwellers of the earth fear likewise him before.
10 Say among the heathen, that the Lord reigns: the world also shall be
established, that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.

10 Among the heathen say God reigns the world not moved to be
Shall be establi^'d; ^ighteously the people judge shall he.
11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar, and
the fullness thereof.

11 O let the heavens all rejoice, and let the earth be glade,
And with its fullness als the sea let it to roar be made.
12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees
of the wood rejoice.

12 And let the field now joy full be, and all that is therein:
Then shall the trees of all the wood for to rejoice begin.
13 Before the Lord, for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he shall
judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.

13 Before the Lord because he comes, he comes to judge the earth,
He Will judge the world with righteousness, and people with his truth.
PSALM. XCVII.
THe Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of Isles be glad
thereof.

THe Lord does reign, let all the earth for to rejoice be made,
And let the multitude of Isles thereof be very glade.
2 Clouds and darkness are rounnd about him: righteousness and judgment are
the habitation of his throne.

2 Clouds darkness are him round about, and righteousness that is his
With judgment of his glorious throne, the habitation is.
3 A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about.

4 His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.

3 Fire goes before him, and it round his foes to burn does make:
4 His lightnings the world enlight'ned the earth did see and shake.
5 The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the
Lord of the whole earth.

5 The hills in presence of the Lord like wax they melted forth,
Even at the presence of the Lord, who rules all the earth.
6 The heavens declare his righteousness: and all the people see his glory.

6 The heavens they his righteousness most clearly do declare,
And all the people als do see his glory every where.
7 Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of
idols: worship him all ye gods.

7 All that serve graven images let them confounded be,
That do themselves of idols boast: all gods him worship ye.
8 Sion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced: because of
thy judgments, O Lord.

8 Then Sion heard, and als was glad of Judah with accord
The daughters did rejoice, because of those thy judgments Lord.
9 For thou, O Lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above
all gods.

9 For thou O Lord art high above all things on earth that are,
Likewise above all other gods thou art exalted far.
10 Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; he preserves the souls of his saints:
he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.

10 Hate evil ye that love the Lord, souls of his saints that be
He does preserve: from wickeds hands them all delivers he.
11 Light is sown for the righteous: and gladness for the upright in heart.

11 For them that righteous are indeed, is sown a joyful light,
And gladenesse also for all those that are in heart upright.
12 Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness*

12 Do ye rejoice now in the Lord, ye men of righteousness,
And thanks at the remembrance give of his own holiness.
PSALM. XCVIII.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things: his right
hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.

O Sing a new song to the Lord, for marvells he has done,
His right hand and his holy arm him victory has won.
2 The Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the hea^hen.

9 The Lord he his salvation has made for to be known,
In heathens sight his righteousness he openly has shown.
3 He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

3 To Isra'ls house of mercy he and truth has mindful been,
Yea the salvation of our God all ends of earth have seen.
4 Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise, and
rejoye, and sing praise.

4 O all the earth unto the Lord make ye a joyful noise,
And do ye make a noise aloud; sing praises and rejoice.
5 Sing unto the Lord with the harp: with the harp, and the voice of a psalm

6 With trumpets and with sound of cornet: make a joyful noise before the
Lord, the King.

5 With harp, with harp unto the Lord, with voice of psalms sing:
6 With Cornets, Trumps make joyful noise before the Lord, the King.
7 Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: the world and they that dwell
therein.

8 Let the floods clap their hands and the hills be joyful together.

7 The sea let and its fullness roar, the world and there that dwell:
8 Let floods clap hands, together let the hills in joy excel.
9 Before the Lord, for he comes to judge the earth: with righteousness shall
he judge the world: and the people with equity.

9 Before the Lord for earth to judge he comes speedily,
The world with justice, people als he will judge with equity.
PSALM. XCIX.
THe Lord reigns, let the people tremble* he sits between the cherubims,
let the eorth be moved.

THe Lord himself alone does reign, let all the people quake:
He sits between the cherubims, let all the earth now s^ake.
2 The Lord is great in Sion and he is high above all people.

3 Let them praise thy great and terrible Name: for it is holy.

2 The Lord's in Zion great, and is all people high above:
3 Thy dreadful great Name let them praise for holy it does prove.
4 The Kings strength also loves judgment, thou do establish equity: thou
ex^utest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

4 The Kings strength als does judgment love thou setlest uprightness:
In Jacob thou do execute judgment and righteousness.
5 Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool: for he is holy.

5 Do ye exalt the Lord our God, at footstool that is his
Do ye give worship unto him, for that he holy is.
6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his
Name: they called upon the Lord, and he answered them.

6 With Moses, Aaron, amongst his Priests, Samuel among them that call
Upon his Name; they called on God, and them he answered all.
7 He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept the testimonies, and the
ordinance that he gave them.

7 He in the cloudy pillar spoke unto them, and they have
His Testimonies also kept and ord'nance ^e them gave.
8 Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that ^orgavest them,
though thou tookest vengean^ of their inventions.

8 Thou answerdst them, O Lord our God, God that them ^orgave,
Though thou of their inventions a vengeance then did crave.
9 Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at (...) holy hill: for the Lord our God
is holy.

Do ye exalt the Lord our God, and at his holy hill
Do ye him worship; for the Lord our God is holy still.
PSALM. C.
MAke a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.

2. Serve the Lord with gladness: come beforo his presence with singing.

O All ye lands, un^o the Lord make ye a joyful noise:
2 Serve God with gladness, him before come ye with singing voice.
3 Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he tha^ has made us, and not we our
selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

3 Know ye the Lord that he is God, he made us and not we;
His people and the sheep likewise we of his pasture be.
4 Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be
thankful unto him, and bless his Name.

4 Enter his gates with thanks, and in his courts his praise proclam^e:
Unto him also thankful be, and d^ye bless his Name.
5 For the Lord is good, his mercy is ever lasting: and his truth endures to
all gene rations.

5 For he that is the Lord is good* his mercy's eternal;
And als his truth it does endure to generations all.
PSALM. CI.
I Will sing of mercy and ju^gement: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

2 I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way,

OF mercy I Will and judgment sing, sing to thee, Lord, I will;
2 I in a perfect way my self behave will wisely still.
O when will thou come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect
heart.

O when will thou come unto me? I will in every part
Within the house that is mine own walk with a per^ite heart.
3 I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that
turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.

3 I will not set before mine eyes the things that wicked be;
I hate their work that turn aside it shall not cleave to me.
4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

4 A heart also that froward is shall far from me depart:
And I will not a person know. that wicked is in heart.
5 Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has an
high look, and a proud heart will I not suffer.

5 I Will him cut off that slandereth his neighbor privily,
Whose look is high, and heart is proud not suffer him will I.
6 Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with
me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

6 Upon the faithful of the land mine eye shall be, that they
May with me dwell; he serve me shall that walks in perfect way.
7 He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that tells
lies, shall not tarry in my sight.

7 He also that deceit does work shall in my house not dwell.
He shall not tarry in my sight that loves lies to tell.
8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: that I may cut of all
wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

8 Yea, all the wicked of the land destroy I early will,
That from Gods city so I may cut off all doers ill.
PSALM. CII,
HEar my prayer, O Lord: and let my cry come unto thee.

2 Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble,

O Lord my prayer do thou hear, let my cry come to thee:
2 In day when I in trouble am, hide not thy face from me.
Incline thi^e ear unto me in the day when I call, answer me speedily.

3 For my days are consumed like smoke: and my bones are burnt as an hearth.

Give ear to me; what day I call, with speed me answer make,
3 For as an hearth my bones are burnt my days consume like smoke.
4 My heart is smitten, and withered like grass: so that I forget to ^at my
bread.

4 My heart within m^ smitten is, and it is withered
Like unto grass: so that I do forget to eat my bread.
5 By reasons of the voice of my groaning' my ^ons clave to my skin.

6 I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the desert.

5 By reason of my groaning voice my bones cleave to my skin,
6 Like Pelican in wilderness like owl I Am desert in.
7 I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.

7 Yea I do watch, and I am as a sparrow that alone
With sorrow heavy sits the houses top upon.
8 Mine enemies reproach me all the day: and they that are mad against me, are
sworn against me.

8 They all the day do me reproach that enemies are to me,
And they that are against me mad against me sworn they be.
9 For I have eaten ashes like bread: and mingled my drink with weeping.

9 For I the ashes eaten have as if they had been bread;
And with my weeping in my drink I have a mingling made
10 Because of thine indignation and the wrath: for thou have listed me up, and
cast me down.

10 Because of wrath that in thee is and indignation:
For first thou have me lifted up and after cast me down.
11 My days are like a shadow, that declineth: and I am withered like grass.

11 My days like to a shadow are, that does declining pass,
And I likewise am withered even like unto the grass.
12 But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever: and thy remembrance unto all
generations.

12 But thou, O Lord, for ever shall endure, and als of thee
Unto all generations shall the remembrance be.
13 Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion* for the time to favor her:
yea, the s^t time is come.

13 Thou shall arise, and mercy thou shall have on Zion yet,
For now the time to favor her yea come is the time set.
14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones* and favor the dust thereof*

14 For in her stones thy servants all their pleasure now do take;
Yea, and the very dust thereof they favor for her sake.
15 So the heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord: and all the Kings of the
earth thy glory.

15 So of the Lord the heathen shall with reverence fear the Name,
And to thy glory all the Kings of earth shall do the same.
16 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.

17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.

16 When Zion up the Lord shall build, he will in his glory rise:
17 The destitutes prayer he will regard, their prayer he will not despise.
18 This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which
shall be created, shall praise the Lord.

18 For generations yet to come this shall be written all,
The folk that shall created be so praise the Lord they shall*
19 For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary: from heaven did
the Lord behold the earth.

19 For he looked down has from the height of all his Sanctuary,
The Lord the earth then did behold even from the heavens hye.
20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner: to loose those that are appointed to
death:

21 To declare the Name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem 5

10 To hear the prisoners groans, to loose to death that ordained are.
21 Gods name in Zion, and his praise in Salem to declare.
22 When the people are gathered together: and the kingdoms to serve the Lord.

23 He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.

22 When people gather, God to serve and Kingdoms so likewise,
23 He weakened in the way my strength, he shortened my days.
24 I said, O my God take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are
throughout all generations.

24 In midst of my days, I said, my God, not now away
Do thou me take; thy years throughout all generations stay.
25 Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the
work of thy hands.

25 Of old thou the foundation of all the earth have laid:
And als the Heavens are the work which thine own hands have made.
26 They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all of them shall wax old
like a garment:

26 Thou shall for evermore endure, but they shall perish all,
Yea, every one of them wax old even as a garment shall,
As a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.

27 But thou art the same, and thy yoars shall have no end.

Thou shall them as a vesture change, and changed be they shall:
27 But thou the same art, and thy years shall have no end at all.
28 The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall be
established before thee.

28 They that the children are of those that servants are to thee
Continue shall, their seed it shall before the established be.
PSALM. CIII.
Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy Name.

2 Bless the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits.

Bless God my soul, his holy Name bless all that is in me:
2 Bless God my soul, forget not all his benefits to thee.
3 Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.

3 Who all those thinc iniquities* forgiveth graciously,
Who likewise thy diseases all does heal most perfectly.
4 Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies.

4 Who also does redeem thy life even from destruction,
Who does with loving kindness thee and tender mercies crown.
5 Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is renewed like
the eagles.

5 Who with abundance of good things does satisfy thy mouth:
So that, even as the Eagles is, renewed is thy youth.
6 The Lord extcuteth righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.

7 He made known his ways unto Moses: his acts unto the children of Israel.

6 For all oppressd God executs both right and judgment so:
7 His ways to Moses, he his acts to Isreal's sons did tho.
8 The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.

8 The Lord is very merciful, and he is gracious,
He is als unto anger slow, in mercy plenteous.
9 He will not always chid^: neither will be keep his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

9 He will not chid^ continually, nor keep his anger still:
10 He dealt not with us as we sinned nor did reward our ill.
11 For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him.

11 For as the heaven^ very high above the earth is set,
So toward them that do him fear his mercy it is great.
12 As far as the east is from the west: so far has he removed our
transgressions from us.

12 As far as from the western part the east removed we see,
So far all our transgressions from us removed has he.
13 Like as a father pitieth his children: so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him.

13 Like as he that a father is his children pities here,
The Lord so likewise pities them that truly do him fear.
14 For he knows our f^rame, he remembers we are dust.

15 As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes.

14 He does remember we are dust, for he our frame does know*
15 Man's days are grass, as flower of field even he does flourish so.
16 For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

16 For over it the wind does pass, and it is gone therefore,
And after that the place thereof shall know it then no more.
17 But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that
foar him: and his righteousness unto childrens children.

17 But on them all that do him fear Gods mercy ever is,
And unto childrens children als the righteousness that is his.
18 To such as keep his covenant: and to those that remember his commandments
to do them.

18 To such as keep his covenant, and also those unto;
That always his commandments remember them to do.
19 The Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens: and his kingdom rules
over all.

19 The Lord himself prepared has up in the heavens his Throne;
The kingdom that to him belongs rules over all alone.
20 Bless the Lord, ye his angels that excel in strength, that doc his
commandments: harkening unto the voice of his word.

20 His Angels that excel in strength, do ye now bless the Lord,
Who his commandments so do and hearken to his word.
21 Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts: ye ministers of his that doc his
pleasure.

21 O bless the Lord all ye his hosts, do ye the same also,
Ye that of his are ministers that his good pleasure do.
22 Bless the Lord, all his works, in all places of his dominion: bless the
Lord, O my soul.

22 All ye his works in places all of his dominion,
Bless ye the Lord; O thou my soul bless thou the Lord alone.
PSALM. CIV.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, O Lord my God, thou art very great: thou art
clothed with honor and majesty.

Bless God my soul, O Lord my God thou art exceeding great:
With honor and with majesty thou clothed art in State.
2 Who coverest thy self with with light, as with a garment: who stretchest out
the heavens like a curtain.

2 Who do with light as with a robe thy self so cov'r about,
Who like unto a curtain als the heavens stretchest out.
3 Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds
his charet, who walks upon the wings of the wind.

3 Who of his chambers does the beams within the waters lay,
Who does the clouds his chariot make, on wings of wind makes way.
4 Who makes his angels spirits: his ministers a flaming fire.

5 Who laid the foundations of the earth: that it should not be removed for
ever.

4 Who fiaming fire his Ministers, his Angels Sprits does make:
5 Who earths foundation laid, that it from thence should never shake.
6 Thou coveredst it with the deeps, as with a garment: the waters stood above
the mountains.

5 As with a garment with the deep then thou it all did cover,
Above the mountains every one the waters they stood over.
7 At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.

7 While as by thee they were rebuked they fled without delay,
And at thy thunders fearful voice they hasted all away.
8 They go up by the mountains: they go down by the valleys, unto the place
which thou have founded for them.

8 They by the mountains do go up; they by the valley ground
Go down into the very place, which thou for them did found.
9 Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over: that they turn not again
to cover the earth.

9 Thou have a bound set so, that they may not the same pass over,
That hence forth they turn not again the earth all for to cover.
10 He sends the springs into the valeys which run among the hills.

11 They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their
thirst.

10 To valleys he sends springs, which run^ among the hills at list.
11 They drink give to each beast of field, wild asses quench their thirst.
12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing
among the branches.

12 The fouls that are of heaven there shall have by them along
Their pleasant habitation, which branches sing among.
13 He waters the hills from his chambers* the earth is satisfied with the
fruit of thy works*

13 And from the chambers that are his hills by him watered be,
The earth is satisfied with fruit of works that are from thee.
14 He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth:

14 He for the cattle causes grass, and herb als for to spring,
For man's service, that forth he food out of the earth may bring.
15 And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to
shine: and bread which strengthens man's heart.

15 And wine that maks man's heart be glade and oil in every part
To make his face to shine, and bread which strengthens a man's heart.
16 The trees of the Lord are full of sap: the cedars of Lebanon which he has
planted.

16 The trees that to the Lord belong they full of sap do stand;
Of Lebanon the cedars which he planted with his hand.
17 Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fur trees are her
house,

17 Where make their nests wherein to sit the birds melodious,
As for the stork, the firre-trees are appointed for her house.
18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for the
conies.

19 He appointed the moon for seasons; the sun knows his going down.

18 Wild goats high hills have for refuge, for conies rocks are so:
19 The moon for seasons he appoints, the sun his fall does know.
20 Thou make darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth.

21 The young lions roar after their prey: and seek their meat from God.

20 Thou darkness make, it is night, when beasts of forests creep abroad:
21 The lions young roar for their prey, and seek their meat from God.
22 The sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in
their dens.

23 Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening.

22 The sun does rise, they gathred are, and down ly in their den:
23 Man to his work, and labor als goes forth until the Even.
24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

24 How manifold Lord are thy works? in wisdom wonderful
Thou evry one of them have made, earth's of thy richesse full.
25 So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts.

25 So is this sea that is great and wide, wherein things creeping all
For multitude are numberless, and beasts both great and small.
26 There go the ships, there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play
therein.

27 These wait all upon thee that thou may give them their meat in due
season.

26 There go the ships; thou madst therein that Leviath an play:
27 Those on thee wait all, that their meat in due time get they may.
28 That thou give them they gather thou openest thine hand, they are filled
with good.

28 That which thou give unto them they gather for their food*
Thy hand thou do open thu^, and they are filled with good.
29 Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled, thou take away their breath,
they die, and return to their dust.

29 Thou hidst thy face they troubled are, thou takst their breath away:
They die, and after to their dust return again do they.
30 Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renuest the face
of the earth.

30 Thou thine own spirit sendest forth, they are created now*
And thou the face of all the earth do after that renew.
31 The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his
works.

31 The glory of the mighty Lord it shall endure for ever,
The Lord himself he shall rejoice in all his works together.
32 He looks on the earth, and it trembles* he touches the hills, and they
smoke.

32 The earth below does tremble all when he on it does look,
The mountains also he does touch, and they together smoke.
33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live* I will sing praise to my God,
while I have my being.

33 As long I to the Lord will sing as I shall life receive,
Unto my God sing praise I will while I my being have.
34 My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.

34 Of him my meditation shall sweet be unto me,
Yea in himself that is the Lord I very glade will be.
35 Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more* bless thou the Lord, O my soul, Praise ye the Lord.

35 Let sinners from the earth consume, no more let wicked be;
O thou my soul, bless thou the Lord, praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM CV.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his Name: make known his deeds among
the people.

2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works.

GIve thanks to God, call on his Name: his deeds to people tell:
2 Sing unto him, psalms to him sing, talk of his wonders all.
3 Glory ye in his holy Name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

3 See that ye in his holy Name to glory do accord,
And let the heart of every one rejoice that seek the Lord.
4 Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.

4 The Lord Almighty and his strength seek ye in every place,
See that also for evermore* ye humbly seek his face.
5 Remember his mavelous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.

5 The marv'lous works that he has done do ye remember now,
His wonders and the judgments als which from his mouth did slow.
6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant: ye children of Jacob his chosen.

6 O ye that of Abraham good his servant are the seed,
Even ye that Jacobs children are* his chosen one indeed.
7 He is the Lord our God: and his judgments are in all the earth.

7 Because he is the mighty Lord who only is our God,
The judgments that are his they are in all the earth abroad.
8 He has remembered his covenant for ever: the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations.

8 His covenant he remembered has for ever for to stand:
To thousand generations the word he did command.
9 Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac;

9 Which covenant himself he made with his own Abraham,
And unto Isaac he likewise by oath made sure the same.
10 And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law: and to Israel for an
everlasting covenant:

10 And unto Jacob for a law the same he did confirm,
To Israel for a covenant that is everlasting firm.
11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your
inheritance.

11 He said, I of Canaan will the land give unto thee,
That it of your inheritance the pleasant lot may be.
12 When they were but a few men in number: yea very few, and strangers in it.

12 When they thus but in number were a few distressed men*
Yea very few, and yet this more but strangers in it then.
13 When they went from one nation to another: from one kingdom to another
people.

23 When as they from one nation another went unto;
And to another people als did from one kingdom go.
14 He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their
sakes:

14 By any man he suffered not them wronged for to be:
Yea, for their sakes even those that were great kings reproved he.
15 Saying, Touch not mine anointed: and do my prophets no harm.

15 Then did he say, Touch ye not those that mine anointed be*
Nor do the ^rophets any harm that do belong to me.
16 Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole stasse of
bread.

16 Moreover he upon the land did for a famine call*
And of their bread the stasse also in fury brake he all.
17 He sent a man before them: even Joseph who was sold for a servant:

17 Before them he in favor sent a man them to uphold,
Even Joseph who to Ishmaelites was for a servant sold*
18 Whose feet they hurt with setters: he was laid in iron.

19 Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him.

18 Whose feet they did with fetters hurt: in iron he did ly;
19 Until the time that came his word, the Lords word did him try.
20 The King sent and loosed him: even the ruler of the people, and let him go
free.

21 He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

20 The King sent and him loosed, even him the peoples Prince set free:
21 Him ruler of his substance all, Lord of his house made he.
22 To bind his princes at his pleasure, and teach his senators wisdom.

22 That he his princes bind with bonds at his good pleasure might,
And those that were his senators should wisdom teach aright*
23 Israel also came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.

23 The people (...) of Israel then into Egypt came:
And Jacob likewise did sojourn within the land of Ham.
24 And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger then their
enemies.

24 And he his people greatly did increase their foes among,
And more then all their enemies he did then make them strong.
25 He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtly with his
servants*

25 Their heart he turned for to hate those that his people were,
And also subtly to deal with his own servants there.
26 He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen

26 His faithful servant Moses he unto them also sent,
And likewise Aaron whom he then had chosen with him went.
27 They showed his signs among them: and wonders in the land of Ham.

28 He sent darkness, and made it dark: and they rebelled not against his word.

27 Among them his signs and wonders they in Hams land did afford,
28 He darkness sent and made it dark, they not contemned his word.
29 He turned their waters into blood* and slew their fish.

30 The land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their kings.

29 He turned their waters into blood, their fish he slew in springs:
30 The land in plenty frogs brought forth in chambers of their Kings.
31 He spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies: and lice in all their
coasts.

31 He spoke, and diverse sorts there came of flies, as mighty hosts,
And by his finger lyce he made to swarm in all their costs.
32 He gave them hail for rains and flaming fire in their land.

33 He smote their vines also and their figtrees: and brake the trees of their
coasts.

32 He hail for rain, and flaming fire within their land did make:
33 Their vines and their fig trees he smot, trees of their costs he brake.
34 He spoke and the locusts came, and caterpillars, and that without number:

35 And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their
ground.

34 He spoke and catterpillars came locusts in number great
35 Ate in their land all herbs, and of their ground devoured the fruit.
36 He smote also all the firstborn in their land: the chief of all their
strength.

36 He also did within their land in fury smite at length
The first born of the man and beast the chief of all their strength.
37 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one
feeble person among their tribes.

37 With silver and with gold also he brought them forth along,
And not one feeble person there was all their tribes among.
38 Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.

39 He spread a cloud for a covering: and fire to give light in the night.

38 Egypt was glade when they did part, their fear did on them light:
39 He spread a cloud for covering, fire to give light by night.
40 The people asked, and he brought quails: and satisfied them with the bread
af heaven.

40 The people asked, and he then brought quails abundantly,
And he them all did with the bread of heaven satisfy.
41 He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out: they ran in the dry places
like a river.

41 The rock he also opened, and waters gushed out,
They like unto a river ran in places dry about.
42 For he remembered his holy promise: and Abraham his servant.

43 And he brought forth his people with joy: and his chosen with gladness:

42 For on his holy promise he, and's servant Abra'm thought:
43 With joy his folk, his chosen ones with gladness forth he brought.
44 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labor of
the people.

44 And unto them he did the lands give of the heathen men,
And what the peoples labor was they did inherit then.
45 That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye the Lord.

45 That for the same they might observe the statuts of his word,
And keep his laws given unto them: praise give ye to the Lord.
PSALM. CVI.
PRaise ye the Lord; O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy
endures for ever.

PRaise ye the Lord, O give ye thanks unto the Lord together,
For he is good; his mercy al^ endures fast for ever.
2 Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth all his praise?

3 Blessed are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness at all
times.

2 Gods mighty acts who utter can, and show forth all his praise?
3 They blessed are that judgment keep* and who does righteousness:
4 Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people* O
visit me with thy salvation*

4 Do thou remember me, O Lord, with favor thou do bear
Unto thy folk; and visit me with thy salvation near.
5 That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness
of thy nation: that I may glory with thine inheritance:

5 That I thy chosens good may see in thy folks gladness glade,
That I with thine inheritance to glory may be made.
6 We have sinned with our fathers: we have committed iniquity, we have done
wickedly.

6 We with our fathers sinned have, we of iniquity
Committed also have the works, we have done wickedly.
7 Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies:

7 Our fathers they in Egypt not thy wonders understood,
And they did not remember then thy mercies multitude.
But provoked him at the sea* even at the Red sea.

8 Nevertheless he saved them for his Names sake: that he might make his
mighty power to be known.

But him provoked at sea, red sea 8 Yet for his Names sake he
Them saved, that his mighty power he might make known to be.
9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the
depths, as through the wilderness.

9 The red sea als he did rebuke and it then dry was made,
So he then through the depths as through the wilderness them led.
10 And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them: and redeemed them
from* the hand of the enemy.

10 And he them saved from the hand of him that hated them,
And from* the enemies hand also he then did them redeem.
11 And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left.

12 Then believed they his words: they sang his praise.

11 Their foes the waters covered, of them left was not one*
12 Then they believed all his words, they sang his praise anon.
13 They soon forgot his works: they waited not for his counsel:

14 But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.

13 They soon forgate his works; they for his counsel not abode:
14 But lusted much in wilderness, in desert tempted God.
15 And he gave them their request: but sent leanness into their soul.

16 They envied Moses also in the camp: and Aaron the saint of the Lord.

15 He gave them their request, but to their soul he leanness sent:
16 In Camp they Moses did envy, and Aaron the Lords Saint.
17 The earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the company of
Abiram.

27 The earth below it opened, and Dathan by and by
Did swallow up, and covered Abirams company.
18 And a fire was kindled in their company: the flamme burnt up the wicked.

18 And likewise in their company a fire was kindled then,
The flame thereof that did break forth burnt up the wicked men.
19 They made a calf in Horeb: and worshipped the molten image.

19 Upon the hill of Horeb als a golden calf they made,
And to the image worship gave that there they molten had.
20 Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eats
grass.

20 Thus he that was their glory then by them there changed was
Into the likeness of an Ox that eats up the grass.
21 They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt:

21 They God their Savior so forgot, which by his mighty hand
Had in his favor to them done great things in Egypt land.
22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and terrible things in the Red sea.

22 Most wondrous works within the land of Ham performed he:
And things that were most terrible even hard by the red sea*
23 Therefore he said, that he would destroy them; had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy
them.

23 Therefore he said, he would them slay, had Moses his choice one
Not stood in breach, to turn his wrath from their destruction.
24 Yea they despised the pleasant land: they believed not his word:

25 But murmured in their tents: and hearkened not unto the voice of* the Lord.

24 Yea they despisde the pleasant land, they not believed his word:
25 But murmured in their tents, and not the voice heard of the Lord.
26 Therefore he lifted up his hand against them: to overthrow them in the
wilderness.

7 To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them in the
lands.

26 Therefore in desert them to slay against them he lifts his hands:
27 Among nations to ov'rthrow their seed, and scatter in the lands.
28 They joined themselves also unto Baal-Peor: and ate the sacrifices of the
dead.

28 To Baal-Peor also they did join themselves indeed,
And sacrifices ate that were then offered to the dead.
29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and the plague brake
in upon them.

29 Thus unto anger they him there provoked by the sin
Of their own ill inventions: the plague on them brake in.
30 Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was
stayed.

30 But Phinehas then there did stand up, and judgment he that day
Did execute, and so at last the fearful plague did stay.
31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness* unto all generations for
evermore.

31 And unto him for righteousness that counted was therefore:
Yea, unto generations all, and that for evermore.
32 They angered him also at the waters of strife; so that it went ill with
Moses for their sakes:

32 They at the waters als of strife then did him angry make,
So that it there went very ill with Moses for their sake.
33 Because they provoked his spirit: so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips.

33 Because that they his Spirit thus provoked bitterly,
So that he did then with his lips speak unadvisedly.
34 They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them:

35 But were mingled among the heathen* and learned their works.

34 They as the Lord commanded them the Nations did not slay:
35 But among the heathen mingled were and learned so their way.
36 And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

37 Ye they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.

36 And they their idols then did serve, which were to them a snare:
37 Yea they to devils did sacrifice their sons and daughters there.
38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan,

38 Blood innocent, yea even their Sons and daughters blood they shed,
Whom to Canaans idols they then sacrifices made.
And the land was polluted with blood.

29 Thus were they defiled with their ow works, and went a whoring with their
own in ventions.

The land polluted was with blood: 39 Their works them did defile,
And so they then a whooring went with their inventions vile.
40 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: insomuch
that he abhorred his own inheritance.

40 Against his people kindled was the wrath of God therefore:
In so much that he did his own inheritance abhor.
41 And he gave them into the hand of the heathen, and they that hated them,
ruled over them.

41 And he in wrath them gave into the hand of heathen men,
And they that them did greatly hate them overruled then.
42 Their enemies also oppressed them: and they were brought into subjection
under their (...)

42 They that als were their enemies oppressd them in the land,
And they into subjection were brought underneath their hand.
43 Many times did he deliver them: but they provoked him with their counsel,
and were brought low for their iniquity.

43 He many times deliv'red them, but with their counsel they
Did him provoke, and were brought low for their iniquity.
44 Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry.

45 And he remembered for them his covenant:

44 Yet he their trouble did regard when as their cry he heard:
45 And he the covenant that was his for them remembered.
And repented according to the multitude of his mercies.

46 He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.

After his mercies multitude 46 he did repent: And made
Them to be piti'd of all that them captives carried had.
47 Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give
thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.

47 O Lord our God do thou us save, from among the heathen gather,
To thank thy holy Name, and in thy praise triumph together.
48 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let
all the people, say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord.

48 From ever, and for ay the Lord Isra'ls God blessed be,
Let all the people say Amen: praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM. CVII.
O Give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

2 Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of
the enemy.

THank God for he is good; for ay his mercy during stands:
2 Let Gods redeemed say so, whom he redeemed from the enemies hands,
3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from
the north and from the south.

3 And he likewise out of the lands did gather them distressed,
From South and also from the North, from East and from the West.
4 They wandered in the wilderness, in a solitary way: they found no city to
dwell in.

4 They wandered in the wilderness, a solitary way,
They found no city there at all wherein then dwell could they.
5 Hungry and thirsty: their soul fainted in them.

6 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered them out of
their distresses.

5 They hungry were, and thirsty als their soul did in them faint:
6 To God they cried in straits, who them help in distresses sent.
7 And he led them forth by the right way: that they might go to a city of
habitation.

7 And by the way that right is he did lead them forth, that so
They of an habitation might to a city go.
8 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

8 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodness then,
And for his works so wonderful unto the sons of men.
9 For he satisfies the longing soul: and fills the hungry soul with
goodness.

9 For he the soul that longing is does satisfy at will,
And he the soul that hungry is does with his goodness fill.
10 Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: being bound in
affliction and i^on:

10 Such as do into darkness sit, and in deaths shade are found,
Who being in affliction, and iron also bound.
11 Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel
of the most High:

11 Because against the words of God they thus rebelled then*
And of him that is the most High the counsel did contemn.
12 Therefore he brought down their heart with labor: they sell down, and
there was none to help.

12 Therefore with labor hard their heart he did bring down anon:
So by the same they down did fall, and there to help was none.
13 Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he saved them out of
their distresses.

13 Then in the time they troubled were they to the Lord did cry,
And out of their distresses them he saved by and by.
14 He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their
bands in sunder.

14 Then did he out of darkness them, and from deaths shadow take,
The bands that were upon them laid in sunder all he brake.
15 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

15 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodness then,
And for his works so wonderful unto the sons of men.
16 For he has broken the gates of brass and ^ut the bars of iron in sunder.

16 For he the gates that were of brass has broken, and withal
The bars that were of iron strong he cut in sunder all.
17 Fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted.

18 Their soul abhors all manner of mean and they draw near unto the gates
of death.

17 For their transgression and their sine fools are afflicted here,
18 All manner of meats their soul abhors, they to deaths gates draw near.
19 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble* he saves them out of their
distresses.

19 The^ in the time they troubled are they to the Lord do cry,
And out of their distresses them he saves by and by.
20 He sent his word, and healed them: and delivered them from their
destructions.

20 Unto them he did send his word, and healed them altogether:
And he from their destructions did also them diliver.
21 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful
works to the children of mem.

21 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodness then,
And for his works so wonderful unto the sons of men.
22 And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving: and declare his
works with rejoicing.

22 Of thanks let them all sacrifice the sacrifices rare;
And let them with rejoicing great the works of his declare.
23 They that go down to the sea in ships, and do business in great waters.

24 These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

23 Who in great waters business do, and go in ships to sea,
24 Within the deep those of the Lord the works and wonders see.
25 For he commands, and raises the stormy wind: which lifts up the waves
thereof.

25 For he commandment does give, and stormy wind does raise,
Which lifts up with violence thereof the raging waves.
26 They mount up to the heaven: they go down again to the depths, their soul
is melted because of trouble.

26 They to the heaven do mount up to depths go down again,
Their soul within them melted is, because of trouble then.
27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wits
end.

28 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: and he brings them out of
their distresses.

27 Like to one drunk, reel, stagger they, at their wits end they be:
28 Then they in trouble cry to God, them from distress brings he.
29 He makes the storm a calm: so that the waves thereof are still.

29 The raging storm to be a calm ^he makes at his will.
So that the waves thereof are made for to be always still.
30 Then are they glad, because they be quiet* so he brings them unto their
desired haven.

30 Then are they all made to be glade, because they quiet be:
So unto their* desired hav'n them safely brings he.
31 O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

31 Oh that men to the Lord would give praise for his goodness then,
And for his works so wonderful unto the sons of men.
32 Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him
in the assembly of the Elders.

32 In peoples congregation als let them exalt him far,
And in assembly give him praise of those that Elders are.
33 He turns rivers into a wilderness: and the water springs into dry ground.

34 A fruitful land into barrenness: for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

33 He to dry ground turns water springs, and floods to wilderness,
34 For sins of them that dwell therein fat land to barrenness.
35 He turns the wilderness into a standing water: and dry ground into
watersprings.

5 Into a standing water all the wilderness he brings:
And he the ground that is most dry turns into water springs.
36 And there he makes the hungry to dwell: that they may prepare a city for
habitation.

36 And there he makes the hungry dwell, that they a city there
Even for a habitation may for themselves prepare.
37 And sow the fields, and plant vineyards: which may yield fruits of
increase.

37 And plant vineyards abundantly and also sow the field,
Which may at last most plenteously the fruits of increase yield.
38 He blesses them also, so that they are multiplied greatly: and suffers
not their cattle to decrease.

38 He also blesses them, so that they greatly do increase,
And does not suffer any way their cattle to decrease.
39 Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction,
and sorrow.

39 Again they are diminished, and very low brought down,
Through sorrow and affliction als, and great oppression.
40 He pours contempt upon princes: and causes them to wander in the
wilderuesse where there is no way.

40 On princes he does pour contempt, and causes them that they
Do wander in the wilderness, wherein there is no way.
41 Yet sets he the poor on high from affliction, and makes him familios
like a ^look.

41 Yet he on high those that are poor does set from miseries,
And even like unto a flock he makes him families.
42 The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.

42 They that are righteous shall rejoice, when they the same ^all see,
And then of all iniquity the mouth shall stopped be.
43 Who so is wise and will observe those things: even they shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord.

43 Who so is wise and will observe those things how they befall,
The loving kindness of the Lord well understand they shall.
PSALM. CVIII.
O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise, even with my glory.

2 Awake psaltery and harp: I my self will awake early.

MY heart is fixed, I Will sing and praise, Lord, with my glory still:
2 Awake Harp, Psaltrie, I my self awake now early will.
3 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing praises unto
thee among the nations.

3 O Lord among the people I will praise unto thee bring,
And I among the Nations will praises to thee sing.
4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.

4 For great thy mercy is above the Heavens highest pitch,
And even unto the highest clouds thy truth does also reach.
5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

5 Above the Heavens, O our God, exalted high be thou,
And let thy glory be above even all the earth below.
6 That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me.

6 That those which thy beloved are delivered may be,
O with thy right hand do thou save and answer give to me.
7 God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem: and
mete out the valley of Succoth.

7 God in his holiness did speak, I joyful will abide,
I Succoths valley will met out, and Shechem will divide.
8 Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraalso is the strength of mine head:
Judah is my lawgiver.

8 Mine Gilead, mine Manasses is the strength als of mine head
Is Ephraim, and Judah he my lawgiver is made.
9 Moab is my wash pot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe, over Philistia will
I triumph.

9 Moab my washpot is, I Will out my shoe over Edom through,
And over all Philistia I will triumphing go.
10 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

10 Who is he now that will me bring into the city strong?
And into Edom who is he that will me lead along?
11 Wilt not thou, O God, who have cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go
forth with our hosts?

11 O God, thou who have cast us off, will thou the same not do?
And wilt not thou, even thou, O God, forth with our armies go?
12 Give us help from trouble: for vain i the help of man.

13 Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.

12 Do thou from trouble give us help, for man's help vain is all:
13 Through God we shall do valiantly our foes tread down he shall.
PSALM. CIX.
HOld not thy peace, O God of my praise.

2 For the mouth of the wicked,

HOld not thy peace, O thou that art the God of all my praise:
2 For that the mouth of them that are most wicked in their ways,
And the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me, they have spoken
against me with a lying tongue.

And of deceitful men the mouths against me opened be,
They with a tongue that lying is have spoken against me.
3 They compassed me about also with words of hatred: and fought against me
without a cause.

3 They also compassd me about with words from hatred brought,
And without any cause from me against me then they fought.
4 For my love they are my adversaries: but I give my self unto prayer.

5 And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.

4 They for my love mine enemies are, but I to prayer me move:
5 They me rewarded ill for good, and hatred for my love.
6 Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand.

7 When he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer become si^.

6 At his right hand let Satan stand, the wicked set him over:
7 Let him condemned be when he is judged, let sin become his prayer.
8 Let his days be few: and let another take his office.

9 Let his children be fatherless; and his wife a widow.

8 Few be his days, another then let thou his office take:
9 Let fatherless his children be, his wife a widow make.
10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their
bread also out of their desolate places.

10 His children still as vagabonds a begging let them go,
Let from their places desolate them seek their bread also.
11 Let the extortioner catch all that he has: and let the stranger spoil his
labor.

11 Let also the extortioner catch all that is on his soil,
And let those that are strangers come and all his labor spoil.
12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to
favor his fatherless children:

12 Let mercy none at all extend unto him in distress:
Nor any let to favor be his children fatherless.
13 Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following let their
name be blotted out.

13 And let thou his posterity be all cut off about,
And in the following age let then their name be bloted out.
14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord, and let not the
sin of his mother be blotted out.

14 O let his fathers wickedness with God remembered be,
And let not als his mothers sin be blotted out by thee.
15 Let them be before the Lord continually* that he may cut off the memory of
them from the earth.

15 Let them all be before the Lord, and that continually,
That he of them may from the earth cut of^ the memory.
16 Because that he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and
needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.

16 Because that he remembered not his mercy to impart,
But did poor needy persecute, to slay the broken in heart.
17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him* as he delighted not in
blessing, so let it be far from him.

17 As he also did cursing love so let it to him go:
As blessing was not his delight far from him be it so.
18 As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment: so let it
come into his bowels like water,

18 As he himself with cursing clothed as with his garment, so
Into his very bowels down like water let it go,
And like oil into his bones.

19 Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him: and for a girdle
wherewith he is girded continually.

And like the oil into his bones: 19 As garments let it be
Which covere him, for girdle als wherewith still girded's he.
20 Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord: and of them that
speak evil against my soul.

20 Let this of mine adversaries from God be the reward,
And of them that against my soul speak ill without regard.
21 But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy names sake: because thy mercy
is good, deliver thou me.

21 But do thou for thine own names sake, O God the Lord for me:
Because that good thy mercy is, let me delivered be.
22 For I am poor and needy; and my heart is wounded within me.

22 For I am in a poor estate, and in a needy case:
My heart it also wounded is within me in its place.
23 I am gone like the shadow when it declineth, I am tossed up and down as the
locust.

2^ Like as a shade when it declines, so likewise am I gone,
And as the locust also I am tossed up and down.
24 My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh fails of fatness.

25 I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me, they shaked
their heads.

24 My flesh of fatness fails all, my knees through fast are weak:
25 I their reproach became; they looked, and on me heads did shake.
26 Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy.

27 That they may know that this is thy hand, that thou Lord have done it.

26 Help me O Lord my God; O save in mercy me anon;
27 That they may know this is thy hand, and that thou have it done.
28 Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed, but
let thy servant rejoice.

28 Them let thou curse, but do thou bless: and when they do arise
Let them ashamed be; but let thy servant then rejoice.
29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a mantle.

29 Let all my foes be clothed with shame and let themselves them cover
Even with their own confusion as with a mantle over.
30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth: yea I will praise him among
the multitude.

30 I greatly with my mouth now will give praise unto the Lord,
Yea, I among the multitude will praise to him afford.
31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save him from those
that condemn his soul.

31 For he shall stand at the right hand of him that poor is then,
That he may him preserve from those that do his soul condemn.
PSALM. CX.
THe Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

THe Lord has said unto my Lord, seat at my right hand take,
Until that those thine enemies thy footstool I do make.
2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies.

2 The Lord he of thy strength the rod send out of Zion shall:
Do thou rule even in the midst of those thine enemies all.
3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness from the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy youth.

3 In the day of thy power shall be thy people willing fast:
In holy beauties from mornes womb dew of thy youth thou have.
4 The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedek.

4 The Lord himself thus has he sworn and will repent him never,
Of order of Melchisedeck thou art a priest for ever.
5 The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath.

6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies;

5 At thy right hand in day of wrath God strike through Kings he will,
6 Among the heathen he shall judge, the place with dead he will sill.
He shall wound the heads over many countries.

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.

He Will wound the heads of those that are set many countries over,
7 He Will in the way drink of the brook, he will lift the head therefore,
PSALM. CXI.
PRaise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart: in the
assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.

PRaise ye the Lord; with all my heart I Will praise the Lord alone
In assembly of upright men and congregation.
2 The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

3 His work is honorable and glorious: and his righteousness endures for
ever.

2 Gods works are great, sought out of all that therein have their pleasure,
3 His work is glorious, hon'rable, his justice lasts for ever.
4 He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and
full of compassion.

4 He wonderful his works has made to be remembered on,
The Lord is gracious, and he is full of compassion.
5 He has given meat unto them that fear ^im: he will be ever mindful of his
covenant.

5 Unto them all that do him fear meat also given has he,
And mindful of his Covenant he evermore will be.
6 He has showed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen.

6 He to his people of his works has showed the power large,
That of the heathen he may give to them the heritage.
7 The works of his hands are verity and judgment: all his commandments are
sure.

8 They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and uprightness.

7 Works of his hands, truth, judgment are, all is sure he does command:
8 They done in truth and uprightness for ever fast do stand.
9 He sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his covenant for ever:
holy and reverend is his Name.

9 He sent redemption to his folk the Covenant of his
He did command for ay; his Name holy and reverend is.
10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have
all they that do his commandments; his praise endures for ever.

10 Gods fear wisdoms beginning is; good understanding they
Have all that his commandments do: his praise endures for ay.
PRaise ye the Lord, blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights
greatly in his commandments.

PRaise ye the Lord, blessed is the man that fears the Lord aright,
That does in his commandments greatly himself delight.
2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be
blessed.

2 His seed shall surely mighty be even all the earth upon,
Of all the upright blessd shall be the generation.
3 Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endures for
ever.

3 And there shall be within his house both wealth and richesse sure;
Yea and the righteousness that is his for ever does endure.
4 Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness: he is gracious, and
full of compassion, and righteous.

4 In darkness there arises light to them that upright be,
Full of compassion, gracious and righteous is he.
5 A good man shows favor and lends; be will guide his affairs with
discretion.

5 A good man he does favor show, and also he does lend,
He with discretion his affairs will guide unto the end.
6 Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in overlasting
remembrance.

6 Assuredly for evermore not moved be shall he,
In everlasting remembrance the righteous shall be.
7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord.

7 He shall not be afraid of what ill tidings can afford,
His heart within him fixed is by trusting in the Lord.
8 His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire
upon his enemies.

8 His heart it is established, he not afraid shall be,
Until upon his enemies that his desire he see.
9 He has dispersed, he has given to the poor: his righteousness endures
for ever: his horn shall be exalted with honor.

9 He has dispersd and given to poor, his righteousness for ever
Endures fast; his horn it shall exalted be with honor.
10 The wicked shall see it, and ^e grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and
melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.

10 The wicked greived shall it see, his teeth he gnashing all
Shall melt away; and the desire of ill men perish shall.
PSALM. CXIII.
PRaise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord: praise the Name of the
Lord.

2 Blessed be the Name of the Lord: from this time forth and for evermore.

PRaise God, O ye Gods servants praise, the Name of God praise ye:
2 From this time forth the Name of God for ever blessed be.
3 From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same: the Lords Name
is to be praised.

3 Even from the rising of the sun unto his going down,
The Name of him that is the Lord must praisd be with renown.
4 The Lord is high above all nations: and his glory above the heavens.

4 The Lord above all Nations exalted high does prove,
The glory that to him belongs the heavens is above.
5 Who is like unto the Lord our God: who dwells on high:

6 Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the
earth?

5 To God our Lord that dwells on high O who is like in worth:
6 Himself that humbles to behold things in the heaven and earth?
7 He raises up the poor out of the dust: and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill*

8 That he may set him with Princes: even with the Princes of his people.

7 From dust he does the poor raise up from dunghill needy lift:
8 That he with Princes, princes of his people may him set.
9 He makes the barren woman to keep house; to be a joyful mother of
children: Praise ye the Lord.

9 The barren woman to keep house he makes, and to be
A mother of her children glade; praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM. CXIV.
WHen Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange
language:

WHen those that were of Israel went out of Egypt there;
And Jacobs house a people from that of strange language were.
2 Judah was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion.

3 The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back.

2 His Sanctuary Judah was, his Kingdom was Israel.
3 The sea it saw, and it did flee, driven back was Jordan all.
4 The mountains skipped like rams: and the little hills like lambs.

5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest, thou Jordan, that thou wast
driven back?

4 Like rams the mountains, little hills like lambs did skipping make:
5 Why fledst thou sea? thou Jordan als that thou wast driven back.
6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hills like lambs?

6 And likewise ye the mountains high that ye did skip like rams?
And ye the hills that little are like to the younger lambs?
7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God
of Jacob:

7 Now at the presence of the Lord earth tremble thou for fear:
Yea at the presence of the God of Jacob to him dear.
8 Which turned the rock into a standing water: the flint into a fountain of
waters.

8 Which into waters turned the rock there standing like a lake,
And in the flint a fountain fair of waters then did make.
PSALM. CXV.
NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory: for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake.

NOt to us Lord, not unto us, but do thou glory take
Unto thy Name, both for thy truth and for thy mercies sake.
2 Wherefore should the heathen say: Where is now their God?

3 But our God is in the heavens: he has done whatsoever he pleased.

2 Wherefore should thus the heathen say, where is their God now gone?
But in the heavens is our God, he what he pleased has done.
4 Their idols are silver and gold: the work of men's hands.

5 They have mouths, but they speak not* eyes have they, but they see not.

4 Their idols silver are and gold, works of men's hands they be:
5 Mouths have they, but they do not speak, eyes have they but not see.
6 They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not.

7 They have hands but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not:
neither speak they through their throat.

6 Ears have they but hear not, they have a nose but smell they not:
7 Their hands not handle, feet not walk, nor speak they through their throat.
8 They that make them, are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them.

9 O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.

8 They that them make are like to them, who trust in them, so be;
9 O Israel trust thou in the Lord, their help and shield is he.
10 O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord* he is their help and their shield.

11 Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.

10 O Aarons house trust in the Lord; their help and shield is he,
11 Ye that fear God trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he.
12 The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us, he will bless the
house of Israel: he will bless the house of Aaron.

12 The Lord of us has mindful been, yea he will bless us still,
He will bless Isra'ls house, the house of Aaron bless he will.
13 He will bless them that fear the Lord* both small and great.

14 The Lord shall increase you more and more: you, and your children.

13 He will them bless that fear the Lord, and that both great and small:
14 The Lord increase you more and more you and your children shall.
15 You are blessed of the Lord: which made heaven and earth.

16 The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords: but the earth has he given to
the children of men.

5 You of the Lord all blessed are, which made the earth and heaven:
6 The heaven, the heavens are Gods, but he earth to men's sons has given.
17 The dead praise not the Lord: neither any that go down into silence.

18 But we will bless the Lord, from this time forth and for overmore. Praise
the Lord.

17 The dead, nor who to silence go Gods praise do not record*
18 But henceforth and for evermore we will bless God; praise the Lord.
PSALM. CXVI.
I Love the Lord because he has heard my voice, and my supplications.

2 Because he has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

I Love the Lord, because my voice, and prayers heard has he:
2 I while I live will call on him who bowed his ear to me.
3 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell got hold upon me: I
found trouble and sorrow.

3 The sorrows that I had of death encompassed me round;
And on me pains of hell got hold, I trouble sorrow found.
4 Then called I upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my
soul.

4 Upon the Name then of the Lord I called in this speech:
Do thou deliver this my soul, O Lord, I thee beseech.
5 Gracious is the Lord, and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.

6 The Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.

5 God gracious and righteous is, yea mercifull's our Lord*
6 God saves the simple; he to me brought low, did help afford.
7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee.

7 Do thou return unto thy rest O thou my soul in me,
For bountifully has the Lord in all things dealt with thee*
8 For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.

^ For this my soul it was from death delivered by thee,
Mine eyes from tears, and als my feet from falling thou did free.
9 I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living.

10 I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.

9 I in the land of living men will walk the Lord before:
10 I did believe, therefore I spoke: I was afflicted sore.
11 I said in my have; All men are liers.

12 What shall I render unto the Lord* for all his benefits toward me?

11 When I was in my haste, I said, that all men liers be;
12 What shall I render God for all his benefits to me?
13 I will take the cup of salvation: and call upon the Name of the Lord.

14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord: now in the presence of all his people.

13 I Will of salvation take the cup, on Gods Name will I call:
14 I Will pay my vows now to the Lord before his people all:
15 Precious in the sight of the Lord: is the death of his saints.

16 O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds.

15 In Gods sight his Saints death is dear: 16 Lord I Am thy servant fast,
Thy servant I Am, thy handmaids son* my bonds thou loosed have.
17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and will call upon the
Name of the Lord.

18 I will pay my vows unto the Lord* now in the presence of all his people.

17 I Will give thee sacrifice of thanks, and on Gods Name will call:
18 I Will to the Lord now pay my vows before his people all.
19 In the courts of the Lords house* in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise
ye the Lord.

19 Within the courts of Gods own house within the midst of thee,
O city of Jerusalem praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM CXVII.
O Praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.

O Give ye praise unto the Lord, ye nations all that be:
And also ye the people all, unto him praise give ye.
2 For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the Lord
endures for ever. Praise ye the Lord.

2 For great's his kindness merciful he does to us afford,
The Lord his truth for ever lasts, O do ye praise the Lord.
PSALM. CXVIII.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endures for
ever.

2 Let Israel now say: that his mercy endures for ever.

O Thank the Lord, for he is good his mercy lasts for ay:
2 That still his mercy does endure let Israel now say.
3 Let the house of Aaron now say: that his mercy endures for ever.

4 Let them now that fear the Lord, say: that his mercy endures for ever.

3 And that for ay his mercy lasts, let Aarons house now say:
4 Let them now say that fear the Lord, his mercy lasts for ay.
5 I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me in a
large place.

5 I called then upon the Lord when I was in distress:
The Lord to me an answer gave and he enlarged my place.
6 The Lord is on my side, I will not fear; what can man do unto me?

6 The Lord himself is on my side, no fear in me shall be:
What thing is it that any man can now do unto me?
7 The Lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon them that hate me.

7 The Lord does take my part with them that help give unto me,
Therefore upon them that me hate I my desire shall see.
8 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put confidence in man.

9 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put confidence in princes.

8 It Is better God to trust then put in man our confidence:
It better is to trust in God then trust in any Prince.
10 All nations compassed me about: but in the Name of the Lord will I destroy
them.

10 All nations have round about encompassed me still,
But in the Name of God the Lord destroy them all I will.
11 They compassed me about, yea, they compassed me about: but in the Name of
the Lord I will destroy them.

11 They compassd me about, yea me about compassed they,
But in the name of God the Lord I will them all destroy.
12 They compassed me about like bees, they are quenched as the fire of thorns:
for in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them.

12 Like bees they compast me about, as fire of thorns so they
Are quenched now; for I them all in Gods name will destroy.
13 Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Lord helped me.

14 The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.

13 That I might fall thou sore did thrust, but then God helped me:
14 God my salvation is become, my strength and song is he.
15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation i^ in the tabernacles of the
righteous: the right hand of the Lord does valiantly.

15 In tabernacles of the just of safety and of joy
The voice it is; for the right hand of God does valiantly.
16 The right hand of the Lord is exalted the right hand of the Lord does
valiantly.

16 The right hand surely of the Lord exalted is on hy,
The right hand of the mighty Lord does very valiantly.
17 I shall not die, but live: and declare (...) works of the Lord.

18 The Lord has chastned me sore: but (...) has not given me over unto death.

17 I shall not die, but live, and shall the works of God discover:
18 The Lord he has me chastned sore, but not to death given over.
19 Open to me the gates of righteousness: will go into them, and I will
praise the Lord.

9 Do ye make open unto me the gates of righteousness,
And I will enter into them, and I the Lord will praise.
20 This gate of the Lord: into which the righteous shall enter.

21 I will praise thee, for thou have heard me: and art become my salvation.

20 This is the gate of God, in which the righteous enter shall:
21 I Will praise thee for thou have me heard, and art my safety all.
22 The stone which the builders refused is become the head- stone of the
corner.

23 This is the Lords doing: it is mavelous in our eyes.

22 The stone's become head corner stone, which builders did refuse:
23 This is the doing of the Lord, in our eyes mavelous.
24 This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it.

25 Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity.

24 This is the day the Lord has made, we will joy and glad in it be.
25 Now save I pray thee, Lord, I pray send now prosperity.
26 Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord: we have blessed you out
of the house of the Lord.

26 He that comes in the Name of God, O blessed let him be,
Out of the house that is the Lords, you blessed all have we.
27 God is the Lord* which has showed (...) light, bind the sacrifice with
cords, even unto the horse of the altar.

27 God is the Lord which unto us his light has showed so,
Bind ye the sacrifice with cords, even altars horns unto.
28 Thou art my God, and I will praise thee thou art my God, I will exalt thee.

29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.

28 Thou art my God I Will thee exalt, my God thee praise I will*
29 O thank the Lord for he is good, his mercy lasts still.
PSALM CXIX.
Aleph*
BLessed are the undefiled in the way* who walk in the law of the Lord,

2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies* and that seek him with the whole
heart.

Blessed are the undefiled in way, who from Gods law not part:
2 And blessed that keep his laws, and him do seek with all the heart.
3 They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

4 Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.

3 They in his ways do walk, they als do no iniquity,
4 Thou have commanded us to keep thy preceps diligently.
5 O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!

6 Then shall I not be ashamed: when I have respect unto all thy commandments.

5 O that thy statutes for to keep thou would my ways direct:
6 Then shall I not be shamed when I thy precepts all respect.
7 I will praise thee with uprightness of heart: when I shall have learned thy
righteous judgments.

8 I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.

7 With upright heart I Will praise, when learned thy judgments right have I:
8 I will thy statuts keep; O not forsake me utterly.
Beth.
9 Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heeed thereto
according to thy word.

9 Wherewithal shall a man that is young his way well cleanse indeed?
According to thy holy Word by thereto taking heed.
10 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy
commandments.

10 With all my heart I have thee sought, O let me not that so
From these commandments of thine I should a wandering go.
11 Thy word have I hid in my heart: that I might not sin against thee.

12 Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.

11 I in my heart thy word have hid, lest sin I should against thee:
12 O thou the Lord, thou blessed art, thy statuts teach thou me.
13 With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

14 I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies: as much as in all riches.

13 The judgments of thy mouth eachone my lips declared have:
14 Much joy thy testimonies way as richesse all me gave.
15 I will meditate in thy precepts: and have respect unto thy ways.

16 I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.

15 I Will in thy precepts meditate, and will thy ways respect:
16 I Will in thy statuts me delight, thy word I Will not forget.
Gimel.
17 Deal bountifully with thy servant: that I may live, and keep thy word.

17 With him now that thy servant is deal bountifully, Lord,
That so I may be made to live and for to keep thy word.
18 Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.

19 I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.

18 Mine eyes unclose that of thy law the wonders I may see:
19 I in the earth a stranger am, hide not thy laws from me.
20 My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times.

20 My soul it does within me break even for the longing great
That to the judgments that are thine at all times is in it.
21 Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed: which do err from thy
commandments.

22 Remove from me reproach and contempt: for I have kept thy testimonies.

21 Thou have rebuked the cursed proud which from thy precepts err:
22 From me, for I thy laws have keept, reproach, contempt, put far.
23 Princes also did sit, and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes.

23 The Princes they did sit also and speak against me ill,
But meditate thy servant did upon thy statuts still.
24 Thy testimonies also are my delight: and my counselors.

24 The chief delight of all my heart thy testimonies be
And they, what ever I have to do, are counselors to me.
Daleth.
25 My soul cleaves unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word.

26 I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.

25 My soul to dust cleaves, quicken me according to thy word.
26 My ways I showed, and me thou heardst: teach me thy statutes, Lord.
27 Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works.

27 Make me to understand the way of those thy precepts all,
So of thy works that wondrous are with knowledge talk I shall.
28 My soul melts away for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy
word.

28 My troubled soul does melt away, for heaviness, O Lord,
In mercy do thou strengthen me, according to thy word.
29 Remove from me the way of lying; and grant me thy law graciously.

29 From me the way of lying all removed let it be,
And graciously thy holy law do thou grant unto me.
30 I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.

30 The way that is of truth I have now chosen by and by;
And all the judgments that are thine before me laid have I.
31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies, O Lord, put me not to shame.

32 I will run the way of thy commandments: when thou shall enlarge my heart.

31 I to thy testimonies stuck, let shame not make me smart,
32 Thy precepts way I Will run, when as thou shall enlarge my heart.
He.
33 Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the end.

33 Lord, of thy statutes teach thou me the way thou do intend;
And I shall then most carefully it keep unto the end.
34 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea I shall observe it
with my whole heart.

34 Give understanding unto me, and I in every part
Shall keep thy law; yea it I shall observe with all my heart.
35 Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein do I delight.

36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.

35 Make me go in thy precepts path, for I delight therein:
36 My heart unto thy testimonies and not to greed incline.
37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity* and quicken thou me in thy way.

38 Stablish thy word unto thy servant: who is devoted to thy fear.

37 From folly turn mine eyes, and in thy way me quicken here:
38 Thy word make to thy servant sure devoted to thy fear.
39 Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.

40 Behold, I have longed after thy precepts, quicken me in thy righteousness.

39 My feared reproach turn thou away for good thy judgments be:
40 Lo for thy precepts I have longed, in justice quicken me.
Vau.
41 Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to
thy word.

41 And do thou let thy mercies als come unto me, O Lord,
Even the salvation that is thine, according to thy word.
42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust in
thy word:

42 So shall I have wherewith I may an answer well afford
Unto him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word.
43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in
thy judgments.

43 The word of truth out of my mouth take thou not utterly,
For in the judgments that are thine my hope it does rely.
44 So shall I keep thy law continually: for ever and ever.

45 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.

44 So I Will for ever and ever keep thy law continually:
45 Because that I thy precepts seek I Will walk at liberty.
46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed.

47 And I will delight my self in thy commandments which I have loved.

46 I Will not be shamed when of thy laws to Kings I mention make*
47 In thy commands which I have loved, I my delight will take.
48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have loved: and
I will meditate in thy statutes.

48 To thy beloved commandments my hands lift up I will,
And I will also meditate upon thy statutes still.
Zain.
49 Remember the word unto thy servant: upon which thou have caused me to hope.

49 Remember on the word thou did unto thy servant say,
Upon the which thou have in hope me caused for to stay.
50 This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.

50 This is in mine affliction my comfort made to be,
For thine own word that lively is has surely quickened me.
51 The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from
thy law.

51 Me greatly in derision have had the proud in mind:
Yet I for that have not at all once from thy law declined.
52 I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord: and have comforted my self.

52 The judgeme^ts which are thine, O Lord, which thou of old us gave
I did remember, and my self comforted so I have.
53 Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law.

54 Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.

53 Because ill men forsake thy law, much horror did me take:
54 In house of this my pilgrimage thy laws my songs I make.
55 I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law.

56 This I had: because I kept thy precepts.

55 Thy Name by night remembered I thy law was kept by me:
56 Because I did thy precepts keep I this have had from thee.
Cheth.
57 Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have said that I would keep thy words.

57 Thou surely art my portion which I have choic'd, O Lord,
I have with great assurance said, that I would keep thy word.
58 I entreated thy favor with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according
to thy word.

58 With all my heart I did entreat the favor that is in thee,
Do thou according to thy word be merciful to me.
59 I thought on my ways: and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

60 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

59 My feet unto thy laws I turned, I thought upon my way:
60 To keep thy precepts I made have, and did not then delay.
61 The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.

62 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

61 The wicked bands have robbed me, I not forgot thy laws:
62 To rise at midnight thee to thank, thy judgments right me cause:
63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and of them that keep thy
precepts.

64 The earth* O Lord, to full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.

63 I am companion of all that thee fear and keep thy word*
64 The earth is of thy mercy full, thy statutes teach me, Lord.
Toth.
65 Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy word.

66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments.

65 Thou well have with thy servant dealt after thy word O Lord:
66 Me judgment good and knowledge teach for I believe thy word.
67 Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.

68 Thou art good, and do good: teach me thy statutes*

67 Ere I afflicted was I strayed, but now thy word I keep:
68 Thou both art good and do good, teach me thy statutes deep.
69 The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with
my whole heart.

69 The proud they forged have a ly against me for my smart,
But I the precepts given by thee will keep with all my heart.
70 Their heart is as fat as grease: but I delight in thy law.

71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted: that I might learn thy
statutes.

70 Their heart as fat as grease it is, I in thy law delight:
71 It Is good that I afflicted was, that learn thy laws I might.
72 The law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands of gold and silver.

72 The law that comes from thy mouth is better unto me
Then of both gold and silver als the many thousands be.
Jod.
73 Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: give me understanding that I may
learn thy commandments.

73 Thy hands me made and fashioned have, do thou now unto me
Give understanding that I may learn precepts given by thee.
74 They that fear thee will be glade when they see me: because I have hoped in
thy word.

74 They that thee fear when they me see, will be with one accord
Exceeding glade, because that I have hoped in thy word.
75 I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me.

75 That very right thy judgments are, O Lord, I well do know,
And that thou in thy faithfulness afflicted have me now.
76 Let I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort: according to
thy word unto thy servant.

76 O let thy kindness merciful be for my comfort Lord,
I thee do pray; according as thy servant has thy word.
77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.

77 Thy tender mercies unto me let come, that in thy sight
I so may live, for that thy law is only my delight.
78 Let the proud be ashamed, for they dealt perversely with me without a cause:
but I will meditate in thy precepts.

78 O let the proud ashamed be, for they without a cause
Have most perversely dealt with me; but muse I Will in thy laws.
79 Let those that fear thee turn unto me: and those that have known thy
testimonies.

80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.

79 Who fear thee and have known thy laws let them turn unto me:
80 Sound in thy statuts make my heart, that I ashamed not be.
Caph.
81 My soul faints for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.

82 Mine eyes fail for thy word: saying, When will thou comfort me?

81 My soul for thy salvation faints, I hope in words from thee:
82 Mine eyes fail for thy word; I say, when will thou comfort me?
83 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy
statutes.

83 For like a bottell I Am become that in the smoke is set,
Yet I the statutes that are thine do not at all forget.
84 How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou execute judgment on
them that persecute me?

84 How many are thy servants days? when will thou execute
The judgment on those wicked men that do me peresecute?
85 The proud have dug pits for me: which are not after thy law.

85 They that are proud have dug pits for me therein to draw,
Which things are not in any way according to thy law.
86 All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfullie; help
thou me.

86 All thy commandments also for ever faithful be;
They wrongfully me persecute, help give thou unto me.
87 They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy precepts.

87 They had almost in fury great consumed me on earth,
But I did not at all forsake thy precepts of great worth.
88 Quicken me after thy loving kindness: so shall I keep the testimonte of
thy mouth.

88 After thy loving kindness, Lord, do thou now quicken me,
The testimony of thy mouth so by me kept shall be.
Lamed.
89 For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.

90 Thy faithfulness is unto all generations:

89 Thy word for ever is, O Lord, in heaven settled fast:
90 Unto all generations thy faithfulness does last.
Thou have established the earth, and it abides.

91 They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.

The earth thou have established, and it abides by thee:
91 This day they last as thou ordained, for all thy servants be.
92 Unless thy law had been my delights: I should then have perished in mine
affliction.

92 Unless the law that thou have given had been my whole delight,
I in my great affliction should then have perished quite.
93 I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou have quickened me.

94 I am thine, save me: for I have soug^ thy precepts.

63 Thy precepts I will never forget, for they have quickened me,
94 I Am thine, me save, for I have sought the precepts given by thee.
95 The wicked have waited for me to d^ stroy me: but I will consider thy
testemonies.

95 The wicked for me waited have me to destroy for ever:
But I thy testimonies will most carefully consider.
96 I have seen an end of all perfection but thy commandment is exceeding
broad.

96 An end of all perfection here have I seen, O God,
But as for thy commandment it is exceeding broad.
Mem.
97 O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

97 O how do I most dearly love the law that is from thee gone,
Even all the day long it is made my meditation.
98 Thou through thy commandments ha^ made me wiser then mine enemies: for
they (...) ever with me.

98 Through thy commandments thou have me wiser made to be
Then those that are mine enemies for they are still with me.
99 I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my
meditation.

99 Then all my teachers now I have more understanding far,
For that my meditations thy Testimonies are.
100 I understand more then the ancients: because I keep thy precepts.

101 I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word.

100 Then the Ancients more I know, because I keep thy precepts way
101 I from ill ways my feet refrained that keep thy word I may.
102 I have not departed from thy judgments for thou have taught me.

102 I from the judgments that are thine yet never did depart,
For thou by them in mercy have me taught within my heart.
103 How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth.

103 O how unto my taste are sweet the words that come from thee:
Yea then the honey to my mouth they sweeter are to me.
104 Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.

104 I through the precepts given by thee do understanding get,
Therefore I every way that is false with all my heart do hate.
Nun.
105 Thy word is a lamp unto my feet: and a light unto my path,

106 I have sworn, and I will perform it: that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.

105 Thy word is to my feet a lamp, and to my path a light:
106 I swear, and I will it perform, to keep thy judgments right.
107 I am afflicted very much: quicken O Lord, according unto thy word.

107 I am, yea even very much afflicted now, O Lord
In mercy do thou quicken me, according to thy word.
108 Accept, I beseech thee, the free will offerings of my mouth, O Lord and
teach me the judgments.

108 The free will offerings of my mouth accept I thee beseech,
And do thou also me O Lord thy judgments clearly teach.
109 My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.

110 The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts.

109 My soul is ever in my hand thy law I not forgot:
110 Ill men for me laid snares, yet from thy precepts erred I not.
111 Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the
rejoicing of my heart.

111 For ever as an heritage thy testimonies part
I taken have, for that they are rejoicing of my heart.
112 I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end.

112 I carefully inclined have my heart for to attend,
That I thy statutes might perform always even to the end.
Samech.
113 I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.

114 Thou art my hiding place, and my shield: I hope in thy word.

113 Thoughts that are vain I do them hate but love thy law O Lord:
114 Thou arr my hiding place and shield, my hope is in thy word.
115 Depart from me, ye evil doers: for I will keep the commandments of my
God.

115 Do ye depart from me all ye that doers are of ill,
For the commandments of my God to keep shall be my will.
116 Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
ashamed of my hope.

116 According to thy word that I may live uphold thou me:
And let me not of this my hope at all ashamed be.
117 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy
statutes continually.

117 Do thou me with thy hand hold up and safe then be shall I,
And to thy statuts I will have respect continually.
118 Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for their
deceit is falsehood.

118 Them all that from thy statuts err thou have trod down for this,
For the deceit that is in them it only falsehood is.
119 Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I
love thy testimonies.

119 Thou all the wicked of the earth like dross do far remove:
Therefore thy Testimonies all with all my heart I love.
120 My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments.

120 This flesh of mine does tremble all and that for fear of thee;
Thy judgments which most dreadful are make me afraid to be.
Ain.
121 I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.

121 I justice and right judgment als have done to evry one:
To those that mine oppressors are leave thou me not alone.
122 Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.

123 Mine eyes fall for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.

122 Thy servants surety be for good let proud me not oppress.
123 Mine eyes for thy salvation fail and word of righteousness.
124 Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes.

125 I am thy servant, give me understanding: that I may know thy testimonies.

124 In mercy with thy servant deal, thy statuts teach me now:
125 I am thy servant, wisdom give that I thy laws may know;
126 It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy law.

127 Therefore I love thy commandments: above gold, yea, above fine gold.

126 It Is time thou work Lord, for they have made void the law that is thine:
127 Therefore thy precepts more I love then gold, yea gold most fine.
128 Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right: and
I hate every false way.

128 Therefore concerning all things I esteem thy precepts great
All to be right, and every way that false is I do hate.
Pe.
129 Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.

129 The testimonies that are thine most wonderful they are;
My soul therefore it ever does observe them all with care.
130 The entrance of thy words gives light: it gives understanding unto the
simple.

131 I opened my mouth, and panted; for I longed for thy commandments.

130 The entrance of thy word gives light, makes simple understand,
131 My mouth I opned, and did pant* I longed for thy command:
132 Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy Name.

132 Look thou on me, and merciful do thou unto me prove,
As thou in use art for to do to those thy name that love.
133 Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over
me.

133 O let thou in thy holy word my steps well ordered be*
Let no iniquity at all, dominion have ov're me.
134 Deliver me from the oppression of man; so will I keep thy precepts.

135 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant and teach me thy statutes.

134 From man's oppression save thou me: so keep thy laws I will:
135 Thy face make on thy servant shine, teach me thy statuts still.
136 Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy law.

136 Of waters rivers down mine eyes do run, because I saw,
That they that wickedly are set keep not thy holy law.
Tsadi.
137 Righteous art thou, O Lord: and upright are thy judgments.

138 Thy testimonies that thou have commanded, are righteous: and very
faithful.

137 Lord thou art righteous, upright are the judgments given by thee:
138 The Testimonies thou command'st right and most faithful be.
139 My zeal has consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words

139 The zeal that is within my heart it has consumed me,
Because that by mine enemies thy words forgotten be.
140 Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loves it.

141 I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.

140 Thy word's most pure, on it therefore thy servants love is set:
141 Small and despised I am, yet I thy precepts not forget.
142 Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy law is the
truth.

142 An everlasting righteousness thy righteousness is sure,
The law also that thou have given the very truth is pure,
243 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my
delight.

143 Much trouble and als anguish great have taken hold on me:
And yet those thy commandments to me delights they be.
144 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
understanding, and I shall live.

144 Thy testimonies righteousness is everlasting all.
Give understanding unto me, and so then live I shall.
Koph.
145 I cried with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy statutes,

146 I cried unto thee, save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

145 With my whole heart, Lord hear, Icri'd thy statutes keep I will:
146 I cried to thee, save me; I Will keep thy testimonies still.
147 I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word.

147 I of the morning did prevent the dawning, and did cry;
And in the word that is from thee my hope it did rely.
148 Mine eyes prevent the night watches: ^at I might meditate in thy word.

148 Mine eyes do timeously prevent the watches of the night,
That in thy word with all my heart then meditate I might.
149 Hear my voice according unto thy loving kindness: O Lord, quicken me
according to (...) judgment.

149 After thy loving kindness let my voice be heard by thee,
According to thy judgments Lord do thou now quicken me.
150 They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law.

151 Thou art near, O Lord: all thy commandments are truth.

150 Who follow mischief they draw nigh, they from thy laws are far:
151 But thou art near Lord, and the truth all thy comandements are.
152 Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old: that thou have founded
them for ever.

152 As for thy testimonies all of old this have I tried
That thou have surely founded them for ever to abide.
Resh.
153 Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.

153 Consider mine affliction and so deliver me,
For I do not forget the law which has been given by thee.
154 Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.

155 Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.

154 After thy word deliver me, me quicken, plead my cause:
155 Salvation's from the wicked far, for they seek not thy laws.
156 Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy
judgments.

156 Thy mercies that most tender are, they great in number be,
According to thy judgments all do thou, Lord, quicken me.
157 Many are my persecutors and mine enemies: yet do I not decline from thy
testimonies.

157 My persecutors many are, and enemies that are mine,
Yet from thy testimonies all I do not now decline.
158 I behold the transgressors, and was greived: because they kept not thy
word.

159 Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy
loving kindness.

158 I saw transgressors, and was grieved, for they not keept thy word;
159 See how thy laws I love, as thou art kind, me quicken Lord.
160 Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous
judgments endures for ever.

160 From the beginning of all things thy word the truth is pure,
Thy righteous judgments every one for ever do endure.
Schin.
161 Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in aw of
thy word.

161 The princes did me persecute when as no cause they saw,
But of the word that from thee is my heart does stand in aw.
162 I rejoice at thy word: as one that finds great spoil.

163 I hate and abhor lying,: but thy law do I love.

162 ^ at thy word rejoice, as one that finds spoil that is great*
163 Thy law I love, but lying all I do abhor and hate.
164 Seven times a day do ^ praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.

165 Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them.

164 Sev*n times a day I do thee praise who do right judgment send:
165 Great peace have they which love thy law, nothing shall them offend.
166 Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation: and done thy commandments.

167 My soul has kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.

166 I hoped for thy salvation, Lord, thy precepts done have I:
167 My soul has kept thy laws, and them I love exceedingly.
168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

168 Thy testimonies I have kept and als thy precepts more,
For all my ways wherein I walk are ever theebefore.
Tau.
169 Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according
to thy word.

169 Before thee let my cry come near O thou who art my Lord:
Give understanding unto me according to thy word.
170 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.

171 My lips shall utter praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes.

170 Let my request before thee come, after thy word me raise:
171 When thou thy statutes have me taught my lips shall utter praise.
172 My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteousness.

172 My tongue of thy most blessed word the speeches shall express,
For all those thy commandments they are even righteousness.
173 Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.

174 I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord: and thy law is my delight.

173 Now let thine hand give help to me, who choosd thy precepts right:
174 I longed for rhy salvation, Lord; thy law is my delight.
175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgments help me.

175 O let my soul live, and it shall give praises unto thee,
And let thy judgments for a help be also unto me.
176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant: for I do not
forget thy commandments.

176 I like a sheep that is lost have strayed, seek me thy servant yet,
For those commandments of thine I do not now forget.
PSALM. CXX.
IN my distress I cried unto the Lord: and he heard me.

2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips and from a deceitful tongue.

UNto the Lord in my distress I cried, and he me heard:
2 From lying lips, deceitful tongues my soul Lord do thou guard:
3 What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false
tongue?

4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of Juniper.

3 What shall be given thee? Or what shall be done false tongue to thee?
4 Sharp arrows of the strong, with coals of Juniper that be:
5 Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech: that I dwell in the tents of Kedar.

5 Now woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech thus so long,
That I do dwell within the tents to Kedar that belong.
6 My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace.

7 I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.

6 My soul it has long dwelt with him that hates peace so far:
7 I am for peace; but when I speak, they ever are for war.
PSALM. CXXI.
I Will lift mine eyes unto the hills: from whence comes my help.

2 My help comes from the Lord: which made heaven and earth.

UP to the hills I Will lift mine eyes from whence my help comes forth,
2 My help it comes from the Lord which heaven made and earth.
3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keeps thee will not
slumber.

4 Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep.

3 Thy foot he will not let move; he will not slumber that thee keeps,
4 Behold he that keeps Israel he slumbers not, nor sleeps.
5 The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

6 The Sun shall not smite thee by day: nor the Moon by night.

5 The Lord thee keeps; on thy right hand the Lord thy shade is right:
6 The Sun shall not thee smite by day, nor yet the Moon by night.
7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy soul.

8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time
forth, and even for evermore.

7 The Lord shall keep thy soul, he shall preserve thee from all ill:
8 The Lord thy going out and in, keep henceforth ever will.
PSALM. CXXII.
I Was glade when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.

I Was most glade when as that they unto me said, this word,
Let us now go into the house of him that is the Lord.
2 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

3 Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together.

2 Jerusalem our feet shall stand within thy gates for ever:
3 Jeruslem's as a city built that is compact together.
4 Whether the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
Israel: to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord.

4 Yea whether all the tribes go up tribes which the Lord does claim,
To Isreal's testimony there to thank the Lord his Name.
5 For there are set thrones of judgment: the thrones of the house of David.

5 For in that place are set the thrones of judgment righteous,
Yea even the most glorious thrones of David his own house.
6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

7 Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

6 Pray for peace of Jerusalem, who love thee prosper shall:
7 In palaces prosperity, peace be within thy wall.
8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I will now say, Peace be within thee.

9 Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.

For brethren and companions mine peace be in thee I Will speak:
9 For the house of the Lord our God thy good now I will seek.
PSALM CXXIII.
UNto thee lift I up mine yes: thou that dwell in the heavens.

2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters,

TO thee I lift mine eyes, O thou that in the heavens do dwell:
2 Behold as servants eyes unto their masters hands look well,
And as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.

As maidens eyes her mistress hand so our eyes also thus
Wait on the Lord our God, till he have mercy upon us.
3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly
filled with contempt.

3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy us upon;
For with contempt exceedingly we filled are evry one.
4 Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease:
and with the contempt of the proud.

4 Our soul it is exceedingly filled with the scorning lewd
Of men at ease; and with contempt of them that are so proud.
PSALM. CXXIV.
IF it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may Israel say.

2 If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against
us.

IF God had not been on our side, may Israel now say,
^ If God had not been our side when men rose us to slay.
3 Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.

4 Then the waters had overwhelmed us; the stream had gone over our soul.

3 They had us swallowed quick, when as against us their wrath was kindled,
4 Then overwhelmed us waters had; the stream our soul had covered.
5 Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.

6 Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.

5 Then likewise waters that are proud gone ov're our soul had they:
6 Blessed be the Lord who to their teeth not gave us as a prey.
7 Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is
broken, and we are escaped.

7 Our soul's escaped as a bird out of the foulers snare*
The snare in pieces broken is; and we escaped are.
8 Our help is in the Name of the Lord: who made heaven and earth.

8 In the Name of the Lord it is from whence we have our aid:
Who both the heavens that are high, and als the earth has made.
PSALM. CXXV.
THey that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever.

THey in the Lord that put their trust shall be as Zion hill,
Which thence can not removed be, but it abides still.
2 As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people, from henceforth even for ever.

2 As round about Jerusalem the mountains are together,
So from henceforth about thy folk the Lord is even for ever.
3 For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest
the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.

3 For on the righteous lot the rod of wicked shall not ly,
Lest that the righteous forth their hands put to iniquity.
4 Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good: and to them that are upright in
their hearts.

4 Do good, O Lord unto all those that good are in thy sight;
And unto evry one of them that are in heart upright.
5 As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.

5 As for such as do turn aside unto their crooked way,
With ill men forth God shall them lead; on Israel peace shall stay.
PSALM. CXXVI.
WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion: we were like them that dream.

WHen as Zions captivity the Lord did turn again,
At that time we were like to them that in a dream remain.
2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then
said they among the heathen, The Lord has done great things for them.

2 Our mouth with laughter, and our tongue with singing filled was then:
They'mong the heathen said; great things God has done for those men.
3. The Lord has done great things for us; whereof we are glade.

4 Turn again our captivity, O Lord: as the streams in the south.

3 The Lord has great things done for us whereof we glade remain:
4 O Lord turn our captivity as streams in south again.
5 They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

6 He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rojoicing: bringing his sheaves with him.

5 Who sow in tears shall reap in joy,
6 Who weeps and goes forth
Seed precious bearing, sure shall turn and bring his sheaves with mirth.
PSALM. CXXVII.
EXcept the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

EXcept the Lord do build the house, who build in vain take pain:
Except the Lord the city keep, the watchman wakes in vain.
2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
sorrows: for so he gives his beloved sleep.

2 Early to rise for you it is vain, and late up sitting keep,
And sorrows bread eat; for so he gives his Beloved sleep.
3 Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his
reward.

4 As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man: so are children of the youth.

3 Lo, children are Gods heritage* wombs fruit his gift also:
4 As arrows in a strong man's hand sons of the youth are so*
5 Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, they shall not*be
ashamed: but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.

5 Who has his quiver full of them a happy man is he,
With the enemies in the gate they will speak they not ashamed shall be.
PSALM CXXVIII.
BLessed is every one that fears the Lord: that walks in his ways.

AMong the people evry one is surely blessed always,
That from his heart does fear the Lord, that walks in his ways.
2 For thou shall ^at the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.

2 For even the labor of thy hands by thee shall eaten be,
Thou shall be happy, and it shall be also well with thee.
3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house, thy
children like olive plants: round about thy table.

3 Thy wife shall as a fruitful vine by thy house sides be found,
Thy children like the Olive plants about thy table round.
4 Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed, that seareth the Lord.

5 The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion:

4 Behold the man that fears the Lord, he thus shall blessed be:
5 The Lord shall out of Zion send his blessings unto thee.
And thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all ^he days of thy life.

6 Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

Thou of thy life shall all the days see Jerusalems well:
^ Thy childrens children thou shall see, and peace on Israel.
PSALM. CXXIX.
MAny a time have they afflicted me from my youth: may Israel now say.

2 Many a time have they afflicted me from ^y youth: yet have they not
prevailed against me*

Often from my youth, may Israel say, with grief they me assailed:
Often from my youth they troubled me, yet'gainst me not prevailed.
3 The plowers plowed upon my back: they ^ade long their surrows.

4 The Lord is righteous: he has cut asun^r the cords of the wicked.

Upon my back the plowers plowed* they furrows long did make:
The Lord is just, asunder he cords of the wicked brake.
5 Let them all be confounded and turned ^ck that hate Zion.

6 Let them be as the grass upon the house tops: which withers before it
grows up.

5 Let them confounded and turned back all be that Zion hate:
6 As on house tops the grass (...) grown, so withred be them let.
7 Wherewith the mower fills not his hand* nor he that binds sheaves, his
bosom.

7 Wherewith the mower does not ^ill at any time his hand,
Nor yet he that does bind the sheaves his bosom on the land.
8 Neither do they which go by, say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we
bless you in the Name of the Lord.

8 Nor do they say, which do go by, Gods blessing on you be,
In his own name that is the Lord now bless you all do we.
PSALM. CXXX.
OUt of the depths have I cried unto thee O Lord.

2 Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.

LOrd from the depths I to thee cried, 2 Lord hear the voice from me,
Let to my supplications voice thine ears attentive be.
3 If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand?

4 But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared.

3 Lord, who shall stand, if thou, O Lord, should mark iniquities?
4 But that thou may feared be, forgiveness with thee is.
5 I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait: and in his word do I hope.

6 My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning:

5* I wait for God, my soul does wait, and I*hope in his word:
6 More then they that for morning watch my soul waits for the Lord;
I say, more then they that watch for the morning.

7 *Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy:

I say, yea more then they that watch the morning for to see:
7 Let Israel hope in God, for with the Lord there mercies be:
And with him is plenteous redemption.

8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

And also is redemption most plenteous with him,
^ And from all his iniquities he Israel shall redeem.
PSALM. CXXXI.
LOrd, my heart is not haughty, nor mine (...) lo^ty* neither do I exercise my
selfin gre^ matters, or in things too high for me.

MIne heart, O Lord, not haughty is, mine eyes not lo^ty be;
I meddle not in matters great, or things too high for me.
2 Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his
mother:

2 Surely my self I have behaved, and quieted in this,
Most like unto a child that of his mother weaned is.
My soul is even as a weaned child.

3 Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

My soul's even as a weaned child, 3 Let Israel altogether
Put all their hope into the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
PSALM. CXXXII.
LOrd, remember David, and all his afflictions.

2 How he swear unto the Lord, and vowe^ unto the might^e God of Jacob;

DAvid and his afflictions all, O Lord remember thou:
2 How to God, Jacobs mighty God he swear and made a vow.
3 Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house: nor go up into my
bed*

4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes: or slumber to my eyelids,

3 Sure to my house tent I Will not come, nor to my bed up go,
4 Sleep to mine eyes, or mine eyelids I Will slumber not give to.
5 Until I find out a place for the Lord* an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob.

5 Until that I do for the Lord a place to make abode
Find out, an habitation for Jacobs mighty God.
6 Lo we heard of it at Ephrata: we found it in the fields of the wood.

6 Lo at the place of Ephrata, of it we understood,
And we did find it in the fields that were within the wood.
7 We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.

8 Arise, O Lord, into thy rest: thou, and the ark of thy strength.

7 We at his footstool worship will, we to his tents will go:
8 Thou Lord, and of thy strength the ark arise thy rest into.
9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints shout for
joy.

9 Let thou thy priests with righteousness, be clothed all about:
And let all them that are thy saints for joy most gladly shout.
10 For thy servant David's sake: turn not away the face of thine anointed.

10 Of thine Anointed let the face away not turned be:
And that for David's sake who is a servant unto thee.
11 The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it: of the
fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

11 God has to David sworn in truth, not turn he will from it,
The fruit I Will of thy body make upon thy Throne to sit.
12 If thy children will keep my covenant an^ my testimony, that I shall teach
them: their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.

12 My covenant if thy children keep and law I teach them all,
Upon thy Throne for ever sit their children also shall.
13 For the Lord has chosen Zion: he has desired it for his habitation.

14 This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it.

13 For God of Zion has made choice, to dwell there he required:
14 This still my rest is, here I Will dwell for I have it desired.
15 I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.

15 I will bless her provision and that abundantly,
And those that are her poor I will with bread all satisfy.
16 I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout
aloud for joy.

16 I with salvation will also her priests all cloth about;
And these that are her Saints likewise for joy aloud shall shout.
17 There will I make the horn of *David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for
mine anointed.

17 There I the horn of David will make for to bud anon:
A lamp I there ordained have for mine Anointed one.
18 His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his crown
flourish.

18 Those who to him are enemies I Will cloth with shame eachone,
But yet the crown that is his own himself shall flourish on.
PSALM. CXXXIII.
BEhold how good and how pleasant it is: for brethren to dwell together in
amity.

BEhold how good a thing it is, how pleasant must it be,
For Brethren thus together here to dwell in unity.
2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
beard, even Aarons beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments.

2 Like precious ointment on the head it is that the beard ran on,
Even Aarons beard that to the skirts went of his garments down.
3 As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing: even life for evermore.

3 As Hermons dew, as dew which down the Zions hills ran over,
For there the blessing God commands, even life for evermore.
PSALM. CXXXIIII.
BEhold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord: which by night stand
in the house of the Lord.

BEhold, bless ye the Lord, all ye that serve the Lord aright,
Ye who of him that is the Lord stand in the house by night.
2. Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and bless the Lord.

3 The Lord that made heaven and earth: bless thee out of Sion.

2 Your hands lift in the Sanctuary, and there the Lord bless ye:
3 The Lord that heaven made and earth, bless out of Zion thee.
PSALM. CXXXV.
PRaise the Lord, praise ye the Name of the Lord: praise him, O ye servants of
the LORD.

2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts of the house of our
God.

PRaise God, ye servants of the Lord, praise Gods name praise him ye:
2* Who in Gods house stand; in the courts of our Gods house that be.
3 Praise the Lord, for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his Name, for it is
pleasant.

3 Praise ye the Lord, for God is good, and praises do ye sing
Unto his Name, and that because it is a pleasant thing.
4 For the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself: and Israel for his peculiar
treasure.

5 For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is above all gods.

4 For God chus'd Jacob to himself his treasure is Israel:
5 For God I know is great: our Lord he gods above is all.
6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth: in the
seas, and all deep plates.

6 What thing soev'r the Lord did please, that in the heaven did he
And in the earth, in seas, and all deep places that there be.
7 He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes
lightnings for the rain: he brings the wind out of his treasuries.

7 He from the ends of earth does cause the vapors to ascend,
For rain he lightnings makes, he does winds from his treasures send.
8 Who smote the firstborn of Egypt: both of man and beast.

9 who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt:

8 Who smote of Egypt the first born of man and beast that be:
9 Who wonders signs O Egyp^sent into the midst of thee.
Upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.

10 Who smote great nations: and slew mighty kings:

And also upon Pharao and all his servants there,
10 Who smot great Nations, and slew the Kings that mighty were.
11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan: and all the kingdoms of
Canaan,

11 Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og of Bashan king:
And all the kingdoms wherein did those of Canaan reign.
12 And gave their land for an heritage: an heritage unto Israel his people.

12 And for a pleasant heritage, he with a liberal hand
An heritage to Israel his people, gave their land*
13 Thy Name, O Lord, endures for ever: and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout
all generations.

13 For ever, Lord, thy Name endures, and thy memorial,
It surely is, O Lord, throughout the generations all.
14 For the Lord will judge his people: and he will repent himself concerning
his servants.

14 For he that is the mighty Lord, will judge his people still,
Concerning those that do him serve repent himself he will:
15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold: the work of men's hands.

16 They have mouths but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not.

15 The heathens idols, silver, gold, works of men's hands they be:
16 They mouths have, but they do not speak eyes have they, but not see.
17 They have ears, but they hear not: neither is there any breath in their
mouths.

18 They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them.

17 Ears have they, but they do not hear; no breath their mouths has past:
18 They that them make are like to them so all that in them trust.
19 Bless the Lord, O house of Israel; bless the Lord, O house of Aaron.

20 Bless the Lord, O house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.

19 O house of Israel bless the Lord, bless God, O Aarons house:
20 O house of Levi bless the Lord, ye that fear God him bless.
21 Blessed be the Lord out of Zion: which dwells at Jerusalem. Praise ye the
Lord.

21 Out of the hill of Zion now the Lord God blessed be,
Which dwells at Jerusalem, praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM. CXXXVI.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

2 O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

O Thanks give to the Lord,
For he is good surely*
2 To God of gods accord
To give thanks cheerfully,
For his mercy
Which is most sure,
Does still endure
Eternally.
3 O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

4 To him who alone does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.

3 Unto the Lord of lords
Give hearty thanks anon:
4 To him who by his words
Great wonders does alone, For his mercy, etc.
5 To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endures for ever.

6 To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endures
for ever.

5 To him that as ye see
Heavens made by's wisdom move:
6 And stretched the earth to be
The waters great above,
For his mercy, etc.
7 To him that made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.

8 The Sun to rule by day: for his mercy endures for ever.

7 To him that by his might
Made great lights shine always,
8 The Sun that is most bright
For to bear rule by day,
For his mercy, etc.
9 The Moon and Stars to rule by night: for his mercy endures for ever.

9 The Moon he made also,
And glistring Stars with light,
In their right course to go,
To rule the darkest night,
For his mercy, etc.
10 To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endures for ever.

10 To him that mighty smot
Egypt a land forlorn,
Who by his anger hot
Did kill all their first born.
For his mercy, etc.
11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.

12 With a strong hand, and with a stretched-out arm: for his mercy endures
for ever.

11 And brought out from that land
His Israel without harm,
12 With a most mighty hand
And with a stretched out arm,
For his mercy, etc.
13 To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endures for ever

14 And made Israel to pass through the midst of it, for his mercy endures for
ev^r.

13 To him which did divide
The red Sea into two,
14 And did his Israel guide
Even through its midst also,
For his mercy, etc.
15 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea: for his mercy endures
for ever.

15 But overthrew Pharo
By his arm that is hie,
And his great host also
In midst of the red Sea.
For his mercy, etc.
16 To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures
for ever.

16 To him which did indeed
His people in distress,
In his great mercy lead
Even through the wilderness,
For his mercy, etc.
17 To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endures for ever.

18 And slew famous kings, for his mercy endures for ever.

17 To him which also smot
The Kings of greatness rare
18 And slew in anger hot
Kings that most famous were
For his mercy, etc.
19 Sihon king of the Amorites for his mercy endures for ever.

20 And Og the king of Bashan, for his mercy endures for ever.

19 Even Sihon that did reign
The Amorites among,
20 And Og to whom as King
The Bashan did belong.
For his mercy, etc.
21 And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for ever.

22 Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for ever.

21 An heritage to be
Their land he also gave,
22 An heritage gave he
For Israel to have,
For his mercy, etc.
23 Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endures for ever.

24 And has redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever.

23 Who in our low estate
Remembered us alone:
24 And from our foes debate
Redeemed us each one,
For his mercy, etc.
25 Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.

26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his endures for ever.

25 Who gives food liberally
To all flesh morn and even:
26 O thanks give cheerfully,
Unto the God of heaven.
For his mercy
Which is most sure,
Does still endure
Eternally.
Another of the same.
GIve thanks to God for he is good,
For his mercy endures for ay,
2 O to the God of gods give thanks
For his mercy endures for ay.
3 ^ give thanks unto the Lord of lords,
For his mercy endures for ay,
4 Who does wonders great alone,
For his mercy endures for ay.
5 To him that heavens by wisdom made,
For his mercy endures for ay,
6 Who 'bove the waters stretched* the earth
For his mercy endures for ay:
7 To him that made the lights so great,
For his mercy endures for ay:
8 The Sun also to rule by day,
For his mercy endures for ay.
9 The Moon and Stars to rule by night,
For his mercy endures for ay:
10 That Egypt smot in their firstborn,
For his mercy endures for ay:
11 And Israel out from among them brought,
For his mercy endures for ay:
12 With a strong hand, and stretched out arm,
For his mercy endures for ay.
13 Who red Sea did divide in parts,
For his mercy endures for ay:
14 And through its midst made Israel pass,
For his mercy endures for ay:
15 Pharo and's host drowned in red Sea,
For his mercy endures for ay.
16 Through desert who his people led,
For his mercy endures for ay:
17 To him who the great Kings did smite,
For his mercy endures for ay.
18 And slew the Kings that famous were,
For his mercy endures for ay:
19 Sihon King of the Amorites,
For his mercy endures for ay.
20 And Og that was of Bashan King,
For his mercy endures, for ay:
21 And gave their land for heritage,
For his mercy endures for ay;
22 His servant Isra'ls heritage.
For his mercy endures for ay:
23 Who in low state remembered us,
For his mercy endures for ay:
24 And from our foes has us redeemed,
For his mercy endures for ay.
25 Who gives food unto all flesh,
For his mercy endures for ay:
26 O give thanks to the God of heaven,
For his mercy endures for ay.
PSALM. CXXXVII.
BY the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down. yea, we wept: when we remembered
Zion.

OF Babylon the rivers by there sat we down together:
Yea, we did weep, when as we there on Zion did remember.
2 We hanged our harps upon the willows, in the midst thereof.

3 For there they that carried us away captive, required of us a song,

2 In midst there of the willowes on our harps we hanged thus.
3 For they that there us captives led, required a song of us.
And they that wasted us, required of us mirth: saying, Sing us one of the
songs of Zion.

And they also that wasted us required us mirth to bring;
They said to us, one of the songs of Zion to us sing.
4 How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land?

5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning.

4 O how the Lords song shall we sing thus in a strange land set?
5 Let my right hand forget her skill, if Salem I forget.
6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof my mouth; if I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

6 If I forget thee let my tongue from my mouths roof not move,
If I Jerus^lem not prefer my chiefest joy above.
7 Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem: who said,
Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.

7 Remember Edoms children, Lord, in Jerusalems day*
Who even to its foundation raze, raze it, then did say.
8 O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.

8 O daughter thou of Babylon, who art destroyed to be,
Who thee rewards as thou us served, most happy be shall he.
9 Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.

9 Yea happy surely shall he be that those thy little ones
Does to him take, and also them does dash against the stones.
PSALM. CXXXVIII.
I Will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing praise to
thee.

2 I will worship toward thy holy temple,

BEfore the gods with all my heart I Will praise, sing praise to thee:
2 Toward thy holy Temple thou shall by me worshipped be;
And praise thy Name, for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth: for thou
have magnified thy word above all thy Name.

I Will praise thy Name both for thy truth, thy kindness, and thy love,
For thou have magnified thy word even all thy Name above.
3 In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me; and strengthnedst me with
strength in my soul.

3 Thou in the day when I did cry, an answer gav'st to me,
And thou with strength within my soul did make me strong to be.
4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: when they hear the
words of thy mouth.

5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory of the
Lord.

4 When all earths Kings Lord of thy mouth hear words, they shall thee praise:
5 Yea in the Lords ways shall they sing, for great Gods glory is.
6 Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: but the proud
he knows afar off.

6 Though that the Lord be high, yet he to them that lowly are
Has a respect; but who are proud he knows them afar.
7 Though I wal^ in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me, thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies; and thy right hand
shall save me.

7 Though I in midst of trouble walk, I from thee life shall have:
Against my foes wrath thou wilt stretch thy hand thy right hand shall me save*
8 The Lord will perfect that which concerns me: thy mercy, O Lord, endures
for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.

8 God will perfect what me concerns, for ay thy mercy stands,
O Lord, do thou not now forsake the works of thine own hands.
PSALM. CXXXIX.
O Lord, thou have searched me, and known me.

2 Thou know my down sitting, and mine up-rising: thou understandest my
thought afar off.

O Lord, thou have me searched and known: 2 Thou understandst what are
My sitting down, and rising up: thou know my thought afar.
3 Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways.

3 My path thou and my lying down compassest in each part;
And likewise thou with all my ways right well acquainted art.
4 For there is not a word in my tongue: but lo, O Lord, thou know it
altogether.

4 For in my tongue while I do speak there is not any word
But lo it altogether is unto thee known, O Lord.
5 Thou have beset me behind and before: and laid thine hand upon me.

6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

5 Thou me besetst behind, before, and laidst thine hand on me,
6 Such knowledge is for me too strange, it to attain's too hie.
7 Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?

7 O whether from thy sprit shall I go there hid for to be?
Or from thy presence me to save, O whether shall I flee?
8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if* I make my bed in hell,
behold, thou art there.

8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou there art as else where;
If I do make my bed in hell, behold thou als art there.
9 If I take the wings of the morning: and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea:

10 Even there shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

9 If mornings wings I take and dwell in utmost parts of sea:
10 There even shall thy hand me lead, thy right hand shall hold me.
11 If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me.

11 If I should say the darkness shall then surely cover me,
Even then the very night it self shall light about me be.
12 Yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day:
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

12 Yea darkness hides not from thee, as day so shines the night;
Unto thee also are alike both darkness and the light.
13 For thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

13 For those my reins that in me are possessed were by thee,
And thou within my mothers womb have also cov'red me.
14 I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are
thy works* and that my soul knows right well.

14 I will thee praise, for fearfully, and strangely made I am,
Thy works are marv'lous, and my soul right well does know the same.
15 My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret: and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

15 My substance was not hid from thee, when as in secret I
Was made, and in earths lowest parts was wrought then curiously.
16 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfite, and in thy book all
my members were written,

16 Thine eyes did all my substance see, yet being unperfite,
And als within thy book thou did these all my members write:
Which in continuance were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them.

Which after in continuance were fashioned every one,
When as that any being had yet of them there was none.
17 How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God: how great is the sum of
them?

17 O God, how also precious are ever unto me
The thoughts thou have; how great likewise the sum of them now be?
18 If I should count them, they are moo in number then the sand: when I awake
I am still with thee.

18 If I should count them, then the sand they mo^ in number be*
And whenever I awake then I am still with thee.
19 Surely thou will slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore, ye
bloody men.

19 O God, thou will them surely slay that wicked be in heart,
Therefore ye that are bloody men, do ye from me depart.
20 For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy Name in
vain.

20 For they against thee wickedly do speak with great disdain,
And they that are thine enemies do take thy Name in vain.
21 Do not I hate them, O Lord: that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

21 O Lord all them that do thee hate do I not hate likewise?
And am I not als grieved with those that up against thee rise?
22 I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them mine enemies.

23 Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts:

22 With perfect hatred I them hate, my foes I count them so:
23 Lord search me, know my heart, me try, my thoughts all do thou know.
24 And see if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.

24 And see if any wicked way at all there in me be,
And in the everlasting way a leader be to me.
PSALM. CXL.
DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man.

DEliver me, Lord, from the man that unto ill is bent,
And me preserve thou from the man that is so violent.
2 Which imagine mischiefs in their heart: continually are they gathered
together for war.

2 Which thus within their heart mischiefs imagining still are:
Together are they gathered coutinually for war.
3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under
their lips. Selah.

3 And thus they sharpened have their tongues as does a serpent his,
Under their lips of Adders als the deadly poison is. Selah.
4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me from the violent
man: who have purposed to overthrow my goings.

4 Lord keep me from the wickeds hands, from violent men me save,
Who wholly for to overthrow my goings purposed have.
5 The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the
way side: they have set grins for me. Selah.

5 The proud for me a snare and cords have hid, and they a net
Have by the way side spread also, they grins have for me set. Selah.
6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O
Lord.

6 Then I did say unto the Lord, thou art a God to me;
Let thou my supplications voice be heard, O Lord, by thee.
7 O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou have covered my head in
the day of battle.

7 O God the Lord, who art the strength of my salvation,
A covering in the battle day my head thou have put on.
8 Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked device,
lest they exalt themselves. Selah.

8 Of him that is wicked the desires, O Lord, not grant thou shall,
Not further thou his ill device, left they themselves exalt. Selah.
9 As for the head of those that compass me about: let the mischief of their
own lips cover them.

9 As for the head of all those men about that compass me,
Let with mischief of their own lips themselves all covred be.
10 Let burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the fire: into deep
pits, that they rise not up again.

10 Let burning coals upon them fall, let them be cast likewise.
Into the fire, into deep pits, that they again not rise.
11 Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth, evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him.

11 Let not an evil speaker be on earth established now,
Evil shall hunt the violent man, him for to overthrow.
12 I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted: and the
right of the poor.

12 I know that he that is the Lord maintain will by his might
The cause of the afflicted man and of the poor the ^ight.
13 Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy Name: the upright shall
dwell in thy presence.

13 The righteous men unto thy Name give thanks shall surely all,
And they also that are upright dwell in thy presence shall.
PSALM. CXLI.
LOrd I cry unto thee, make haste unto me: give ear unto my voice when I cry
unto thee.

UNto thee do I cry, O Lord, do thou make have to me,
Give thou an ear unto my voice when I cry unto thee.
2 Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice.

2 Let thou my prayer be set forth as incense before thee,
As evening sacrifice so let my hands uplifting be.
3 Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: keep the door of my lips.

3 O thou the Lord now do thou set a watch my mouth before,
And of my lips I thee beseech that thou would keep the door.
4 Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works, with men
that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

4 My heart incline not unto ill, ill works let me not treat
With men that work iniquity, nor of their dainties eat.
5 Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil,

5 But let the righteous man me smite it shall a kindness be:
Let him reprove, it shall be as excellent oil to me,
Which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their
calamities.

Which shall not break my head at all, for yet also by me
For them in their calamities my prayer it shall be.
6 When their judges are overthrown in sto^y places, they shall hear my words,
for they are sweet.

6 When as their Judges overthrown in stony places meet,
They surely then shall hear my words, for they are very sweet.
7 Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth* as when one cutteth and
cleaves wood upon the earth.

7 Even at graves mouth our very bones they scattred are each one,
As when one cutteth, and does cleave the wood the earth upon.
8 But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not
my soul destitute.

8 But, O thou, who art God the Lord* mine eyes unto thee be*
My soul leave thou not destitute, my trust it is in thee.
9 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and the grins of the
workers of iniquity.

10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets: whilst that I withal escape.

9 Keep me from snares they laid for me and from ill workers trap,
10 In their own nets let wicked fall whilst I withal escape.
PSALM. CXLII.
I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: with my voice unto the Lord did I make my
supplication.

I Unto him that is the Lord, thus with my voice did cry,
My supplication with my voice unto the Lord made I.
2 I poured out my complaint before him: I showed before him my trouble.

2 Before him then I my complaints did pour out in great store,
And what to me a trouble was I showed him before.
3 When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path: in the
way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.

3 When in me was ov'rwhelm'd my sprit, my path was known to thee:
They snares in ways wherein I walked laid privily for me.
4 I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me, refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul.

4 On my right hand I looked, and saw, but none at all was there
That would me know, refuge me failed: none for my soul did care.
5 I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
land of the living.

5 I unto thee, O Lord, did cry, I said unto thee then
My portion and refuge thou art in land of living men.
6 Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, deliver me from my
persecutors for they are stronger then I.

6 Since that I am brought very low, attend unto my cry:
Me from my persecutors save, who stronger are then I.
7 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy Name: the righteous shall
compass me about: for thou shall deal bountifully with me.

7 That I thy Name may praise, bring thou my soul from prison free,
The just me'l compass, for thou shall deal bounteously with me.
PSALM. CXLIII.
HEar my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness.

LOrd hear my prayer, my suits hear thou and in thy faithfulness
An answer give thou unto me, and in thy righteousness.
2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

2 In judgment enter not with him that servant is to thee,
For justified in thy sight no living man shall be.
3 For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long
dead.

3 For the en'mie has my soul pursued, my life to ground has tread,
He has me made in darkness dwell, as those that long were dead.
4 Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me: my heart within me is desolate.

4 My spirit therefore me within is overwhelmed by this,
This heart of mine within me als all desolate it is.
5 I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on the work
of thy hands.

5 The days of old remember I, to meditate I use,
On all thy works; yea on the work done by thy hands I muse.
6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsts after thee, as a
thirsty land. Selah.

6 I unto thee stretch forth my hands, my soul that is in me,
Most like unto a thirsty land, still thirsts after thee. Selah.
7 Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me: lest
I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

7 Lord, hear with speed, my spirit does fail, hide not thy face from me,
Lest like to them that do go down into the pit I be.
8 Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I
trust, cause me to know the way wherein I should walk:

8 Cause me at morn thy kindness hear for in thee trust I do,
Cause thou me for to know the way wherein that I should go.
For I lift up my soul unto thee.

9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me.

For I to thee lift up my soul, 9 O Lord deliver me
From those mine enemies; me to hide I do flee unto thee.
10 Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy spirit is good: lead me
into the land of uprightness.

10 Teach me to do thy will, for that thou art my God indeed:
Thy sprit is good; into the land of uprightness me lead.
11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.

11 O for the sake of thine own Name, Lord, do thou quicken me,
And do thou for thy righteousness my soul from trouble free.
12 And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my
soul: for I am thy servant.

14 And of thy mercy cut thou off mine enemies, and the same
Destroy all that afflict my soul, for I thy servant am.
PSALM. CXLIV.
BLessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.

O Blessed ever be the Lord who is my strength alight,
Which unto war does teach my hands, and fingers for to fight.
2 My goodness, and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield,
and he in whom I trust: who subdueth my people under me.

2 My goodness, fortress, shield, high tower, my savior als, and he
In whom I trust; who does subdue my people under me.
3 Lord, what is man that thou take knowledge of him: or the son of man, that
thou make account of him?

3 Lord, what is man that thou of him thus do knowledge take?
Or yet the son of man, that thou of him account do make?
4 Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passes away.

5 Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke.

4 Man is like vanity; his days as shadows pass away.
5 Lord bow thy heavens, do thou come down, hills touch, and smoke shall they.
6 Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy
them.

6 Do thou thy lightnings bright cast forth, by scattring them annoy:
Thine arrows also shoot thou out, and do thou them destroy.
7 Send thine hand from above, rid me and deliver me out of great waters: from
the hand of strange children.

7 Do thou thy hand send from above, rid and deliver me
Out of great waters; from the hands of children strange that be.
8 Whose mouth speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood.

8 Whose mouth does utter words which are but words of vanity,
And their right hand a right hand is of falsehood utterly.
9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery, and an instrument
of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.

9 A new song Lord, I Will to thee sing upon a Psalterie:
On instrument^ that has ten strings I Will praises sing to thee.
10 It is he that gives salvation unto kings: who delivers David his servant
from the hurtful sword.

10 It Is he that does salvation unto great Kings afford,
And who his servant David als saves from the hurtful sword.
11 Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth
speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.

11 Rid, save me from strange childrens hands, whose mouth speaks vanity,
And their right hand a right hand is of falsehood utterly.
12 That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth: that our daughters
may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace.

12 That as the plants our sons may be in youth grown up that are,
Our daughters as the corner stones, dressed like a palace rare.
13 That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that our sheep
may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets,

13 That full our garners may afford all manner of store for meat,
That thousands forth our sheep may bring, ten thousands in our street.
14 That our oxen may be strong to labor; that there be no breaking in, nor
going out: that there be no complaining in our streets.

14 Our oxen be to labor strong, that no inbreaking be,
Nor going out, and that our streets be of complaining free.
15 Happy is that people that is in such a case: yea happy is that people,
whose God is the Lord.

15 That people happy is, that is in such a case restord,
Yea happy is that people all whose God is even the Lord.
PSALM. CXLV.
I Will extol thee, my God, O king: and I will bless thy Name for ever and
ever:

2 Every day will I bless thee: and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.

I Will thee extol my* God and King, and bless thy Name always,
2 Each day I will thee bless, and will thy Name for ever praise.
3 Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: and his greatness is
unsearchable.

3 Great is the Lord, and greatly he is to be praised in this,
The greatness als that is in him, unsearchable it is.
4 One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.

4 One generation shall praise thy works unto another:
And clearly also shall declare thy mighty acts together.
5 I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty: and of thy wondrous
works.

5 The honor of thy majesty that glorious is in thee,
I Will of it speak, and of thy works that very wondrous be.
6 And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare
thy greatness.

6 Men of the might of all thy acts that very dreadful are,
Shall utter speeches; and I will thy greatness so declare.
7 They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness: and shall
sing of thy righteousness.

7 They utter shall abundantly the memory to all
Of thy great goodness, yea and sing thy righteousness they shall.
8 The Lord is gracious and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of great
mercy.

8 Full of compassion, gracious the Lord is unto his,
He is als unto anger slow, of mercy great he is.
9 The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works.

6 The Lord our God he unto all his goodness does declare,
And over all the works he does his tender mercies are.
10 All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord: and thy saints shall bless thee.

11 They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom: and talk of thy power.

10 Thee all thy works shall praise, O Lord, thy Saints shall bless thee all:
11 Thy kingdoms glory tell shall they, talk of thy power they shall.
12 To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts: and the glorious majesty
of his kingdom.

12 To make known to the sons of men his acts that mighty be,
And of the kingdom that is his the glorious majesty.
13 Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: and thy dominion endures
throughout all generations.

13 Thy kingdom it a kingdom is that is everlasting sure,
And thy dominion throughout all ages does endure.
14 The Lord upholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that be bowed
down.

14 He that is the Almighty Lord upholdeth all that fall,
And those that low be bowed down up high he raises all.
15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due
season.

15 The eyes of all things evry where they do upon thee wait,
And in the season that is due thou give them their meat.
16 Thou openest thine hand: and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

16 Thy hand thou do it open make and also liberally,
Thou the desire of evry thing that lives do satisfy.
17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways: and holy in all his works.

18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: to all that call upon
him in truth.

17 The Lord in all his ways is just, in his works holy all*
18 God near is all that call on him, in truth that on him call.
19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.

19 And the desire fulfill he will of them that do him fear
He will them save, he will also unto their cry give ear.
20 The Lord preserves all them that love him: but all the wicked will he
destroy.

20 The Lord to all that do him love will a preserver be,
But as for those that wicked are, them all destroy will he.
21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his
holy Name for ever and ever.

21 The praise of him that is the Lord, my mouth it shall proclaim:
And let all flesh for ever and ever, so bless his holy Name.
PSALM. CXLVI.
PRaise ye the Lord: praise the Lord, O my soul.

2 While I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises unto my God, while
I have any being.

PRaise God; the Lord praise, O my soul: 2 I Will praise God while I live:
While I have being, to my God in songs I Will praises give.
3 Put not your trust in Princes: nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help.

3 See that ye do not put your trust in Princes, nor for this
In him that is the son of man in whom no help there is.
4 His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his
thoughts perish.

4 His breath goes forth, and after he returns to his clay,
The thoughts of his do perish all in that same very day.
5 Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: whose hope is in the
Lord his God.

5 He happy is that has the God of Jacob to afford
Unto him help; whose steadfast hope is in his God the Lord.
6 Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keeps
truth for ever.

6 Which made the Heaven and the earth the sea, and whatsoever
Within the same has its abode, which keeps truth for ever.
7 Which executes judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the
hungry: the Lord ^oseth the prisoners.

7 Which judgment executs for such, as that oppressed be,
Who gives unto the hungry food: God sets the prisoners free.
8 The Lord opens the eyes of the blind, the Lord raises them that are bowed
down: the Lord loves the righteous.

8 Eyes of the blind God opens, the Lord he raises thus
Them that are greatly bowed down, God loves the righteous.
9 The Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth the fatherless and widow:
but the way of the wicked he turns upside down.

9 God strangers keeps, he widows helps and fatherless that be:
But of the wicked men the way upside down turns he.
10 The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations.
Praise ye the Lord.

10 The Lord he shall for ever reign, O Zion, even he
Thy God to generations all: praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM. CXLVII.
PRaise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely.

PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good praise to our God to sing:
For it is pleasant, and also praise is a comely thing.
2 The Lord does build up* Jerusalem: he gathers together the outcasts of
Israel.

3 He heals the broken in heart: and binds up their wounds.

2 God builds Jerus'lem, and th'out casts gathreth of Israel:
3 Their wounds he binds up, and he the broken in heart does heal.
4 He tells the number of the stars: he calls them all by their names.

5 Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.

4 He tells the number of the Stars, them all by names does call,
5 Great is our Lord, and of great power his knowledge passes all:
6 The Lord lifts up the meek; he casts the wicked down to the ground.

7 Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praise upon the harp unto our God.

6 God up the meek lifts, he to ground casts those that wicked be:
7 With thanks to God sing, on the harp praise to our God sing ye.
8 Who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth: who
makes grass to grow upon the mountains.

8 Who cover does the heaven with clouds who for the earth below
Prepares rain; who makes grass upon the mountains grow.
9 He gives to the beast his food: and to the young ravens which cry.

10 He delights not in the strength of the horse: he takes not pleasure in
the legs of ^ man.

9 He gives to the beast his food, and to young rav'ns which cry:
10 He not delights in strength of horse, man's legs he cares not by.
11 The Lord takes pleasure in them the fear him: in those that hope in his
mercy.

11 But in all them that do him fear the Lord does pleasure take,
In them that to his mercy do in hope themselves betake.
12 Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Zion.

13 For he has strengthened the bars of the gates: he has blessed thy children
within thee.

12 The Lord praise, O Jerusalem, thy God O Zion praise,
13 For thy gates bars he did make strong and thy sons in thee bless:
14 He makes peace in thy borders: a^ silleth thee with the finest of the
wheat.

15 He sends forth his commandment ^ on earth: his word runs very swiftly.

14 He in thy costs makes peace, he thee with finest wheat does fill.
15 He his commands sends forth on earth, his word runs swiftly still.
16 He gives snow like wool: he scatters the hoar frost like ashes.

17 He casts forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?

16 Hoare frosts like ashes scattreth he, like wool gives snow on land:
17 Like morsells forth his ice he casts, who in his cold can stand.
18 He sends out his word, and melts them: he causes his wind to blow, and
the waters flow.

18 He sends his word and melts them, and also for to blow
(...) wind he causes by his might, and then the waters flow.
19 He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.

19 Unto his servant Jacob he his word so does reveal,
His statuts and his judgments both, unto his Israel.
20 He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have
not known them. Praise ye the Lord.

20 He not with any Nation to deal so did accord,
And they his judgments have not known, O do ye praise the Lord.
PSALM. CXLVIII.
PRaise ye the Lord, Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the
heights.

UNto the Lord do ye give praise, give ye unto the Lord
Praise from the heavens* in the hights praise unto him afford.
2 Praise ye him all his angels: praise ye him all his hosts.

3 Praise ye him sun and moon: praise him all ye stars of light.

2 All ye his Angels praise ye him, his hosts all praise him ye:
3 Praise him ye Sun and Moon: praise him all stars of light that be.
4 Praise him ye heaven of heavens: and ^e waters that be above the heavens*

5 Let them praise the Name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were
created.

4 Praise him ye heaven of heavens, ye floods above the heavens that are:
5 Let them Gods Name praise, for he bad, and they created were.
6 He has also established them for ever and ever: he has made a decree which
shall not pass.

6 For ever and for ever als them shablished has he;
And which for ever shall not pass he has made a decree.
7 Praise the Lord from the earth: ye dragons and all deeps.

8 Fire and hail, snow and vapor: stormy wind fulfilling his word.

7 Ye dragons, and als ye all deeps praise from the earth the Lord:
8 Fire, hail, snow, vapor, stormy wind fulfilling all his word.
9 Mountains and all hills: fruitful trees and all cedars.

10 Beasts and all cattle: creeping things and flying fowl.

9 All hills and mountains, fruitful trees, and all ye cedars hye;
10 Beasts and all cattle, creeping things, and ye the fowls that fly.
11 Kings of the earth and all people: princes and all judges of the earth.

12 Both young men and maidens: old men and children.

11 Kings of the earth, all people, als princes, earths judges all:
12 Ye young men and ye maidens both, old men and children small.
13 Let them praise the Name of the Lord, for his Name alone is excellent: his
glory is above the earth and heaven.

13 Let them Gods Name praise, for his Name is excellent alone;
His glory is above the earth, and heaven also gone.
14 He also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints: even
of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.

14 His peoples horn, of all his saints the praise, exalts he;
A people near him, Isreal's sons: praise to the Lord give ye.
PSALM. CXLIX.
PRaise ye the Lord: sing unto the Lord a new song: and his praise in the
congregation of saints.

PRaise ye the Lord, and a new song sing ye the Lord unto,
And in the congregation of Saints his praise also.
2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful
in their king.

2 Let Israel in him rejoice, who by his might him made,
Let them that Zions children are in their own King be glade.
3 Let them praise his Name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
the timbrell and harp.

3 O in the dance unto his Name let them all praises bring,
Let them with timbrell, and with harp unto him praises sing.
4 For the Lord takes pleasure in his people: he will beautify thee meek with
salvation.

4 For God in those does pleasure take that his own people be,
The meek with his salvation als beautify will he.
5 Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds.

5 O let all those that are the saints in glory great rejoice,
And let them also on their beds aloud sing with their voice.
6 Let the high praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword in
their hand.

6 And let there be with in their mouth high praises of the Lord,
And let there so be in their hand a sharp two edged sword.
7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen: and punishments upon the people.

8 To bind their kings with chains, and their wobles with fetters of iron.

7 To punish people, t'execute vengeance the heathen on:
8 Their kings with chains, their nobles als to bind with bands of iron.
9 To execute upon them the judgment written: This honor have all his saints.
Praise ye the Lord.

9 On them judgment to execute that is written in his word,
This honor have all Saints of his, praise give ye to the Lord.
PSALM. CL.
PRaise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament
of his power.

PRaise ye the Lord* praise God within his Sanctuary h^e,
Unto him in the firmament of his power praise give ye.
2 Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

2 And for his acts that mighty are praise unto him express,
Do ye him praise according to his excellent greatness.
3 Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psalterie and
harp.

4 Praise him with the timbrell and dance: praise him with stringed instruments
and organs.

3 With trumpets sound him praise; him praise with harp and psalter^e:
4 With timbrel, dance, string'd instruments and organs praise him ye.
5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals.

6 Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.

5 Praise him on cymbals loud, him praise on cymbals sounding hie:
6 Let each thing breathing praise the Lord: praise to the Lord give ye.
FINIS.
THE SONGS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT IN MEETER:

By M. ZACHARY BOYD Preacher of Gods Word.

EPHESIANS. 5. 18. 19. Be ye filled with the Spirit, etc. Speaking to your selves
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in your
heart to the Lord. GLASGOW, Printed by the Heirs of GEORGE ANDERSON. Anno 1648.

The Songs of the Old and New Testament.
THe Song of Songs, 1 The Song of Moses at the red Sea. 2 The song of Moses a
little before his death 3 The song of Deborah. 4 The song of Hannah. 5 David's
lamentations for Saul and Jonathan. 6 The song of David at the promise of
Messiah. 7 The song of Isaiah concerning the vineyard. 8 Isaiahs song of thanks
for Gods mercies. 9 Isaiahs song inci^ing to confidence in God. 10 The song of
Hezekiah. 11 The Lamentations of Jeremiah. 12 The song of Jonah. 13 The song of
Habakkuk. 14 The song of Marie. 15 The song of Zacharies. 16 The song of
Simeon. 17
To the right Reverend, the faithful Ministers of GODS Word of the Church of
Scotland.
RIGHT REVEREND,
IT pleased You in the General Assembly last, at Edinburgh, Anno 1647. to take
to your consideration, the great utility the Church of GOD may have by the
Songs contained in holy Scriptures; After due deliberation, it pleased You to
ordain that I should labor in that work* In obedience unto You, I have
endeavored to come as near to the Text as was possible for me to do; And those
my labors I in all humility offer to be considered, by the most learned and
most judicious Brethren, that the Church having the use thereof, may in
obedience to the Apostles precept Ephesians. 5. 18. in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, make melody in their heart to the Lord, whom I entreat in all
humility to direct You in all things by his holy Spirit; So I remain

From Glasgow, the 27 of February, 1648. Your humble servant in the LORD, M.
ZACHARY BOYD.

THE SONG OF Solomon made in praise of Christ, and his Church.
CHAPTER I.
The Church speaks to Christ.
LEt him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then
wine.

LEt him with kisses of his mouth to kiss me now incline,
For sure thy love far better is then is the finest wine.
2 Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment powered
forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

2 Because that of thine ointments ^ood the savor sweet does prove,
Thy Name as ointment forth is powered thee therefore virgins love.
3 Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his chambers:

3 Do thou me draw and then anon we after thee will run:
The King himself he has me now his chambers brought within.
We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine:
the upright love thee.

We Will in thee glade be and rejoice, thy love also will we
Remember more then finest wine, the upright do love thee.
4 I am black, but comely, (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the tents of Kedar,
as the curtains of Solomon.

4 O Salems* daughters black I am, but yet a comely one
As tents of Kedar, and even as curtains of Solomon.
5 Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me.

5 Upon me look not ye, because I black do seem to be,
Because the Sun has with his beams long looked upon me.
My mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but mine own vineyard have. I not kept.

My mothers children wroth with me the vineyards keeper made,
But I my self have not at all so kept mine own vineyard.
6 Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make
thy flock to rest at noon:

6 O thou, whom dearly loves my soul, I pray thee tell me soon
Where thou do feed, and where thou makst thy flock to rest at noon.
For why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions?

For why* should I be any* way* as one that turns aside
By flocks of thy companions where ever they do abide?
CHRIST.
7 If thou know not, (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the
footsteps* of* the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents.

7 O fairest one if thou not know, by the flocks footsteps go,
And do thou feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents also.
8 I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs charlots*

8 My love unto a company I have compared thee,
Of horses in the chariots that for King Pharo be.
9 Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.

10 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.

9 With jewel rows thy cheeks are fair, with chains of gold thy neck:
10 Of gold we borders will thee make which silver studs do deek.
The Church.
11 While the king sits at his table, my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof.

12 A bundle of myrrh is my welbeloved unto me;

11 While at his table sits the King my spiknard sends it smell:
12 Of mirrhe a bundle unto me is my beloved well.
He shall ly all night betwixt my breasts.

13 My beloved is unto me, as a cluster of Camphire, in the vineyards of Engedi.

Betwixt my breasts he will lie all night 13 My welbelov'd's to me
As of Engedies vineyards rare, the Camphires clusters be:
CHRIST.
14 Behold* thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair, thou have doves eyes.

14 O do behold, most fair thou art even thou my love so rare,
Behold of Doves the eyes thou have, and thou art very fair.
The Church.
15 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant: also our bed is green.

16 The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fire.

15 Lo, pleasant fair thou art my love, green also is our bed:
16 Beams of our house they cedars are, of fur our rafters made.
CHAPTER II.
CHRIST.
I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys.

2 As the lilly among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

I AM Sharons rose, the lilly als that valleys grows along:
As lillies among thorns, my love so daughters is among.
The Church.
3 As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the
sons.

3 As the apple tree among the trees is of the wood so throng,
So likewise my Beloved is* the sons of men among.
I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste.

Under his shadow I sat down with great delight there placed,
And there his fruit which pleasant is was sweet unto my taste.
4 He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.

4 Unto the house of banqueting* to come he did me move:
His banner that was over me was altogether love.
5 Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love.

6 His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.

5 Me sick of love with flagons stay, with apples me solace:
6 Under my head his left hand is, his right me does embrace.
7 I charge you, O* ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of
the field* that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

7 By Roes, field Hindes, O Salems maids, I charge you that ye cease
^o stir or yet at all awake my love, until he please.
8 The voice of my beloved! behold, he co^th leaping upon the mountains,
skipping upon ^e hills.

The voice of my Beloved! behold! he comes thus anon
upon the mountains leaping high and skipping hills upon.
9 My beloved is like a roe, or a young heart: ^hold, he stands behind our
wall, he looks ^rth at the windows, showing himself through ^e lattesse.

He Is like a Roe or Heart that is young, he stands behind our wall,
^t windows he looks forth, himself he shows through lattesse all.
10 My beloved spoke, and said unto me, ^se up my love, my fair one, and come
away.

11 For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over ^d gone.

Then my Beloved said, Rise my love, away come my fair* One:
For lo the winter it is past, the rain is over and gone.
12 The flowers appear on the earth, the time the singing of birds is come, and
the voice of ^ turtle is heard in our land.

12 The flowers upon the earth appear, of singing of the bird
The time is come; the Turtles voice within our land is heard.
13 The fig tree puts forth her green figs and the vines with the tender
grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.

13 The fig tree her green figs puts forth, vines with grapes tender they
Do sweetly smell; arise my love my fair one come away.
CHRIST.
14 O my dove that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs,

14 O thou my dove that art even now in clifts within the rock,
Within the secret places of the stairs where thou do lurk.
Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and
thy countenance is comely.

Let thou me see thy countenance, thy voice let thou me hear,
For sweet thy voice is, and also thy countenance is clear.
15 Take us the Foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines: for our vines
have tender grapes.

15 Do ye for us the foxes take, foxes that little be
That spoil the vines, for tender grapes our vines have, as ye see.
The Church.
16 My beloved is mine, and I am his: he ^edeth among the lillies.

16 My Welbeloved sure is mine, and I am his indeed,
among the lillies smelling sweet he pleasantly does feed.
17 Until the day break* and the shadows ^e away: turn my beloved, and be
thou like a ^oe, or a young Heart, upon the mountains of ^ether.

17 Until day break and shads flee hence, turn my beloved, and be
Thou like a Roe, or Heart that is young on Bethers mountains hie.
CHAPTER III.
BY night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found
^n not.

BY night I did upon my bed him seek with all my mind
whom my soul loves; I him sought, but him I did not find.
2 I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the broad
ways I will seek him whom my Soul loves:

2 I will now rise, and in the streets about the city move,
And in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul does love.
I sought him, but I found him not.

3 The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him
whom my Soul loves.

I sought him, but I found him not, 3 The Cities watchmen me
Did find; I said then did ye him whom my soul loves see?
4 It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my Soul
loves;

4 It but a little was that I from them did pass away,
But I him whom my soul does love did find without delay:
I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.

I held and would not let him go, until that by me he
Was to her house and chamber brought that had conceived me.
5 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

5 O Salems daughters I you charge by Roes, field Hindes ye cease
To stir or yet for to awake my love until he please.
6 Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant.

6 Of smoke like pillars who is this that comes from wilderness,
Perfumed with frankincense and mirrhe, all merchands powders als.
7 Behold his bed, which is Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about it, of
the valiant of Israel.

7 Behold, his bed is Solomon's, threescore men valiant all
About it are, of those that are the valiant of Israel.
8 They all hold swords, being expert in war, Every man has his sword upon his
thigh, because of fear in the night.

8 Expert in war, they all do hold swords in their hands most bright,
^ach man his sword has on his thigh, because of fear by night.
9 King Solomon made himself a charet o^ the wood of Lebanon.

10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold,

9 Of Lebanons wood Solomon himself a charet made;
10 It Is pillars made of silver were, with gold the bottom laid:
The covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem.

The covering of it purple was, the midst of it for them
Was paved with love, that daughters were of his Jerusalem.
11 Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon,

11 O ye that Zions daughters are do ye go forth anon,
And do ye with great reverence behold king Solomon.
With the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals,
and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

With crown wherewith his mother him crowned in his spousals day,
And in the day his heart was filled with gladenesse every way.
CHAPTER IV.
CHRIST.
BEhold, thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair, thou have doves eyes
within thy locks:

BEhold my love thou art most fair, behold fair is thy skin,
The pure and christ eyes of the Dove thou have thy locks-within:
Thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from mount Gilead.

Thy hair that is upon thy head, is also very near
Like to a flock of goats that from mount Gilead do appear.
2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn which came up from
the washing, whereof every one bear twins, and none is barreu among them.

2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, even shorn from washing gone,
Whereof each one bare twins, and them among is barren none.
3 Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy temples
are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.

3 Thy speech is comely, and thy lips like scarlet thread we see,
Within thy locks thy temples like piece of pomgranats be.
4 Thy neck is like the tower of David, builded for an armory, whereon there
hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

4 Thy neck is like King David's tower, built for an armorie,
Whereon a thousand bucklers hang, men's shields that mighty be.
5 Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, which feed among the
lillies.

5 Thy breasts in number two are like unto two Roes indeed
That young are, and are also twins which among the lillies feed.
6 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
monntaine of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

6 Until the day most clearly break and shaddows flee from hence;
I Will get me to thee mounts of Myrrh, and hill of frankincense.
7 Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.

8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon:

7 Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot at all in thee:
8 Spouse come with me from Lebanon from Lebanon with me.
Look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions
dens, from the mountains of the Leopards.

Look from the tops of Amana, Shenir and Hermon hie,
From Lions dens, from mountains great where Leopards there be.
9 Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my
heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

9 My heart thou ravished, sister, spouse, my heart thou in effect
Have ravished with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse, how much better is thy love
then wine? and the smell of thine ointments then all spices.

10 How fair's thy love, my sister spouse? how better much then wine
Is this thy love! thine ointments smell more then all spices fine!
11 Thy lips, O my spouse drop as the hon comb, honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

11 Thy lips, Spouse, drop as honey comb, the honey milk excel
Under thy tongue; as Lebanon thy garments they do smell.
12 A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse: a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed.

12 My sister spouse a garden is, which is enclosed well,
A spring shut up, a fountain als whereon is set a seal.
13 Thy plants are an orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, Camphire,
with Spikenard.

13 Thy plants an orchard are also even of pomegranates rare,
With pleasant fruits, the Camphire sweet and Spiknard likewise are:
14 Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all trees of frankincense,
Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief spices:

14 Spiknard, Saffron, and Calamus, and Cynamon with all,
Trees of frankincense, Aloes, Mirrhe, all spices principal.
15 A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.

15 A fountain for to water well the gardens all anon:
A well of living waters als and streams from Lebanon.
The Church.
16 Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out;

16 O north wind, do thou now awake, and come thou south about,
Upon my garden blow, that so its spices may flow out:
Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.

Let him that my beloved is come to his garden sweet,
That he his fruits that pleasant are may with contentment eat.
CHAPTER V.
CHRIST.
I Am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh with
my spice,

MY sister and my spouse, I am my garden come into,
I carefully have gathered my mirrhe and spice also.
I have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk:
eat, O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved!

I honey comb with honey ate, my wine, milk, drunk have I,
Eat, O ye friends, drink O Beloved; yea, drink abundantly.
The Church.
2 I sleep, but mine heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocks,
saying,

2 I sleep securely but my heart does wake both night and day,
It is the voice of my Beloved that knocking thus does say,
Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled
with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

My Sister, Love, Dove, undefiled, now open to me right,
For filled is my head with dew, my locks with drops of night.
3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on a while?
I washed also have my feet how shall I them defile?
4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole o the door, and my bowels were moved
for him.

4 By of the door the hole his hand my Welbelov'd put in,
And for him then my bowels all were moved me within.
5 I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.

5 To open to my love I rose, my hands with myrrh did drop,
My fingers with sweet smelling myrrh on handles of the lock.
6 I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone:

6 To my Beloved I opened then, but my Beloved alone
Withdrawn himself had far away, and from the door was gone:
My soul failed: when he spoke I sought him but I could not find him: I called
him, but he gave me no answer.

My soul it failed when he spoke, I after him did crave,
But could not find him, I him called, but he no answer gave.
7 The watchmen that went about the city* found me, they smote me, they
wounded me* the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

7 The cities watchmen found me then, me smot, me wounded they,
The keepers of the walls* they took my vail from me away.
8 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love.

8 O daughters of Jerusalem I charge you from above,
If my Beloved ye find, that ye him tell, I Am sick of love.
The Daughters of Jerusalem.
9 What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among women?
what is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge us?

9 O fairest, among women thou what is thy Beloved*more?
What is he more then others are, that thou do charge so sore?
The Church.
10 My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

11 His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushie and black as a
raven.

10 Both white and rudy's my Beloved, chief among thousands ten:
11 His head's as gold, his bushy locks are black as is a rav'n.
^ His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with milk
and fitly set.

12 His eyes are as the eyes of doves that by the rivers sit,
They washed also are with milk and they are fitly set.
13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lillies,
dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

13 His cheeks are as the spices bed, as flowers that sweet excel,
His lips like lillies droping Myrrh, that has the sweetest smell.
14 His hands are as gold rings set with the* Berill: His belly is as bright
ivory, overlaid with Saphires.

14 His hands as gold rings als are set with Berill richly made,
His belly as bright ivory is with Saphires overlaid.
15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

15 His legs like Marble pillars are, on fine gold sockets set;
His countenance is as Lebanon, as Cedars passing great.
16 His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely: This is my beloved,
and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

16 Most sweet his mouth is, yea he is most lovely altogether:
This my Beloved, and this my Friend is, O thou Salems daughter.
CHAPTER VI.
The Daughters of Jerusalem.
WHether is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest among women, whether is thy
beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

O Whither's thy Beloved gone, of women all most fair?
O whither turned, that we with thee may seek him, now declare?
The Church.
2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in
the gardens, and to gather lillies.

2 Into his garden my Beloved to beds of spices rare,
To feed in gardens is gone down to gather lillies there.
3 I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: he feeds among the lillies.

3 My Welbeloveds I am all, and my Beloved indeed
Is likewise mine: and now he does among the lillies feed.
CHRIST.
4 Thou art beautiful, O my love as Tirzah* comely as Jerusalem, terrible as
an army with banners.

4 My love as Tirza beautiful as Salem comely so
Thou art; as one host terrible that does with banners go.
5 Turn away thine eyes from me for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a
flock of goats that appear from Gilead.

5* From me thine eyes turn thou away, for they me overcome,
Thy hair is as a flock of goats from Gilead that do come.
6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof
every one bears twins, and there is not one barren among them.

6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep, which go from washing throng:
Each one bears twins^ and there is not one barren them among.
7 As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.

7 The temples also of thine head within thy locks that ly,
As of a pomegranate a p^ece do seem right pleasantly.
8 There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without
number.

8 Though threescore of fair queens there be, and concubines fourscore,
And virgins als them to attend, even without number more.
9 My dove, my undefiled is but one* she is the only one of her mother, she is
the choice one of her that bare her:

9 My Dove my undefild's but one, she of her mother ^are
Is the only one, and she the choice is of her that her bare.
The daughters saw her, and blessed her* yea, the Queens and the Concubines and
they praised her.

The daughters of the land her saw, and blessed her likewise,
Yea even the Queens and Concubines and they als did her praise.
10 Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as
the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?

10 Who Is she as morning that looks forth, fair as the Moon, and clear
As is the sun, and armies as that dreadful banners bear.
11 I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, and
to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded.

11 I down to the Nut-garden went the valleys fruits to see:
To see if vines were flour^h'd, and pomegranates budded be.
12 Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadab.

12 Or ever then I was aware, my soul it at the last
Like charets of Aminadab made me to make great have.
13 Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee:

13 Return, return O Shulamite, return, return to me:
That we with gladness great of heart may so now look on thee*
What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two armies.

What will ye in the Shulamite with great contentment see?
Even such a sight as if it were two Armies company.
CHAPTER VII.
HOw beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes daughter, the joints of thy
things are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.

HOw beatifull thy feet with shoes O Princes daughter are!
Joints of thy things are jewels like wrought by a workman rare.
2. Thy navell is like a round goblet, which wants not licour: thy belly is
like an heap of wheat, set about with lillies.

2 Thy navel's like a goblet round, which liquor wants not*
Thy belly's like an heap of wheat, with lillies set about.
3 Thy two breasts are like two young Roes, that are twins.

4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory: thine eyes like the fish pooles in Heshbon,
by the gate of Bathrabbim:

3 Thy breasts are like two twin young Roes: 4 As ivory tower is set
Thy neck, thine eyes like Heshbons pools hard by Bathrabbims gate.
Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.

Thy nose it is even like the tower that is in Lebanon,
Which toward all the city of Damascus looks down.
5 Thine head upon thee is like Carmell, and the hair of thine head like
purple, the King is held in the galleries.

5 Thy head on thee is Carmel like, als of thine head the hair
Is Purple like, the King is held in galleries most rare.
6 How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights!

7 This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of
grapes.

6 O love how art thou for delights both pleasant and how fair!
Thy stature^'s like palm trees, thy breasts they like grapes clusters are.
8 I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof,

8 I did then say that I go up unto the palm tree would,
Yea of the boughs thereof I will with all my force take hold.
Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy
nose like apples.

Now also shall thy breasts all be as clusters of the vine,
And of thy nose the pleasant smell like apples that are fine.
9 And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak.

9 Roof of thy mouth like best wine is that sweetly down does go
For my Beloved, and sleepers lips does cause to speak also.
The Church.
10 I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.

11 Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field:

10 I my Beloveds am, and his desire is toward me,
11 Come my Beloved, unto the field, let us forth going be,
Let us lodge in the villages.

12 Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourtsh,

Let us lodge in the villages: 12 Up early get to be
At vineyards, if so that the vines do flourish let us see:
Whether the tender grapesappear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there will I
give thee my loves.

Even whether tender grapes appear, and pomegranates bud forth,
There surely will I give to thee my loves of greatest worth.
13 The mandraks give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruits, new and old which I have laid up for thee, O my ^loved.

3 The mandrakes smell, and at our gates all pleasant fruits there be,
Both new and old, which I laid up, O my Beloved for thee*
CHAPTER VIII.
The believing Jews.
O That thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother, when I
should find thee without,

O That thou as my brother were that of my mother kind
Did suck the breasts, even at what time I thee without should find.
I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.

2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house, who would instruct
me:

I would thee kiss, yet not be loathed 2 Yea I would thee conduct,
And bring thee to my mothers house who would me there instruct.
I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate.

3 His left hand should be under my head: and his right hand should embrace me.

(...) would thee cause drink spiced wine of my pomegranats juice:
3 Under my head his left hand laid, his right should me embrace.
4 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
love until ^e please.

4 O daughters of Jerusalem, I charge you that you cease
To stir up or awake my love, and that until he please.
CHRIST.
5 Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?

5 Who is this from the wilderness that comes up by and by?
And thus on her Beloved One does leaning still rely?
I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

Under the aple tree I thee did raise up being there,
Thy mother there thee did bring forth, she brought forth that thee bare.
Jewish Church.
6 Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: For love is
strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave:

6 Me as a seal upon thine heart as seal on arm m'ingrave:
For love's as death* strong, jealousy is cruel as the grave.
The coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

7 Many waters cannot quench love, neithe^ can the floods drown it:

The coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a vehement flame:
7 The waters great, love can not quench nor floods can drown the same.
If a man would give all the substance of (...) house for love, It would
utterly be contemned

If of his house the substance all a man for love to buy
Would gladely give, yet would it be contemned utterly.
8 We have a little sister, and she has ^ breasts, what shall we do for our
sister, in i^ day when she shall be spoken for?

8 We have a little sister, which no breasts has less or more,
What shall we for her do the day she shall be spoken for?
CHRIST.
9 If she be a wall, we will build upon her palace of silver: and if she be a
door, we wi^ enclose her with boards of Cedar.

9 If she a wall be, we will on her a palace build of silver;
If she a door be, we her will enclose with boards of Cedar.
The Church.
10 I am a wall, and my breasts like towers* then was I in his eyes as one that
found favor.

10 I am a wall, my breasts they are like towrs upon the ground,
Then was I in his eyes as one that had his favor found.
CHRIST.
11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto keepers:

11 At Baal-Hamon a vineyard king Solomon had set;
The vineyard unto keepers he for profit out had let.
Every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.

Of those his servants evry one for the fruit of the vine
A thousand pieces was to bring of silver that was fine.
12 My vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.

12 My vineyard mine before me is, thou must O Solomon
A thousand have; who keep its fruits two hundred live upon,
13 Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice,
cause me ^ hear it.

13 O thou that in the gardens fair most pleasantly do dwell,
Companions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it well.
The Church.
14 Make haste, my beloved, and be thou lik^ to a Roe, or to a young Heart, upon
the mountain^ of spices.

14 Make have my Welbelov'd, and be thou like unto a To,
Or unto a young Heart that does on hills of spices go.
The Song of Moses at the Red Sea, after God had drowned Pharao and his whole
host. EXODUS 15. 1.
I Will sing unto the Lord, for he has trium phed gloriously; the horse and
his rider ha^ ^he thrown into the sea.

I To the Lord will sing, for he triumphed has gloriously;
The horse he and his rider als has thrown into the sea.
2 The Lord is my strength and song, and h^ is become my salvation: he is my
God, and I wi^ prepare him an habitation;

^ The Lord my strength is and my song, and he is my salvation,
He is my God, and I Will prepare for him an habitation.
My fathers God, and I will exalt him.

3 The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is ^is Name.

He is my fathers God, and I will high exalt his fame:
^ The Lord he is a man of war, JEHOVAH is his Name.
4 Pharaohs chariots and his host has he cast unto the sea: his chosen
captains also are drowned in the Red sea.

4 He Pharos charets and his host has cast into the sea:
Now in the red sea also drowned his chosen captains be.
5 The depths have covered them, they sank unto the bottom as a stone.

5 The fearful depths they likewise have, them covered eachone,
unto the bottom headlongs they then sank as does a stone.
6 Thy right hand, O Lord is become glori^us in power; thy right hand, O Lord,
has dashed in pieces the enemy.

6 Thy right hand Lord it is become in power glorious all,
Thy right hand Lord the enemy has dashed in pieces small.
7 And in the greatness of thine excellency thou have overthrown them that
rose up against thee; thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as
stubble.

7 Who'gainst thee rose them thou ov'rthrew, in great excellency,
Thy wrath thou sentest forth which them consumed as stubble dry.
8 And with the blast of thy nostrils, the waters were gathered together: the
floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of
the sea.

8 The waters at thy nostrils blast, together gathred were:
Floods stood as heaps, in heart of sea, the depths congealed were there.
9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my
lust shall be satisfied upon them:

9 The en'my said, I will pursue, I Will overtake anon,
I Will part the spoil; my lust shall be them satisfied upon;
I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.

10 Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in
the mighty waters.

I Will draw my sword, my hand it shall destroy them all indeed:
10 Thy wind blew, seas them cov^ they in great waters sank as lead:
11 Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst ^he gods? who is like thee, glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

11 Who Is like thee Lord among the gods who is like thee glorious
In holiness, fearful in praise and doing wonders thus?
12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

13 Thou in thy mercy have led forth the people which thou have redeemed:

12 Thy right hand then thou stretched out, earth swallowed them at last.
13 In mercy thou the folk ledst forth which thou redeemed have:
Thou have guided them in thy strength unto ^hy holy habitation

14 The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the
inhabitants of Palestina.

Thou have them to thy holy house in thy strength guided well.
14 Men shall hear, fear, grief shall them seiz in Palestine that dwell:
15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed: the mighty men of Moah trembling
shall take hold upon them: all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.

15 The Dukes of Edom then amazed, strong Moab trembling shall
On them take hold, the Cananites they melt away shall all.
16 Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatness of thine arm they
shall be as still as a stone, till thy people pass over,

16 By greatness of thine arm^ strong fear, dread, shall on them fall,
They shall be still even as a stone till pass thy people all.
O Lord, till the people pass over, which thou have purchased.

O Lord till that the people do pass ov're with great renown,
Which thou by thine Almighty hand have purchased as thine own.
17 Thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
inheritance, in the place O Lord, which thou have made for thee to dwell in.

17 In hill of thine inheritance Lord thou shall bring them well,
And plant them in the place which thou have made for them to dwell.
In the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.

18 The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

O Lord even in the Sanctuary which thy hand stablish'dall:
18 The Lord for ever and also for ever reign he shall.
19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots, and with his horsemen
into the sea, and the Lord brought again the waters of the sea, upon them:

19 For Pharos horse with charets went and horsemen in the sea,
The Lord again sea waters brought upon them fearfully.
But the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.

But those that were the children then of Israel by descent,
They in the midst of all the sea on dry land safely went.
The Song of Moses a little before his death. DEUTERONOMY. 32.
The Preface.
GIve ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my
mouth.

O Ye the heavens that are high do ye to me give ear,
The words that from my mouth proceed O earth now do thou hear.
2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.

2 My doctrine as the rain shall drop, my speech as dew shall pass,
As small rain on the tender herb, and showrs upon the grass.
3 Because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatness unto our
God.

3 Because I surely publish will the Name of God the Lord,
Ye greatness to our God therefore ascribe with one accord.
The first Part.
4 He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.

4 He is the rock, his work's persite, his ways all judgment be;
A God of truth, void of all sin, most just and right is he.
5 They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children:
they are a perverse and crooked generation.

5 Their spot is not his childrens spot, themselves corrupt'd they far,
A crooked generation and a perverse they are.
6 Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? is not he thy
father that has bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee?

6 Unwise people, do ye requite the Lord thus? Is not he
Thy father, buyer? Has he not made and established thee?
7 Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy
father, and he will show thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee.

7 Remember ye the days of old, years past consider well;
Thy father ask, he will thee show, thy Elders will thee tell.
8 When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam,

8 When the most High to Nations did the inheritance divide,
When he the sons of Adam all did separate beside,
He set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of
Israel.

He by his wisdom set the bounds then of the people all,
According to the number of the children of Israel.
9 For the Lords portion is his people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

9 For to his portion has the Lord his people without blot:
And of his own inheritance his Jacob is the lot.
10 He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness: he led
him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.

10 In wilderness he found them, in wast howling desert dry:
He led, instructed, and them kept as th'aple of his eye.
11 As an eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads
abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings.

11 As The Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttreth her young upon,
Her wings does spread, and takes them, and bears them thereon.
12 So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him.

12 So by his might the Lord alone did lead him carefully,
And no strange god there was at all with him in company.
13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the
increase of the fields, and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil
out of the flinty rock.

13 On earths high place he made him ride, fields increase for to eat,
From flinty rocks he made him suck the oil and honey sweet.
14 Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs and rams of the breed
of Bashan,

14 Of Kine the butter, and of sheep the milk, for them in need,
With fat of lambs, and also rams, that were of Bashans breed.
And goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, and thou did drink the pure
blood of the grape.

He gave them goats, with Kidneys fat of wheat that was right good,
And thou also even of the grape did drink the purest blood.
The second Part.
15 But Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick,

15 But Jesurun then waxed fat, and he did also kick:
Thou waxed art exceeding fat, thou art grown very thick,
Thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.

With fatness thou art cov'rd, he then GOD which him made forsook,
And he of his salvations rock light estimation took.
16 They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations
provoked they him to anger.

16 They him provoked to jealousy with strange gods evry way,
Him with abominations to wrath provoked they.
17 They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not* to new
gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

17 To dev'ls not God they sacrificed, to gods whom they not knew,
New gods whom not your fathers feared, that were come up of new.
18 Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God
that formed thee.

18 Thou art unmindfull of the rock which once thee did beget,
And God himself that formed thee thou likewise did forget.
The third Part.
19 And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provocking of
his sons, and of his daughters.

19 And when the Lord it saw, he did abhor them evry one,
Because of the provoking great of daughter and of son.
20 And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall
be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.

20 He said, I Will hide from them my face, and I their end will see:
For they a very froward race, and faithless children be.
21 They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God, they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities:

21 With that which is not God they have me moved to jealousy,
To anger they have me provoked, even with their vanity.
And I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people, I will
provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.

And I Will them move to jealousy with such as are no flock,
Them with a foolish nation to anger I Will provoke.
22 For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and
shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of
the mountains.

22 For fire is kindled in my wrath, it burns to lowest hell,
Earths increase, hills foundations consume and fire it shall.
*23 I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them.

23 Upon them likewise great mischiefs most surely heap I will,
And in mine anger I will spend on them mine arrows ill.
24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with
bitter destruction:

24 They shall be altogether burnt with pain of hunger great,
And with destruction bitter als* devoured with burning heat:
I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of
the dust.

I also will the teeth of beasts upon them fiercely thrust,
Even with the poison that is of the serpents of the dust.
25 The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and
the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.

25 The sword without, terror within, the young man shall destroy,
The virgin, and the suckling als with him whose hairs are gray.
26 I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men:

26 I said, that into corners I would them all scatter then,
I would make their remembrance als to cease from among men:
27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should behave themselves strangely,

27 Yea were it not I feared the wrath of the enemy they have,
And lest that their adversaries should strangely them behave,
And lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all
this.

And lest that they with hauty heart should say these words an one:
Our hand now high is, and the Lord this work all has not done.
28 For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding
in them.

29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end.

28 For of counsel a Nation void they are, nothing know they,
29 O that they wise this understood, and their last end would weigh.
30 How should one chase a thousand* and two put ten thousand to flight, except
their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?

30 How should but one a thousand chase, and two chase thousands ten:
Except their Rock thus had them sold, and them shut up had then.
31 For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.

31 For in no way the rock that is theirs as our Rock mighty is,
Our enemies themselves they are the judges even of this.
32 For their vine is of the vine of Sodom* and of the fields of Gomorrah:
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter.

32 Of Sodoms vine and Gomors fields, their vine is surely all,
Their clusters they most bitter are, their grapes are grapes of gall.
33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venime of aspes.

34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?

33 Their wine of dragons poison is, of asps the venim strong:
34 Is not this laid in store with me my treasures sealed among?
The fourth Part.
35 To me belongs vengeance, and recompense, their foot shall slide in due
time:

35 Vengeance to me and recompense belongs for their crime:
Their foot shall slide assuredly in due appointed time.
For the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon
them make haste.

The day of their calamity it is now near at hand,
And things that shall upon them come make have, and shall not stand.
36 For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants;
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left.

36 For God shall his own people judge, and for his saints repent,
When none shut up or left he sees but that their power is spent.
37 And he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted.

37 And he in his great wrath shall say, where are their gods now gone?
Their stable rock in whom they all did put their trust alone.
38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their
drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.

38 Which fat ate of their sacrifice, and drank drink offerings wine:
Let them rise up now and you help, as your protection fine.
39 See now that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I
make alive; I wound, and I heal:

39 See now that I am he, even I, no god there is with me:
I kill, and make alive; I wound, and als make whole to be.
Neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

Nor is there any now that can out of my hand deliver:
40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.
41 If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will
render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

41 If hold my hand on judgment take, and glittring sword I whet,
I Will render vengeance to my foes, and pay those that me hate.
42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood (and my sword shall devour flesh)

42 I also those mine arrows will make drunk with blood therefore,
The flesh of all mine enemies my sword it shall devore.
And that with the blood of the slain* and of the captives, from the beginning
of revenges upon the enemy.

With blood of those that have been slain and those that captives ly:
From the beginning of revenge upon the enemy.
43 Rejoice, O ye nations with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his
servants,

43 Rejoice ye nations with his folk, for he who does not change,
Will of his servants all the blood in his own time avenge.
And will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his
land, and to his people.

And will to his adversaries a vengeance render full,
And to his people and his land he will be merciful.
The Song of Deborah, and Barak, after the victory against the army of Iabin
King of Canaan; who reigned in Hazor, whose captain was Sisera, whose head was
cut off by Iahell, the wise of Heber. JUDGES 5. verse. 2.
PRaise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves:

FOr the avenging of Israel praise ye the Lord most hy,
When as the people offered themselves most willingly.
3 Hear, O ye kings, give ear, O ye princes; I, even I will sing unto the Lord,
I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.

3 Hear O ye Kings, ye Princes als give ear, I, even I will
Sing to the Lord, to Isreal's God I will sing praises still.
4 Lord when thou wentedst out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of
Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped
water.

4 Lord when thou wentest out of Seir, and marched from Edom field,
The earth did tremble, heavens did drop, the clouds did water yield.
5 The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the
Lord God of Israel.

5 The mountains melted from before the Lord God Eternell,
Even that Sinai from God before, the God of Israel.
6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Iael* the
highways were unoccupied, and the travelers walked through bywayes.

6 In days of Shamgar Anaths son of Jael in the days,
The high ways were unoccupi'd men traveled through bywayes.
7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I
Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

7 They ceased that dwelt in villages, in Israel they did cease,
Till I Deborah in Israel a mother rose for peace.
8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear
seen among forty thousand in Israel?

8 They chose new gods, war seizd their gates was there a shield or spear?
That forty thousand men among in Israel did appear.
9 My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people: Bless ye the Lord.

9 My heart's to Isreal's governors who t'offer did accord
Themselves among people willingly, O do ye bless the Lord.
10 Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that ^it in judgment, and walk by
the way.

10 Ye that do ride on asses white do ye together say;
Ye that do in the judgment sit and walk als by the way.
11 They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing
water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord,

11 Who saved are from the archers noise where they did water draw,
There shall they of the Lord rehearse the righteous acts and law.
Even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in Israel:
then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.

The righteous acts in Israel in villages there done:
Then shall the people of the Lord unto the gates go down.
12 Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song, arise Barak, and lead
thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

12 Wake, wake, wake, wake, Deborah sing, thou Barak rise anon,
Thy captive lead captivity thou Abinoams son.
13 Then he made him that remains have dominion over the nobles among the
people: the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

13 Him that remains dominion^ then he over the Nobles gave
Among people; God dominion made me over the mighty have.
14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek, after thee
Benjamin, among thy people:

14 Of Ephraim against Amalek there was a worthy root:
And after thee, was Benjamin, among thy people great.
Out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the
pen of the writer.

And out of Machir als came down thy Governors, and then
They did come out of Zebulon that handle writers pen.
15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah: even Issachar,

15 And the most mighty Princes there of Issachar that day,
Were with Deborah in the field, even Issachar I say,
And also Barak, he was sent on foot into the valley: for the divisions of
Reuben, there were great thoughts of heart.

Als Barack to the valley sent on foot, did soon depart:
For Reuben his divisions there were great thoughts of heart.
16 Why abodest thou among the sheep folds, to hear the bleatings of the
flocks? for the divisions of Reuben, there were great searchings of heart.

16 Why in sheepfolds abodest thou to hear flocks bleet apart?
For Reuben his divisions were searchings great of heart.
17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher
continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

17 Beyond the Jordan Gilead 'bod, why Dan in ships remained;
Asher continued on sea shore, within his breaches trained,
18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the
death, in the high places of the field.

18 Then Zebulon and Naphtali were people that did yield
Their lives to jeopard unto death, in high parts of the field,
19 The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by
the waters of Megiddo, they took no gain of money.

19 Kings came and fought, in Taanah fought the Kings of Canaan then
They by Megiddos waters fought, of money took no gain.
20 They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.

20 Together against Sisera they fought from heavens hy,
The Stars als in their courses all did fight then by and by.
21 The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon:
O my soul, thou have trodden down strength.

21 The river Kishon, Kishon old away them sweept eachone,
O thou my soul thou surely have, great strength now trodden down.
22 Then were the horse hoofs broken, by the means of the pransings, the
pransings of their mighty ones.

22 Then were the hoofs of horses strong all broken with their bones,
Even by the means of pransings* great, pransings of mighty ones.
23 Curse ye Meroz, (said the angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof:

23 Curse ye the men of Meros all, said the Angel of the Lord:
Curse yo^th 'inhabitans thereof most bitterly by word;
Because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the mighty.

Because that they came not all their help for to afford
Unto the Lord, against mighty men they did not help the Lord.
24 Blessed above women shall Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed
shall she be above women in the tent.

24 Jael of Heber Kenite wife 'bove women blessed shall be,
Above all women in the tent a blessing shall she see.
25 He asked water, and she gave him milk, she brought forth butter in a lordly
dish.

25 He water asked, and she gave him milk of sweet relish,
She also to him butter brought forth in a lordly dish.
26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmens hammer:
and with the hammer she smot Sisera,

26 Her right hand to the hammer there unto the nail she put
Her hand, and with the hammer then there Sisera she smot:
She smot of his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.

When she the through his temples both had stricken in great speed,
And pierced him* thereafter she did there smite off his head.
27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell;
where he bowed, there he fell down dead*

27 He at her feet did bow, he fell, and he lay down anon,
He at her feet bowed, fell, where bowed, there he even dead fell down.
28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the
lattesse, why is his chariot so long in coming?

28 Then Sis'ras mother looked out at windows, and did cry
Through lattesse, what can be the cause his charets thus do stay?
Why tarry the wheels of his chariots?

29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to her self,

Why tarry thus his charet wheels? 29 Her ladies wife did say,
Yea the unto her self returned an answer on this way,
30 Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey, to every man a damsel
or two?

30 Have they not sped? and have they not the wealthy prey also
Divided unto evry man a damsel or two?
To Sisera a prey of diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of needle work,

To Sisera a prey that they of diverse colors make,
Of diverse colors even a prey that is of needle work.
Of diverse colors of needle work on both sides, meet for the necks of them
that take the spoil?

Of diverse colors on both sides of needle work they make,
Which for the neck of them is meet, that thus the spoil do take.
31 So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love him, be as
the sun when he goes forth in his might.

31 Lord let thy foes so perish all; but who him love upright,
Let them be as the Sun, when as he forth goth in his might.
The Song of Hannah, which she sang to God when she had born Samuel, after long
barrenness. 1 SAMUEL 2. verse. 1.
MY heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is
enlarged over mine enemies: because I rejoice in thy salvotion.

MY heart in God does joy, in God my horn's raised: ov're my foes
My mouth enlarged is, for I do in thy health rejoice.
2 There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee: neither is
there any rock like our God.

2 There is none holy as the Lord, for none is thee beside:
Nor is there any rock that does like to our God abide.
3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth:

3 See that henceforth ye do no more exceeding proudly talk,
Nor let your tongue within your mouth with arrogance walk.
For the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.

Because the Lord he is a God of knowledge as we see,
And by him in a balance just all actions weighed be.
4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled, are girt with
strength.

4 The bows even of the mighty men are broken all at length,
And they that stumbled here and there are well now girt with strength.
5 They that were full, have hired out themselves for bread, and they that were
hungry, ceased:

5 They that very full now have hired out themselves for bread,
And they that also hungry were, did cease from having need*
So that the barren has born seve^, and she that has many children, is waxed
feeble.

So that she that still barren was, has born sev'n great and small,
And she that many children has is waxed feeble all.
6 The Lord kills, and makes alive, he brings down to the grave, and
brings up.

6 The Lord almighty does both kill and als alive does save,
He brings up, and likewise he brings down unto the grave.
7 The Lord makes poor, and makes rich he brings low, and lifts up.

7 The Lord is he that makes poor and also makes rich,
He brings very low, and he up lifts to a pitch.
8 He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to set them among princes,

8 He raises from the dust the poor, the beggar from dunghill*
He lifts up, them for to set among the Princes still.
And to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are
the Lords, and ^e has set the world upon them.

Of glorys Throne to make them heirs, for that the Lords alone
Of earth the pillars are, and he the world set them upon.
9 He will keep the feet of his saints, and the ^icked shall be silent in
darkness; for by ^rength shall no man prevail.

^ He of his saints will keep the feet, the wicked all at length
^n dark shall silent be, for none prevail shall by his strength.
10 The adversaries of the Lord shall be bro^en to pieces: out of heaven shall
he thunder upon them:

^0 The Lords adversaries they shall in pieces broken be,
Out of the heaven upon them a thundering make shall he.
The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto
his king, and ex^ the horn of his anointed.

Ends of the earth the Lord shall judge, and strength give to his King,
The horn of his Anointed One he shall exalt to reign.
The lamentations of David for the death of Saul and Jonathan, slain upon the
mountain of Gilboah. 2 SAMUEL 1. verse. 19.
THe beauty of Israel is slain upon thy hi^ places: how are the mighty fallen.

OF Israel is the beauty slain upon thy places hy,
How is it that thy mighty men are fallen shamefully!
2 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon: lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the un circumcised
triumph.

2 Tell't not in Gath nor Askelon, lest Philistines rejoice,
Lest daughters of th'uncircumcisde triumph with shouting voice.
3 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be (...) dew, neither let there be rain
upon you, nor fields of offerings:

3 Ye of Gilboah mountains high O let there be no dew,
Let neither fields of offerings, nor rain be upon you,
For there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as
though he had not been anointed with oil.

For of the mighty is the shield, there cast away as vile,
The shield of Saul as he had not, anointed been with oil.
4 From the blood of the slain, from the fa^ of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan
turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

4 From blood of slain, from mighties fate the bow of Jonathan*
Did not turn back, the sword of Saul returned not empty than.
5 Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their
death they were not divided.

5 Saul, Jonathan, both lovely were and pleasant in their lives,
And in their death at last they not divided were likewise.
They were swifter then eagles, they were stronger then lions.

Then Eagles that are swift in flight they were both swifter far,
Yea they both stronger were also then fiercest lions are.
6 To daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with
other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

6 Ye Isreal's daughters, weep over Saul who with delights eachone
In scarlet clothed, who ornaments of gold your clothes put on.
7 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast
slain in thine ^igh places.

7 How in midst of the battle do the mighty fallen ly!
O Jonathan thou wast even slain upon thy places hy.
8 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been
unto me:

8 My brother Jonathan, I am distressed sore for thee,
For very pleasant thou have been at all times unto me:
Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.

9 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished.

Thy love to me was wonderful, all women's love it past:
9 How fell the mighty, and of war were all the weapons lost!
The Song of David, which he sang to give thanks after that Nathan had promised
him benefits and blessings, but chiefly the Messiah to come of his seed. ^ SAM.
7. verse. 18.
WHo am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto?

O Lord my God, now who am I that thou on me have thought?
What is my house that thou in love me hitherto have brought?
2 And this was yet a small thing in thy fight, O Lord God; but thou have
spoken also of thy servan^s house for a great while to come,

2 And this O Lord God in thy sight, a small thing was in sum;
But of thy servants house thou spak'st for a great while to come.
And is this the manner of man, O Lord God?

3 And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord God, know thy
servant*

Lord God, is this the manner of man? 3 What David more thee to
Can say? for thou O Lord my God do me thy servant kno.
4 For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart have thou done all
these great things; to make thy servant know them.

4 For thy words sake, according to thine own heart have thou done
All those great things, for them to make unto thy servant known.
5 Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God: for there is none like thee, neither
is there any god beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

5 Thou Lord art great, like thee is none, no God is thee beside,
According to all things that we with our own ears have tried.
6 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom
God went to redeem for a people to himself,

6 And what one Nation in the earth does like thy people seem,
Like Israel whom to himself, God went for to redeem,
And to make him a name, and to do for you great things, and terrible for thy
land,

Even for a people, and a Name to make him, and to do
For you great things and terrible, for this thy land also,
Before thy people which thou redeemdst to thee from Egypt, from the nations
and their gods?

Before thy people which thou have* redeemed unto thee
From Egypt, from the Nations, and these their gods that be.
7 For thou have confirmed to thy self thy people Israel to be a people unto
thee for ever* and thou, Lord, art become their God.

7 For to thy self thou Israel have confirmed to thee for ay
A people; and thou art, O Lord, become their God always.
8 And now, O Lord God, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant,
and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou have said.

8 What of thy servant and his house thou Lord have spoken now,
Do as thou said, and so for ay establish it do thou.
9 And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying; The Lord of hosts is the God
over Israel:

9 And let thy Name that is glorious be magnified for ay,
The Lord of hosts he is the God that is over Israel, say;
And let the house of thy servant David be established before thee.

10 For thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant,

Let David's house thy servant be before thee stablish'd well:
10 Thou Lord of hosts, Israls God did to thy servant reveal;
Saying; I will build thee an house: therefore bath thy servant found in his
heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

Thou said I will thee build an house, therefore thy servant he
Has in his heart found for to pray this prayer unto thee.
11 And now, O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou
have promised this goodness unto thy servant.

11 And now, O Lord, that God thou art, thy words are very true,
And thou this goodness promisde have unto thy servant now.
12 Therefore now let it please thee to bless ^e house of thy servant, that it
may continue for ever before thee:

12 Therefore be pleased for to bless thy servants house always,
That it may so continue still before thee fast for ay.
For thou O Lord God, have spoken it, and with thy blessing let the house of
thy servant be blessed for ever.

For thou Lord, God have spoken it, with blessings come from thee
O do thou let thy servants house for ever blessed be.
The Song of Isaiah, concerning the vineyard, wherein Gods people is reproved
for their barrenness in good works, notwithstanding of all the pains were
taken by the Prophets. ISAIAH 5. verse. 1.
NOw will I sing to my welbeloved, a song, of my beloved touching his vineyard:
my welbeloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill.

TO my Beloved of his vine a song now sing I will:
My Welbelov'd a vineyard has in a most fruitful hill.
2 And he fenced it, and gathered our the stones thereof, and planted it with
the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it.

2 He did it fence, and gathered our the stones thereof eachone,
He planted it with choicest vine, a tower he built thereon.
And also made a wine press therein: and he looked that it should bring forth
grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

He a vine-presse made als therein, and looked it should bring forth
Good grapes; but forth at last it brought wild grapes of nothing worth.
3 And now; O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my vineyard.

3 And now, O ye inhabitants of Salem, and als ye
Of Judah men, judge, I you pray, 'twixt my vineyard and me.
4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes?

4 What could I my vineyard unto do more then I have done?
Wherefore when for good grapes I looked, did wild grapes grow thereon?
5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard, I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up:

5 And now go to; I Will tell you what I Will to my vineyard do,
I Will take away its hedge, and it shall be up eaten so:
And break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor dug,

And I Will break down the wall thereof, and it trod down shall be:
6 I Will lay it wast, none pruned shall nor yet it dug see,
But there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that
they rain no rain upon it.

But briars and thorns there shall come up: I also will anon
Command the clouds that they no rain shall rain the same upon.
7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hoasts is the house of Israel, and the men
of Judah his pleasant plant.

7 For vineyard of the Lord of hosts the house of Israel is,
The men of Judah also are the plasant plant of his.
And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry.

And he did then for judgment look, but lo oppression hard;
For rigtheousnesse, but O behold, a cry then there was heard.
A Song of thanks for the mercies of God. ISA. 12. verse. 1.
O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is
turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

I Will thee praise, O Lord, though thou with me most angry wast,
Thine anger turned is away, thou me comforted have.
2 Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord I
EHOVAH is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation.

2 Behold, God's my salvation. I Will trust, and will not fear^
For Lord Jovah's my strength and song, he is my salvation near.
3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water ^ut of the wells of salvation.

4 And in that day shall ye say,

3 Therefore ye of salvation, with joy shall in that day,
Out of the wells draw water als,
4 Ye in that day shall say,
Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make
mention that his name is exalted.

Praise ye the Lord, call on his Name, the doings that are his
Show to his people, mention make that is Name exalted is.
5 Sing unto the Lord; for he has done excellent things: this is known in all
the earth.

5 Do ye now sing unto the Lord; because that he has done
The things that be most excellent; this in all earth is known.
6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the holy one of
Israel in the midst of thee.

6 Of Zion thou inhabitant, cry out, and shouting be:
For of Isra^l the holy One is great in midst of thee,
A Song inciting to confidence in GOD. Isa. 26. verse. 1.
WE have a strong city, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

WE have a city that is strong, the Lord salvation so
He will appoint for mighty walls and bulwarks strong also.
2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may
enter in.

2 O open ye the gates, that so the righteous Nation
Which constantly the truth does keep may enter in anon.
3 Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee: because
he trusts in thee.

3 Assuredly thou will him keep in perfect peace to be,
Whose mind is still upon thee staid, because he trusts in thee.
4 Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting
strength.

4 For ever trust ye in the Lord, for ye shall feel at length,
That in the Lord JEHOVAH is an everlasting strength.
5 For he brings down them that dwell on high, the lofty city he lays it
low, he lays it ^ow, even to the ground, he brings it even to ^he dust.

5 For dwellers high he does bring down, the city proud lays low,
He lays it low, to ground it brings even to the dust below.
6 The foot shall tread it down, even the feet ^f the poor, and the steps of
the needy.

7 The way of the just is uprightness: thou ^ost upright, do weigh the path
of the just.

The foot, poor^s feet and needies steps shall tread it in the way:
Upright's the justs way, thou upright, the just man's path do weigh.
8 Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, ^ave we waited for thee; the
desire of our soul to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

Yea in thy judgments way, O Lord, we waited have for thee,
Our souls desires unto thy Name, and thy remembrance be.
9 With my soul have I desired thee in the ^ght, yea with my spirit within me
will I seek ^e early.

I with my soul desired have thee in the time of hight,
Yea with my spirit within me I will seek thee early right:
For when thy judgments are in the ear^ the inhabitants of the world will
learn right^ ousnesse.

For when the judgments that thou sends upon the earth do press,
Then all the worlds inhabitants will learn thy righteousness.
10 Let favor be showed to the wicked, y^ will he not learn righteousness*

10 Let unto him that wicked is be favor showed not small*
Yet for the same he righteousness will not then learn at all:
In the land of uprightness will he deal (...) justly, and will not behold the
majesty of (...) LORD.

Even in the land of uprightness he will unjustly deal,
And of the Lord the Majesty behold no way he will.
11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, t^ will not see: but they shall see, and
be asham^ for their envy at the people,

11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they
shall see, and be ashamed, because the people they envy.
Yea the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.

12 Lord, thou will or dain peace for us: for ^ou also have wrought all our
works in us.

^ea them thy foes fire shall devore, 12 Lord thou will ordain thus
^irm peace for us, for thou als have wrought all our works in us.
13 O Lord our God, other lords besides ^ee have had dominion over us: but by
thee ^ly will we make mention of thy name.

^ Lord God, besides thee other gods over us dominion had:
^ea only of thy Name, by thee will mention to be made.
14* They are dead, they shall not live; they ^e deceased, they shall not rise:

^ Henceforth these wicked shall not live who are now dead and slain,
^ last they all deceased are, they shall not rise again.
Therefore have thou visited and destroyed ^em, and made all their memory to
perish.

therefore thou have them visited, and them destroyed always,
and als have made their memory to perish quite away.
15 Thou have increased the nation^, O Lord thou have increased the nation,
thou art glorified; thou had removed it far unto all the ends of the earth.

15 Thou have increased the nation, Lord, thou have increased its worth,
You Are glorified; thou it removed far to all ends of earth.
16 Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them.

16 Lord, when they were in trouble they did visit thee anon,
They prayers powered out when was thy chastning them upon.
17 Like as a woman with child that draws near the time of her delivery, is
in pain, and cries out in her pangs; so have we been in the sight, O Lord.

17 As she that is with child draws near to her deliverie;
In pain is, and cries in her pangs, so in thy sight were we.
18 We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought
forth wind,

18 We surely all have been with child, we in great pain of mind
Have all been, we have as it were brought forth the very wind:
We have not wrought any deliverance in the ^arth, neither have the inhabitants
of the world ^allen.

We have not a deliverance wrought on earth, as we perceive,
Nor yet the worlds inhabitants at all down fallen have.
19 Thy dead men shall live, together with ^y dead body shall they arise:

^9 Thy men that dead are they shall live together well they all
^ith my dead body even revive, and als arise they shall:
Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy ^ew is as the dew of herbs, and
the earth shall ^st out the dead.

^wake, sing ye in dust that dwell, as dew of herbs indeed
^o is thy dew, and als the earth shall cast out all her dead.
^ Come, my people, enter thou into thy cham^rs, and shut thy doors about
thee: hide thy ^f as it were for a little moment, until the ^dignation be
overpast.

^ My people, to thy chambers come doors shut about thee fast,
^ thou thee for a moment hide, till wrath be overpast.
21 For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of
the earth for their iniquity:

21 For lo, the Lord out of his place does come most speedily
To punish earths inhabitants, for their iniquity.
The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

The earth shall als disclose the blood, that in it did remain,
And shall no more the means afford, to cover close her slain.
The Song of Hezekiah, after God had healed him of his sickness. etc. ISA. 38.
verse. 10.
I Said in the cutting off of my days, I shall g^ to the gates of the grave: I
am deprived o^ the residue of my years.

IN cutting off my days I said, to gates of grave I Will go:
Of those my years the residue I am deprived so.
2 I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living: I
shall behol^ man no more with the inhabitants of the world.

2 In livings land the Lord, the Lord, I said, I shall not see:
I shall no more see man with those on earth that dwellers be.
3 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me, as a shepherds tent: I have
cut off like a weaver my life:

3 Departed is mine age, and is removed from me with strife
As shepherds tents; I weaver like have thus cut off my life.
He will cut me of with pining sickness: from day even to night will thou make
an end of me.

That I may wholly be cut off, he will pining sickness send,
From day even unto night will thou so of me make an end.
4 I reckoned till morning, that as a lion so will he break all my bones: from
day even to night will thou make an end of me.

4 I reck'ned until morn, that as a lion so will he
Break all my bones; from day to night thou wilt make an end of me.
5 Like a cran or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove,

5 Even like a cran in my distress, or as a swallow sad
So did I chatter: as a dove a heavy mourning had.
Mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me.

Mine eyes they long with looking up now very failed be,
O Lord, I am oppressed sore, do undertake for me.
6 What shall I say? he has both spoken unto me, and himself has done it: I
shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

6 What shall I say? He spoken has, and als has done no less,
I shall go softly all my years in my souls bitterness.
7 O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my
spirit: so will thou recover me, and make me to live.

7 Lord by those things men live, in them my spirit life does take,
And so thou will recover me, and me to live wilt make.
8 Behold, for peace I had great bitterness; but thou have in love to my soul
delivered it from the pit of corruption:

8 O do behold, how for my peace I had great bitterness,
But thou in love have saved my soul from pit of rottenness.
For thou have cast all my sins behind thy (...)

9 For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee: they that go
down into the ^it cannot hope* for thy truth.

My sins thou cast behind thy back: 9 For neither grave nor death
Can praise thee, they that go to pit cannot hope for thy truth.
10 The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father
to the children shall make known thy truth.

10 The living, yea the living shall thee praise, as I this day:
The father to the children shall make known thy truth always.
11 The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the
stringed instruments, all the days of our life, in the house of the LORD.

11 The Lord was ready me to save, we will while we live accord
My songs to stringed instruments in the house of the Lord.
THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH.
CHAPTER. 1.
HOw does the city sit solitaty, that was full of people? how is she become as
a widow?

HOw is it that the City does sit solitary still?
How is she as a Widow now, that people much did fill?
She that was great among the nations, and princess among the provinces, how
is she become tributarie.

She that among the Nations was great, and Princess made*
Among Provinces, how is she thus tributary tread?
2 She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheecks: among all
her lovers she has none to comfort her,

2 She weepeth very sore by night, and on her cheeks are tears;
Among all her Lovers she has none for comfort in her fears.
All her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.

3 Judah is gone into captivity, because of affliction,

Her friends all have dealt treacherously with her, and turned her foes;
^ Judah's gone to captivity, because of many woes;
And because of great servitude: she dwel^th among the heathen, she finds no
rest: all ^er persecutors overtook her between the straits.

And for the servitude that is great: among heathen she does dwell,
^he finds no rest, her took in straits her persecutors fell.
4 The ways of Zion do mourn, because none ^me to the solemn feasts: all her
gates are ^esolate:

The ways of Zion they do mourn, because there is none that
Come to the solemn feasts, yea all her gates are desolate.
Her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, ^d she is in bitterness.

^er Priests they in great trouble sigh, her Virgins more and less
^re grievously afflicted all, and she is in bitterness.
5 Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies ^sper: for the Lord has
afflicted her.

These that are her adversaries, the chief above her be;
Her enemies prosper, for the Lord afflicted her has he.
For the multitude of her transgressions, her children are gone into captivity
before the enemy.

And also for the multitude of her transgressions hye,
Her children before th'en'my are gone in captivity.
6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are
become like hearts that find no pasture,

6 From her that Zions daughter is, the beauty all is gone,
Her Princes are become like Hearts, that pasture do find none.
And they are gone without strength before the pursuer.

7 Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction.

Before the fierce pursuer they without all strength are gone.
7 Salem remembered in the days of her affliction,
And of her miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old,

And in time of her miseries things pleasant to behold,
That she had in possession even in the days of old,
When her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her, the
adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.

When fell in hands of enemies the people of her stock,
And none her helped, the foes it saw, and did her Sabbaths mock.
8 Jerusalem has grievously sinned: therefore she is removed: all that
honored her, despise her,

8 Jerusalem sinned greivously, she is removed therefore:
They all together her despise, that honour^d her before:
Because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth and turns backward.

Because that they her nakedness have seen while she did mourn,
Yea, she does sigh most heavily, and backward als does turn:
9 Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembers not her last end, therefore
she came down wonderfully:

9 Her filthiness is in her skirts, her last end she not on
At all remembers, therefore she came wonderfully down.
She had no comforter: O Lord, behold my affliction: for the enemy has
magnified himself.

No comforter she had; O Lord, see my affliction,
For that the enemy himself has magnified alone.
10 The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for
she has seen

10 The adversary has spread out his hand on what had been
All her things pleasant on the earth, for she has clearly seen
That the heathen entered into her Sanctuary, whom thou did command that they
should not enter into thy congregation.

That heathen men had thus into her Sanctuary gone,
Whom thou would not to enter in thy Congregation.
11 All her people sigh, they seek bread, they have given their pleasant things
for meat to relieve the soul:

11 Her people sigh, they all seek bread, and also they did give
Their things that pleasant are for meat, their soul for to relieve.
See, O Lord, and consider, for I am become ^ile.

12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see,

See Lord: consider, for I Am vile, ^2 Is it nothing to you
All passers by? See and also this well consider now,
If there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith
the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger.

If any sorrow be like mine done to me, every way
Wherewith the Lord afflicted me in his fierce angers day.
13 From above has he sent fire into my bones, and it prevails against them:

13 He from above into my bones sent fire me to assail,
And it in a most fearful way against them does prevail:
He has spread a net for my feet, he has turned me back: he has made me
desolate, and ^aint all the day.

He turned me back, and for my feet a net spread in the way;
He has als made me desolate, and faint even all the day.
14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and
come up upon my nock:

14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand alone,
They wreathed are, and also they come up my neck upon:
He has made my strength to fall, the Lord has delivered me into their hands,
from whom I am not able to rise up.

He has my strength made for to fall, the Lord has me likewise
Delivered into their hands from whom I cannot rise.
15 The Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me: he
has called an assembly against me,

15 God under foot in midst of me has trod my mighties all,
In midst of me; he against me did an assembly call
To crush my young men: the Lord has trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah,
as in a wine press.

So for to crush my young men all, the Lord has with distress
The virgin Judahs daughter trod, even as in a wine press.
16 For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water,
because the comforter that should relieve my soul, is far from me:

16 For this I weep, with water down mine eye does run, mine eye,
For the comforter that my soul should save, is far from me:
My children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.

17 Zion spreads forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:

Because the enemy prevailed my sons are spoiled eachorre*
17 Zion she spreads forth her hands, to comfort her there is none,
The Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round
about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

Concerning Jacob God ordaind his foes about him round;
Among them is Jerus'lem as a menstruous woman found.
18 The Lord is righteous, for I have rebel^ed against his commandment: hear I
pray you, ^ll people, and behold my sorrow:

18 The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his will:
I pray you people all to hear. and see my sorrow still:
My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

19 I called for my lovers but they deceived me;

My Virgins and my young Men are gone in captivity*
19 I for my lovers then did call, but they deceived me.
My priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought
their meat to relieve their souls.

My Priests, yea and mine Elders als then up the ghost did give,
While meat they in the city sought their souls for to relieve.
20 Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress; my bowels are troubled; mine heart
is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled:

20 See Lord, my bowels troubled are, for in distress am I:
Mine heart's turned in me, for I have rebelled grievously,
Abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

21 They have heard that I sigh, there is none to comfort me:

Abroad the sword bereaves, at home there is as death we see:
21 They have all heard that I do sigh there is none to comfort me:
All mine enemies have heard of my trouble, they are glad that thou have done
it* thou will bring the day that thou have called,

Mine enemies all my trouble heard, that thou the same have done
They are right glade; thou wilt bring the day that thou have called anon,
And they shall be like unto me.

22 Let all their wickedness come before thee,

And they shall be like unto me: 22 Do thou now let therefore
Even all their grievous wickedness come clearly thee before.
And do thou unto them as thou have done unto me for all my transgressions, for
my sigh^ are many and my heart is ^aint.

As thou to me for all my faults have done, do them unto,
For now my sighs they many are, my heart is faint also.
CHAPTER II.
HOw has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and
cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel,

HOw Zions daughter has the Lord cov'rd with a cloud in wrath?
And unto earth from heaven cast down Isreal's beauty has?
And remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger*

2 The Lord swallowed up the habitations of Jacob:

And in the day of's wrath did not to mind his footstool call?
2 The Lord the habitations has of Jacob swallowed all,
And has not pitied: he has thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
daughter of Judah:

And he them has not pitied: he in his wrath so sad
Thrown down by force has the strong holds that Judahs daughter had:
He has brought them down to the ground: he has polluted the kingdom and the
princes thereof.

He by his might unto the ground has made them all to fall:
The kingdom he polluted has, and Princes thereof all,
3 He has cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he has drawn
back his right hand from before the enemy,

3 Of Israel all the horn cut off in his fierce wrath has he,
He has drawn back his right hand from before the enemy:
And he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire which devoureth round about.

4 He has bent his bow like an enemy:

Against Jacob he like flaming fire did burn which wastes about:
4 He has his bow bent, like unto an enemy most stout.
He stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant
to the eye, in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion:

As an adversary he stood, what pleasant was to the eye
With his right hand within the tent of Zion all slew he:
He poured out his fury like fire.

5 The Lord was as an enemy: he has swallowed up Israel, he has swallowed up
all her palaces:

His fury he powered out like fire, 5 God was as enemy:
He swallowed Israel, he devoured he palaces so hy:
He has destroyed his strong holds, and has increased in the daughter of
Judah mourning and lamentation.

His strong holds he destroyed has, and has increasde anon
In Judahs daughter mourning great, and lamentation.
6 And he hatth violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were of a garden,
he has destroyed his places of the assembly:

5 He violently removed his tent, as't of a garden were,
He of the assembly has destroyed the places that are there:
The Lord has caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion,
and has despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.

God causd in Zion solemn feasts and sabbaths be forgot,
In his wraths indignation he King, Priest, regarded not.
7 The Lord has cast off his alter: he has abhorred his sanctuary: he has
given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces;

7 The Lord his altar has cast off, and loathed his Sanctuary:
Her palace walls he in the hand gave of the enemy,
They have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn
feast.

Within the house that is the Lords a noise als made have they,
As if it for a solemn feast had been a joyful day.
8 The Lord has purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion; he has
stretched out a line: he has not withdrawn his hand from destroying:

8 The Lord has purposd to destroy his Zions daughters wall
He stretched a line, he not withdrew his hand from wasting all.
Therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament, they languished together.

9 Her ga^es are sunk into the ground;

Therefore he made the rampart so and wall for to lament;
They languished together then; 9 Her gates to ground they went*
He has destroyed and broken her bars; her king and her princes are among the
Gentiles; the law is no more,

He has destroyed, and broke her bars, her King and Princes thus,
Among the Gentiles scattered are, the law no more's for us.
Her prophets also find no vision from the LORD.

10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and keep silence:

Her Prophets also from the Lord at all no vision found,
10 Of Zions daughter th'elders als sit silent on the ground;
They have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with
sackcloth*

In this their grief they have cast up the dust their heads upon,
And they themselves have also girt with sackcloth evry one;
The virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.

11 Mine eyes do fail with tears; my bowels are troubled;

And Salems virgins hang their heads down to the ground right far,
11 Mine eyes they now do fail with tears: my bowels troubled are,
My liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people, because ^e children and the sucklings swoon in the ^reets of the city.

^ly liver is powered on the earth for the destruction
Of people mine, because in streets young children sucklings swoon.
12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swooned as the
wounded in ^e streets of the city,

12 They to their mothers said, Where is corn, wine for to be found?
When as within the cities streets as wounded men they swoon'd,
When their soul was poured out into their mothers bosom.

^v'n at the same time when their soul the city all throughout
^to their mothers bosom was with sorrow powered out.
13 What thing shall I take to witness for ^ce? what thing shall I liken to
thee? O ^ughter of Jerusalem?

13 What thing for thee to witness now shall taken be by me?
O Salems daughter what shall I now liken unto thee?
What shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of
Zion? for breach is great like the sea;

O Virgin Zions daughter dear that I may comfort thee,
What shall I equal thee unto? thy breach great's like the sea.
Who can heal thee?

14 Thy prophets have seen vain and for things for thee,

Who is he that well can thee heal? 14 Thy prophets they have seen
Such things for thee as merely vain and foolish als have been,
And they have not discovered thiue iniqui^ ^urn away thy captivity; but have
seen for false burdens, and causes of banishment.

Thy sin they not discovered, thy thrall to turn away
But burdens false, of banishment the causes seen have they.
15 All that pass by, clap their han^ thee; they hiss and wag their head at
the d^ter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city,

15 All that pass by clap hands at thee they hiss and wag their head
At Salems daughter, saying thus, is this the town indeed,
That men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth?

16 All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and
gnash the teeth:

That men beauties perfection call of the whole earth the joy,
16 Against thee thy foes their mouth make wide, hiss, gnash their teeth do
they:
They say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this is the day that we looked
for: we have found, we have seen it.

They say we have her swallowed up this surely is the day
We looked for; we have it found, we have it seen always.
17 The Lord has done that which he had devised: he has fulfilled his word
that he had commanded in the days of old:

17 The Lord has done what he devisd, fulfilled he has by sword,
That in the days that were of old he did command by word.
He has thrown down, and has not pitied and he has caused thine enemies to
rejoice ove^ thee, he has set up the horn of thine adversarie^

He down did throw and piti'd not, he causd thine enemies
To joy over thee, the horn he raisd of thine adversaries.
18 Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wa^ of the daughter of Zion, let tears
run down lik^ a river day and night:

18 Their heart did cry unto the Lord, O Zions daughters wall,
Let tears down still both day and night even like a river fall.
Give thy self no rest, let not the apple o^ thine eyes cease.

19 Arise, cry out in the night:

Give to thy self no rest, let not cease the apple of thine eye
19 Do thou arise, and in the night cease thou not out to cry:
In the beginning of the watches power o^ thine heart like water before the
face of the Lord

See that in the beginning of the watches thou power out
Thine heart before the face of God, like water round about.
Lift up thy hands toward him, for the life of thy young children, that faint
for hunger in the top of every street.

Thy hand to him lift for the life of thy young children all:
That in the top of every street for hunger fainting fall.
20 Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou have done this: shall the women
eat their ^uit, and children of a span long?

^o Lo* Lord, consider to whom thou have done this us among:
O shall the women eat their fruit and babes of a span long?
Shall the Priest and the Prophet be slain in ^e sanctuary of the Lord.

21 The young and the old lie on the ground (...) the streets:

shall Priest and Prophet thus be slain in Gods own Sanctuary?
21 The young and old both on the ground within the streets do ly:
My virgins and my young men are fallen by ^e sword: thou have slain them in
the day of ^y anger, thou have killed and not pitied.

^ly Virgins, young men fell by sword, thou have them slain at last,
^v'n in the day of thy fierce wrath thou killed, not piti'd have.
22 Thou have called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in the
day of the Lords anger none escaped

22 Thou have as in a solemn day my terrors round about
Called so, that in Gods day of wrath none has escaped out,
Nor remained: those that I have swadled and brought up, has mine enemy
consumed.

Nor yet remained has alive. those that I swadled have,
And als brought up, mine enemy consumed has in the grave.
CHAPTER III.
I Am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

2 He has led me and brought me into darkness, but not into light.

I Am the man that greef has seen by rod of his own wrath.
2 Now into darkness, not to light me led, and brought he has.
3 Surely against me is he turned, he turns his hand against me all the day.

3 Surely against me every where he turned is always:
He in his wrath does turn his hand against me all the day.
4 My flesh and my skin has he made old, he ^th broken my bones.

5 He has builded against me, and compas^ me with gall and travel.

My flesh and skin he has made old, and bones has broken small:
He against me built, and compast me with travel and with gall.
6 He has set me in dark places, as they (...) be dead of old.

7 He has hedged me about, that I cannot (...) out: he has made my chain
heavy.

^ He has me in dark places set, as who of old be dead:
^ He hedged me, out I can not get, my chain he heavy made.
8 Also when I cry and shout, he shuts out ^y prayer.

9 He has enclosed my ways with hewe^ ^tone: he has made my paths crooked.

8 When also I do cry and shout, my prayer out shuts he:
9 He with hew'n stone my ways enclosd, my paths made crook'd to be.
10 He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places.

10 He was unto me as a Bear, that lying is in wait,
And as a lion that is in the places most secret.
11 He has turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he has made me
desolate.

11 He turned has aside my ways, and also more then that
He has me pulled in pieces all, he made me desolate.
12 He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.

13 He has caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.

12 He bent his bow, he as a mark for th'arrow set me so.
13 He has his quivers arrows causd to pierce my reins into.
14 I was a derision to all my people, and their song all the day.

15 He has filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with wormwood.

14 I to my people scorn, and song all day was made to be:
15 He has me filled with bitterness, with wormwood drunk made he.
16 He has also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he has covered me with
ashes.

16 He also broken has my teeth with gravel stones in wrath,
And likewise in his rage he me with ashes cov'red has.
17 And thou have removed my soul far off from peace: I forgot prosperity.

18 And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord.

17 I good forgot, my soul thou have from peace removed far:
18 I said that from the Lord my strength and hope als perished are.
19 Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.

20 My soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

19 Remembering mine affliction, gall, wormwood, misery;
20 My soul does still remember them, and humbled is in me.
21 This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.

22 It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed,

21 This I do to my mind recall, therefore I hope in thee,
22 It Is of the mercies of the Lord we not consumed be,
Because his compassions fail not.

32 They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.

Because that his compassions fail not in any ^ase:
23 They evry morning still are new, great is thy faithfulness.
24 The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

25 The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him.

24 The Lord's my portion, says my soul, I Will hope in him therefore:
25 God's good to them that wait for him to souls that him adore.
26 It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation
of the Lord.

26 It Is good that both a man should hope, and also quietly
For the salvation of the Lord wait on continually.
27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

28 He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him.

27 It Is good in's youth man bear the yoke, 28 He sits so alone,
And silence keeps, because that he has born it him upon.
29 He puts his mouth in the dust: if so ^e there may be hope*

30 He gives his cheek to him that smites ^im, he is filled full with
reproach.

29 His mouth he puts in the dust, if so there hope may be:
30 He to the smiter* gives his cheek, filled with reproach is he,
31 For the Lord will not cast off for ever.

32 But though he cause grief, yet will he ^ve compassion according to the
multitude of his ^ercies.

31 For God for ay will not cast off: 32 Though greef he cause, yet good
He Will pity have according to his mercies multitude.
33 For he does not afflict willingly; nor ^rieve the children of men.

34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,

33 For willingly he not afflicts, nor does men's children grieve:
34 Under his feet all prisoners to crush on earth that live.
35 To turn aside the right of a man before ^he face of the most high.

36 To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord ^pproveth not.

35 To turn aside man's right before the face of the most Hye,
36 God to subvert man in his cause approves not willingly.
37 Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it
not.

37 Who is he that says, and it then to pass comes in the land,
When as the Lord in any way did not the same command?
38 Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good*

39 Wherefore does a living man complain,

38 Out of the most Highs mouth does not both good and ill proceed,
39 Wherefore thus does a living man complain in any need?
A man for the punishment of his sins?

40 Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

A man for his sins punishment* 40 Let us to search attain
And try our ways, and to the Lord let us now turn again.
41 Let us lift our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

42 We have transgressed and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned.

41 Let us lift up our heart and hands to God in heaven at last:
42 We have transgressed and rebel'd and thou not pardoned have.
43 Thou have covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou have slain, thou have
not pitied.

43 Thou persecuted have, and us with anger cov'rd at last,
Thou have us by our enemies slain. and thou not pitied have.
44 Thou have covered thy self with a cloud that our prayer should not pass
through.

45 Thou have made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people.

44 Thou with a cloud thee cov'rd, that through our suit pass should not thus.
45 Th'off-scouring and refuse thou madst in midst of people us.
46 All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

47 Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.

46 Against us opned have their mouths our enemies eachone:
47 Destruction, desolation, fear, and snares come us upon.
48 Mine eye runs down with rivers of water, for the destruction of the
daughter of my people.

48 With rivers even of water great still runs down mine eye,
Even for destruction that does on my peoples daughter ly.
49 Mine eye trickleth down and cease not, without any intermission:

50 Till the Lord look down, and behold from heaven.

49 Mine eye down trickleth, without cease or intermission:
50 Till that the Lord from Heaven behold, and us look down upon.
51 Mine eye affects mine heart, because of all the daughters of my city.

52 Mine enemies chased me sore like a bird, without cause.

51 Mine eye affects* my heart, even for my cities daughters all:
52 Me without cause sore chased my foes like to a bird that is small.
53 They have cut of my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

54 Waters flowed over mine head, then I said, I am cut off.

53 In dungeon they cut off my life, and cast on me a stone;
54 The waters over my head did flow, I said, cut off I Am gone.
55 I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon.

56 Thou have heard my voice, hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.

55 Out of the dungeon low, O Lord, on thy Name called I,
56 Thou heardst my voice, hide not thine ear while I do breath and cry.
57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou said. Fear not.

58 O Lord, thou have pleaded the causes of my soul, thou have redeemed my lise.

57 Thou near drewst when I called on thee, thou said, Let fear be past,
58 Thou pleadst the causes of my soul, my life redeemed thou have.
59 O Lord, thou have seen my wrong, judge thou my cause.

60 Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their imaginations against me.

59 O Lord, do thou now judge my cause my wrong all seen thou have,
60 Thou their imaginations sawst and vengeance against me
61 Thou have heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against
me.

61 Thou have most clearly heard, O Lord, how their reproach did fall,
And their imaginations that were against me all.
62 The lips of those that rose up against me and their device against me all
the day.

62 The lips of those that up did rise against me evry way,
And their device mischievous all against me all the day.
63 Behold their sitting down and their rising up, I am their music.

63 Behold their sitting down, and als their rising up for ill:
I in this case most surely am become their music still.
64 Render unto them a recompense, O Lord, according to the work of their hands.

64 Unto them in thy fury great O thou, the mighty Lord,
According to their handy work a recompense afford,
65 Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

66 Persecute and destroy them in anger, from under the heavens of the Lord.

65 Unto them sorrow give of heart, thy curse unto them render,
66 From under the Lords heavens destroy, them persecute in anger.
CHAPTER IV.
HOw is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the stones of
the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.

HOw is the gold thus dim become? how is fine gold changed far?
The temples stones out in the top of each street powered are.
2 The precious sons of Zion, compareable to fine gold, how are they esteemed
to earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!

2 The precious sons of Sion like to fine gold in the lands,
How are they as earths pitchers thought the work of potters hands?
3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young
ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the
wilderness.

3 Sea monsters even draw out the breasts their young ones suck to give,
My people's fierce like ostritches in wilderness that live.
4 The tongue of the sucking child cleaves (...) the roof of his mouth for
thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto them.

4 The sucking child his tongue for thirst to his mouths roof cleaves so,
The children young ask bread, and none it breaks them unto.
5 They that did feed delicately, are desolate in the streets: they that were
brought up in scarlet, embrace dunghils.

5 They that did delicatly feed in streets are desolate?
They that in scarlet were brought up dunghills embrace for that:
6 For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is greater
then the punishment of the sin of Sodom,

6 Of sins my peoples daughter did the punishment is more
Then of the sin of Sodom was the punishment before.
That was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.

7 Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then milk,

That in a moment was ov'rthrown, no hands did stay on her;
7 Her Nazarites more pure then snow, then milk they whiter were.
They were more rudy in body then rubies, their polishing was of sapphire.

8 Their visage is blacker then a coal: they are not known in the streets:

Then rubies they more rudy were, as polished sapphire drawn:
8 Their visage blacker's then a coal, in streets they are not known.
Their skin cleaves to their bones: it is withered, it is become like a stick.

9 They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that be slain with
hunger:

Their skin it cleaves to their bones, it like a stick does wither:
9 The slain with sword are better then they that be slain with hunger.
For these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field.

For piece and piece those pine away, before to death they yield,
They stricken through are for the want of fruits that fill the field.
10 The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children, they were
their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

10 The hands of women pitiful their children sodden have,
My folk in their destruction for meat them did receive.
11 The Lord has accomplished his fury, he has poured out his fierce anger,
and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the foundations thereof.

11 His fury God accomplished has, his wrath he out did power;
In Zion he put fire which there its ground-works did devour.
12 The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not*
have believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the
gates of Jerusalem.

12 Kings of the earth and dwellers in the world would not believe,
That the en'mie into Salems gates to enter should get leave.
13 For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, that have
shed the blood of the just in the midst of her;

13 For sins of all her prophets vile and priests iniquities,
That of the just have shed the blood in midst of her that lies.
14 They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

14 As blind they wandered in the streets, themselves polluted much
They have with blood, even so that men could not their garments touch.
15 They cried unto them, Depart ye, it is unclean, depart, depart, touch not,
when they fled away and wandered:

15 They cried unto them, Depart, unclean it is, we say,
Depart, depart, touch not, when thus they wandering fled away:
They said among the heathen, they shall no more sojourn there.

16 The anger of the Lord has divided them,

They said among the heathen, there no more sojourn they shall.
16 The anger of the mighty Lord divided has them all.
He will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests,
they favored not the elders.

He Will have no more regard to them: of priests the persons they
Respected not, they favored not the elders any way.
17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed sor our vain help: in our watching we
have watched for a nation that could not save us.

17 For us, our eyes for our vain help as yet they failed ^have,
We in our watching watched for a Nation could not save.
18 They hunt our steps that we cannot go in our streets: our end is near, our
days are fulfilled, for our end is come.

18 They hunt our steps, that we can not go in our streets ov'rcome,
Our end is near, our days fulfilled are, for our end is come.
19 Our persecutors are swifter then the eagles of the heaven* they pursued us
upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness.

19 Our persecutors swifter are then heavens Eagles, thus
On hills they us pursued, and wait in desert laid for us.
20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their
pits, of whom we said,

20 Likewise of our nostrils the breath th'Anointed of the Lord,
Was apprehended in their pits of whom we said this word,
Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen.

21 Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwell in the land of Uz.

Under his ^haddow we shall live among the heathen thus,
21 Rejoice, O E^oms daughter that dwell'st in the land of Uz.
The cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shall be drunken, and shall
make thy self naked.

The cup also shall pass even through till it come unto thee:
Thou shall thy self all naked make, and thou shall drunken be.
22 The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion, he
will no more carry thee away into captivity.

22 The punishment accomplished is of thine iniquity,
O Zions daughter he will no more as captive carry thee.
He will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom, he will discover thy sins.

O thou that Edoms daughter art he surely visit still
Wilt thine iniquity, and he thy sins discover will.
CHAPTER V.
REmember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider and behold our reproach.

REmember now, O Lord our God, what is come us upon,
Consider also our reproach, and it behold anon.
2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to alients.

3 We are Orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.

2 To strangers turnd's our heritage, our house to aliants far:
3 We Orphans are and Fatherless, our mothers widows are.
4 We have drunken our water for money, our wood is sold unto us.

5 Our necks are under persecution: we labor and have no rest.

4 For money we our water drink, our wood is sold to us:
5 Our necks under affliction are we restless labor thus.
6 We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be
satisfied with bread.

6 We unto the Egyptians have given the hand in need,
And to th'Assyrians, for to be but satisfied with bread.
7 Our fathers have sinned and are not, and ^e have born their iniquities.

8 Servants have ruled over us: there is one that does deliver us out of their
hand.

Sinned have our fathers, and are not, and born their sins we have,
Over us ruled servants, and none does out of their hand us save.
9 We gat our bread with the peril of our ^es, because of the sword of the
wilderness.

With peril of our lives we gat our bread in great distress,
because of the most bloody sword that was in wilderness.
10 Our skin was black like an oven, because the terrible famine.

11 They ravished the women in Zion, and ^maids in the cities of Judah.

^ Our skin for famine terrible like as a^e ov'n was black,
They Zions women, Judahs maids by ravishing did take.
12 Princes are hanged up by their hand: the ^es of elders were not honored.

12 Up by their hand most cruelly the Princes hanged are there,
The faces of the Elders als by no man honored were
13 They took the young men to grindo, and the children fell under the wood.

14 The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their music.

13 They took the young men for to grind* boys under wood did fall,
14 The Elders ceased from the gate, from music young men all.
15 The joy of our heart is ceased, our dau^ is turned into mourning.

16 The crown is fallen from our head: (...) unto us that we have sinned.

15 Joy of our heart it ceased is, our dance to mourning's turned,
16 The crown is fallen from our head, woe's us that we have sinned.
17 For this our heart is fa^, for these things our eyes are dim.

18 Because of the mountain of Zion, which desolate, the foxes walk upon it.

17 For this our heart is saint, our (...) are dim for things so done*
18 For Zions hill that is desolate, it foxes walk upon.
19 Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever: thy^rone from generation to generation.

^9 Thou who art the most mighty Lord remainst for ever fast:
Thy Throne from generation does to generation last.
20 Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?

21 Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we ^ll be turned:

^0 Why us forgetst thou still and als ^so long forsak'st us all:
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and turned be we shall:
Renew our days as of old.

22 But thou have utterly rejected us: thou art ^y wroth against us.

^n as of old renew our days:
22 But utterly thou both ^ist us rejected, and thou art with us exceeding
wroth.
The Song of Jonah, for his deliverance out of the belly of the Whale. Jonah.
2. verse. 2.
Cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the
belly of hell ^d I, and thou heardest my voice.

BY reason of my trouble I to God who heard me cried,
Out of hells belly did I cry, thou heardst my voice I tried.
2 For thou had cast me into the deep, in (...) midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me bout, all thy billows and thy waves passed over (...)

2 For thou had cast me in the deep, in midst even of the sea,
Floods compassde me, thy billows all and waves past over me.
3 Then I said, I am cast out of thy (...) yet I will look again toward thy
holy temple.

3 Then said I, I out of thy sight am cast with great disdain,
Yet to thy holy temple I at last will look again.
4 The waters compassed me about eve^ the soul: the depth closed me round
about, weeds were wrapped about my head.

4 The waters compassde me about even to the soul indeed,
The depth me closd about, and weeds were wrapped about my head.
5 I went down to the bottoms of the m^tains; the earth with her bars was about
for ever:

Even to the bottomes I went down of mountains high that be,
^ikewise the earth was with her bars for ever about me.
Yet have thou brought up my life from corru^ion, O Lord my God.

^et thou who art the Lord my God, now by thy power alone
^ly life in danger great have brought up from corruption.
6 When my soul fainted within me, I re^mbred the Lord, and my prayer came in
unto ^e, in thine holy temple.

The Lord I did remember when my soul did faint in me,
^to thy holy Temple came my prayer unto thee.
7 They that observe lying vanities, forsake ^ir own mercy.

They that do lying vanities observe in any way.
The mercy then that is their own they do forsake always.
8 But I will sacrifice unto thee with the ^ice of thanksgiving, I will pay
that that I have ^wed: salvation is of the Lord.

But I to thee with voice of thanks will sacrifice afford,
I will what I have vowed pay; salvation's of the Lord.
The Song and prayer of Habbakkuk, upon Sigionoth. HABAK. 3. verse. 2.
I Have heard thy speech and was afraid,: O Lord, revive thy work in the midst
of the years in the midst of the years make known; in wra^ remember mercy.

I Heard thy speech, and was afraid, in midst of years on earth,
Revive thy work, Lord make it known on mercy think in wrath.
2 God came from Teman, and the holy o^ from mount Paran. Selah. His glory
cover^ the heavens, and the earth was full of his prais^

2 From Teman and from Paran moun^ came God the holy One, Selah.
His glory cov'rd the heavens, his praise filled all the earth anon,
3 And his brightness was as the light, he h^ horns coming out of his hand, and
there wa^ the biding of his power.

3 His brightness als was as the light, out of his hand moreover
He horns had coming, and there was the hiding of his power.
4 Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.

5 He stood and measured the earth:

4 Before him went the pest, and coals went burning from his feet;
5 He stood and also measured the earth as was most meet:
He beheld and drove asunder the nations, and the everlasting mountains were
scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways are everlasting.

He looked and sunder nations drove, old mountains scattred were,
The hills perpetual did bow, his ways eternal are.
6 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of
Midian did tremble.

6 The tents of Cushan I did see under affliction;
The curtains of the Midian land did tremble evry one.
7 Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the
rivers?

7 Was the displeasure of the Lord made against the rivers fall?
Or was thine anger that is great against the rivers all?
Was thy wrath against the sea, that tho^ did ride upon thine horses, and thy
chariots o^ salvation?

Or was thy wrath against the sea that thou did ride upon*
Thine horses and the chariots of thy salvation?
8 Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy
word, Selah. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.

8 Thy bow was made quite naked as thou oaths to tribes did give,
Even thine own word; thou also did the earth with rivers cleave.
9 The mountains saw thee, and they trembled; the overflowing of the water
passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high.

9 The hills thee saw, and trembled all, great waters passed by,
The deep his voice did utter then, and lift his hands on hy.
10 The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitations: at the light of thine
arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear,

10 The Sun and Moon stood where they dwelt, of those thine arrows clear*
They at the sight went, and the shine of thy most glittring spear.
11 Thou did march through the land in indignation, thou did thresh the
heathen in anger.

11 Thou in thine indignation through all the land did press,
And als the heathen people thou did in thine anger thresh.
12 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed,

12 Thou of thy people wentest forth for the salvation:
Yea even for the salvation great with thine Anointed One,
Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the
foundation unto the neck. Selah.

Out of the house of wicked men thou did wound the head,
Discov'ring the foundation unto the neck with speed. Selah.
13 Thou did strike through with his staves the head of his villages: they
came out as a whirlewinde to scatter me:

13 Thou through his village heads did strike with staves of his that be,
They as a whirlewind did come out, and that to scatter me:
Their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.

14 Thou did walk through the sea with thine horses through the heap of great
waters.

Their joy it was as to devore the poor man secretly:
14 Through heaps of water great thou walkst with horses through the sea.
15 When I heard, my belly trembled: my lips quivered at the voice: rottennes
entered into my bones,

15 My belly trembled when I heard* and at the voice anon
My lips did quiver, rottenesse did enter in my bone:
And I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he
comes up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops.

I trembled in my self, that I might rest in days most sad,
When he up to the people comes with troops he will them invade.
16 Although the fig tree shall not blossom* neither* shall fruit be in the
vines, the labor of the olive shall fail,

16 Though that the fig tree blossom not nor fruit in vines shall be,
The labor of the olive fat shall fail as all shall so.
And the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold,
and there shall be no herd in the stalls:

The fields shall not yield any meat, the flock als from the fold
Shall be cut off, there shall no herd in stals be young or old.
17 Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

17 Yet I in him will now rejoice who is the Lord alone,
I also joy will in the God of my salvation.
18 The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hindes feet, and
he will make me to walk upon mine high places.

18 The Lord my God hs is my strength, he will make my feet to be
Like feet of Hindes, he will make me walk upon my places hie.
The Song of Mary, after Elizabeth told her that at her salutation the child in
her womb leaped for joy. Luke 1. 46.
MY soul does magnify the Lord,

2 And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

MY soul now with all gladness filled the Lord does magnify,
2 My sprit rejoiced has in God a Savior for me.
3 For he has regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for behold, from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

3 For of his handmaid he did so regard the state so small,
For lo, all generations me from henceforth blessed shall call.
4 For he that is mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his name.

5 And his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation.

4 He mighty did great things to me, and holy is his Name:
5 They that him fear from race to race, his mercy have on them.
6 He has showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud, in the
inmagination of their hearts.

6 He with his arm has showed strength, the proud he in all parts
In the imagination has scattered of their hearts.
7 He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.

7 He has put down even from their seats those that most mighty be,
And also he exalted has them of a low degree.
8 He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away.

8 Them that are hungry he has filled with good things evry way,
And those that rich are also he has empty sent away.
9 He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy.

10 As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

9 He helped his servant Israel, he mercy did remember,
10 As he unto our fathers spoke; t'Abr'am and's seed for ever.
The Song of Zacharias after he had been nine months dumb for not believing
the angel Gabriel. Luke 1. verse. 68.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, for be has visited and redeemed his people,

THe Lord the God of Israel for ever blessed be,
For that his people visited and als redeemed has he.
2. And has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant
David.

2 And of salvation he for us has raised up on hy
A glorious horn in David's house, who served him faithfully.
3 As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the
world began.

3 As by the mouth of those that were his holy prophets than,
Which have among his people been even since the world began.
4 That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that ha^
us.

4 That from those that our enemies are we should be saved here;
And likewise from the hand of all that hatred to us bear.
5 To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
covenant.

5 The mercies promisd to perform unto our fathers ever,
And als his holy Covenant made with them to remember.
6 The oath which he swear to our father Abraham,

7 That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies,

6 The oath which unto Abraham our father then he swear*
7 That he would grant that we from those saved that our enemies are,
Might serve him without fear.

8 In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

Without all fear so might him serve, 8 In holiness always
And righteousness before him als of our life all the days
9 And thou child shall he called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shall
go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways;

9 And thou O child shall called be the Highests prophet rare.
For thou before the Lord shall go, his ways for to prepare.
10 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their
sins.

10 That so he might the knowledge give of his salvation
Unto his people, by their sins most free remission.
11 Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high
has visited us,

11 Even through the mercy of our God that tender is, whereby
Us on the earth has visited the DAYSPRING from on hy.
12 To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

12 To light them that in darkness sit, and in death shade abide,
Into the way of holy peace our feet there for to guide.
The Song of SIMEON. Luke 2. verse. 29.
LOrd now let thou thy servant depart i^ peace, according to thy word.

NOw in thy mercy let thou thine own servant O Lord
At last by death in peace depart, according to thy word.
2 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation:

3 Which thou have prepared before the face of all people,

2 For thy salvation mine eyes have seen for great and small,
3 Which thou prepared have before the face of people all.
4 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israle.

A precious light to lighten all the Gentiles far and near,
And als the glory of Israel that is thy people dear.
FINIS.
Georgii Buchanani hymnus Matutinus ad Christum.
PRoles parentis optimi,
Et par parenti maximo,
De luce vera vera lux;
Verusque de Deo Deus:
En nox recessit jam nitet
Aurora luce praevia
Coelum solumque purpurans:
Et clausa tenebris detegens;
Sed fuscat ignorantiae
Caligo nostra pectora,
Et nubilis erroribus
Men's pene cedit obruta.
Exurge sol purissime,
Diemque d^ mundo suum:
Nostramque noctem illuminans
Erroris umbram discute.
Dissolve frigus horridum,
Arvumque nostri pectoris,
Calore lampadis tuae,
Humore purganoxio:
Ut irrigetur coelitus
Roris beati nectare,
Et centuplo cum foenore
Coeleste semen proferat.
A Morning Hymn for CHRIST.
ODay spring from on hy
Cause pass away our night,
Clear first our morning sky,
And after shine thou bright:
2
Of lights thou art the Light
Of righteousness the Sun,
Thy beams they are most bright,
Through all the world they run*
3
The day thou have begun,
Thou will it clearer make,
We hope to see this Sun
High in our Zodiac.
4
And there he beams shall shake,
Of a most golden how,
Which fading flowrs shall make
Their colors to renew.
5
O make thy morning dew
To fall without all cease,
Do thou such favor show
As unto Gideons fleece.
6
O do thou never cease,
To make that dew to fall
The dew of grace and peace,
And joys celestial.
7
This morning we do call
Upon thy Name divine,
That thou among us all
Cause thine Aurora shine.
8
Let shadows all decline
And wholly pass away,
That light which is divine.
May bring to us our day.
9
A day to shine for ay,
A day that is most bright;
A day that never may
Be followed with a night.
10
O of all lights the light,
The light that is most true,
Now bani^h thou our night,
And still our light renew.
11
Thy face now to us show,
O Son of God most dear,
O Morning Star most true
Make thou our darkness clear.
12
Nothing at all is here
That with thee can compare,
^ unto us draw near,
And us thy children spare.
13
Thy mercies they are rare
If they were understood,
Wrath due to us thou bare
And for us shed thy blood.
14
Like beasts they are most rude,
Whom reason cannot move;
Who do not for thy good
Thee most entirely love.
15
Make us mind things above,
Even things that most excel,
Of thine untainted love
Give us the sacred seal.
16
In mercy with us deal,
And all our sins remove,
Thy self to us reveal,
And this our song approve,
17
Us in thy mercy move
To walk still in thy way
First make us sick of love,
And then with flagons stay.
18
Let us not go astray
To wander far from thee,
Thou art the only way
To joys that lasting be,
19
O that we light could see.
That shines in thy face,
So at the last should we
To glory go from grace;
20
Within thy sacred place,
Is only true content,
Where God's seen face to face
Above the firmament.
21
O that our hours were spent
Among the sons of men,
To praise th'Omnipotent!
Amen, yea, and Amen.
FINIS.

