AN ODE Occasioned by the DEATH OF THE QUEEN, WITH A LETTER From the AUTHOR TO
Mr. DRYDEN. abusing him severely.

By a Gentleman A True Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Francis Saunders, at the Blue Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New-Exchange, MDCXCV. 14. June.

TO Mr. Dryden.
SIR,
THough I have little Acquaintance with you, nor desire to have more, I take
upon me, with the Assurance of a Poet, to make this Dedication to you, which I
hope you will the more easily excuse, since you have often used the same
freedom to others; and since I protest sincerely, that I expect no Money from
you.

I could not forbear mentioning your Admired Lewis, whom you compare to
Augustus, as justly as one may compare you to Virgil; Augustus (though not the
most exact Pattern of a Prince) yet, on some Occasions, showed Personal Valor,
and was not a League-Breaker, a Poisoner, a Pyrat: Virgil was a good Man and a
clean Poet, all his Excellent Writings may be carried by a Child in one hand
more easily, than all your Almanzors can be by a Porter upon both shoulders.

When I saw your prodigious Epistle to the Translation of Juvenal, I feared you
were wheeling to the Government; I confess too I long expected something from
you on the late sad occasion, that has employed so many Pens, but it is well
that you have kept silence; I hope you will always be on the other side; Did even
Popery ever get any honor by you?

You may wonder that I subscribe not my Name at length, but I defer that to
another time: I hear you are Translating again, let English Virgil be better
than English Juvenal, or it is odds you will hear of me more at large; in the mean
time, hoping that you and your Covey will dislike what I have written, I remain,

Sir, Your very Humble Servant, A. B.

AN ODE Occasioned by the DEATH of the QUEEN.
THE Queen is dead and Lewis lives!
O Justice, though from Earth long since you flew,
Will you forsake the Heavens too?
O where are the Rewards that Virtue gives?
Or gives she none,
But her Poor helpless self alone?
Do the most earnest Vows made by Mankind
To the Great God above mix idely with the Wind?
Has the Almighty from His height
But an imperfect sight
Of things below the Firmament?
Or, if He plainly sees and hears,
Can He be Goodness, yet would not relent
To a whole wretched Nation's Prayers and Tears?
Cease to expostulate, Vain Man,
The Almighty (much offended) can,
But will not always see and hear;
He shuts His pitying Eye, He stops His willing Ear:
Virtue the best Rewards to MARY gives,
Justice in Heaven alone must refuge find:
For a sad Vengeance on depraved Mankind,
The Queen is dead, and Lewis lives.
To us, alas! she is dead; no more, no more, the Queen
By Human Eyes is seen:
From the Corrupted Age she is flown
Not to behold
Votes bought and sold;
Into the Seats of Holiness she is gone:
Less perfect Saints must stay
For part of their wished Heaven till the Great Judgment-Day:
She Is now Entire in the High Palace, where
Few Earthly Rulers ever will appear:
She Is now where she will Her Glorious William see,
(But Guarded Nations pray that late the time may be)
With Him she will live above
In Triumph and in Pure Eternal Love.
For Ever near The Almighty is Her Place
She Is clothed with Light,
The Angels she beholds, employs their fight,
And to the Heavens adds the Beauty of Her Face:
The Cherubins and Seraphins rejoice,
To the Celestial King
Harmoniously they sing,
And hear the Music of Her Voice.
Thus Blessing and thus Blessed,
The Pious Queen looks down
From Her Etherial Throne,
And wonders that the World's possessed
Still with Infernal Vice! What pleasure Tyrants find
In the destruction of Mankind!
Why madly Heaven to lose,
By various Wickedness, so many Mortals choose!
FINIS.
THE Temple of Death, a Poem; written by the Marquess of Normanby. Horace of
the Art of Poetry, made English by the Earl of Roscommon. The Duel of the
Stags, by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard. Together with several other
Excellent Poems by the Earls of Rochester and Orrery, Sir Charles Sedley, Sir
George Etheridge, the Honorable Mr. Montague, and other choice Pens. To which
are added several Poems of the Honorable Madam Wharton. The Second Edition
Corrected.

An Epistle to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord
Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, occasioned by His Majesty's Victory in
Ireland.

An Epistle to Charles Montague Esquire; on His Majesty's Voyage into Holland, by
Mr. George Stepny.


