A POEM upon the CORONATION.

By J. Baber Esquire;

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham. 1685.

A POEM upon the CORONATION.
LET the Globe mend its pace, Stars Stars push on,
Let Moons change quick, and Phoebus swifter run;
May the Thames faster Ebb, and faster Flow,
Let Nature her Concern for Britain show,
Time whet his Scythe, to cut the Hours, which stay
The Glories of the CORONATION Day;
May the kind Skies lend aid, the Spring to dress,
And Trees in Early Blossoms Joys express.
My Pulse does with unusual fastness beat,
And shows Desire impatient, as it is great!
Haste, Glorious Morn! for Britain's greedy Eyes
Will follow Phosphor, till he quits the Skies.
With shouts and Acclamations, their Old Way,
The Multitude will their Allegiance pay.
The Loyal Soldiers of the Land and Seas
Their Joys shall often repeat in loud Huzza's:
Extravagant Mirth be proper every where,
Philosophers shall Bacchanals appear.
Oh Bacchus, how have I in Envy Those,
Who loyal Hearts infused in Thee exposed!
But I, spurred on by Importuning Muse,
To show my gladness, must my Credit lose;
No Theme shall ever draw me in again:
Heart once atone for my Transgressing Pen.
Hold, Muse! forbear those Joys to antedate,
Would you could the past Acts of JAMES relate,
His Valor for his Countries Glory shown,
His Love on much more nice occasions known,
During our Civil Broils, distracted Rage,
How he retired, and chose a Pilgrimage!
He did however with regret remove
From England, though unworthy of his Love.
Even then his Thoughts were bent of the Kingdom's Good,
More than to seek his Adversaries Blood:
Like the True Mother he resigns his share,
The Infants dear-beloved Life to spare;
The careless Whore mean while with all her heart
The Babe would sever, to obtain a part:
So for our Peace, YORK sometime stepped aside,
And Others staid the Nation to divide.
Tell what, since Britain's Monarch he is proclaimed,
Is done, and how his Subjects Hearts are gained:
How All his Declaration did behold,
And wished it writ in Characters of Gold.
This Golden Days denotes; for, from his Mouth,
Did ever fall Indubitable Truth?
Safely on him may England's Church depend,
Pious he is, and will the Faith defend:
The Faith I mean of our Progenitors,
We by our Practice scarce can call it Ours;
That Faith and Loyalty go hand in hand,
And thus united shall Hells Gates withstand.
All who to be True Christians do profess,
To you, Great Sir, must say with thankfulness,
Your Sacred Word our Faith's defense secures.
And now Jove's safety does consist in Yours.
More than Religion, famed for Liberty,
England's pronounced, as in past Ages, free;
The Laws with force attacque, whoever dare,
Your Self, their Second, in the Fight declare;
Thus when you of our Laws protection take,
You choose the same which you your self would make.
They dream of Safety, who rely on Laws,
For few are perfect, clear, and void of Flaws.
Some with Obscurity, some Doubts abound,
Some were designed to puzzle and confound;
But JAMES's Justice all Defects supplies,
And he sleeps safely, who on him relies.
His Conquering Justice, when he takes the Field,
Must make his Enemies, like Subjects yield,
By that to him, the Universe must own,
A Right to Victory as to his Crown.
What, though his Genius him to Arms incite,
His Prudence can dispose the time to fight,
That Prudence which a settled Government,
Has now contrived, and gave the Land content,
That of his Treasury himself takes care,
And does his Subjects Blood, and Substance spare,
To Us a Father's Tenderness he shows
That All Things he inspects, and All Things knows.
Kings that have just took pains, to view about,
And able Ministers by chance pick out,
Have on the Toils of Servants, built their Fame;
By his own Labors JAMES makes known his Name.
The Minister grows almost out of date,
He Supervizes Judge, and Magistrate,
And bears alone the Burden of the State.
Factions, and Plots he will in their Bud defeat,
Tares shall no more spring up amongst the Wheat.
Nor can his lofty, vast, unbounded Mind
To rule his Kingdoms only be confined,
His Vigilance does over the Main extend,
And the Ocean in his Thoughts does comprehend.
He Admiral becomes, no less than King,
And him you would present judge at Every Thing.
For some great End it was, no doubt, that Fate
So soon to Heaven did mighty CHARLES translate,
Whose Health, and Vigor, did the world beguile,
With hopes that he should longer Rule this Isle;
But now we find this sudden Work was done
To place great JAMES upon his Questioned Throne,
Rebellion to subdue, and those confute
That dared about the Crown's Descent dispute,
To lay 'em prostrate, solemnly to own
Thy Title they contested to the Crown.
These had affirmed, should CHARLES have you survived,
To Reign in Peace you never could have arrived,
And that their Bill had been a flaming Sword
To guard the Throne from you their Lawful Lord,
Posterity intending to delude
With compast Projects, which were but pursued.
Let a long Reign the Contrary evince,
Make us, Sir, understand who makes our Prince,
Make Heaven's Will be better understood,
The Crown's Descent, Proximity of Blood,
The word, Succession, with reserve to use,
As was Jehova's Name by Pious Jews,
Those whose Icarian boldness soared so high,
With melted Wings (which nearer Earth could fly)
By Royal Beams, came tumbling from the Sky.
Crowned with one King more Virtues never were seen,
Never so many Graces in one Queen,
Whose Beauty to describe Attempts were always weak,
Nor shall I on that Subject silence break;
Where Laureats have of Just Description failed,
That Theme by Verse should be no more Assailed.
Tasso the Poet of your Ancient Line,
Were he alive, this Subject must decline,
With me confess, who am discouraged quite,
It Is to your disadvantage all men write.
In History it never did appear
Where King and Consort better coupled were,
How often are Kings with homely Persons caught?
They Married are indeed, but ye are matched.
And may your God-like Persons, many more
Years Reign together, than ye lived before:
Our Hopes are great, but I shall little say
Of Sons, from you, which shall great Britain sway.
Next ye
The Greatest Christian Princes on the Earth,
Expected twenty years a Dauphin's Birth,
And since the Greatness of his conquering Fame,
Shows, Heaven does take more Time, a King to frame
Than other Men. Then Britain cannot despair
'Twixt such a Couple in due Time an Heir.
Mean while her present Happiness all Tongues must sing,
The Greatest Subject JAMES become the Greatest King.
FINIS.

