BABEL and BETHEL: or, The POPE in his Colors.
WITH The Church of Englands Supplication to his Majesty, our gracious
Sovereign, the true Defender of the Faith; To protect her from all the
Machinations of Rome, and its bloody Emissaries.
Rome's Scarlet whore does here in Triumph Ride,
And Spurns off Sovereign Crowns in Height of Pride
Poor Christians and brave Cities too she Burns:
And Stabbs and Poisons daily serve her Turns.



Behold our Church (like Esther here does tender
Her Supplications to the Faiths Defender:
In vain Rome Plots, whilst Charles ye Scepter Sways
May Sled and Gibbet end all Traitors Days.



SCarce had bright Truth, with an enlivening Ray,
Chased the black Mists of Ignorance away,
Restored the Gospel, and our Souls set free
From slavish Chains of New Idolatry;
But all the Powers of Darkness did unite,
And club their hellish Mists to Eclipse that Light.
As when from Egypts Thraldom Israel came,
Led by a Cloud by day, by night a Flame,
Straight cruel Pharaoh did Gods Flock pursue,
Till the Seas Billows all his Host o'rethrew:
So, in the early Reformations dawn,
When Englands Church had seas'nably withdrawn
Herself from Spiritual Egypts dangerous yoke,
Endeav'ring Truths long Banished to revoke;
Winnow'd the Chaff from Corn, the Dross from Gold,
And would no more Romes Superstitions hold:
That haughty Pharaoh with the Triple Crown
(Through all the World for Pride and Rapine known)
Bestirred himself, and from each gloomy Cell
Summoned up all the Troops of raging Hell,
At once to ruin both our Church and State,
By close Intrigues of Spite, and open Hate.
A thousand Plots, a thousand Snares were laid;
With Craft they undermine, with Force invade.
Pregnant with Mischiefs, every Age they show
Some recent Cruelties, some Treasons new.
Singly at first began their Butchers Trade;
Smithfield was then their flaming Shambles made.
Next, the whole Kingdom at one Blow they hope
To sacrifice unto their Moloch-Pope.
But still incircled with Heavens mighty Arm,
Blessed Isle! thou stand'st secure, and free from harm.
The Invincible Armade of haughty Spain
Attempts our Angel-guarded Coasts in vain.
Fauxes dark Lanthorn's brought to Light; and Thames
Triumphs over baffled Tyburs bitter streams,
Seeing its LONDON more illustrious grown
By all those Firebrarnds that on her were thrown.
Those Modern Bloodhounds, who so curstly sought
Our Sovereigns Life, and Ruin to have brought
Upon us All, in their own Traps are caught.
For these repeated Mercies let us pay
Kind Heaven our Thanks in some uncommon way;
And never turn back in Popish paths to stray.
Mean time this Figure courts your welcome Eye,
Where first you may that Man of Sin descry,
Romes mighty Mufti, who in Pomp does sit,
And owns no Rule (but's Lust) of Just, or fit.
Two Swords are Brandisht in his bloody hand,
Boasting both Souls and Bodies to Command;
The double Engines of his fatal Ills;
First he Excommunicates, and then he Kills.
Two Keys, the one locks Truth up from men's eyes,
The Other sets open the Shop of Heresies,
Errors, and Superstitions, which are hurled
By's busy Imps ore all the hoodwinked world.
From his vile Mouth proceeds a reaking steam
Of Pride, which does both Kings and God Blaspheme;
Usurps the Powers Divine; makes void God's Laws;
Pardons All Sin for Gold; and over-aws
Poor Mortals with his full-mouthed Curses, till
They truckle to his haughty boundless Will.
Treads on the Pope Alexander set his foot on the neck of the Emperor
Frederick the first, saying, Thou shall tread on the Asp, and walk on the
Basilisk: And afterward Crowning his Son, placed the Crown between his feet,
and so put it on his head, and then spurned it off again; to show he had Power
to Depose him.
Necks of Emperors, and owns
A Power at pleasure to Kick off their Crowns.
This is that Holy-monstrous-three-Crown'd Head,
Whereby Rome's cruel Synagogue is led.
How long! how long, Lord! Holy, Just and True!
Shall thy Revenging Arm cease to pursue
This earthly Lucifer? Why sleeps thy Thunder
To crush such Pride, and break these bands asunder?
Hasten thy thickest Plagues t'avenge their Cause
Whom he has Martyred for thy Sacred Laws.
Make all true Christian Kings to hate that Whore, Rev. 17.16.

And Burn the Strumpet they did once Adore.
Allow this Transport, Reader; if thou art
A Protestant, like Zeal must warm thy heart.
But next, Behold! a nobler Scene is shown,
Our Gracious Sovereign on his well-fixt Throne.
To whom, Our Church, beset on every side
With Popish Hamans fierce and cruel Pride,
Like good Queen Esther bows her Reverend Knee,
And thus implores his known Benignity;
"Great Prince! preserved by Miracle! I sue
"First to my Head in Heaven, and next to You.
"For me Your Glorious Father lost his Crown,
"And long Your Self were Banished from Your own.
"In those black Days how often did You maintain
"My Holy Truths, whilst Jesuits barked in vain!
"That Constancy Heaven now rewards with Power,
"To yoke those Savage Boars, that would devour
"My tender Plants, and with fresh Plots pursue
"To strike me dead, by Murdering of You.
"Let not Zerviah's brood too strong become,
"But scatter all th'Intrigues of bloody ROME.
This said --
See! how the King (ever the Churches Friend)
Does straight his gracious Scepter forth extend;
Professing 't shall to all the World be known,
Her Safety's precious to Him, as His Own.
This Justice must secure: To spare sometimes
Is Cruelty, and does encourage Crimes.
To Execution let the Guilty go,
And the next Age a needful Warning show.
Of Catholic Religion prate no further,
Your Crimes are Treasons, Blood, and horrid Murder.
O Rome! Lives yet that Wolf which was thy Nurse,
When growing Great, thou grew'st the whole Worlds Curse?
May none yet leap thy Walls, or leave thy See
Unslain, though he a King and Brother be?
Retainst thou yet that Savage kind, to Prey
On the distressed Flock which shuns thy way?
Do all that suck thy breasts, for Milk suck Blood?
Dare none that spring from thee Die well? do good?
Must Gibbets only Rock them to their Rest?
Do they desire that Death, become they't best?
Must Traitorous Villains only be thy Saints?
Wear none white Robes but such as Scarlet Paints?
Why else do all Ill men so fast drink up
The deadly Lees of thy Enchanted Cup?
Or why do Fools so Credit what Rome says,
But 'cause they soon can learn Implicit Faith?
If the Pope's Girdle keep Heavens Keys, sans doubt
He Will never Bar his own dear Martyrs out.
Nor need they fear where Jesuits have to do,
Garnet shall be a Saint, and Coleman too.
Their Writings and Examples Murder teach;
They Will not Condemn the Doctrine which they Preach.
This makes our Desperate Ruffians, Romans dye.
And our Cracked Madams seek a Nunnery.
From Popish Faith, and Popish Tyranny,
Lord, ever keep our British Nations free.
Blast all the Counsels of Achitophel,
Unvail the Intrigues of every Treacherous Cell.
Preserve the King, and his Great Council too:
Guide with thy Grace and Blessing, all they do.
That we secure, each under his own Vine,
May all in joyful Acclamations join:
And never in our Hallelujahs cease
To magnify the Author of our Peace. Amen.
FINIS.

