The Batchellors Banquet OR, A Banquet for Batchellors, Wherein is prepared
sundry dainty dishes to furnish their tables, curiously dressed, and seriously
served in.

Pleasantly discoursing the variable humors of Women, their quickness of wits,
and unsearchable deceits.

View them well, but taste not,
Regard them well, but waste not.


LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little-Brittain, 1677.

You Batchellors that with us mean to feast,
Come all and welcome to our homely fare;
If at our Banquet you will be a Guest,
Here at our furnished Table take a share:
Our Ordinary is but six pence price.
Variety of dishes, be not nice.
We must confess our board it is not spread
As is the married man's, with Carp and Lout;
We do not use to feed upon Cods-head,
Crabs, Ill-pies, Gudgeon, nor the dogged Pout:
For flesh, we taste no Souse, no Lomb, no Quail,
No Woodcock, Wigeon, Bittern, Goose nor Rail.
For our last service, we feed not on Choose;
Small-reasons, Bitter-almonds, nor choak-pears;
We eat the best, and do the worst refuse,
Have good content, and sing away sad cares:
Good diet, English beer, and Spanish sherry,
Come Batchellors then let us all be merry.
The Batchellors Banquet: Or a Banquet for Batchellors: wherein is prepared
sundry dishes to furnish their Table: Curiously dressed, and seriously served in.
CHAP. I. The humor of a young wife new married.
IT is the natural inclination of a young Gallant in the pleasant prime, and
flower of his flourishing youth being fresh lusty and jocond, to take no other
care but to employ his money to buy gay presents for pretty lasses, to frame
his green wits in penning love Ditties, his voice to sing them sweetly, his
wandering eyes to gaze on the fairest dames and his wanton thoughts to plot
means for the speedy accomplishment of his wished desires, according to the
compass of his estate. And albeit his parents or some other of his kindred, do
perhaps furnish him with necessary maintenance, so that he wants nothing, but
lives in all ease and delight; yet cannot this content him, or satisfy his
unexperienced mind: for although he daily see many married men first lapt in
lobs pound, wanting former liberty, and compassed round in a a cage of many
cares, yet notwithstanding overruled by self-will, and blind by folly he
supposes them therein to have the fullness of their delight, because they have
so near them the Image of content Venus star gloriously blazing upon them, I
mean a dainty fair wife bravely attired, whose apparel perhaps is not yet paid
for, howsoever (to draw their husband into a fools paradise) they make them
believe that their father or mother have of their cost, and bounty afforded it.
This lusty youth (as I erst said) seeing them already in this maze of bitter
sweetness, he goes round about, turmoyling himself in seeking an entrance, and
taking such pains to find his own pain, yt in the end, in he gets, when for the
have he makes to have a taste of these supposed delicates he has no leisure to
think, or no care to provide those things that are hereunto requisite. The
jolly Yonker being thus gotten in, does for a time swim in delight, and has no
desire at all to wind himself out again, till time and use which makes all
things more familiar and less pleasing, do qualify this humor: then glutted
with satiety, or pinched with penury, he may perhaps begin to see his folly,
and repent as well his fundness, as his too much forwardness, but all too
late, he must have patience perforce: his wife must be maintained according to
her degree, and withal (commonly it haps she carries the right stomach of a
Woman) slender maintenence will not serve, for as their minds mount above their
estates, so commonly they will have their abiliments. And if at a feast or some
other gossips meeting whereunto she is invited, she see any of the company
gaily attired for cost or fashion, or both, or chiefly the latter, for
generally women do affect novelties, she forthwith moves a question in her
self, why she also should not be in the like sort attired, to have her garments
cut after the new fashion as well as the rest, and answers it with resolution,
that she will and must have the like: A wating only fit time and place for the
moving and winning of her husband thereunto, of both which she will make such
choice, that when she speaks she will be sure to speed; observing her
opportunity when she might take her husband at the most advantage, which is
commonly the garden of love, the state of marriage delights, and the life
wherein the weaker sex has ever the better: when therefore this lusty Gallant
would fulfill his desire, for which cause he chiefly ran wilfully into the
peril of lobs pound, then squeamishly she begins thus, saying, I pray you
husband let me alone, trouble me not, for I am not well at ease: which he
hearing, presently makes this reply.

Why my sweet heart what ailes you, are you not well: I pray thee wife tell me,
where lies thy grief? or what is the cause of your discontent? whereupon the
vile woman fetching a deep sigh makes this answer? O Husband, God help me, I
have cause enough to grieve, and if you knew all you would say so: but alas it
is in vain to tell you any thing, seeing that whatsoever I say, you make but
little reckoning of it: and therefore it is best for me to bury my sorrows in
silence, being out of hope to have any help at your hands. Jesus, wife (says
he) why use you these words? is my unkindness such, that I may not know your
grief: tell me I say, what is the matter? In truth husband it were to no
purpose, for I know your custom well enough; as for my words they are but
waste wind in your ears, for how great soever my grief is, I am assured you
will but make light of it, and think that I speak it for some other purpose.

Go to Wife, says her husband, tell it me, for I will know it. Well husband,
if you will needs, you shall. You know on Thursday last, I was sent for, and
you willed me to go to Mistress M. Churching, and when I came thither, I found
great cheer, and no small company of wives, but the meanest of them all was not
so ill attired as I, and surely I, was never so ashamed of my self in my life:
Yet I speak it not to praise my self, but it is well known, and I dare boldly
say, that the best women there, came of no better stock than I. But alas, I
speak not this for my self, for God wot I pass not how meanly I am apparelled,
but I speak it for your credit, and my friends. Why Wife, says he, of what
calling and degree were those you speak of? Truly good Husband (says she) the
meanest that was there, being but of my degree, was in her loose Gown, with
hanging sleeves, her French Roses, her Silk Grograine Kirtle, her Bever Hat,
with a Gold Band, and these with the rest of her attire, made of the newest
fashion which is known the best: Whereas I poor wretch had on my thredbare
Gown, which was made me so long ago, against I was married, besides that it
was now too short for me, for it is I remember, since it was made about three
years ago, since which time I am grown very much, and so changed with cares
and griefs, that I look far older then I am: Trust me, I was so ashamed, being
amongst my neighbors, that I had not the heart to look up, but that which
grieved me most was when Mistress Luce B. and Mistress T. said openly that it
was a shame both for you and me, that I had no better Apparel. Tush Wife (quoth
the good man) let them say what they list, we are never a whit the worse for
their words, we have enough to do with our money, though we spend it not in
Apparel: You know Wife, when we met together, we had no great store of
Household Stuff, but were fain to buy it afterward by some and some, as God sent
money, and yet you see we want many things that are necessary to be had:
Besides the Quarter Day is near, and my Landlord you know will not forbear his
Rent: Moreover, you see how much it costs me in Law about the recovering of the
tenement which I should have by you: God send me to get it quickly, or else I
shall have but a bad bargain of it, for it has already almost cost me as much
as it is worth. At these words his Wives choler begins to rise, whereupon she
makes him this answer. Goodly, goodly, (says she) when you have nothing else
to hit me in the teeth withal, ye twit me with the tenement; but it is my
fortune. Why how now Wife says her Husband, are you now angry for nothing Nay,
I am not angry, I must be content with that which God has ordained for me: But
I wis the time was, when I might have been better advised, there are some yet
living that would have been glad to have me in my smock, whom you know well
enough to be proper young men and therewithal wise and wealthy: but I verily
suppose I was bewicht to match witch a man that loves me not: though I
purchased the ill will of all my friends for his sake, this is all the good
that I have gotten thereby: I may truly say I am the most unhappy Woman in the
world: Do you think that Law. Tom. and N. M. (who were both suitors to me) do
keep their Wives so? no by lady, for I know the worst cloths that they cast
off, are better than my very best which I wear on the chiefest days in the
year: I know not what the cause is that so many good women dye, but I would to
God that I were dead too, that I might trouble you no more, seeing I am such an
eye sore unto you. Now by my faith wife, says he, you say not well, there is
nothing that I think too good for you, if my ability can compass it. But you
know our estate, we must do as we may, and not as we would, yet be of good
cheer, and I will strain my self to please you, in this or any other thing.

Nay, I have no mind on such matters, and if you had no more desire thereto
than I, I promise you, you would never touch me. No Wife (says he) hoping so
with a jest to make her merry, by my honesty I swear, I verily think that if I
were dead, you would not be long without another husband. No marvel sure says
she, I lead such a good life with you now, By my Christian soul I swear, there
should never a man kiss my lips again. And if I thought I should live long with
you, I would use means to make my self away: Herewithall she puts finger in the
eye, making show as though she wept: Thus plays she with the silly sot her
husband (meaning nothing less than to do as she says) while he poor fool is
in mind both well and ill apaid: he thinks himself well, because he imagines
her of a cold constitution, and therefore exceeding chaste: he thinks himself
ill, to see her fained tears, for that he verily supposes she loves him, which
does not a little grieve him, being so kind and tender hearted. Therefore he
uses all means possible to make her quiet, never will he give her over, while
he has effected it. But she prosecuting her former purpose which she has
already set in so fair a forwardness, makes as though she were nothing moved
with his gentle persuasions: Therefore to cross him, she gets her up betimes
in the morning, sooner a great deal than she was wont, powting and lowering, all
the day, and not giving him one good word. But when night comes, and they again
both in bed, laying her self sullenly down, and continuing still silent, the
good man hearkens whether she sleep or no, feels if she be well covered or not,
he softly pluckes up the clothes upon her, lapping her warm, being double
diligent to please her. She lying all this while winking, noring his kindness
and carfulness toward her, feems on a sudden to awake from a sound sleep,
gruntling and nusling under the sheets giving him occasion thereby thus to
begin. How now sweet heart, what are you asleep? Asleep (says she) faith Sir
no: a troubled mind can never take good rest. Why woman are you not quiet yet?
No doubt (says she) you care much whether I be or no. By lady wife and so I
do: and since yesternight, I have bethought me (having well considered your
words) that it is very meet and requisite, that you should be better furnished
with apparel than heretofore you have been, for indeed I must confess thy
cloths are too simple; and therefore I mean against my cousin M. wedding (which
you know will be shortly) that you shall have a new gown made on the best
fashion, with all things suitable thereunto, in such sort that the best woman
in the parish shall not pass you. Nay (quoth she) God willing I mean to go to
no weddings this twelve month, for the goodly credit I got by the last By my
faith (says he) but you shall, what? you must not be so headstrong and
self-willed. I tell you if I say the word you shall go, and you shall want
nothing that you ask or require. That I ask? alas husband (quoth she) I ask
nothing, neither did I speak this for any desire that I have to go brave, trust
me, for my own part I care not if I never stir abroad save only to Church: but
what I said was upon the speeches which were there used, and such other like
words, which my Gossip N. told me that she had also heard in company where she
was. With these words the good kind fool her husband is netled, for on the one
side he considers his sundry other occasions to use money and his small store
thereof, which is perhaps so slender, that his single purse cannot extempore
change a double pistolet. And so ill bested of household stuff, that perhaps the
third part is not a sufficient pawn for so much money as this new suit of his
Wives will stand him in. But one the other side he weighs her discontent, the
report of neighbors speeches, and lastly how good a Wife he has of her, how
chaste, how loving, how religio us, whereof the kind Ass has such an opinion,
that he thanks God with all his heart, for blessing him with such a Jewel: In
this thought he resolves that all other things set aside, he must and will
content her. And herewithall he sets his brains afresh on work, to consider how
best he may compass it: And in this humor he spends the whole night without
sleep, in continual thought. And it comes to pass that the Wife perceiving to
what a point she has brought her purpose, does not a little rejoice and smile
in her sleeve to see it. The next morning by the break of day the poor man gets
up who for care and thought could take no rest all night, and goes presently to
the Drapers, of whom he takes up cloth for three months time, paying for it
after an execssive rate, by reason of their forbearance, and in like sort makes
provision for the rest; for perhaps because he would buy it at a better rate,
he pawns for ready money the Lease of his house, or some fair piece of plate,
which his grandfather bought, and his father charily keeping, left for him
which now he is enforced to part with, to furnish thereby his wives pride; and
having thus dispatched his business he returns home with a merry heart, and
shows his Wife what he has done: who being now sure of all, begins to curse
the first inventers of pride, and excess in apparel: saying, Fie upon it, what
pride is this? but I pray you husband, do not say hereafter that I made you lay
out your money in this needless sort, for I protest that I have no delight or
desire to go thus garishly: If I have to cover my body and keep me warm, it
contents me. The good man hearing his Wife say so, does even leap for joy,
thinking all her words Gospel, and therefore presently he sets the tailor a
work, willing him to dispatch out of hand, that his wife may be brave so soon
as may be. She having thus obtained her purpose, does inwardly triumph for very
joy, howsoever outwardly she does dissemble, And whereas before she vaunted,
that she could find in her heart to keep always within doors, she will be sure
now every good day to go abroad, and at each feast and Gossips meeting to be a
continual guest, that all may see her bravery, and how well she does become it,
for which cause she also comes every Sunday daily to the Church, that there she
may see and be seen, which her Husband thinks she does of mere devotion. But in
the mean while the time runs on, and the day comes wherein the poor man must
pay his Creditors, which being unable to do, he is at length arrested, and
after due proceeding in Law, he has an Execution served upon him, or his pawn
is forfeited, and by either of both he is almost utterly undone. Then must his
fine wife of force veil her peacocks plumes, and fall again to her old byas,
keeping her house against her will, because she could not be furnished with gay
attire according to her mind. But God knows in what misery the silly man does
live, being daily vexed with her brawling and scolding, exclaiming against him,
that all the house does ring thereof, and in this sort she begins her vagaries:
Now cursed be the day that ever I saw thy face, and a shame take them that
brought me first acquainted with thee: I would to God I had either died in my
cradle. or gone to my grave when I went to be married with thee. Was ever woman
of my degree and birth brought to this beggary? or any of my bringing up kept
thus basely and brought to this shame? I which little knew what labor meant,
must now toil and tend the house as a drudge having never a coat to my back, or
scant handsome hose to my legs, and yet all little enough, whereas, I wis, I
might have had twenty good marriages, in the meanest of which I should have
lived at ease and pleasure, without being put to any pain, or suffering any
penury. Wretch that I am, why do I live? Now would to God I were in my grave
already, for I am weary of the World, weary of my life, and weary of all. Thus
does she daily complain, and lay all the fault of her fall on him which least
deserved it, nothing remembering her own pride, in coveting things above their
estate or ability, her misgovernment, and daily gadding with her Gossips to
Banquets and Bridals, when she should have looked to her house and followed her
own business at home. And his folly is also such, that being blinded with
dotage, (through too much loving her,) cannot perceive that she is the cause of
all this evil, of all the cares, griefs, and thoughts, which perplex and
torture him, and yet nothing cuts him so much as this, to see her so fumish and
unquiet, whom if he can any time somewhat pacify, then is his heart somewhat at
rest. Thus does the silly wretch ross and turmoyle himself in Lobs pound, wrapped
in a kind of pleasing woe, out of the which he has neither power nor will to
wind himself: but therein does consume the remnant of his languishing life,
and miserably end his days.

CHAP. II. The humor of a woman pranked up in brave apparel.
THe nature of a woman inclined to another kind of humor (which is this) when
the wife seeing her self bravely apparelled, and that she is therewith fair and
comely, (or if she be not) yet thinking her self so (as women are naturally
given to sooth themselves) she does, as I said before, haunt after feasts and
solemn meetings, wherewith her husband perhaps is not very well pleased: which
she perceiving, the more to bleer his eyes, she takes with her some kinswoman,
or Gossip, or possibly some lusty Gallant, of whom she claims kindred, though in
very deed there be no such matter, but only a smooth color to deceive her
husband: And perchance to induce him the sooner to believe it, her mother
(which is privy to the match) will not stick to say and swear it is so: Yet
sometime the husband to prevent his wives gadding, will feign some left; as
want of horses or other like hindrances: then presently the Gossip or
Kinswoman (of whom before I spoke) will thus solemnly assault him.

Believe me Gossip, I have as little pleasure as who has least in going
abroad, for I wis I had not so much business to do this xii months as I have
at this instant: yet should I not go to this wedding, being so kindly bidden, I
know the young Bride would take it in very ill part. Yea and (I may say to you)
so would our neighbors, and other our friends which will be there, who would
verily imagine, we keep away for some other cause: and were it not for this I
protest I would not stir out of doors, neither would my Cousin your wife have
any desire to go thither: thus much I can truly witness that I never knew any
woman take less delight in such things than your wife; or which being abroad,
will make more haste to be at home again.

The silly man her Husband, being vanquished by these words, and no longer able
to deny their request, demands only what other women do appoint to go, and who
shall man them? Marry Sir: (says she) that shall my Cousin H. And besides your
wife and I, there goes my Kinswoman T. and her Mother, Mistress H. and her
Aunt: my Uncle T. and his Brother, to be met with both their wives, Mistress C.
my next neighbor: and to conclude, all the women of account in this street: (I
dare boldly say) that honester Company there cannot be, though it were to
convey a Kings Daughter.

Now it often chanced that this smooth tongued Oratrix who pleads thus queintly
with woman's art, must have for her pains a Gown cloth, a Jewel, or some other
recompense, if she prevail with the good man, and cunningly play her part. He
after some pause (perhaps) will reply in this sort: Gossip, I confess it is
very good company but my wife has now great business at home, and besides she
uses to go very much abroad, yet for this time I am content she shall go. But
I pray you Dame (quoth he) be at home betimes. His wife seeing that her gossip
had gotten leave makes as if she cares not for going forth, saying: By my faith
man I have something else to do, than to go a Bridal at this present: what? we
have a great household, and rude servants (God wot) whose idleness is such, that
they will not do any thing, if a bodies back be turned: for it is an old
Proverb: (When the Cat is away the Mouse will play.) And therefore Gossip hold
you content, we must not be altogether careless nor set so much by our pleasure
to neglect our profit: And therefore hold me excused, for I cannot now be
spared nor I will not go, that is flat. Nay good gossip (says the other)
seeing your husband has given you leave, let us have your company this once,
and if it be but for my sake, such a chance as this comes not every day. With
that the good man taking the old Gyb aside, whispers her thus in the ear: were
it not Gossip for the confidence I repose in you, I protest she should not stir
out of doors at this time. Now as I am an honest woman (quoth she) and of my
credit Gossip, you shall not need to doubt any thing.

Thus to horse they get, and away they spur with a merry gallop, laughing to
themselves, mocking and flouting the silly man for his simplicity: the one
saying to the other, that he had a shrewd jealous brain, but it should avail
him nothing. Tush (said the young woman) it is an old saying, He had need have
a long spoon that will eat with the devil, and she of a good wit that would
prevent the fury of a jealous fool: and with this and the like ralk, they pass
the time till they come to the place appointed, where they meet with lusty
Gallants, who (peradventure) had at the former feast made the match and were
come thither of purpose to strike up the bargain. But howsoever it is, this
lusty Less lacks no good cheer, nor any kindness which they can show her.

Imagine now how forward she will be to show her best skill in dancing and
singing, and how lightly she will afterward esteem her husband being thus
courted and commended by a crew of lusty Gallants, who seeing her so bravely
attired, and graced with so sweet and smooth a tongue, so sharp a wit, so
amiable a countenance, will each strive to exceed other, in serving, loving,
and pleasing her: for the gallant carriage and wanton demeanor of so
beautiful a piece, cannot choose but encourage a mere coward, and heat (if not
inflame) a frozen heart: One assayes her with sugared terms, and some pleasant
discourse, painting forth his affection with Lovers eloquence: Another gives
her a privy token, by straining her soft hand, or treading upon her pretty
foot: Another eyes her with a piercing and pitiful look, making his countenance
his fancies Herald: and perhaps the third (which is most likely to speed)
bestows upon her a gold Ring, a Diamond, a Ruby or some such like costly toy:
By all which aforesaid tokens, she may well conceive their meanings, (if she
have any conceit at all;) and sometimes it so falls out, that they fall in
where they should not: and she stepping somewhat aside, does so shrewdly strain
her honesty, that hardly or never the grief can be cured. But to proceed this
over-gorgeous wantonning of his wife, drings the poor man behind hand, and does
withal cause a greater inconvenience; for in the end by one means or other,
either through her too much boldness, or her Lovers-want of wariness, the
matter at length comes to light, whereof some friend or kinsman gives him
notice.

He being tickled by this bad report, thereupon searching further, finds it
true, or gathers more likelihood of suspicion, and that presently infects his
thoughts with jealousy, into which mad tormenting humor, no wise man will
ever fall: for it is an evil both extreme and endless, especially (if it be
justly conceived) upon the wives known leadness, for then there is no hope of
curing. She on the other side seeing this, and receiving for her loose life
many bitter speeches, does closely keep on her old course, but now more for
spite than pleasure; for it is in vain to think that she will reclaim her
self. And if he (hoping by constraint to make her honest) fall to beating her,
(though he use never so much severity) he shall but kindle so much more the
fire of that lewd love, which she bears unto others: Hereon follows a heap of
mischiefs; he grows careless of his business, letting all things run to ruin:
she on the other side becomes shameless, converting into deadly hate the love
that she should bear him. Judge now what a purgatory of perplexities the poor
man does live in: and yet for all this he is so besotted, that he seems to take
great pleasure in his pains, and to be so far in love with Lobs pound, that
were he not already in, yet he would make all haste possible to be possessed of
the place, there to consume the residue of his life, and miserably end his days.

CHAP. III. The humor of a woman lying in Child bed.
THere is another humor incident to a woman, when her husband sees her belly
to grow big (though peradventure by the help of some other friend) yet he
persuades himself it is a work of his own framing: and this breeds him new
cares and troubles, for then must he trot up and down day and night, far and
near, to get with great cost that his wife longs for? if she let fall but a
pin, he is diligent to take it up, lest she by stooping should hurt her self;
She on the other side is so hard to please, that it is a great hap when he fits
her humor, in bringing home that which likes her. though he spare no pains nor
cost to get it. And often times through ease and plenty she grows so queasie
stomacht, that she can brook no common meats, but long for strange and rare
things, which whether they be to be had or no, yet she must have them, there is
no remedy. She must have Cherries, though for a pound he pay ten shillings, or
green Pescods at four nobles a peck: yea, he must take a horse and ride into
the Country, to get her green Codlings, when they are scarce so big as a
scotch button. In this trouble and vexation of mind and body, lives the silly
man for six or seven months, all which time his wife does nothing but
complain, and he poor soul takes all the care, rising early, going late to bed,
and to be short, is fain to play both the husband and the huswife. But when the
time draws near of her lying down, then must he trudge to get Gossips, such as
she will appoint, or else all the fat's in the fire. Consider then what cost
and trouble it will be to him, to have all things fine against the Christning
day, what store of Sugar, Biskets, Comphets and Caraways, Marmalet, and
Marchpane, with all kind of sweet suckets and superfluous banqueting stuff,
with a hundred other odd and needless trifles, which at that time must fill the
pockets of dainty dames: Besides the charge of the Midwife, she must have her
nurse to attend and keep her, who must make for her warm broths, and costly
cawdels, enough both for her self and her mistress; being of the mind to fare
no worse than she: If her mistress be fed with partridge, plover, woodcocks,
quails, or any such like, the nurse must be partner with her in all these
dainties: neither yet will that suffice, but during the whole month she privily
pilfers away the sugar, the nutmegs and ginger, with all other spices that
comes under her keeping, putting the poor man to such expense, that in a whole
year he can scarcely recover that one months charges. Then every day after her
lying down, will sundry dames visit her, which are her neighbors, her
kinswomen, and other her special acquaintance, whom the good man must welcome
with all cheerfulness, and be sure there be some dainties in store to set
before them: where they about some three or four hours (or possibly half a day)
will sit chatting with the Childwife. And by that time the cups of wine have
merrily trold about, and half a dozen times moistened their lips with the sweet
juice of the purple grape: They begin thus one with another to discourse; Good
Lord neighbor, I marvel how our Gossip Frees does, I have no seen the good soul
this many a day.

Oh God help her, quoth another, for she has her hands full of work, and her
heart full of heaviness: While she drudges all the week at home, her husband
like an unthrift never leaves running abroad to the Tennis court, and dicing
houses, spending all that ever he has in such lewd sort: yea, and if that were
the worst it is well: but hear you Gossip, there is another matter spoils all,
he cares no more for his wife, than for a dog, but keeps queanes even under her
nose: Jesus faith another, who would think he were such a man, he behaves
himself to orderly and civilly to all men's sights: Tush, hold your peace Gossip
(says the other) it is commonly seen, the still sow eats up all the draff, he
carries a sooth countenance, but a corrupt conscience: That I know F. well
enough, I will not say he loves mistress G. go too Gossip, I drink to you. Yea
(and says another) there goes foul lies if G. himself loves not his maid N. I
can tell you their mouths will not be stopped with a bushel of wheat that speak
it. Then the third fetching a great sigh, saying, by my troth such another bold
Bettress have I at home: for never give me credit Gossip, if I took her not the
other day in close conference with her Master; but I think I beswadld my maid
in such sort, that she will have small lift to do so again. Nay Gossip (says
another) had it been to me, that should not have served her turn, but I would
have turned the queen out of doors to pick a Sallet, for wot you what Gossip?
It is ill setting fire and flax together: but I pray you tell me one thing,
when saw you our friend Mistress C. Now in good sooth she is a kind creature,
and a very gentle Peat: I promise you I saw her not since you and I drank a
pint of Wine with her in the fish market. O Gossip (says another) there is a
great change since that time, for they have been fain to pawn all that ever
they have, and yet God knows her husband lies in prison. O the passion of my
heart (says another) is all their great and glorious show come to nothing?
good Lord what a world is this? Why Gossip (says another) it was never like to
be otherwise, for they loved ever to go fine, and fair daintily, and by my
faith Gossip, this is not a world for those matters, and thereupon I drink to
you. This is commonly their communication, where they find cheer according to
their choice. But if it happen contrary, that they find not things in such
plenty and good order as they would wish, then one or other of them will talk
to this effect: Trust me gossip, I marvel much and so do all our other
friends, that your Husband is not ashamed to make so small account of you, and
this your sweet child if he be such a niggard at the first, what will he be by
that time he has five or six? it does well appear he bears but little love to
you whereas your vouchsafing to match with him has done him more credit than
ever had any of his kindred. Before God, says another, I had rather see my
husbands eyes our then he should serve me so: therefore if you be wise use him
not to it: neither in this sort let him tread you under foot: I tell you it is
a foul shame for him, and you may be well assured since he begins thus yt
hereafter he will use you in the same order, if not worse. In good sooth says
the third it seems very strange to me that a wise woman, and one of such
parentage as you are, who as all men konws, is by blood far his better, can
endure to be thus used by a base companion. Blame us not to speak, good Gossip,
for I protest the wrong that he does you does likewise touch us, and all other
good women that are in your case.

This Child wife hearing all this, begins to weep, saying: Alas Gossip, I know
not what to do or how to please him, he is so diverse and wayward a man, and
besides he thinks all too much that is spent. Gossip he is (said one) a bad and
a naughty man, and so it is well seen by your usage. All my Gossips here can
tell, that when I was married to my husband, every one said that he was so
hasty and hard to please, that he would kill me with grief: and indeed I may
say to you, I found him crabbed enough: for he began to take upon him mightily,
and thought to have wrought wonders, yet I have used such means that I have
tamed my young master, and have at this present brought him to that pass, that
I dare swear he had rather lose one of his joints than wrangle with me: I will
not deny but once or twice he beat me shrewdly, which I, God wot, being young
and tender, took in grievous part, but what he got by it let my Gossip T.
report, who is yet a woman living, and can tell the whole story: to whom my
good man within a while after said, that I was past remedy. and that he might
sooner kill me: than do any good by beating me, (and by these ten bones so he
shall) but in the end I brought the matter so about, that I got the bridle into
my own hands, so that I may now say I do what I lift: for be it right or wrong,
if I say it he will not gain say it; for by this Gold on my finger, let him do
what he can, I will be sure to have the last word; so that in very deed, if
that women be made underlings by their husbands, the fault is their own: For
there is not any man alive (be he never so churlish) but his wife may make him
quiet and gentle enough, if she have any wit. And therefore your good man
serves you but well enough, since you will take it so.

Believe me Gossip (says another) were I in your case, I would give him such
welcome at his coming home, and ring such a peale of bad words in his ears,
that he should have small joy to stay the hearing.

Thus is the poor man handled behind his back, whiles they make no spare to
help away with his good wine and sugar (which he has prepared,) whom they for
his kindness thus ingratefully requite: yea, and now and then having their
brains well heated, they will not stick to taunt him to his face: accusing him
of little love and great unkindness to his wife.

Now it does many times so chance, that he having been forth to provide such
meats as she would have, he comes home (perhaps at midnight) and before he
sits down to rest himself, has a very earnest desire to know how his wife
does, and perchance being loath to lie abroad, because of expense travels the
later, that he may reach to his own house where (when he is once come) he
asks ye Chambermaid, or else the Nurse, how his wife does: they having their
errand before given them by their Mistress, answers, she is very ill at ease,
and that since his departure she tasted not one bit of meat: but that toward
ye evening she began to be a little better, all which be mere lies. But the
poor man bearing these words, grieves not a little, though he be all to be
moyld, weary and wet, having gone a long journey through a bad and filthy way
upon some ill paced trotting Jade, and may be is fasting too: yet will he
neither eat nor drink, (nor so much as once sit down) till he have seen his
Wife, Then the idle prattling Nurse, which is not to learn to exploit such a
piece of service, begins to look very heavily, and to sigh inwardly as though
her Mistress had been that day at yt point of death; which he seeing, was the
more earnest to visit his wife: whom at the entrance of the Chamber, he hears
lie groaning to her self, and coming to the bed side, kindly sits down by her,
saying, how now my sweet heart, how do thou? Ah husband (quoth she) I am very
ill, nor was I ever so sick in my life, as I have been this day. Alas good soul
(says he) I am the more sorry to hear it. I pray thee tell me where lies thy
pain? Ah husband (quoth she) you know I have been weak a long time, and not
able to eat any thing. But Wife (quoth he) why did you not cause the Nurse to
boil you a Capon, and make a mess of good broth for you? So she did (said his
wife) as well as she could, but it did not like me God wot, and by that means I
have eaten nothing, since the broth which your self made me: Oh me thought that
was excellent good.

Marry Wife (says he) I will presently make you some more of the same, and you
shall eat it for my sake. With all my heart good husband (says she) and I
shall think my self highly beholden unto you. Then trudgeth he into the
Kitchen, there plays he the Cook, burning and brotling himself over the fire,
having his eyes ready to be put out with smoke while he is busy in making the
broth: what time he chides with his maids, calling them beasts and baggages,
that knows not how to do any thing: not so much as make a little broth for a
sick body, but he must be fain to do it himself. Then comes down Mistress
Nurse as fine as a farthing fiddle, in her petticoat and girtle, having a white
wastcoat, with a flaunting cambrick Ruff about her neck; who like a Doctress
in faculty, comes thus upon him. Good Lord sir, what pains you take, here is no
body can please our Mistress but your self: I will assure you (on my credit)
that I do what I can, yet for my life, I cannot any way content her. Moreover
here came in mistress Cot, and mistress Cen. who did both of them what they
could to have your Wife eat something: Nevertheless, all they did could not make
her taste one spoonful of any thing all this live-long day: I know not what she
ayls: I have kept many women in my time, both of worship, and credit, (simple
though I stand here) but I never knew any so weak as she is: I, I (quoth he)
you are a company of cunning Cooks, that cannot make a little broth as it
should be. And by this time the broth being ready, he brings it straight to his
wife, comforting her with many kind words, praying her to eat for his sake, or
taste a spoonful or twain, which she does, commending it to the Heavens,
affirming also that the broth which the others made had no good taste in the
world, and was nothing worth. The good man hereof being not a little proud,
bids them make a good fire in his wives chamber, charging them to tend her
well. And having given this direction, he gets himself to supper with some cold
meat set before him, such as the Gossips left, or his Nurse could spare, and
having this short pittance he goes to head full of care.

The next morning he gets him up betimes, and comes very kindly to know how his
wife does, who presently pops him in the mouth with a smooth lie: saying that
all night she could take no rest till it grew toward the morning, and then she
began to feel a little more ease, when God knows she never slept more soundly
in all her life. Well wife, (said the good man) you must remember that this
night is our gossips supper, and they will come hither with many other of our
friends, therefore we must provide some good thing for them, especially because
it is your upsitting and a fortnight at least since you were brought to bed:
but good wife let us go as near to the World as we may, seeing that our great
charge does every day increase, and money was never so ill to come by.

She hearing him say so, begins to pout, saying; would for my part I had died
in travel, and my poor infant been strangled in the birth, so should you not be
troubled with us at all, nor have cause to repine so much at our spending: I am
sure there is never a woman in the world, that in my case has worse keeping or
is less chargeable, yet let me pinch and spare, and do what I can all is
thought too much that I have: Trust me I care not a straw whether you provide
me any thing or no, although the sorrow be mine, the shame will be yours, as
yesterday for example: I am sure here came in above a dozen of our neighbors
and friends of mere kindness to see me, and know how I did, who by their
countenance and coming, did you greater credit then you deserve: But God knows
what entertainment they had, having nothing in the house to set before them
which made me so much ashamed, that I knew not what to say: I tell you what,
before God I may boldly speak it, (for I have seen it) that when any one of
them lies in, their very servants have better fare then I my self have had at
your hands, which they seeing (betwixt themselves yesterday) when they where
here, did most cunningly flout both you and me for their entertainment. I have
not (as you know) lien in above fifteen days, and can yet scant stand on my
legs and you think the time too long till I be moyling about the house (to
catch my bane,) as I fear I have done already. Believe me wife (quoth he) you
mistake me greatly, for no man in the world can be more kind to his wife, then
I have done already. Kind to me (quoth she) by the mass that you have with a
murren: no doubt but I have had a sweet mess of cherishing at your hands, but
I see your drift well enough, you gape every day for my death, and I would to
God it were so for me: the month end is half expired, and I fear the rest will
come before we be ready for it: my sister S. was here no longer ago then to
day, and asked if I had ever a new Goun to be Churched in, but God wot I am far
enough from it, neither do I desire it, though it be a thing which ought both
by reason and custom to be observed.

And because it is your pleasure, I will rise to morrow what chance so ever
befall, for the worst is, I can but lose my life: full well may I gather by
this, how you will use me hereafter, and what recount you would make of me, if
I had nine or ten Children, but God forbid it should ever come to pass, I
desire rather to be rid of my life, and to shun the shame of the world, than
long to live with such an unkind churl. Now verily wife (says ye good man) I
must needs blame your impatience for growing so choleric without cause.
Without cause quoth she?) do you think I have no just cause to complain? I will
assure you there is never a woman of my degree, that would put up the
intolerable injuries that I have done, and daily do by means of your hoggish
conditions, Well wife, says the good man, Fox ^at ^apes
ly as long as you list, and rise when you will, but I pray you tell me how this
new Gown may be had which you so earnestly ask for: By my faith (quoth she) you
say not well, for I ask nothing at your hands, neither would I have it though I
might: I thank God I have gowns enough already, and sufficient to serve my
turn, and you know I take no delight in garish attire, for I am past a girl,
but it makes me smile to see what a show of kindness you would fain make: Fie
on thee dissembler, you can cog and flatter as well as any man in this Town,
and full little think they that see you abroad, what a Devil you are at home:
for what with your crooked qualities with toyling, moyling, carking and caring,
and being beside broken with Child bearing, my countenance is quite changed, so
that I look already as withered, (...).
as the bark of an Elder bough: There is my cousin, T. T. who when I was a
little girl, was at a woman's estate, and in the end married master H. with
whom she leads a Ladies life looking so young and lusty, that I may seem to be
her mother, I, I, such is the difference betwixt a kind and an uncourteous
husband: and who knows not but he was a suter to me and made many a jourdey to
my fathers house for my sake, and would so fain have had me, that while I was
to marry, he would not match himself with any? but so much was I bewitched,
that after I had once seen you, I would not have changed for the best Lord in
the Land, and this I have in recompense of my love and loyalty: Go to wife
(says he) I pray you leave these lavish speeches, and let us all call to mind
where we may best take up cloth for your gown: for you see, such is our weak
estate, that if we should rashly lay out that little money which is in the
house, we might possibly be unprovided for all other necessaries: therefore
whatsoever should chance hereafter, it is best to keep something against a
rainy day: And again, you know within these eight or nine days, I have five
pound to pay to master P. which must be done, there is no shift, otherwise I am
like to sustain treble damage. Tush (quoth she) what talk you to me of these
matters? alas I ask you nothing, I would to God I were once rid of this
trouble: I pray you let me take some rest, for my head aches (God help me) as it
should go in pieces, I wis you feel not my pain, and you take little care for
my grief: Therefore I pray you send my gossips word that they may not come, for
I feel my self very ill at ease. Not so (quoth he) I will never break custom,
nor so much as gainsay their courteous offer, they shall come sure, and be
entertained in the best manner I may. Well (quoth she) I would to God you would
leave me, that I might take a little restand then do what you list: Upon these
speeches the Nurse straight steps in, and rounds her master in the ear: I pray
you Sir do not force her to many words, for it makes her head light, and does
great harm to a woman in her case, especially her brains being so light for
want of sleep: and besides she is, God knows, a woman of a tender and choice
complexion, and with that she draws the Curtains about the Bed: Thus is the
poor man held in suspense, till the next day that the Gossips come, who will
play their parts so kindly, and gall him to the quick with their quibs and
taunts, that his courage will be wholly quail'd, and be ready (if they should
bid him, like the Prodigal Child, even to eat draffe with the hogs,) rather
than he would displease them. But to proceed, he in the mean while is double
diligent, to provide all things against their coming, according to his ability,
and by reason of his wives words, he buys more meat, and prepares a great deal
better cheer than he thought to have done. At their coming, he is ready to
welcome them with his cap in hand, and all the kindness that may be showed.
Then does he trudge bare headed up and down the house, with a cheerful
countenance, like a good Ass fit to bear the burden: he brings the Gossips up
to his wife, and coming first to her himself, he tells her of their coming. I
wis (quoth she) I had rather they had kept at home, and so they would too, if
they knew how little pleasure I took in their coming. Nay I pray you wife
(says he) give them good countenance seeing they become for good will: with
this they enter, and after mutual greetings, with much gossips ceremonies, down
they sit and there spend the whole day in breaking their fasts, dining and in
making an afternoons repast: besides their petty suppings at her beds-side, and
at the cradle, where they discharge their parts so well in helping him away
with his good wine and sugar, that the poor man coming often to cheer them, does
well perceive it, and grieves inwardly thereat, howsoever, he covers his
discontent with a merry countenance. But they not caring how the game goes,
take their peniworths of that cheer which is before them, never asking how it
comes there, and so they merrily pass the time away, prattling, and talking of
many good matters. Afterward the poor man trots up and down anew to get his
wife the foresaid gown, and all other things thereto suitable, whereby he sets
himself soundly in debt: sometimes he is troubled with the child's brawling,
sometimes he is brawl'd at by the nurse: then his wife complains that she was
never well since she was brought to bed, then must he cast his cares anew,
devising by what means to discharge his debts, and lessen his expenses: then
resolves he to diminish his own port, and augment his wives bravery, he will go
all the year in one suit, and make two pair of shwes serve him in a twelve
month, keeping one pair for holydays, another for working days, and one hat in
three or four years. Thus according to his own rash desire, he is up to the
ears in Lobs pound, and for all the woe and wretchedness that he has felt, he
would not yet be out again, but does then willingly consume himself in
continual care, sorrow and trouble, til death does set him free.

CHAP. IV. The humor of a woman that has a charge of children.
THe next humor that is by nature incident to a woman, is when the husband
has been married nine or ten years, has five or six childen, Being tired with
scolding, as a hackney Jade with travel.
has passed many evil days, unquiet nights, and troubles aforesaid, has his
lusty youthfulness spent so that it is now high time for him to repent: But
such is his gross folly that be cannot, and such is his dullness through the
continual vexations, which have tamed and wearied him, that he cares not
whatsoever his wife says or does, but is hardened like an old Ass, which being
used to the whip, will not once mend his pace, be he lashed never so much: The
poor man sees two or three of his daughters marriageable, which is soon known
by their wanton tricks, their playing, dancing, and other youthful toys, but he
keeps them back, having perhaps small commings in, to keep, maintain and
furnish them as they look for, with gowns, kirtles, linen, and other
ornaments, as they should be for three causes. First, that they may be the
sooner sued unto by lusty gallants: Secondly, because his denying hereof should
nothing avail: for his wife which knows her daughters humors by her own, when
she was of the like years, will see that they shall want nothing. Thirdly they
peradventure, bearing right women's minds, if their Father keeps them short,
will find some other friends that shall offer it them. The poor man being thus
perplexed on all sides by reason of the excessive charges which he must be at,
will (as it is likely) be but honestly attired himself, not caring how he goes
so he may but rub out, be it never so barely, and would be glad to escape so:
But as the fish in the pond, which would also think himself well, though
wanting former liverty, if he might be suffered to continue, is cut off before
his time: So is likewise this poor man served, being once plunged in the
perplexing pond or rather pound of wedlock and house keeping: for howsoever
when he considers the aforesaid charges and troubles, he begins to have no joy
of himself, and is no more moved than a tired Jade, which forces not for the
spur: Yet for the furnishing of his wife and daughters, so that he may have
peace at home, and enjoy an easy bondage, he must trudge up and down early and
late abut his business in that course of life which he professes.

Sometimes he journeys thirty or forty miles off, about his affairs: Another
time twice so far to the Term or Assizes, concerning some old matter in law,
which was begun by his grandfather, and not yet toward an end: he puts on a
pair of boots of seven years old, which have been cobled so often that they are
now a foot too short for him, so that the top of the boot reaches no further
than the calf of his leg, he has a pair of spurs of the old making whereof the
one wants a rowell, and the other for want of leathers, is fastened to his foot
with a point: He puts a laced coat on his back, which he has had six or seven
years, which he never wore but upon high days, whose fashion is grown clean
out of request, by reason of new invented garments: whatsoever sports or
pleasures he lights on (by the way on his journey) he takes no joy in them
because his mind is altogether on his troubles at home: he fares hard by the
way, as also his poor horse (if he have one) his man follows him in a turned
suit with a sword by his side, which was found under a hedge at the siege of
Bulleine; he has a coat on his back, which every man may know was never made
for him, or he not present when it was cut out: for the wings on his shoulders
come down half way his arm, and his skirts as much below his wast; To be short,
the poor man goes every way as near as may be, for he remembers at what charges
he is at home, and knows not what it will cost him in feeing his Counselors,
Attorneys, Pettyfoggers, which will do nothing without present pay: he
dispatcheth his business speedily, and hies him home, with such have to avoid
greater charges, that he rests no where by the way. And hereby it chances that
many times he comes home at such an hour, as is as near morning as to night,
and finds nothing to eat, for his wife and servants are in bed, all which he
takes patiently, being now well used to such entertainment: Surely for my part,
I think that God sends such adversity and distress to those only whose good and
mild nature he knows to be such, that they will take all things in good part.

But to proceed, it is very likely that the poor man is very weary, his heart
heavy, by reason of the care and thought which he has of his business: and it
may be (he looks to be welcome to his own house, and there to refresh himself)
howsoever he forgets not his former usage. But it falls out otherwise, for his
wife begins to chidee whose words carry such a sway with the servants, that
whatsoever their master says, they make small account of it: but if their
mistress command any thing, it is presently done, and her humor followed in
all things, else must they pack out of service; so that it boots not him to bid
them do any thing, or rebuke them for not doing it: And his poor man that has
been with him dares not likewise open his mouth to call for any victuals to
comfort himself, or for the horses, lest they should suspect him to be of his
masters faction (who being wise and of a quiet mild nature) is loath to make any
stir, or breed any disquietness in the house, and therefore takes all in good
part, and sits down far from the fire, though he be very cold: But his wife
and children stand round about it, but all their eyes are cast on her, who
looks on her husband with an angry countenance, not caring to provide ought for
his supper: but contrariwise taunts him with sharp and shrewd speeches, whereto
for the most part, he answers not a word, but sometimes (perhaps being urged
through hunger or wearinese, or unkindness of his wife) he does thus utter his
mind. Well mise you can look well enough to your self, but as for me, I am both
weary and hungry, having neither eaten nor drunk n all this day, and being
beside wet to the very skin, yet you make no eeckoning toprovide any thing for
my supper.

Ah (quoth she) you do well to begin first, lest I should, which have most
cause to speak: have you not done very well (think ye) to take your man with
you, and leave me no body to white the cloathe? Now before god, I have more
loss in my linen, than you will get this twelve month: Moreover, you shut the
Hen Koust door very well, did you not? When the Fox got in, and eat up four of
my best brood Hens, as you (to your roast will soon find) by the mass, if you
live long you will be the poorest of all your kin. Well wife (says the good
man) use no such words, I pray, God you be thanked I have enough, and more
shall have when it pleases him: and I tell you, I have good men of my kin. But
quoth she, I know not where they be, nor what they are worth. Well (says he)
they are of credit and ability too. But for all that (quoth she) they do you
small good. As much good (says he) as any of yours. As any of mine (says she)
and that she spoke with such a high note, that the house rung withal, saying.
By cocks soul, were it not for my friends you would do but sorrily.

Well good wife (says he) let us leave this talk: Nay (says she) if they
heard what you said, they would answer you well enough. The good man holds his
peace, fearing lest she should tell them, being of greater ability then he was,
and besides, because he was loath that they should be offended with him. Then
one of the three children falls a crying, and he perhaps which his father loved
best, threupon the mother presently took a rod, turned up the child's tail, and
whipped him well favouredly; and the more to despite and anger her husband than
for ought else. The good man being therewith somewhat moved, wills her to leave
beating the child, showing by his bended brows that he was not a little angry
at her doings. Now gyp with a murren (quoth. she) you are not troubled with them,
they cost you nothing, but it is I that have all the pains with them night and
day. Then comes in the Nurse with her verdict, and thus she begins, saying O
Sir, you know not what a hand she has with them and we also that tend them.
Then comes in the chambermaid with her five eggs, In good faith Sir it is a
shame for you, that at your coming home, when all the whole house should be
glad thereof, that you should contrary wise put it thus out of quiet: says he
(Is it I that make this stir?)

Then is the whole household against him, when he seeing himself thus baited on
all sides, (and the match so unequal,) gets him to bed quietly without his
supper, all wet and dirty; or if he do sup, he has but thin fair: and being in
bed where he should take his rest, be is so disquieted with the children, whom
the nurse and his wife do on purpose set on crying, to anger him the more, that
for his life he cannot sleep one wink.

Thus is he vexed with continual troubles, wherewith he seems to be well
pleased, and would not though he might be free from them but does therein spend
his miserable and unhappy life.

CHAP. V. The humor of a woman that marries her inferior by birth.
A Woman inclined to another kind of humor, which is, when the husband has
been married, and has passed so many troubles, that he is wearied therewith,
his lusty youthful blood grown cold: is matched with a wife of better birth
then himself, and perhaps younger, both which things are very dangerous, and no
wise man should seek his own spoil, by wrapping himself in either of those
bonds, because they are so repugnant, that it is both against reason and nature
to accord them. Sometimes they have children, sometimes they have none; yet
this notwithstanding, the wife can take no pains, yet must be maintained
according to her degree, to the husbanda exceeding charges: for the furnishing
whereof, the poor man is forced to take extreme toil and pains, and yet for all
this thanks God for vouchsafing him so great a grace, as to be matched with her:
If now and then they grow to hot words together (as often it happens) then
presently in upbrading and menacing sort, she tells him that her friends did
not match her to him to be his drudge, and that she knows well enough of what
lineage she is come, and will brag withal, that when she list to write to her
friends and kinsmen, they will presently fetch her away. Thus does she keep him
in awe, and in a kind servitude, by telling him of them, who would perhaps have
matched her better, and not with him, but for some privy escape that she has had
before, whereof the poor soul knows nothing; or if perhaps he has heard some
inkling thereof, yet because he is simple, the credit that he might give
thereunto is quite dashed, by a contrary tale of others suborned by them, who
perchance will not stick to swear that this is a slander raised by evil
tongues, and forced maliciously against her, as the like is done against many
other good women, whose good names are wronged, and brought in question by bad
persons on their tippling bench because themselves cannot obtain their purpose
of them: notwithstanding, if her husband be not able to maintain her according
to her mind, then will she be sure to have a friend in store that shall offer
it her, if her husband deny it, and in the end she remembers that such a
Gentleman at such a feast proffered her a Diamond, or sent her by a messenger
some twenty or thirty crowns, which she as then refused, but now purposes to
give him a kind glance to renew his affection, who conceiving some better hope,
and meeting soon after with her Chambermaid, as she is going about some
business, calls to her, saying: Sister I would fain speak with you. Sir quoth
she say what you please. You know (quoth he) that I have long loved your
Mistress without obtaining any favor: but tell me I pray you, did she never
speak of me in your hearing? In faith sir (says he) never but well: I dare
swear she wishes you no harm. Before God sister, says the Gentleman, if you
will show me some kindness herein, and do my commendations to your mistress,
assuring her of my love and loyalty, it should be worth a new gown unto you,
mean while take this in earnest; with that he offers her a piece gold; she then
making a low cursie, says Sir, I thank you for your good will, but will not
take it; By my faith says he, but you shall, and with that he forces it on
her; adding these words: I pray you let me hear from you to morrow morning. She
being glad of such a booty hies her home, and tells her mistress how she met
with a gentleman that was in a passing good vein, and to be short after some
questions used by her mistress, it appears to be the very same man whom she
would fain entrap. I tell thee, says she to her maid, if he be as kind as he
is proper, he were worthy to be any woman's love. Believe me mistress (says the
maid) his very countenance shows that he is kind, it seems that he was only
made for love, and withal he is wealthy, and thereby able to maintain her
beauty and her person in bravery whom he affects. By this light (says the
mistress) I can get nothing of my husband. The more unwise you (says the maid)
to be used so. Alas quoth she what shall I do? I have had him so long, that I
cannot now set my heart on any other. Tush (quoth the maid) it a folly of any
woman to set her heart so on any man, for you know they care not how they use
us when they are once lords over us. Beside, your husband, though he would yet
he cannot maintain and keep you according to your degree: but he of whom I
speak will furnish and maintain you gallantly, what garments soever he will
have: and what color and fashion soever you like best you shall presently have
it, so that there wants nothing else, save only a quaint excuse to my Master,
making him believe you had it by some other means. By my troth quoth her
mistress, I know not what to say. Well Mistress (says the maid) advise you
well, I have promised to give him an answer to morrow morning. Alas (says the
other,) how shall we do? Tush mistress, answers the maid, let me alone: As I go
to morrow to the market, I am sure he will watch to meet with me, that he may
know what news: then I will tell him that you will not agree to his desire for
fear of discredit, this will give him a little hope and so we shall fall into
further talk, and I doubt not but to handle the matter well enough. According
to promise next morning to market she hies, somewhat more early then she was
wont, and by the way she meets with this lusty gallant, who had waited for her
at least three hours: he has no sooner spied her, but he presently makes
toward her, and at her coming thus salutes her: Sister, good morrow, what news
I pray, and how does your fair Mistress? In faith Sir, (says she) she is at
home very pensive and out of patience; I think that never any woman had such a
froward husband. Ah villain (says he) the Devil take him. Amen (says the
maid) for both my mistress and all the servants are weary with tarrying with
him, Out on him slave (says he) but I pray you tell me what answer gave your
Mistress touching my suit? In faith (quoth she) I spoke unto her, but she
would not agree thereunto, for she is wonderfully afraid to purchase her self
discredit, and is besides plagued with such a froward and suspicious husband,
and although she were never so willing, yet could she not, being continually
watched by him, his mother and brethren: I think on my conscience, unless that
it were that she spoke to you the other day, the poor woman talked not with any
man these four months; yet she speaks very often of you, and I am well assured
that if she would bend her mind to love, she would choose you before all men in
the World. He being ravished with these words, replies thus, Sweet sister, I
pray you be my friend herein, and I will always rest at your command. In good
faith (says she) I have done more for you already, then ever I did for any man
in my life. And think not (says he) that I will be unmindfull of your
kindness, but what would you counsel me to do? In faith Sir (says she) I
think it best that you should speak with her your self, and now you have an
excellent opportunity, for my master has refused to give her a gown, whereat
she storms not a little, you shall do well therefore to be to morrow at the
Church, and there salute her, telling her boldly your desire: you may also
offer her what you think good, but I know she will take nothing: marry she
will think the better of you, knowing thereby your frank and bountiful nature.
Oh, (says he) I would she would gladly take that which I would gladly bestow
on her. Nay, answers the maid, I know she will not, for you never knew a more
honester woman: but I Will tell ye how ye may do it afterward: Look what you
purpose to bestow upon her, you shall deliver unto me, I will do my best to
persuade her to take it: but I cannot assure you that I shall prevail. Surely
sister (says he) this is very good counsel, herewithall they part, and she
returns home, laughing to her self; which her mistress seeing, demands of her
the cause thereof. Marry (says the maid) this lusty gentleman is all on fire,
to morrow he will be at Church; purposing there to speak with you; now must you
demean your self wisely, and make very strange of it, but stand not off too
much, lest you dismay him clean: as you will not wholly grant, so must you feed
him with some hope. She having her lesson thus taught by her maid gets her up
betimes the next morning, and to the Church she goes, where this amorous
Gallant has waited for her coming ever since four a clock. She being set in
her Pew, makes show as if she were devoutly at her prayers, when (God wot) her
devotion is bent to the service of another Saint: it were worth the noting to
see how like an image she sits: and yet for all her demureness, she applies
all her five senses, and that full zealously in this new humor of religion. To
be short, he steals unto her sneaking unto her from the belfrey unto her Pew,
and being come, greetes her after the amorous order, and from greeting he falls
to courting, whereto she does in no wise yield consent, neither will she take
ought that she offers, yet answers him after such a sort that he does assurely
gather that she loves him thereby, and sticks only for fear of discredit:
whereat he is not a little jocund, and having spent his time to so good a
purpose, he takes his leave and she hasting home to her Counselor, acquaints
her what has passed between them; who thereupon takes occasion to say thus,
Mistress, I know well that now he longs to speak with me, but at our meeting I
will tell him that you will yield to nothing for which I will fain my self
sorry: And I will add withal, that my master is gone out of town, and will
appoint him to come hither toward the evening, with promise that I will let
him in, and convey him so secretly into your Chamber, that you shall know
nothing thereof. At what time you must seem to be highly offended, and if you
be wise, you will make him buy his pleasure with some cost, which will cause
him to esteem the more of you; Tell him that you will cry out, and then do you
call me. By handling him thus, I can assure you that you shall get more of him,
than if you had yielded at the first. All this while I will have in my keeping
that which he will give you, for he has appointed to deliver it me to morrow,
and I will make him believe, that you would by no means take it. But when the
matter is brought to this pass, then will I make show to offer you his gift
before him, telling you that he is willing you bestow it on you to buy you a
gown cloth withal: Then must you chide, and seem to be angry with me for
receiving it, charging me to deliver it back again to him, but be sure I will
lay it up safe enough. Well devised wench (says the Mistress) I am content it
shall be so. This plot being thus laid, the crafty wench goes presently to find
out this jolly Gallant, whose first word is, What news?

Now in good faith Sir, (says she) the matter is no further forwards, then if
it were yet to begin: yet because I have meddled so far in it, I would be loath I
should not bring it about, for I fear that she will complain of me to her
husband and friends; but if I could persuade her by any means to receive your
gifts, then out of question the matter were dispatched, and in good faith I Will
try once more: I have one good help, and that is this: my master (as I told you
before) will not give her a new gown, at which unkindness, she storms mightily.

The hot Lover hearing this, gives her presently twenty Crowns for her good
will, whereupon she speaks thus: In good faith sir, Better then two years
wages, and soon got.
I know not how it comes to pass, but sure I am, I never did so much for any
man before, as I have done herein for you: See, se^e Sir, what danger I have
put my self in for your sake; for if my Master should have any inckling of it,
I were utterly undone: yet for you I will hazard a little further: I know she
loves you well, as good hap is my Master is not now in Town, if you therefore
will be about the doors toward six of the clock at night, I will let you in;
and so convey you secretly into my Mistresses Chamber, who does sleep very
soundly; for you know she is but young: being there I could wish you go to bed
to her and for the rest you need not (I trust) any tutor: I protest that I know
no other means for the compassing of this matter, perhaps it will fadge: For it
is a great matter when a lover and his mistress are both together naked in the
dark, Just as J^rmans lip.
which does help forward a woman's conceit to that which in the day time perhaps
she would hardly grant. Oh my sweet friend (quoth he) for this kindness my purse
shall be at thy command. To be short, night comes, he is there according to
promise, whom she straight conveyes into her mistresses chamber, then he
presently uncloaths himself and steps softly into her bed, and being once in,
he begins to embrace her, hereat she (that seems till then asleep) starts up on
a sudden, and with a fearful voice asks who is there? it is I sweet Mistress,
says he, fear nothing. Ah (quoth she) think you to prevail thus? No, no, and with
that she makes as though she would rise, and calls her maid who answers not a
word, but alas for pity like an undutiful servant leaves her at her greatest
need. She therefore (good woman) seeing that she is forsaken, says with a
sigh. Ah me, I am betrayed: then begin they a stout battle, he urging his
advantage, she faintly resisting, but alas, what can a naked woman do against a
resolute lover? there is therefore no other remedy, but that at length (poor
soul) being out of breath with striving, she must needs yield to the stronger;
she would fain have cried out (God wot) had it not been for fear of discredit:
for thereby her name might have been brought in question, therefore all things
considered, she does willingly, God knows, let him supply her husbands place,
garnishing his Temples, for pure good will, with Acteons badge. Thus has she
got a new gown, which her good man refused to give her; to blear whose eyes,
and keep him from suspicion, she gets her mother in her husbands sight to bring
home the cloth and give it her, as though it were her cost and lest also he
should suspect any thing, she makes her believe she bought it with the money
she got by selling old commodities which her husband knew not of: But it may be
(and often it happens so) that the mother is privy to the whole matter, and a
furtherer thereof. After this gown she must have another, and too or three gold
imbroidered girdles, and other such costly knacks which the husband seeing,
will in the end suspect somewhat, and begin to doubt of his wives honesty, or
shall perhaps receive some advertisement thereof from some friend or kinsman:
for no such matter can be long kept close, but in the end will by some means or
other be made known and discovered: Then falls he into a frantic vein of
jealousy, watching his Wives close packing; and for the better finding it out,
he comes home on a sudden about midnight, thinking then to discover all, and
yet perhaps may miss his purpose. Another time coming in at unawares he sees
something that he likes not, and then in a fury falls on railing, but be sure
that she answers him home, not yiedling an inch unto him; for besides the
advantage of the fight; which is waged by her own trusty weapon (her tongue I
mean) she knowing withal that she is of better birth; hits him in the taeth
therewith and threatens him to tell her friends how badly he does use her. To
be short, the poor man shall never have good day with her, but either with
thought of her incontinency, or if he speak to her, he is born down with
scolding lies, and despised of his own servants: his state runs to ruin, his
health decays, his body dryes up, and wears away with grief, he grows
desperate and careless. Thus is he plunged in Lobs pound, wearied in a world of
discontents, wherein notwithstanding he takes delight, having no desire to
change his state: but rather if he were out, and knew what would follow, yet
would he never rest till he had gotten in again, there to spend and end (as now
he must) his life in grief and misery.

CHAP. VI. The humor of a woman that strives to master her husband.
THe next humor whereunto a woman is addicted, is, when the husband has got a
fair young wife, who is proper and fine in whom he takes great delight: yet
perhaps she is bent all together to cross and thwart: the man being of a kind
and mild nature loving her entirely, and maintains her as well as he can,
notwithstanding her frowardness: it may be also that she has care of his
credit and honesty and does abhor such lewdness as she of whom we speak before
did use, yet has she nevertheless an extreme desire of Sovereignty, (which is
known a common fault amongst women)and to be her husbands commander, and a
busy medler in his matters: be he a Judge, a Nobleman, or Gentleman, she will
take upon her to give sentence, and answer suitors, and whatsoever she does he
must stand to it.

This is (I say) a general imperfection of women be they never so honestly,
never so kindly used, and have never so much wealth and ease, to strive for the
breeches, and be in odd contrary humors, of purpose to keep her husband in
continual thought and care how to please her.

He gets him up betimes in the morning, leaving her in bed to take her ease,
while he stirs about the house and dispatcheth his business, look to the
servants that they loyter not, causes dinner to be made ready, the cloth to be
laid, and when all things are ready, he sends one to desire her to come down,
who brings back answer that she is not disposed to dine. Nay (says he) I will
never sit down nor eat a bit till she be here: So receiving his second message
by his maid, or perhaps by one of his children; replies thus: Go tell him again
that I will not dine to day. He hearing this is not yet satisfied but sends
likewise the third time, and in the end goes himself, and thus begins: How now,
what ails you Wife, that you will eat no meat? hereto she answers not a word.
The poor man marvells to see her in this melancholy dump, (although perhaps she
has played this pageant many times before) and uses all entreaty he may, to
know of her the cause thereof: but in vain, for indeed there is no cause at
all, but only a mere mockery: Sometimes she will persist so obstinately in this
humor, that for all the persuasions and kindness that he can use, she will
not come. Sometimes it may be she will, and then he must lead her by the hand
like a Bride, and set her chair ready for her, mean while it is so long before
he can get her down, that the meat is cold when it comes to the table. Being
set, she will not eat one bit, and he seeing that (like a kind Ass) will fall
likewise: whereat she smiles inwardly, having brought him so to her bow, first
in crossing him, then in making him fast from dinner: wherein (to say the
truth) she has reason, for what needs a woman to seek his favor, who does
already love her, and show her all the kindness that he can. Sometimes the
good man riding abroad about his business, meets with two or three of his
friends, with whom perhaps he has some dealings, and has been long acquainted
with them: It may be also that he invites them home to his house, as one friend
will do to another, and sends his man before to his wife to make all things
ready in the best sort that she can for their entertainment: the poor
servingman gallops in such haste, that both himself and his borse is all on a
sweat, when he comes home he does his errand to his Mistress, telling her
withal that the guests which his master brings are men of good account. Now by
my faith (says she) I will not meddle in it, he thinks belike that I have
nothing else to do, but drudge about to prepare banquets for his companions, he
should have come himself with a vengeance and why did he not? Foorsooth (says
the servant) I know not, but thus he bad me tell you. Go too (says she) you
are a knave that meddles in more matters then you have thank for. The poor
fellow hearing this holds his peace, she in a fume flings up into her chamber,
and which is worse, sends out her servants, some one way. some another: as for
his maids, they have their lesson taught them well enough, knowing by custom
how to behave themselves to weary their Master: well he comes home with his
before. said friends, calls presently for some of his servants: but one of the
maids makes answer of whom he demands whether all things be ready: In good
faith Sir my Mistress is very sick, and here is no body else can do any thing:
with that he being angry leads his friends into the Hall, or some other place
according to his estate, where he finds neither fire made, nor cloth laid.
Judge then in what a taking he is, although it may be that his friends
perceived by the sending of his man, that his commandments were not of such
force as an act of Parliament. The good man being ashamed, calls and gapes first
for one man, then for another, and yet for all this there comes none, except it
be the scullion or some chare-woman, that does use his house, whom his wife
has left there of purpose, because she knew they could serve to do nothing.
Being herewith not a little moved, up he goes into his wives chamber, and thus
he speaks unto her: Gods precious woman, why have you not done as I willed ye?
Why (says he) you appoint so many things to be done, that I know not what to
do. Before God (says he) and ^ith that he scratches his head, you have done me
a greater displeasure than you think: these are the dearest friends that I
have, and now here is nothing to set before them. Why (quoth she) what would
you have me to do? I wis if you cast your care well you shall find that we have
no need to make banquets: I would to God you were wiser, but since you will
needs be so lusty, even go throw with it your self on Gods name: for I Will not
meddle with it. But what the Devil mean ye (says he) to send all the servants
abroad? Why (quoth she) what did I know that you will need them now? yet did
she know it well enough, and had of purpose sent them forth on sleevelese
errands, the more to anger and dispight him: who seeing that he can prevail
nothing, gives over talking to her, and gets him down in a bitter chafe: for it
may be that his guests be of such account, and he so much beholding unto them
that he had rather have spent an hundred crowns than it should so have fallen
out. But she cares not a whit, being well assured, that howsoever she thwarts
him, he will hold his hands, and in scolding she knows her self to be the
better. To be short, the poor man being vexed with shame and anger, runs up and
down the house, gets as many of his servants together as he can: If his
provision be but slender at home, he sends presently abroad; in the mean while
he calls for a clean towel, the best table-cloth, and wrought napkins. But the
maid answers him, that he can have none. Then up to his wife goes he again, and
tells her that her friends do entreat her to come down and bear them company,
showing her what a shame it is and how discourteously they would take it if she
come not: And finally, he uses all the fairest speeches that he can to have
her come and to welcome and entertain them for his credits sake. Nay in faith
(quoth she) I will not come, they are too great states for my company, and no
doubt they would scorn a poor woman as I am. It may be she will go, but in such
sort, and with such a countenance, that it had been better for him she had not
come at all, for his friends will somewhat perceive by her looks, and gesture,
that howsoever they be welcome to the good man, she had rather have their room
than their company. But if she refuse to come (as it is the more likely) then
will he ask her for the best towel, table-cloth and napkins. Napkins (quoth
she) as though those that be abroad already be not good enough for greater and
better men than they are: when my brother or any of my kinsmen come, which are
I wis their equals in every respect, they can be contented to be served with
them: but were these your guests never so great, yet could I not now fulfill
your request though my life should lie on it: for since morning I have lost my
keys of the great chest where all the linen lies. I pray you bid the maid look
for them, for in good truth I know not what I have done with them; (...),
and no marvel, for I have so much to do, that I know not how to bestir my
self, well I wot, I have spoiled my self with continual care and trouble.

Now in good faith (quoth he) you have dressed me fairly, but it is no matter:
Before God I Will break open the Chest: Now surely then (quoth she) you shall do a
great act, I would fain see you do it, I would for my part you would break all
the Chests in the house. The poor man hearing her in these terms, knows not
well what to do, but takes that which he next lights on, and therefore shifts
as well as he can; he causes his guests to sit down at the table, and because
the beer then abroach is on tilt, and therefore not very good, he bids one of
the servants broach a new barrel and fill some fresh drink but then there is
neither tap nor spigger to be found, for his wife of purpose had hidden them
out of the way. Toward the end of the dinner he calls for cheese, and fruit,
but there is none in the house, so that he is ^ain to send to his neighbors
for the same, or else be utterly destitute: mean while his boy being at the
table with the guests at last tells them how his Mistress fains her self sick,
because she is not pleased with their Masters coming. Well, when bed time
comes, he can get no clean sheets nor pillowbeers, because for sooth the kepes
are lost, so that they must be content to lie in those that be foul, and have
been long lain in. The next morning they get them gone betimes seeing by the
good wives countenance that they are nothing welcome. By the way their lackies
tell them what the Gentleman's boy reported, whereat they laughed heartily, yet
find themselves agrieved, vowing never to be his guest any more. The husband
also getting him up betimes in the morning goes presently to his wife, and thus
begins: By Jesus wife, I muse what you mean to use me thus, I know not how to
live with you. Then she replies, saying: Now God for his mercy, and I so
troublesome? Got wot I am every day (poor soul) troubled with keeping the hogs,
your Geese, your chickens, I must card, I must spin, and continually keep the
house, look to the servants, and never fit still, but toyling up and down to
shorten my days, and make me dye before my time, and yet I cannot have one
hours rest or quietness with you, but you are always brawling, and do nothing
your self, but spend and waste your goods and mine with odd companions. What
odd companions (says he) as though you know not that these are such men, as
can either much further or much hinder me: It is a sign that you deal very
well that you must stand in distress of such persons. Hereupon she takes
occasion to rail and scold all the day long: the man being wearied with her
wawardness, and age (being hasted with grief and sorrow) does unawares overtake
him. Briefly, he is in every respect wretched: but such is his folly, that he
reckons his pains pleasure, and would not though he might, be again at liberty,
out of Lobs pound or if he would, it is now too late: for he must of force
continue there, in care, thought, and misery, till death make an end of him and
them together.

CHAP. VII. The humor of a covetous minded Woman.
THe next humor belonging to a woman is, when the Husband is matched to a
modest civil woman, who is nothing given to that thwarting and crossing humor
whereof I spoke before. But be she good or bad, this is a general rule, many
wives hold and steadfastly believe, that their own Husbands are worst of all
others. It often happens that when they match together, they are both young, and
entertain each other with mutual delights, so much as may be, for a year or two
or longer, till the vigor of youth grow cold. But the woman droops not so soon
as the man: the reason whereof is, because she takes no care, thought, nor
grief, breaks not her sleep, and troubles not her head as he does but does
wholly addict her thoughts to pleasure and solace. I deny not that when a woman
is with child she bides many times great pains, and is often very ill at ease,
and at the time of her deliverance, she is for the most part, not only in
exceeding pain, but also in no less danger of death: But all this is nothing to
the husbands troubles, on whose hands alone does rest the whole charge and
weight of maintaining the house, and dispatching all matters, which is
oftentimes entangled so with controversies, and so thwarted with cross fortune,
that the poor man is tormented with all vexations of mind.

Being thus wearyed, and as it were worn away with continual grief, troublous
cogitations, toil and travel, he has no mind on any other pleasure: whereas
she on the other side is as lusty as ever she was: mean while his stock decays,
and his state grows worse and worse: and as that diminishes, so he must
perforce shorten her allowance and maintenance, which is almost as great a
Corrosive to her, as the former: You may be well assured, that this change in
him makes her also change her countenance, from mirth and cheerfulness to
lowering melancholy, seeking occasions of disagreements, and use them in such
sort, that their former love and kindness was not so great, as are now their
brawls, jars, and discords. It does also oftentimes happen, that the Woman by
this means wasis and consumes all, giving lewdly away her husbands goods, which
he with great pains and cares has gotten. The good man, he goes every way as
near as he can, and wearily contains himself within his bounds, casting up what
his yearly revenues are, or what his gains is by his profession, be it
merchandise or other, and then what his expenses be: which he finding greater
then his comings in, begins to bite the lip and becomes very pensive: his wife
and he being afterward private together in their chamber, he speaks thereof
unto her in this manner: In faith wife. I much marvel how it comes to pass that
our goods go away thus, I know not how: I am sure I am as careful as man can
be, I cannot find in my heart to bestow a new cloak on my self, and all to save
money. By my troth Husband (says she) I do as much marvel at it as you, I am
sure for mine own part, that I go as near in housekeeping every day as I can.

To be short, the poor man not doubting his wife, nor suspecting her ill
carriage, after long care and thought concludes, that the cause thereof is his
own ill fortune, which keeps him down, and crosses all his actions with
contrary success, but it may be that in process of time, some friend of his
(being more clear fighted in the matter) perceiving all goes not will, does
privily inform him thereof, who being astonished at his report, gets him home
with a beavy countenance, which the wife seeing, and knowing her self guilty,
begins presently to doubt the worst, and perhaps ghesseth shrewdly at the
author thereof; but howsoever: she will take such an order, that she will be
sure to escape the brunt well enough.

The good man will not presently make any words hereof unto her, but defer it a
while, and try in the mean time whether he can (of himself) gather any further
likelihood: for which purpose he will tell her, that he must needs ride some
ten or twelve miles out of Town about some earnest business. Good faith
husband (says she) I had rather you would send your man, and stay at home your
self. Not so wife (says he) but I will be at home again my self within these
three or four days: Having told her this tale, he makes as though he took his
journey, but does privily lie in ambush in such a place, where he may know
whatsoever is done in the house: But she smelling his drift, sends word to her
sweetheart, that he do not come in any case, and all the time of his
desembled absence, she carries her self so that it gives no likelihood of
suspicion: which the silly man seeing, comes out of his ambush, enters his
house, making as if then he were returned from his journey? And whereas before
he lowred now shows a cheerful countenance, being verily persuaded that his
friends report is a mere lie, and that he thinks so much the rather, because
she does at his coming run to meet him, with such a show of love, and does so
embrace and kiss him that it seems impossible so kind a creature should play
false: But long after (being in bed together) he thus speaks to her:

Wife, I have heard reported certain words that like me not. Good faith husband
(says she) I know not what is the cause thereof: I have noted this great while
that you have bin very pensive, and was afraid that you had had some great
loss, or that some of your friends had been killed, or taken by the Spaniard. No
(says he) that is not the matter, but a thing which grieves me more than any
such matter can do. Now God for his mercy (quoth she) I pray you husband let me
know what it is. Marry wife (says he) a friend of mine told me that you kept
company with R.R. the veriest Russian in all the Town, and a many other matters
he told me of you. Here at she crossing her self in token of admiration (though
smiling inwardly) replies thus: Dear Husband, if this be all, then I pray you
give over your pensiveness: I would to God I were as free from all other sins,
as I am from that, then laying one hand on her head: she thus proceeds: I will
not swear any thing touching him, but I would the Devil had all this under my
hand, if I ever touched any man's mouth saving yours or some of our friends and
kinsmen, or such at least as you have commanded me. Ha, ha, is this the matter?
In troth I am glad that you have told me: I had verily thought it had been some
greater matter, but I know well enough whereupon these speeches grew, and I
would that you did likewise know, what moved him to speak them, Oh brave
dissembler.
I know you would not a little marvel, because he has always professed such
friendship toward you. In good faith I am nothing sorry that he has awaked
the sleeping dog. What mean you by that word (quoth he?) Nay (quoth she) be not
desirous to know it, you shall know it soon enough some other time. Birlady
(says he) I Will know it now. By my troth husband (says she) I was often
wonderfully angry when you brought him in hither, yet I forbear to speak of it,
because I saw you loved him so well. But speak now (says he) and tell me what
the matter is. Nay, nay (quoth she) it skils not greatly. Go to wife (says the
good man) tell me, for I will know it. Almost as bad as Judas kisses.
Then takes she him about the neck, and sweetly kissing him, says thus: Ah my
dear Husband, what villains are these that would seem to abuse you, whom I
honor and love above all men in the world, Well Wife (says he) I pray thee
tell me the man that so misuseth us. The devil take the liar.
In troth (quoth she) that vile dissembling Traitor, that flattering tell tale,
that puts that bad report in your ears, whom you esteem so much: reposing such
great confidence in him, he is the only man and none but he, that has
earnestly urged me any time this two years to commit folly with him. But God (I
praise him) has given me grace both to refuse him and his offers, although I
were continually troubled and importuned by him: I wis, when you thought he
came hither so often for your sake, Thus is he bored through the nose with a
cushen.
it was for this cause for never a time that he came, but he was in hand with
me to obtain his filthy desire, till in the end I threatened to tell you of it,
but I was loath to do it, fearing to breed a quarrel between you, so long as I
was sure to keep him from doing you herein any injury: Beside, I had still a
good hope, that he would at length give over: I wis it was no fault of his that
he sped not. Gods for my life (says the good man) being in a great rage, what
a treacherous villain is this? I would never have suspected any such matter in
him, for I durst have put my life in his hands. By this light Husband (says
she) if ever he come more within the doors, or if ever I may know that you have
any talk with him, I Will keep house no longer with you. Ah dear Husband, and with
that she clips and culs him again about the neck, should I be so disloyal as to
abuse you in this sort? so sweet, As kind as a Seacrab, seizing on a dead
carrion.
so amiable, and so kind a man, who lets me have my will in all things? God
forbid I should live so long to become a strumpet now. But for Gods sake
Husband, forbid him your house with whom this knave has slandered me withal,
yet I would the Devil had me if ever he made such motion to me: nevertheless,
by Gods grace he shall not come henceforth in any place where I am and with
that she begins to weep, and he (kind fool) does appease and comfort her,
promising and swearing that he will do as she will have him, save only that he
will not forbid him his house, with whose company the other had charged her,
and withal he vows, never to believe any more of these reports, nor so much as
to harken to any such tales again, notwithstanding he still feels a scruple of
suspicion in his conscience: Within a while he begins to fall at defiance with
his honest friend, who informed him of his Wives wantonness, and he seems to
be so deeply besotted with her love, that you would say he were transformed
without enchantment, into Acteons shape: His charge of Household still
increases, he has many Children, and is perplexed on every side; but his Wife
follows her pleasure far more than before, for though it be never so openly
known, yet will no man tell him thereof, because they know that he will not
believe them, and (which is more ridiculous) he that abuses him most, shall be
most welcome unto him of any. To be short, age will overtake him, and perhaps
poverty, from the which he will never be able to raise himself. Lo here the
great good and pleasure that he has gotten by entering into Lobs pound, every
man mocks him; some say it is pity because he is an honest man: others say, it
is not a matter to be sorrowed for, since it is the common rule of such. They of
the better sort will scorn his company. Thus lives he in pain, grief, and
disgrace. which he takes for great pleasure, and therein will continue till
death cut him off.

CHAP, VIII. The humor of a woman that still desires to be gadding abroad.
THe next humor of a woman is, when the husband has been in Lobs pound some
five or six years, part whereof he has spent in such pleasure as wedlock does
at the first afford, but now the date of these delights is out, he has perhaps
some three or four children: but his wife is now big again, end a great deal
worse of this child than she was of any other: whereat the poor man grieves not
a little, who takes great pains to get her that which she longs for: Well, the
time of her lying down draws near, and she is wonderfully out of temper: so
that it is greatly feared that she will hardly escape. Then falls he on his
knees, and prays devoutly for his Wife, who soon after is brought to bed,
wherefore he is not a little jocond, making sure account that God has heard
his prayers. She goships, kinswomen and neighbors, come in troops to visit and
rejoice for her safe delivery. She for her part wants no good cherishing,
whereby she recovers her strength, and is as fresh and lusty as ever she was.

After her Churching, she is invited by some of her neighbors. who also
invites five or six others of her neighbors and friends, who is received and
feasted with all kindness; which Banquet does perhaps cost her Husband more
than would have kept the house a whole fortnight: Amongst other she propounds a
question, and makes a match to go all together to a certain Fair, which will be
within ten days at such a place, to the which place they shall have a most
brave and pleasant journey, by reason of the fair weather, for they will always
conclude such an agreement in some of the best seasons of the year, and she
takes upon her to make this motion chiefly in regard of her Gossip, which was
lately brought a bed, that she may after her long pain and travel somewhat
recreate and refresh her self. But she answered her with thanks for her good
will, saying, she knows not how to get leave of her Husband. What (says the
other) that is the least matter of a thousand. Tush Gossip (says another)
stand not upon that, we will all go and be merry, and we will have with us my
Gossip G. T. my Cousin H. S. though perhaps he be nothing kind to her: But this
is their ordinary phrase, and they undertake this journey, because they cannot
so well obtain their purposes at home, being too near their Husbands noses.
After this agreement, home she comes with a heavy countenance: The good man
asks what she aileth. Marry (quoth she) the Child is very ill at ease,
(though he were never in better health since he was born) his flesh burns as
though it were fire, and as the Nurse tells me, he has refused the dug these
two days, although she durst not say so much till now. He hearing this and
thinking it true, is not a little sorry, goes presently to see his Child, and
weeps for pity.

Well, night comes, to bed they go, and then she fetching a sigh, begins thus:
Husband, I see you have forgotten me. How mean you that, says he? Marry (quoth
she) do you not remember that when I was in child bed you said, that if it
pleased God that I escaped, I should go to such a Fair with my Gossips and
neighbors to make merry, and cheer up my self, but now I hear you not talk of
it. In troth wife (says he) my head is troubled with so many matters, and such
a deal of business, that I have no leisure to think on any thing else: but
there is no time past yet, the Fair will not be this fortnight. By my troth
(quoth she) I shall not be well unless I go. Well wife (says he) content your
self: for if I can by any means get so much money ye shall go. You know it is
not little that we shall spend there: yea more I wis then will be my ease to
lay out. Good Christ (quoth she) is it now come to that? you promised me
absolutely, without either ifs or auns: before God I will go, whether you will
or no: for there goes my Mother, my Gossip T. my Cousin B and my Cousin R. and
his wife. If you will not let me go with them, I know not with whom you will
let me go. He hearing her thus wilful, thinks it best for his own quietness,
to let her go, though he strain his purse somewhat the more. The time comes, he
hires horses, buys her a new riding gown, and does furnish her according to
her mind: peradventure there goes in their company a lusty Gallant, that will
frollick it by the way on her Husbands cost, for his purse must pay for all. It
may be he will go himself, because he has never a man, or else cannot spare
him from his work. But then is the poor man notably perplexed, for she will on
purpose trouble him for every trifle more than she would do to another: because
it does her good to make a drudge of him; and so much the rather, that he may
not afterward have any desire to go abroad with her again.

Sometime her stirrup is too long, sometimes too short: and he must still
alight to make it fit: sometimes she will wear her cloak, sometimes not, and
then he must carry it. Then finds she fault with her horses trotting, which
makes her sick, and then she will alight and walk on foot, leaving him to lead
the horses. Within a while after they come to a water, then must he be troubled
to help her up again. Sometimes she can eat nothing that is in the Inn, then
must he (being weary all day with riding) trudge up and down all the Town, to
find something that will fit her stomach: All which notwithstanding, she will
not be quiet: and not she only, but her Gossips also will be bobbing and
quipping him, saying that he is not worthy to be a woman's man. But he is so
inured to these janglings that he cares not for all their frivolous words.

Well at length to the Fair they come, and then must he play the Squire in
going before her, making so much room for them as he can, when there is any
throng or press of people, being very chary of his wife, lest she should be
hurt or annoyed by thrusting. There moyles he like a Horse, and sweats like a
Bull, yet cannot all this please her. Some Dames of the company, which are more
flush in crowns than her good man, bestows money on Gold Rings, Hats, silk
Girdles, Jewels, or some such toys; yea, costly toys, which she no sooner
sees, but presently she is on fire; until she have the like. Then must he
herein content her, (if he love his own ease) and have he money or not, some
shift must be made to satisfy her humor. Well now imagine them going
homewards, and think his pain and trouble no less, than it was coming forth:
her Horse perhaps does flounder much, or trots too hard, which is peradventure
by reason of a nail in his foot or some other mischance. Then must he perforce
buy, or hire another Horse; and if he have not money enough to do so, then must
he let her ride on his, and he trot by her side like a Lackey. By the way she
will ask for twenty things, for milk because she cannot away with their drink;
for pears, plumbs, and cherries: When they come near a Town he must run before
to choose out the best Inn: ever and anon as she rides, she will of purpose
let fall her wand, her mask and gloves, or something else, for him to take up,
because she will not have him idle: When they are come home, she will for a
fortnight together, do nothing else but gad up and down amongst her Gossips,
to tell them how many gay and strange things she has seen: all that has
passed by the way, in going and coming, but especially of her good man, whom
she will be sure to blame, saying, that he did her no pleasure in the world,
and that she poor soul, being sick and weary, could not get him to help her, or
to provide any thing for her that she liked: And finally, that he has had no
more care of her, than if she had been a mere stranger.

But he (poor sot) finding at his return all things out of order, is not a
little troubled to set them in due frame again, and toyls exceedingly at his
labor, that he may recover his charges which he has been at in his journey.
But she, what for gossiping, for pride, and idleness, will not set her hand to
any thing: And yet if ought go well: she will say that it was through her
heedfulnes and good huswifery. If otherwise, then will she scold and lay the
fault thereof on him, although it be her own doings. To be short, having thus
gotten a vein of gadding, she will never leave it, and hereby the poor man will
be utterly spoiled, for both his substance shall be wasted, his limbs through
labor filled with aches, his feet with the gout, and age comes on him before
his time: yet as though this were not evil enough, she will be continually
brawling, scolding, and complaining, how she is broken through childbearing.
Thus is the filly man up to the ears in Lobs pound, being on each fide beset
with care and trouble which he takes for pleasure, and therein languisheth
whiles he lives.

CHAP. IX. The humor of a cursed Queen, married to a froward Husband.
THe next humor that is incident to a woman, is when the husband having entered
very young into Lobs pound, and there fettered himself by his too much folly,
for a vain hope of ticklish delights, which lastet but for a year or two, has
matched himself with a very froward and perverse woman (of which sort there are
too many) whose whole desire is to be Mistress, and to wear the breeches or at
least to bear as great a sway as himself. But he being crafty, and withal
crabbed, will in no wise suffer this usurped sovereignty but with sundry
matters withstands it. And there has bin great stir and arguing about this
matter between themselves, and now and then some battles: but do she what she
can, either with her tongue or hands, notwithstanding their long controversy,
which has perhaps lasted at the least these twenty years: he is still
victorious and holds his right: but you must think that his striving for it all
this while, has been no small trouble and vexation unto him, beside all other
aforesaid evils. All which, or part thereof, he has likewise endured. Well, to
be short, he has perchance three or four children all married, and by reason
of the great pains and travel that he has taken in bringing them up, providing
them portions, maintaining his wife, increasing his stock, or at least keeping
it from being diminished, and living with credit amongst his neighbors: At
last it may be he has gotten the gout, or some other dangerous disease, and
withal is grown old, and thereby feeble: so that being set, he can hardly
rise, through an ach that he has got in his arms or legs: Then is their long
war come to an end, and the case (as Ployden says) clean altered: For his wife
being younger than he, and as frolic as ever she was, will now besure to have
her own will in despite of his heart: Hereby the poor man which has
maintained the combat so long, is now utterly put down: his own children which
before he kept in awe well enough, will now take heart to themselves, and if he
reprove them for their lewdness and disobedience, she will maintain them
against him to his teeeh, which must needs be a great grief unto him.

But besides all this, he is in doubt of his servants; for they likewise
neglect their former duty and lean all together to their Mistress: so that he
poor man, which now by reason of his sickness, and feebleness of body, has
more need of attendance than ever he had, shall have but very little or none at
all: For though he be as wise and as careful as ever he was, yet since he
cannot bestir himself to follow them as he was wont, they contemn and make no
more reckoning of him, than if he were a mere fool.

Then peradventure his eldest son, thinking that his father lives too long,
will take upon him to guide the house, and dispose all things at his pleasure,
as if his father were become an innocent, and could no longer look to things as
he was wont: Judge you whether the good man seeing himself thus abused by his
wife, children and servants, be grieved or not. If he purpose to make his Will,
they will seek all means to keep him from doing it, because they hear an
inkling, that he will bestow somewhat on the Parish, or will not bequeath his
wife so much as she would have.

To be short, that they may make an end of him the sooner, they will many times
leave him in his Chamber half a day and more without meat, fire, or ought else,
not one of them coming to see what he wants, or to do him any service: his wife
is weary of him by reason of his spitting, coughing, and groaning.

All the love and kindness which he had in former times showed unto her, is
quite forgotten; but this strife for superiority, and his crabbednesse toward
her (when she had justly moved him) this she can still as well remember, as
when it was first done: Neither will she spare to prate thereof to her
neighbors: telling them that he has been a bad man. and that she has led
such a life with him, that if she had not been a woman of great patience, she
should never have endured to keep house with so crabbed a churl.

She will likewise boldly reproach, and twit him in the teeth with those former
matters, for it does yet shrewdly stick in her stomach, that she could not till
now be Mistress. But he that was wont to charm her tongue, and keep her under,
who seeing him now in his distress and weakness, takes advantage, and
continues his bad usage: Seeing all his Children, which should fear and
reverence him, take part with their Mother, being taught and set on by her:
seeing this (I say) and being no less angry then grieved, he calls some of
them in a rage, and when they are come before him, thus begins he to his wife.

Wife, you are she, whom by the laws of God and man, I should love and esteem
more than any thing else in the world and you on the other side should bear the
like affection to me: but whether you do so or not, I refer it to your own
conscience: I tell you I am not well pleased with your using me thus: I think
you take me still for the Master of the house as before you have done, but
whether you think so or not, be sure I will be Master while I live, yet you I
thank you, do use me and account of me in very slight manner: I have always
loved you well, never suffered you to lack that which was meet: I have in like
sort loved, and also maintained your Children and mine, according to my degree,
add now both you and they do very unkindly requite me.

Why (says she) What would you have us to do? We do the best we can, but you
cannot tell your self what you would have. The better we use you, and the more
we tend you, the worse you are, but you were never other, always brawling, and
never quiet, nevee pleased full nor fasting: I think never woman was so long
troubled with a croaked Pestle as I have been.

Ah Dame (says he) leave these words I pray you: then turning him to his
eldest son, he said: Son, I have marvelled at your behavior of late toward
me, and tell you I am not well pleased therewith: You are my eldest, and shall
be mine heir, if you behave your self as a Child ought to do: But you begin
already to take state upon you, and to dispose of my goods at your pleasure: I
would not wish you to be so forward, but rather while I live, to serve and obey
me as it becomes you to do: I have been no bad father unto you, I have nothing
impaired or diminished, but increast that which was left me by my Father, which
if you do your duty to me (as I did mine to him) I will leave to you after my
decease as he left to me: but if you continue in your stubbornness and
disobedience, before God (I swear) I will not bestow one penny or cross upon
thee.

Here his wife begins again to thwart him: Why, what would you have him do? it
is impossible for any one to please you; he shall have enough to do that shall
always tend you: I wis it is high time that you and I were both in Heaven, you
know not your self what you would have, I marvel what you ail. Well, well
(says he) I pray you be quiet, do not maintain him thus against me, but it is
always your order.

After this, the Mother and Son departing, consult together, and conclude, that
he is become a child again, and because he has threatened to disinherit them,
they resolve that no man shall be suffered to come and speak with him: His son
takes upon him more than before, being born out by his Mother; who together
with him, makes every one believe that the poor man is become childish, and
that he has lost both his sense and memory.

If any of his honest friends and former acquaintance, which were wont to
resort unto him, come now to ask for him, his Wife will thus answer them: Alas
he is not to be spoken with, and when he demands the cause thereof, doubting he
is dangerously sick: Ah good neighbor (says she) he is become an Innocent,
even a Child again, so that I poor soul must guide all the house, and take the
whole charge of all things upon me, having none to help me: but God be praised
for all.

In faith (says the other) I am very sorry to hear this, and do much marvel at
it, for it is not long since I saw him, and spoke with him, and then he was in
as good memory, and spoke with as good sense and reason as ever he did before.
In truth (says she) he is now as I tell ye.

Thus does she wrong and slander the poor man, which has always lived in good
credit, and kept his household in very good order: but you may be well assured,
that he seeing himself in his age thus despised and injured, and being not able
to remedy himself, nor stir without help from the place where he is, thereby to
acquaint his friends therewith, which might in his behalf redress it, is not a
little grieved, vexed, and tormented in his mind, with sorrow and anger: So
that it is a great marvel he falls not into despair: For it is enough to make a
Saint become impatient to be used thus by those which should obey serve and
honor him. And in my opinion this is one of the greatest corrosives that any
man can feel: such is the issue of this great haste and extreme desire to be in
Lobs pound, where he must now remain perforce, till death do end (at once) both
his life and languishing.

CHAP. X. The humor of a Woman given to all kind of pleasures.
ANother humor incident to a woman by nature, is, when the husband (thinking
that wedlock was of all estates the happiest, and altogether replenished with
delight and pleasure) because he saw some of his friends, who for a while after
they were married, were very cheerful and jocund, never cease toyling and
turmoyling himself till he has gotten into Lobs pound, wherein he is presently
caught fast like a bird in a net: for this comparison, if we do examine the
particulars thereof, does very fitly resemble his estate. The silly birds which
fly from tree to tree and from field to field to seek meat, when they see a
great deal of Corn spilt on the ground, think themselves well apaid, and
without any fear come hither to feed thereon, picking up the grains of corn,
but alas they are deceived, for on a sudden the net is drawn and they are all
fast tied by the legs, and thence carried in a sack or panier one upon another
to the fowlers house, then cooped up in a cage. Oh how happy would they think
themselves, if they were again at their former liberty to fly whither they
list, but they wish too late: yet were this all the evil that they should
endure, it were well, but (which is worse) they shall soon after have their
necks wrung off, and their little bodies spitted to be made meat for men to eat.

But they are therein far more simple than the Birds, for they being fast in
Lobs pound, and so besotted with their own sorrows, that they have no power to
free themselves: So likewise they have no will to do it. But to proceed; the
wife not loving her husband, for some defect which is in him, that she may have
some color for that she does, makes her mother and other friends which blame
her for it, believe, that her husband is bewitched; and by reason of some
Sorcery, made for the most part impotent; hereupon she complains of her ill
fortune, resembling it to those, which having the Cup at their noses cannot
drink: mean while she has a sweet heart in a corner, who is not bewitched, who
uses her company so long, and with so little heed, that in the end her husband
perceives it, and falling into the vain of jealousy, beats her well
favouredly, and keeps a foul stir both with blows and words, so that she not
liking his usage, gives him the slip, but then is he clean out of patience, and
so husbands in this taking are so mad, that they never lin seeking them, and
would give half they are worth to find her again: who having thus played the
pageant, and seeing her husbands humor, compacts with her mother, whose good
will she will be sure to get by one means or other (whereas at the first she
will perhaps think hardly of her departure from her husband) she does I say, so
handle the matter with her that she will make the good man believe her daughter
has been all this while at home with her, and that she came to shun his bad
usage, who (had she tarried with him till then) had been lamed for ever.

Before God (quoth she) I had rather you should restore her again to me, than
beat her thus without cause, for I know that you suspect her wrongfully, and
that she has never offended you: I wis I have straightly examined her about it,
but if she would have been naught, you did enough to provoke her: By Gods
passion, I think few women could have born it. Well (it may be) that upon these
or the like terms he takes her again: it may be also that they are both
desirous to be divorced, each accusing other, and seeking to wind themselves
again out of Lobs pound, but in vain. For either the causes that they allege
are not thought sufficient by the Judge, how hard soever they plead, but must
of force continue still together, are laughed to scorn of all that hear the
cause: for if they be separated, yet will not all this set them free, but
rather plunge them in deeper than before, but neither of them can marry whiles
the other lives, and their chastity so brittle (especially hers) that hold it
cannot, nor long endure.

She who was wont to be so frolic, must needs continue so still. Nay
peradventure, being now without controlment, follows her evil and lewd life
more freely than before: and whereas she was but erst a private Queen, she is
now common in the way of Good fellowship, or else some lusty Gallant takes her
into his house and shelters her by his nose, which must needs be unto him an
exceeding inward grief, and an open disgrace and shame in the eyes of the
world; and which is worse, he knows not how in the world to remedy it, but must
perforce endure both, while this miserable life does last.

CHAP. XI. The humor of a woman to get her Daughter a Husband, having made a
little wanton escape.
THe next humor that a woman is addicted unto, is, when a lusty young Gallant
riding at pleasure up and down the Country, but especially to those places of
sports and pleasure where the finest Dames and dainty Girls meet, who can
finely mince their Measures, having their tongues trained up to all kind of
amorous chat; in which delightful exercises, this Youngster both by reason of
his youth, his loose bringing up, and natural inclination, takes a great
felicity in such vain company: and so much the rather, because he finds
himself always welcomed, and kindly entertained to such places, and the reason
is the comeliness of his person, his amiable countenance, and queint
behavior: for whosoever has these good helps, shall want no favor at Women's
hands. It may be also, that his parents are still living: and he their only
joy, they having herhaps no Child but him, so that all their most delight is in
maintaining him bravely. It may be also, that he is newly come to his Lands,
and loves to see fashions, though it cost his purse never so largely. If any
Gentlewoman offer any kindness, he is ready to require it: and at length
through long passing to many places, he lights on one that does exceedingly
please his eye, and inflame his heart: she is perhaps Daughter to some
Gentleman, some Citizen, or some worthy Farmer. She has a clear complexion, a
fine proportion, a wanton eye, a dainty tongue, and a sharp wit; by reason of
all which good gifts, she is grown very famous. She has been wooed, sued, and
courted by the bravest Gallants in the Country; of whom perhaps some one being
more forward and courageous than the rest, has offered her such kindness. as
sticks by the ribs a good while after, and would needs enforce this courtesy
with such importunity, that she had not the power to resist it: for a woman
that has her fine wits, if she be withal of a cheerful sanguine complexion,
cannot be so unkind, or so hard-hearted as to deny, or repulse the petition of
an amorous Friend, if he do any thing earnestly prosecute the same. And (to be
plain) be she of what complexion soever, she will be nothing slack to grant
such a suit.

But to return to our purpose, by reason of her tender compassion, and kind
acceptance of his proffered service, it so falls out she has played false, then
is there no other shift but to keep it both secret and close, and to take such
order as they best can, for smoothing up of the matter; he that has done the
deed, being a poor young man, though proper of body, and perhaps can dance very
well, by which good quality he won her favor, and within a while after cropped
the flower of her maidenhead: he (I say) after a week or two, and no further
matter (lest this privy, escape should be openly known) is warned from coming
any more to the house, or frequenting her company whatsoever.

But now you must note, that she being but a simple girl, between fourteen and
fifteen years of age, nothing expert, but rather a novice in such matters, and
having been but lately deceived, knows not her self how it is with her: But her
Mother which by long experience has gotten great judgment, does by her
color, her complaining of pain at her heart and stomach: with other like
tokens, perceive it well enough, and having (as before I said) cashiered the
Author of the action: then takes she her daughter aside, and schools her so
that in the end she confesses that he has been dallying with her, but she
knows not whether to any purpose or not. Yes (says her Mother) it is to such
purpose, as by these signs I know very well, that you have thereby both shamed
your self, and all our friends, and spoiled your marriage quite and clean.

To be short, having somewhat chid her after the common order, for having no
more respect nor care of her honesty, (yet not chiding very extremely, because
she knows the frailty of youth by her own former experience) she concludes thus
comfortably: Since it is done, and cannot be altogether remedied, she will seek
both to hide and salve the matter as well as she can, charging her Daughter ta
set a good countenance on it, lest it should be suspected, and to follow her
counsel and commandment in all things: Whereupon the poor Wench willingly
consents, then the Mother proceeds thus:

You know Master T. A. that comes hither so often, he is you see a proper
Gentleman, and a rich Heir, to morrow he has appointed to be here again: Look
that you give him good entertainment. and show him good countenance. When you
see me and the rest of our Guests talking and discoursing together, ever and
anon cast your eyes on him, in the kindest and lovingest manner that you can.
If he seem desirous to speak with you, be not coy, but hear him willingly,
answer him courteously. If he entreat love of you, tell him that you know not
what it means, and that you have no desire at all to know it; yet thank him for
his good will; for that Woman is too uncourteous and uncivil, which will not
vouchsafe the hearing or gently answering to those that love her and wish her
well.

If he offer you money take none in any case; if a ring, or a girdle, or any
such thing, at the first refuse it, yet kindly and with great thanks: but if he
urge it on you twice or thrice, take it, telling him since that he will needs
bestow it on you you will wear it for his sake. Lastly, when he takes his
leave, ask him when he will come again: These instruments being thus given, and
the plot laid for the fetching in of this kind fool into Lobs pound:

The next day he comes, and is on all hands more kindly welcome and
entertained: after dinner, having had great cheer, the Mother falls in talk
with the other guests, and this frollick Novice gets him as near to her
Daughter as he can, and while the other are hard in chat he takes her by the
hand, and thus begins to court her:

Gentlewoman, I would to God you knew my thoughts. Your thoughts Sir (says
she) how should I know them, except you tell them me? It may be you think
something that you are loath to tell. Not so (says he) yet I would you knew it
without telling. But that (says she smiling) is impossible. Then (quoth he) if
I might do it without offense, I would adventure to tell you them. Sir (says
she) you may freely speak your pleasure: for I do so much assure me of your
honesty, that I know you will speak nothing that may procure offense.

Then thus (says he) I acknowledge without feigning, that I am far unworthy of
so great a favor, as to be accepted for your Servant, friend, and lover, which
are so fair, so gentle, and every way so gracious, that I may truly say, you
are replenished with all the good gifts that nature can plant in any mortal
creature: But if you would vouchsafe me this undeserved grace, my good will,
diligence, and continual forwardness to serve and please you shall never fail:
but I would therein equal the most loyal lover that ever lived, I would esteem
you more than any thing else, and tender more your good name and credit than
mine own.

Good Sir (quoth she) I heartily thank you for your kind offer, but I pray you
speak no more of such matters, for I neither know what love is, nor yet care
for knowing it: This is not the lesson that my Mother teaches me now adays.
Why (says he) if it please you, she shall know nothing of it; yet the other
day I heard her talk of preferring you in marriage to one Master G. R. How say
you to that (quoth she?) Marry thus (answers the Gentleman) if you would
vouchsafe to entertain me for your Servant, I would never marry but only rely
upon your favor.

But that (said she) should be no profit to either of us both, and beside it
would be to my reproach, which I had not thought you would seek. Nay (quoth he)
I had rather dye then seek your discredit. Well Sir (says she) speak no more
hereof, for if my Mother should perceive it, I were utterly undone. And it may
be her Mother makes her a sign to give over, fearing she does not play her part
well.

At the breaking up of their amorous Parley, he conveys into her hand a gold
ring, or some such toy, desiring her to take it and keep it for his sake: which
at the first (according to her Mothers precepts) she does refuse: but upon his
more earnest urging of it, she is content to take it in the way of honesty, and
not on any promise or condition of any farther matter: when it was brought to
this pass, the mother makes metion of a journey to be made the next morning,
some ten or twelve miles off, to visit, or feast with some friend, or to some
Fair, or whatsoever other occasion presents it self. To this motion they all
agree, and afterward sit down to supper, where he is placed next the Daughter,
who carries her self so toward him with her piercing glances, that the young
Heir is set on fire therewith: Well, morning comes: they mount on Horseback,
and by the opinion of them all: there is never a Horse in the company that can
carry double but his: So the gull is appointed to have the Maiden ride behind
him, wherefore he is not a little proud: and when he feels her hold fast by the
middle (which she does to stay her self the better) he is even ravished with
joy.

After their returning home, which perhaps will be the same night the Mother
taking the Daughter aside, questions with her, touching all that had passed
between the amorous Gallant, and her: which when her daughter had rehearsed,
then proceeds the wily Grandame thus: If he court thee any more (as I know he
will) then make him answer that thou have heard thy father and me talk of
marching thee with Master G. R. but that thou have no desire as yet to be
married: if he then offers to make thee his Wife, and use any comparisons of
his worth and wealth as though he were every way as good as he, thank him for
his good will and kindness, and tell him that you will speak with me about it,
and that for thy own part thou could find in thy heart to have him to thy
Husband rather than any one else: upon this lesson the daughter sleeps,
revolving it all night in her mind.

The next morning she walks into the Garden and this lusty yonker follows;
when having given her time of the day, he falls to his former suit. She wills
him to give over such talk, or she will leave his company: Is this the love you
bear me, (quoth she) to seek my dishonesty? you know well enough that my Father
and Mother are minded to bestow me otherwise.

Ah my sweet Mistress (says he) I would they did so far favor me herein, as
they do him: I dare boldly say and swear it, and without vain glory utter it,
that I am every way his equal. Oh Sir, (answers she) I would he were like you.
Ah sweet Mistress (says he) you dain to think better of me than I deserve, but
if you would further vouchsafe me that other favor, I should esteem my self
most happy. In troth Sir (says she) it is a thing that I may not do of my
self, without the counsel and consent of my Parents, to whom I would gladly
move it, if I thought they would not be offended: But it would be so much the
better, if you brake the matter unto them; and be sure, if they refer the
matter to me, you shall speed as soon as any. He being ravished with these
words, and yielding her infinite thanks, trots presently to the Mother, to get
her good will.

To be short (with some little ado) the matter is brought about, even in such
sort as he would desire: they are straight way contracted, and immediately
wedded, both because that her friends fear that the least delay will prevent
all, and because he is so hot on the spur, that he thinks every hour a year
till it be done. Well, the wedding night comes, wherein she behaves her self so
(by her Mothers counsel) that he dares swear on the Bible that he had her
Maidenhead.

Within a while after, it comes to his Friends ears, without whose knowledge he
has married himself, who are exceeding sorry, knowing she was no meet match
for him, and it may be they have heard withal of his Wives humor: but now
there is no remedy that knot is knit, and cannot be undone, they must therefore
have patience perforce.

Well he brings his fair Bride home to his own house, where (God wot) he has
but a small time of pleasure, for within three or four months after their
marriage, she is brought to bed: Judge then in what taking the poor man is. If
he put her away, his shame will be public, she grows common, and he not
permitted to marry again while he lives, and if he keep her still, love her he
cannot, suspect her he will, and she both hate him, and perhaps seek his end:
Finally, all the joys, pleasures, and delights which before time they had, are
all turned to brawls, banning, cursing and fighting, Thus is he hampered in
Lobs pound, where he must of force remain, till death ends his lives miseries.

CHAP. XII. The humor of a woman being matched with an over kind Husband.
THere is another humor incident to a Woman, which is when a Young man has
turmoyled and tossed himself so long, that with much ado, he has gotten into
Lobs pound, and has perhaps met with a Wife according to his own desire, and
perchance such a one, that it had been better for him to have lighted on
another: Yet he likes her so well, that he would not have mist her for any
Gold, for in his opinion there is no Woman alive like unto her, he has a great
delight to hear her speak, is proud of his match, and peradventure is withal
of so sheepish a Nature, that he has purposed wholly to govern himself by her
counsel and direction: So that if any one speak to him about a Bargain, or
whatsoever other business, he tells them that he will have his Wives opinion
in it, and if she be contented, he will go through with it; if not, then will he
give it over: Thus is he as tame and pliable as a Iack-an-Apes to his Reeper.
If the Prince set forth an Army, and she be unwilling that he should go, who
(you may think) will ask her leave, then must he stay at home, fight who will
for the Country: But if she be at any time desirous to have his room (which
many times she likes better than his company) she wants no Iourneys to employ
him in, and he is as ready as a Page to undertake them: If she chide, he
answers not a word; generally, whatsoever she does, or howsoever, he thinks it
well done.

Judge now what a case this silly Calf is in: Is not he (think you) finely
dressed, that is in such subjection? The honestest Woman, and most modest of that
Sex, if she wear the Breeches, she is so out of reason in taunting and
controlling her Husband: For this is their common fault, and be she never so
wise, yet because a Woman, scarce able to govern her self, much less her
Husband, and all his affairs: For were it not so, doubtless God would have made
her the head: which since it is otherwise, what can be more preposterous, than
that the Head should be governed by the Foot? If then a wise and honest Woman's
superiority be unseemly, and breed great incoveniences, etc. How is he dressed
(think you) if he light on a fond, wanton, and malicious Dame? Then
(doubtless) he is soundly sped: she will not stick to keep a sweetheart under
his nose; yet is he so blind, that he can perceive nothing, but for more
security she will many times send him packing beyond Sea about some odd
errand, which she will buzze in his ears, and he will perform it at her
pleasure, albeit she send him forth at midnight, in Rain, Hail, or Snow, for he
must be a man fit for all weathers: Their children (if they have any) must
needs be brought up, apparelled, fed, and taught, only according to her
pleasure: and one special point of their learning, is always to make no
account of their Father: If any of their children be daughters, she will marry
them according to her mind, to whom she list, when she list, and give with them
what Dowry she list, without acquainting him therewith, till she have concluded
the match, and then she tells him not to have his consent, but as a Master may
tell his servant, to give him direction how to behave himself to deal therein.
Finally, she orders all things as she thinks best her self, making no more
account of him (especially if he be in years) than men do of an old horse which
is past labor.

Thus is he mewed up in Lobs pound, plunged in a sea of cares and corrosives,
yet he (kind fool) deems himself most happy in his unhappiness, where he must
now perforce remain while his life does last, and great pity it were he should
want it, fith he likes it so well.

CHAP. XIII. The humor of a Woman whose Husband is gone beyond the Sea, upon
some business.
ANother humor of a woman is, when the Husband has been married some seven or
eight years, more or less, and as he thinks, he has met with a good Wife as
any man can have, with whom he has continued all the aforesaid time, with
great delights and pleasures: But admit he be a Gentleman, and that he is
desirous to purchase honor by following Arms and in this humor he is resolved
to make a step abroad, and not to tarry always like a cowardly Drone by the
smoke of his own Chimney: But when he is ready to depart, she having her cheeks
blubbered with tears, falls about his neck, culs, kisseth, and imbraceth him,
then weeping sighing, and sobbing, she thus begins to him:

Ah sweet Husband, will you now leave me? Will you thus depart from me, and
from your loving Children, which know not when we shall see you again, or
whether you shall ever come home again or no? Alas sweet Husband go not: Tarry
with us still, if you leave us, we are utterly undone.

Ah sweet Wife (says he) dissuade me not from this enterprise, which concerns
my Credit and Allegiance: for it is our Princes commandment, and I must obey:
but be you well assured, I will not be long from you (if it please God.)

Thus does he comfort and quiet her in the best sort that he can, and be she
never so importunate, be her tears never so many, her entreaty never so
forcible, yet go he will, esteeming his Renown and Duty to his Prince and
Country, more than Wife and Children, though next to it, he esteem and love
them chiefest of all other. And at his departure, he recommends them to the
care and courtesy of his chiefest friends: Yet some there be whose tender
hearts melt so easily with kind compassion that one of their wives tears, and
the least of their entreaties, will ty them so fast by the leg at home, that
they will not stir one foot from her sweet side, neither for Ring nor Keysar,
Wealth nor Honor. These are Cravens, and unworthy to be called Gentlemen.

But to return to this valourous and brave minded Gentleman, of whom we spoke
before; It may be, that either by the long continuance of the Wars, or by his
misfortunes, in being taken Prisoner, or some other let, he comes not home in
four or five years, and all that while there is no news of him, you may be
sure that his Wife is a sorrowful Woman, and wholly surcharged with grief,
being thus deprived of her loving Mate, and hearing nothing of his estate. But
all things have an end, and she seeing that in so long time, she can hear no
tidings of him, does peremptorily conclude that he is dead. Then considering to
live comefortlesse in Widows estate, were an uncouth life, she determines to
marry her self to some; one, so soon as conveniently she may: which will be
soon enough; for a fair Woman, if willing, can want no choice. Thus the former
sorrow is somewhat alaid, and within a while after, clean extinguished by the
fresh delights, pleasures, contents and solace, which this new choice does
yield. So that now her other Husband is wholly forgotten, her Children which
she had by him little regarded and the Goods which belong to them, are spent on
others, while the poor wretches want things needful, but not blows and hard
usage. To be short, the tears which she bestowed upon her other Husband at his
departure, are dried up, her embraces vanished. And whosoever should see her
with this second Husband, and what kindness she shows him, would verily think
that she loves him far berter than she did the first, who in the mean while is
either taken Prisoner, or else fighting in extreme hazard of his life.

But in the end it chances so, that by paying his Ransom (if he have been
prisoner) home he comes, clean changed, through the many troubles he has had:
and being come somewhat naer, fails not to enquire of his wife and children,
for he is in great fear, that they are either dead, or in some great distress.
And doubtless in the time of his Imprisonment, or other dangers, he has often
thought, often dreamed of them and often sorrowed for them, often besought God to
preserve and bless them. And that perhaps sometimes, at the very instant when
she was in the others arms, toiyng and dallying, and in the midst of her
delights.

Well, enquiring (as aforesaid) he hears that she is married again, then judge
you with what grief he hears it. But his grief is boorlesse, for now the matter
is past remedy, if he have any care of his credit, any regard of his estimation
he will never take her more though perhaps the other, having his pleasure of
her, could be well contented either to restore her to him, or to leave her to
any one else.

She on the other side is utterly ashamed, and her name stained with perpetual
reproach: and neither he nor she can marry whiles they live. Their poor
children are likewise grieved and shamed at their Mothers infamy. Sometimes
likewise it happens that for the wives cause the Husband being courageous
quarrels, and perhaps combats with him, who being better than himself, does
either wound or kill him, and the occasion hereof sprung from their wives
pride, because (for sooth) she will take the wall of the other Wife or sit
above her: whom she will in no wise suffer, nor loose an inch of her estate,
and hereupon the Husbands must go together by the ears.

Thus the supposed blessedness which he expected by plunging himself in Lobs
pound, is turned into sorrow, trouble, danger, and continual discontent while
life does last.

CHAP. XIV. The humor of a Woman that has been twice married
THere is another humor belonging to a Woman, which is, when a Young man
(having found the way into Lobs pound) meets with a Wife of like years, fresh,
lusty, fair, kind, and gracious: with whom he has lived two or three years in
all delights, joys and pleasures, that any married couple could have. Never did
the one displease the other; never foul word past betwixt them but they are
almost still colling and billing each other like a couple of Doves: And nature
has framed such Sympathy berween them, that if the one be ill at ease or
discontented, the other is so likewise. But in the midst of this their mutual
love and solace, it chances that she dies, whereat he grieves so extremely,
that he is almost beside himself with sorrow: he mourns not only in his
Apparel, for an outward show, but unfeignedly in his very heart, and that so
much, that he shuns all places of pleasure and all company, lives solitarily,
and spends the time in daily complaints and moans, and bitterly bewailing the
loss of so good a Wife, wherein no man can justly blame him, for it is a loss
worthy to be lamented, and a Jewel, which whosoever has, is happy (but this
happiness is very rare.)

To be short, his thoughts are all on her, and she is so firmly printed in his
mind, that whether he sleep or wake, she seems always to be in his sight: but
as all things have an end, so here had sorrow. After a while, some of his
friends having spied out a second match, which as they think is very fit for
him, do prevail so much with him, through their persuasions, that he accepts
it, and marries himself again, but not as before, with a Young Maid, but with a
lusty Widow, of a middle age, and much experience, who by the trial which she
had of the first Husband, knows how to handle the second: But that she may do
it the better, she does not presently discover her humor, till she have
thoroughly marked how he is inclined, what his conditions are, and what his nature
is: which finding it mild, and kind, and very flexible (the fittest mould to
cast a Fool in) having now the full length of his foot, the shows she her self
what she is, unmasking her dissembling malice; her first attempt is to usurp
Superioriry and to become his Head, and this she obtains without great
difficulty, for there is nothing so lavish as a simple and well natured young
man, being in subjection, that is married to a Widow, especially if she be (as
the most of them are) of a perverse and crabbed nature. I may very well compare
him to an unfortunate Wretch, whose ill fortune is to be cast into some strong
Prison, under the keeping of a most cruel and pitiless Iaylor, that is not
moved to compassion, but rather to great rigor, in beholding the miseries of
this poor Wretch, whose only refuge in this distress, is to pray unto God, to
give him patience to endure this cross, for if he complain of his hard usage,
it will afterward prove worse.

But to proceed. This jolly Widow will within a while grow jealous, fear and
suspect that some other Dame has part of that which she so earnestly desired,
and wherewith she could never be satisfied, so that if he glut not her
insatiate humor, straightway she conceives this opinion; If he do but only
talk, nay, (which is worse) look on any other Woman, For the by her good will
would be always in his arms, or at the least in his company: For as the Fish
which having been in water, that through the heat of the summer is half dried
up, begins to stick full of mud, seeks for fresh water, and having found it,
does willingly remain therein, and will in no wise return to his former place:
Then so an old Woman, having gotten a young Man, will cling to him like Joy to
an Elm.

But on the other side, a young man cannot love an old Woman, howsoever he does
dissemble, neither is there any that more endangers his death: for it is with
him, as with one that drinks musty wine, who if he be thirsty, feels nothing
while he is drinking, but at the end of his draught, he feels such a
displeasing taste, that it does almost turn his stomach.

But if young men in no wife can fancy old Women, what love think you young
Women can bear to old Men, when besides the sundry imperfections of their Age,
which are so loathsome, that it is impossible for a fresh, young, tender
Damsel, (be she never so virtuous) to endure their company, much less the
kisses and embraces of the person which has them: All the lusty Gallants
thereabouts will not fail to use whatsoever devices and means possible for the
horning of the old Dotard: hoping that she will be easily won to wantonness:
And surely they ground this hope on great liklihood; for since it is no
difficult exploit to graft the like kindness on a young man's forehead, who is
able in far better measure to feed his Wives appetite, and the has therefore
more cause to be true to him, it may surely seem no great matter to perform the
like piece of service with this other unfortunate Dame.

But now to return to our young man, yoked (as before I said) to this old
Widow, I thus conclude, that his estate is most miserable: For besides the
danger of his health, and besides the subjection, nay rather servitude which he
lives in, this third evil, (I mean his Wives jealousy) is alone an untolerable
torment unto him: So that be he never so quiet, never so desirous to content
her, never so fearful to displease her, yet cannot he avoid her brawls,
objections, and false accusations of Lewdness and Disloyalty: For an Old Woman
infected with Jealousy, is like a Hellish Fury.

If you go to any of her Friends about business, yea, to the Church to serve
God, yet will she always think the worst, and assure her self, that he plays
false, though indaed he be never so continent: Who whatsoever he pleads in
his own defense, yea, though he prove himself blameless, by such reasons as
she can by no reason confute, yet will not all this satisfy her: Such is the
perverseness of her stubborn, crabbed, and malicious nature, made worse by
Dotage and Raging Jealousy: For being privy to her own defects, and knowing
that he by reason of his youth and hansomenesse may perchance fall in favor
with a young Dame, thinking withal that a young man, when he may have such a
match, will be loath to leave it for a worse or prefer sour verjuice before
sweet wine, she concludes peremptorily in those suggestions as before. Lo here
the issues of this Asses turning into Lobs pound, and intangling of himself
again, when he had once gotten out to his former liberty, which if he once more
looked for, he is mad; for he must now perforce continue there while life does
last, which by this means, will be far shorter, and he look far older, having
been but two years married with this old crib, than if he had lived ten years
with a young wife.

CHAP. The humor of a young Woman given over to all kind of wantonness.
THere is yet another humor that a Woman is subject to, which is, when an
unfortunate young Man having long labored to get into Lobs pound, and having
in the end obtained his desires, does match himself with a lusty wanton Young
Wench, which without fear of him, or care of her own credit, takes her pleasure
freely, and withal so over boldly, and unadvisedly, that within a while her
Husband perceives it, who thereupon being not a little enraged, does in the
heat of his impatience, after much brawling on both sides, roughly and
desperately threaten her, thinking thereby to terrify her, and make her honest
by compulsion: But that makes her worse, for where as before she did it for
wantonness, now will she do it for despite: and what with the one and the
other, be so inflamed, that were she sure to be killed for it, yet would she
not leave it: Which he perceiving watching her doings so narrowly, that in the
end he sees her sweetheart come closely to his house, then being on fire with
fury, runs hastily to surprise him, and enters his Wives Chamber, with full
purpose to kill him, though he had ten thousand lives: But judge you what a
taking the poor young man is in, seeing himself thus surprised, and looking for
nothing else but present death, because he has nothing to defend himself. But
she, for whose sake he has incurred this danger, does kindly free him by this
stratagem: for as her Husband is ready to strike or stab him, she catches him
hastily about the middle, crying out, Alas man what do you mean? While she thus
stays her Husband, the yonker betakes him to his heels, running down the
stairs amain, and out of the doors, as if the Devil were at his tail, and after
him the good man, as fast as he can drive. But when he sees that he cannot
overtake him, he turns back in a like rage, to wreak his anger on his Wife. But
she dreading as much gets her hastily (before his return) to her Mother, to
whom she complains of his caussess suspicion, and Devilish fury, justifying
her self, as if she were not the Woman that would commit so lewd a part: But
her Mother sifting the matter narrowly, her Daughter confesses her fault, but
to make it seem the less, she tells her a large tale of the Young Man's
importunity, who for so long time together, did continually trouble her, and
whither so ever she went he would be sure to follow her, begging pitifully her
love, and favor, that she had often sharply answered him, and flatly denied
his Suit, yet could she not for all that be rid of him: so that in the end she
was enforced for her own quietness to grant his request: She repeats withal,
how kindly and entirely he loves her, how much he has bestowed on her, how
many foul journeys he has had for her sake, in Rain and Snow, as well by Night
as Day, in danger of Thieves, in peril of his Life, and how narrowly he escaped
her Husband the last time, so that for very pity and compassion, she was moved
to favor him: And no Woman could be so hard hearted, as to suffer so true and
kind a Young Man to languish for her love, and dye unregarded: for on my life
Mother (says she) if I had not yielded, he would have died for thought.

The Mother hearing her Daughter to say thus, accepts her answer for current,
and thinks that she has sufficiently justified her self; but to prevent
further scandal, and to appease her angry son in law, and reconciled her
Daughter unto him by casting a mist before his eyes, she takes this course, she
sends for her special Gossips and Companions. whose counsels in like cases she
does use: They coming at the first call, and being all assembled, either
before a good fire (if it be Winter) or in a green Arbor (if it be Summer) one
of them noting her daughters heavy countenance, demands the cause thereof:
Marry (says she) she has had a mischance, about which I have made bold to
trouble you, and crave your advice: With that she recounts all the whole matter
unto them, but showing the true cause of her Husbands anger: To be short, she
has ready two or three pottles of Wine, and a few junkets, which they
presently fall aboard on, that they may the berter give their several verdicts
afterward; mean while they comfort the Young Woman, bidding her assure her
self, that her Husband is more perplexed than she, and that I know by mine own
experience, for my Husband and I were once at variance, but he could never be
quiet till we were made friends. In good faith Gossip (says another) and so
served I mine. Another (...) makes a motion to send for the Young Gallant that
is so true a (...) to her Gossips Daughter, that his presence may cheer her;
and (...) away her Melancholy.

This Motion does her Mother faintly contradict, but in the end most voices
prevail, he is sent for and comes with a trice, then there is much good that,
many a rerpoach and kind scoff given the poor Husband: And to mend the matter,
comes in the Chambermaid, who was privy to all the former close packing between
her Mistress and her Sweet heart, and for her silence and employment, in
furthering both their contents, she has gotten a good new gown and somewhat
else.

It may be her Master has sent her abroad about some business, or perhaps she
coyns an excuse of her self, thereby only to make a step abroad to see her
Mistress, and to bring her some news how all things go at home: She has no
sooner set her foot within the room where they are, then one of them ask how
her Master does? My Master (says she) I never saw a man in that taking: I dare
say, that since yesterday morning when this misfortune happened, he has not
eaten one crumme, drunk one drop, or slept one wink all yesternight. To day he
sat down to dinner, and put one bit in his mouth, but could not swallow it, for
he spit it out presently, and sat a good while after in a dump: In the end
striking his knife on the table, he rose hastily, and went into the Garden, and
immediately came in again: To be share, be is altogether out of temper, and
can rest no where: He does nothing but sigh and sob, and he looks like a dead
man: hereat they laugh apace, and to be short, they determine that two of the
chief of them, shall go and speak with him the next morning, and that when they
are in the midst of their talk, the rest shall come in afterward. The Mother
with her two Gossips, according to this plot, do proceed in the matter. And
next morning finding him in his dumps, one of them gently asks him what he
ailes: hereto he answers only with a sigh: whereupon she takes occasion thus
to speak: In good faith Gossip, I must chide you, my Gossip your wives mother
told me I know not what of a disagreement between your wife and you, and a
certain fond humor that you are fallen into: I wis I am sorry to hear it: And
before God you are not so wise as I had thought you had been, to wrong your
wife thus (...) shout a cause, for I durst lay my life there is no such matter.
(...) this good day (says another) I have known her ever since she was a
little one, both Maid and Wife, and I never saw but well by the woman: And in
good sooth it grieves me to the very heart, that her name should now come in
question without cause: Before God, you have done the poor woman that disgrace,
and so stained her good name, that you will never be able to make her amends.
Then steps in the Chambermaid with her five eggs In good faith (says she) I
know not what my Master has seen, or whereon he does ground his suspicion, but
I take God to my witness, that I never saw any such matter by my Mistress and
yet I am sure that if there were any such thing, I should see it as soon as
another. Gods body, Drab (says he, all enraged) will thou face me down of that
which my self saw? Oh Gossip, (quoth the one of the Dames) God forbid that
every man and woman which are alone together, should do evil. I deny not (says
the Chambermaid) that the villainous knave has long sued unto my Mistress for
such a matter, but by my honesty Master, I know that there is never a man
alive, whom she hates more: And rather than she would commit any such folly
with him, she would see him hanged and be burned her self: I marvel how the
Devil he got into the house.

Here the other Gossips come in, one after another, and each gives her verdict:
In good faith Gossip (says one) I think that next your wife, there is never a
woman in the world, that loves you better than I do: and if I knew or thought
any such matter, I would not let to tell you of it. Surely (says another)
this is but the Devils work to set them at variance, for he cannot abide that
husband and wife should live well together. In good faith says the third, the
poor woman does nothing but weep, By Christ (quoth the fourth) I fear it will
cost her her life, she grieves and takes on in such sort. Then comes the Mother
weeping and crying out making as though the would scratch out his eyes with her
nails; exclaiming in this sort.

Ah cursed Caitiff, woe worth the time that ever my Daughter matched with thee,
to be thus shamed and slandered, and have her name spotted without cause. But
she is well enough served, that would take such a base churl, when she might
have had sundry good Gentlemen. Ah good Gossip (says another) be not out of
patience.

Ah Gossip (says she) if my Daughter were in fault, by our good Lord, I would
kill her my self. But think ye I have no cause to be moved, when I see my
child, being guiltless, thus used? With that she flings out of doors in a
rage, and all the Gossips come upon him thick and threefold, who is so full of
sundry thoughts, and so grieved and troubled, that he knows not whereon to
resolve, nor what to say.

In the end they growing some what calmer, promise if he will, to undertake the
reconciling of him and his wife, which he most earnestly desires them to do.

They accordingly perform it, so that all controversies are ended, all strife
ceased, the matter hushed up, and his wife taken home again; who taking greater
courage by the success hereof, and being now clean past shame. will grow far
bolder in her villainy, than before. And he door Meacock, on the other side,
having his courage thus quailed, will never afterward fall at odds with her,
for fear of the like storm, but will suffer her to have her own will in all
things, and be in a manner subject to her, spending the remnant of his life in
care, fear, discontent and grief, his goods wasting he knows not how, and
himself become alaughing stock to all that know him.

An Advertisement.
Those most Famous Pills so eminently Known in most Parts of Europe to be the
only True, Safe, and Effectual Medicine against the DROPSY and SCURVY, with
all other Sharp, Salt, and Watery Humors; and Helps many other desperate
Diseases, Cleansing the Womb of all Superfluous Humidity, that often is the
Cause of Non Conception, are still faithfully Prepared by W. Sermon Doctor of
Physic and Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Sold by the Said Doctor
and Mr Edward Thomas Bookseller at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain etc.

FINIS.

