THE Book of Job PARAPHRASED.

BY SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Rectour of Covent Garden, and One of His Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary.

Ecclus. II. 5. Gold is tried in the Fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of
Adversity.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, An. Dom. MDCLXXIX.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of BEDFORD, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the GARTER, etc. My very good Lord, and Patron.
My Lord,
THough I have not pursued the design, which I have long had in my thoughts, of
making some public acknowledgment of my obligations to your Lordship, for
placing me, when I thought not of it, in this Station which I hold in
Covent Garden: yet I have only deferred it, till the most proper opportunity,
as it seems to me, for this small expression of my gratitude. For I could not
have prefixed your Lordships Name to any Work of mine, which I believe would
have been so acceptable, as this wherewith I now present you; desiring it may
remain as a lasting Testimony of the sense I have of the favors I have
received from your Lordship. Whom as I have always observed to have a
particular Veneration and Affection for the holy Scriptures, so I know to be a
constant Reader of them: And therefore humbly offer this assistance to your
Lordship for the understanding of the oldest Book (as I have shown) of that
Sacred Volumn, which, I am confident, you esteem above all earthly Treasures.

There have been many large Volumns written for its Explication; which will
cost abundance of time and pains to peruse; and after all, the design and scope
of the Whole may not be understood, while the Readers mind stays so long, in
the several Parts. I have therefore taken quite another course, and only given
the sense of it in a compendious, but perspicuous, Paraphrase (or Metaphrase
rather, as the Ancients would have called it) which is not much longer than the
Text, put into other words. It would have been more easy to have enlarged it,
than it was to make it thus short: which I the rather chose to do, not merely
because it will be more useful for those who have little leisure, or less
money; but because thereby I have preserved, I persuade my self, the Majesty of
the Book; and made it still look not like the Word of a man, but, as it is
indeed, the Word of God.

Which I could never have presented to your Lordship and the World, more
seasonably than now; when the State of our affairs is so dangerously perplexed,
that we cannot stand upright, nor preserve our souls from sinking into the
saddest fears, or discontents, or some such troublesome passion, without a
strong confidence in the most Wise, Just, and Merciful Providence of the
Almighty: which Orders things, in unsearchable ways, to the good of those that
steadfastly adhere unto him in faithful Obedience. Which is so admirably
represented in this holy Book, that one cannot read it seriously, and not be
moved to resign the conduct of our selves and all that concerns us unto God's
most blessed will and pleasure; to wait patiently for him, as the Psalmist
speaks, and keep his way; not to be disheartened by any trouble that befalls us,
much less forsake our integrity: but still expect the End of the Lord, as S.
James speaks, i. e. the issue to which he will bring our troubles; persuading
our selves that he is very pitiful, and of tender Mercy. And therefore, as He
does not love to grieve us by laying afflictions on us; so is wont many times
to bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil: and to produce it by such
unexpected means, as shall surprise us with the greater admiration of his
Wisdom and Goodness.

For a great Reader of Ancient Writers tells us, he has observed in the
Histories of all Ages, that the great events which determine the fate of great
Affairs, do happen less frequently according to design, than by accident and
occasion. Our enterprises here below are derived from above; and we but Engines
and Actors of pieces that are composed in heaven. Homo histrio, Deus vero Poeta
est. God is the Sovereign Poet, and we cannot refuse the part which he appoints
us to bear in the Scene. All our business is to act it well; cheerfully
complying with his Orders concerning us, and submitting our selves to the
direction of his Providence.

To which, and all other Religious courses, did we more heartily apply our
selves, there is no doubt but that in this Book we might read God's gracious
intentions toward this Church and Kingdom. Which his most merciful Providence
would bring, as he did his Servant Job, through all these clouds which now
incompass us, into a splendour incomparably beyond all that, wherein hitherto we
have appeared. Why should we despair of it, when he shows by the unexpected
discovery, which he has made, of the designs of our Enemies against us, that
he has no mind to cast us off; if we will not carelessly cast away our selves,
by the continued neglect of our duty to him?

God of his infinite goodness, awaken all our hearts to make such a good use
both of that deliverance, and of our present distress (which is so great, that
we see no way out of it, but by his power alone to whom Job owed his
resurrection) that we may, in the issue, be the more happy and the better
established, for having been so miserably unsettled. In which prayer, I am sure
your Lordship will cordially join with,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and affectionate Servant, Sy. Patrick.
April 19.79.
THE PREFACE.
THE study of the Holy Scriptures is so much recommended to us by the
Scriptures themselves, and has been judged so necessary by the holy Doctors
of the Church, that S. Chrysostom (who was wont to press this duty with great
earnestness, not only in his Sermons, but in his private discourses with his
people) adventures to say, Hom. 3. in Lazar. Tom. V. 243.
that a man cannot, he cannot be saved, unless he be conversant in this
spiritual reading. But as the neglect of them is very dangerous, when men are
able to read them; so the reading them without understanding, must needs be
unprofitable. Though a Christian (as the forenamed great Person speaks) can no
more be without the Scriptures than an Artificer without his tools; yet we must
acknowledge that he will make but ill work with them in many places, unless he
be instructed how to use and apply them to the purpose for which they were
designed. Whosoever therefore shall assist the minds of Christians by giving a
clear meaning of them (in which that holy Father employed much of his time) it
is certain does great service to God, and to their Souls. For this contributes
much to the honor of the Holy Scriptures (which want nothing to make them
reverenced by considering men, but to be understood) and it invites men to the
reading them, and it conveyes the heaveniy truth easily and delightfully into
their minds.

Which has moved me to attempt the explaining of the most ancient Book in the
whole Bible, by way of a short Paraphrase. In which if I have not always tied
my self to our English Translation (which ever gives an excellent sense of the
Original words) it was because I thought another meaning sometimes more
agreeable to the whole discourse: which I have endeavored to carry on
coherently from first to last. But if the matter would bear it, I have, when I
met with a word of two senses, expressed them both. And where I found any
difficulty I consulted with such Interpreters as are of best note in the
Church: being unwilling to do any thing without the warrant of some or other of
them. I was forced indeed here and there to follow only my own judgment; but
not without the appearance of very urgent reasons: of which if I should give an
account, by adding notes to those places, it would make this, which I intend
for common use, swell into too big a Volumn. I have only therefore (in the
Argument presixed to each Chapter) pointed to such Histories in the Bible as
may help to illustrate some passages: and shown how the dispute is menaged,
till God himself determine it.

But there are two things, of which I think my self bound to give a larger
account; to avoid the imputation of such novelty, as may be justly censured.
The One is, That I have interpreted those three known verses in the XIX.
Chapter, 25, 26, 27. not of Job's resurrection from the dead at the last day,
but of his restoration to an happy estate in this world; after he had been so
sorely afflicted. There are many, of no mean esteem, (Mr. Calvin amongst the
rest) who have done so before me; in following whom, I do not forsake the sense
of the ancient Doctors. For though I take that to be the literal sense of the
words, yet I doubt not there is another more secret and hidden, which lies
covered under them; and that we ought to look upon Job's Restoration (and so I
have always explained it) as a notable type of the future Resurrection of our
Bodies out of the Grave. And accordingly our Church has very fitly applied the
words (as many of the Fathers do) to this purpose; in the Office of the Burial
of the Dead.

St. Hierome (or the Author of the Commentaries upon Job under his name) is my
Guide in this business: who says no more then this, that Job in these words,
resurrectionem futuram prophetat in Spiritu, prophecieth in the Spirit the
future Resurrection. Now the words of the Prophets had commonly an immediate
respect to some thing which was then doing or shortly to be done, besides that
sense which the Holy Ghost directed them to signify in the latter days. And so
had these words of Job; of which that Father indeed gives us only the Mystical
sense, but he does so in many other places of that Book, where it is certain
and acknowledged, the holy man had another meaning, in which he was more nearly
concerned. I shall refer the Reader only to one place in the First Chapter:
where he says that Job did far typum Christi And so he says in his
Praeface, Figuram Christi portavit. And in his Conclusion XLII. 14. Figuram
manifest habuit Salvatoris.
, and therefore expounds those words v. 20, 21. in this manner, He fell on the
ground when he emptied himself of the form of God, to take on him the form of a
Servant: and came naked out of his Mothers Womb, being not aspersed with the
least spot of Original Sin. He that will may read what follows, and see how he
only sets down a mystical sense, when it is certain another (upon which that is
built) is first intended. And so we are to take his exposition upon these
words, which secundum mysticos intellectus (as he speaks, XXXVIII. 16.)
according to the hidden interpretations are to be understood of the
Resurrection of the dead at the second coming of Christ: but relate in the
first place to Job's resurrection out of that miserable condition wherein he
lay, which was a figure of the other. They therefore who interpret these words
otherways (to speak with that Father in his Commentaries upon Ezekiel. XXXVII. 1.
etc.) ought not to make me ill thought of, as if by expounding them in the
literal sense only, I took away a proof of the Resurrection from the dead. For
I know there are far stronger testimonies (of which there can be no doubt nor
dispute) to be found for the confirmation of that truth. On those let us rely,
on the plain words of Him who is the Truth (and of whom Job was but a Figure)
which are abundantly sufficient to support our faith: and let none imagine,
that we Give occasion to Heretics (as he speaks presently after) if we deny
these words to be meant of the general Resurrection.

The Second thing of which I am to give an account is, that I have not
expounded Behemoth to signify the Elephant, nor Leviathan to signify the Whale:
because many of their Characters do not agree to them; but every one of them to
the description which the writers of Natural History have given of two other
Creatures. And therefore I have herein followed the guidance of that excellent
Critic Bochartus, who takes the former for the River-horse, and the later for
the Crocodile: as I have expressed it in the Margin, but put neither of them in
the Text. For I leave every one, as our Translatours have done, to apply the
words to any other Creatures, if they can find any besides those now mentioned,
which have all the qualities that are here ascribed to them.

I have adventured also in the beginning to add a few words, as the manner of
Paraphrasts is, to give an account of the time when Job lived, which seems to
have been before the Children of Israel came out of Egypt. For though there be
plain mention, of the drowning of the Old World, and the burning of Sodom, in
this Book, yet there is no allusion to the drowning of Pharaoh, and other
miraculous works which attended their deliverance. Nor is there any notice
taken of that Revelation of Gods will to Moses, when Elihu reckons up those
ways whereby God was wont to discover himself to men. Such like reasons moved
Origin Lib. 1. contra Celsum, p. 305.
to say that Job was (...) more ancient than even Moses himself: and Eusebius
Lib. 1. Demonstr. Evang. Cap. 6.
to pronounce that he was before Moses two whole ages. Which is conformable to
the opinion of many of the Hebrew Writers, who (as Mr. Seldom observes Lib.
VII. De Jure Not. etc. Cap. 11.
) think Job lived in the days of Isaac and Jacob. The judgment of other
Eastern people is not much different from this, as may be seen in Hottinger's
Smegma Orientale Page 381, 452, 453.
.

And therefore one Use we may make of this Book is, to inform our selves what
are the true natural dictates of humane reason; which teaches greater Chastity
than many Christians are now willing to observe; strict Justice, both private
and public; compassionate Charity to those who are in need; together with a
pious care to please God, and to worship and confide in him alone: as we may
learn here better than from any other Book in the World. For in the XXXI.
Chapter, Job gives such a character of his Life, with respect to all these, as
declares both that there is a Law written in our hearts, and what instructions
it gives us, if we will attend to it. There is not the least syllable that we
read concerning his being Circumcised, or observing the Sabbath, or such like
parts of the Mosaical Discipline, which assures us he was neither a natural
Israelite, nor a Proselyte (as St. Austin speaks Lib. XVIII. Cap. 47. De Civit.
Dei.
) and yet he found such a rule of life in himself, that, by the assistance of
the Divine Grace, he ordered not only his outward actions, but the inward
motions of his mind after such a manner, as is not unsuitable to the
Evangelical Doctrine of our Savior. They are the words of Eusebius in the
place forenamed; where he does not fear to add, that the Word of Christ has
published to all Nations that most ancient manner of Godliness which was among
the first Fathers: so that the New Covenant is no other than that old godly
polity, which was before the times of Moses. I may add before the time that
Abraham was Circumcised; when as St. Chrysostom speaks very significantly Upon
Romans II. 14.
(...), Their Conscience and the use of reason sufficed instead of the Law.

The Hebrew Books indeed are full of discourses concerning certain Precepts,
which all mankind after the Flood observed, but cannot all of them be deduced
from the principles of Reason. They call them the VII. Precepts of the sons of
Noah: who delivered them, they say, to all his Children by whom the World was
peopled; and therefore the Israelites ever exacted the observance of them from
all those Gentiles, whom they admitted as Proselytes at large to their
Religion. Two of those Precepts concerned their duty toward the blessed
Creator: the next Four respected their duty toward their Neighbors: the Last
forbad cruelty toward other Creatures. They are reckoned up commonly in this
order. I. Concerning Strange Worship, or Idolatry. II. About blaspheming the
Name of God. III. About Murder. IV. About the uncovering of Nakedness, or all
silthy Mixtures. V. About Theft and Rapine. VI. About Judicatures and Civil
Government; to make the other Precepts more carefully observed. VII. About not
eating of any flesh which is cut off from any Animal alive. The Authors that
treat of these are innumerable; among whom I shall only mention Maimonides; who
thus delivers his opinion of them in his Treatise of Kings, Chap. IX.

Adam the first man received commands about Six things (which are those first
above mentioned) from whence it is, that the Mind of Man inclines more pronely
to them, than to the rest of the Commands which we have received from our
Master Moses. Besides these, it is manifest, Noah received another, according
to what we read IX. Genesis 4. Flesh with the life thereof you shall not eat. And
thus things stood throughout the whole world until the days of Abraham; to
whom there was superadded the Precept of Circumcision.

But as there is not the least sign that Circumcision was part of Job's
Religion, so there is no footstep at all remaining of his observance of the
last of those VII. Precepts, which they say all the Sons of Noah, who were
pious, carefully obeyed. A Great man of our own Nation Mr. Seldom L. ult. de
Jure Naturali, etc. Cap. II.
has sifted this business with as much diligence as is possible; but after all
his search, he is fain to stop at those first Six Precepts delivered to Adam.
For though this General Character be given of Job in the beginning of the Book
that he was a perfect, or simple, and upright man, fearing God and eschewing
evil; and in the XXXI. Chapter, and other places, there are particular
instances given of his abhorring strange Worship, (v. 26.) Blasphemy, (Chap. I.
5.) Murder, (XXXI. 29, 31.) Adultery, and other filthiness, ( Ib. v. 1, 9.)
Theft, Rapine and Deceit, (v. 5, 6, 7.) for the punishment of which he mentions
Judges in his days, (v. 11, 28.) and was himself one of the chief: (XXIX. 11.)
Yet there is not so much as one word to be found, that I can discern,
concerning the Seventh Precept; whether we understand thereby eating flesh with
the blood in it; or, which is more likely (because other Nations that were not
Jews, might lawfully eat that which dyed of it self, XIV. Deuteronomy. 21.) eating
that which was cut alive from any living Creature.

Which makes me think that it was not so generally known, as the Jews now
pretend; till the memory of it was revived by Moses, among whose Ancestors the
Tradition was more carefully preserved, than in other Nations. For Job, and
such like pious persons, seem to have been governed by those Precepts only
which the first Man received; that is, the dictates of Natural reason.
According to those words of Tertullian in his Book against the Jews: Chap. 2.
where he contends that before the Law of Moses written in Tables of Stone,
there was a Law not written, which was naturally understood, and observed by
the Fathers: Which he elsewhere calls the Common Law, which we meet withal in
publico Mundi, in the streets and highways of the world, in the natural
Tables: which mankind having broken, our Savior came to repair and renew;
abrogating the Law of Moses, in which the Jews had placed too much confidence,
while they neglected these natural Precepts. Or rather He has not only engaged
us by his holy Sacraments to observe those more strictly, but raised them also
to a greater height of purity; according to that of St. Chrysostom, in his
Book of Virginity: We are to show greater Virtue, because now there is an
abundant Grace poured out; and great is the gift of the coming of Christ.

But the principal benefit (to omit the naming of many other, whereby I might
recommend this work) which I hope pious Souls, especially the Afflicted, will
reap by this Book, is to be persuaded thereby that all things are ordered and
disposed by Almighty God; without whose command or permission neither good
Angels, nor the Devil, nor Men, nor any other Creature, can do any thing. And
that as his Power is infinite, so is his Wisdom and Goodness; which is able to
bring good out of evil. And therefore we ought not to complain of Him in any
condition, as if He neglected us or dealt hardly with us; but rather cheerfully
submit our selves to his blessed will; which never does any thing without
reason, though we cannot always comprehend it. To that issue God himself at
last brings all the dispute between Job and his friends: representing his Works
throughout the World to be so wonderful and unaccountable, that it is fit for
us to acknowledge our ignorance, but never accuse his Providence; if we cannot
see the cause why he sends any affliction or continues it long upon us. Instead
of murmuring and complaining, in such a case, this Book effectually teaches us
to resign our selves absolutely to Him; silently to adore and reverence the
unsearchable depth of his wise counsels; contentedly to bear what He inflicts
upon us; still to assert his righteousness, in the midst of the calamities
which befall the good, and in the most prosperous successes of the wicked; and
steadfastly to believe that all at last shall turn to our advantage, if like His
servant Job, we persevere in faith, and hope, and patience.

To which this Book gives so high an encouragement, and contains such powerful
comforts for the Afflicted; that the old Tradition is, Moses could not find any
thing like it for the support and satisfaction of the Israelites in their
Egyptian bondage: and therefore took the pains to translate it into their
Language, out of the Syriack wherein it was first written. Thus He who writes
the Commentaries upon this Book under the name of Origin, tells us That he
found in Antiquorum dictis in the sayings of the Ancients; that when the Great
Moses was sent by God into Egypt, and beheld the affliction of the Children of
Israel to be so grievous, that nothing he could say was able to comfort them in
that lamentable condition; He declared to them the terrible sufferings of Job,
with his happy deliverance; and setting them down in writing also, gave this
Book to that distressed people. That reading these things in their several
Tribes and Families, and hearing how sorely this blessed man suffered; they
might comfort and exhort one another, to endure with patience and thanksgiving
the evils which encompassed them: and hearing withal how bountifully God
rewarded Job for his patience, they might hope for deliverance; and expect the
benefit of a blessed reward of their Labors.

Be ye constant, O Children of Israel, (said Moses, with a pleasing
countenance, when he delivered this Book into their hands) do not faint in your
minds, O ye posterity of Abraham, but suffer grief and bear these evils
patiently, as that man in the Land of Vz did, whose name was Job: who though he
was a righteous and faithful person, in whom was no fault, yet suffered the
sorest torments by the malice of the Devil; as you do now most unjustly from
Pharaoh and the Egyptians. They treat you indeed very basely, and have enslaved
you, without any fault of yours, etc. But do not despair of a better condition;
you shall be delivered as Job was, and have a reward of your tribulations, like
that which God gave to him.

There follows a great deal more to the same purpose in that Writer, which I
shall not transcribe. But only add that the Church of Christ, as he observes,
was wont, after this example, to read this Passion of Job publicly in all
their Assemblies; upon Holy Days (when they commemorated the Martyrs) and upon
Fasting days, and days of Abstinence; and upon the days of our Savior's
Passion: of which they thought they saw a figure in the sufferings of Job; as
of our Savior's Resurrection and exaltation, in Job's wonderful recovery, and
advancement to a greater height of Prosperity. And as they read this History in
the Church publicly; so when they went to visit any one privately that was in
grief, mourning, or sorrow, they read a Lesson of the patience of Job for their
comfort and support under their troubles; and to take away the distress and
anguish of their heart.

I pray God it may have that effect upon all afflicted persons, who shall read
it; and that others also, considering the instability of all worldly things
(which is here also lively represented) may use their prosperity with such
moderation, that they may bear a change of their condition, if it come, with an
equal mind. I am sure there is no Man, of whatsoever rank, or in whatsoever
condition, he be; but may learn very much, if he please, from this admirable
Pattern. Which is the very first that is left us upon record, of a Virtuous
Life, both in Prosperity and in adversity, and that not only as a Private man
but as a Prince: In whom it is the greater commendation to obey the will of
God; because he has more means and temptations to fulfill his own.

That therefore shall conclude the character of Job; who when he had no
superior to control him (as you may read, Chap. XXIX. and XXXI.) gave such an
example of Piety and Devotion, Humility and Moderation, Chastity and Purity,
Justice and Equity, Charity and Compassion; as few have done in a private
Condition. This is as admirable, and will be praised as much to all
generations, as his generous Patience. Which was so much famed in ancient
times, that (from a passage, which some Editions of the LXX. have added to the
Conclusion of this Book) it went as a common Tradition (...) (as Theophanes
speaks) having nothing incredible in it; that Job was one of those, who had the
honor to rise out of his Grave at our Savior's Resurrection: when, as St.
Matthew assures us, XXVII. 51. many bodies of Saints which slept, arose, and
went into the holy City, and appeared unto many.

V. James 7, 11. Behold we count them happy which endure. Be patient therefore,
Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.


IMPRIMATUR,

Dec. 17. 1678. Guil. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris dom(...)

A PARAPHRASE ON The BOOK of JOB.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter is a plain Narration of the flourishing condition wherein Job
lived, before the envy and malice of the Devil brought upon him the sorest
Calamities; which are particularly described, with the occasion of them, and
his admirable Constancy under them: whereby he became as eminent an example of
Patience in Adversity, as he had been of Piety and all manner of Virtue in his
Prosperity.

1. THere was a man in the land of Vz, whose name was Job; and that man was
perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.
1. IN the time of the ancient Patriarchs, before the giving of the Law of
Moses, there lived in Arabia a person of great eminence, whose name was Job: A
man not more illustrious for his Birth or Place, then for the height of his
Virtue; which appeared in a most unblamable life, void of all hypocrisy, both
in his Piety toward God, and in his dealings with men, and all other ways.

2. And there were born unto him seven sons, and three daughters.
2. Whom God therefore had so wonderfully blessed, that his outward Prosperity
was equal to the Perfections of his Mind. For first, He had given him the sweet
fruits of Marriage, in a numerous issue of seven Sons and three Daughters:

3. His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and
five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very great
household; so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the east.
3. And then enriched him abundantly with the wealth of that country; which
consisted in seven thousand Sheep, three thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of
Oxen, as many She-asses; with such a very great Tillage, and so many Servants,
that in those Eastern parts he had neither superior nor equal.

4. And his sons went and feasted in their houses everyone his day, and sent
and called for their three sisters, to eat and to drink with them.
4. And together with all this Happiness, he had the pleasure to see his
Children live in love and unity. For it was the custom of his Sons to meet at
each others houses, and to make a feast every one upon his birthday: (III. 1.)
And he whose turn it was to treat the rest, always invited their three Sisters
to come and be merry with them.

5. And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job
sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered
burnt-offerings, according to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be
that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job
continually.
5. This Feast was wont to last seven days; at the end of which their good
Father never failed to send a Messenger to them, to call upon them, to prepare
themselves by fasting and prayer for the Sacrifice he meant to offer for them:
And when they were assembled, he rose up early in the morning, (the fittest
time for devotion,) and prayed to God, by offering burnt-offerings, for every
one of them; because he was afraid they might have done or spoken something
that was profane, and misbecoming their Religion, when their minds, loosened by
mirth, were less upon their guard. And thus he did constantly after every Feast.

6. para; Now there was a day, when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the LORD, and Satan came also among them.
6. But his great Piety was not sufficient to preserve him from false
accusations. For, as Job set a time for his Children to examine themselves, so
there are certain seasons when the Angels come and stand in the Divine
presence, to give an account of their Ministry, and to receive commands from
God the Judge and Governor of the world: and Satan, that subtle adversary of
mankind, came one day and thrust in himself among them.

7. And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence come thou? Then Satan answered the
LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it.
7. And the Lord (to make him sensible he was not an absolute Prince, but His
Subject) called to him, and demanded an account of him, where he had been, and
from whence he came. To which he gave an answer, which expressed, as the great
restlesness of his mind and his unwearied diligence, so the limitation of his
power, which extends only to this lower world; for he told Him, he came from
going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.

8. And the LORD said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil?
8. Then the Lord said to him again; After all thy inquisitiveness and busy
search, thou have nothing to object against the Integrity of my Servant Job; a
man that excells in Piety, and Justice, and all other Virtues, which he
practices exactly and sincerely.

9. Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, Does Job fear God for naught?
9. Yes, said Satan; He serves himself rather then Thee: it is not Thy pleasure
which he regards, but his own profit.

10. Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he has on every side? thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the land.
10. Have not Thou paid him well for his pains? and so environed him and his
Family, and all belonging to him in every place, that no harm can come to them?
whereby all his business prospers, and his flocks and his herds are so
increased, that the country can scarce hold them.

11. But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will
curse thee to thy face.
11. But I am confident, if Thou will but employ that power to plague him, which
has so long preserved him, he will, not only in his heart but, openly deny
thy Providence.

12. And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, all that he has is in thy power,
only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the
presence of the LORD.
12. Then the Lord (who was willing to prove thy Virtue of his Servant in an
afflicted estate, as He had done in a prosperous) withdrew the protection He
had given him, and granted Satan a commission to dispose of all belonging to
Job according as he pleased; excepting only his Person, which He commanded him
not to touch. This was joyful news to that malicious Spirit; who went
immediately to do what he had long desired.

13. para; And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brother's house:
13. And within a short time found an opportunity to try the Constancy of Job,
by doing him all the mischief possible, in one and the same day: which was the
Birthday of his eldest Son, when all his Children (far from fearing any evil)
were met, according to their custom, at his house, to feast and rejoice
together.

14. And there came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and
the asses feeding beside them;
14. Then it was that Satan put in execution what he had designed; and first of
all stirred up a thievish sort of people in Arabia, to fall upon that part of
his land which was next to them. Of which tidings was presently brought to Job
by a messenger, saying,

15. And the Sabaeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they have slain
the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee.
15. As the Oxen were at plough, and the Asses in a pasture hard by them, the
Sabaeans made an inrode into thy country, and carried them all away; having
slain, by an unexpected assault, all those who should have preserved them,
except my self alone, who made an escape to acquaint thee with it.

16. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of
God is fallen from heaven, and has burnt up the sheep, and the servants, and
consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
16. He had not quite delivered his message before another of his Servants
arrived, (as evils seldom come single,) to tell him that there had been a very
great lightning in those parts, where his Sheep were feeding; which had
consumed both them and the Shepherds, and left none surviving, but himself
alone, to give him notice of this disaster.

17. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
Chaldaeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried
them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only
am escaped alone to tell thee.
17. He had not finished his narration before another messenger was at the door,
saying, Our neighbors, the Chaldaeans, seeking for booty, divided themselves
into three parties, who set upon us all at once: and they have carried away the
Camels, and killed all the Servants that looked after them, except my self, who
made a shift to save my self by flight, to bring thee news of this invasion.

18. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and
thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house:
18. Before he had concluded came in another, the most doleful Messenger of
all, saying, Thy Children, as thou know, were feasting with their elder
Brother;

19. And behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the
four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead;
and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
19. And behold, on a sudden there arose a violent wind; which coming from the
desert, and whirling about the house, took away the four corners of it, and
buried them all in its ruins: and there is not one of the guests escaped, that
I know of, but only my self, to be the messenger of this great Calamity.

20. Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down
upon the ground, and worshipped,
20. Then Job (who had heard all the rest without disturbance) was overcome with
grief at this last word, and, laying aside all other thoughts, gave up himself
to the most lamentable sorrow: for he rent his upper garment, cut off the hair
of his head, and threw himself upon the ground. Where he deceived the Devil's
expectation; for he most reverently adored, as became his Piety, the Divine
Majesty, and submitted himself to his will, saying,

21. And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return
thither: the LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away; blessed be the name of
the LORD.
21. I am but what I was at first, and what I must have been again at last: and
He that has stripped me of all before I die, has taken away nothing but what He
gave. Let Him therefore be praised, who is the donour of all good things, and
the disposer of all events.

22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.
22. This was the worst word rhat he spoke, when all these evils came upon him
so unexpectedly, and so thick together: All the rest was like this; and nothing
dropped from his mouth which in the least accused or questioned the Providence of
God.

CHAP. II.
ARGUMENT.
The first part of this Chapter is a continuation of the Narration, which was
begun in the foregoing, of the Calamities which befell this good man; whom God
suffered the Devil to afflict in his Body, as he had already done in his Goods
and Children. And then follows a farther testimony of his Constancy,
notwithstanding his Wife's angry and profane accusation of the Divine
Providence. Though, it is true, he was so much dejected to see himself reduced
to this extremity of Misery, that neither he, nor his Friends that came to
visit him, were able for several days to speak a word.

1. AGAIN there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the
LORD.
1. AFter these things, the Angels going again to attend the pleasure of the
Divine Majesty, and to give an account of their several charges; Satan also
openly appeared among them, and presented himself, as ready and desirous to be
examined about his management.

2. And the LORD said unto Satan, From whence come thou? And Satan answered
the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it.
2. But, not daring to speak before he was called, he waited till the Divine
Majesty asked where he had been, and what he had done. To which he answered as
he had done before, that he had not lost his time, but had fetched a circuit
round about the earth, to find opportunity for the exercise of his power.

3. And the LORD said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil? and still he holds fast his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.
3. Well then, said the Lord, art not thou convinced how true a Character I gave
of my Servant Job, and how much thou have calumniated him? For he still
resolutely continues as perfectly Virtuous as he was in his Prosperity, though
I have consented to these miserable Calamities, which he suffers undeservedly.

4. And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man
has will he give for his life.
4. To which Satan answered again and said, that his Constancy was not so
wonderful; since a man has reason to think himself rich, who is in health.
Who is there that will not give another's skin, to save his own? nay, part with
his Children, as well as his Goods, to save his Life?

5. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee to thy face.
5. But enlarge now my commission a little farther, and let me afflict his Body,
so that it touch him to the very quick; and he will openly renounce Thee, and
deny thy Providence.

6. And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his
life.
6. To which the Divine Majesty (knowing the fidelity of Job, which hereby would
become more illustrious) was pleased to yield; and said, Behold, I give thee
the same power over his Person, which thou had over his Family and Goods:
inflict what Diseases thou will upon him, so they do not kill him.

7. So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job with sore
boils, from the sole of his foot unto his crown.
7. No sooner had Satan obtained this new grant, but, withdrawing himself from
the presence of the Divine Majesty, he went to pursue his mischievous desires;
and smote Job from top to toe with a fiery Ulcer, whose sharp humor was
extreme grievous and painful, and pricked him (according to his wish) to the
very bone.

8. And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down
among the ashes.
8. The filthiness of the Disease also increased that sorrow and heaviness which
before had seized on him, and made him sit down in the ashes: where he laid
hold on what came next to hand, a piece of a broken pot, to wipe away the foul
Matter which issued out of his Boils.

9. Then said his wife unto him, Do thou still retain thine integrity? curse
God, and die.
9. And it was a farther addition to his Grief, to hear his dear Consort (whom
the Divine goodness he thought had still left to help him to bear his
Affliction) utter this profane speech; What a folly is it still to persist in
the Service of God, when all thou gettest by it is to give Him thanks, and
perish?

10. But he said unto her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks:
what? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
In all this did not Job sin with his lips.
10. These words struck him to the very heart: but, in stead of being angry with
God, he only severely reproved her; telling her, that she talked like one of
the wicked women: and then piously represented to her, that we ought to take
nothing ill which comes from the hand of God; (as all evil things do, as well
as good;) and the more good we have received from Him, the less reason we have
to complain when we suffer any evil. No discourse but such as this was heard to
come from his mouth.

11. Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon
him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad
the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appointment
together to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him.
11. Now there dwelt in the neighboring Provinces three great men, with whom
Job had long maintained a particular friendship; who, hearing the sad tidings
of his Sufferings, came every one from his country to visit him. Their names
were Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; who
all three met at his house on the same day, according to an appointment they
had made, to come and condole with him, and comfort him.

12. And when they lift up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted
up their voice and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust
upon their heads toward heaven.
12. But as soon as ever they entered into the place where he lay, they were
surprised with so miserable a spectacle of deformity, that they shrieked aloud,
as men affrighted, and burst out into tears, and rent their garments, and threw
dust into the air; which, falling on their heads, expressed the confusion they
were in, to find him so covered over with Ulcers that they could not know him.

13. So they sats down with him upon the ground seven days, and seven nights;
and none spoke a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.
13. And when they approached nearer him, they only sat down upon the earth,
in the same mournful posture wherein they found him; but were not able (so
much were they astonished) for seven days and nights to say one word of the
business about which they were come to him. And indeed his Grief was so
exceeding great, that they did not well know what to say; till time, which
alters all things, had assuaged a little both his Grief and theirs.

CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT.
Here begin the Discourses which Job and his Friends had about his Affliction;
which are all represented, by the Author of this Book, poetically; not, as
hitherto, in a plain simple narration, but in most elegant verse. And being
overcharged with Grief, (without the least word of comfort from his Friends,)
he that had for some time born the weight of his Afflictions with an admirable
Constancy, could not contain himself any longer, but bursts out (to such a
degree was the anguish of his spirit increased) into the most passionate
Complaints of the Miseries of humane Life. The consideration of which made him
prefer Death much before it; and wish that, either he had never come into the
world, or gone presently out of it again, or, at least, might now forthwith be
dismissed.

1. AFter this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day.
1. AND at the end of seven days Job himself began by Complaints to give some
vent to his Grief; which had stupefied him thus long: But he burst out into
such bitter Lamentations, that he wished a thousand times he had never been born.

2. And Job spoke, and said,
2. That which he said was to this effect.

3. Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said,
There is a man-child conceived.
3. Let the Day and the Night of my Birth be never more mentioned; but be quite
forgotten, as if it had never been.

4. Let that day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the
light shine upon it.
4. Let that Day be turned into Night, and not be counted among the days: let
the Sun then withdraw its light, and never shine upon it.

5. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it,
let the blackness of the day terrify it.
5. Let the most dismal darkness and the thickest clouds wholly possess it, and
render it terrible to men.

6. As for that night, let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined unto
the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.
6. And let the Night be of the same sort: and both of them quite blotted out of
the Calendar.

7. Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.
7. Let no body meet together on that Night, to feast or make merry.

8. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their
mourning.
8. Let it be as odious as the day wherein men bewail the greatest misfortune;
or the time wherein they see the most dreadful apparition.

9. Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark, let it look for light, but
have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day:
9. Let there not so much as a Star appear in that Night; nor so much light as
we see at peep of day:

10. Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow from
mine eyes.
10. Because it did not bury me in my mother's womb, and thereby secure me from
all these Miseries.

11. Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came
out of the belly?
11. What a misfortune was it, that I did not die before I was born; or at least
as soon as I came into the world?

12. Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck?
12. That they who received me from the womb did not let me fall on the ground;
or my Nurse refuse to give me suck?

13. For now should I have lien still, and been quiet, I should have slept;
then had I been at rest:
13. Then should I have felt none of these Miseries which I now endure; but lain
quiet and undisturbed:

14. With kings and counselors of the earth, which built desolate places for
themselves;
14. Equal to Kings and the greatest persons, who lie alone in the Tombs which
they built themselves:

15. Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver:
15. (Having gold and silver in abundance, whereof now they are bereaved:)

16. Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants which never saw
light.
16. Or like an Abortive, which was never numbered among men.

17. There the wicked cease from troubling: and there the weary be at rest.
17. There are none can hurt us in the grave, though they be never so malicious;
nor shall we toil any more, when we come thither.

18. There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
oppressor.
18. The Captives, and they who are condemned to hard servitude, take no pains
there; and do not dread the voice of the Exactour of their labors.

19. The small and great are there, and the servant is free from his master.
19. There none are greater then other; but the Servant in that place is as free
as his Master.

20. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the
bitter in soul?
20. Is it not strange that a man should be forced to live, when he has no mind
to it?

21. Which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more then for hid
treasures?
21. But wishes for death, though in vain; and seeks it more eagerly then the
greatest riches?

22. Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave?
22. Leaping for joy when he can meet with his grave, as far more welcome to him
then a mine of Silver;

23. Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in?
23. Not knowing which way to turn himself, but only thither?

24. For my sighing comes before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like
the waters.
24. This is my condition, whose meat merely sustains a miserable life; which is
all Sighs and Sobs, as loud as the roarings of the Lion.

25. For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was
afraid of is come unto me.
25. For the very thing which I dreaded is fallen upon me, notwithstanding all my
care to prevent it.

26. I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet: yet trouble
came.
26. I did not confide in my Riches, nor in the least lull my self in security;
(Chap. l. 5.) and yet that did not preserve me from being miserable.

CHAP. IV.
ARGUMENT.
Eliphaz incensed at this Complaint of Job, in stead of condoling with him, and
pitying the Miseries which had put him into this Agony, and applying fitting
Lenitives to his Anguish; bluntly rebukes him for not following the good Advice
that he used to give to others in their Adversity: and tells him, he had reason
to suspect his Piety, because the Innocent were not wont to suffer such things,
but only wicked Oppressors; whom, though never so mighty, God had always
humbled. Witness the Horims, who dwelt in Seir, (II. Deuteronomy. 12.) whom the
ancestors of Eliphaz (XXXVI. Genesis 11.) had overcome, though they were as
fierce as Lions. To those Beasts of prey, of all sorts, he compares the Tyrants
whom he speaks of in this Chapter, v. 10, 11. intending, it is likely, to
remember him also of the destruction of the Emims by the children of Moab, (II.
Deuteronomy. 10, 11.) and of the Zamzummims, (v. 20, 21.) who were rooted out by the
children of Ammon, as the Horims by the children of Esau: from whose Grandchild
Eliphaz seems to have been descended, and called by the name of the eldest Son
of Esau. He tells Job also of a Vision he had, to confirm the same truth, That
man's Wickedness is the cause of his Destruction.

1. THen Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,
1. THen Eliphaz (one of his most ancient Friends, descended from Teman) replied
to him, and said;

2. If we assay to commune with thee, will thou be grieved? but who can
withhold himself from speaking?
2. We must either still keep silence, or speak what will not please thee. But
Truth sure is more to be regarded then Friendship; and therefore I must
remember thee,

3. Behold, thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak
hands.
3. That thou, it is well known, have given good Counsel unto others, (and
perhaps reproved their Impatience,) thou have encouraged those who were
disspirited;

4. Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened
the feeble knees.
4. And by thy discourse have supported those whose hearts were ready to sink,
and settled those who trembled under their burden.

5. But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it touches thee, and thou
art troubled.
5. And now that thou art fallen into the same condition, thou can not practice
thy own Lessons; but faintest, and art struck with consternation.

6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy
ways?
6. Is not this the time to exercise thy Piety, (so much famed,) thy Confidence
in God, thy Hope, thine Integrity?

7. Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished being innocent? or where were the
righteous cut off?
7. Consult thine own observation, and tell me when thou ever saw a Righteous
man forsaken by God.

8. Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the
same.
8. Quite contrary, I have seen the Wicked reaping the fruit of their doings.

9. By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they
consumed.
9. God blasts and consumes them as the nipping wind, or the fire does the corn
in the field.

10. The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the teeth
of the young lions are broken.
10. Though they be as fierce as the Lions and as strong, their power is broken.

11. The old lion perishes for lack of prey, and the stout lions whelps are
scattered abroad.
11. The greatest Tyrants and their posterity, after they have long enjoyed
their power, are deprived of all their riches gotten by oppression, and come to
nothing.

12. Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a little
thereof.
12. If these observations be not sufficient to convince thee, hear what God
himself secretly whispered to me.

13. In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men,
13. As I was ruminating one night, when all were asleep, of some Visions which
I had had;

14. Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.
14. I was on a sudden seized with such a fear, that it made every joint of my
body tremble.

15. Then a spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh stood up.
15. Whereupon I saw a Spirit pass by me, which made mine hair stand an end.

16. It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image was
before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,
16. I am not able to describe what it was like; for though it stood still, and
I saw an image of something, yet I can only tell what I heard in a still
voice, saying;

17. Shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure then his
maker?
17. Can any one think that a miserable Man is more righteous then God his
Judge? or that it is possible for anybody to be more unreprovable then He that
made him?

18. Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with
folly:
18. The Heavenly Ministers themselves may fail; for they are not perfectly
wise, though they have no flesh and blood as we have.

19. How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in
the dust, which are crushed before the moth?
19. How can we then pretend to Perfection, who dwell in bodies of dirt; which
stand upon no firm foundation, but are as subject to be destroyed as a garment
to be fretted with moths?

20. They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without
any regarding it.
20. We see continual examples of those that are cut off: they are quite taken
away, when nobody thinks of it.

21. Does not their excellency which is in them go away? they die even without
wisdom.
21. Though their Dignities be never so great, and their Posterity never so
numerous, all go away with them, and they die like so many Beasts, who have no
understanding of their latter end.

CHAP. V.
ARGUMENT.
Eliphaz still prosecutes the very same Argument; endeavoring to confirm it
from the opinion and observation of other men, as well as from his own. And
thereupon exhorts him to Repentance, as the surest way to find mercy with God;
and to be not only restored to his former Prosperity, but to be preserved
hereafter from the Incursions of savage people, or of wild beasts, and from all
the rest of the Disasters which had befaln him. Of this he bids him, in the
conclusion, to be assured; for it was a point he had studied.

1. CALL now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the saints
will thou turn?
1. IF thou do not believe me, thou may enquire of others. There is no good
man but is of this opinion: and if an Angel should appear to thee, (as there
did to me,) thou would have no other information but this;

2. For wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the silly one.
2. That God in his anger and indignation destroys the wicked, and him that errs
from his Precepts.

3. I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his habitation.
3. This is so certain, that I have predicted his downfall, when he seemed most
firmly settled in his Prosperity.

4. His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither
is there any to deliver them.
4. His Children also fell with him; Justice took hold of them, and would not
let them escape:

5. Whose harvest the hungry eats up, and takes it even out of the thorns;
and the robber swalloweth up their substance.
5. The hungry Soldier devoured their harvest; there was no fence could secure
it, but the rest of their riches became a prey to the Robber.

6. Although affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble
spring out of the ground:
6. For we are not to ascribe the Trouble and Misery of mankind merely to
earthly Causes, which are but the instruments of God's Justice;

7. Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
7. Who has made it as natural to Man to suffer, (having offended Him) as it is
for the sparks to fly upward.

8. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause:
8. Wherefore, if I were in thy case, I would humbly address my self to God, and
desire Him to order all things as He pleases.

9. Which does great things, and unsearchable; mavelous things without
number.
9. For He is the Author of all those wonderful things, whose Causes we can no
more find out, then we can count their number.

10. Who gives rain upon the earth, and sends waters upon the fields:
10. Of the Rain, for instance, in its season; and of the Springs which run in
the fields;

11. To set up on high those that below; that those which mourn may be exalted
to safety.
11. Whereby men of low condition are enriched and grow great; as the plants and
corn shoot out of the earth, after they are moistened with Showrs.

12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot
perform their enterprise.
12. And, on the contrary, He defeats the craftiest Designs of subtle men to
raise themselves; and it is not in their power to effect that which they have
most wisely contrived.

13. He takes the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward
is carried headlong.
13. Nay, they produce that which they studied to avoid; and when they think
themselves sure, make too much haste to their ruin.

14. They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as in
the night.
14. They trip in the plainest way; and see not their danger, when it is visible
to everybody but themselves.

15. But he saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand
of the mighty.
15. Whereby many a helpless man is delivered, both from the open force, and
from the treacherous flatteries or calumnies of those that are too strong for
them.

16. So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.
16. And therefore he that is oppressed should not despair, nor should the
Oppressors boast themselves; for there is hope that God will save the one, to
the utter destruction of the other.

17. Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects: therefore despise not thou
the chastening of the Almighty:
17. Behold then, how little reason there is to complain of God's Chastisements;
which if thou do not refuse, He is able to turn to thy good.

18. For he makes sore, and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole.
18. For He does not merely wound, but, like a wise Surgeon, by that very
means He cures and heals.

19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall no evil
touch thee.
19. Thy Troubles cannot be so many, but if thou submissively accept them, He
will free thee from them.

20. In famine he shall redeem thee from death; and in war, from the power of
the sword.
20. He will feed thee in the most barren years, and defend thee in the day of
battle.

21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shall thou be
afraid of destruction when it comes.
21. False accusers shall not be able to hurt thee; and when whole Countries are
depopulated thou shall be secure.

22. At destruction and famine thou shall laugh: neither shall thou be afraid
of the beasts of the earth.
22. When nothing is to be seen but wild Beasts, whom famine forces from their
dens, thou shall be cheerful and undaunted:

23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts
of the field shall be at peace with thee.
23. For the stony parts of the country shall not fail to bring forth its fruits
plentifully; and the Beasts of the field shall not devour them.

24. And thou shall know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and thou shall
visit thy habitation, and shall not sin.
24. Wheresoever thou pitchest thy Tent, thou shall find it in safety: and when
thou take an account of thine Estate, all things shall answer thine
expectation.

25. Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as
the grass of the earth.
25. Thou shall find thy Posterity also very great and numerous like the grass;
though now thou art as bare as the earth in winter.

26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes
in, in his season.
26. Thou shall not die a violent or untimely death; but be carried to thy grave
as corn is to the barn, when it is full ripe and fit to be gathered.

27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy
good.
27. Doubt not of this, for we have thoroughly considered it, and find it so:
receive it therefore, and keep it in memory.

CHAP. VI.
ARGUMENT.
Job, not at all convinced by these Discourses, justifies the Complaint he had
made, (Chap. III.) which Eliphaz had now accused; maintaining that his Grief
was not equal to the Cause of it. And therefore he renews his wishes of Death:
at which though they might wonder who felt nothing to make them weary of Life;
yet he had reason, he shows, for what he did; and one more then before, which
was their Unkindness: who pretended to be Friends; but by this rude Reproof of
him at the very first, without so much as one compassionate word, or the least
syllable of Consolation, showed how little sympathy they had with him in his
Sufferings. These things he desires them to consider, and weigh the cause of
his Complaint a little better, before they passed any farther judgment on it.

1. BUT Job answered and said,
1. HERE Job replied to Eliphaz, and spoke in these terms to him:

2. Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the
balances together!
2. Would to God some more equal person then you would lay my Complaint and my
Sufferings one against the other, and judge sincerely which is the heaviest.

3. For now it would be heavier then the sand of the sea: therefore my words
are swallowed up.
3. He would soon find, that the Sand of the Sea is not so heavy as my Misery;
and that I am not able to complain enough.

4. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks
up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
4. The Almighty himself has given me such a wound, that I am dis-spirited: for
nothing but dreadful Spectacles present themselves ready armed against me.

5. Does the wild ass bray when he has grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?
5. It is easy for you, who feel no pain nor want, to forbear Complaints; which
is no more then the very Ass and other brute creatures do.

6. Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in
the white of an egg?
6. But may not he who eats insipid things, call for a little salt to make them
go down better? (How much more then may we call for something to qualify that
which is very bitter?)

7. The things that my soul refused to touch, are as my sorrowful meat.
7. As I do now, who have nothing afforded me for my support, but such
Discourses as yours, which my very soul loathes.

8. Oh that I might have my request! and that God would grant me the thing that
I long for!
8. I cannot but cry unto God, and beseech Him to grant me my heart's desire.

9. Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his
hand, and cut me off.
9. Which is, that He would be pleased not to let me languish in this miserable
condition; but with one stroke more quite cut me off.

10. Then should I yet have comfort, yea, I would harden my self in sorrow: let
him not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the holy One.
10. It would be a great comfort to me, to hope for this; and would strengthen
me to endure the severest pains: for I would receive the sentence of Death with
acclamations of praise, if God would pronounce it against me.

11. What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I
should prolong my life?
11. For I have not strength enough to endure any longer; nor any hope of better
days in the conclusion, which should make me willing to have my Life prolonged.

12. Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?
12. God has not made me insensible; and therefore do not wonder that I desire
to be released from the sharpest Pains.

13. Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?
13. Do not think my Reason has forsaken me, and that I do not understand my
self.

14. To him that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend; but he
forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
14. Were it so, a Friend should show me the more Pity; as you would do, but
that you fear not God, nor remember that he can afflict you as he does me.

15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks
they pass away:
15. My dearest Friends prove as deceitful as the Torrents, which make a great
noise, and run with a violent stream,

16. Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid.
16. When the melted Ice and Snow fall thick into them:

17. What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed
out of their place.
17. They promise water, but in the Summertime are dried up;

18. The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish.
18. So that you can scarce find any mark of the course wherein they ran, they
are so perfectly vanished.

19. The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.
19. They that travel into our neighboring Countries expected to quench their
thirst there, where they had sometime seen so much water;

20. They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither and were
ashamed.
20. But were shamefully disappointed, and blushed to think they should seek
relief from such uncertain Streams.

21. For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid.
21. Just such are you, good for nothing; who, seeing my Calamity, shrink from
me.

22. Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your substance?
22. And yet I never sent for you; nor do I ask, now you are come, any Relief
from you.

23. Or, Deliver me from the enemie's hand? or, Redeem me from the hand of the
mighty?
23. I do not expect you should deliver me from these Calamities, which as so
many mighty enemies oppress me.

24. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I
have erred.
24. Do not mistake me, nor think that I despise the assistence of your Counsel
and Advice: no, I am ready to receive your Reproofs, and humbly to submit to
them, if you can better inform me.

25. How forcible are right words! but what does your arguing reprove?
25. Oh what power is there in Truth! but your Reprehensions are ineffectual.

26. Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate,
which are as wind?
26. You only study to show your Eloquence; and in vain use words to drive me
to Desperation.

27. Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and you dig a pit for your friend.
27. You fall upon him who is already depressed and without defense; and in a
barbarous manner devise counsel against your Friend.

28. Now therefore be content, look upon me, for it is evident unto you, if I
lie.
28. But let it please you to consider my Case a little better; and then judge
if I be in the wrong.

29. Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
righteousness is in it.
29. Discuss things over again, I beseech you, and do it fairly. I say, let me
have a second Hearing; it will but the more show my Innocence.

30. Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse things?
30. Have I said any thing hitherto that is faulty? I do not think my judgment
is so corrupted, but that I can discern what is bad, though spoken by my self.

CHAP. VII.
ARGUMENT.
Job proceeds still in the defense of his Complaint, and of his Wishes to see
an end of so miserable a Life; which at the best is full of Toil and Trouble.
And, since his Friends had so little consideration of him, he addresses himself
to God; and hopes he will not be angry, if he ease his Grief by representing to
him the Dolefulness of his condition, and expostulating a little with him about
the continuance of it, and his release from it.

1. IS there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days also
like the days of an hireling?
1. IS not the whole Life of miserable Man a perpetual conflict with various
Troubles? and must he not at best undergo much toil, labor and weariness?

2. As a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an hireling looks for
the reward of his work:
2. Why may I not then as passionately wish to see an end of it, as the Slave in
a hot day gasps for the refreshment of the Shade? or the Labourer longs for the
Evening when he may rest, and be paid for his pains?

3. So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisom nights are
appointed to me.
3. I am sure my days are no less void of Contentment then theirs; and in the
night, when men are wont to forget their Sorrows, I can do nothing but
restlesly increase them.

4. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am
full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.
4. I no sooner am laid down, but I wish to be up again; and the night seems
very tedious, while I toss up and down in unquiet and tormenting thoughts,
calling for the morning.

5. My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken, and
become loathsome.
5. How can I do otherways, when my Body is nothing but Ulcers full of Worms,
and crusted over with Scabs; which have made such clefts in my skin, that I am
loathsome to my self?

6. My days are swifter then a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope.
6. All my happy days are run away in a moment; and there is no hope I should
recover them.

7. O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good.
7. O my God, remember how short the most pleasant Life is; which when it is
gone, I cannot live over again.

8. The eye of him that has seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes are upon
me, and I am not.
8. I can never return to my Friends after I have left them: Thou do but frown
upon me, and I vanish quite out of the World.

9. As the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: so he that goes down to the
grave shall come up no more.
9. Just as a Cloud dissolves on a sudden before the Sun, so does Man sink down
into his grave and appear no more.

10. He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any
more.
10. He must make his habitation there, for hither he cannot return; but others
shall take his place, which will no longer acknowledge him the owner of it.

11. Therefore I will not refrain my mouth, I will speak in the anguish of my
spirit, I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
11. Suffer me then to speak freely, and to give vent to my Grief, by
complaining a little of the inexpressible Miseries which oppress me.

12. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou set a watch over me?
12. Am I like a Sea, or a Whale, (or wild Beast,) that must be shut up and
confined under these unsupportable Sufferings, and by no means break through
them?

13. When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint:
13. If Death may not come and put an end to them, one would have hoped at least
to have found some intermission of them by Sleep.

14. Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions.
14. But then I am haunted with such frightfull Dreams, and such horrid
Apparitions,

15. So that my soul chooses strangling, and death rather then my life.
15. That I had much rather die the most violent death, then carry this carcass
any longer about with me.

16. I loath it, I would not live always: let me alone, for my days are vanity.
16. It is loathsome to me: I would not, if I might, live always in it. Dismiss
me therefore, since I have no pleasure in Life, which of it self will end
shortly.

17. What is man, that thou should magnify him? and that thou should set
thine heart upon him?
17. Is mortal Man so considerable, that Thou should honor him so much as to
contend with him, and set Thy self against him?

18. And that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every moment?
18. That Thou should send new Afflictions on him every morning; nay, try his
strength and courage every moment?

19. How long will thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow
down my spittle?
19. It is time to turn away thy Displeasure from me; at least for so short a
space, as to give me leave to breathe.

20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why
have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?
20. I am not able to give Thee satisfaction for my Offenses against Thee, O
Thou Observer of men. But why do Thou not remove me quite out of thy sight,
if I be a burden to Thee?

21. And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine
iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the
morning, but I shall not be.
21. Or else forgive my Sin, and so far release me from its Punishment, as to
let me die? which I shall do presently, and not be found to morrow to endure
these Afflictions, if Thou do not still hold me under them.

CHAP. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
The foregoing Apologies of Job, it seems, made little impression on his
Friends: for, he had no sooner done, but another of them, called Bildad,
continued the Dispute; with as little intermission, as there was between the
Messengers that brought him (Chap. I.) the sad tidings of his Calamities. And
it does not appear by his discourse, that he differed at all in his Principles
from Eliphaz. For, though he give him very good Counsel, yet, he still presses
this as the sense of all Antiquity, (v. 8.) that God ever prospers the Just,
and roots out the Wicked, be they never so flourishing for a season. And he
being descended from Shuah, one of Abraham's Sons by Keturah, (XXV. Genesis 2.)
seems to me to have a particular respect, in this appeal to History, unto the
Records, which then remained, of God's blessing upon that faithful man's
posterity, (who hitherto, and long after, continued in his Religion,) and of
the extirpation of those Eastern people, (neighbors to Job,) in whose country
they were settled, because of their Wickedness.

1. THEN answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
1. WHEN Job had made an end of this Discourse, Bildad (another great Friend of
his, descended from Shuah, one of Abraham's Sons by Keturah,) reprehended him
in the same manner as Eliphaz had done, saying;

2. How long will thou speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy
mouth be like a strong wind?
2. Why do thou persist to talk on this fashion, and with such vehemence
expostulate with God?

3. Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert justice?
3. Do thou imagine the Supreme Judge will not do thee right? or that He who
needs nothing will swerve from the rules of Equity?

4. If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away for
their transgression;
4. Is it not now reasonable to think that thy Children had highly offended Him;
for which cause He took a sudden and hasty Vengeance on them?

5. If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the
Almighty;
5. And that if thou did now (in stead of Complaining) implore his Grace and
Favor, with humble Supplication,

6. If thou were pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and make
the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
6. And were thy self sincere in heart and upright in thine actions, He would
certainly have a regard to thee, and restore thy Family to its former splendor?

7. Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase.
7. I am confident, thou art not now so low, but in time He would make thee as
high, nay, far more eminent then thou wast before.

8. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thy self to the
search of their fathers.
8. I do not desire thee to take my word for it; but let those who are gone
before us instruct thee, and search diligently into the Histories of the most
ancient Times.

9. (For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth
are a shadow.)
9. (For, alas! we are not old enough to understand much; being able to make but
few Observations, by reason of the exceeding shortness of our lives.)

10. Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart?
10. They will not fail to inform thee aright; and out of their long experience,
and the prudent Observations of many Ages, justify the truth of my words.

11. Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water?
11. The Rushes and Flags we see can shoot up no higher, when they want their
mud and their moisture.

12. While it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, if withers before
any other herb.
12. There is no need to stop their growth by cutting them down; for they will
wither of themselves, even when they are fresh and green: while smaller Herbs,
which want not water, continue their beauty.

13. So are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall
perish:
13. Just such is the condition of all those who neglect God: (without whose
Blessing none can flourish:) who knows him also that counterfeits Piety, and
will defeat him of the Happiness he expects.

14. Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider's web.
14. He may flatter himself with vain hopes, and be so much the more miserable;
for the things wherein he trusts are as weak as a Spider's web.

15. He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it
fast, but it shall not endure.
15. He may fansy his Family to be so great and potent, that it will support
him; but it shall fall as well as himself: He may endeavor to keep it up by
strong Alliances, but to no purpose.

16. He is green before the sun, and his branch shoots forth in his garden.
6. Nay, he may seem to all the world, as well as to himself, to be like a
flourishing Tree, which spreads its branches in a fair garden;

17. His roots are wrapped about the heap, and sees the place of stones.
7. Whose roots have wreathed themselves thick about the earth, and whose head
lifts up it self above the highest edifices:

18. If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have
not seen thee.
18. But when God blasts him, and plucks him up by the roots, there shall remain
no remembrance that such a man ever lived in that place.

19. Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.
19. Believe it, the pleasure such men take in their prosperous estate is no
better then this; and out of the dust shall others spring up and flourish in
their stead.

20. Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the
evildoers:
20. It is a certain truth, that God will not desert the Upright; nor will He
uphold the Wicked.

21. Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.
21. Thou thy self (if thou art upright) shall still be so blessed by Him, that
thou shall not be able to contain thy Joy within thy heart; but it shall appear
in thy countenance, and burst out into joyful Songs.

22. They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the dewlling place
of the wicked shall come to naught.
22. They that rejoiced at thy Fall, shall be perfectly counfounded at thy happy
Restoration; and never recover themselves, but utterly perish.

CHAP. IX.
ARGUMENT.
Job allows what Bildad had well spoken in the beginning of his Speech; and
very religiously adores the Justice, Wisdom, and Sovereignty of the Almighty:
with whom he protests he had no intention to quarrel or dispute; but only to
assert the contrary Maxim to that which they maintained, That Piety will not
secure us from all Calamities, which do not ever fall upon those that deserve
them. Witness, on one hand, the prosperous estate of wicked Princes, v. 24.
(particularly of one great Prince, who then somewhere reigned in their
neighboring countries;) and, on the other hand, his own Infelicity,
notwithstanding his known Integrity, v. 25. About this he confesses he was very
much unsatisfied: though he knew it was in vain to argue with God about it; nor
would his Affliction suffer him to do it.

1. THEN Job answered and said,
1. WHEN he had done, Job began again, and replied in this manner:

2. I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God?
2. There need not so many words to prove what thou said in the entrance of
thy Speech; for I know very well that God never perverts Judgment, and that
frail Man cannot justify himself before Him.

3. If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.
3. If he should go about to answer to a thousand things which may be objected
to him, he would hardly clear himself in One.

4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself
against him, and has prospered?
4. I adore also His Wisdom and Power as well as his Justice; and am sensible
that no men can be safe who obstinately oppose Him.

5. Which removes the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in
his anger.
5. Though they were as big and as strong as the Mountains, He can hastily
overturn them, in a moment, before they think of it.

6. Which shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.
6. For He is able to remove the whole Earth out of its place, and shatter the
very Foundations of it.

7. Which commands the sun, and it rises not; and seals up the stars.
7. Nor are the Heavens less subject to His Power; for neither Sun nor Stars can
shine if He forbid them.

8. Which alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the
sea.
8. He alone commands the Clouds to cover them, and makes the Sea swell and lift
up its Waves.

9. Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south.
9. All the Constellations of Heaven obey Him in their several seasons: both
those which we see, and those in the other Hemisphere.

10. Which does great things past finding out, yea, and wonders without number.
10. In short, I agree with Eliphaz, ( V. 9.) that the Wonders He does are
innumerable, and past my comprehension.

11. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not: he passes on also, but I perceive
him not.
11. He sets them before mine eyes continually, and yet I am not able to
understand them.

12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, What
do thou?
12. If He snatch away any thing suddenly, who can make Him restore it, or cause
Him to give an account why He did it.

13. If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him.
13. If He will continue his Displeasure, there is no remedy; but the proudest
Undertakers must confess their inability to relieve us.

14. How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with
him?
14. What am I then, poor Wretch, that I should contend with his Anger? or where
shall I find out words choice enough to plead with Him?

15. Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would make
supplication to my judge.
15. It is not fit for me to open my mouth before Him in the justest Cause;
unless it be to supplicate his Favor when He judges me.

16. If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe that he
had hearkened unto my voice.
16. And if I had made Supplication, and He had granted my desire, I would not
think my Prayer had done the buisiness, (or believe my self to be out of all
danger.)

17. For he breaks me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause.
17. For I am not conscious of any Guilt; and yet you see with what violent
blasts He has shattered me and my Family in pieces, and given me one Wound
after another.

18. He will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness.
18. No sooner was one past, but another immediately followed; which have left
me not the least pleasure in Life.

19. If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who shall
set me a time to plead?
19. If I stand upon my Might; alas! it is not to be named with His: if upon my
Right; what Judge is there above Him, to appoint us a day of hearing?

20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: If I say, I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
20. If I should justify my self, there would be something in my very Plea to
condemn me: it will render my Cause worse to pretend I am innocent.

21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my
life.
21. Though I were so, yet I would not be mine own Judge in the Case: I do not
value my Life so much, as to contend about it.

22. This is one thing, therefore I said it, he destroys the perfect and the
wicked.
22. All that I affirm is this, and I persist in that opinion, That He lets the
Innocent suffer sad things as well as the Guilty.

23. If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.
23. When a Plague comes, which kills in a moment, He regards not though it fall
upon the Innocent.

24. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covers the faces of
the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?
24. And on the other side, (so false is your Discourse,) we see the Government
of the Earth given into the hands of a wicked Prince, who blinds the eyes of
his Judges. If you deny this, tell me, where is the man, and what is his name,
who administers things uprightly?

25. Now my days are swifter then a post: they flee away, they see no good.
25. I my self was in Prosperity, but it is fled away swifter then a post; and
there is not the least footstep of it remaining.

26. They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hastes to the
prey.
26. The Ships that are carried with the most rapid stream, or the hungry Eagle
in chase of her prey, do not make more haste away.

27. If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness, and
comfort my self:
27. I think sometime with my self, that I will forget the Miseries of which I
complain, and be more cheerful and courageous.

28. I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou will not hold me innocent.
28. But then my Grief frights away that resolution; knowing Thou will not
release me, but make me still groan under them.

29. If I be wicked, why then labor I in vain?
29. I am wicked in Thine account; and therefore it is to no purpose to
vindicate mine Innocence.

30. If I wash my self with snowwater, and make my hands never so clean;
30. Were I never so pure and clean from all Filthiness in heart and life,

31. Yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.
31. Thou would notwithstanding cover me with filthy Ulcers, and make my
nearest Relations abhor to approach me.

32. For he is not a man as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come
together in judgment.
32. For God is not like to me, that we should dispute upon even terms.

33. Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us
both.
33. Nor is there any body above us both to compose our differences, and command
silence, when either of us exceeds our bounds.

34. Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me.
34. As for my self, His Rod, which is upon me, keeps me in such awe, that I
cannot speak freely.

35. Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with me.
35. Let Him remove that, and then I shall utter my mind with less dread: For I
am not so bad as you imagine.

CHAP. X.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter the passionate Complaints and Expostulations with God, from
which Job tells us (in the foregoing Chapter) he intended hereafter to refrain,
break out afresh; and he earnestly desires to know what his Guilt is: which
God, who made him, he was sure could not but perfectly understand, if there was
any; and needed not, for the discovery of it, to expose him to these severe
Torments. Which, he still is of the opinion, may justify his Wishes of never
being born, or of dying presently after. Though, those Wishes being vain, he
acknowledges it is more rational to desire, that God would be pleased to
intermit his Pain a while; if He did not think fit quite to remove it.

1. MY soul is we ary of my life, I will leave my complaint upon my self; I
will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
1. AND since Life is a burden to me, which can find no ease but only in
complaining, I will take that liberty, (for it is in vain to contend against
it, IX. 27.) though no words can express my Anguish and Misery.

2. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou contendest
with me.
2. O Thou Supreme Judge of all, do not pronounce thy final Sentence against me,
till Thou have first shown me what the Crimes are for which I suffer.

3. Is it good unto thee that thou should oppress? that thou should
despise the work of thine hands? and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
3. What benefit will Thou receive by my spoils? or is it agreeable to Thee to
slight thine own workmanship, and to countenance the reasonings and designs of
evil men?

4. Have thou eyes of flesh? or see thou as man sees?
4. Do Thou judge of things as Men do, who can see no farther then the
outside, or are led by their affections?

5. Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's days,
5. Must Thou take time, as we do, to find out the truth, and understand the
bottom of a buisiness?

6. That thou inquire after mine iniquity, and sear^best after my sin?
6. Is that the reason Thou usest me thus severely, (and have laid me upon a
Rack,) and as it were examinest what I have done amiss?

7. Thou know that I am not wicked, and there is none that can deliver out
of thine hand.
7. Surely Thou (whose Vengeance none can escape) know without the help of
such torments, that I am not guilty.

8. Thine hands have made me, and fashioned me together round about; yet thou
do destroy me.
8. There is no part of me but was most elaborately made and fashioned by Thee;
(and therefore Thou can not be ignorant of me;) though now Thou art about to
ruin me.

9. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into dust again?
9. Need I put Thee in mind that I was formed by Thee, as the Potter works the
Clay into what shape he pleases; and now Thou art crumbling me in pieces again?

10. Have thou not poured me out as milk, and crudled me like cheese?
10. Did not Thou gather all the scattered Parts together, and compact them in
my mother's womb?

11. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones
and sinews.
11. And first cover them with Skin, and then with Flesh, and at last strengthen
them with Bones and Sinews?

12. Thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has preserved my
spirit.
12. And in due time bring me into the world, and give me all the Comforts of
life, and by thy constant care preserve both it and them?

13. And these things have thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with
thee.
13. Thou can not have forgotten these things: and I am sure that this Misery
I now endure is not without thy order.

14. If I sin, then thou markest me; and thou will not acquit me from mine
iniquity.
14. I cannot offend Thee in the least, but Thou (by whom I was thus formed)
must needs know and observe it; and I cannot avoid thy Punishment for it.

15. If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up
my head: I am full of confusion, therefore see thou mine affliction;
15. If I be wicked, I am undone; and if I be righteous, I am so oppressed that
I cannot look upon what a lamentable confusion I am in, beholding nothing but
Misery which way soever I cast mine eyes.

16. For it increases: thou huntest me as a fierce lion; and again thou
show thy self mavelous upon me.
16. For it grows greater and greater, while Thou pursuest me as a Lion does his
prey; and when I hope there is an end of my Troubles, sendest more to fill me
with new astonishment and horror.

17. Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation
upon me; changes and war are against me.
17. Fresh witnesses of thine Anger rise up against me: Thou multipliest thy
Plagues upon me; so that there is no end, but only a change of my Conflicts.

18. Wherefore then have thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I had
given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!
18. And therefore I cannot but wish as I did at the first, that my Mother's
womb had been my Grave: Happy had it been for me if I had died there, and never
come into this miserable world:

19. I should have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried
from the womb to the grave.
19. Or that I had died as soon as I was born, and been carried from the Womb to
my Grave;

20. Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort
a little:
20. To which I am now very near. May I beg therefore but this one favor, that
since Thou will not quite remove thy Hand, Thou will forbear a while to strike,
and let me breathe and refresh my self a little;

21. Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and
the shadow of death;
21. Before I depart thither from whence I shall not return, (to ask any more
favors;) be laid, I mean, in my Grave, the place of dismal darkness:

22. A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where the light is as darkness.
22. Where it is as dark as dark can be; and there is no succession of day and
night, as we have here, but one perpetual night.

CHAP. XI.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter gives an account of the sense of Zophar about the buisiness in
dispute. It is uncertain whence he was descended; but probably he dwelt upon
the borders of Idumaea, (for there we find an ancient City called Naama, XV.
Josh. 41.) and from thence came to visit Job in his Affliction. But in stead of
joining with him in his Prayer for a little respite from his Pain, (with which
Job had concluded his last Discourse,) he calls him an idle Talker, and accuses
him of irreverence toward God. Concerning whose incomprehensible Counsels, and
irresistible Power, etc. he discourses with great sense, and gives Job
exceeding good Advice: but still follows the opinion of the other two Friends,
that he would not have been so miserable, if he had not been Wicked.

1. THEN answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,
1. HERE a third Friend of Job's ( Zophar of Naama) began to speak with no small
passion.

2. Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of
talk be justified?
2. Do thou think to stop our mouths with abundance of words; and by thy
Talkativeness to persuade us thou art innocent?

3. Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no
man make thee ashamed?
3. Must we not confute thy false Allegations; but suffer thee to be insolent,
because thou art miserable?

4. For thou have said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.
4. For thou pretendest not to have offended either in word or deed; and that
God himself can find no reason to condemn thee.

5. But, Oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee;
5. O that He would vouchsafe to show thee thine error, and with his own mouth
confute thee!

6. And that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to
that which is! know therefore that God exacteth of thee less then thine
iniquity deserves.
6. That He would show thee the secret Reasons of his wise Counsels (which far
surpass thine) in this Affliction; and make thee know that He would be just, if
He should punish thy Sin more severely!

7. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection?
7. Art thou able, after all thy buisy inquiries, to give an account of God's
Judgments, and perfectly comprehend the Reasons of his Providence?

8. It is as high as heaven, what can thou do? deeper then hell, what can
thou know?
8. Thou may as well take a measure of the height of Heaven, or of the depth
of Hell.

9. The measure thereof is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea.
9. The Earth and the Sea, as long and as broad as they are, have their bounds;
but that has none.

10. If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him?
10. If He seize upon any thing, and shut it up, (as a Hunter does his prey in a
net,) He will gather it, and who shall force Him to restore it?

11. For he knows vain men: he sees wickedness also, will he not then
consider it?
11. For he knows vain Men, (who mind not what they say or do,) He sees their
most hidden wickedness; and will not He punish it?

12. For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild asse's colt.
12. Shall Man, void of understanding, take the confidence to dispute with God?
Man, who is naturally as rude and blockish as a wild Asse's colt?

13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him;
13. If thou art truly wise, cease disputing, and fall to Prayer.

14. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacles.
14. If thou art guilty of any Sin, banish it quite away; and reform thy self
and thy Family.

15. For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, yea, thou shall be
steadfast, and shall not fear:
15. For then shall thou look cheerfully again, and be perfectly freed from this
loathsome condition: yea, thou shall be settled without any fear of losing thy
Happiness.

16. Because thou shall forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass
away:
16. Which shall be so great, that it shall blot out the remembrance of thy past
Miseries: or thou shall think of them as of Waters, that are run away, and will
return no more.

17. And thine age shall be clearer then the noonday; thou shall shine forth,
thou shall be as the morning.
17. The rest of thy Life shall be more glorious then the Sun at noon: even thy
darkness shall be like the morning-light.

18. And thou shall be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shall dig about
thee, and thou shall take thy rest in safety.
18. Thou shall be confident, though any evil threaten thee; because there is
hope God will deliver thee: thou shall dig wells of water, and none shall
disturb thy Tents or thy Flocks.

19. Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea, many shall
make suit unto thee.
19. Thou shall be in perfect peace, and none shall disquiet thee: yea, the
multitude shall sue to thee for thy Favor, and the greatest persons shall
desire thy Friendship.

20. But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape; and
their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.
20. But the Wicked shall in vain look for Happiness: they shall not escape
their deserved Punishment, but their hope of Deliverance shall faint away.

CHAP. XII.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter Job taxes all his three Friends with too great a conceit of
their own Wisdom, which had not, as yet, taught them common Humanity to the
miserable. And lets them understand, that he need not come to them to learn,
but might rather teach them the falseness of that Proposition, wherewith Zophar
had concluded his Speech, concerning the Infelicity of the Wicked. For the
contrary, he tells them, was obvious to sense, v. 7, 8, etc. And as for what
Zophar had discoursed of the Wisdom and Power of God, he would have them know,
that he was as well skilled in those Points as the best of them, and understood
as much of the History of ancient Times: particularly of the vain attempt at
the Tower of Babel, unto which it is probable he has respect in the 14. verse;
as, in all the following, he seems to have to what you read in XIV. Genesis 5, 6,
7, 8. of the rooting out of those fierce Giants the Rephaim, and other such
like barbarous and rapacious people; of the particulars of which we have now no
Records remaining.

1. AND Job answered, and said,
1. TO this Job replied in such words as these.

2. No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.
2. You believe then there are no men of sense in the world besides your selves:
so that if you were dead, there would be no Wisdom left among us.

3. But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you: yea,
who knows not such things as these?
3. Let not your vanity abuse you; I have Understanding as well and as much as
you; and so has everybody else: for I see nothing singular in all you have
said.

4. I am as one mocked of his neighbor, who calls upon God, and he answers
him: the just upright man is laughed to scorn.
4. I am not so simple but I see how you deride your Friend, when you bid him
call upon God that He may answer him. But this is no new thing, the best of men
has been mocked at on this fashion.

5. He that is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the
thought of him that is at ease.
5. Though he be as a Lamp, yet they who are dazzled with the splendor of
worldly Prosperity despise him: the Upright is never acceptable to him who is
not steadfast in his goings.

6. The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure;
into whose hand God brings abundantly.
6. For they thrive and flourish, though they rob the Just; and even such men
live without disturbance, as provoke God with those very things which He
bestows upon them with his own hand.

7. But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the
air, and they shall tell thee:
7. Thou need not go any farther then to the Beasts or Birds, to learn how
well the Wicked fare.

8. Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; and the fishes of the sea
shall declare unto thee.
8. The Earth brings forth her fruit to them abundantly; and the Fishes of the
Sea deny them not their service.

9. Who knows not in all these, that the hand of the LORD has wrought this?
9. Who is so stupid as not to understand by all these, that God has ordered it
should be thus?

10. In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all
mankind.
10. Whose right it is to dispose of all creatures, as well as of mankind.

11. Does not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?
11. Cannot the mind distinguish truth from falsehood, as exactly as the palate
sweet from bitter?

12. With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days, understanding.
12. And the older we grow, the wiser one would think we should be.

13. With him is wisdom and strength, he has counsel and understanding.
13. But what is all our wisdom to God's? who (as He knows, so) can do all
things; and he never errs in his understanding, or miscarries in his designs.

14. Behold, he breaks down, and it cannot be built again: he shuts up a
man, and there can be no opening.
14. In is not in the power of any creature to repair that which He throws down;
nor to extricate that man whom He casts into difficulties and streights.

15. Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sends them
out, and they overturn the earth.
15. If He deny us Rain, the waters themselves dry up: and He sends such Floods
as break the strongest banks.

16. With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver are his.
16. Nor is his Wisdom, as I said, inferior to his Power: But the Subtlety of
those who deceive is as well known to Him, as the Silliness of those who are
deceived.

17. He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the judges fools.
17. He defeats the wisest Statesmen, and infatuates the ablest Senators:

18. He loses the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.
18. So that they are not able to keep the Crown on the head of their Kings; but
they are stripped of their royal ornaments, and bound in chains.

19. He leads princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty.
19. Their great Ministers are carried captives with them; nor are the most
powerful forces they can raise able to defend them.

20. He removes away the speech of the trusty, and takes away the
understanding of the aged.
20. Eloquence, Fidelity, and the Prudence which has been gained by long
experience, signify as little for their preservation.

21. He pours contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.
21. The Nobleness of their birth or their Munificence is not at all regarded:
and He dissolves the strongest Confederacies, into which their Friends enter
for their support.

22. He discovers deep things out of darkness, and brings out to light the
shadow of death.
22. No Plot can be so secretly carried but He discovers it; and brings to light
that which has been contrived in the greatest obscurity.

23. He increases the nations, and destroys them: he enlarges the nations,
and streightneth them again.
23. Whole Nations (as well as their Princes) are perfectly under his power;
whom He sometimes multiplies, and again diminishes by war, famine, or
pestilence. He inlarges their bounds, and, when he pleases, reduces them into
narrower limits.

24. He takes away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and
causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.
24. He deprives their Leaders both of courage and judgment; and brings them
into such confusion, that they know not which way to turn themselves.

25. They grope in the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger like a
drunken man.
25. Blind men see as much as they; and their Counsels and motions are as
uncertain as those of a man in drink.

CHAP. XIII.
ARGUMENT.
From the foregoing Observations, Job still continues to assert, first, his own
Understanding to be equal, or rather superior, to theirs; who had better
therefore learn of him, and know that God* was not pleased to have his
Providence defended by Untruths, nor to see men partial, though it was in His
behalf: and secondly, his own Integrity to be such, that he would ever defend
it against all Accusers, even before God himself. Whom he desires to take
cognizance of the Cause, and to let him understand what the Crimes were for
which he was thus severely handled. For he protests that he was ignorant of
them; though the Punishments he had endured were more then sufficient to awaken
the sense of his Guilt, he being almost consumed by them.

1. LO, mine eye has seen all this, mine ear has heard and understood it.
1. I Have said nothing, I would have you know, but what I my self have
observed; or received from credible reports, which I have found to be certainly
true.

2. What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto you.
2. Whereby you may see I had reason to say, that I know as much as you, and am
not to learn of you.

3. Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.
3. Would to God I might speak with Him, and lay my Reasons open before Him; and
be troubled with your Discourses no longer.

4. But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.
4. For your Conclusions are false; and, like unskilful Physicians, you
exasperate the Diseases, which you cannot cure.

5. Oh that you would altogether hold your peace, and it should be your wisdom.
5. The best proof of your Wisdom would be, to say never a word more of these
matters.

6. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
6. But listen a little to me, I beseech you, and hear by what Reasons I will
defend my self.

7. Will you speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?
7. Does God stand in need of Untruths to justify his proceedings? cannot He be
righteous unless I be wicked?

8. Will you accept his person? will ye contend for God?
8. Has He so little Right on his side, that you must show Him favor? or do
you think to oblige his Majesty by doing me wrong?

9. Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do
ye so mock him?
9. Will it be to your advantage, think you, that God should strictly examine
all you have said? or can He be deceived with your Flatteries, as frail men may
be?

10. He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept persons.
10. No; He will severely chastise you, for designing to gratify Him by
condemning me.

11. Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon you?
11. The incomparable Excellence of God, one would think, should have frighted
away such a thought; and his dreadful Majesty made you not presume to imagine
He wanted your patronage.

12. Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay.
12. Whose Remonstrances, on his behalf, are no better then dust; and the
Arguments you accumulate, but like so many heaps of dirt.

13. Hold your peace, let me alone that I may speak, and let come on me what
will.
13. Keep silence therefore, and do not disturb me in my Speech; for I will omit
nothing.

14. Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine hand?
14. And I am so conscious to my self of my Innocence, that I must still wonder
why I suffer such inraging Miseries, and am exposed to so many Dangers.

15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine own
ways before him.
15. Assure your selves I will never forgo this Plea; but still maintain mine
Innocence, though I were at the last gasp, and had no hope of Life.

16. He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come before him.
16. And I am confident God himself would vindicate it; for I am no Hypocrite,
nor shall false Accusations be admitted at his Tribunal.

17. Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears.
17. Do not interrupt me, but give due attention to what I am about to say.

18. Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be justified.
18. See, I beseech you, I refuse not to be tried, but have framed a Process
against my self; and am so sure of the goodness of my Cause, that I know I
shall be acquitted.

19. Who is he that will plead with me? for now if I hold my tongue, I shall
give up the ghost.
19. Let who will come and accuse me, I am ready to answer: for to hold my
peace, on so just an occasion, is death to me.

20. Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide my self from thee.
20. Let me only beg, O Great Judge of all, that Thou will forbear to make use
of two things against me; and then I will appear confidently, to plead my Cause
before Thee.

21. Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me afraid.
21. Do not continue my Pain: and let not the sight of thy Majesty put me in
disorder.

22. Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer thou me.
22. Then summon me to thy Bar, and charge me; and I will defend my self: or let
me question Thee; and do Thou clear thy proceedings against me.

23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression
and my sin.
23. Tell me what, and how many, are mine Iniquities and Sins; for I am ignorant
of them: I desire to know them all, great and small, against Thee, or against
my Neighbor.

24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy?
24. For what cause am I thus afflicted, and used as if I was thine Enemy?

25. Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and will thou pursue the dry
stubble?
25. What honor will Thou get by employing thy Power against One, who is no
more able to stand before Thee, then the Leaf to resist the wind which sports
with it, or the dry Stubble the fire which instantly consumes it?

26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth.
26. For Thou have passed severe Decrees against me; and punished me for the
Crimes which were committed before I well knew what I did.

27. Thou put my feet also in the stocks, and look narrowly unto all my
paths; thou set a print upon the heels of my feet.
27. And Thou do execute them as severely; for I can no more escape then a
Malefactor whose feet are in the stocks; who is encompassed with a vigilant
guard, and cannot stir a foot from the place where he is:

28. And he as a rotten thing consumes, as a garment that is moth-eaten.
28. But there he rots and wastes away, as I do, like a Garment that is eaten by
the moths.

CHAP. XIV.
ARGUMENT.
The good man proceeds to plead with God for some mitigation of his Miseries,
from the consideration of the Shortness of life, and the Trouble that naturally
belongs to it; which he thought might move Him not to add any greater burden
of Suffering: especially, considering that when he is dead, he cannot come into
the world again, (as the Plants do,) to receive the marks of his Favor. Which
he hopes therefore He will bestow upon him here, notwithstanding the depth of
his Misery, (which tempted him to the borders of Impatience, v. 13.) It being
very easy for Him to remove his Affliction, though never so heavy, whose Power
is so great, that He removed Mountains out of their place, and brought a
Deluge, as we may say, of Sand (as they saw sometimes in their neighboring
Countries) to overflow the most fruitful Regions.

1. MAN that is born of a woman, is of few days, and full of trouble.
1. MAN is born to die; and as he cannot live long, so his short Life is subject
to many Cares.

2. He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flees also as a shadow,
and continues not.
2. He may be compared to a Flower, which is beautiful indeed, but suddenly
cropped; or to the Shadow on a dial, which never stands still, but is hasting
away apace.

3. And do thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bring me into
judgment with thee?
3. And do Thou concern thy self so far about such a Wretch, as to summon him
before thy Tribunal; and there pass dreadful Sentences against him, as Thou
do against me?

4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.
4. The common Frailty of Humanity might make Thee overlook him: for nothing,
Thou know, can be better then the Original from whence it comes.

5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee;
thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass.
5. Or if he were more considerable then he is, yet since he can live but to
such a time as Thou have prefixed, beyond which he cannot prolong his days one
moment;

6. Turn from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling,
his day.
6. That, I should think, might move Thee not to torment him in this manner; but
to let him alone till that appointed time come, which will be as welcome to him
as the end of his labor is to the Hireling.

7. For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again,
and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.
7. And after that, there is more hope of a Tree then of him; for if it be cut
down to the very ground, the body of it will grow again, and thrust out new
branches.

8. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in
the ground:
8. Nay, though it has been so long cut down that the roots of it are grown
old, and the trunk seems quite dead;

9. Yet through the sent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a
plant.
9. Yet when it is well moistened it will shoot up again, and bring forth boughs,
as if it were but newly planted.

10. But man dies, and wastes away: yea, man gives up the ghost, and where
is he?
10. But when Man dies, he crumbles into dust; and none can set it together, to
make him live again.

11. As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decays and dries up:
11. As Lakes and great Rivers are dried up, when their waters find a new
channel:

12. So man lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more: they shall
not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.
12. So Man laid down in his grave shall come no more hither; but in that bed of
dust shall sleep perpetually.

13. Oh that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep me
secret, until thy wrath be past; that thou would appoint me a set time, and
remember me!
13. I wish I were buried alive, rather then suffer such things; or that I could
take sanctuary somewhere till this Storm be over; or at least Thou would set
me a certain time when Thou will deliver me.

14. If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will
I wait, till my change come.
14. Then (though there be no hope of living here again, after I am dead) Thou
shall see I will patiently wait all the days of that appointed time, till that
happy Change come.

15. Thou shall call, and I will answer thee: thou will have a desire to the
work of thine hands.
15. Do Thou speak the word, and it shall be done: show Thou have some love to
thy own workmanship.

16. For now thou numbrest my steps, do thou not watch over my sin?
16. Though now Thou seem to number every step I have trod in all my life,
and do not spare to punish every Fault;

17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine iniquity.
17. Having taken as great care the memory of them should not be lost, as if
they had been sealed up in a bag; and added one Punishment to another:

18. And surely the mountain falling comes to naught: and the rock is removed
out of his place.
18. Yet notwithstanding the highest Mountains may fall like a leaf, and the
Rock be removed from its place;

19. The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which grow out of
the dust of the earth, and thou destroyest the hope of man.
19. The Waters, though soft, wear away the hard Stones, and the very Dust or
Sand sometimes overflows the fruitful Fields: Why therefore (since such
strange and unexpected things come to pass) may there not be some hope for
miserable Man?

20. Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passes: thou changest his
countenance, and sendest him away.
20. Who is not able to stand before Thee; but must yield and be gone for ever
when Thou requirest: Thou spoilest his beauty, and sendest him away into
another World.

21. His sons come to honor, and he knows it not; and they are brought low,
but he perceives it not of them.
21. And then whether his Children, whom he leaves behind, be rich, or whether
they be poor, it is indifferent to him: for he knows not what passes here.

22. But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall
mourn.
22. But while he is in flesh he cannot but be in pain for them; and his Soul is
inwardly grieved to see their misery.

CHAP. XV.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter Eliphaz renews the Dispute with more eagerness and fierceness
then before; being very angry that Job slighted them so much, and thought
himself so wise, (as he interpreted it,) that he disdained their Exhortations,
and would not follow the Counsel they had given him, of Confessing his Sins,
and praying to God for Forgiveness: (V. 8. VIII. 4, 5, 6.) But (except this one
Argument, that he need not be ashamed to confess his Guilt, when he considered
how prone all men are to sin) there is nothing new in his Discourse: but he
merely urges what he had asserted at first, from his own and the wisest men's
observations, That they are not the Good, but the Wicked, whom God punishes
with such Calamities as now were fallen upon Job. And with great ornaments of
speech he most admirably describes the Vengeance which God is wont to take upon
impious Tyrants: having his Eye, I suppose, upon Nimrod, or some such mighty
Oppressor.

1. THEN answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said,
1. THEN Eliphaz, incensed with these Reproaches, rose up again, and said,

2. Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the
east wind?
2. Do thou pretend to be wise, who answerest us with such empty Discourses;
and whose heart is swollen with such pernicious Opinions, and vents them with so
much vehemence?

3. Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he can
do no good?
3. Is this thy Wisdom, which teaches thee to wrangle to no purpose; and to
pour out words, for which one is never the better?

4. Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.
4. The better, did I say? they distroy all Religion, and discourage men from
pouring out their Complaint in prayer to God.

5. For thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou chusest the tongue of the
crafty.
5. Thou rather teach them to dispute with Him; whereby thou have proclaimed
thine Iniquity, while with fallacious words thou seek how to dissemble it.

6. Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify
against thee.
6. I need produce no farther testimony against thee; for thy own mouth has
done the buisiness, and condemned thee of Impiety.

7. Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the hills?
7. Thou art but a Man, why do thou talk as if thou were God; or at least were
made before the World?

8. Have thou heard the secret of God? and do thou restrain wisdom to thy
self?
8. Wast thou admitted into God's secret Counsels, and thereby ingrossedst all
Wisdom to thy self?

9. What know thou that we know not? what understandest thou which is not in
us?
9. Wherein (to retort thy own words upon thee) does thy Knowledge exceed ours?
Let us hear what Secret thou have learnt, which we do not understand.

10. With us are both the gray headed, and very aged men, much elder then thy
father.
10. If by age and long experience men acquire Wisdom; there are some of us who
are much elder then thy Father.

11. Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret thing
with thee?
11. Why do thou slight then those Divine Consolations which we have given
thee? Have thou some secret ones, which nobody else knows of?

12. Why does thine heart carry thee away? and what do thine eyes wink at,
12. What makes thee have such an high opinion of thy self, and in this manner
contemn us?

13. That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and let such words go out of
thy mouth?
13. Nay, oppose thy self to God, and take the boldness to argue with Him?

14. What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman,
that he should be righteous?
14. Thou will maintain thy Innocence, thou say; but thou forget test sure
what thou art, and whence thou come: else thou would not stand upon thy
Justification, nor complain that thou art wronged.

15. Behold, he puts no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean
in his sight.
15. Remember what I told thee before, (IV. 18.) that the Angels are not
immutably good; the Heavenly inhabitants, I say, are not without their spots.

16. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like
water?
16. What a loathsome and filthy creature then is Man, who is as prone to sin, as
he is to drink when he is dry?

17. I will show thee, hear me; and that which I have seen, I will declare,
17. Do not stop thine ears whilst I show thee thine error; and I will say
nothing but what mine own eyes have seen,

18. Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not bid it;
18. And which wise men have observed, and their Fathers before them, who have
reported it to their Children:

19. Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them.
19. And they no mean persons neither, but such as were alone thought worthy to
be entrusted with the Government of whole Countries; which no foreign power
could enter (as they have done thine) while they ruled.

20. The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days, and the number of years
is hidden to the oppressor.
20. The wicked Tyrant (this is their and my observation) is never free from
inward Torment; all his life long he is in dread of some greater Oppressor
then himself.

21. A dreadful sound is in his ears; in prosperity the destroyer shall come
upon him.
21. His Guilt so pursues him, that it makes him fear some mischief or other is
still falling on him; and in the most peaceable time he does not think himself
in safety.

22. He believes not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is waited
for of the sword.
22. When he lies down, he is afraid he shall be killed before the morning; and
fancies nothing but naked swords round about him.

23. He wandreth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knows that the day
of darkness is ready at his hand.
23. He shall wander to get a Morsel of bread where he can find it; and when he
has it, he shall imagine it will prove his poison.

24. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail against him,
as a king ready to the battle.
24. The Distress and Anguish wherein he sees himself shall affright him; they
shall press upon him, and overpower him, as a King does his Enemies whom he
has surrounded with his forces.

25. For he stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself
against the Almighty.
25. Which will be a just punishment of his audacious Impiety; because he defied
God, and resolutely set himself in opposition to the Almighty:

26. He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers.
26. Who will suddenly lay fast hold on him and kill him, though he be never so
well armed:

27. Because he covers his face with his fatness, and makes collops of fat
on his flanks.
27. Because he minds nothing but his belly; and, casting away all fear of God,
nourishes up himself in Luxury, Pride, and Haughtiness;

28. And he dwells in desolate cities, and in houses which no man inhabiteth,
which are ready to become heaps.
28. Possessing Cities which he has laid desolate; and Houses out of which he
has driven the owners, and which are running to ruin.

29. He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall
he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.
29. But the Riches he has gotten by such Violence and Oppression shall come to
Nothing: He may design great things, but shall leave them imperfect.

30. He shall not depart out of darkness, the flame shall dry up his branches,
and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.
30. When his Troubles begin, they shall not end, till they have destroyed both
him and his Children: One word of God's mouth (so mad a thing it is to set
himself against Heaven) will utterly consume him.

31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his
recompense.
31. Let such Examples teach him that is seduced into evil ways, not to trust to
such uncertain Greatness; for vexatious Disappointments shall be all that he
will get by it.

32. It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be
green.
32. He shall meet with them, when he little thinks of it; and see his Children
wither away as well as himself.

33. He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his
flower as the olive.
33. They shall die before their time; as the unripe Grape, or the Blossom of
the vine or olive, are struck with hail, or bitten off by the frost.

34. For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall
consume the tabernacles of bribery.
34. The most numerous Families of such ungodly men shall have none in them
left: the Divine Vengeance shall destroy the House which was built with
illgotten goods.

35. They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares
deceit.
35. And they justly deserve to be thus punished, because all they design and
do is nothing but the Oppression and Ruin of their Subjects: against whom,
when one Design miscarries, they conceive new arts to undo them.

CHAP. XVI.
ARGUMENT.
Job reproves the vanity and obstinacy of Eliphaz, in repeating the same things
over again, and still persisting in his Inhumanity, though he saw his Case so
pitiable. Which he again describes, to make him sensible how unworthily he was
treated by him and the rest of his Friends: who, in effect, joined with his
Enemies; who took this opportunity to rail at him. Whereas there was no Crime
of his appeared to justify their Accusations, and to make good Eliphaz his
Argument: which signified nothing, unless he meant to say, that Job was like
that wicked Tyrant of whom he had discoursed. Which was so far from any show of
truth, that he protests he never hurt anybody, and was always a sincere lover
of God, etc. v. 17, 18. The truth of which God knew; to whose Bar he appeals
from their unjust Sentence.

1. THEN Job answered, and said,
1. HERE Job interrupted him, and said,

2. I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye all.
2. Thou do but repeat what has been often said already: Such Comforters as
you, are as troublesome as my Sufferings.

3. Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?
3. May not one endlesly pour out such empty Discourses? (as I may with more
reason call thine, then thou did mine XV. 3.) I wonder at thy confidence,
that, having so little to say, thou should take upon thee to answer.

4. I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my soul's stead, I could
heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.
4. I could insult as well as you; and, if we could change conditions, let you
see how easy it would be to oppress you with such words as these, and in a
grave fashion to mock at your Calamities.

5. But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should
assuage your grief.
5. But I abhor the thought of such a guilt: I would not fail to fortify you, in
that case, with the best Arguments I could invent; and carefully abstain from
the least word that should augment your Grief.

6. Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged: and though I forbear, what am I
eased?
6. Though, as for my self, I find my Misery admits of no Consolation: For
whether I defend my Innocence, or silently suffer you to condemn me, it makes
no difference.

7. But now he has made me weary: thou have made desolate all my company.
7. God has long since quite tired me with one Trouble upon another. Thou have
not ceased, O God, till Thou have left me neither Goods, nor Children, no nor a
Friend to comfort me.

8. And thou have filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me: and
my leanness rising up in me, bears witness to my face.
8. The furrows in my face (which is not old) show the greatness of my
Affliction: which is extremely augmented by him, who rises up with false
Accusations to take away mine Honor, as this Consumption will do my Life.

9. He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me: he gnasheth upon me with his
teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
9. He rends my Good name in pieces with a passion equal to his hatred: my Enemy
is enraged against me, and cruelly sets himself to spy out the least occasion
to calumniate me.

10. They have gaped upon me with their mouth, they have smitten me upon the
cheek reproachfully, they have gathered themselves together against me.
10. There is no small number of such as these, who look like so many wild
beasts coming to devour me: having already most shamefully abused me, and
joined themselves together, to give full satisfaction to their wrath wherewith
they are filled against me.

11. God has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of
the wicked.
11. So God will have it; who has abandoned the protection of me, and delivered
me bound into the hands of the ungodly, to use me at their pleasure.

12. I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder: he has also taken me by my
neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark.
12. How happy was I heretofore! and now I am crushed in pieces: From an eminent
condition he has thrown me down into the most despicable; and there I am
exposed (as a Butt to the Arrow) to all manner of Indignities and Miseries.

13. His archers compass me round about, he cleaves my reins asunder, and does
not spare; he pours out my gall upon the ground.
13. He is not content to take away all my Goods, and destroy my Family; but, to
the reproach of my Friends, (which strike like so many darts to my very heart,)
He has added Ulcers in every part of my Body, with inward pains which rack me
without intermission; and, in one word, has so mortally wounded me, as if my
bowels were already shed upon the ground.

14. He breaks me with breach upon breach, he runs upon me like a giant.
14. Before one Wound be closed, He makes another; and in so violent a manner,
that I can make no more resistance then a Dwarf can do against a Giant.

15. I have sowed sackeloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust.
15. The Sackcloth which I put on at the first, now cleaves so fast to me, as if
I had sewed it to my skin: and all my Authority and Honor is changed into
Contempt.

16. My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death:
16. My Face is dirty, and mine Eyes, in a manner, quite put out, by the very
Tears which have fallen from thence.

17. Not for any injustice in mine hands; also my prayer is pure.
17. And yet I must still say, I never offered such a violence as this to any
man; and was always (so false is Eliphaz his Accusation XV. 4.) a sincere
Worshipper of God.

18. O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.
18. If this be not true, let my blood be left to the Dogs to lick, when I am
dead; and let neither God nor man regard my Complaint while I am alive.

19. Also now behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.
19. But what need these imprecations? The great God who rules over all is my
Witness; and can testify how just I have been toward my Neighbors, and how
pious toward Himself.

20. My friends scorn me: but mine eye pours out tears unto God.
20. From your judgment therefore (who, in stead of comforting my Innocence,
scornfully set your selves to defame me) I appeal to His; and beseech Him with
perpetual tears to vindicate me.

21. O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his
neighbor!
21. I am so assured of the goodness of my Cause, (as well as of his Justice,)
that I wish for nothing more, then to have it speedily heard and tried by Him,
in the same manner that pleas are held before earthly Judges.

22. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not
return.
22. For my Life cannot last long; and I know that when I am gone, I cannot
return hither again, for Him to do me justice.

CHAP. XVII.
ARGUMENT.
Here Job desires he may be tried presently before God's Tribunal, his Life
being just upon the point to expire, as he had said in the end of the former
Chapter; and continues to urge again in this, because his Friends were very
unfit Judges in his case, and had passed such a Sentence upon him, as upright
men would never approve of. Whereby they had given him a new Vexation, to hear
them talk so idly, and put him in hope of recovering his Happiness, if he would
follow their Admonitions; when they saw him just dropping into the Grave, which
was the only thing, he says, that he could hope for.

1. MY breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me.
1. MY vital spirits are spent, they give but a glimmering and dying light;
whereby I can see nothing but Graves on every side prepared for me.

2. Are there not mockers with me?? and does not mine eye continue in their
provocation?
2. How can I support my spirits, when my Friends, who should comfort me, mock
at all I say for my self? This so bitterly exasperates me, that I cannot take a
wink of sleep, nor think of any thing else.

3. Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will strike
hands with me?
3. Once more therefore I beseech Thee, O God, to assure me that Thou will judge
my Cause Thy self: Let somebody undertake for Thee: who is it that on thy
behalf will engage to do me right?

4. For thou have hid their heart from understanding: therefore shall thou not
exalt them.
4. Not these Friends of mine; for they comprehend nothing of the way of thy
Judgments: therefore Thou shall not conferr this honor on them, who talk so
absurdly.

5. He that speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children
shall fail.
5. I must speak the truth of them, (though it displease them,) and not sooth
them up in their errors: for he that flatters his Friends, when he should
reprove them, may look long enough before either he or his Children find one
that will deal sincerely with them.

6. He has made me also a byword of the people, and aforetime I was as a
tabret.
6. This very person who spoke last has made me a proverb in every-bodie's
mouth; and it is the vulgar pastime to talk of my Calamities.

7. Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a
shadow.
7. No wonder then that excessive Sorrow has darkened mine eyes; and that all
the flesh of my body is so consumed, that I am but the Shadow of a man.

8. Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall stir up
himself against the hypocrite.
8. Upright men hereafter will be astonished at the cruel sentence which my
Friends pass upon me; and the innocent will resolutely oppose the wicked, when
he judges the worse of Piety, because of my Afflictions.

9. The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall
be stronger and stronger.
9. The righteous will not be moved by such arguments to change his purpose of
well-doing: much less will he do any evil action, but grow rather the better
by Adversity, and add Perseverance to his Piety.

10. But as for you all, do you return, and come now: for I cannot find one
wise man among you.
10. And truly I wish that all you, who have charged me so heavily, would
consider things better, and hearken to what I have said: for I must tell you
again, there is not a man of you that judges truly of my Case.

11. My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my
heart.
11. Repent of your harsh Censures before I die, as I must speedily, my Joys
being quite gone, and all the hopeful Designs, which had possessed my heart,
being utterly subverted.

12. They change the night into day: the light is short because of darkness.
12. In stead whereof other thoughts are come to torment me; which will not let
me sleep in the night, nor enjoy any pleasure in the day.

13. If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness.
13. If I hope for any thing now, (as you would have me,) it is for a Grave:
That Is the only House I can promise my self; there I am going to rest in a bed
where I shall not be disturbed.

14. I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art my
mother, and my sister.
14. I have already made so near an alliance with Death, that my Father and
Mother and nearest Kindred are nothing so near me as Worms and Rottenness.

15. And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?
15. How vain then are all the hopes you would have me feed my self withal?
(XI. 15, 16, etc.) Who shall see, when I am sure I shall not, the Happiness you
would have me look for here?

16. They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in
the dust.
16. All these Hopes you speak of shall sink down into the bottom of the grave;
when you my Friends, as well as I, shall take up your lodging in the dust.

CHAP. XVIII.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter Bildad again takes up the Dispute, and pretends to reply to
what Job had said. But I do not see any thing new, saving the description he
makes (as Eliphaz had done before him) of the Ruin which shall inevitably
fall, according to the fixed rules of Providence, (so he fansied) upon the
Wicked and his family; notwithstanding all the assistence that his Friends and
Allies can lend him for his Preservation. And this he seems to imply was the
fate of Job; whom he does not so much as exhort to Repentance, (as he had done
in his former Discourse Chap. VIII.) being very angry with him, that he had no
higher esteem of their Wisdom.

1. THEN answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
1. THEN Bildad the Shuhite, seeing Job continue in his first opinion, rose up,
and said,

2. How long will it be, ere you make an end of words? mark, and afterward we
will speak.
2. How long shall we continue this Dispute? Let us make an end of it, unless he
will attend better to our Reasons; then we will go on to argue with him.

3. Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight?
3. To what purpose is it to talk with one who tells us we understand nothing,
(XVII. 4, 10.) but looks upon us as a company of dull Beasts, into whom nothing
of Wisdom will enter?

4. He teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and
shall the rock be removed out of his place?
4. Such is his Passion; which will not let him see how he himself, like a wild
Beast, tears his own Soul in pieces with impatient Anger. What art thou, that
God for thy sake should cease to govern the world by his known Laws, which are
fixed and immutable?

5. Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire
shall not shine.
5. Say what thou will, it is an everlasting Truth, that the Wicked shall not
continue in the Splendor wherein we sometime see him: but though he seem to
sit as by a great fire, (warm in his wealth and honor and power,) there shall
not remain so much as a spark to comfort him.

6. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out
with him.
6. The glory of his Family shall be turned into contempt, and all their joy
shall end in sorrow.

7. The steps of his strength shall be straightened, and his own counsel shall
cast him down.
7. The attempts which his power makes to preserve his Greatness, shall but more
perplex him: and his own devices shall prove his overthrow.

8. For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walks upon a snare.
8. He shall entangle himself by his own wiles; and, having contrived himself
into danger, every step he takes in pursuance of his designs shall farther
ensnare him.

9. The grin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail against
him.
9. Before he is aware he shall find it so impossible to disengage himself; that
they who thirst after his blood, or wealth, or place, shall easily lay hold on
him.

10. The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.
10. He shall not foresee his danger; but be caught as a Bird or a Beast in a
Snare or Trap, when he thinks himself secure in his proceedings.

11. Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his
feet.
11. Then he shall be surrounded with a thousand Terrors; and which way soever
he runs to save himself, he shall meet with them.

12. His strength shall be hunger-bitten, and destruction shall be ready at his
side.
12. He shall pine away till he has no strength remaining: for nothing but
Mischief shall attend and accompany him in every place.

13. It shall devour the strength of his skin: even the firstborn of death
shall devour his strength.
13. Rottenness shall eat up his bones; I say, his very bones shall rot and be
consumed.

14. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring
him to the king of terrors.
14. Whatsoever he relies upon for the support of himself and Family, it shall
utterly fail him; nay, help to hasten his Death, the most dreadful of all his
Enemies.

15. It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his: brimstone
shall be scattered upon his habitation.
15. That man had best take heed, who shall have a mind to dwell in his House
when he has left it; for thunder and lightning shall destroy it.

16. His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off.
16. And it shall never be built up again, nor shall his Family be restored; but
be like a Tree, whose roots are so dried up in the earth, that it shall never
shoot forth any more branches.

17. His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in
the street.
17. His very Memory shall perish, as well as himself; and his Name never be
mentioned among men, unless it be to make him infamous.

18. He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.
18. He shall be cast out of his splendid Greatness into some obscure Grave; and
removed out of the world as some unclean thing.

19. He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining
in his dwellings.
19. None of his Descendents shall survive him; nor any of his Kindred remain to
keep up his Name.

20. They that come after him shall be astonished at his day, as they that went
before were affrighted.
20. Future times shall read of this severe Vengeance of God upon him with
astonishment; as they who see it shall be seized with horror.

21. Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of him
that knows not God.
21. Certain it is, that this is a just description of the miserable condition
of the Wicked: they that do not honor God shall thus be abased.

CHAP. XIX.
ARGUMENT.
The purpose of this Chapter (in which Job replies to Bildad) is to show, that
it would be sufficient for him also merely to repeat the same things, as they
had done in Ten Discourses: But the more to aggravate their want of Compassion,
or rather Cruelty, toward him, he represents several new things, which made his
condition more deplorable then he had hitherto said. One of which was, that he
could not tell the Reason why God dealt thus with him: who notwithstanding was
so gracious, that in the depth of this Misery and Anguish, He affords him a
glimmering of a comfortable Hope, (which began now to appear in his Soul, and
which he had hitherto wanted,) that God would at last take pity upon him, and
show his Friends their error, by restoring him to his former Health and
Splendor. That seems to be the literal meaning of the 25. and 26. verses, and
of the two next that follow: where, among other things, he says he doubted not
but his Redeemer should stand last upon the earth, (so it is in the Hebrew, the
word day not being there,) that is, quite overcome the Devil, and deliver him
from these Distresses; like a mighty Conqueror, who keeps the field, when all
his opposers are routed and fled away. But in this he was, as S. Austin calls
him, eximius Prophetarum, and prophesied of the Resurrection of the Body at the
last day.

1. THEN Job answered, and said,
1. THEN Job, hearing him also repeat his former discourse, (Chapter VIII.) wherein
he reflected on him as a Wicked man, burst out again into these words.

2. How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?
2. Will you never cease to torment me, and to break my very heart with your
words, which grate upon me as sorely as all the Miseries I endure?

3. These ten times have ye reproached me: you are not ashamed that you make
your selves strange to me.
3. You have reproached me often enough, one would think; and yet you are not
ashamed to continue your hard-hearted Censures, as if I were a perfect
Stranger, and my manner of life utterly unknown to you.

4. And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with my self.
4. Suppose that I have done amiss, (which is more then you know,) I suffer
sufficiently for it; and it does not become you to increase my Sufferings by
your Reproaches.

5. If indeed you will magnify your selves against me, and plead against me my
reproach:
5. But if you will still proceed to lift up your voice to declaim against me,
and allege my Calamities, which have made me contemptible, as an argument to
condemn me;

6. Know now that God has overthrown me, and has compassed me with his net.
6. Let this answer suffice you: That I am sensible it is God's doing; who,
having laid me thus low, and environed me with unavoidable Miseries, calls upon
you to compassionate rather then reproach me.

7. Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is
no judgment.
7. And my Case is the more pitiable, because I know not the Cause of all this;
nor can have any audience or redress, though I appeal to God with the loudest
cries, and protest to Him that I am innocent.

8. He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he has set darkness in my
paths.
8. There is no way open for my escape; but his Plagues surround me so on every
side, that I am at my wits end, and know not which way to turn my self.

9. He has stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head.
9. He has not merely stripped me of my Ornaments, and taken that Dignity and
Authority from me wherewith I was invested;

10. He has destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope has he
removed like a tree.
10. But brought me to such utter Ruin, that, like a Tree plucked up by the
very roots, I have not so much as Hope remaining, which is the only comfort of
the miserable.

11. He has also kindled his wrath against me, and he counts me unto him as
one of his enemies.
11. For He has done all this with such violence, as if He were extremely
incensed against me, and looked upon me as his Enemy.

12. His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp
round about my tabernacle.
12. Whole Armies of Evils, by his order, have at the same time invaded me; and
laid such a straight siege to me, that not the smallest Comfort I had could
escape their fury.

13. He has put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily
estranged from me.
13. I looked for some relief from my Brethren; but they were so astonished at
the number and dreadfulness of my Calamities, that they durst not approach me:
and as for my Neighbors, who formerly so much courted my acquaintance, they
truly kept aloof off, as if they had never known me.

14. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.
14. They whom Nature inclined to it have failed to perform the duties of
Humanity toward me; and they to whom I was tied by a stronger bond then Nature
have forgotten the Friendship there was between us.

15. They that dwell in mine house, and my maids count me for a stranger: I am
an aliant in their sight.
15. They that have been kindly entertained at my house, nay, the people of my
Family, have forgot the respect they were wont to give me; and look upon me as
if they had no relation to me.

16. I called my servant, and he gave me no answer: I entreated him with my
mouth.
16. I called to my Slave, and he regarded not what I said; no, not when I
beseeched him as if he had been my Master.

17. My breath is strange to my wife, though I entreated for the childrens sake
of mine own body.
17. Which is the less wonder, since I am become so loathsome that my Wife will
not come near me; though I have conjured her to it by the dear memory of our
Children, those common pledges of our mutual love.

18. Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spoke against me.
18. After these examples young Children and Fools despise me: and when I rise
up to invite them to me, abusive language is all the return they make to my
Courtesy.

19. All my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned
against me.
19. And, which is worst of all, the men whom I entrusted with my greatest
Secrets cannot endure me; and they who have received so many tokens of my Love
are become mine Enemies.

20. My bone cleaves to my skin, and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the
skin of my teeth.
20. All these Afflictions have so wasted me, that I am little more then skin
and bone: a Mouth to complain withal is all the flesh that is left me.

21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God
has touched me.
21. O ye my Friends, (if you still deserve that name,) who are the only
persons that undertake to comfort me, have pity, have pity, I beseech you, upon
a miserable wretch; and consider what Wounds the hand of God has given me.

22. Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
22. Will you assume the same prerogative, and think you have the same right to
afflict me? And does it not suffice you to see my Body all consumed, but you
will vex my very Soul also with your perverse reasonings?

23. Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!
23. Oh that the Protestations and Appeals I have so often made might remain
upon record, and be registered in the public Acts and Monuments!

24. That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!
24. May they be graven upon a plate of lead with an iron pen; nay, cut into a
rock or marble pillar to continue to all Posterity!

25. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the earth.
25. For my Hope, which was as dead as my self, (XVII. 13, 15. XIX. 10.) begins
to revive, because, though I seem for the present to be forsaken of God, yet I
know that He can hereafter deliver me out of this miserable condition, since He
lives for ever; and will, I doubt not, at last appear victorious over all the
Enemies which now oppress me.

26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God:
26. And though the Worms, which have eaten my Skin, should proceed to consume
the rest of this wretched Body; yet I feel my Soul inspired with a comfortable
belief, that before I die I shall see my self restored, by the mercy of God, to
a happy estate.

27. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another;
though my reins be consumed within me.
27. He will not let me always lie under these Reproaches; but I begin to assure
my self, that with these very eyes I shall see Him vindicate my Innocence: not
only others, but I my self shall live to see it; and I even faint away with
vehement desire to behold that happy day.

28. But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is
found in me?
28. Which will make you repent that you have thus persecuted me; who have not
without ground thus long disputed this matter with you, but am sure the right
lies on my side, and not on yours.

29. Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath brings the punishments of the
sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.
29. Take my advice therefore in good time, and dread the just displeasure of
God against you for your perverse Reasonings, (for his wrath punishes men's
iniquity with the sword or some such sore Vengeance,) whereby you will know to
your cost, that there is a more righteous Judgment then yours.

CHAP. XX.
ARGUMENT.
The abrupt beginning of this Speech of Zophar shows that he was in a passion;
which, though he pretends to bridle it, would not let him calmly consider the
Protestation which Job had made of his Innocence. But he goes on in the old
Common place of the certain Downfall of the Wicked, be he never so powerful
and well supported. Which he illustrates indeed after an excellent fashion,
with great variety of Figures, and remarks upon Histories as old as the World.
In some of which he had observed, that the Wicked after their Fall had made not
able attempts to get up again; but by the hand of God were so crushed, that
they could never rise more. All the slaw in his Discourse is this, (which was
common to him with the rest,) that he imagined God never varied from this
method; and therefore Job, without doubt, was a very bad man, though it did not
appear he was, any other way, but by his Infelicity.

1. THEN answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,
1. HERE Zophar, though he had no new thing to produce, hastily interrupted Job,
and said,

2. Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste.
2. These words of thine make my former thoughts return again; and do so provoke
me, that I am not able to forbear speaking any longer.

3. I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding
causes me to answer.
3. While thou pretendest to correct my Errors, I have heard my self rather
shamefully reproached: yet I will not suffer my Passion to reply, but the clear
light of my Understanding shall answer for me.

4. Know thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth,
4. It seems thou do not yet understand, though it be a Truth as old as the
World,

5. That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite
but for a moment?
5. That the Happiness which the Wicked, and he that counterfeits Piety, so much
boast of, is of no long standing; and will continue but for a few moments.

6. Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the
clouds:
6. Though he should be advanced to the highest pitch of humane Greatness, and
overtop all mankind, as much as the highest trees do the lowest shrubs;

7. Yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung: they which have seen him
shall say, Where is he?
7. Yet he shall fall as low as his dunghill, and, like it, be cast out for ever
with contempt: They who saw him so flourishing shall be astonished at his Ruin,
and ask with amazement, What is become of him?

8. He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found: yea, he shall be
chased away as a vision of the night.
8. For his Happiness has no firmer foundation then a Dream, of which we have
no remembrance in the morning; or if we have, all the rich furniture and feasts
which appear to us in our sleep, vanish in an instant as soon as we awake.

9. The eye also which saw him, shall see him no more; neither shall his place
any more behold him.
9. Just so shall he pass away, and all his Glory with him: Those eyes that were
wont to gaze upon it with envy, shall lose the sight of it, and never behold it
more.

10. His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall restore
their goods.
10. His Children shall have enough to do to pacify the rage of the Poor, whom
he has oppressed; and he shall be forced with shame to restore with his own
hands the goods he has extorted from them.

11. His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him
in the dust.
11. His very Bones are full of pain and anguish. All which Punishments of his
secret Sins shall stick to him till they bring him to his Grave.

12. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his
tongue:
12. Though Wickedness, like some dangerous meats, be pleasant in the acting, as
they are in the chewing; so that a man is as desirous to continue it, as a
Glutton is to keep a long relish of those sweet morsels upon his palate:

13. Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still within his mouth:
13. Though he will by no means part with it, when he is told the danger; but
still retains it, as the other does that meat in his mouth, which he is told is
no better then poison:

14. Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within him.
14. Yet after it is committed it wrings and gripes the Conscience; as those
dainty bits, when they are swallowed, do the bowels: the pleasure is turned
into pain, the sweetness into such bitterness as brings the most sudden
destruction.

15. He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall
cast them out of his belly.
15. His ill-gotten Goods, for instance, which he devoured with so much
greediness and unsatiable desire, shall never thrive with him; but he shall be
forced to refund them with a torment far exceeding the pleasure wherewith he
got them: God himself shall violently force them from him, and all his other
Riches together with them.

16. He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper's tongue shall slay him.
16. Which shall prove as great and as deadly a Torture to him, as if, when he
squeezed the poor, he had sucked the poison of Asps, or been bitten with a
Viper.

17. He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and butter.
17. This shall be his portion, in stead of the pleasures of Nature and Art;
which he flattered himself would flow in several streams to him perpetually.

18. That which he labored for shall he restore, and shall not swallow it
down: according to his substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not
rejoice therein.
18. He may endeavor again with new labor to repair his broken fortune; but it
shall be in vain: though he should get as much Riches as he had before his
change, he shall have no joy in them.

19. Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the poor; because he has
violently taken away an house which he builded not:
19. When he has with new Oppressions grinded the poor, and left them
destitute, when he has violently seized on a House, he shall not be able to
build it.

20. Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired.
20. When he has turned, as we say, every stone, and been as restless as a
woman in travail; all his pains shall bring forth nothing of that which he
desired.

21. There shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man look for his
goods.
21. He shall have no more left him to eat, then he was wont to leave for
others; which shall put him out of all hope of mending his condition.

22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in streights: every hand of
the wicked shall come upon him.
22. The greater fullness you can suppose him to regain of worldly Goods, the
more he shall be distressed; for the hand of every man whom he has afflicted
shall lay hold on him to demand satisfaction.

23. When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath
upon him, and shall rain it upon him, while he is eating.
23. God himself also shall disturb him in his Enjoyments, with the sorest
effects of his Divine Vengeance; which shall come pouring down from Heaven,
when he thinks himself most secure.

24. He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him
through.
24. He shall run from a lesser Danger to fall into a greater; as if one,
avoiding the weapon in a man's hand, should be shot through with a bow of steel.

25. It is drawn and comes out of the body; yea, the glistring sword comes
out of his gall; terrors are upon him.
25. And though he should draw the shaft out of his body, and the wound in his
bowels should be healed, he shall not escape so; for Terrors shall perpetually
accompany him.

26. All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown shall
consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle.
26. Nothing but dreadful Dangers shall wait for him in those places where he
hoped for Safety: a Fire not kindled by man shall devour him; and the same
Pestilence or Burning-fever shall take hold of the rest of his Family.

27. The heaven shall reveal his iniquity: and the earth shall rise up against
him.
27. The Heaven by Thunder, Lightning or Tempests shall declare it self his
enemy; and the Earth by Wild beasts, or Serpents, or some other way, shall make
war against him.

28. The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in
the day of his wrath.
28. His whole Revenue shall melt away as waters poured out, in the day when God
intends to punish him.

29. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed
unto him by God.
29. This is the portion which God the righteous Judge will allot to the Wicked:
thus will the Almighty reward his Blasphemies, or his other proud and insolent
words.

CHAP. XXI.
ARGUMENT.
To bring the Dispute to a speedier issue, Job (after a short preface,
reproving their Incivility) comes close to the buisiness: and does not content
himself merely with denying what they had said, but shows them where the
fallacy in their Discourse lay; viz. in concluding an Universal from some
Particulars. For he maintains, from as good History and Observations as they
could produce, that, though God do make some Wicked men such examples of his
Vengeance, as they had said, yet He lets others, and they of the vilest sort,
Atheists and Deriders of Divine Providence, live prosperously, and die
peaceably, and have stately Monuments built to perpetuate their Memory. In
brief, he shows there is great variety in God's proceedings about the
Punishment of the Wicked; which makes them so bold as they are in their
Impiety. And seems to have respect to the History of Ishmael, who was a wild,
or barbarous, man, grasping at all he could lay his hands on, and persecuting
Isaac; and yet had XII Princes descended from him, settled in their several
Fortresses, as we read XVI. Genesis 12. XVII. 20. XXV. 16. And it is possible, to
the History of Eliphaz his own Country: Esau his Ancestour being very rich,
(XXXVI. Genesis 6, 7.) and having many Dukes, whose posterity afterward advanced
themselves to the title of Kings, that sprang from him, before there was any
King over the Children of Israel. XXXVI. Genesis 15, 31.

1. BUT Job answered, and said,
1. BUT Job, who knew the falseness of this Assertion, (in which Zophar secretly
struck at him,) That God always punishes Sinners in this manner, would not let
it pass without Answer, and therefore said again unto them;

2. Hear diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.
2. Let me prevail with you, to attend better then you have done hitherto to my
Discourse: Do me this kindness, and it shall serve in stead of all the
Consolations I promised my self from you.

3. Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on.
3. Hear me patiently, and do not so hastily interrupt me as Zophar just now
did; (XX. 2.) who, after I have done, may begin, if he please, to deride me
again.

4. As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not my
spirit be troubled?
4. Have I not all this while made my Appeal to God? why then do you interrupt
me, and take upon you to pronounce that Sentence which I expect from Him alone?
But if my Complaint had been to you, yet, seeing there is just cause for it,
can I choose but be vexed to see you will not hear me patiently?

5. Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.
5. Consider well my Misery, and being astonished at the greatness of it, and of
your Rudeness, be so civil now as to impose silence on your selves, while I am
speaking to you.

6. Even when I remember, I am afraid, and trembling takes bold on my flesh.
6. I am sure I my self am astonished at the very remembrance of it: were I free
from it, yet the thought of what is past makes every joint of my body tremble.

7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?
7. Let me therefore again desire you to answer me this question more leisurely;
If what you have said be true, how come we to see so many wicked men not only
enjoy all the Good things of this life, but grow old in their enjoyment, and
want no Honor or Power to which Riches can advance them?

8. Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring
before their eyes.
8. Nay, live to see their Children settled in the World; yea, their Childrens
children grow up like young plants before their eyes?

9. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.
9. There is no body disturbs their Tranquillity in any of their habitations;
nor does God inflict any Punishment on them for their sins:

10. Their bull gendreth and fails not; their cow calveth, and casts not
her calf.
10. But extends his care even to their Herds of Cattle; where the Kine never
fail to conceive, and in due time bring forth their Calves, and do not miscarry.

11. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.
11. And so do their flocks of Sheep, with whom their Wives may be compared; who
bring forth their little ones as easily and as numerously: and their Children
dance about their houses, like the little Lambs which skip about their fields.

12. They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.
12. They lift up their voice, and sing to the timbrel and harp: they dance for
joy at the sound of the pipe.

13. They spend their days in wealth, and in a woment go down to the grave.
13. In a word, they prolong their days to a great old age, in all manner of
pleasure; and then do not lie long languishing on a bed of Sickness or Pain,
but go easily and suddenly to their grave.

14. Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways.
14. And yet these are the men that never think of God; or, if they do,
presently bid those thoughts be gone; for they desire to have nothing to do
with Him or with his Laws.

15. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we
have if we pray unto him?
15. They know no such Being, they say, as the Almighty; nor do they owe Him any
service: and if they should worship and serve Him, they do not believe they
shall be a whit the better for it.

16. Lo, their good is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from
me.
16. Do not imagine that I am of their opinion; I know very well that they
cannot make themselves rich and prosperous without God; and therefore far be it
from me to join with them in their Impiety.

17. How often is the candle of the wicked put out? and hwo often comes their
destruction upon them? God distributeth sorrows in his anger.
17. But yet, I say, how often is it that we see the Joy of these Wicked men
extinguished? Sometimes indeed God takes a speedy Vengeance on them; but it is
not his usual course to destroy them, and to give them such Plagues and
Torments (as you speak of) for their portion.

18. They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carries
away.
18. We do not see them so frequently, as you say, driven away like Stubble
before the wind, and all their Estates scattered like the Chaff which is blown
away with a storm.

19. God lays up his iniquity for his children: he rewards him, and he
shall know it.
19. And when does God punish the Iniquity of the wicked in his Children, (as
you pretend he always does XX. 10.) and that while he lives and beholds it
himself?

20. His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the
Almighty.
20. It is not such a common thing as you make it, for him to see his own Ruin,
and to feel the effects of the dreadful wrath of the Almighty.

21. For what pleasure has he in his house after him, when the number of his
months is cut off in the midst?
21. As for what befalls his Children when he is dead, he concerns not himself:
it is nothing to him though they be cut off in their most flourishing estate.

22. Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing be judges those that are high.
22. Shall we be so bold as to instruct God how to govern the World? and tell
Him He is not just, unless He punish the Wicked when we expect it? He judges
the highest Beings, and therefore knows sure how to govern us.

23. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.
23. Who must not think to tie Him to our Rules. For one man dies in the highest
and firmest worldly Prosperity, meeting with nothing all his days to disturb
his Quiet and Tranquillity:

24. His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.
24. Health as well as Riches accompany him to his grave; his Ribs are fat, and
his Bones full of marrow, even in his old age:

25. And another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with
pleasure.
25. When another man (who perhaps is better then he) dies in great Pain and
Anguish; after a miserable Life, in which he never enjoyed any Pleasure.

26. They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them.
26. They shall both alike have the Dust for their bed, and Worms for their
covering; and no distinction, that we can see, be made between them.

27. Behold, I know your thoughts, and the divices which ye wrongfully imagine
against me.
27. I am sensible that in all this I very much contradict your thoughts; which
are as well known to me as to your selves: I see by what Arguments you are
studying to oppress me.

28. For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the
dwelling-places of the wicked?
28. I hear you say within your selves, What is become of the House of Job, who
lived like a Prince? what difference is there between him, and those wicked men
whose Dwelling-places are destroyed?

29. Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their tokens?
29. But let me answer you; or rather go and ask the first passengers you meet
with, (for it is a thing vulgarly known, and they are not interessed in our
Disputes,) let them tell you their observations about God's Providence:

30. That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction; they shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath?
30. Which all agree in this, that the Wicked is spared very often in a common
Calamity; though it be very general as well as terrible, yet many of them
escape it.

31. Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he
has done?
31. Which makes the Wicked so bold, that none dare reprove him: much less is he
in danger of being punished for his Offenses, since God spares him, and Man
dreads him.

32. Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the comb.
32. The Pomp of his Funeral is answerable to the Splendor wherein he lived;
and a stately Monument is raised to preserve his memory, and represent him as
if he were still living.

33. The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him; and every manshall draw
after him, as there are innumerable before him.
33. There he lies quietly in the earth, and none disturbs his ashes: he suffers
nothing but what all men shall do after him, as innumerable have done before
him.

34. How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remains
falsehood?
34. See then how ill you discharge the office of Comforters, whose Answers have
so little truth in them. For you maintain that Prosperity is the inseparable
companion of Piety; when everybody can tell you, that none flourish more then
the Wicked, and that Calamities are common to all mankind.

CHAP. XXII.
ARGUMENT.
Though Job had clearly stated the Controversy in the foregoing Chapter, yet
Eliphaz would not yield; but begins the Combat a third time, without any
ground at all, but a pure mistake, as I have expressed it in the first verse.
And to avoid the Reproof, which had been given him, of repeating merely the
same things; he now brings in a catalogue, though without any proof, (so much
was his anger and bitterness increased,) of the particular Sins, both against
God and against his Neighbor, of which he supposes Job to have been guilty.
Else, he still boldly concludes, God would not have punished him with such
severity, that there was not a greater instance of his Indignation to be found
any-where; unless it was in the Old World, and in Sodom. Yet he has so much
Moderation, that he invites him at last to Repentance, and promises him the
happy fruit of it; as he had done in his first Speech, but not in his second.
Nay, he tells him, in conclusion, for his encouragement, that he should be able
to do as much for a Nation, as Ten righteous men, could they have been found
there, might have done for Sodom.

1. THEN Eliphaz the Temanite answered, and said,
1. THEN Eliphaz, not being able to deny all this, and yet not minding the scope
of it, (but imagining Job had accused the Divine Providence of Injustice, in
suffering the Wicked to prosper, and the Righteous to be afflicted,) grew very
angry, and said,

2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto
himself?
2. Is God ever the better for any thing that we do? Because a wise man
receives great benefit by his Virtue, shall we think that God is a Gainer by it
too, and that He is bound to reward it?

3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it gain
to him, that thou make thy ways perfect?
3. Does He, who needs nothing, (being Possessour of all things,) desire thou
should be righteous for His own advantage? or will it turn to His profit, if
thou live never so unblameably?

4. Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into
judgment?
4. Or, on the contrary, is He afraid thou should hurt Him by thy Sins, and
will therefore punish them? Is this the reason that He now afflicts thee, to
prevent the damage they might do Him?

5. Is not thy wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite?
5. Are not rather thy Sins against God and against Men so great and so
numberless, that no other Cause is to be sought of thy sore and multiplied
Punishments?

6. For thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught, and stripped the
naked of their clothing.
6. For (to begin with those against Man) thou have been a Tyrant, and exacted
Pawns of thine own Kindred for little or nothing: and have stripped even those of
their Garments, who had no more but just to cover their nakedness.

7. Thou have not given water to the weary to drink* and thou have withholden
bread from the hungry.
7. Thou have been hardhearted to the weary Traveller, when thou saw him
ready to die with thirst or with hunger.

8. But as for the mighty man, he had the earth, and the honorable man dwelt
in it.
8. But as for the Great and the Powerful, all thy estate was at his service:
if he brought the title to any Land in question, he was sure to carry the cause
by thy Favor to him.

9. Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been
broken.
9. When at the same time the poor Widows and Orphans (whose protection God has
in a special manner commended to us) could not obtain the favor of having
Justice done them; but were crushed and broken by thee, and had all the means
of defending themselves taken from them.

10. Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubles thee;
10. Thou art guilty, sure enough, of some such Sins as these, which are the
cause that now thou art beset with these Calamities, and most dreadful Plagues
have on a sudden confounded thee.

11. Or darkness that thou can not see, and abundance of waters cover thee.
11. Oh thy Blindness! do thou not yet see how God has proportioned thy
Punishment to thy Crimes? has the depth of the Afflictions wherein thou art
plunged quite taken away all sense from thee?

12. Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the stars,
how high they are.
12. Is not God above the Heavens? behold, He is the Head and Governor of the
Stars, although they be so high; and therefore how should thou think to
escape his Justice?

13. And thou say, How does God know? can be judge through the dark cloud?
13. But perhaps thou fansiest (such is thy Impiety against Him, as well as
Cruelty to thy Neighbor) that, because He is so high, He minds not what is
done here below: or that He cannot discern the difference of things so very
remote, through such a mist as is between us.

14. Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not; and he walks in
the circuit of heaven.
14. He is wrapped, thou imaginest, in such thick Clouds, that they obscure us
from his sight: or He is confined to the Heavens, and so buisied in their
affairs, that He has no leisure to attend to ours.

15. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?
15. But did thou never observe, or have thou forgotten, the course of the old
Atheistical World, who ran licentiously into all manner of Wickedness?

16. Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a
flood.
16. To whom God therefore put a stop, by destroying them before their time, and
carrying them quite away with the Flood, when they thought themselves firmly
settled in the earth;

17. Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can the Almighty do for
them?
17. And were saying, (as thou would have us believe the wicked now do, and
yet prosper, XXI. 14.) We have nothing to do with God, nor He with us. Do
thou remember what God then did to them, for their horrid Ingratitude to him,

18. Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the wicked
is far from me.
18. Who had filled their houses with all manner of good things? O vile
wretches! whose wicked thoughts I abhor as much as thou thy self, (XXI. 16.)

19. The righteous see it, and are glad: and the innocent laugh them to scorn.
19. Whose overthrow Noah and his Family beholding, rejoiced in God's righteous
Judgment: That innocent man derided their Incredulity.

20. Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire
consumes.
20. Whereas we, who believe God's Care and Providence, are untouched in our
Estates; when the relics of those impious men are devoured by Fire from
Heaven.

21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come
unto thee.
21. Let me advise thee therefore, (whom God has not yet quite consumed,) to
join thy self to the society of the Righteous, and to become like Noah: then be
secure, and doubt not but by that means all Happiness shall return to thee.

22. Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in
thine heart.
22. Do not refuse the Instruction which such men give thee from God; but
heartily embrace it, and faithfully preserve it to be the rule of thy Life.

23. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up; thou shall put
away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.
23. Thou shall soon feel the comfortable fruits of it: for if thou return to
the Almighty, who has laid thee thus low, He will return to thee, and raise
thee up as high as ever: He will pardon thine Iniquity, and remove the
Punishment of it far from thee and thine.

24. Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones
of the brooks.
24. Thou shall recover all thy Losses with usury; and no more value gold then
the dirt, on which it shall lie; nor the purest gold more then the pebbles in
the brook.

25. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plenty of
silver.
25. Thou shall be at no pains to secure thy vast Heaps of gold and silver;
because thy Almighty Restorer, who gave them to thee, will defend them better
then the strongest fortress, and be Himself thy Treasure.

26. For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up
thy face unto God.
26. For then thou shall be so far from doubting of his Care over thee, that
thou shall delight to think how He loves thee: thou shall not be dejected any
more, but confidently and cheerfully expect his Blessing on thee.

27. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou
shall pay thy vows.
27. Thou shall ask nothing of Him, but thou shall obtain it; and have abundant
cause to be continually giving thanks to Him, for his bounteous Goodness in
fulfilling thy desires.

28. Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and
the light shall shine upon thy ways.
28. Thou shall accomplish whatsoever thou designest, and all thy undertakings
shall be prosperous.

29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say, There is lifting up: and he
shall save the humble person.
29. Thou shall pray to God also to lift up others, who are in a low condition;
and He shall grant thy petitions, by delivering him that is depressed.

30. He shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the
pureness of thine hands.
30. Yea, a whole Country shall owe its safety to thy Innocence: it shall be
delivered by thy pious Prayers and blameless Actions.

CHAP. XXIII.
ARGUMENT.
To the foregoing Discourse of Eliphaz Job thought at first to make no Answer,
but only by complaints of their Injustice, and fresh Appeals to God: by whom
he desires, more carnestly than ever, to be tried; being assured that He would
acquit him. And though for the present God was not pleased to give him
audience, (of which he complains with too much passion;) yet he maintains that
hope, which began to appear in his Soul, (in his last Discourse with Bildad Chapter
XIX.) that God would at last clear him from all the Aspersions which were cast
upon him.

1. THEN Job answered, and said,
1. THEN Job, hearing his Person thus defamed, and his Discourse perverted,
renewed his Complaints, and said,

2. Even to day is my complaint bitter: my stroke is heavier then my groaning.
2. Still my just Defense of my self is judged to be Rebellion against God:
which renders my Sufferings heavier then all my Sighs and Groans can express:

3. Oh that I knew where I might find him I that I might come even to his seat!
3. And makes me once more appeal to God, and wish I could be admitted into his
presence, (so free I am from the conscience of any Guilt,) and approach even to
his Judgment Seat.

4. I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.
4. I would set before Him the Justice of my Cause; and fill my mouth with
Confutations of your false Accusations.

5. I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he
would say unto me.
5. I would press to know his Judgment of me, and diligently attend to the
Sentence which He would pass upon me.

6. Will he plead against me with his great power? No, but he would put
strength in me.
6. Do you think He would make no other use of his absolute Power then to
oppress me? I cannot believe it; He would rather employ it to support me;

7. There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for
ever from my judge.
7. Till at his Bar I had proved my self a Righteous person, and been perfectly
acquitted by him my righteous Judge.

8. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot
perceive him:
8. But all these, alas! are vain Wishes; for which way soever I turn my self,
whether to the East or to the West, I cannot see Him appear to do me right.

9. On the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: he hides
himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him.
9. He works and moves invisibly in all other quarters of the world; but I can
discover nothing He does to clear my Innocence.

10. But he knows the way that I take: when he has tried me, I shall come
forth as gold.
10. My only comfort is, that, though I cannot know all his Ways, yet He, being
everywhere, knows the whole course of my Life: and when He has proved me by
these Afflictions, as gold is by the fire, I doubt not I shall be cleared from
these Imputations which you lay upon me.

11. My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined.
11. I am sure I have ever followed his guidance, and so steadfastly observed his
Commandments, that no temptation has made me swerve from them.

12. Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, I have esteemed
the words of his mouth more then my necessary food.
12. I have prevented the Advice you give me, (XXII. 22.) having never done
otherwise then He bid me, and laid up his words more carefully then my
necessary provision for this life.

13. But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desires,
even that he does.
13. But for the present this does not at all move Him to relieve me: He
continues his purpose, (whatever it be,) and none can alter it, no more then
they can hinder the fulfilling of it.

14. For he performs the thing that is appointed for me: and many such things
are with him.
14. For what He has resolved to inflict upon me, that I find He will
accomplish: and many such things as these He does, of which He will not give
us the reason.

15. Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am afraid of
him.
15. This terrifies me, when I reflect upon it, notwithstanding my Innocence: I
tremble at the thoughts of his absolute Power and unsearchable Wisdom, which
may think fit still to continue these Afflictions;

16. For God makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me:
16. Which by the weight of them have broken my spirit, and made me so timorous,
that I cannot but dread the danger I am in of suffering more from his Almighty
hand.

17. Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither has he covered the
darkness from my face.
17. For still He keeps me alive under all these Evils which I endure; and will
not let me have the favor to die by that hand which strikes me so severely.

CHAP. XXIV.
ARGUMENT.
Upon farther consideration Job thought good again to confute their rash
Assertion, about the Plagues which always befall the Wicked, by an Induction of
particulars that prove the contrary. Among which, the wild Arabs, he tells
them, are a notorious instance, whose profession is Rapine, and yet they thrive
and prosper in it; v. 5, etc. And so do the more civilized Oppressors, of whom
he says something before, and again v. 11, 12. Where he seems to reflect upon
hard Landlords, and griping Merchants and Traffiquers in cities. To whom he
adds Murderers, Adulterers, Pirates, with several other wicked Villains, (in
the conclusion of the Chapter,) who notwithstanding die like other men, and are
not called to an account, for their enormous Crimes, in this present World.

1. WHY, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him,
not see his days?
1. BUT, to answer a little what you have so often asserted; If Punishments from
the Almighty be so apparent and visible upon the Wicked, why do not they who
are truly Pious see these public and open Judgments?

2. Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed
thereof.
2. Especially when the Wickedness of some of them is so notorious, that they
violate all known Rights; seizing on the Lands of their Neighbors, taking away
their Cattle, and (not content with that) owning it when they have done, by
putting them openly into their pastures?

3. They drive way the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow's ox for a
pledge.
3. If a poor Fatherless child have an Ass left him to carry his burdens, they
drive it away on some pretense or other; and have no more mercy then to take of
the Widow, for the security of her debt, the only Ox she has wherewith to
plough her ground.

4. They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide themselves
together.
4. They offer Abuses to helpless people upon the highway: so that the meaner
sort dare not appear, for fear of their Insolence or their Violence.

5. Behold, as wild asses in the desert go they forth to their work, rising
betimes for a prey: the wilderness yields food for them and for their
children.
5. And you shall see others of them who (making Pillage their trade) leave the
Cities and Towns, and go to skulk in Forests and desert places; where becoming
wild and savage, they live on Rapine and Spoil; in which they are so diligent,
that those Wildernesses (where they neither plough nor sow) maintain their
families.

6. They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the vintage of
the wicked.
6. For they make Inrodes, out of those Woods, into the neighboring Fields and
Vineyards; and thence wickedly carry away the Corn and the Grapes, never
regarding who is the owner of them.

7. They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no covering
in the cold.
7. They spare not the poor Reapers and Vintagers; but, stripping them to their
very skin, leave them never a rag to defend them from the cold, when they go to
rest after their wearisome labors.

8. They are wet with the showrs of the mountains, and embrace the rock for
want of a shelter.
8. They are exposed (poor wretches!) to the injury of the weather, as they lie
asleep at the foot of mountains: they have nowhither to run, but into Caves and
Holes of rocks; where they endeavor to shroud themselves, when they see a
Tempest coming.

9. They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor.
9. Nay, the Persons of men are not safe from the violence of these Outlaws: but
they snatch away young Children from their Mothers breasts; and carry away the
Poor (pretending they owe them something) to make them their Slaves.

10. They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf
from the hungry:
10. Whom when they have stolen, they will not allow so much as Clothes to cover
their nakedness; nor let him that is ready to starve eat of the Sheaf which he
has gleaned.

11. Which make oil within their walls, and tread their winepresses, and suffer
thirst.
11. They cause these miserable creatures to press out their oil and their wine
in their Cellars; but let them not taste a drop, though they be ready to die
with thirst.

12. Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded cries out:
yet God lays not folly to them.
12. Whole Cities groan under the Oppression of some or other of these wicked
men, and cry out like those that are dying of their wounds: and yet God, who
knows all this, does not make them examples of his Displeasure, nor can we tell
when He will punish them for their Injustice and Cruelty.

13. They are of those that rebel against the light: they know not the ways
thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.
13. The world would be very empty, if He should destroy all such persons; for
besides these open, there are more secret Sinners, who look upon the light as
their Enemy: They dare not be seen in the daytime; or if they be espied, they
presently seek to hide themselves, that they may not be discovered.

14. The murderer rising with the light, kills the poor and needy, and in
the night is as a thief.
14. The Murderer, for instance, rises before the Sun, to kill those whose
poverty calls them up to early labor; and then lurking all day in the close
thickets and woods, he turns Robber, and rifles rich men's houses in the night.

15. The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye
shall see me; and disguiseth his face.
15. The Adulterer also, whose eye has let an unlawful love into his heart,
waits for the dusk of the evening, to favor his lewd desire: Then he hopes
nobody he meets withal will know him; but lest they should, he wraps his face
in his cloak to prevent discovery.

16. In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselves
in the daytime: they know not the light.
16. And, when all are at rest, he will dig through the walls of houses, if
there be no other way to come at the Adulteress: The assignment was made
between them in the daytime, and the place then marked out, at which he may
most easily enter; but it is the night which brings them together, to act the
works of darkness.

17. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one know them,
they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.
17. These are their delight; and if they chance to sleep too long together, and
the morning surprise them, they are ready to die with fear: if any one know
them, they are in the very agonies of death.

18. He is swift as the waters, their portion is cursed in the earth: he
beholds not the way of the vineyards.
18. To this wicked crew you may add the Pirate, who robs upon the Sea, and
runs from one little creek to another in swift ships: which bring him in so
much riches, that he despises the employment of those who till the earth and
plant vineyards, as poor and unprofitable.

19. Drought and heat consume the snow-waters: so does the grave those which
have sinned.
19. And yet all these, after they have spent their life in such horrid
Villainies, do not die of lingering and tormenting Diseases; but go down to the
grave as easily as Snow-water sinks into the dry ground when it is melted by
the Sun.

20. The womb shall forget him, the worm shall feed sweetly on him, he shall be
no more remembered, and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.
20. God sets no such mark of his Displeasure upon him, but that his Mother may
soon forget him: The hand of Justice does not hang him on a gibbet for the
birds to feed on; but he is carried to his grave like other men, to be the
sweet food of worms. There he lies quietly, and neither he nor his Wickedness
are any more remembered then a Tree which is broken all to shivers.

21. He evil entreats the barren that bears not: and does not good to the
widow.
21. This is true even of him who, to hide his Villainy, kills the Child in the
womb of her whom he has deflowred; and when he has abused a poor Widow, makes
her no satisfaction.

22. He draws also the mighty with his power: he rises up, and no man is
sure of life.
22. The greatest persons are not able to stand before him: When he rises up to
assassinate, there is no man, be he never so strong, is sure of his life.

23. Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he rests; yet his eyes
are upon their ways.
23. Though he give you his hand, and promise you security so solemnly, that you
think you may rely upon him; yet he watches all occasions, and lies in wait
secretly, to do you mischief.

24. They are exalted for a little while, but are gone, and brought low; they
are taken out of the way, as all other, and cut off as the tops of the ears of
corn.
24. Thus these Impious men flourish and are lifted up above all other; and then
they depart the world without any Punishment: They are laid down and shut up in
their Graves like all other men; nay, they die as easily (without those tedious
pains which some endure) as the top of an Ear of corn is cropped with your hand.

25. And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech
nothing worth?
25. All this I know to be so true, that I challenge all the World to disprove
me: I am sure it is not in any man's power to show that my Discourse is
frivolous.

CHAP. XXV.
ARGUMENT.
The foregoing Discourse of Job, in the XXIV. Chapter, was so undeniable, that
Bildad begins to break off the Dispute. For he says not a word to it, but only
advises him to speak more reverently of the Majesty of God, then, he imagined,
he had done in his appeal to him Chap. XXIII.

1. THEN answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
1. THEN Bildad, (whose turn it was to speak,) being unable to refute what Job
had said, only desired him in a few words, to beware how he reflected upon the
Justice of God, or imagined himself to be just if He examined him. The words
were these.

2. Dominion and fear are with him, he makes peace in his high places.
2. Take heed what thou say of God, the Sovereign of the World, who ought to
be worshipped by thee with the most awful reverence; as He is in the Heavenly
places, where they never rebel against his orders.

3. Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom does not his light arise?
3. Has He not innumerable troops of Angels and other Creatures, all ready to
execute his pleasure? And where is the man that is out of the verge of his
all-overspreading Providence?

4. How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born
of a woman?
4. Why then does such a pitiful wretch as he talk of his Righteousness, before
this glorious Majesty? He forgets sure the condition of his Birth, who pretends
to Purity in his sight.

5. Behold even to the moon, and it shines not; yea, the stars are not pure in
his sight.
5. Let a man lift up his eyes as high as the Moon, nay, look as far as the Sun
and the Stars of Heaven, he shall find that they have their Spots; nay, in His
presence, have no luster at all.

6. How much less man that is a worm, and the son of man which is a worm?
6. What can be expected then from miserable Man or his posterity; who, being
full of Corruption whilst they live, can be nothing but Rottenness when they
are dead?

CHAP. XXVI.
ARGUMENT.
Job hearing Bildad wander so far from the buisiness, derides his grave
affectation of Wisdom; and tells him that, though he talked as if he thought
himself fit to be a Coadjutour to God Almighty, yet, as his Discourse was
impertinent, so it was but mean and flat, in comparison with what he was able
to speak himself, concerning the Omnipotent Wisdom of God: which he sets forth
in a far more lively manner.

1. BUT Job answered, and said,
1. TO this Job replied almost as briefly; saying,

2. How hastthou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the arm that
has no strength?
2. O wonderful Advocate! How excellently have thou defended Him who has no
need of thy help? Do thou think to do the Almighty any service by such
Discourses?

3. How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? and how have thou
plentifully declared the thing as it is?
3. What admirable Advice would thou give Him in his Government of the world,
if He would admit thee to be his Counselor, who imaginest, no doubt, thou
aboundest with Wisdom, and have hit the very mark?

4. To whom have thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?
4. Do thou think me ignorant of such things as these? or can thou pretend
to any extraordinary inspiration concerning them?

5. Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof.
5. I know, as well as thou can inform me, the Power of God; which appears not
only in the Heavens, (to which thou biddest me look,) but even in the lowest
parts of the Earth: where vast giant-like Creatures are formed under the water,
whose inhabitants are innumerable.

6. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering.
6. Nor is his Knowledge, I am sensible, less then his Power; but penetrates
into the greatest depths: the very dead, who are quite removed out of our
sight, being perfectly visible unto him.

7. He stretches out the north over the empty place, and hangs the earth
upon nothing.
7. Who by his wonderful Power and Wisdom stretches out the whole World from
the one Pole to the other: which He alone sustains; as He does this globe of
Earth hanging in the Air, without any thing to support it.

8. He binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent
under them.
8. It is He who binds up the fluid Waters, as it were in bags, and keeps them a
long time hanging in the Clouds: through which they do not burst all at once,
but distill by drops to moisten the earth in due season.

9. He holds back the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud upon it.
9. These Clouds He spreads before the glorious face of Heaven, to restrain the
beams of the Sun from scorching the earth.

10. He has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to
an end.
10. He has enclosed the waters of the Sea in shores; and so exactly compassed
them about, that as long as the world lasts they shall not be able (be they
never so furious) to exceed those bounds, but shall break all their rage
against them into froth.

11. The pillars of heaven tremble, and are astonished at his reproof.
11. And yet the highest Mountains, which look as if they were the pillars and
supporters of the Heavens, quake and tremble, when He thunders and lightens
upon them.

12. He divides the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smites
through the proud.
12. By his Power He raises a Tempest, which makes great furrows in the Sea, and
divides, as it were, one part of it from another: and (such is his Wisdom) He
knows how to appease it again, and depress its proud waves into the deadest
calm.

13. By his spirit he has garnished the heavens; his hand has formed the
crooked serpent.
13. Finally, by his wise contrivance the Heavens were adorned, and made thus
beautiful, as we behold them: His Power made the Milky way, (and other
celestial Signs,) whose windings are so admirable.

14. Lo these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him?
but the thunder of his power who can understand?
14. And yet these are but very small parcells of his Works: For, alas! it is
very little that such as we can comprehend of Him; but the utmost force of his
Power is past all understanding.

CHAP. XXVII.
ARGUMENT.
As Bildad began to decline the Dispute, so Zophar quite gives it over: either
looking upon Job as incurably obstinate, or (as we might more charitably
conceive, were it not for what we read XXXII. 1.) being convinced he had more
reason on his side. Whose silence so raised the spirit of Job, that he now
triumphs over his Opponents: as the word MASCHAL, which we render PARABLE, may
denote. For it signifies among the Hebrews, an elegant ingenious kind of
speech; excelling, and, as it were, dominearing over, all other, in its
pithiness, or neatness, or some other rare quality. Such is the following
Discourse of Job, which begins (in this Chapter) with a vehement Protestation,
that he would never desert his Plea; nor yield to their Doctrine, that a
remarkable Vengeance always attends upon Wickedness in this world: though he
grants, and largely here asserts, that sometimes there does.

1. MOreover Job continued his parable, and said,
1. AFTER Job had made some pause, and Zophar (whose turn it was now to speak)
had nothing at all to reply, He proceeded with greater eloquence then ever to
assert his Innocence; saying,

2. As God lives, who has taken away my judgment, and the Almighty, who has
vexed my soul;
2. I protest by the Eternal God, who, for the present, will not judge my Cause;
by the Omnipotent Lord of the world, who has loaded me with so many
Afflictions, that they have taken away all the pleasure of Life from me:

3. All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
3. I protest, I say, that as long as I have breath in my body, and He shall
enable me to speak a word,

4. My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.
4. My tongue shall be the faithful interpreter of mine heart, and I will never
speak otherways then I think.

5. God forbid that I should justify you: till I die, I will not remove my
integrity from me.
5. Therefore never hope I will yield to your Opinion, which I know to be false:
no, I abhor the thought of it, and will sooner die then confess the Guilt which
you charge me withal.

6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live.
6. You shall never extort that from me, but I will resolutely maintain my
Righteousness, and not be persuaded by any reasons to desert its defense: my
Conscience does not hitherto accuse me, and it shall never upbraid me
hereafter, for betraying mine Innocence.

7. Let mine enemy be as the wicked; and he that rises up against me, as the
unrighteous.
7. And let me tell you, he that sets himself against me, and would have me
thought wicked, shall be found so himself in the end: I say again, he shall
prove himself unrighteous sooner then me;

8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God
takes away his soul?
8. Who know very well, it is madness for a man to counterfeit Piety, when he
has none: for though he may get Riches by that pretense while he lives, yet
what hope has he when he dies?

9. Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him?
9. Nay before that, when any Calamity comes upon him, will God give any regard
to the cries of one who regarded Him so little?

10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God?
10. Or will he himself have the confidence to go to God, and expect any comfort
from Him? will he not rather despond in such a case, and cease to call upon Him?

11. I will teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the Almighty will
I not conceal.
11. Do not disdain to learn of me, and I will make you understand what God
does with the Wicked; and discover to you some of the secrets of his Almighty
Providence.

12. Behold, all ye your selves have seen it, why then are ye thus altogether
vain?
12. Behold, there is not one of you but has by his own experience found what I
am about to say to be certainly true; and yet, such is your vanity, you will
defend an ungrounded opinion.

13. This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of
oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty.
13. I grant that a Wicked man (but not all Wicked men, as you maintain) does
sometimes receive such Punishment from God as he deserves: which might make
other tyrannical Oppressors fear to meet with the same Vengeance.

14. If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his offspring
shall not be satisfied with bread.
14. We have seen, for instance, his numerous posterity fall by the sword of
Justice or War; or by the fury of a popular Tumult: and they who escaped were
reserved to perish with cruel Hunger;

15. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his widows shall
not weep.
15. Or else with such pestilential Diseases, that none would adventure to bury
them, nor did their widows survive to lament them.

16. Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;
16. So that if he have treasured up such heaps of Riches, that he values silver
no more then dust, nor costly apparel and furniture then the mire of the street;

17. He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall
divide the silver.
17. He shall have only the trouble of gathering them together, but none of his
shall enjoy them: God shall translate all these Treasures to another family,
who shall do more good with them.

18. He builds his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper makes.
18. He builds a goodly Fabric, out of which he is as easily shaken as a moth
out of a garment: and it shall not be more durable then the booth, which is
made for him that keeps the fruits of a garden.

19. The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he opens his
eyes, and he is not.
19. And when he dies, he shall have no Monument made for him: nay, while he
lives it so falls out, that he looks about him, and sees that everybody has
deserted him.

20. Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest steals him away in the
night.
20. Innumerable Terrors then break in upon him and surprise him, like an
Inundation of waters; the Divine Vengeance, like a violent Tempest,
unexpectedly hurries him away.

21. The east wind carries him away, and he departs: and, as a storm,
hurleth him out of his place.
21. Some pestilent Vapor blasts him irrecoverably; and as certainly kills him,
as a Whirlwind hurls things out of their place.

22. For God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee out of his
hand.
22. Or God shall send some other Mischiefs so fast upon him, (without any pity
to him, who had none for others,) that all the attempts shall be in vain, which
he makes to escape the Vengeance.

23. Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.
23. At which the beholders shall rejoice, and applaud God's righteous Judgment:
(which I confess He sometimes executes:) They shall hiss at his Name when he is
dead, in that very place where he has been so much magnified.

CHAP. XXVIII.
ARGUMENT.
The Connection of this Chapter with the foregoing, I hope I have truly
expressed in the first verse. And that being found, it is not difficult to see
at what it drives; viz. to stop the buisy Inquiry of mankind, who are very
wise, he shows, in other things, but have not wit enough to comprehend the
reasons why God does not inflict those Punishments upon all Wicked men, which
fall upon some. It is not needful to set down here, how this Argument is
managed, (with such admirable elegance of words, and such weightiness of
matter, as make it deserve the name of Maschal, Parable, or Proverb,) because
it will sufficiently appear in the Paraphrase.

1. SVRELY, there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold, where they
fine it.
1. YOU would have me give a Reason perhaps why God punishes some Wicked men,
and not all: But the wit and industry of mankind, which have discovered Mines
of silver and gold, must not think to find out this Secret, which God has
reserved to himself.

2. Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the stone.
2. They invent means to extract Iron and Brass, out of the Earth and out of
Stone.

3. He sets an end to darkness, and searches out all perfection: the stones
of darkness, and the shadow of death.
3. There is no Mine so dismally dark, but there some man or other sets things
in order for his work; he searches to the very bottom of it, and finds out
those Stones which lie in the most abstruse and hidden parts of the Earth.

4. The flood breaks out from the inhabitants; even the waters forgotten of
the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men.
4. A Flood breaks out from some neighboring place, and disturbs the Miners:
(for the waters seem as if they would stagnate there and never stir a foot:)
but by the hard labor of man they are drained, and leave the place dry again.

5. As for the earth, out of it comes bread: and under it is turned up as it
were fire.
5. Out of the surface of the Earth he gets Herbs and Corn, for his food and
sustenance; and underneath it he finds Lime and Brimstone and such like fiery
stuff, for other uses.

6. The stones of it are the place of sapphires: and it has dust of gold.
6. He goes into Countries whose stones are the place where Sapphires are
lodged; and whose dust to him is as good as gold.

7. There is a path which no fowl knows, and which the vulture's eye has not
seen:
7. He treads in paths which no Bird of prey knows; which the most
quick-sighted among them has never seen:

8. The lions whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it.
8. Where the wildest Beasts, who search for solitary places, never made their
den, or so much as approached; no not the ravenous Lions, whose hunger leads
them everywhere to seek satisfaction.

9. He puts forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the mountains by
the roots.
9. He digs through the hardest Rocks by his obstinate labor; and undermines
Mountains, that he may find the Treasure hid in their bowels.

10. He cutteth out rivers among the rocks, and his eye sees every precious
thing.
10. And if he meet with Waters which hinder his work, he cuts a Channel through
the Rock to convey them away; and never rests till he has discovered every
thing that may requite his indefatigable pains.

11. He binds the floods from overflowing, and the thing that is hid,
brings he forth to light.
11. Nay, more then this, he stops the course of Rivers, and leaves not a drop
remaining; that he may bring to light all that is hidden in the bottom of them.

12. But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding?
12. But though he be so successful in these Searches, he must not think to
comprehend the Reasons of wise providence. He may study as long as he pleases,
and weary himself with buisy inquiries; but never be able with all his labor
to dive into the bottom of this Secret, why God does not punish all the Wicked,
who so insolently contemn him.

13. Man knows not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land of the
living.
13. Alas! this Wisdom is not to be purchased with all that wretched Man has
to give for it: it is not a thing that any part of this world affords.

14. The depth says, It is not in me: and the sea says, It is not with me.
14. The Miners, poor Souls! dig they never so deep, are never like to come
within the reach of it: nor is it to be fetched by the Mariner from any of
those Countries to which he sails.

15. It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the
price thereof.
15. All the Gold and Silver which men have heaped up by such long toil and
labor, are too inconsiderable a price to be offered for it.

16. It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx or the
sapphire.
16. Though it be the purest Gold which comes from Ophir, together with all the
precious Stones wherewith that rich Country abounds, they are of so little
value,

17. The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it shall not
be for jewels of fine gold.
17. That if you should add the Gold and the Crystal which are brought from
other places, with all the Vessels made by the art of man of the most refined
and massy gold, they could do nothing to obtain it.

18. No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom
is above rubies.
18. The precious Stones which are fetched out of the mountains of the East are
not worthy to be named with it: Men may dive into the Sea and fetch up Pearls,
but this Wisdom lies a great deal deeper.

19. The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with
pure gold.
19. The Arabian Topaz, which is so much esteemed for its wonderful luster,
does not come near it; nor are all the golden Ornaments, which they wear in
those parts, proportionable to it.

20. Whence then comes wisdom? and where is the place of understanding?
20. By what means then shall we get this Wisdom of which we are so desirous?
who can show us where it lies, that we may go and search for it?

21. Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the
fowls of the air.
21. We may ask this question as often as we please, but none can resolve us:
for it is concealed from all men living; the most soaring wits were never able
to disclose it.

22. Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears.
22. Death is the best Informer, and the Grave the only place where we may
learn something of it. But this is all that they can tell us, (which is as far
short of a full account, as a rumor is from a certain knowledge,) that they
will shortly make all men equal; and then it will be of no great moment,
whether we have been happy or miserable.

23. God understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof.
23. None but God understands the way and method of his own Providence: He alone
knows the place of that Wisdom we enquire after; which is nowhere else, but
in his own Mind.

24. For he looks to the ends of the earth, and sees under the whole heaven:
24. For who should govern the World but He, whose Understanding is infinite;
and sees the motions of all Creatures, from one end of it to the other?

25. To make the weight for the winds; and he weighs the waters by measure.
25. Which He has set in such exact order, and given to them such just
measures, that the Wind cannot blow, nor the Waters flow, but in those
proportions which He has prescribed.

26. When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the
thunder:
26. To the like laws He has bound the Rain, and appointed the course which the
Thundering cloud shall take.

27. Then did he see it, and declare it, he prepared it, yea, and searched it
out.
27. And when He ordered all these things, He was pleased in the wisdom which
He saw in his works; He made it visible and apparent; He fixed it therefore,
and made these Laws perpetual: because, after all the search that could be
made, He found no fault in it.

28. And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and
to depart from evil is understanding.
28. And making Man at the same time, He imprinted this sense upon his heart;
that he ought to be an humble Adorer, not a Censurer, of his secret Wisdom,
whereby He governs the World. For the highest Wisdom and skill that man can
attain, is to be possessed with such a Religious Fear of the great Lord of all,
as not to dare to do any thing which he knows will displease Him.

CHAP. XXIX.
ARGUMENT.
To such Discourses as these, Job presumes his Friends would have given greater
attention, then it seems they did, had not the Vileness of his present
condition made his Speeches also contemptible. And therefore he puts them in
mind, with what reverence all his Orations were formerly received, by great and
small: wishing God would restore to him those happy days; and inserting, all
along, some remarkable instances of his Integrity (especially as a Judge) in
the height of his Princely Prosperity. When he had an uncontrollable Power to
do as he pleased, and yet never abused it; but employed it constantly for the
defense and comfort of the meanest people in his Province.

1. MOreover Job continued his parable, and said,
1. HERE Job made another pause, to see if his Friends would return any Answer:
But they continuing silent, he proceeded in his eloquent Vindication of
himself; saying,

2. Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me:
2. Oh that God would re-establish me in that happy Condition, wherein, sometime
ago, I was a principal part of his Care! You would then give a greater regard
to my words, then you do now in my Misfortune:

3. When his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness:
3. Which has left me Nothing but only Wishes, that He would restore me those
pleasant days, when I saw nothing but continued tokens of his Favor; by which
I passed untouched through all the Inconvenices and Troubles of this Life.

4. As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my
tabernacle:
4. Oh the flourishing season of that prosperous estate! would it were possible
to recall the Felicity of those days, when the Divine Providence treated me so
kindly, that all my Answers were held for Oracles:

5. When the Almighty was yet with me, when my children were about me:
5. When the Almighty Goodness had not ceased to be gracious to me; but I saw my
self surrounded with my Children and Servants, waiting to know my pleasure.

6. When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of
oil:
6. When my Lands were so fertile and were blessed with such plenty, as if the
rivers had flowed with butter and oil:

7. When I went out to the gate, through the city, when I prepared my seat in
the street!
7. When I went in state to the Court of judgment, and sat on the Bench, in the
open place, where the people are wont to have their causes heard:

8. The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and stood up.
8. And the Youth seeing me appear, were seized with such fear, that they durst
not look me in the face; and the Aged no sooner perceived me, but they rose up
from their seats, and, in token of reverence, stood in my presence.

9. The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.
9. Immediately ensued a general Silence; the Princes themselves breaking off
their discourses, and not taking the liberty to speak a word.

10. The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their
mouth.
10. The Nobles and great Commanders could not have heard me with greater
attention and stilness, if they had quite lost their voices, or their tongues
had been tied to the roof of their mouths.

11. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it
gave witness to me:
11. And (so far was I from being a Tyrant, as you have accused me, XXII. 5, 6.)
there was no ear heard the Sentence I gave, but praised my Integrity; no eye
saw me after I had spoken, but you might have beheld therein the Respect and
Honor which they all bare me.

12. Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that
had none to help him.
12. Because I never failed to ease the Poor when he complained of his
Oppressions; the Fatherless, and such as had none to take their parts, ever
found me their Defender.

13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I caused
the widow's heart to sing for joy.
13. I had his prayer for my Prosperity, whose life and estate I preserved, when
he was in danger of utter undoing: and I made the sorrowful Widow such a
joyful woman, that she openly proclaimed my praise.

14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and
a diadem.
14. For in the morning I put on a resolution to do justly, together with my
clothes; and I never swerved from it all the day after: But looked upon the
righteous Sentence which I pronounced, as a greater ornament then the purple
Robe on my Shoulder, and the Diadem upon my head.

15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.
15. I instructed him who did not well understand his own buisiness; and
assisted him who wanted means to carry on his cause.

16. I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not, I searched out.
16. For the Poor I had such a paternal affection, that it made me his Advocate
as well as his Judge: and I never left studying his cause, (when there was an
obscurity in it,) till I had cleared the buisiness, and done him right.

17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.
17. By which means I disabled the Unjust to oppress them; and forced them to
restore that which they had violently extorted from them.

18. Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the
sand.
18. And having done so many Virtuous actions, and being in such high Authority,
I was apt to promise my self that, after an exceeding long and happy Life, I
should die quietly in mine own house, among my Children and Friends.

19. My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon my
branch.
19. For, being like a Tree whose root spreads out it self by the waters, and
whose boughs are perpetually moistened by the sweet dew of Heaven, I thought I
should never wither.

20. My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.
20. My Esteem and Reputation increased every day, and grew greater; and so did
my Power to defend the Authority and Dignity I had obtained.

21. Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel.
21. Though there was no need I should so employ it; for when I spoke, all men
gave me the greatest attention, and my words were a Law to them:

22. After my words they spoke not again, and my speech dropped upon them.
22. Which when I had uttered, no man contradicted, or so much as corrected; but
it sweetly instilled it self and sunk into their hearts.

23. And they waited for me as for the rain, and they opened their mouth wide,
as for the latter rain.
23. For they expected my Opinion with the same eager desire that the Husbandman
does the Showrs, after he has sown his seed; they gaped for it as the thirsty
Earth does for the latter Rain, to plump the corn.

24. If I laughed on them, they believed it not, and the light of my
countenance they cast not down.
24. The Reverence they bare me was so great, that when I laid aside my Gravity,
and jeasted with them, they would not believe it; but still took all I said to
be serious: and whatsoever pleasantness I used with them, it did not diminish
my Authority among them.

25. I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as
one that comfort (...) the mourners.
25. But if I went to visit them, they still preserved their Respect to me, and
gave me the Preeminence. And as my Condescension to them did not make them less
honor me, so their Submission to me did not make me less familiar with them:
for when I sat as a King guarded with many troops of followers, I comforted
the meanest, and would not suffer them to be dejected.

CHAP. XXX.
ARGUMENT.
From the foregoing account of his ancient Splendor, he takes occasion to
annex a no-lesselegant description of the Vileness of his present condition.
Hoping that the consideration of such a prodigious Change (which he represents
in several particulars, and not without some touches still upon his Integrity)
might at last move his hard-hearted Friends to some compassion toward him:
especially, when they saw how near he was to his Grave, notwithstanding all his
Prayers to God for relief.

1. BUT now they that are younger then I, have me in derision, whose fathers I
would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.
1. BUT now they that are younger then I, have me in derision, whose fathers I
would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.
1. BUT now, alas! there is so sad an alteration, that the Youths, who durst not
look me in the face, have the confidence to mock and jear me; even those
Youths, whose Fathers were so mean, that I disdained to employ them in the
vilest service.

2. Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age
was perished?
2. Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age
was perished?
2. Men whom if I had had a mind to employ, were fit for Nothing; being so lazy,
listless, and unable to do any buisiness, that it was in vain to call them to
it.

3. For want and famine they were solitary: fleeing into the wilderness in
former time desolate and waste:
3. Beggarly fellows, who, being ready to starve, were ashamed to be seen; and
sneaked into desert places to hide their poverty: it is but yesterday that they
were most wretchedly miserable;

4. Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper-roots for their meat.
4. Satisfying their hunger with those unsavory Herbs, which they cut up in the
salt marshes; and having no other bread but the roots of Juniper-trees.

5. They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them, as after a
thief)
5. They were driven from the society of men; and if ever they appeared, an
outcry was raised against them, as there is against a Thief when he is
discovered.

6. To dwell in the clifts of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the
rocks.
6. They had no other habitation, but the Clefts which the brooks sometimes make
in the valleys; or the Caves which they found in other parts of the earth, or
in the rocks.

7. Among the bushes they brayed, under the nettles they were gathered together.
7. Their Sighs might be heard, like the braying of Asses, among the
thornbushes; they lurked together under nettles or thistles:

8. They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were viler
then the earth.
8. Being lewd Villains, the Children of obscure Parents; viler then the Earth
upon which they trod.

9. And now am I their song, yea, I am their by word.
9. And now I am become their Pastime: They have made Songs of my Calamity; and
it is the common entertainment to discourse of my Misery.

10. They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my face.
10. They express an abhorrence of me; and, as vile as they are, will not come
near me; or if they do, it is only to show their extreme Contempt of me.

11. Because he has loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also let loose
the bridle before me.
11. God, they see, has scattered all my Estate, and by sore Afflictions laid
me very low; which has made them forget all Respect to me, and take an
unrestrained license in their insolent behavior toward me.

12. Upon my right hand rise the youth, they push away my feet, and they raise
up against me the ways of their destruction.
12. They set up the very Boys to accuse me; they push me down, and then trample
on me: I am become the beaten path, as I may call my self, of their pernicious
Reproaches.

13. They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper.
13. They so disturb my thoughts, that I know not what course to take in this
miserable condition: which they heighten by their Calumnies; and are so
fruitful in them, that they need none to help to invent them.

14. They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation they
rolled themselves upon me.
14. They assault me with such a fury as Soldiers do their Enemies, when they
have made a wide breach in the wall of a besieged City, and pour in all their
forces to destroy them.

15. Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and my
welfare passes away as a cloud.
15. This dismal Change has fearfully astonished me, to see all my Wishes and
Hopes dispersed like the wind, and all the Happiness I possessed passed away as
swiftly as a cloud.

16. And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction have taken
hold upon me.
16. I can do nothing now but melt into tears; my very Soul is ready to faint
away with grief; when I think how those joyful days are gone, and what
Distresses have seized on me, and come to take their place.

17. My bones are pierced in me in the night-season: and my sinews take no rest.
17. In the night (when Sleep is wont to bury our Grief) I feel such sharp
pains, as penetrate through my very bones; my blood boils so violently in my
veins, that I can take no rest.

18. By the great force of my disease, is my garment changed: it binds me
about as the collar of my coat.
18. It requires a great deal of strength, when I would shift my clothes, to
pull them off: my outward garment, by the filthy Matter of my sores, being
glewed as fast to me, as the collar of my shirt.

19. He has cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.
19. I look as if I had been thrown into the dirt: there is little difference
between me, and dust and ashes.

20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest
me not.
20. And, which is saddest of all, I call upon Thee, O God, but cannot prevail
with Thee to relieve me: I continue praying and waiting for thy help, and Thou
sufficiently understandest my miserable case;

21. Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest thy self
against me.
21. But thy former Kindness to me is turned into such Severity, that it looks
like Cruelty: Thou have given me such deadly blows, as if thou hatedst me.

22. Thou liftest me up to the wind: thou causest me to ride upon it, and
dissolvest my substance.
22. Thou did lift me up on high, and made me, as it were, to ride upon the
clouds: but have thrown me down with so much the sorer Fall, which has broken
me all in pieces.

23. For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed
for all living.
23. So that I can think of nothing but dying, and going to my Grave; the common
Sanctuary of all mankind.

24. Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave, though they cry in
his destruction.
24. Whither thy afflicting hand will not pursue me: for though men cry when
they are sent thither, yet when they are there, all their Sufferings and
Complaints are ended.

25. Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for
the poor?
25. Strange, that I should be thus punished without any mercy! was I wont to be
so unmercifull to others? No, I never looked upon men under any hardship
without tears; and was so sensibly touched with the Miseries of the Poor, that
I ever relieved them.

26. When I looked for good, then evil came unto me: and when I waited for
light, there came darkness.
26. Which gave me good hope that I should be very happy: but in stead thereof,
the saddest Afflictions and Troubles are befaln me.

27. My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction prevented me.
27. Which have so suddenly surprised me, that they have put me into the
greatest commotion and disorder: my bowels boil without the least intermission.

28. I went mourning without the sun: I stood up, and I cried in the
congregation.
28. My Affliction is so constant without any glimpse of Joy, that I am a
perpetual Mourner; and am not able to lie still, nor to refrain from Shrieks
and Cries in the greatest Assemblies.

29. I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.
29. I can do nothing but lament my self, as if I were one of those mournful
creatures, which make such doleful noises in desert places.

30. My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burnt with heat.
30. The boiling heat in my body has so parched me, that my Skin looks black;
and the Marrow in my bones and all my vital moisture is dried up.

31. My harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of them
that weep.
31. And, to say no more, all Mirth is banished my House, the musical
instruments are laid aside, and nothing but Mourning and Weeping come in their
room.

CHAP. XXXI.
ARGUMENT.
It was possible his Friends might make quite another use then Job intended of
the relation he had made of his miserable Condition, in the Chapter foregoing:
and therefore, lest it should harden them in their old Error, and they should
take what he had said to be an argument of his Guilt; He gives in this Chapter
a large and particular account of his Integrity, which in general he had so
often asserted; laying his very soul, and the most secret Inclinations of it
open before them; together with the Actions of his whole life, in his private
capacity, (for of his public he had spoken before Chap. XXIX.) both in respect
of his Neighbors, of all sorts, and in respect of God. To whom he again most
solemnly appeals, in the conclusion of his Discourse, that he did not boast of
more Virtues then he had; but would most gladly be tried before Him, by some
impartial Judge. I need not here enumerate his Virtues, because they are
plainly and distinctly expressed in the Paraphrase; and I do not pretend to
give the entire contents, but the design only, of each Chapter.

1. I Made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?
1. BUT do not, I beseech you, any longer look upon these Sufferings as an
argument that I am not innocent; for I protest to you, I have been very
resolute and careful to avoid even the occasions of Lasciviousness: And
therefore how should I ever so much as deliberate to corrupt a Virgin?

2. For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of the
Almighty from on high?
2. For I know there is a God in Heaven, an Almighty Being, who rules over all:
and what could I expect from Him, as the reward of such Impurity?

3. Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers
of iniquity?
3. Does it not lead to destruction? nay, do not strange and horrible
Punishments fall upon the workers of that Iniquity?

4. Does not he see my ways, and count all my steps?
4. Is it possible to commit it so secretly, that it shall not be known by Him,
who observes every motion, and tells every step I take?

5. If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot has hasted to deceit;
5. If I have broke my Promises, or have been forward to deceive and cheat my
Neighbor;

6. Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity?
6. I refuse not to be tried: but rather desire my actions may be scrupulously
weighed and examined; for God, I am sure, will approve of my upright dealing.

7. If my step has turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine
eyes, and if any blot has cleaved to my hands:
7. If I have turned aside from the rules of Justice for fear or favor; if I
have coveted the Goods of other men, or my hands have taken any Bribes,

8. Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted out.
8. Let me be served in my kind, and let other men eat the Corn which I have
sowed, and pluck up the Trees (roots and all) which I have planted.

9. If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my
neighbor's door:
9. If my heart has been seduced to filthy desires after another man's Wife; if
I have watched for his absence, or some fair opportunity, to enter into his
house, and defile his bed;

10. Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her.
10. Then let others take away my Wife from me, and make her the vilest Slave,
whom they may use at their pleasure.

11. For this is an heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the
judges.
11. I ever thought this a Crime of the highest nature, an Iniquity to be
corrected by the severity of the public Justice.

12. For it is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all
mine increase.
12. For it is a Fire, which, if it be not extinguished, consumes men and their
estates, yea destroys whole Families and Kingdoms: and so incenses the Divine
Displeasure, that, should it escape the Magistrates punishment, I could never
hope that any thing of mine (were I guilty of it) should thrive, but all come
to utter ruin.

13. If I did despise the cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant, when
they contended with me:
13. So far was I from doing such foul Injuries to my Neighbors, that I never
extended my Power to the oppression of my Slaves: but was content to wave the
privilege the Law gave me, of using them as I pleased; and to allow them a
fair hearing, when they had any difference with me.

14. What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall
I answer him?
14. For I thought with my self, that though men could not punish me for my
rigor toward them, yet I should never be able to excuse it to God, when He
came to judge me; nor tell what to answer, when He called me to an account for
my ill usage of them.

15. Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us
in the womb?
15. I often also called to mind, that there was not such a difference in our
Estates, as there was an equality in our Births: and that we having one common
Creator, my Slave was as nearly related to God as my self.

16. If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of
the widow to fail:
16. Nor have the Poor any reason to complain of me: for if I ever denied to
satisfy their desire, or let the Widow in vain expect my relief;

17. Or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the fatherless has not eaten
thereof:
17. Or have sitten down at my Table alone, without the company of Fatherless
children;

18. (For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a father, and I have
guided her from my mother's womb)
18. (For whom I have always had a natural compassion from my very youth; I
brought it into the world with me, and it has been my companion ever since;)

19. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering:
19. If I have suffered any to perish for want of Clothing, or let the Poor go
naked without a covering;

20. If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the
fleece of my sleep;
20. If his loins did not admonish him to bless me, as often as he girded on his
garment, and he were not kept warm with the cloth made of my wool;

21. If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in
the gate:
21. If I ever have beaten the Fatherless, because I knew I should be too strong
for him in the Court, in case he complained there of the Injustice;

22. Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from
the bone.
22. Then let that guilty Arm fall off from my shoulder, or be broken in two in
the midst.

23. For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his
highness I could not endure.
23. For I never thought I could escape the Divine Vengeance; the dread of which
affrighted me, when men could not, from all such insolence: for I knew I could
not support my self against his Majesty.

24. If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art my
confidence:
24. Whose Favor I do not desire, if I have put my trust in Riches, and thought
my self safe and secure because I was furnished with the noblest Treasures:

25. If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had
gotten much:
25. Or if I was vainly elated and puffed up with the large Possessions left me
by my Ancestors, or with the great increase I had made to them by my own
industry.

26. If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness:
26. If when I beheld the Sun arise, or the Moon appear in her full luster,

27. And my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand:
27. I ever entertained an opinion in my mind that they were Gods, or kissed my
hand in token of worship and reverence to them;

28. This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have
denied the God that is above.
28. This also were a fearful Crime, which God's Vicegerents should punish:
because it were to put those Stars in the place of Him who is above all Heavens.

29. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lift up my self
when evil found him:
29. Whom I do not wish to be my Friend, if I ever was glad at the ruin of mine
Enemy; or insulted over him, when any mischief befell him:

30. (Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his soul)
30. (No, I was not so much as guilty of making any Imprecations against him,
nor was provoked by his malice to wish him dead:)

31. If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we
cannot be satisfied.
31. Though the people of my Family were so enraged at him, that, if I would
have yielded to their passion, they were ready to eat him up with an insatiable
Anger.

32. The stranger did not lodge in the street: but I opened my doors to the
traveller.
32. Much less was I guilty of Unkindness to Strangers, whom I never suffered to
lodge in the streets: for the door of my house stood open, that any Traveller
might turn in there, if he pleased.

33. If I covered my transgressions, as Adam: by hiding mine iniquity in my
bosom.
33. If I have studied to seem better then I am, and have not now made a free
Confession; but, like our First Parent, have concealed or excused my Faults,
and out of self-love have hidden mine Iniquity;

34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me:
that I kept silence, and went not out of the door?
34. Because I dread what the people will say of me, or am terrified by the
Contempt, into which the knowledge of my Guilt may bring me with the
neighboring families: then I am content my mouth should be stopped, and that I
never stir out of my door any more.

35. Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire is, that the Almighty would
answer me, and that mine adversary had written a book.
35. Oh that the truth of all this might be examined by some equal Judge!
Behold, I continue still to desire of God this favor: And let him that can
accuse me, bring in his Libell in writing against me.

36. Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me.
36. Surely I would not endeavor to obscure it, but openly expose it to be read
by all; nay, wear it as a singular Ornament, which would turn to my honor,
when the world saw it disproved.

37. I would declare unto him the number of my steps, as a prince would I go
near unto him.
37. I my self would assist him to draw up his Charge, by declaring to him
freely every Action of my life: I would approach him as undauntedly as a
Prince, who is assured of the goodness of his cause.

38. If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof complain:
38. For if so much as a bit of my Land was unjustly gotten, or I have defrauded
those who ploughed it of their wages;

39. If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the
owners thereof to lose their life:
39. If I have taken the fruits of it from my Tenants, and paid nothing for
them; or let them such hard bargains, that it broke their heart:

40. Let thistles grow in stead of wheat, and cockle in stead of barley. The
words of Job are ended.
40. Then let Corn never grow there any more; but let it be overrun with
Thistles, and the most stinking Weeds.

Here Job ended his Defense.

CHAP. XXXII.
ARGUMENT.
It appears, by the 15. verse of this Chapter, that there were several other
persons present, besides those that are named, when this Dispute was held
between Job and his three Friends. Among whom there was a young man named
Elihu; who was either a Syrian, (in which language this Book was first written,
and translated by Moses into Hebrew, says the Author of the Commentaries under
Origen's name,) descended from the second Son of Nahor, Abraham's Brother,
XXII. Genesis 21. or an Idumaean, of the same Country with Eliphaz the Temanite,
XXV. Jer. 23. I have made him a Syrian in my Paraphrase, because he is said to
be of the kindred of Ram: by whom we are to understand either Aram, or, as the
Hebrews think, Abraham; by whom such Wisdom and Piety might be promoted in his
Brother's Family, as is apparent in Elihu. Who, though much inferior to the
rest in years, (for which reason he had beld his peace thus long,) yet was much
superior to them in Knowledge. Which he discovers in the judicious Censures he
here passes, not only upon the three Friends, but upon Job himself: whom he
has nothing to charge withal, relating to any Crime committed before this
Affliction befell him; but thinks he had not managed the Dispute about it with
so much Calmness and Submission to God as became his Piety. In this he differs
from those that spoke before him: For I do not find that he blames him for any
Miscarriages, but those only which he observed in the heat of his Disputation;
and he spends his time, rather in justifying God, then in carping at Job, as
the other had done.

1. SO these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his
own eyes.
1. AND his three Friends also left off disputing with him; because they saw him
immovably fixed in the opinion of his Innocence.

2. Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the
kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself
rather then God.
2. Which very much displeased a young man, who had stood by all this time, and
heard what both sides said for themselves. His name was Elihu, descended from a
Brother of Abraham: who was exceeding angry with Job, because he spent more
time in justifying himself, then in justifying God;

3. Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had
found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
3. And with his three Friends also, because they were not able to maintain
their Charge against Job, and yet had condemned him to be a wicked Hypocrite.

4. Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder then he.
4. Yet he moderated his passion so discreetly, that he said not a word, till he
had waited, as well as Job, to see whether they would resume the Debate:
because it was not fit he thought, for him to meddle, as long as his Elders had
any thing to say.

5. When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men,
then his wrath was kindled.
5. But when he saw that none of the three offered to reply, but sat as men
that knew not what to say, he was not able to hold his peace any longer:

6. And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, answered, and said, I am young,
and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you mine
opinion.
6. But in this manner addressed himself unto them; saying, I have considered
all this while mine own Youth and your aged Experience; which has deterred me
so much, that I have hitherto been afraid to interpose my Opinion.

7. I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.
7. I thought with my self, that it was becoming one of my small standing, to
hear rather then to speak; and to learn Wisdom in such grave company as yours,
rather then pretend to teach it.

8. But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
them understanding.
8. But I see I was mistaken: Man is a very wretched thing, though he live never
so long, if God do not illuminate him. It is the Divine Inspiration which gives
Understanding.

9. Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand judgment.
9. They are not always the wisest, who are in Authority, and the Teachers of
others: nor do old men always so well employ their years, as to understand the
difference of things.

10. Therefore I said, Hearken to me, I also will show mine opinion.
10. Therefore let me entreat you to lend your ears a little to me: I also will
tell you what I think about this matter.

11. Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst you
searched out what to say.
11. Do not think me too forward; for I have with great patience heard all your
Discourses, and observed your Arguments; and let you proceed till you have
searched as far as you could into the buisiness:

12. Yea, I attended unto you: and behold, there was none of you that convinced
Job, or that answered his words:
12. And having duly considered and comprehended every word, I must needs
pronounce that there is none of you has confuted Job; nor said any thing to
the purpose, in answer to his Defense of himself.

13. Lest ye should say, we have found out wisdom: God thrusts him down, not
man.
13. For it is not sufficient for you to say, he is Obstinate; and therefore it
is wisely done of us to leave him to God: He shall confound him, by continuing
his Affliction; not We, by our Arguments.

14. Now he has not directed his words against me: neither will I answer him
with your speeches.
14. Which truly are so weak, that I shall make no use of them: But as Job has
directed none of his words against me, so I shall trouble him with none of your
Replies.

15. They were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking.
15. See, I beseech you, all you that hear us, how these Disputants are amazed;
how silent they are, as if their speech had forsaken them.

16. When I had waited, (for they spoke not, but stood still, and answered no
more)
16. You are my Witnesses, that I have waited for satisfaction: but after long
expectation they bring forth nothing; they are at a stand, and furnished with
no further Answer.

17. I said, I will answer also my part, I also will show mine opinion.
17. Which made me resolve within my self, that I would have a share in this
Dispute; and show, as I have often told you, what my Opinion is concerning it.

18. For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constrains me.
18. And indeed it is high time; for I am so full, by long thinking of what I
have to say, that I am in pain till I have uttered my mind.

19. Behold, my belly is as wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst like
new bottles.
19. My thoughts work within me, like new Wine in a Vessel: and we are both
alike in danger to burst, unless there be a vent.

20. I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and answer.
20. I must speak therefore, if it be but to ease my self: I will open my lips,
as they do such Vessels, and make an Answer, because I cannot with safety hold
my peace any longer.

21. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me give
flattering titles unto man.
21. And, I beseech you, let me speak with all freedom; with regard only to the
Cause, and not to the Person: and do not expect that I should complement, and
give to man any glorious titles.

22. For I know not to give flattering titles, in so doing my maker will soon
take me away.
22. For I do not understand that art of soothing men into a great opinion of
themselves: or if I did, I should not venture to use it; lest He that made me
should presently stop my mouth, for not dealing plainly.

CHAP. XXXIII.
ARGUMENT.
Here Elihu addresses his Speech to Job alone, (for he rejected all that the
three Friends had said, as sufficiently confuted by Job in his Dispute with
them,) and tells him, first, that he was the man who would now plead with him
in God's behalf, (as he had often desired,) and that he was no unequal match for
him. And then begins to reprehend those passages which he thought were
blameable in Job's Speeches; particularly his insisting so much upon his
Integrity: which, though true, should not have been mentioned without due
acknowledgment, that the Sovereign of the World had done him no wrong in thus
afflicting him; and that it was not fit for him to question the Wisdom and
Justice of God's Providence, because he did not understand it. For the care of
God over Man and his kindness to him, he shows, is so apparent, upon so many
scores, that it ought not to be denied because of the unaccountable Afflictions
that may befall us; which we ought rather to think are one of the ways whereby
He does Man good.

1. WHerefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my words.
1. AND truly I think I need not use any farther Preface, to persuade thee, O
Job, to hear my Discourse, and to give an attentive ear to all I have to say.

2. Behold, now have I opened my mouth, my tongue has spoken in my mouth.
2. Behold, now I begin; my words are upon my tongue, if thou art ready to
receive them.

3. My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips shall utter
knowledge clearly.
3. And I assure thee they shall be the unfeigned language of mine heart, which
it shall not be hard for thee to understand: for the instruction they give thee
shall be clearly and perspicuously delivered.

4. The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given
me life.
4. And first of all consider, that I am no other Creature then what thou art; a
Man whom the power of God has formed, and then inspired with Life.

5. If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.
5. Thou need not therefore decline the Encounter; but if thou art able to
answer, set thy forces in order against me, and stand up to oppose me.

6. Behold, I am according to thy wish in God's stead: I also am formed out of
the clay.
6. Thou have formerly desired (IX. 33. XIII. 3.) that somebody would appear in
God's stead, to reason the Case with thee: Behold, thou have thy wish; I am the
Man that appears for Him; who am made of the same matter with thy self.

7. Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be
heavy upon thee.
7. Look upon me, the Combat is not unequal, (as thou complainedst when thou
lookedst upon God, IX. 34. XIII. 21.) thou see no dreadful Majesty in me to
affright thee, nor any Power to oppress thee.

8. Surely thou have spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy
words, saying,
8. I do not accuse thee neither, as they three Friends have done, of Crimes
uncertain or unknown; but of what I my self, with mine own ears, have heard
thee utter.

9. I am clean without transgression, I am innocent; neither is there iniquity
in me.
9. For surely thou have said more then once, (X. 7. XIII. 23. XVI. 17, etc.
XXXI.) I am pure and without any Fault, in my heart and in my actions, both
toward God and toward man.

10. Behold, he finds occasions against me, he counts me for his enemy.
10. Behold, He, who I thought would have vindicated my Innocence, seeks for
occasions to fall out with me; and for slight matters declares himself mine
Enemy.

11. He puts my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.
11. Whom He keeps so fast in prison, that I cannot stir; and watches so
narrowly, that I can find no way to escape.

12. Behold, in this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God is greater
then man.
12. This is thy complaining language, and mark what I say to thee: Though I
cannot accuse thee, as thy Friends have done, of other Sins, yet in this thou
do offend; and I must reprehend thee for it, by remembering thee that there is
no comparison between God and Man.

13. Why do thou strive against him? for he gives not account of any of his
matters.
13. And therefore why do thou presume to dispute with Him, and call Him to an
account for his actions, who will not reveal to us all the Secrets of his
Providence?

14. For God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man perceives it not.
14. Not that God envies knowledge to us, for He teaches man more ways then one;
and a great deal more then he takes care to learn.

15. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in
slumbrings upon the bed:
15. One way is by a Dream, (which you may call a Night-vision,) when men fall
into a deep sleep, or lie on their beds between sleeping and waking:

16. Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction,
16. Then (when their minds are free from the buisiness and cares of the day) He
secretly whispers Instruction in their ears, and imprints it upon their minds.

17. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.
17. Not to make them understand indeed all the secret reasons of his
Providence; but to turn man from his evil way, and to dispose him with all
humility to submit himself to his Heavenly Instructor:

18. He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the
sword.
18. Who by this means mercifully preserves him (if he obey his Admonition) from
running on to his own destruction; and rescues him from the violent death,
which the sword of Justice or of an Enemy would have inflicted on him.

19. He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his
bones with strong pain:
19. Another way (and more common then this by Dreams) is the painful Diseases
wherewith he chastises man, and lays him low on his bed; though his
constitution of body be never so firm and strong.

20. So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.
20. In which languishing case he loathes his food; yea, nauseates that very meat
which formerly was his greatest delight.

21. His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and his bones that
were not seen, stick out.
21. Which makes so great a change in him, that his Flesh, which formerly
appeared plump and fair, cannot be seen; and his Bones stick out, which
formerly did not appear.

22. Yea, his soul draws near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers.
22. There is but a step between him and his grave; the pangs of death being
ready to seize on him.

23. If there be a messenger with him, and interpreter, one among ^ thousand,
to show unto man his uprightness:
23. If then (which is a third way whereby God teaches men) there come a Divine
Messenger unto him; a rare person, that can expound the mind of God, and
persuade the sick man to repent and amend his life;

24. Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to
the pit, I have found a ransom.
24. He shall beseech God to be gracious to him, saying, Spare him, good Lord,
and rescue him from going down to the grave; let it satisfy thee that thou
have corrected him, and that I have found him a Penitent.

25. His flesh shall be fresher then a child's: he shall return to the days of
his youth.
25. Presently the sick man shall begin to recover, and become a new man in his
Body, as well as in his Mind: His Flesh shall look as fresh as when he was a
child; and he shall be restored to the Vigor and Strength of his youthful age.

26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall
see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his righteousness.
26. His Prayer also shall be acceptable to God, and prevail for the Blessings
he asks: He shall go into the House of God, and with the most joyful voice
give thanks unto Him, and praise his Goodness; who will then acquit him, and
restore this poor man to his Favor.

27. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that
which was right, and it profited me not;
27. And he, (as becomes a true Penitent) casting his eyes upon his Neighbors,
shall openly confess and say, I have offended God, and He has justly chastised
me; I have done wickedly, and He has punished me according to my desert:

28. He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see
the light.
28. But has redeemed me from that Death into which I was going; and not only
made me live, but given me hope that I shall enjoy prosperous days.

29. Lo, all these things works God oftentimes with man,
29. Behold in all this the wonderful goodness of God; who by so many means
very often admonishes Man:

30. To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living.
30. To reduce him from those evil courses, which had just brought him to his
Grave; and to raise him up again to live in all true Happiness and Pleasure.

31. Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me, hold thy peace, and I will speak.
31. Mark this well, O Job, for it may very much concern thee: consider what I
have said; and if thou please to hear me patiently, I will still instruct
thee more fully.

32. If thou have any thing to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to justify
thee.
32. Or if thou have any thing to object to what I have said, I am willing to
hear it: Speak before I go any farther; for I heartily desire thou may clear
thy self, and appear a Righteous person.

33. If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.
33. If thou have no exception against my Discourse, then continue thy
attentions, and silently listen to me; and I will teach thee more Wisdom.

CHAP. XXXIV.
ARGUMENT.
Here Job shows himself a far more humble and teachable person then his three
Friends: for, though Elihu had invited him to make what exceptions he pleased
to his Discourse in the former Chapter, he would not open his mouth; because he
plainly saw that Elihu had hit upon the thing wherein he was defective. And so
this young man proceeds to carry the Charge a little higher, and tells him,
with more sharpness then before, that there were some words in his Discourses
which sounded in his ears, as if he accused God's Justice and Goodness. For
what else did he mean when he complained that God did not do him right; and
that he destroyed alike both good and bad? Which rash Assertions he overthrows
from the consideration of the Sovereign Dominion, Power, Righteousness and
Wisdom of God: and represents to him what behavior and discourse would have
better become him, then that which he had used.

1. FVrthermore Elihu answered, and said,
1. TO this last motion Job consented; and replying never a word, Elihu
proceeded in his Discourse, and said,

2. Hear my words, O ye wise, men, and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.
2. I do not desire to be Judge alone in this Cause, but I appeal to them that
are wise; and beseech all those (among you that hear me) who are intelligent,
to mark and consider what I now deliver.

3. For the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat.
3. You can discern whether it be true or false; for the Mind is as proper a
Judge of Discourse, as the Palate is of Meat.

4. Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among our selves what is good.
4. Let us agree to examine the buisiness, that we may be able to pronounce a
righteous judgment: let us debate among our selves, and resolve, whether Job
have a good Cause or no.

5. For Job has said, I am righteous: and God has taken away my judgment.
5. For he has said, I am innocent; and God (who knows I do not deserve to
suffer in this manner, XXVII. 2, 6.) will not do me right:

6. Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without transgression.
6. I scorn to defend my self with lies; but I must still maintain, that this
deadly Wound is given me for no Crime of mine.

7. What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water?
7. Did you ever know such a man as Job, who, in stead of adoring the Almighty,
(as becomes his Wisdom and Piety,) takes the liberty to pour out abundance of
contemptuous language concerning his Judgments?

8. Which goes in company with the workers of iniquity, and walks with
wicked men.
8. He associates himself with Evildoers; and talks after the same rate that
the Wicked are wont to do.

9. For he has said, It profits a man nothing, that he shall delight himself
with God.
9. For he seems to me to be of this opinion, that though a man study to please
God, he shall get nothing by it. IX. 22.

10. Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: far be it from God,
that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit
iniquity.
10. What think you of this, ye men of wisdom? Do you not abhor such a thought
as much as I, that He who is Almighty should wrong any man, and He who is
All-sufficient should swerve from the rule of Righteousness?

11. For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to
find according to his ways.
11. He will never be charged with such Weakness, but always deals with men
according as they deserve: For he that does well never fails to find a Reward,
and he that does ill, meets with a just Punishment.

12. Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert
judgment.
12. Surely, I need not fear to affirm this with the greatest confidence, that
the Supreme Judge of the World will never condemn an Innocent person; nor will
He that possesses all things be corrupted to pronounce an unrighteous Sentence.

13. Who has given him a charge over the earth? or who has disposed the whole
world?
13. For He did not receive the Government of the world from any above himself;
nor is there any higher Being, whose Authority He may be thought to dread, and
for fear of whom He may be tempted to do unjustly.

14. If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit and his
breath;
14. No, He made and He sustains all creatures; so that if he should contain his
Goodness within Himself, and recall that Spirit and Life which He has infused
into them;

15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust.
15. Nothing could subsist one moment: but all Mankind would expire together,
and return unto their dust.

16. If now thou have understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of my
words.
16. If thou art wise, mind what I say; and consider also what follows.

17. Shall even he that hates right govern? and will thou condemn him that is
most just?
17. Can he be an enemy to Justice Himself, who binds us so fast to the practice
of it? and will thou condemn His Actions, who is most powerful, as well as
just; and therefore need not serve himself by any wrongful dealing?

18. Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked, and to princes, Ye are
ungodly?
18. There is no King on Earth but looks upon it as a great and unsufferable
reproach to be called a Tyrant: nor will inferior Rulers endure you should
say, that they have no regard to Equity.

19. How much less to him that accepts not the persons of princes, nor
regards the rich more then the poor? for they all are the work of his hands.
19. Shall we impute then any such thing to Him, before whom a Prince or a Rich
man is no more then the meanest and poorest persons? who shall have the same
Justice from Him with the greatest, because they are all alike the work of his
Hands.

20. In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at midnight,
and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken away without hand.
20. How should He stand in awe of the Power of Kings, or be bribed with the
Gifts of the rich, who can strike them all dead in a moment? Whole Nations
tremble before Him, and in their deepest security are destroyed. He needs not
the help of any force on earth to put down a mighty Tyrant; but invisible
powers carry him away.

21. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings.
21. For there is no one passage of man's Life, but He is acquainted with it:
and therefore cannot be suspected through Ignorance of their actions (no more
then through fear of their persons) to overlook their Crimes, or to do them
any Injustice.

22. There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity
may hide themselves.
22. They may seek to hide their Wickedness, when they have committed it; and
may make Excuses and subtle Pretenses: But they cannot cast a mist before His
eyes, who sees into the thickest Darkness, and the deepest Secrets.

23. For he will not lay upon man more then right; that he should enter into
judgment with God.
23. And therefore, as He will never charge man with that of which he is not
guilty; so, when He calls him to an account, He will not delay, nor put off his
Judgment, to hear what man can say for himself.

24. He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in
their stead.
24. For He needs not be informed how matters stand; and therefore breaks in
pieces Mighty men, without inquiry or examination of witnesses against them;
and confers their Dignity upon others.

25. Therefore he knows their works, and he overturneth them in the night so
that they are destroyed.
25. And by this means shows that He knows their works; when He so suddenly
overturns them, that they are crushed in pieces.

26. He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others:
26. He punishes them as men that in his eyes are apparently wicked; and
therefore makes them public Examples for the terror of their neighbors.

27. Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways.
27. Because they would not follow his Counsels, nor regard any of his Commands:

28. So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he hears
the cry of the afflicted.
28. But went on in their Oppression of the Poor, till they cried to Heaven for
Vengeance upon them: and the Cry of such afflicted people God never fails to
answer.

29. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides
his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a nation, or
against a man only:
29. And if He will grant such poor wretches rest and ease, who can disturb
them? or if He be angry with their Oppressor, who can show him favor? (which
is as true of whole Nations, as of one single person.)

30. That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.
30. He will not let the wicked Tyrant reign always, though he pretend Piety and
the public Good never so much; lest the people should be ensnared into sin by
his Example.

31. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will
not offend any more.
31. Wherefore it is best for an afflicted person not to complain, but to
suspect himself, (though he be never so good;) and presently to say to God, I
confess this Suffering is just; I will not offend by pleading my Innocence.

32. That which I see not, teach thou me; If I have done iniquity, I will do no
more.
32. If I have overlooked any thing that I should have observed, do thou show it
me: if I have committed any Fault, I will take care to do so no more.

33. Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou
refuse, or whether thou choose, and not I: therefore speak what thou know.
33. Have thou addressed thy self to God in this manner? Answer that question;
for God will recompense it, if thou do despise such good Counsel: which
perhaps thou will choose to do, but so would not I. Speak therefore what thy
opinion is.

34. Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.
34. Or let any understanding person tell us what is their opinion; for such, as
I said before, would I have to judge between us.

35. Job has spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.
35. Job seems to me to be very much mistaken; and his Discourses to be
inconsiderate and without reason.

36. My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end, because of his answers
for wicked men.
36. And therefore I am so far from wishing he may be presently released from
his Afflictions, that I take it to be more desirable, he should be still tried
and proved by them; till he recant the Answers in which he has complained of
Divine Providence, after the manner of wicked men.

37. For he adds rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands amongst us,
and multiplieth his words against God,
37. For otherwise he will add greater Offenses to those lesser he has already
committed: he will defend what he has inconsiderately spoken; nay triumph, as
if he had gotten the better of us; and, in stead of making the Confession to
which I have exhorted him, continue to multiply his Complaints against God.

CHAP. XXXV.
ARGUMENT.
Job still keeps silence, notwithstanding that Elihu had made the harshest
construction of his words; because he was sensible he meant him well, and had
now, in the conclusion of his Discourse, given him very wholesome Counsel; and,
allowing his Integrity, had only charged him with some unhappy Expressions,
which had fallen from him when he was in great anguish of spirit. Which, I
suppose, was the reason he does not contradict him, though he continue, here in
this Chapter, to fasten the very same harsh sense upon his words, v. 2, 3.
Which he refutes from the consideration of the infinite disproportion there is
between Man and God: who is never the worse indeed for any Evil, nor at all the
better for any Good that we do: and yet has such a Love to Mankind, that it
is certain He would not have them miserable, but takes care for their relief
when they are oppressed, if they address themselves, as they ought, to Him.

1. ELIHV spoke moreover, and said,
1. TO this Job making no Answer, Elihu pressed him again, and said;

2. Think thou this to be right, that thou said, My righteousness is more
then Gods?
2. Let me appeal to thy own Conscience. Do thou think this to be right, that
thou said, God is not so righteous as I am?

3. For thou said, What advantage will it be unto thee, and, What profit
shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?
3. What else could be thy meaning, when thou utteredst such words as these,
What does God care whether I be innocent or no? or what benefit shall I have by
it, if I be?

4. I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.
4. I will answer thee, and such as thou art, in a few words.

5. Look unto the heavens, and see and behold the clouds which are higher then
thou.
5. Cast up thine eyes to the Heavens, look upon the Clouds and the Sky; and
consider that, as high as they are, they are not so much above thee, as God is
above them.

6. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto him?
6. And therefore it is true, that He is never the worse for the Sins which thou
have committed; nor will be the worse, though thou should proceed to commit
more and greater:

7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine
hand?
7. And that He is never the better for thy being Righteous; which can conferr
nothing upon Him which He has not already, nor add any thing to his Greatness.

8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit
the son of man.
8. But thou should not conclude from thence, that it is all one whether a man
be good or bad: For thy Wickedness will prove hurtful to thy self and to the
rest of mankind; and thy Righteousness will do thee and them great service.

9. By reason of the multitude of oppressions, they make the oppressed to cry:
they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty.
9. The cries of the Oppressed tell us what mischief Injustice does, and how
miserable it makes them: The tyranny of the mighty forces them to cry aloud to
God for Vengeance; who, though He be not hurt himself by it, is touched with a
sense of their Affliction.

10. But none says, Where is God my maker, who gives songs in the night?
10. The greatest mischief is, that not one of these miserable Wretches inquires
seriously after God, who gave him his being; and is able therefore, not only
to relieve him, but to comfort, yea to fill him with Joy, in the midst of the
saddest Affliction.

11. Who teaches us more then the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser
then the fowls of heaven.
11. Having endued us with Reason and Wisdom to consider, that He, who takes
care of the Beasts and the Birds, will not neglect us; if we do not merely cry
and groan under our Oppressions, (as those brute Creatures do,) but with hearty
Repentance, and a thankful sense of his Benefits, and humble Confidence in his
Goodness, piously address our selves unto Him.

12. There they cry, (but none gives answer) because of the pride of evil men.
12. This is the reason that God does not deliver them; because they lie crying
indeed under their Affliction: but it is not a sense of Him, but only the
haughty Violence of their Oppressors, which extorts it from them.

13. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.
13. For we must not think that God (though He be inclined to relieve the
Afflicted) will give ear to men so void of Piety: He will not regard those, who
have so little regard to Him; even for this reason, because He stands in need
of nobody.

14. Although thou say thou shall not see him, yet judgmeni is before him,
therefore trust thou in him.
14. Therefore, although thou complainest that thou do not see Him appear for
thy deliverance; (XXIII. 8.) yet do not conclude from thence that He is
unrighteous: but go and condemn thy self before Him, and then patiently wait
for his Mercy.

15. But now because it is not so, he has visited in his anger, yet he knows
it not in great extremity:
15. But now, because there is nothing of this in thee, God has thus severely
afflicted thee; and not at all regarded the exceeding great Prosperity wherein
thou have hitherto lived.

16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain: he multiplieth words without
knowledge.
16. And Job may spare his Complaints hereafter, for they are to no purpose: he
heapeth up words without reason.

CHAP. XXXVI.
ARGUMENT.
Having reprehended some of the unwarrantable Expressions in Job's Discourses,
(which he himself would not justify,) Elihu comes closer to the buisiness, and
speaks to the very Cause it self. Showing from the Nature of God, and the
Methods of his Providence, that if Job had, in stead of Disputing, submitted
himself humbly to God's Corrections, He would have delivered him: (it being as
easy for Him to lift up, as to cast down:) And that his not discerning the
Reason of his Corrections, (which Job had made a great cause of his Grief, XIX.
7.) ought not to have hindered his humble Submission; because we are not able to
comprehend any of the Works of God, which we see every day, and acknowledge to
be most excellently contrived.

1. ELIHV also proceeded, and said,
1. JOB still keeping silence, Elihu proceeded in his Discourse, and said;

2. Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, that I have yet to speak on God's
behalf.
2. Be not weary, and I will open my mind more fully; for thou have not yet
heard all that God has to say for himself by my mouth;

3. I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and I will ascribe righteousness to my
maker.
3. Which shall now, from the most sublime Contemplations, assert the
Righteousness of my Maker.

4. For truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in knowledge is
with thee.
4. For assure thy self I will not seek to baffle thee with sophistical
Arguments: He that discourses with thee is none of those subtle Disputers, but
loves sincere and solid Reason.

5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any: he is mighty in strength and
wisdom.
5. Know then that God is most mighty, but despises not the meanest: The
excellence of His Power, and the greatness of His Mind, will not suffer Him to
wrong anybody.

6. He preserves not the life of the wicked: but gives right to the poor.
6. When men are extremely wicked, and fit to be punished, He will let them live
no longer; but the Poor at last shall recover their right, and be delivered out
of their Affliction.

7. He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings are they on
the throne, yea, he does establish them for ever, and they are exalted.
7. For whatsoever Affliction the Righteous suffer, God never ceases to take a
special care of them; and sometimes raises them to the highest Offices that
Kings can confer upon them: in which they are settled as long as they live, and
exalted above the power of their Enemies that would pull them down.

8. And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction:
8. Or if they should fall into any Trouble, which lies as heavy on them, and
holds them as fast, as if they were bound with chains and with cords;

9. Then he shows them their work, and their transgressions that they have
exceeded.
9. It is only to make them reflect upon their Lives, and to show them their
Sins; because they grow strong, and begin to prevail over them.

10. He opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return
from iniquity.
10. He disposes them hereby to listen to Instruction, and admonishes them to
forsake their Sins, and return to their Duty.

11. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and
their years in pleasures.
11. And if they profit so much by their Affliction, as to obey this Counsel,
and devoutly serve Him, they shall regain their former Splendor; and pass the
rest of their life in Prosperity and Pleasure.

12. But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die
without knowledge.
12. But if they be disobedient, they shall be utterly cut off, and die in their
Folly.

13. But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he binds
them.
13. And they that are false-hearted do but heap up Wrath to themselves by their
counterfeit Piety: which surprises them so suddenly, that it gives them no time
so much as to cry to God, when his Punishments seize on them.

14. They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.
14. They die before their time in the flower of their age; and perish like the
impure Sodomites, with an hasty and unexpected Destruction.

15. He delivers the poor in his affliction, and opens their ears in
oppression.
15. Whereas He delivers the poor humble man in his Affliction; and makes his
Oppression the means of giving him wholesome Counsel:

16. Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad place
where there is no straitness, and that which should be set on thy table, should
be full of fatness.
16. Even so would He have rescued thee (if thou had humbly submitted to his
Correction) out of these miserable Streights to which thou art reduced: and not
only enlarged thee, but set thee so far from all danger of falling again into
them, that Peace and Plenty should have been thy portion.

17. But thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice
take hold on thee.
17. But thou have maintained the cause of the Wicked: and such as a man's Cause
is, such will the Judgment of God be upon him.

18. Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke:
then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.
18. And because God is angry with thee, take heed lest thou farther incense Him
to punish thee so heavily, that upon no terms He will deliver thee.

19. Will he esteem thy riches? no not gold, nor all the forces of strength.
19. Do thou think He will have any regard to thy Riches? No, not if thou
had all the Treasure and all the Force which all the power on earth can
muster up.

20. Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.
20. Do not dream that they can do thee any service; nor entertain thy self
with vain hopes, as thou art musing on thy bed in the night: when God sometimes
destroys whole Nations on a sudden.

21. Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this have thou chosen rather then
affliction.
21. But let thy Sufferings teach thee Caution, and make thee afraid to go on to
provoke offended Justice: for thou have done it too much already, in choosing
rather to accuse Divine Providence, then to submit patiently to his
Chastisements.

22. Behold, God exalts by his power: who teaches like him?
22. Consider the vast extent of God's Power, which lifts men up as well as
casts them down. What Lord is there so absolute as He? or who shall teach Him
how to govern his Dominions?

23. Who has enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou have wrought iniquity?
23. What Visiter is there over Him, to examine and take an account of His
Actions? or who may presume to say, This or that is not well done?

24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.
24. See that thou leave off this carping at his Providence; and remember to
extol and magnify it, as well as the wonderful fabric of the World, which
men behold with admiration and praise.

25. Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off.
25. All mankind contemplate it with astonishment: there are none so dull, but
in the farthermost parts of the earth they behold, if they open their eyes, the
Majesty of God;

26. Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his
years be searched out.
26. And must confess that He is great in Wisdom and Power, and cannot be
comprehended by our shallow Understandings; which are presently confounded,
when they enter into the Search of His Eternal Being.

27. For he makes small the drops of water: they pour down rain according to
the vapor thereof:
27. For it is He who dissolves the Clouds into water, and does not pour it down
all at once; but by small drops sweetly restores to the earth the vapor which
was exhaled from thence.

28. Which the clouds do drop, and distill upon man abundantly.
28. For He has made the Clouds to be fluid bodies; which distill their showrs
in so many places, that there are multitudes of spectatours and admirers of
this wonderful contrivance.

29. Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his
tabernacle?
29. And can any one understand how He spreads those Clouds, and makes them hang
in the air, when they are full of water? or give an account of the dreadful
Sounds, which are heard from thence, and which tell us that He dwells in those
celestial places?

30. Behold, he spreads his light upon it, and covers the bottom of the sea.
30. Observe also how He spreads the beams of the Sun upon the Sea, and covers
it all over with light; which raises new Vapors and Clouds in the room of
those which are exhausted.

31. For by them judges he the people, he gives meat in abundance.
31. Which He uses for quite contrary ends; both to punish mankind by Storms and
Tempests and Floods, and to make a plentiful provision for them by fruitful
Showrs.

32. With clouds he covers the light; and commands it not to shine, by the
cloud that comes betwixt.
32. By those Clouds also He sometimes quite hides the Sun from us, that it
cannot ripen the Fruits; and sometimes only intercepts its beams a while, that
it may not burn them up by immoderate heat.

33. The noise thereof shows concerning it, the cattle also concerning the
vapor.
33. The very Cattle perceive the Cloud as soon as it rises, and declare what
God intends to do with it; whether to turn it into Storms and Tempests, or
into fruitful Rain and Showrs.

CHAP. XXXVII.
ARGUMENT.
Elihu continues his Speech, which he had begun before, concerning the
incomprehensible Works of God: and limits himself chiefly, as he had in the
foregoing Chapter, to the Wonders God does in the Clouds. To which, at last,
he subjoyns the amazing extent, brightness and firmness of the Sky; in which
the Sun shines with a luster, which we are not able to behold. And thence
concludes, that the Splendor of the Divine Majesty is infinitely more dazzling,
and that we must not pretend to give an account of his Counsels.

1. AT this also my heart trembles, and is moved out of his place.
1. THESE are a few of the Works of God; and though there be innumerable more,
yet this one single effect of his Power strikes terror into me, and makes my
heart tremble, as if it would leap out of my body, and leave me dead.

2. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out of
his mouth.
2. Hearken, I beseech you, seriously to the horrible Noise, which comes out of
some of those clouds; and it will astonish you also. The smallest Murmurs of it
are so dreadful, that it may be fitly styled the Voice of God, calling men to
stand in awe of Him.

3. He directs it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of
the earth.
3. It is heard far and near, for he darts it through the whole region of the
air; accompanied with his Flashes of Lightning, which shoot to the ends of the
earth.

4. After it a voice roareth: he thundreth with the voice of his excellency,
and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.
4. After them follow the claps of Thunder, more terrible then the roarings of a
Lion: which grow louder and louder, till they conclude in violent Rain, or
Hail, or Tempest.

5. God thundreth marvellously with his voice; great things does he, which we
cannot comprehend.
5. And He who thunders thus with His most wonderful Voice, does other great
things, which the wit of man cannot comprehend.

6. For he says to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewise to the small rain,
and to the great rain of his strength.
6. For in those clouds, which I have so often mentioned, He makes the Snow, and
commands it to cover the earth: and on a sudden they turn into Rain, which
sometimes falls in gentle Showrs, and sometimes in impetuous Spouts of water.

7. He seals up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work.
7. Which stop the labor of all those whose buifiness is in the fields; and
makes the Husbandmen know that He disposes of it as He pleases.

8. Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.
8. The very Beasts also are driven, at that season, into their Lurking-places,
and are forced to stay in their Dens.

9. Out of the south comes the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.
9. From one quarter of the Heavens blow turbulent Winds; and from the opposite
quarter, those cold Blasts which clear and purify the air again.

10. By the breath of God, frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is
straightened.
10. By the like sharp blasts God sends the Frost; and binds up the Waters so
fast that they cannot flow.

11. Also by waterings he wearieth the thick cloud: be scatters his bright
cloud.
11. In serene evenings also He presses the cloud, into drops of Dew upon the
earth: or the dewy cloud receiving the Sunbeams, by a dispersed and various
light, makes the beautiful Rainbow in the Heavens.

12. And it is turned round about by his counsels: that they may do whatsoever
he commands them upon the face of the world in the earth.
12. For it is turned about and whirled several ways, according to the orders
of His wise Counsel; and so are all the rest that I have mentioned, which
execute his Commands upon the face of the whole earth.

13. He causes it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or for
mercy.
13. Being sent either to bring a Dearth, and to scourge our sins with Plagues
and Pestilential Diseases; or to produce the wonted Crop of the earth, for the
necessary sustenance of man and beast; or to reward our Obedience with
extraordinary Plenty and very Healthful seasons.

14. Hearken unto me, O Job: stand still, and consider the wondrous works of
God.
14. Listen diligently to these things, O Job, do not dispute any more with God,
but silently consider these his wonderful Works.

15. Do thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud
to shine?
15. Can thou tell beforehand what Orders God will give about them? art thou
able to tell so much as when a Rainbow will appear in the clouds?

16. Do thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him
which is perfect in knowledge?
16. What can thou tell us then of the hanging of the Clouds in the air, as in
an equal balance; and such like stupendous Works of his most absolute Wisdom?

17. How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south -wind?
17. Whence comes the violent Heat which wesometimes feel? or how do Calms come
out of the same quarter, from whence come Whirlwinds? v. 9.

18. Have thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten
lookingglass?
18. Lift up thy thoughts still higher, and tell us, did thou join with Him,
when He stretched out the Sky; in which, as in a mirror, we behold the
admirable Power and Wisdom of Him, who, though it be so wide and vast, made it
as firm, as it is clear and bright?

19. Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech by
reason of darkness.
19. Teach us (if thou art so well skilled) what we shall say to Him of His
Power and Wisdom; for we must confess our Ignorance is so great, that our
thoughts are confounded when we attempt it.

20. Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be
swallowed up.
20. Is any thing that I have said of Him worth His hearing? Whoever he be that
goes about to describe Him, shall lose himself, and be dazzled with the
brightness of his Glory.

21. And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the wind
passes, and cleanses them.
21. For, alas! men are not able to look upon the brightness of the Sun, when it
shines in the Heavens, after a wind has swept and cleansed them,

22. Fair weather comes out of the north: with God is terrible majesty.
22. And brought pure and serene weather out of the Northern parts: How then
shall they look upon God, whose Majesty is most dreadful; and therefore not to
be pried into with Curiosity, but worshipped and praised with the humblest
Reverence?

23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent in power,
and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.
23. For when we have done all we can, we must acknowledge that the Almighty
cannot be comprehended by our Understanding: His Power is so excellent, His
Judgment so exact, His Justice so abundant, that He ought not to be questioned
by us for what He does; but if He be, He will not give an account of His
Actions.

24. Men do therefore fear him: he respects not any that are wise of heart.
24. Which should make all men stand in awe of Him, and lowly adore, rather then
boldly dispute with Him: For He despises all those who are so wise in their
own conceit.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
ARGUMENT.
What Elihu had said concerning the Divine Majesty, in the 22. verse of the
foregoing, God declares to be true, by a sensible demonstration, as I have
expressed it in the first Verse of this Chapter. In which God himself appears
as a Judge (according to Job's repeated desires) to decide this great
Controversy. And taking up the Argument begun by Elihu, (who came nearest to
the truth,) and prosecuting it in unimitable words, (excelling his and all
other men's in the loftiness of the style, as much as Thunder does a Whisper,)
He convinces Job of his Ignorance and Weakness; by showing him how little he
understood of the most obvious things in this World. Intending from thence, at
last, to infer, that he who found himself puzzled, when he went about to give
an account of the meanest of God's visible Works, should not presume to
penetrate into his secret Counsels; nor question his Goodness, no more then he
could his Wisdom and Power, though he knew not why he was afflicted. One
instance had been sufficient to bring Job to a Nonplus; but He heaps up
abundance, to humble him the more, when he saw how much cause there was for it:
whether he considered the Earth, or the Heavens; the Sea, or the Sun; things
contained in the bosom of the Sea, or in the bowels of the Earth; especially
all the Meteors (as we call them) which are formed in the Clouds, and the
Constellations in the higher Regions; together with the Beasts upon the earth,
and the Birds which sly in the air; one of each of which he mentions in the end
of this Chapter.

1. THEN the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
1. NO sooner had Elihu spoken these words, but there was a sensible token of
the Presence of that most dreadful Majesty of God, (XXXVII. 22.) among them.
For there arose an unusual Cloud, (after the manner of God's appearing in those
days,) and a Voice came out of it, as loud as a Tempest; which called to Job,
saying,

2. Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
2. Who is this that disparages my Counsels, with his ignorant Discourses about
them?

3. Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer
thou me.
3. If thou have the courage to argue the case with Me, (as thou have often
desired,) make thy self ready for the Debate, and answer me the questions I
shall ask thee.

4. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare if thou
have understanding.
4. Where wast thou, when I founded the earth? speak Man, and relate how I went
about that work, if thou art so skillful as thou pretendest.

5. Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched
the line upon it?
5. How came it to have these Dimensions? (For thou, sure, who presumest to
censure my Providence, can not be ignorant of such matters.) After what
manner was the line and the rule applied, to give it these exact Proportions?

6. Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the
cornerstone thereof?
6. Can thou tell how it was fixed, and settled upon its Center; or what it is
that holds all the Parts of it so firmly together?

7. When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for
joy.
7. Where wast thou when the bright Stars first appeared to proclaim my Praise
with one consent? and all the Angelical Powers expressed their joy, but did
not assist, at the birth of the World?

8. Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth as if it had issued
out of the womb?
8. What Midwise had the Sea, to bring it forth, when it burst out of the
confused Abyss, like an Infant out of the womb?

9. When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a
swadlingband for it,
9. And I covered it with Clouds as with a garment; and wrapped its boisterous
waves in a thick Mist, with as much ease, as a Nurse swaddles a newborn Child?

10. And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,
10. And laid it in that Bed, which I had appointed to be broken up for it in
the earth? where though it be tossed to and fro, as an Infant in a Cradle, yet
it keeps within its Shores, which cannot be overturned.

11. And said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther: and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed.
11. For I have fixed its Bounds, and resolved, Thus far shall thou flow, but no
farther: These Sands and these Clifts shall stop thy swelling waves, be they
lifted up never so tempestuously.

12. Have thou commanded the morning since thy days? and caused the dayspring
to know his place.
12. Raise up thy thoughts still higher, and tell me, do thou remember since
the morning Light was made? or was it thou who ordered the Sun, in what part of
the Heaven it should every day arise?

13. That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be
shaken out of it?
13. And spread its Beams to the ends of the earth; that the Wicked, who delight
in works of darkness, may be detected, and dragged to their deserved Punishment?

14. It is turned as clay to the seal, and they stand as a garment.
14. For they are daunted at its approach, and change color as often as the Clay
does its form under different seals: they are no more consistent with
themselves then a changeable Garment:

15. And from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm shall be
broken.
15. And at last lose the use of that Light, which innocent persons enjoy with
so much pleasure: their insolent Power, which in the Night was so audacious,
being broken in pieces in the Morning.

16. Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? or have thou walked in the
search of the depth?
16. O thou who adventurest to enter into the Abyss of my Judgments, did thou
ever penetrate into the spring of the Sea? or have thou perfectly discovered
all that lies at the bottom of that great Deep?

17. Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the doors
of the shadow of death?
17. Has the Earth opened all her dark caverns to thee? or have thou gone down
to the very Center of it?

18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare, if thou know it
all.
18. Nay, do thou so much as understand all that grows upon the Surface of the
earth? Show thy skill, if it be so comprehensive.

19. Where is the way where light dwells? and as for darkness, where is the
place thereof,
19. Tell me, which is the way that leads to the place where Light takes up its
dwelling when the Sun goes down? or what becomes of the Darkness when the Sun
rises again?

20. That thou should take it to the bound thereof, and that thou should
know the paths to the house thereof?
20. Art thou able to go, and bring either of them hither? or to carry them back
again away from hence, and prescribe them their limits at thy pleasure?

21. Know thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number of thy
days is great?
21. Art thou acquainted with these things, because thou wast then born when I
made them? How come thou to discourse so confidently of my Government of
mankind, who could neithertell that thou should be born, nor art able now
to say when thou shall die?

22. Have thou entered into the treasure of the snow? or have thou seen the
treasures of the hail,
22. And when wast thou in the Clouds, to see how the Snow or the Hail is made
in such abundance?

23. Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of
battle and war?
23. That I need no other weapon then those, if I please to use them, for the
destruction of mine Enemies?

24. By what way is the light parted, which scatters the eastwind upon the
earth?
24. Art thou able to give an account how the Light diffuses it self, all over
in an instant? or what makes the East Wind blow so violently upon the earth?

25. Who has divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters? or a way for
the lightning of thunder,
25. Did thou make a chanel in Heaven for the conveyance of overflowing
Showrs? or open the way for the breaking out of Lightning and Thunder?

26. To cause it to rain on the earth where no man is; on the wilderness
wherein there is no man?
26. Is it by thy direction that these Showrs go, and fall upon the desert
places; where there are no Inhabitants to employ their art to provide them with
water?

27. To satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of the
tender herb to spring forth?
27. And that they satisfy the dry and barren parts of the earth, where all the
labor of man is unprofitable, without such plentiful Rains to make them
fruitful?

28. Has the rain a father? or who has begotten the drops of the dew?
28. What Is more common then the Rain and the Dew? but who is able to produce
one drop of either?

29. Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who has
gendred it?
29. In whose womb was the Ice formed? or who can make so small a thing as the
hoary Frost?

30. The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.
30. Whence comes the Cold that turns the waters into Stone, and fetters the
raging waves of the Sea?

31. Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the hands of
Orion?
31. Can thou forbid the sweet Flowers to come forth, when the Seven-stars
arise in the Spring? or open the Earth for the Husbandman's labor, when the
Winter season, at the rising of Orion, ties up their hands?

32. Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season, or can thou guide
Arcturus with his sons?
32. Is it by thy power that the rest of the Stars, great and small, appear in
the Southern and the Northern Signs, in their proper season?

33. Know thou the ordinances of heaven? can thou set the dominion thereof
in the earth?
33. Do thou understand the Orders and the Laws, which I have established
among the Heavenly Bodies? or could thou tell what to do, if it were
referred to thee here on earth, to settle the Government of them?

34. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may
cover thee?
34. Let me see an instance of thy Power and Skill; lift up thy voice to the
Clouds, and command them to pour out abundance of waters, upon the place where
thou now art.

35. Can thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we
are?
35. Or call to the Lightnings, and bid them go whither thou have a mind to send
them: and let me hear them answer, Behold, we are ready to obey thee.

36. Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? or who has given understanding
to the heart?
36. Did thou give thy self understanding? How comes it then to be so small,
that thou can not tell how a Thought is made?

37. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles of
heaven,
37. Nor with all the Wisdom thou have, so much as count the number of the
Clouds? whose Showrs thou art as unable to stop, as to make them run:

38. When the dust grows into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?
38. Though they have fallen so long, that the earth is abundantly satisfied, and
fit for the plough, or for the seed.

39. Will thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of the young
lions,
39. Or do thou pretend to have great power upon Earth, though none in Heaven?
will thou undertake then to provide food for a Lion and all his whelps?

40. When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?
40. And that in a Desert; where they lie lurking in their dens, and greedily
watch for a prey, in close and shady places?

41. Who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God,
they wander for lack of meat.
41. Or, which is less, will thou take upon thee to feed the young Ravens? who,
expelled by the old ones out of their nest, complain to Me of their Cruelty,
but know not where to get a bit of meat?

CHAP. XXXIX.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter continues the Discourse begun in the latter end of the foregoing,
concerning God's Providence about Beasts and Birds. And to the Two before
mentioned, he adds Seven more. First, the wild Goat or Hind, whose hard labor
among the rocks God is wont to help and promote (as the Psalmist observes XXIX.
9. and other Authors agree) by a clap of Thunder; the terror of which puts
her into such an agony, that she presently excludes her young one, which sticks
in the birth. Then he mentions the wild Ass; and after that a tall Creature in
those Countries called Reem: which we render an Unicorn; but Bochartus has
proved to be a two-horned Goat in Arabia of great strength, with an erected
head and ears. Of the rest I need say nothing here, they are so well known.

1. Know thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? or can
thou mark when the hinds do calve?
1. VAIN Man, who would so fain pry into my Secrets! did thou ever climb the
rocks to see the wild Goats bring forth? or have thou assisted at the hard
labor of the Hindes, and helped to ease them of their burden?

2. Can thou number the months that they fulfill? or know thou the time
when they bring forth?
2. Do thou know the moment of their conception? or keep an account when
they will be delivered?

3. They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out their
sorrows.
3. Have thou seen how they bow themselves? with what pain they bring forth, and
with how much difficulty they are freed from their sorrow?

4. Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn: they go forth
and return not unto them.
4. And yet their young ones are lusty and strong; they grow up in the open
fields; they leave their mothers, and return to them no more.

5. Who has sent out the wild ass free? or who has loosed the bands of the
wild ass?
5. Was it thou that gave the wild Ass his liberty, and made him so free from
the Servitude, in which you keep other creatures?

6. Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.
6. Who but I made that difference between him and them; and laying no burden
on him, assigned him the Wilderness and barren Countries for his habitation?

7. He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regards he the crying of
the driver.
7. Where he laughs at those that live in the tumult and bustle of Cities; and
hears none of the cries of him that drives other Asses to their labor:

8. The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after every
green thing.
8. Nor is confined in small Enclosures, but has whole Mountains to range in
for his pasture; where he finds sufficient food to appease his hunger.

9. Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide by thy crib?
9. Go to the Unicorn, (thou who would have all things conformable to thy
will,) and see if thou can persuade him to serve thee: will he be content to
be tied to thy crib all night?

10. Can thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow
the valleys after thee?
10. Or submit his proud neck to thy yoke all day? can thou make him go to
plough? or will he draw the harrow over thy land?

11. Will thou trust him, because his strength is great? or will thou leave thy
labor to him?
11. Will thou rely upon him (because his strength is great) to do all the rest
of thy work in the field?

12. Will thou believe him that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into
thy barn?
12. Or leave thy harvest out of doors, till thou have prevailed with him to
bring it home, and lay it in thy barn?

13. Gave thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and feathers unto
the ostrich?
13. Have other Birds any reason to complain that they are not so goodly as the
Estrich? whose wing is triumphant, if it be compared with the wing and the
feather of the Stork.

14. Which leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust;
14. But her inward qualities are not so beautiful as her plumes: For she does
not seek for solitary places wherein to lay her Eggs; but drops them any-where
upon the ground, and negligently leaves them to be corrupted by the heat of the
Sand and of the Sun.

15. And forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may
break them.
15. She does not secure them from the foot of travelers or of wild beasts; who
frequently tread upon them, and crush them in pieces:

16. She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers: her
labor is in vain without fear;
16. But is hardened against the fruit of her own womb, as if it were not hers;
and so she loses all her labor, because she has no fear it may be lost.

17. Because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
understanding.
17. For God has not given her that wisdom which he has bestowed upon other
Creatures; but made her of a stupid and careless nature:

18. What time she lifts up her self on high, she scorneth the horse and his
rider.
18. Though He has imparted so much as is necessary for her preservation: For
when she raises her self, and lifts up her wings, she runs so fast, that she
despises a man on horseback, who cannot overtake her.

19. Have thou given the horse strength? have thou clothed his neck with
thunder?
19. And now I speak of the Horse, let me ask thee again, Who was it that made
him so much superior to other creatures in strength and in courage? Did thou
give him his valiant Spirit; or clothe his neck with such a stately Main?

20. Can thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is
terrible.
20. Or put that Vigor and Mettle into him, which makes him leap and bound in
the air like a grasshopper? There is a majesty in his Looks; and when he snoars
vehemently it is terrible.

21. He paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength: he goes on to
meet the armed men.
21. He stamps impatiently on the ground, and breaks it up with his feet: he
glories in his strength, and goes out boldly to meet the arms that oppose him.

22. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turns he back from
the sword.
22. He derides all the dreadful instruments of War, and cannot be dismayed by
them: he runs upon naked Swords;

23. The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.
23. And is not daunted at the noise of Arrows which come whizzing by his ears,
nor at the sharp points of Spears and Lances which are thrust at his breast.

24. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage: neither believes he
that it is the sound of the trumpet.
24. He makes the earth quake and tremble, as he gallops over it, and rids
abundance of ground in a moment: neither can he stand still, when he hears the
sound of the Trumpet:

25. He says among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smells the battle afar off,
the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
25. But the louder it is, the more he neighs and dances for joy. He perceives
the Battle before it begins, by the thundering voice of the Captains, and the
shouting of the Soldiers.

26. Does the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south?
26. Behold, also, how the Hawk mounts up aloft. Did thou give her those swift
wings? or teach her, when the winter comes, to fly into the southern parts;
that she may still enjoy the warmth of the Sun?

27. Does the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?
27. But what Bird sores so high as the Eagle? Is she beholden to thee for that
strength which carries her into the clouds? or was it by thy direction, that
she builds her Nest quite out of all men's reach?

28. She dwells and abides on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the
strong place.
28. She dwells on the top of high Rocks; in the steep and craggy Rock, as in an
inaccessible Fortress, she settles her abode.

29. From thence she seeks the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.
29. There she leaves her young ones safely, while she goes to provide them
food; from thence (so sharp is her sight) she spies her prey a vast way off.

30. Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is she.
30. Which when she has seized and torn, she brings to her nest, that they may
suck its blood: she looks down to the very earth; and where the carcasses lie,
there may she be found.

CHAP. XL.
ARGUMENT.
Job modestly declining to say one word in his own defense, (though he was
graciously invited by God to speak, if he had any Plea remaining,) is still
more humbled by a plain declaration from the Divine Majesty, that Elihu had
reason to reprove him for his immoderate Complaints, (which some might look
upon as an Accusation of God's Providence;) and for maintaining his own
Righteousness so much, and God's Righteousness so little, in the Dispute he had
had with his Friends. Showing him withal, that he was not sensible enough of
the infinite Distance and Inequality between him and God; when he desired so
vehemently to argue his Case with Him, that he forgot to make those Submissions
to the Divine Majesty, which had better become him. This Disproportion is most
lively represented and illustrated, by an admirable description of the strength
of the BEHEMOTH, a word of Egyptian termination; signifying, not the Elephant,
(which seldom lies down, and never among reeds, as this does, v. 21.) but a
creature in that Country called by the Greek Writers Hippopotamus, i. e.
River-horse. For it appears by the Second book of Esdras, Chap. VI. v. 49. that
the Hebrews reckon Behemoth, not among the Land-creatures, but among those
belonging to the Water, which were created on the fifth day. And there is none,
that we know, of that sort, to whom the Characters here mentioned belong, but
the Creature now named.

1. MOreover the LORD answered Job, and said,
1. AFTER a short silence, to see what Job would reply to this long Discourse,
the Lord proceeded, and said;

2. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that reproves
God, let him answer it.
2. Why do thou not speak? Has not the Almighty brought Arguments enough to
convince thee? Let him that will argue with God about His Providence, first
make an Answer to these Questions.

3. Then Job answered the LORD, and said,
3. Then Job, whose Confusion had made him silent, answered with great humility,
and said;

4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my
mouth.
4. Behold, I am a wretched creature, and not worthy to speak unto thy Majesty:
nor do I know what to answer; and therefore I will hold my peace.

5. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea, twice, but I will proceed
no farther.
5. I have said too much already, in speaking only these two words to Thee: But
I have done; I will add no more.

6. Then answered the LORD unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
6. Then the Divine Majesty spoke again, after the same manner as before, saying,

7. Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou
unto me.
7. What? have thou (who desiredst so much to plead with Me) lost thy Courage?
pluck up thy spirit, man, and prepare thy self (as I said at the first) to
answer the Questions I shall farther ask thee.

8. Will thou also disannull my judgment? will thou condemn me that thou may
be righteous?
8. Is there any reason to suspect my Care of Mankind, who have shown it so much
about other Creatures? Can thou not defend thy self, but thou must also
complain of Me? must I be condemned, that thou may be justified?

9. Have thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like him?
9. Who art thou, that talkest so much of thine own Innocence, that thou
forgettest to maintain my Righteousness? Have thou a Power equal to mine? or
can thou speak with a Voice like this; or imitate the Thunder thou hear in
the clouds?

10. Deck thy self now with majesty and excellency, and array thy self with
glory and beauty.
10. Lift up thy self then, and let me see thee appear in the highest Majesty:
put on thy Robes, and show thy self in such Royal state, that all may honor
and reverence thy excellent Greatness.

11. Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and
abase him.
11. Let all thine Adversaries round about thee (as becomes a mighty Prince)
feel the fierceness of thy Wrath: frown upon all the haughty, and make them
hang down their heads.

12. Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low: and tread down the
wicked in their place.
12. Look, I say, upon every proud Oppressor, and make him cringe and throw
himself at thy feet: tread down all the Wicked, wheresoever thou shall find
them.

13. Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in secret.
13. Cast them all into one grave, that the world may be no more troubled with
them: cover those faces with perpetual shame and confusion, which now bear
themselves so high, and overlook all others.

14. Then will I also confess unto thee, that thine own right hand can save
thee.
14. When I see thee do such things as these, then will I my self also magnify
thy Power; and acknowledge that thou need none of my help to deliver thee.

15. Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee, he eats grass as an ox.
15. But consider a while (if thou art not yet humble enough) a Creature
Behemoth, i. e. Riverhorse.
which I have made in a Country not far from thee: He lives among the fishes in
the great river of Egypt, but he feeds upon the earth, and eats gra^^ like an
Ox.

16. Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his
belly.
16. Consider, I say, the greatness of his Strength, and the firmness of his
Flesh: not only in his Loins, but even in the Navel of his belly; where other
creatures are wont to be weak and tender.

17. He moves his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped
together.
17. He has a Tail as thick and as stiff as a Cedar; but he bends and throws it
back at his pleasure: the Nerves of his thighs are so many, that they are
intricate and perplexed one within another.

18. His bones are as strong pieces of brass, his bones are like bars of iron.
18. His Bones (for so they are rather then Grissles) are as strong as bars of
brass, and as hard and firm as rods of iron.

19. He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him, can make his sword
to approach unto him.
19. He is one of the principal works of God, a very singular instance of his
Power: He that made him has fastened such crooked Teeth in his jaws, exceeding
sharp, that therewith he mows the grass and the corn, as with a Sithe.

20. Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the
field play.
20. For he goes (in the night) to graze upon the hills; in the company of the
rest of the beasts (...) the field, who sport themselves in those rich pastures:

21. He lies under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.
21. But (in the day) he lies down in shady and close places; under the covert
of the reeds, and in the fenny mud.

22. The shady trees cover him with their shadow: the willows of the brook
compass him about.
22. The bushy trees, which are there very numerous, afford him a shelter: he is
encompassed with the willows and the osiers, which grow in abundance on the
banks of Nile.

23. Behold, he drinks up a river, and hastes not: he trusts that he can
draw up Jordan into his mouth.
23. Nay, (behold a wonder) he dives to the very bottom of the river, and there
takes his repose without fear: He will be secure, though Jordan also should
break out, and be poured upon his mouth.

24. He takes it with his eyes: his nose pierces through snares.
24. Who dare come in his sight, and attempt to take him by open force? where is
he that will undertake to fasten hooks in his Nose?

CHAP. XLI.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter another Creature of vast bigness and strength is described,
called in the Arabian language LEVIATHAN. By which we are not, in this place,
to understand the Whale; because that Fish is not armed with such Scales as
Leviathan is here said to have, v. 15. nor is impenetrable, as everybody
knows; and, to say no more, never creeps upon the Earth, which is part of the
description of this Leviathan, v. 33. Whereby we are therefore to understand
the Crocodile, (to whom every part of this description exactly belongs,) a
Creature as big again as a Man of the greatest stature, and in some places
vastly greater: there having been Crocodiles seen of twenty, nay forty foot
long; and in some places of an hundred. To this fierce and untameable Creature
God sends Job, that he might learn more Humility, then to contend with his
Majesty; when he saw how unable he was to stand before one of his Creatures.
That use He himself teaches Job to make of this description, v. 10, 11, 12.

1. CAN thou draw out leviathan with an book? or his tongue with a cord which
thou let down?
1. THERE is another Creature also in the same River, which I would have thee
consider; and behold therein the Divine Power, and humane Weakness. Can thou
catch * Crocodile. the Leviathan * as you do other fishes? can thou let down
a line, and draw him out by the tongue with a hook?

2. Can thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?
2. When thou have made a cord of the rushes of the river, can thou put it
about his nose; or strike an iron, as sharp as a thorn, into his jaw?

3. Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto
thee?
3. Will he importune thy favor, and with many prayers beseech thee to spare
him? will he sue for his liberty with submissive words, and speak thee fair to
let him go?

4. Will he make a covenant with thee? will thou take him for a servant for
ever?
4. Will he enter into bonds, and make a solemn covenant with thee, never to do
thee hurt; but to be thy slave, and do thee service for ever?

5. Will thou play with him, as with a bird? or will thou bind him for thy
maidens?
5. Will thou adventure to play with him, as with a Sparrow? or tie him by the
leg, for the sport and pastime of thy Daughters?

6. Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the
merchants?
6. Shall the society of Fishermen make a feast for joy they have taken him? and
sell their share in him among the Merchants?

7. Can thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears?
7. Where is the dart wherewith thou can hope to penetrate his Skin? or the
fish-spear that is able to wound his Head?

8. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.
8. Go, and touch him if thou dare: the battle will be soon ended, for thou
shall not do it the second time.

9. Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the
sight of him?
9. Mark what I say; he will be sorely disappointed that thinks to take him: for
he will be ready to sink down with fear at the very sight of him.

10. None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before
me?
10. Though he lie asleep on the shore, there is none so hardy, as to dare to
awake him. Who is he then that takes upon him to contend with Me? If one of my
Creatures be so terrible, how dangerous is it to provoke my Majesty?

11. Who has prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the
whole heaven is mine.
11. And where is the man to whom I am a Debtour? How came I, that made the
whole World, to be obliged to thee, or any one else? Did you first begin to do
me kindnesses, that I should owe you a requital?

12. I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.
12. What Insolence is this, to dispute with Me, when thou art not able to stand
before this single work of my hands? none of whose lims or joints I will
conceal; nor forbear to speak of his strength, and of the comely disposition of
all his parts.

13. Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his
double bridle?
13. And first take a view of his scaly Skin, wherewith he is covered: who has
ever stripped him of that upper garment? or who dare come within his doubled
Snout?

14. Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about.
14. Who will venture to open his wide Jaws, and so much as look into his Mouth?
in which his long rows of Teeth are very dreadful.

15. His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.
15. The Scales of his back are like the plates of a shield, which I have
provided for his defense: every one of them is closely compacted, and strictly
sealed to the next.

16. One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.
16. They are knit so close, that the air, which presses into all things else,
cannot come between them.

17. They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be
sundred.
17. They cleave one to another, they hold so fast together, that no art or
violence can make a separation.

18. By his neezings a light does shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of
the morning.
18. When he sneezeth, as he lies gaping in the Sun, the Spirits break forth
with such a force, that they seem to sparkle: and when he rises up out of the
river, his Eyes appear before the rest of his body, as the morning light before
the Sun.

19. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.
19. The Steam also which then comes out of his mouth is as vehement as if it
were full of burning torches; or there were a fire in him, that sends forth
sparks.

20. Out of his nostrils goes smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron.
20. Out of his Nostrils goes a Smoke like the reek of a seething pot, or a
boiling caldron.

21. His breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth.
21. His Breath is so hot, though he come out of the water, that it is
sufficient to kindle coals; and may be called a flame, which issues out of his
mouth.

22. In his neck remains strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him.
22. His Neck is exceeding strong, as if it were the very seat of strength:
sadness and terror marches before him, and seizes on all those that meet him.

23. The flakes of his flesh are, joined together: they are firm in themselves,
they cannot be moved.
23. The Muscles of his flesh are glewed together; every one of them is compact
and solid; they are not easily moved.

24. His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether
millstone.
24. He is as far from Fear, as he is from Pity: for his heart is as firm as a
stone; as hard as an anvil, or a piece of the nether millstone.

25. When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings
they purify themselves.
25. But the stoutest hearts tremble when he lifts up himself above the water:
they are seized with such a fright, that they are at their wits end, and know
not which way to turn themselves.

26. The sword of him that lays at him cannot hold; the spear, the dart, nor
the habergeon.
26. Though they assault him with the sword, it will do them no service; for
the hardness of his Skin will break it in pieces: the Spear, also the Dart and
the Javelin are altogether as feeble, and cannot enter into him.

27. He esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.
27. All the other Weapons of iron (which the wit of man can devise) he values
no more then a straw; and those of brass, no more then rotten wood.

28. The arrow cannot make him flee: sling-stones are turned with him into
stubble.
28. The Arrow shot out of the strongest bow cannot make him flee: and those
Stones, which are thrown out of a Sling with so much force, move him no more
then a little chaff.

29. Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.
29. Lay at him with heavy Clubs, and he regards them no more then if they were
stubble: shake the Lance at him, and he contemns its most violent thrusts.

30. Sharp stones are under him: he spreads sharp-pointed things upon the
mire.
30. For in stead of him, it meets only with the rough Shells wherewith he is
armed: which are so hard, that he beats back the sharpest Weapon, and throws it
into the mire.

31. He makes the deep to boil like a pot: he makes the sea like a pot of
ointment.
31. When he tumbles about in the bottom of the River, he raises bubbles on the
top; and the water of the Lake is so troubled, with the slimy mud which he
stirs up, that it looks like a Pot of ointment.

32. He makes a path to shine after him: one would think the deep to be hoary.
32. When he swims, he makes furrows in the face of the Deep; and leaves a path
behind him so covered with froth and foam, that it looks as if it were grown
old, and were full of gray hairs.

33. Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.
33. His fellow is not to be found upon the earth; where he creeps indeed in the
dust, but is so made that he cannot be trodden under foot and bruised.

34. He beholds all high things: he is a king over all the children of pride.
34. No, though he lie so low, yet he despises the tallest Beasts; and reigns
over the Oxen and Camels, and all those creatures whose long legs raise them to
the loftiest height: whom he masters and rends in pieces at his pleasure.

CHAP. XLII.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter concludes the Book, with an account how Job completed the
Submission which he had begun before to make to God. Whose Pardon he
sorrowfully begs; confessing and repenting of his Fault; resigning himself
entirely to be instructed by Him: but resolving never hereafter to complain,
nor to move any questions about his Providence. This Repentance God accepts;
and for his sake grants a Pardon also to his Friends, whom he condemns as more
faulty then Job. Who after this receives extraordinary marks of God's Favor;
and has such an ample Recompense made him for his Losses, as may encourage all
posterity to persevere in well doing and patient suffering; believing
steadfastly that nothing can be done or permitted by God without much reason,
(whose Wisdom shines so gloriously in all his Works,) and humbly expecting a
comfortable issue out of all our Troubles.

1. THEN Job answered the LORD, and said,
1. THESE words so lively represented the Power, and Wisdom of God in his
Works, that Job, seeing his error more clearly then ever, submitted himself
unto the Great Lord of all, and said;

2. I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be
withholden from thee.
2. I am abundantly satisfied that thy Power is as large as thy Will; and that
nothing can hinder Thee from effecting every thing which Thou designest: but as
Thou had reason to cast me down, so Thou can restore me and lift me up
again.

3. Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered
that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
3. I am sensible also of the Justice of the Reproof which Thou have given me
(XXXVIII. 2.) and do confess I very much forgot my self, when I adventured to
talk so ignorantly of thy wise Administrations. It was that which made me so
rash as to discourse of things far above my reach; wonderful things, which I
ought humbly to admire, not arrogantly censure.

4. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and declare
thou unto me.
4. Be not angry with me, I beseech Thee, but graciously hear me speaking in thy
own words. I do not pretend to give an account of thy wonderful Works and of
thy Providence; and therefore ask me no more Questions, (XXXVIII. 3.) but let
me learn of Thee, and do Thou instruct my Ignorance.

5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee.
5. Something I did know before, of thy Greatness, and Mightiness, and Wisdom;
but nothing so clearly as I do now, by this revelation and visible appearance
of thy dreadful Majesty.

6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.
6. Which touches me with a sensible displeasure against my self, for my
undecent Complaints, and vehement Expostulations, and eager Desires to die or
to be delivered: I condemn them all, (together with whatsoever I have spoken
too boldly about thy Government,) and in the most sorrowful manner repent,
that I have justified my self so much, and Thee so little.

7. And it was so, that after the LORD had spoken these words unto Job, the
LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and
against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right,
as my servant Job has.
7. Which ingenuous Confession pleased the Lord so much, that He did not chide
Job any farther: but turning his voice to Eliphaz, (his principal Accuser,) He
said, I am angry with thee and with thy two Friends: For you have made a
perverse construction of the Afflictions I sent upon Job; whom, notwithstanding
all his Errors, I acknowledge to be my Servant, and to have spoken better of
Me then you have done.

8. Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my
servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering; and my servant Job
shall pray for you, for him will I accept: lest I deal with you after your
folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my
servant Job.
8. And therefore take no less then seven Bullocks, and as many Rams, and carry
them to my Servant Job; whom I appoint to be your Priest, to offer for you a
Burnt-offering, in token of my absolute Dominion over all Creatures. And that
faithful Servant of mine shall pray for you, and obtain your Pardon: for I
have a great love to him, and will be favorable to you for his sake. Do not
fail to go about this, lest I inflict some grievous punishment upon you;
because, as I said, you have made an ill representation of my Providence, and
repeated those things confidently, which my Servant Job showed you to be false.

9. So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite
went, and did according as the LORD commanded them: the LORD also accepted Job.
9. So Eliphaz and his two Companions submitted themselves also unto God, and
went, as He commanded them, and desired Job to intercede for them. And the Lord
heard his Prayer, and was reconciled to them.

10. And the LORD turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends:
also the LORD gave Job twice as much as be had before.
10. And at that very time when Job was performing this charitable office for
his Friends, the Lord was pleased to begin to restore to him all those things
which had been taken away from him: and never ceased, till He had not only
established him in his former Splendor, but made him twice as rich as he was
before.

11. Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all
they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in
his house: and they bemoned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the
LORD had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every
one an ear-ring of gold.
11. All his Kindred likewise and his familiar Acquaintance (whom his unusual
Affliction had estranged from him, XIX. 3.) when they heard of the wonders the
Lord had done for him, came to visit him and feast with him: And after they had
condoled his Misery, and testified their sorrow for all that had befaln him,
they congratulated his happy Recovery; and, in token of their joy, every one of
them presented him with a piece of money, and a pendant of gold.

12. So the LORD blessed the latter end of Job more then his beginning: for he
had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of
oxen, and a thousand sheasses.
12. Thus the Lord impoverished this good Man, only to make him richer. For in
stead of seven thousand Sheep, which he had before his Troubles, he found he
had fourteen thousand, when they were ended; and for three thousand Camels,
which were taken from him, the Lord gave him six thousand: and multiplied his
yoke of Oxen, which were but five hundred, into a thousand; and his she-Asses,
in the same proportion.

13. He had also seven sons, and three daughters.
13. His Wife also became very fruitful, and brought him as many Children as he
had lost; seven Sons, and three Daughters.

14. And he called the name of the first, Jemima, and the name of the second,
Kezia, and the name of the third, Kerenhappuch.
14. And to preserve the memory of so mavelous a Deliverance, (of which they
were so many living monuments,) he called the name of the first Jemima, that
is, the Day; because of the Felicity wherein he now shone, after a sad Night of
Affliction, wherein he had lain: and the second, Kesia, (a Spice of an
excellent smell;) because God had healed his filthy stinking Ulcers, which made
even his Wife refuse to come near him, XIX. 17: and the last he called
Kerenhappuch, i. e. Plenty restored, or, an Horn of varnish; because God had
wiped away the tears which fouled his face, (as he complains XVI. 16.)

15. And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job,
and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.
15. The Beauty also of these Women proved as bright as their Names; for there
were none so amiable in all that Country: and their Father did not (as the
manner was) endow them with a small portion of his goods, but (having a large
estate, and a great affection to them) he made them Coheirs with their
Brethren, in the inheritance which he left them.

16. After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his
sons sons, even four generations.
16. After which glorious Restitution of Himself and his Family, his years were
multiplied as well as his estate: For the Lord added almost an Age and an half
(no less then an hundred and forty years) to those he had lived before; so that
he had the pleasure to see his Childrens Children to the fourth generation:

17. So Job died, being old and full of days.
17. And departed not out of the World till he was so fully satisfied, that he
desired not to live any longer.

AN APPENDIX TO THE PARAPHRASE.
HERE ends the Book of Job: whose short Sufferings (for the space of XII
months, as the Hebrews reckon in Seder Olam) were recompensed with a very long
Life in great Prosperity. If we could rely upon all their Traditions, this
might have been added to the Paraphrase upon the last words, that the whole
time of his Life was two hundred and ten years. For in the Jerusalem Targum
upon XII. Exodus 40. and in Bereschit Rabba upon XLII. Genesis 2. they make account
that the Israelites staid just so long in Egypt: And in the Chronicle
forenamed, and in Bava Bathra and other Books they tell us, that Job was born
that very year when Jacob went with his Family down thither to sojourn; and
died that year when they were delivered from thence by the hand of Moses. But
this agrees neither with what other of their Authors say, whom I mentioned in
my Preface; nor with the LXX, who in the last verse but one of this Book insert
this Clause, All the days of his life were two hundred and forty years.

This indeed might be easily reconciled with the account before mentioned, if
we did but rectify their numbers in the beginning of that verse by the Hebrew
Truth, and cut off the thirty years which they have added to the true time that
he lived after his recovery from his sickness: for then this passage also must
be corrected, and in stead of 240, we must set down 210. Which we might also
prove in this manner (out of Seder Olam, Cap. 3.) to be the right account of
his Age: because it is said v. 10. of the last Chapter, that the Lord added to
Job the double of what he had before; and therefore if an hundred and forty
years were added, he had seventy before, which in all make two hundred and ten.
But it is not worth our while to trouble our selves with such uncertainties:
much less is it safe to rely upon any thing which is supported by no stronger
Authority then the Hebrew Tradition. The vanity of which appears most
notoriously in this, that Manasseh Ben Israel says Lib. 1. de Resurrect. Cap.
ult.
, it is evidently certain by Tradition, that the Mahometans at this day pay a
great reverence to this holy man's Sepulcher, and honor it at Constantinople
with much religion and devotion: when all men that have any considerable
acquaintance with other Authors besides those of their own Nation (upon which
the Hebrews dote) may easily know, that the Job whom the Turks honor was a
Captain of the Saracens, who was slain when they besieged that City in the year
of Christ 675.

It will be to better purpose, if I take notice of an observation of theirs
which has more certainty in it; because clearly founded upon the Holy
Scriptures. Which is, that Job was a Prophet among the Gentiles; and a Prophet
of very eminent quality and degree. Who deserved to have been at least
mentioned by Josephus in his Book of Antiquities, where he has not vouchsafed
to Name him: nay, to have been praised by the Son of Sirach in his Catalogue of
famous men, (XLIV. Ecclus, etc.) who were honored in their Generations, and
were the glory of their Times. But, according to the humor of the Jews, he
magnifies only those of their own Country, or such from whom they were
directly descended: not considering how much it was for their honor, that by
the care of their noble Ancestors the History of Job and his excellent Virtues
had been preserved. Which he ought not therefore to have omitted; but to have
celebrated him among the chief of those Worthy persons, by whom God wrought
great glory; such as did bear rule in their Kingdoms, men renowned for their
power, giving counsel by their understanding, and declaring prophecies, etc.
XLIV. Ecclus 2, 3.

Nay, his Friends deserved a short remembrance, who seem nothing inferior to
the Wise men among the Jews, (though they mistook in the application of many
excellent Truths,) but are acknowledged by themselves to have been Prophets
among the Gentiles. And not without reason; for Eliphaz we read IV. 13, etc.
had Nightvisions, an Apparition of an Angel, and secret Whispers, like the
still small Voice which Elijah heard 1 Kings XIX. 12. which made R. Sol. Jarchi
not fear to say that the Shechinah was upon him. And Elihu, it is easy to
discern, felt a Divine Power working in him mightily, XXXII. 8, 18, 19. which
was not altogether a stranger he shows (XXXIII. 15, 16.) to other men; whom God
in those days instructed by Dreams, among other ways that he had of
communicating his mind to them. But there was none equal to that wherein He
made Himself known to Job: who in three things seems to have had the
preeminence above all the Gentile Prophets. First, In that God was pleased to
speak to him aloud by a Voice from Heaven, XXXVIII. 1. (which the Jews call the
Bath Col,) and not merely in such silent Whispers as He did to Eliphaz.
Secondly, That this Voice was attended with a notable token of a Divine
Presence, from whence it came, viz. a Whirlwind: which I take to have been
something like that sound as of a rushing mighty wind, wherein the Holy Ghost
came upon the day of Pentecost. And Lastly, He saw likewise in all probability
the appearance of some Visible Majesty (XLII. 5.) suppose in a glorious Cloud
(as the LXX seem to understand it, XXXVIII. 1.) or something like that which
Moses beheld in the Bush, when God first called unto him out of the midst of
it. III. Ex. 4.

Which need not at all puzzle our belief; when we consider that the Church in
those days was Catholic, and not as yet confined to any one Family or Nation.
God was pleased indeed to show an extraordinary grace to Abraham, in calling
him out of his own Country and Father's House, where Idolatry had taken a deep
root, and had been long growing without any hope of amendment. (For if we may
give any credit to Kessaeus a Mohammedan writer, or to Elmacinus a Christian,
they were infected with it in the days of Heber, who stoutly opposed it; but
with so little effect, that though God sent a whirlwind which threw down all
their Idols and broke them in pieces, that false worship still prevailed.) But
this does not warrant us to imagine that God utterly rejected, and neglected
all other people: to whom He revealed Himself in a very familiar manner, and
gave many demonstrations of his Divine Presence among them; till they corrupted
their ways by such abominable Idolatries, that they became altogether
unprofitable, and unfit for the society of that Holy Spirit, which often times
moved them. Even among the Canaanites (into whose Country God led Abraham) we
find Melchisedeck was then a Priest of the most high God; a greater person then
that Prophet, and the Minister of that Oracle (some fancy) which Rebekah went
to consult when she felt the Twins struggling in her Womb, XXV. Genesis 22. To
whom I might add several others, if I had a mind to prolong this discourse.

And though the Book before mentioned ( Sedar Olam Rabba, Chap. 21.) is pleased
to say, that the Holy Ghost ceased to inspire men of any other Nation after the
giving of the Law; yet it is easy to show that therein it contradicts even
their own affirmation elsewhere, which is grounded on good reason, that Balaam
was a Prophet divinely moved among the Syrians in Mesopotamia. He was a man
indeed of naughty affections, and inclined to Superstition, but still had many
illuminations and motions from the most High; as appears not only by his
predictions, but by the express words of Moses, who says the Spirit of God came
upon him, XXIV. Number. 2. To which if I should add his own testimony concerning
himself, that he heard the words of God, and saw the vision of the Almighty,
and that in an extraordinary manner, having his eyes open in his ecstasy; I see
no reason why it should be rejected; especially since he declared at the first,
when the Princes of Midian importuned him to go with them, that he would be
wholly guided by the LORD in the buisiness; and when he was come to Balack,
constantly went to meet the LORD, to ask Him what he should say; and professed
his care to speak what the LORD had put in his mouth: XXII. 8. XXIII. 3, 12,
15, etc. These considerations, to which many more might be added, are
sufficient to show that there is little, if any, ground for the opinion of
Theodoret, who resolves Quaest. 39. in Number.
that Balaam did not enquire of the True God; though the answer was given by
him of whom he was ignorant, not by him whom he invoked: and that the
conclusion of S. Basil, Epist. 80. ad Eustath.
or Greg. Nyssen Lib. de Trinitate.
(it is uncertain whose Work it is wherein we find it) is more remote from
truth; who determine, that when the Scripture says he went to consult with
God, we are thereby to understand the Devil. For should we allow the word
ELOHIM or GOD, to be so equivocal, that it may be applied not only to other
excellent Beings besides the Divinity, but to the Devil himself, (which is the
foundation there laid for that conclusion) yet the word JEHOVAH or LORD, is
never so used; and Balaam always says that he would go and meet with Him. And
accordingly the LORD is said to put a word in his mouth, even then, when, just
before, we read that God met him, XXIII. 4, 5. where it is most reasonable by
GOD to understand the Angel, mentioned XXII. 35. whom the LORD employed to
deliver His mind unto him.

All which I have said to show that God did not quite desert the Gentile World,
as long as there were any considerable relics of the ancient Religion
remaining among them; and they did not wholly divert to fables, and deliver up
themselves to the guidance of evil spirits, against the apparent testimony of
the Holy Spirit of God. Who spoke to them by such good men as Job; in whose
days those sinners were not only reproved but punished also by the Judges, who
worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars: which seems to have been the oldest
Idolatry of all other; as not only Maimonides, but Diodorus Siculus observes.
And if they had listened to such instructions, and not suffered themselves to
be led merely by sense, to which those heavenly bodies appeared in such an
amazing brightness that struck with admiration (as the last named Author
speaks) they fancied them to be (...), both Eternal and the first Gods; we
cannot conceive that they would have sunk so low, as to fall into
Image Worship; which in Job's Country does not seem to have obtained in his
days.

But the chiefest part of the Wisdom of this Prophet consisted in his piety:
of which he proved a rare example, as I have said already; especially in
adversity. Wherein he behaved himself with such admirable Virtue, that, though
the Apostle to the Hebrews do not mention him among those who were famous for
their Faith (he not being of their race to whom the Promises were made, yet) S.
James in the next Epistles highly magnifies and applauds his Patience. And not
only propounds him (together with the Prophets and Holy men who had spoken to
them in the Name of the Lord, v. 10.) as a pattern of well doing and contented
suffering to the Christian Hebrews; but numbers him among those Blessed Souls,
whose worthy deeds we praise, and whose happiness we admire, v. 11. Or rather
he names him alone as an example of a happy man; who endured more then any that
we read of in ancient times, and in the end found the Lord so mercifully
gracious and bountiful to him, that it may encourage all pious men to endure
with such wonderful submission as he did.

Who when he lost his goods, his house, his children, his health; nay, was all
over ulcerous and in great pain; and moreover, was solicited by his wife to
speak irreverently; if not irreligiously of God, and to deny his Providence;
and by his Friends was upbraided as an hypocrite, nay accused, in their
passion, as a tyrannical Oppressor; whereby they endeavored to bereave him
(as S. Ambrose observes Lib. 1. de Interpell. C. 4.
) of that great comfort in affliction culpa vacare to be conscious of no
enormous crime, and to make him appear to himself as the author of his
calamity; at which his inferiors mocked and scofft, who had formerly had him in
great veneration; nay, it exposed him to the scorn of those, who were not
worthy to be set with the dogs of his flock; so that he looked as if he had been
deserted by God, and made an example of his heaviest displeasure: yet he bare
all at the very first, (when men are wont to be shaken, nay overthrown by the
sudden news of such dreadful disasters,) not only with much resolution and
resignation, but with hearty thanksgiving; and through the whole course of his
calamity committed no error that I can discern, but what the indiscreet and
uncharitable censures of his Friends provoked him unto; which put him upon too
frequent and long justifications of himself, and perplexed him extremely,
(which seems his greatest trouble) that he could not find out the reason why
God afflicted him so severely.

But in the issue God revealed to him what it was fit for him to think in this
matter also: and thereby has given us such satisfaction in that great
controversy and difficult question about God's Providence, as is nowhere to be
met withal, but in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Even prudent men, as S. Ambrose
L. 11. de Interpellatione, c. 1.
observes in a Book he has written about Job, are apt to be extremely moved
when they see the wicked abound with good things, and the just very much
afflicted: and truly, says he, it is lubricus locus, a slippery place, in which
the Saints have scarce been able to tread in the path of a true Opinion, as we
see in David, and Job; who maintained a long conflict with his three ancient
Friends that came to comfort him upon this subject. And God himself brought the
dispute at last, to such a conclusion, as may fully settle the minds of all
those who meet with this Book, and preserve them from being scandalized, or in
the least offended, on such occasions. The Mahomtans themselves seem to be
fully satisfied; as we read in the Lives of the Fathers, written in the
Arabian language by Kessaeus: who brings in the Most High, speaking to Job's
Friends after this manner Hotting. Hist. Orientalis, l. 1. c. 3.
Do you not know that Job is a Prophet of God, whom He has chosen to his
Apostleship; and to whom He has committed his Inspiration? God would not have
you think that He is angry with him; as you seem to gather from this afflicted
state wherein he lies. For you know that God is wont to prove the Prophets, the
Just, the Martyrs, and other good Men; wherein notwithstanding there is no
indignation, or contempt of them, but honor rather with God most high.

Thus S. Chrysostom I find most elegantly represents him as a far more
glorious spectacle when he sat on the Dunghill, then the greatest Prince,
without his virtue, is when he sits upon a Throne. His Ulcers, says he Hom. V.
ad Populum Antiochenum.
were far more valuable in my account, then all their precious Stones. For what
profit do we receive by them? what necessity, what want do they supply? But
these Ulcers of his, are the comfort of all manner of heaviness that can seize
upon us. You may know this to be true, if when a man has lost his genuine and
only Son, you show him a thousand Jewels and precious Stones; which give no
comfort at all to his grief, nor in the least assuage his trouble and pain. But
in this case, if you remember him of the wounds of Job, he presently finds some
ease; when you ask him, saying, why do thou weep and lament, O Man, on this
fashion? thou have lost one Son; but that Blessed Man lost all the Children he
had; and, together with that blow, received a stroke in his Flesh, and sat
naked in the Dung, besmeared all over with the silth that ran out of his
Wounds; in a deep Consumption, which by little and little wasted that just that
true, that devout Man: who abstained from all manner of evil, and had God
himself for the Witness of his Virtue. If thou do but speak these words,
instantly thou extinguishest the heaviness of the Mourner, and riddest him of
all his grief; and so the Ulcers of that righteous Man become more profitable
to him then Jewels.

Do you therefore conceive now that you have that Champion before your eyes;
and that you see the Dung, and him sitting in it; a Statue of Gold, of
Diamonds, I am not able to say of what: For there is nothing so precious as to
be worthy to be compared with that Ulcerated Body, whose Sores shine more
brightly then the beams of the Sun; which inlighten only the eyes of the mind.
They make us see; and they made the Devil quite blind: for after he had given
those wounds in his body, he fled and appeared no more. See here, Beloved, how
great the gain of affliction is! For when that righteous man was rich and
enjoyed his ease, the Devil had something to say against him: though falsely
indeed, yet this he had to say, Does Job serve God for naught? But after he had
stripped him naked, and made him a beggar, he had not a word to say; he durst not
so much as open his mouth against him. When he was rich, then he adventured to
wrestle with him, and threatened to supplant him: but after he had made him
poor, deprived him of all he had, and reduced him to the extremest grief and
sorrow, he ran away and durst not renew the assault. When his body was sound,
then he laid violent hands on him: but when he had filled it with wounds, he
was routed and fled away vanquished. By this thou see how much Poverty may
prove better then Riches, Weakness then Health, Temptation then Ease and Quiet,
to those that are vigilant and watchful: who make a profit of all these; and
by fighting grow more illustrious and courageous. Who ever saw, who ever heard
such noble Combats?

But there is none, that I have met withal, who represents him in such lively
colors, as the streat S. Basil; who in a Sermon of his Tom. 1. Homil. XXIII.
p. 565, etc.
(the latter part of which was occasioned by a lamentable Fire, that happened
near their Church, and put it in danger,) exhorts all the Rich, who were
untouched by the flames, to relieve their poor Neighbors, whose Goods were
consumed in them; and then addressing himself to those, who had saved
themselves but nothing else, beseeches them not to take their loss too heavily,
nor to let their minds be disturbed: but to shake off the misty cloud of
sorrow, and to strengthen their Souls with such generous and manly thoughts, as
might turn this Accident into an occasion of Crowns. For which end he advises
them to put themselves in mind of the Constancy of Job; and to say to
themselves as he did, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; as it seemed
good to the Lord, so it is come to pass. And by no means, says he, let any of
you be moved with what has happened, either to say or think, there is no
Providence which rules our affairs; or presume to accuse the dispensation and
judgment of the Lord: but let him fix his eyes on that Champion, and make him
his Counselor, who will advise him to better thoughts.

Let him recount in order all the Agonies he endured, and then observe how
bravely he came off; and how the Devil threw all his darts at him in vain: not
one of them giving him a deadly wound. First he set upon his Goods, and
endeavored to overwhelm him with the doleful news of various Calamities,
which came tumbling like the waves of the Sea, one upon the neck of another.
But all to no purpose; for the Just man received them as a Rock does the fury
of a Tempest: turning the rage of the Waves into froth, and standing it self
immovable. He said not a word, that we read of, he made no complaints of these
disasters: or if he said any thing we may well presume it was those decent and
becoming words which we read in the conclusion, The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so it is come to pass. But he did not
think any of those Calamities that befell him, to be worth his lamenting with
his tears.

Well, but there comes one afterward that tells him a most dismal story, of the
death of all his Children by the fall of the house wherein they were making
merry. At this, it is true, he rent his garments; and it is the first
expression of his grief that we meet withal, in compliance with the passions
of Nature, and to declare himself a most tender Father. But he set some bounds
to his grief, and adorned what had happened with those pious words; The Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away, etc. As if he should have said, I was
called their Father, as long as He, that made me so, pleased. But now He has
taken off this Crown of Children from my head, and it is not fit for me to
contend and dispute with him about his own. Let that be, which seems best to
the Lord. He it was that formed them, I was but the Instrument. Why should I
who am but a Servant, foolishly complain of my Master; and repine at that
decree, which I cannot alter?

With such words as these that righteous Man wounded the Devil; and, as one
would say, shot a dart quite through his heart. Which so enraged him, that
seeing him still a Conqueror, he made an assault upon his Body; which he
turned into corruption, and made it become such a bag of worms, that from a
Throne it was cast upon a Dunghill. And yet the good man remained immovable;
and when his Body was torn, preserved still the hidden treasure of piety in his
Soul, of which the Devil could not rob him. And therefore, not knowing what to
do more, he betook himself to his old stratagem; and instigating his Wife to
entertain irreligious and blasphemous thoughts, attempted that way to overthrow
this Champion. For she, tired with the long continuance of his Calamities, came
to him, and clapping her hands at what she beheld, upbraided him with these
lamentable fruits of his piety: and rehearsing his former prosperity, and then
pointing at his present which he received from the Lord for all his Sacrifices.
With abundance of such like words, which were enough to disturb the most
composed, and subvert the most steady and resolved mind. I am a vagabond, said
she, and am forced to crouch to others like a slave. I, who was a Queen, am
constrained to depend upon my servants for relief: I, who maintained many
liberally, am now nourished my self out of other folks charity. Adding, that it
would be far better for him, to provoke his angry Creator, by impious words,
to cut him off; then by an unprofitable patience thus to prolong both his and
her misery.

But he, more offended with these words then any of his former sufferings, with
eyes full of indignation looked upon her as an enemy; and asked what ailed her
to talk thus like one of the foolish women? Lay aside, said he, these thoughts,
and let me hear no more of this advice; which makes me appear to my self, as if
one half of me were wicked and irreligious. What, shall we receive good at the
hands of the Lord, and shall we not suffer evil? Remember all the past happiness
thou have enjoyed; and oppose better unto worse. No man's life is entirely and
throughout happy. (...). To be always as well as we can wish, belongs to God.
If thou art grieved at what is present, fetch thy comfort from what thou have
received before. Now thou weepest, but formerly thou did laugh; now thou art
poor, but there was a time when thou wantedst nothing. Then thou drankest of
the pure fountain of life; be content, and drink now the more patiently of the
troubled waters. Behold the Rivers, their streams are not clear in all places.
And our life thou know is like to one of them, which slides away
continually, and is often times full of waves, which come roling one upon
another. One part of this River is passed by; and another is running on its
course. This part of it is gushing out from the fountain; and the next is ready
to follow it, as soon as it is gone. And thus we are all making great have to
the common Sea; death I mean, which swallows up all at last.

If we receive good from the hands of the Lord, shall we not bear evil? Think
of that again. Shall we go about to compel the Judge, to afford us just the
very same things for ever? Shall we presume to instruct our Lord and Master how
he ought to conduct our life? He has the power of His own decrees and orders;
as He pleases, so he appoints our portion for us. And we know that He is wise;
and that He dispenses to His servants what is most profitable for them. Do not
then curiously pry into the counsels and resolution of thy Lord and Governor:
only take in good part, and affectionately embrace, whatsoever is ordered by
his Wisdom. Love his Administration; and whatsoever He is pleased to give,
receive it with pleasure. Demonstrate now in a sorrowful condition, that thou
wast worthy of all the joy which thou had formerly in a better.

Thus Job discoursing, he baffled the Devil once more; and gave him such a
repulse, that he made him perfectly ashamed to see himself thus vanquished. And
what ensued after this? why, when the Devil was beaten, his disease fled away
too; having assaulted him in vain, and got no ground of him. His flesh began to
recover into a second Youth. He flourished also in his Estate, which was
restored to him with increase. For Riches flowed so plentifully into his house,
that they were double to what he had before. First, that he might be no loser
by his Affliction; and Secondly, that he might have a merciful reward of his
patience under it. Therefore it was that his Horses, and Mules, and Camels, and
Sheep, and all the rest of his revenue were doubled: only his Children were no
more then equal to the number he had before; seven Sons, and three Daughters.
The reason was, because his Beasts indeed entirely perished; but the better
part of his Children still survived, when they were taken from him. And
therefore being again adorned with as many Sons and Daughters, as formerly he
enjoyed, he had a double portion of them also: those who were present with him
here, and those who expected him in the other World. Behold then, what good
things this just man, Job, heaped up to himself by his patient submission to
God. And do thou therefore, if thou have suffered grievously in this sire,
which the malice of the Devil kindled, bear it constantly; and lenify the
affliction with these better thoughts: according to that which is written, Cast
all thy care upon the Lord, and he will sustain thee.

To this purpose that great person S. Basil discourses, when he represents how
Job received the first assaults of his Affliction, and how happily it ended.
And there is great reason to think that he did not, in the progress of it,
swerve from those good beginnings, which had so blessed a conclusion: but
whatsoever expressions fell from him, when he was engaged in the heat of
Disputation, he still preserved such a religious temper of mind, as made him
not cease to submit himself reverently to God's will, and to thank him for all
the benefits he had formerly received from his Bounty. Nor do I find any cause
for the Censures which Maimonides More Nevochim, Part. III. Cap. 23.
(and out of him Menasseh Ben-Israel Lib. 1. De Resurrectione, c. 16.
) has passed upon the disputation between him and his four Friends, about
Divine Providence; which he has thus stated.

Job (says he) maintains that Mankind is so vile a sort of Being, that God
does not regard the best of them any more then he does the worst; but it is all
one to him, when a Calamity comes, whether it light upon the Offenders or upon
the Innocent. Nay more then this, he affirms that there is no expectation after
death, and consequently no hope remaining for him. Which are such blasphemies,
that Maimonides is fain to seek excuses for him; and for that end alleges a
common saying among their Wise men, that a man is not apprehended, or seized
on, because of his grief: that is, what he says in extremity of pain, is not
imputed to him for sin. But there is no need of this Apology; for the places he
alleges do not prove him guilty of uttering such things, as (to speak in his
words) are evil in the highest degree. Though Menasseh Ben-Israel is so
presumptuous as to charge him with such a profane denial of Divine Providence,
at least here below the Moon, that he makes him impute all his misery to the
malignant aspect of the Planets under which he was conceived and born.

To which opinion of Job, say they, every one of his Friends opposed a
particular opinion of their own, differing each of them from the other. And
first Eliphaz endeavors to establish this for a certain truth; That as
Afflictions do not come by chance but by the Providence of God, so they are
sent for the sins of men; and therefore without all doubt Job was a great
offendour, which was the cause he was handled on this manner. This opinion,
says Maimonides, he held to the last; only was fain to add in conclusion,
that all the ways whereby we deserve punishment do not appear.

Then after him (when Job had argued against this) comes Bildad, who produces a
new opinion, grounded upon the doctrine of permutation, or recompense, as they
speak. That is, he believed the Evils which Job endured here, should, if he
proved innocent, be changed into good things; and in the issue be highly
serviceable to him in another world.

After whom succeeds Zophar with a different resolution from all these; which
was, that God acts according to his own pleasure, and that we are not to search
for any cause of his actions out of his own will; nor to say, why does he this
and not that? In short, we are not to seek the way of equity, and the decree of
wisdom in his doings; for it necessarily belongs to his Essence that He do
what He will: and our understanding is too shallow to comprehend the secrets of
his Wisdom, whose right and propriety it is that He may do according to his
Pleasure, and for no other cause.

And these four Opinions about Providence Maimonides undertakes to show have
had their several Assertors since; who have propagated them among their
Scholars. Job's opinion he says is the same with Aristotle's, who attributed
all to accident. Bildad was followed by the Sect of Mutazali (a kind of
Pharisees among the Ismaelites) who ascribed all to Wisdom: Zophar by the Sect
of Assaria, who attributed all to will and pleasure: And Eliphaz, he fancies,
held the opinion of the Law; which is, that God deals with men according to
their works.

But when all that these men had disputed, nothing moved Job, there stands up
another, whose name was Elihu, who first proves the Providence of God from
prophetical dreams, XXXIII. 13. and to those things which Eliphaz had said,
adds, according to the imagination of Menasseh Ben-Israel, the doctrine of the
transmigration of Souls (which he labors to find in v. 14.) and thereby in a
wonderful way, says he, resolves all the doubt; by determining that Job and
other just men, may be punished for sins which they committed in a former body.

But as there is no footstep that I can see for this fond conceit, which he
honors with the name of a mystery; so it is evident these men follow their own
vain inventions in all this discourse, directly contrary to the Book it self.
For they make Job's opinion the very worst of all the rest; when the Lord
himself tells Eliphaz in the conclusion of the Book (XLII. 7.) that He was
angry with him and his two other Friends; because they had not spoken of him so
rightly as Job had. And it does not appear by their speeches that they held
several opinions about Providence, and took every one of them a different way
(that is a mere Rabbinical subtilty) to solve the doubt, wherein Job's unusual
sufferings had perplexed them. But they seem to have harped all of them upon
one and the same string; as I have represented in the Arguments before each
Chapter: which it is thought fit should be here set down by themselves; that
the Reader may take a view of the whole work all together.

From whence the conclusion of Maimonides will be very evident (which is the
best thing he says) that The scope of the Book is, to establish the great
Article of Providence; and thereby to preserve us from error, in thinking that
God's Knowledge is like our Knowledge; or his Intention, Providence, and
Government, like our Intention, Providence, and Government. Which foundation
being laid, nothing will seem hard to a man, whatsoever happens. Nor will he
fall into dubious thoughts concerning God; whether He knows what is befaln us
or no; and whether He takes any care of us. But rather he will be inflamed the
more vehemently in the love of God; as it is said in the end of this Prophecy;
Wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. So say our Wise men;
They that act out of love, will rejoice in Chastisements.

THE ARGUMENTS TO THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. ARGUMENT. THIS Chapter is a plain Narration of the flourishing
condition wherein Job lived, before the envy and malice of the Devil brought
upon him the sorest Calamities; which are particularly described, with the
occasion of them, and his admirable Constancy under them: whereby he became as
eminent an example of Patience in Adversity, as he had been of Piety and all
manner of Virtue in his Prosperity. fol. 1

CHAP. II. ARGUMENT. The first part of this Chapter is a continuation of the
Narration, which was begun in the foregoing, of the Calamities which befell
this good man; whom God suffered the Devil to afflict in his Body, as he had
already done in his Goods and Children. And then follows a farther testimony of
his Constancy, notwithstanding his Wife's angry and profane accusation of the
Divine Providence. Though, it is true, he was so much dejected to see himself
reduced to this extremity of Misery, that neither he, nor his Friends that came
to visit him, were able for several days to speak a word. fol. 11

CHAP. III. ARGUMENT. Here begin the Discourses which Job and his Friends had
about his Affliction; which are all represented, by the Author of this Book,
poetically; not, as hitherto, in a plain simple Narration, but in most elegant
verse. And being overcharged with Grief, (without the least word of comfort
from his Friends,) he that had for some time born the weight of his Asslictions
with an admirable Constancy, could not contain himself any longer, but bursts
out (to such a degree was the anguish of his spirit increased) into the most
passionate Camplaints of the Miseries of humane Life. The consideration of
which made him prefer Death much before it; and wish that, either he had never
come into the world, or gone presently out of it again, or, at least, might now
forthwith he dismissed. fol. 17

CHAP. IV. ARGUMENT. Eliphaz incensed at this Complaint of Job, in stead of
condoling with him, and pitying the Miseries which had put him into this Agony,
and applying fitting Lenitives to his Anguish; bluntly rebukes him for not
following the good Advice that he used to give to others in their Adversity:
and tells him, he had reason to suspect his Piety, because the Innocent were
not wont to suffer such things, but only wicked Oppressors; whom, though
never so mighty, God had always humbled. Witness the Horims, who dwelt in Seir,
(II. Deuteronomy. 12.) whom the ancestors of Eliphaz (XXXVI. Genesis 11.) had overcome,
though they were as fierce as Lions. To those Beasts of prey, of all sorts, he
compares the Tyrants whom he speaks of in this Chapter, v. 10, 11. intending,
it is likely, to remember him also of the destruction of the Emims by the
children of Moab, (II. Deuteronomy. 10, 11.) and of the Zamzummims, (v. 20, 21.) who
were rooted out by the children of Ammon, as the Horims by the children of
Esau: from whose Grandchild Eliphaz seems to have been descended, and called by
the name of the eldest Son of Esau. He tells Job also of a Vision he had, to
confirm the same truth, That man's Wickedness is the cause of his Destruction.
fol. 22, 23

CHAP. V. ARGUMENT. Eliphaz still prosecutes the very same Argument;
endeavoring to confirm it from the opinion and observation of other men, as
well as from his own. And thereupon exhorts him to Repentance, as the surest
way to find mercy with God; and to be not only restored to his former
Prosperity, but to be preserved hereafter from the Incursions of savage people,
or of wild beasts, and from all the rest of the Disasters which had befaln him.
Of this he bids him, in the conclusion, to be assured; for it was a point he
had studied. fo 27

CHAP. VI. ARGUMENT. Job, not at all convinced by these Discourses, justifies
the Complaint he had made, (Chap. III.) which Eliphaz had now accused;
maintaining that his Grief was not equal to the Cause of it. And therefore he
renews his wishes of Death: at which though they might wonder who felt nothing
to make them weary of Life; yet he had reason, he shows, for what he did; and
one more then before, which was their Unkindness: who pretended to be Friends;
but by this rude Reproof of him at the very first, without so much as one
compassionate word, or the least syllable of Consolation, showed how little
sympathy they had with him in his Sufferings. These things he desires them to
consider, and weigh the cause of his Complaint a little better, before they
passed any farther judgment on it. fol. 33

CHAP. VII. ARGUMENT. Job proceeds still in the defense of his Complaint, and
of his Wishes to see an end of so miserable a Life; which at the best is full
of Toil and Trouble. And, since his Friends had so little consideration of him,
he addresses himself to God; and hopes he will not be angry if he ease his
Grief by representing to him the Dolefulness of his condition, and
expostulating a little with him about the continuance of it, and his release
from it. fol. 39

CHAP. VIII. ARGUMENT. The foregoing Apologies of Job, it seems, made little
impression on his Friends: for, he had no sooner done, but another of them,
called Bildad, continued the Dispute; with as little intermission, as there was
between the Messengers that brought him (Chap. I.) the sad tidings of his
Calamities. And it does not appear by his discourse, that he differed at all in
his Principles from Eliphaz. For, though he give him very good Counsel, yet, he
still presses this as the sense of all Antiquity, (v. 8.) that God ever
prospers the Just, and roots out the Wicked, be they never so flourishing for a
season. And he being descended from Shuah, one of Abraham's Sons by Keturah,
(XXV. Genesis 2.) seems to me to have a particular respect, in this appeal to
History, unto the Records, which then remained, of God's blessing upon that
faithful man's posterity, (who hitherto, and long after, continued in his
Religion,) and of the extirpation of those Eastern people, (neighbors to Job,)
in whose country they were settled, because of their Wickedness. fol. 44

CHAP. IX. ARGUMENT. Job allows what Bildad had well spoken in the beginning of
his Speech; and very religiously adores the Justice, Wisdom, and Sovereignty
of the Almighty: with whom he protests he had no intention to quarrel or
dispute; but only to assert the contrary Maxim to that which they maintained,
That Piety will not secure us from all Calamities, which do not ever fall upon
those that deserve them. Witness, on one hand, the prosperous estate of wicked
Princes, v. 24. (particularly of one great Prince, who then somewhere reigned
in their neighboring countries;) and, on the other hand, his own Infelicity,
notwithstanding his known Integrity, v. 25. About this he confesses he was very
much unsatisfied: though he knew it was in vain to argue with God about it; nor
would his Affliction suffer him to do it. fol. 49, 50

CHAP. X. ARGUMENT. In this Chapter the passionate Complaints and
Expostulations with God, from which Job tells us (in the foregoing Chapter) he
intended hereafter to refrain, break out afresh; and he earnestly desires to
know what his Guilt is: which God, who made him, he was sure could not but
perfectly understand, if there was any; and needed not, for the discovery of
it, to expose him to these severe Torments. Which, he still is of the opinion,
may justify his Wishes of never being born, or of dying presently after.
Though, those Wishes being vain, he acknowledges it is more rational to desire,
that God would be pleased to intermit his Pain a while; if He did not think fit
quite to remove it. fol. 56

CHAP. XI. This Chapter gives an account of the sense of Zophar about the
buisiness in dispute. It is uncertain whence he was descended; but probably he
dwelt upon the borders of Idumaea, (for there we find an ancient City called
Naama, XV. Josh. 41.) and from thence came to visit Job in his Affliction. But
in stead of joining with him in his Prayer for a little respite from his Pain,
(with which Job had concluded his last Discourse,) he calls him an idle Talker,
and accuses him of irreverence toward God. Concerning whose incomprehensible
Counsels, and irresistible Power, etc. he discourses with great sense, and
gives Job exceeding good Advice: but still follows the opinion of the other two
Friends, that he would not have been so miserable, if he had not been Wicked.
fol. 61

CHAP. XII. ARGUMENT. In this Chapter Job taxes all his three Friends with too
great a conceit of their own Wisdom, which had not as yet, taught them common
Humanity to the miserable. And lets them understand, that he need not come to
them to learn, but might rather teach them the falseness of that Proposition,
wherewith Zophar had concluded his Speech, concerning the Infelicity of the
Wicked. For the contrary, he tells them, was obvious to sense, v. 7, 8, etc.
And as for what Zophar had discoursed of the Wisdom and Power of God, he would
have them know, that he was as well skilled in those Points as the best of
them, and understood as much of the History of ancient Times: particularly of
the vain attempt at the Tower of Babel, unto which it is probable he has
respect in the 14. verse. as, in all the following, he seems to have to what you
read in XIV. Genesis 5, 6, 7, 8. of the rooting out of those fierce Giants the
Rephaim, and other such like barbarous and rapacious people; of the particulars
of which we have now no Records remaining. fol. 66

CHAP. XIII. ARGUMENT. From the foregoing Observations, Job still continues to
assert, first, his own Understanding to be equal, or rather superior, to
theirs; who had better therefore learn of him, and know that God was not
pleased to have his Providence defended by Untruths, nor to see men partial,
though it was in His behalf: and secondly, his own Integrity to be such, that
he would ever defend it against all Accusers, even before God himself. Whom he
desires to take cognizance of the Cause, and to let him, understand what the
Crimes were for which he was thus severely handled. For he protests that he was
ignorant of them; though the Punishments he had endured were more then
sufficient to awaken the sense of his Guilt, he being almost consumed by them.
fol. 72

CHAP. XIV. ARGUMENT. The good man proceeds to plead with God for some
mitigation of his Miseries, from the consideration of the Shortness of life,
and the trouble that naturally belongs to it; which he thought might move Him
not to add any greater burden of Suffering: especially, considering that when
he is dead, he cannot come into the world again, (as the Plants do,) to receive
the marks of his Favor. Which he hopes therefore He will bestow upon him here,
notwithstanding the depth of his Misery, (which tempted him to the borders of
Impatience, v. 13.) It being very easy for Him to remove his Affliction, though
never so heavy, whose Power is so great, that He removed Mountains out of their
place, and brought a Deluge, as we may say, of Sand (as they saw sometimes in
their Neighboring Countries) to overflow the most fruitful Regions. fol. 78

CHAP. XV. ARGUMENT. In this Chapter Eliphaz renews the Dispute with more
eagerness and fierceness then before; being very angry that Job slighted them
so much, and thought himself so wise, (as he interpreted it,) that he disdained
their Exhortations, and would not follow the Counsel they had given him, of
Confessing his Sins, and praying to God for Forgiveness: (V. 8. VIII. 4, 5, 6.)
But (except this one Argument, that he need not be ashamed to confess his
Guilt, when he considered how prone all men are to sin) there is nothing new in
his Discourse: but he merely urges what he had asserted at first, from his own
and the wisest men's observations, That they are not the Good, but the Wicked,
whom God punishes with such Calamities as now were fallen upon Job. And with
great ornaments of speech he most admirably describes the Vengeance which God
is wont to take upon impious Tyrants: having his Eye, I suppose, upon Nimrod,
or some such mighty Oppressor. fol. 83, 84

CHAP. XVI. ARGUMENT. Job reproves the vanity and obstinacy of Eliphaz, in
repeating the same things over again, and still persisting in his Inhumanity,
though he saw his Case so pitiable. Which he again describes, to make him
sensible how unworthily he was treated by him and the rest of his Friends: who,
in effect, joined with his Enemies; who took this opportunity to rail at him.
Whereas there was no Crime of his appeared to justify their Accusations, and to
make good Eliphaz his Argument: which signified nothing, unless he meant to
say, that Job was like that wicked Tyrant of whom he had discoursed. Which was
so far from any show of truth, that he protests he never hurt any body, and was
always a sincere lover of God, etc. v. 17, 18. The truth of which God knew; to
whose Bar he appeals from their unjust Sentence. fol. 91

CHAP. XVII. ARGUMENT. Here Job desires he may be tried presently before God's
Tribunal, his Life being just upon the point to expire, as he had said in the
end of the former Chapter; and continues to urge again in this, because his
Friends were very unfit Judges in his case, and had passed such a Sentence upon
him, as upright men would never approve of. Whereby they had given him a new
Vexation, to hear them talk so idly, and put him in hope of recovering his
Happiness, if he would follow their Admonitions; when they saw him just
dropping into the Grave, which was the only thing, he says, that he could
hope for. fol. 97

CHAP. XVIII. ARGUMENT. In this Chapter Bildad again takes up the Dispute, and
pretends to reply to what Job had said. But I do not see any thing new, saving
the description he makes (as Eliphaz had done before him) of the Ruin which
shall inevitably fall, according to the fixed rules of Providence, (so he
fancied) upon the Wicked and his family; notwithstanding all the assistence
that his Friends and Allies can lend him for his Preservation. And this he
seems to imply was the fate of Job; whom he does not so much as exhort to
Repentance, (as he had done in his former Discourse Chap. VIII.) being very
angry with him, that he had no higher esteem of their Wisdom. fol. 101

CHAP. XIX. ARGUMENT. The purpose of this Chapter (in which Job replies to
Bildad) is to show, that it would be sufficient for him also merely to repeat
the same things, as they had done in Ten Discourses: But the more to aggravate
their want of Compassion, or rather Cruelty, toward him, he represents several
new things, which made his condition more deplorable then he had hitherto said.
One of which was, that he could not tell the Reason why God dealt thus with
him: who notwithstanding was so gracious, that in the depth of this Misery and
Anguish, He affords Him a glimring of a comfortable Hope, (which began now to
appear in his Soul, and which he had hitherto wanted,) that God would at last
take pity upon him, and show his Friends their error, by restoring him to his
former Health and Splendor. That seems to be the literal meaning of the 25.
and 26. verses, and of the two next that follow: where, among other things, he
says he doubted not but his Redeemer should stand last upon the earth, (so it
is in the Hebrew, the word day not being there,) that is, quite overcome the
Devil, and deliver him from these Distresses; like a mighty Conqueror, who
keeps the field, when all his opposers are routed and fled away. But in this he
was, as S. Austin calls him, eximius Prophetarum, and prophesied of the
Resurrection of the Body at the last day. fol. 106, 107

CHAP. XX. ARGUMENT. The abrupt beginning of this Speech of Zophar shows that
he was in a passion; which, though he pretends to bridle it, would not let him
calmly consider the Protestation which Job had made of his Innocence. But he
goes on in the old Common place of the certain Downfall of the Wicked, be he
never so powerful and well supported. Which he illustrates indeed after an
excellent fashion, with great variety of Figures, and remarks upon Histories as
old as the World. In some of which he had observed, that the Wicked after their
Fall had made notable attempts to get up again; but by the hand of God were so
crushed, that they could never rise more. All the flaw in his Discourse is
this, (which was common to him with the rest,) that he imagined God never
varied from this method; and therefore Job, without doubt, was a very bad man,
though it did not appear he was, any other way, but by his Infelicity. fol.
114, 115

CHAP. XXI. ARGUMENT. To bring the Dispute to a speedier issue, Job (after a
short preface, reproving their Incivility) comes close to the buisiness: and
does not content himself merely with denying what they had said, but shows them
where the fallacy in their Discourse lay; viz. in concluding an Universal from
some Particulars. For he maintains, from as good History and Observations as
they could produce, that, though God do make some Wicked men such examples of
his Vengeance, as they had said, yet He lets others, and they of the vilest
sort, Atheists and Deriders of Divine Providence, live prosperously, and die
peaceably, and have stately Monuments built to perpetuate their Memory. In
brief, he shows there is great variety in God's proceedings about the
Punishment of the Wicked; which makes them so bold as they are in their
Impiety. And seems to have respect to the History of Ishmael, who was a wild,
or barbarous, man, grasping at all he could lay his hands on, and persecuting
Isaac; and yet had XII Princes descended from him, settled in their several
Fortresses, as we read XVI. Genesis 12. XVII. 20. XXV. 16. And it is possible, to
the History of Eliphaz his own Country: Esau his Ancestour being very rich,
(XXXVI. Genesis 6, 7.) and having many Dukes, whose posterity afterward advanced
themselves to the title of Kings, that sprang from him, before there was any
King over the Children of Israel. XXXVI. Genesis 15, 31. fol. 122, 123

CHAP. XXII. ARGUMENT. Though Job had clearly stated the Controversy in the
foregoing Chapter, yet Eliphaz would not yield; but begins the Combat a third
time, without any ground at all, but a pure mistake, as I have expressed it in
the first verse. And to avoid the Reproof, which had been given him, of
repeating merely the same things; he now brings in a catalogue, though without
any proof, (so much was his anger and bitterness increased,) of the particular
Sins, both against God and against his Neighbor, of which he supposes Job to
have been guilty. Else, he still boldly concludes, God would not have punished
him with such severity, that there was not a greater instance of his
Indignation to be found any-where; unless it was in the Old World, and in
Sodom. Yet he has so much Moderation, that be invites him at last to
Repentance, and promises him the happy fruit of it; as he had done in his first
Speech, but not in his second. Nay, he tells him, in conclusion, for his
encouragement, that he should be able to do as much for a Nation, as Ten
righteous men, could they have been found there, might have done for Sodom.
fol. 131, 132

CHAP. XXIII. ARGUMENT. To the foregoing Discourse of Eliphaz Job thought at
first to make no Answer, but only by complaints of their Injustice, and fresh
Appeals to God: by whom he desires, more earnestly then ever, to be tried;
being assured that He would acquit him. And though for the present God was not
pleased to give him andience, (of which he complains with too much passion;)
yet he maintains that hope which began to appear in his Soul, (in his last
Discourse with Bildad Chap. XIX.) that God would at last clear him from all the
Aspersions which were cast upon him. fol. 140

CHAP. XXIV. ARGUMENT. Upon farther consideration Job thought good again to
confute their rash Assertion, about the Plagues which always befall the Wicked,
by an Induction of particulars that prove the contrary Among which, the wild
Arabs, he tells them, are a notorious instance, whose profession is Rapine, and
yet they thrive and prosper in it; v. 5, etc. And so do the more civilized
Oppressors, of whom he says something before, and again, v. 11, 12. Where he
seems to reflect upon hard Landlords, and griping Merchants and Traffiquers in
cities. To whom he adds Murderers, Adulterers, Pirates, with several other
wicked Villains, (in the conclusion of the Chapter,) who notwithstanding die
like other men, and are not called to an account, for their enormous Crimes, in
this present World. fol. 144

CHAP. XXV. ARGUMENT. The foregoing Discourse of Job, in the XXIV. Chapter, was
so undeniable, that Bildad begins to break off the Dispute. For he says not a
word to it, but only advises him to speak more reverently of the Majesty of
God, then, he imagined, he had done in his appeal to him Chap. XXIII. fol. 152

CHAP. XXVI. ARGUMENT. Job hearing Bildad wander so far from the buisiness,
derides his grave affectation of Wisdom; and tells him that, though he talked
as if he thought himself fit to be a Coadjutour to God Almighty, yet, as his
Discourse was impertinent, so it was but mean and flat, in comparison with what
he was able to speak himself, concerning the Omnipotent Wisdom of God: which
he sets forth in a far more lively manner. fol. 154

CHAP. XXVII. ARGUMENT. As Bildad began to decline the Dispute, so Zophar quite
gives it over: either looking upon Job as incurably obstinate, or (as we might
more charitably conceive, were it not for what we read XXXII. 1.) being
convinced he had more reason on his side. Whose silence so raised the spirit of
Job, that he now triumphs over his Opponents: as the word MASHAL, which we
render PARABLE, may denote. For it signifies among the Hebrews, an elegant
ingenious kind of speech, excelling, and, as it were, domineering over, all
other, in its pithiness, or neatness, or some other rare quality. Such is the
following Discourse of Job, which begins (in this Chapter) with a vehement
Protestation, that he would never desert his Plea; nor yield to their Doctrine,
that a remarkable Vengeance always attends upon Wickedness in this world:
though he grants, and largely here asserts, that sometimes there does. fol.
158, 159

CHAP. XXVIII. ARGUMENT. The Connection of this Chapter with the foregoing, I
hope I have truly expressed in the first verse. And that being found, it is not
difficult to see at what it drives; viz. to stop the buisy Inquiry of mankind,
who are very wise, he shows, in other things, but have not wit enough to
comprehend the reasons why God does not inflict those Punishments upon all
Wicked men, which fall upon some. It is not needful to set down here, how this
Argument is managed, (with such admirable elegance of words, and such
weightiness of matter, as make it deserve the name of Mashal, Parable, or
Proverb,) because it will sufficiently appear in the Paraphrase. fol. 165

CHAP. XXIX. ARGUMENT. To such Discourses as these, Job presumes his Friends
would have given greater attention, then it seems they did, had not the
Vileness of his present condition made his Speeches also contemptible. And
therefore he puts them in mind, with what reverence all his Orations were
formerly received, by great and small: wishing God would restore to him those
happy days; and inserting, all along, some remarkable instances of his
Integrity (especially as a Judge) in the height of his Princely Prosperity.
When he had an uncontrollable Power to do as he pleased, and yet never abused
it; but employed it constantly for the defense and comfort of the meanest
people in his Province. fol. 173

CHAP. XXX. ARGUMENT. From the foregoing account of his ancient Splendor, he
takes occasion to annex a no-less elegant description of the Vileness of his
present condition. Hoping that the consideration of such a prodigious Change
(which he represents in several particulars, and not without some touches still
upon his Integrity) might at last move his hard-hearted Friends to some
compassion toward him: especially, when they saw how near he was to his Grave,
notwithstanding all his Prayers to God for relief. fol. 180

CHAP. XXXI. ARGUMENT. It was possible his Friends might make quite another use
then Job intended of the relation he had made of his miserable Condition, in
the Chapter foregoing: and therefore, lest it should harden them in their old
Error, and they should take what he had said to be an argument of his Guilt;
He gives in this Chapter a large and particular account of his Integrity, which
in general he had so often asserted; laying his very soul, and the most secret
Inclinations of it open before them; together with the Actions of his whole
life, in his pripate capacity, (for of his vublick he had spoken before Chap.
XXIX.) both in respect of his Neighbors, of all sorts, and in respect of God.
To whom he again most solemnly appeals, in the conclusion of his Discourse,
that he did not boast of more Virtues then he had; but would most gladly be
tried before him, by some impartial Judge. I need not here enumerate his
Virtues, because they are plainly and distincily expressed in the Paraphrase;
and I do not pretend to give the entire contents, but the design only, of each
Chapter. fol. 188

CHAP. XXXII. ARGUMENT. It appears, by the 15. verse of this Chapter, that
there were several other persons present, besides those that are named when
this Dispute was held between Job and his three Friends. Among whom there was a
young man named Elihu; who was either a Syrian, (in which language this Book
was first written, and translated by Moses into Hebrew, says the Author of the
Commentaries under Origen's name,) descended from the second Son of Nahor,
Abraham's Brother, XXII. Genesis 21. or an Idumaean, of the same Country with
Eliphaz the Temanite, XXV. Jer. 23. I have made him a Syrian in my Paraphrase,
because he is said to be of the kindred of Ram: by whom we are to understand
either Aram, or, as the Hebrews think, Abraham; by whom such Wisdom and Piety
might be promoted in his Brother's Family, as is apparent in Elihu. Who, though
much inferior to the rest in years, (for which reason he had held his peace
thus long,) yet was much superior to them in Knowledge. Which he discovers in
the judicious Censures he here passes, not only upon the three Friends, but
upon Job himself: whom he has nothing to charge with all, relating to any
Crime committed before this Affliction befell him; but thinks be had not
managed the Dispute about it with so much Calmness and Submission to God as
became his Piety. In this he differs from those that spoke before him: For I do
not find that he blames him for any Miscarriages, but those only which he
observed in the heat of his Disputation; and he spends his time, rather in
justifying God, then in carping at Job, as the other had done. fol. 198, 199

CHAP. XXXIII. ARGUMENT. Here Elihu addresses his Speech to Job alone, (for he
rejected all that the three Friends had said, as sufficiently confuted by Job
in his Dispute with them,) and tells him, first, that he was the man who would
now plead with him in God's behalf, (as he had often desired,) and that he was no
unequal match for him. And then begins to reprehend those passages which he
thought were blameable in Job's Speeches; particularly his insisting so much
upon his Integrity: which, though true, should not have been mentioned without
due acknowledgment, that the Sovereign of the World had done him no wrong in
thus afflicting him; and that it was not fit for him to question the Wisdom
and Justice of God's Providence, because he did not understand it. For the care
of God over Man and his kindness to him, he shows, is so apparent, upon so many
scores, that it ought not to be denied because of the unaccountable Afflictions
that may befall us; which we ought rather to think are one of the ways whereby
He does Man good. fol. 205

CHAP. XXXIV. ARGUMENT. Here Job shows himself a far more humble and teachable
person then his three Friends: for, though Elihu had invited him to make what
exceptions he pleased to his Discourse in the former Chapter, he would not open
his mouth; because he plainly saw that Elihu had hit upon the thing wherein he
was defective. And so this young man proceeds to carry the Charge a little
higher, and tells him, with more sharpness then before, that there were some
words in his Discourses which sounded in his ears, as if he accused God's
Justice and Goodness. For what else did he mean when he complained that God did
not do him right; and that he destroyed alike both good and bad? Which rash
Assertions he overthrows from the consideration of the Sovereign Dominion,
Power, Righteousness and Wisdom of God: and represents to him what behavior
and discourse would have better become him, then that which he had used. fo. 214

CHAP. XXXV. ARGUMENT. Job still keeps silence, notwithstanding that Elihu had
made the harshest construction of his words; because he was sensible he meant
him well, and had now, in the conclusion of his Discourse, given him very
wholesome Counsel; and allowing his Integrity, had only charged him with some
unhappy Expressions, which had fallen from him when he was in great anguish of
spirit. Which, I suppose, was the reason he does not contradict him, though he
continue, here in this Chapter, to fasten the very same harsh sense upon his
words, v. 2, 3. Which he refutes from the consideration of the infinite
disproportion there is between Man and God: who is never the worse indeed for
any Evil, nor at all the better for any good that we do: and yet has such a
Love to Mankind, that it is certain He would not have them miserable, but takes
care for their relief when they are oppressed, if they address themselves, as
they ought, to Him. fol. 224.

CHAP. XXXVI. ARGUMENT. Having reprehended some of the unwarrantable
Expressions in Job's Discourses, (which he himself would not justify,) Elihu
comes closer to the buisiness, and speaks to the very Cause it self. Showing
from the Nature of God, and the Methods of his Providence, that if Job had, in
stead of Disputing, submitted himself humbly to God's have Corrections, He
would have delivered him: (it being as easy for Him to lift up, as to cast
down:) And that his not discerning the Reason of his Corrections, (which Job
had made a great cause of his Grief, XIX. 7.) ought not to have hindered his
humble Submission; because we are not able to comprehend any of the Works of
God, which we see every day, and acknowledge to be most excellently contrived.
fol. 229

CHAP. XXXVII. ARGUMENT. Elihu continues his Speech, which he had begun before,
concerning the incomprehensible Works of God: and limits himself chiefly, as he
had in the foregoing Chapter, to the Wonders God does in the Clouds. To which,
at last, he subjoyns the amazing extent, brightness and firmness of the Sky;
in which the Sun shines with a luster, which we are not able to behold. And
thence concludes, that the Splendor of the Divine Majesty is infinitely more
dazzling, and that we must not pretend to give an account of his Counsels. fol.
237

CHAP. XXXVIII. ARGUMENT. What Elihu had said concerning the Divine Majesty, in
the 22. verse of the foregoing, God declares to be true, by a sensible
demonstration, as I have expressed it in the first Verse of this Chapter. In
which God appears himself as a Judge (according to Job's repeated desires) to
decide this great Controversy. And taking up the Argument begun by Elihu, (who
came nearest to the truth,) and prosecuting it in unimitable words, (excelling
his and all other men's in the loftiness of the style, as much as Thunder does a
Whisper,) He convinces Job of his Ignorance and Weakness; by showing him how
little he understood of the most obvious things in this World. Intending from
thence, at last, to infer, that he who found himself puzzled, when he went
about to give an account of the meanest of God's visible Works, should not
presume to penetrate into his secret Counsels; nor question his Goodness, no
more then he could his Wisdom and Power, though he knew not why he was
afflicted. One instance had been sufficient to bring Job to a Nonplus; but He
heaps up abundance, to humble him the more, when he saw how much cause there
was for it: whether he considered the Earth, or the Heavens; the Sea, or the
Sun; things contained in the bosom of the Sea, or in the bowels of the Earth;
especially all the Meteors (as we call them) which are formed in the Clouds,
and the Constellations in the higher Regions; together with the Beasts upon the
earth, and the Birds which fly in the air; one of each of which he mentions in
the end of this Chapter. fol. 244, 245

CHAP. XXXIX. ARGUMENT. This Chapter continues the Discourse begun in the
latter end of the foregoing, concerning God's Providence about Beasts and
Birds. And to the Two before mentioned, he adds Seven more. First, the wild
Goat or Hind, whose hard labor among the rocks God is wont to help and
promote (as the Psalmist observes XXIX. 9. and other Authors agree) by a clap
of Thunder; the terror of which puts her into such an agony, that she
presently excludes her young one, which sticks in the birth. Then he mentions
the wild Ass; and after that a tall Creature in those Countries called Reem:
which we render an Unicorn; but Bochartus has proved to be a two-horned Goat
in Arabia of great strength, with an erected head and ears. Of the rest I need
say nothing here, they are so well known. fol. 254

CHAP. XL. ARGUMENT. Job modestly declining to say one word in his own defense,
(though he was graciously invited by God to speak, if he had any Plea
remaining,) is still more humbled by a plain declaration from the Divine
Majesty, that Elihu had reason to reprove him for his immoderate Complaints,
(which some might look upon as an Accusation of God's Providence;) and for
maintaining his own Righteousness so much, and God's Righteousness so little,
in the Dispute he had with his Friends. Showing him withal, that he was not
sensible enough of the infinite Distance and Inequality between him and God;
when he desired so vehemently to argue his Case with Him, that he forgot to
make those Submissions to the Divine Majesty, which had better become him. This
Disproportion is most lively represented and illustrated, by an admirable
description of the strength of the BEHEMOTH, a word of Egyptian termination;
signifying, not the Elephant, (which seldom lies down, and never among reeds,
as this does, v. 21.) but a creature in that Country called by the Greek
Writers Hippopotamus, i. e. River-horse. For it appears by the Second book of
Esdras, Chap. VI. v. 49. that the Hebrews reckon Behemoth, not among the
Land-creatures, but among those belonging to the Water, which were created on
the fifth day. And there is none, that we know, of that sort, to whom the
Characters here mentioned belong, but the Creature now named. fol. 261, 262

CHAP. XLI. ARGUMENT. In this Chapter another Creature of vast bigness and
strength is described, called in the Arabian language LEVIATHAN. By which we
are not, in this place, to understand the Whale; because that Fish is not armed
with such Scales as Leviathan is here said to have, v. 15. nor is impenetrable,
as every body knows; and, to say no more, never creeps upon the Earth, which is
part of the description of this Leviathan, v. 33. Whereby we are therefore to
understand the Crocodile, (to whom every part of this description exactly
belongs,) a Creature as big again as a Man of the greatest stature, and in some
places vastly greater: there having been Crocodiles seen of twenty, nay forty
foot long; and in some places of an hundred. To this fierce and untameable
Creature God sends Job, that he might learn more Humility, then to contend with
his Majesty; when he saw how unable he was to stand before one of his
Creatures. That use he himself teaches Job to make of this description, v. 10,
11, 12. fol. 268

CHAP. XLII. ARGUMENT. This Chapter concludes the Book, with an account how Job
completed the Submission which he had begun before to make to God. Whose
Pardon he sorrowfully begs; confessing and repenting of his Fault; resigning
himself entirely to be instructed by Him: but resolving never hereafter to
complain, nor to move any questions about his Providence. This Repentance God
accepts; and for his sake grants a Pardon also to his Friends, whom he condemns
as more faulty then Job. Who after this receives extraordinary marks of God's
Favor; and has such an ample Recompense made him for his Losses, as may
encourage all posterity to persevere in well doing and patient suffering;
believing steadfastly that nothing can be done or permitted by God without much
reason, (whose Wisdom shines so gloriously in all his Works,) and humbly
expecting a comfortable issue out of all our Troubles. fol. 277

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAGE 158. lin. 17. and p. 165. l. 16. for MASCHAL, read MASHAL. p. 247. l.
23. r. cliffs. p. 250. l. 6. r. abundance; p. 298. l. 21. r. great. p. 302. l.
25. r. God alone.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for R. Royston. (viz.)
Books Written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick. THE Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise
showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of receiving the Holy Communion:
together with suitable Prayers and Meditations for every Month in the Year; and
the principal Festivals in memory of our Blessed Savior, in Four Parts. The
Third Edition corrected. The Devout Christian instructed how to pray and give
thanks to God: or a Book of Devotions for Families, and particular persons, in
most of the concerns of humane Life. The Second Edition, in Twelves. An Advice
to a Friend. The Third Edition, in Twelves. A Friendly Debate between a
Conformist and a Nonconformist, in Octavo: Two Parts. Jesus and the
Resurrection justified by Witnesses in Heaven and in Earth, in Two Parts, in
Octavo new. The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians love to it, in
Octavo, new.

The End of the Catalogue.

