^^E BOOK OF PSALMS PARAPHRASED; WITH ARGUMENTS to each PSALM.

The Second Volume.

By SIMON PATRICK, D. D. Dean of PETERBVRGH, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, An. Dom. MDCLXXX.

TO The Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of DAVENTRY, Lord High
CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND, And one of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
IT is so unusual in this Age, to confer Benefits unsought, especially such as
your Lordship was pleased lately to think me worthy of; that I ought to have
the higher esteem, not merely of your Lordship's singular kindness to me, but
chiefly of that noble principle of Virtue in your mind from whence it purely
flowed. Which will excuse, I hope, the presumption of this Dedication; to which
I am prompted by nothing, but only an eager desire, publicly to testify my
gratitude to your Lordship, as soon as it was possible. Which made me lay hold
upon the very first opportunity, that presented it self: and choose rather to
prefix your Lordship's great Name, to the remainder of this Work (part of which
was published some months ago) then let any thing appear in the world under my
name, which did not carry along with it a thankful acknowledgment of my
obligations to your Lordship. To whose Judgment knowing persons attribute so
much; that as it is a very great honor to receive any mark of your Lordship's
good opinion, so it is a preferment to which, whether I will or no, your
Lordship has advanced me.

I will endeavor not to fall from it by forgetfulness of your Lordship's
favors; but preserve such a remembrance of them, as is suitable to the present
sense I have of them: which is as much beyond what I can express, as they are
beyond what I could deserve.

The best expression I can make of it will be in my prayers to God, that, as
the King has made you the supreme Dispenser of his Justice to his People, and
his Divine Majesty has made you a great Pattern of Piety and Devotion, as well
as other exemplary Virtues; so, He would be pleased to give you wisdom and
prudence to conduct your self with such dexterity as well as integrity in the
management of all the public Business, with the care of which you are
entrusted, that you may continue (as you are) a supporter of the Government, a
Patron of Religion, a Friend of good Men, and, in a word, a Blessing, not only
to your own virtuous Family but, to the whole Nation. For, though there are
some so imperfect, that they will allow no such words to be said of any, but
those that please them in every thing; yet, the most of good Men, or at least
the best, will thankfully acknowledge the happiness we enjoy in the Authority
your Lordship has, and will join in those Prayers with,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and most obliged Servant, S. Patrick.

A PARAPHRASE ON THE PSALMS.
The Third Book.
PSALM LXXIII.
ARGUMENT.
Here begins a new Collection of XVII. Psalms, most of them very disconsolate
and full of sad Complaints, which make up the Third Book of this Volume, as the
Hebrews divide it. They were most of them composed by Asaph (and but one of
them by David) though who he was, is not resolved by Interpreters: who suspect
indeed there might be another Author of some of these Psalms; but have no
other Asaph to name, but Asaph the Singer, who was famous in the days of David,
1 Chronicles. VI. 39. XVI. 5. 2 Chr. V. 12. And accordingly Apollinarius thus
descants upon the Title, The Divine invention of David failing in the composing
of Songs, Asaph arose and by the Divine Spirit resounded this Hymn. But it
seems to me that there is another person of this name mentioned in the holy
Books (who may be more probably entitled to this Work) called Asaph the Seer
(see Psalm. L.) who lived in the days of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 30. and whose
Son, I suppose, was then Recorder, 2 King. XVIII. 37. XXXVI. Isa. 3. Some of
them indeed (as I shall take notice in due place) may be thought rather to
belong to another Asaph in after times: but for the present Psalm (and most of
the rest) I can find no person so likely to whom it may be entitled, as him
now named: who composed it, I conceive, either when he saw the miserable havoc
which Strangers made among them in the days of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 17, 18,
19. XXIX. 8, 9. or when Senacherib invaded them, notwithstanding the
reformation which Hezekiah had made: or, which is most probable, upon the
occasion that David wrote the XXXVII. Psalm, to comfort himself and good men,
when they saw the lewder sort among them thrive and prosper; and the pious
sometimes sorely afflicted: quite contrary to the Sanctions of their Law, which
promised all good things to those that observed it; and threatened the evil to
those that broke it. This extremely afflicted his Spirit, and staggered his
Faith, till he considered the matter more deeply; and then he broke out into
this Meditation, saying,

1. TRVLY God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.


1. I Will never hereafter, whatsoever Confusions I behold, question the
justice of God's Providence; but constantly affirm that He is not merely Just,
but very Good; yea has a most singular love to his faithful people; who
notwithstanding the evils they endure, will never consent to do any evil.

2. But as for me, my feet were almost gone: my steps had well-nigh slipped.


2. Time was indeed, when I, even I, who have had such long experience of his
care over me, began to doubt and stagger in my Faith: nay, was in danger to
tumble headlong into unbelief.

3. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.


3. The reason was, that having a just indignation against the folly, or rather
madness of wicked men, it first vexed me to see them, notwithstanding their ill
deservings, in a very flourishing condition; and then tempted me to think it
very hard that sober men should not equal, if not exceed them, in such
happiness: especially when I saw no likelihood that it would end, but that they
continue in their prosperity.

4. For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.


4. For as they carry on all their designs smoothly and meet with no rub in
their way, nor are in any danger (so great is their power) to be bound over by
humane justice to answer for their crimes, how many soever they commit: so they
are not afflicted with sore diseases by the hand of God, nor brought to their
graves with pains and torment; but after a long life, in firm and vigorous
health, depart easily out of the world.

5. They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other
men.


5. Their life is nothing so laborious and toilsome as that of many honest, but
poor and wretched men: and they escape untouched, or are little hurt, by such
calamities as are common to all mankind.

6. Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain: violence covers them as
a garment.


6. Which makes them so unsufferably proud, and vainly conceited of themselves,
that they not only tyrannize over their neighbors; but openly boast of the
power they have to do them mischief: and glory in all the violence and cruelty,
whereby they maintain and increase their pompous greatness.

7. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more then heart could wish.


7. In which they pamper themselves to such an excess, that in their very
countenance they express the haughty swelling of their minds and hearts: which
are strangely puffed up, by their being raised (not only beyond the
expectation of all other men; but) far above all that they themselves at first
imagined or could design.

8. They are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak
loftily.


8. They mock at all those who scrupulously tie themselves to the Rules of
Justice, or tell them of the danger they run by their violation: for they
threaten to undo all those that oppose them; and publicly declare in the
height of their arrogance, that they will not be bound by any Laws.

9. They set their mouth against the heavens; and their tongue walks through
the earth.


9. No, not those of God himself, who (with all the invisible Powers of which
men talk) they say is but a Name; which they do not dread: and therefore no
wonder, if such blasphemers of His Majesty spare neither high nor low, but let
their tongues loose, to abuse and calumniate whomsoever they please upon earth.

10. Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them.


10. And yet, as bad as they are, there is none of them but has his followers
and admirers; whom he first invites and then retains, like beasts, by filling
their bellies: which abundantly contents them, though others be squeezed and
oppressed, to give them this poor satisfaction.

11. And they say, How does God know? and is there knowledge in the most High?


11. Nay, they drink in their opinions, and join with them in their impiety,
saying, How can God know what we do here? or if He do, why should we think that
He, who is so high, troubles Himself about our affairs?

12. Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, they increase in
riches.


12. For behold, there are none that contemn Him more then these men; and yet
He is so far from inflicting any punishment on them, that none enjoy such a
continued course of prosperity as they; whose wealth and power increases every
day.

13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.


13. And verily, if these men discourse aright, I have taken a great deal of
pains to little purpose; while I have studiously endeavored to keep my heart
pure from so much as ill designs, as well as to refrain the doing of any evil
actions; from the charge of which I can safely purge my self.

14. For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.


14. And yet I am plagued perpetually by the restless malice of these wicked
doers; which as constantly as the Sun rises falls on me, a deal sooner then on
other men.

15. If I say, I will speak thus: behold, I should offend against the
generation of thy children.


15. But, whatsoever confused and foolish thoughts came on a sudden into my
mind, I concluded upon more mature deliberation, that if I said as these men
do, I should basely betray the cause of all them, who are truly dear unto Thee.

16. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me.


16. And therefore resolved with my self, before I pronounced my sentence, to
study this point more seriously; which at first sight appeared so hard, that it
grievously perplexed me.

17. Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.


17. And retiring my self into the holy places to consult with Thee, and with
those to whom Thou communicatest thy Secrets, I was presently sensible how
short their felicity is; unto which death having put an utter end, it is
followed with a dismal after-reckoning in another world.

18. Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down
into destruction.


18. And next I considered, that all of them do not stand so firm as they
imagine, but merely flatter themselves with vain hopes of continuing in their
station to the end of their days: for being raised to the highest preferments,
they find them to be very slippery places; from whence, to the amazement of
themselves and of all spectatours, they come tumbling down into a most horrible
ruin.

19. How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are utterly
consumed with terrors.


19. Oh what an astonishing change is this! which is the more frightfull, when
on a sudden the Divine vengeance seises on them; and, when they least expect
it, an end is put to their greatness: nay, they are quite destroyed, in a most
terrible manner, as if they had never been.

20. As a dream when one awaketh; so, O LORD, when thou awakest, thou shall
despise their image.


20. So that it is but a dream of happiness wherein they live, and they pride
themselves in a mere imaginary glory; which not only vanishes away, when Thou,
O Lord, do arise to judge them, but becomes as contemptible, in that very
City where they appeared in all their pomp and splendor, as the fine things,
which a man sees in his sleep, are when he awaketh.

21. Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.


21. And therefore when my spirit boiled with vexation, and grew sour at the
sight of their prosperity; (Ver. 2, 3.) when I was so vehemently provoked to
passionate complaints, feeling the sharpest touches of grief and anger;

22. So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.


22. I now ingenuously acknowledge, it was for want of such manly and religious
thoughts as these; which should have been in my mind, when I thought of thy
Administrations, if I had not been dull and stupid; as void of sense as the
beasts, which look only at things before their eyes, and have no regard to
what is to come, or is not seen.

23. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my right
hand.


23. For if I had looked beyond my senses, I might have seen that I am under
the care of thy good Providence, and that Thou have been my guide and my
supporter, even when I had these brutish thoughts, and did not suffer these
wicked men to destroy me.

24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.


24. And therefore I ought in all reason still to conclude, That Thou will
direct me to behave my self so wisely, that I shall never fall into their
snares: but, after I have suffered a while, be preferred to those dignities
from whence they fall; and, which is more, be so graciously accepted by Thee,
as to continue in them unto immortal glory.

25. Whom have I in heaven, but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I
desire besides thee.


25. This I expect from thy Almighty Goodness, who art the solest object of my
hope: For thou know there is none in Heaven, whom I depend upon for help and
protection but Thee alone; none upon Earth whose favor I seek, but only
thine, which shall perfectly content me.

26. My flesh, and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever.


26. It is possible I may still be pressed with such sore afflictions, that not
only my bodily strength, but also my courage may begin again to fail me; but
then I will recover my self, and fortify my Soul by flying unto Thee, O God,
for safety: in whose love I will always think my self happy, and enjoy
everlasting satisfaction.

27. For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee.


27. For there is nothing more certain or more remarkable then this; that they
who, by forsaking Thee, have put themselves far from under thy care, will never
be able, by any other means, to save themselves from perishing: For Thou have
already made such men a terrible Example of thy displeasure; and utterly
destroyed those, who, quitting thy service, have devoted themselves to the
worship of other Gods, 2 Chronicles. XXVIII. 6, 18, 19. XXIX. 7, 8, 9.

28. But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord
GOD, that I may declare all thy works.


28. And therefore I will learn by their miscarriages, that it is the best and
safest course for me, to adhere to my good God; and to make my humble addresses
to Him alone. I have done so hitherto, and no danger shall tempt me hereafter
to quit this hold, and to confide in any thing, but only in the Sovereign of
the World, who never fails those that depend upon Him, and will, I hope, be so
gracious unto me, that I shall have abundant cause to publish and proclaim to
all others the Works of his Providence; in preserving the Good, and in throwing
the wicked down, at last, to the ground.

PSALM LXXIV.
Maschil of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
The desolation of Jerusalem and of the Temple, as well as the rest of the
Country, made by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, was the sad occasion of this
Psalm. For it is altogether improbable, that it has respect to the days of
Antiochus Epiphanes, as some fancy; because, as Theodoret perrinently notes (to
omit all other reasons) we read nothing in any History of his burning the
Temple, or so much as of his laying the City waste; which are both here most
sorrowfully bewailed by Asaph. Who was not therefore that Asaph in David's time
(unless we should grant him to have written by the spirit of Prophecy, and
predicted what should be in aftertimes, as a great many think) because there
was no such Temple in those days, nor had been, as is here described: Nor was
it Asaph the Seer in Hezekiah's days (of whom see Argument of the foregoing
Psalm) who saw no such desolation made by Senacherib (for he did not take
Jerusalem, nor shoot so much as an arrow into it) nor, in all likelihood,
prophesied of the destruction here spoken of; because the description of it in
this Psalm is so plain, that we may most reasonably think the Author of it had
it before his eyes, and did not merely see it by the spirit of Prophecy; which
is not wont to foretell things in so clear a manner, but more obscurely and
darkly.

I conclude therefore it was some other Asaph who composed this Psalm, in the
time of the Captivity, and in the middle, or rather toward the conclusion of
it; because he complains, Ver. 9. that they had no Prophet (as there was in the
beginning of the Captivity, particularly Jeremiah) to tell them how long it
should last. And considering that in the second Verse he speaks of himself as
one that dwelt still in the Land of Israel, pointing to Mount Sion as a place
near to him; I take him to have been some pious man of the posterity of Asaph,
who was suffered to remain there with the Chaldaeans.

And if it were fit to suppose him to have written this Psalm very young, and
to have lived to a great age, when I have no proof of either; I should guess
him to be Asaph the Keeper of the King's Forest, in the days of Nehemiah: who
desired Artaxerxes to write to him, to furnish him with Timber out of Lebanon,
for the rebuilding some of those places, which the Psalmist here complains were
destroyed. Among which, the Porch of the Court of the Sanctuary remained
unbuilt even unto those times.

Howsoever from the mention of Mount Sion in the second Verse, it is manifest
Grotius forgot himself, when, in his Notes upon Ver. 6. he applies this Psalm
to the destruction of Shiloh; which he supposes Asaph to have here bewailed.
For Mount Sion had then never been in their possession, as it was afterward,
and had lain so long waste (Ver. 3.) when Asaph wrote this Psalm, that it
looked like a perpetual desolation. Besides the Tabernacle was not burnt when
Shiloh was destroyed, but remained, though without the Ark, till the days of
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. I. 3. see Psalm LXVIII. And of the meaning of Maschil, see
Psalm XXXII.

1. O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke
against the sheep of thy pasture?


1. O God, the Sovereign Judge of the world, who have justly expelled us out of
our Land, and continued our banishment so long, that little hope appears of our
being restored to it again; behold the anguish of our Souls, wherein we cry
unto Thee for mercy: For we are confounded to see Thee so highly incensed
against those, who were once under thy most indulgent care; as if Thou were
resolved never to be reconciled to us any more.

2. Remember thy congregation which thou have purchased of old: the rod of
thine inheritance which thou have redeemed, this mount Sion, wherein thou have
dwelt.


2. Thou have not forgotten, we know, though it be very long ago, with the
expense of how many Miracles Thou did make our Ancestors thy peculiar
people: For which reason, though we be exceedingly underserving, we beseech
Thee to let all the world see, Thou will not utterly abandon the poor
remainders of that Nation, which Thou did acquire at so great a price; that
Kingdom which Thou did rescue out of the most miserable slavery, to be thy
own possession; and this Mount Sion, wherein (after Thou had by many wonders
brought us into Canaan, and routed out the old Inhabitants) Thou wast pleased
at last, to settle thy abode among us.

3. Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations: even all that the enemy
has done wickedly in the sanctuary.


3. Make haste, good Lord, to come and visit the ruins of our Country and
City, which have lasted exceeding long, and will never be repaired without thy
powerful help: which we implore against the Authors of them; who, to all the
other mischiefs they have done, have with a peculiar spite, not only defaced
but, utterly destroyed thy dewlling place.

4. Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations: they set up their
ensigns for signs.


4. They are thy Enemies therefore as well as ours, whose fury and rage so
transports them that they roar rather then shout; whilst they triumph in those
places where thy people were wont to meet to praise thy Name: There they have
set up their Banners in token of their Victory; and bragg, as if their Gods
were superior unto Thee.

5. A man was famous, according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees.


5. Every one of them laid about him, and bestirred himself with all his might;
as if he hoped to get renown by the mischief he did: which was committed with
no more remorse, then if they had been lopping off boughs in the thickets of a
Forest, where they may be spared.

6. But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and
hammers.


6. Just so methinks I see (as if it were now a doing) how they hacked and
hewed with Axes, and knocked down with Hammers, the curious carved Work of the
Temple: whose elegance would have moved any but Barbarians, to have preserved
it with as great a zeal, as they employed to beat it in pieces.

7. They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down
the dewlling place of thy name to the ground.


7. But, so mad was their rage, it was not satisfied with this; but set fire
unto thy holy place: And what that did not consume, they pulled down; till they
had utterly profaned the habitation consecrated to thy Majesty, by laying it
level with the ground.

8. They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burnt up
all the synagogues of God in the land.


8. Nor did all this give a stop unto their fury; but they rather grew the more
outrageous: For designing quite to destroy our Religion, both in this and in
future Generations, they left not so much as one place, wherein we might meet
to say our Prayers, or hear the Law, throughout the Land.

9. We see not our signs, there is no more any prophet, neither is there among
us any that knows how long.


9. And, which is the saddest thing of all, Thou seem to have left us too;
and we see no token of thy Divine presence with us: So far we are from
beholding any miraculous works, as our Fathers did, for our deliverance; that
there is not so much as a Prophet to be found, to give us any advice, or speak
a word of comfort to us: not a man among us, that can tell when these
calamities will have an end.

10. O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme
thy name for ever?


10. What a reproach is this, O God? which has quite tired our patience; and
makes us cry unto Thee to make haste, to avenge thy self of these insulting
Enemies: Stop their blasphemous mouths, O God; and let them not say any more,
as they have done too long, that Thou art not able to deliver us.

11. Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy
bosom.


11. For we are confounded and know not what to say, while Thou thus
withdrawest thy powerful presence from us; that mighty power which was wont to
do such wonders for us: exert it again we beseech Thee, and stretch it out for
the destruction of those, who have spoken of it so contemptuously.

12. For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.


12. Why should I despair of it? since the great God, whom they deride, has
many Ages ago undertaken the Government and Protection of us: working for us
such deliverances in this Land which now lies waste, as astonished all the
world.

13. Thou did divide the Sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters.


13. Thou art that God, to whose power the raging Sea is subject; which at thy
command retired, and opened a way for us to pass thorough; but came back again,
with its wonted violence, and overwhelmed the Egyptians; who, like so many
Sea Monsters, thought to have devoured us.

14. Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat
to the people inhabiting the wilderness.


14. Pharaoh, that fierce Tyrant, as terrible as the vastest Whales, Thou did
utterly destroy there; with all his stern Captains and Commanders: whom the Sea
spewed up (XIX. Exodus 30.) to find their Tombs in the bellies of the wild
Beasts, and Birds; which people the neighboring Wilderness.

15. Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty
rivers.


15. Where, when our Fathers wanted drink, Thou made water to gush out of a
Rock; (XVII. Exodus 6. XX. Numb. 9.) which followed them in a full stream, till
they came to the borders of Canaan: And then Thou driedst up the waters of
Jordan, at a time when they ran violently, and (as if many Rivers had been
joined in one) it overflowed all its Banks, III. Josh. 15, 17.

16. The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou have prepared the light
and the sun.


16. And still there are such instances of thy power, which the whole world, if
they would but mind, have always before their eyes. For as Thou did sometimes
change the dry Land into a River, and a River into dry Land; so Thou do
continually change the Day into Night, and the Night into Day: having settled
the Moon to govern the one, and the Sun to govern the other, in their turns.

17. Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and
winter.


17. By thy Almighty wisdom also it is, that the motion of the Sun not only
makes the days and nights; but the different climates of the Earth, and the
seasons of the year: which are sometimes hot, and sometimes cold; sometimes
flourishing, as we see in the Summer, with all manner of fruit; and sometimes
stripped, as we see in the Winter, of all its ornaments, that afterward it may be
the more fruitful.

18. Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O LORD, and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy name.


18. And we sure have endured a very tedious winter; wherein all things have
looked most ruefully. May it please Thee now to return, like the Sun, unto us,
and let thy Enemies know Thou have not forgotten how they have reproached Thee,
O Lord; (whom they ought to have honored as the mighty Creator of all things)
but wilt vindicate thy glory, by punishing these insolent people, who,
foolishly puffed up with their Victories, have despised and derided thy
omnipotent Majesty.

19. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the
wicked, forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.


19. Deliver, we beseech Thee, thy Church, which like a Turtle-dove can do
nothing but meekly mourn, and make her silent complaints unto Thee, from those
violent men, who, like Birds of prey, seek utterly to destroy her: Let them not
take away its life and being; but, though we be at present deserted by Thee
yet, hear our cries, and at last relieve a poor helpless company, who flee unto
Thee, and depend upon Thee alone for safety.

20. Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full
of the habitations of cruelty.


20. Though we are unworthy to be regarded by Thee, yet have regard unto thy
own promises; wherein Thou have engaged thy self unto our Fathers, to give to
them and their posterity the Land of Canaan: which is so far from being now
inhabited by thy people, that every blind corner of it is a den of thieves and
murderers; who have filled it with rapine and cruelty.

21. O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy
name.


21. O let not thy poor afflicted servant, who implores thy aid against these
barbarous oppressors, be denied his suit; and go away ashamed to see himself
disappointed of his hope: but let him, and all the rest of thy miserable
people, who were never in greater need of thy help, be restored to praise thy
goodness in their ancient possessions; from whence they have been thus long
banished.

22. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily.


22. Appear, O God, in our behalf; and thereby vindicate thy self from
reproach: let me again beseech Thee, to show that Thou art not unmindfull of
all the scoffs, which prosperous fools belch out against Thee, every day.

23. Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up
against thee, increases continually.


23. It is time to punish all the insulting language of thy Enemies: for the
insolent braggs, and furious threats of those that oppose Thee, increase still
more and more; and rise up to a greater height of audacious impiety.

PSALM LXXV.
To the chief Musician, Al-taschith. A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
I take this Psalm to have been made by Asaph the Seer, mentioned 2 Chronicles.
XXIX. 30. (see Psalm. LXXIII.) after the great deliverance, which, by the
strange destruction of Senacherib's Army, God gave the good King Hezekiah. For
whose use Asaph composed this Psalm, and delivered it to the chief Master of
the Music in the Tabernacle; that he might therein make his public profession
of his obligations to Almighty God, and his resolution to serve Him and to
depend upon Him: as he advises all men else to do; if they would not be undone;
or if they hoped for any good, of which He is the sole and absolute Dispenser.

If Al-taschith be more then a note that this Psalm was to be sung like to the
LVII. and those that follow; it may signify as much, as thou shall not, or
wilt not destroy. And be applied either to Senacherib, who, the Prophet told
them, should not accomplish his design of destroying them, as he had done other
Nations (2 King. XIX. 17. 2 Chronicles. XXVII. 14.) or to God, who had not given him
Commission, as he pretended, to destroy Jerusalem (2 King. XVIII. 25.) but
would defend it (2 King. XIX. 34.) and not suffer it to be laid desolate.

Symmachus gives a more spiritual sense of the word, and calls this a triumphal
Song concerning Immortality. Because it contains, as Theodoret explains it, a
prediction of the righteous judgment of God in the destruction of the wicked,
and rewarding the lovers of virtue: which should admonish us, not to suffer any
godly thoughts, we have in our mind, to perish; but to preserve them whole and
entire, that we may inherit immortality.

What is to be understood by a Psalm-Song, see in the Argument of Psalm LXVII.

1. UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that
thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.


1. UNTO Thee, O God, the righteous Judge, who art the sole Author of this
great deliverance, do I and all my people give most solemn thanks: Nor can we
ever thank Thee enough, but we must again and again renew our acknowledgments
unto Thee; whose Almighty Power is still ready at hand, we clearly see by the
wonders Thou have done, to succor all those, who gratefully commemorate thy
benefits.

2. When I shall receive the congregation, I will judge uprightly.


2. And I will not content my self with these verbal praises alone; but as soon
as I shall meet with a fit opportunity, and we can have our solemn Assemblies
again (which by this invasion have been interrupted, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 1.) I will
perfect the Reformation which I have begun: and see that equal Justice be done
to all my people; as well as that they be preserved in thy true Religion.

3. The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the
pillars of it. Selah.


3. The whole Country has been in a miserable confusion; while their hearts
melted with fear of an utter desolation: But as then I supported their spirits,
and encouraged the Great men and the Officers to do their duty (2 Chronicles.
XXXII. 6, 7, 8.) So I will hereafter establish such Magistrates and Judges, as
shall bring all into better order.

4. I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly; and to the wicked, Lift not up
the horn.


4. I have told them my mind already, and do still solemnly proclaim and
declare, that I will proceed with the utmost severity against the contemners of
thy Laws; and therefore I advise them not to be so madly rude and insolent: For
the proudest of them all shall know, that it is safest for them to be more
modest, then to glory, as they do, in their impiety; or to boast of the power
they have to be injurious to their neighbors.

5. Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.


5. Do not vaunt of this, I once more advise you, nor bear your selves high, as
if you would out-brave Heaven it self: be not refractory and stubborn, nor
arrogantly say, that you will have your way, and that none shall curb you.

6. For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south.


6. For which way soever you turn your selves, whether to the East, or to the
West, or to the mountainous Deserts that lie on the North and South of us; in
vain do you think to escape the righteous judgment of God.

7. But God is the judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.


7. Who being the Sovereign Lord and Governor of the world, easily lays those
low that proudly exalt themselves against his Authority; and lifts up those
that humbly submit themselves unto Him.

8. For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
of mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the
wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them


8. For he never wants power to inflict the most dreadful punishments; which
(like an intoxicating Wine full of stupifying ingredients, that loosens the
very joints, and takes away all a man's strength to resist) never fail to have
their effect: And the godly may taste of them, nay suffer sorely for a time;
but the heaviest and most grievous punishments (like the dregs at the bottom of
such Wine) shall fall to the share of all the wicked of the Land; who shall be
forced to endure the utmost expressions of the Divine vengeance upon their sins.

9. But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.


9. And this I, who am His Minister to execute his judgments, will not cease to
declare as long as I live; that none may pretend ignorance for their excuse:
And I will sing praises unto God (who delivered Jacob from all evil) not only
for his late miraculous preservation of us, by his vengeance on Senacherib
(whom he has made an Example of his wrath to all proud contemners of Him) but
for making me the Instrument of so happy a Reformation.

10. All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.


10. For this is my resolution, not merely, as I said, to praise Him; but to
pull down the haughty spirit, and cut short all the power of the wicked, that
they shall not be able to do such mischief as they desire: and to raise the
righteous into such Authority, that they shall not fear what their most
insolent enemies can do unto them.

PSALM LXXVI.
To the chief Musician on Neginoth. A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
It is visible to every eye that the Psalmist here commemorates some notable
Victory, over very powerful Enemies: whereby God delivered (when it was in
great danger) the whole Country; particularly Jerusalem. Which is called here
Salem, Ver. 2. by an usual form of speech among the Hebrews, who are wont in
names of places, to cut off the former part: instead of Abel-Sittim, saying
only Sittim; and Nimrim for Beth-Nimrim; Lechi for Ramath-Lechi; Sheba for
Beer-Sheba, and many such like; as Bochartus has shown in the Second Book of
his Phaleg, chap. 24. and in the First part of his Work concerning the Animals
named in Scripture, Book 2. chapter 25.

And there is as little reason to doubt that the particular deliverance here
aimed at, is that from Senacherib's Army; which Asaph the Seer, mentioned 2
Chr. XXIX. 30. (see Psalm. LXXIII.) was not content to celebrate in the former
Hymn, which he made for the use of the King; but added this also, for his own
use, and all other pious persons. Who he hoped would join in it; especially
when it was sung in the Temple, as he directed the Master of the Music, after
the same manner as Psalm. IV.

Some of the Greeks seem to have perceived something of this: For, though there
be no such Title in the ancient Hexaplus of Origin; yet in after times
Theodoret tells us, he found in some Copies this Inscription, which still
continues; An Ode against the Assyrian: which Apollinarius follows.

Of a Psalm-Song, see Psalm LXVII.

1. IN Judah is God known: his Name is great in Israel.


1. GOD has so illustriously demonstrated himself among us (in this unexpected
and terrible execution) to be the Sovereign Ruler and Judge of the World; that
he must shut his eyes that does not see it: His Power and all his other
glorious perfections, which are conspicuous every where, are in no Country so
magnified as they are in Israel.

2. In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dewlling place in Sion.


2. Our Enemies themselves, who reviled Him (2 Chronicles. XXXII. 17, 19.) and
despised Jerusalem ( Ib. Verse 10.) are now sure convinced, that there this
Mighty Lord makes his abode: in the top of that Mountain where he has chosen
to fix his dewlling place.

3. There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the
battle. Selah.


3. Before the Walls of which He has slain with an invisible Dart, the fiery
Archers (who have not shot so much as one Arrow into it, 2 King. XIX. 32.) and
made the Shields, and Swords, and the rest of their military preparations,
altogether useless and unprofitable.

4. Thou art more glorious and excellent then the mountains of prey.


4. Whereby thou, O Sion, art become more glorious then all the Mountains,
where the fiercest Beasts of prey, or the most desperate Robbers, have their
resort: who never made such slaughters.

5. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none of the
men of might have found their hands.


5. For they, whose courage made them fear no danger, but confidently promised
themselves the spoil of Jerusalem, are given unto us for a spoil: They lay down
to sleep, but never awaked; 2 King. XIX 35.) not a man, among the most mighty
of them, was able to strike a stroke; or do any thing to defend himself against
that hand, which cut them off.

6. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a
dead sleep.


6. But the most experienced Horsemen, as well as they that rode in Chariots,
sunk down dead, at the sudden check, the severe rebuke; which they received
from Thee, O God of Jacob, whom they reproached, 2 King. XIX. 22, 23.

7. Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art angry?


7. Thou, and none but Thou, art to be dreaded: And what King is he, that is
able, for so short a time as a moment, to resist thy power? which in an instant
can destroy all those, who incur thy heavy displeasure.

8. Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared and
was still,


8. We have an Example of it before our eyes; for when we made our solemn
appeal to Thee (2 King. XIX. 3, 4, 15, 16.) Thou wast pleased to pronounce a
sentence of condemnation from heaven upon our enemies: which struck such
terror into those that survived, that they who before were full of rage and
made a tumultuous noise (Ver. 27, 28.) were as still as Lambs; and durst not
stir a foot, but only to return from whence they came, Ver. 28, 36.

9. When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.


9. They were afraid to continue their attempts against us, when God, who had
long suffered their insolence, sent an Angel to chastise it, and to do
execution upon them: and thereby delivered the helpless people of this Land;
who had patiently born their horrible oppression.

10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shall
thou restrain.


10. Which may well be a warning to all fell Tyrants, not to be so fierce and
outrageous, which will only present Thee with the fairer opportunity to
glorify thy self, and raise thy praise to a greater height; as Thou have now
done, by suppressing the Assyrians fury: who if they have any relics of
wrath, which may boil up again in their hearts; Thou shall chain it up, and not
suffer it to break forth to our further disturbance.

11. Vow, and pay unto the LORD your God; let all that are round about him
bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.


11. And let this excite you all, who are thus marvellously delivered, to make
more liberal promises of grateful Sacrifices; as well as to perform those,
which you have already vowed, to the great Lord your most gracious God: who so
far excells all others, that the Nations round about us, who hear the fame of
this, shall reproach you (if you be forgetful of his benefits) by the presents
which they shall make to Him; (2 Chr. XXXII. 23.) who ought to be feared by all
his Friends, and is most terrible to his Enemies.

12. He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings of the
earth.


12. For he can easily, with a sudden stroke, not only take down the proud
stomach, but take away the life, of the fiercest Captains and Commanders: (2
Chr. XXXII. 21.) yea, make the greatest Monarchs (who keep the world in awe)
quake and tremble at his dreadful executions.

PSALM LXXVII.
To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun. A Psalm of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
A Psalm composed by Asaph, and sent by him to that Song-Master, who was over
the Children of Jeduthun: in which I imagined, at first sight, that he
represented the sad condition of Hezekiah, and the motions of his heart toward
God, in his sickness, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 24. XXXVIII. Isa. 1. But, upon further
consideration, it appears from the latter part of it, that he bewails the
calamity of all the Nation: either when Senacherib overran the Country; or
else in the Captivity of Babylon. If we refer it to the latter, then it was not
Asaph the Seer, whom I mentioned before Psalm LXXIII. that made this Psalm; but
some other in after times (see Psalm. LXXIV.) who laments the long continuance
of their Captivity: which looked like an utter forsaking by God; but he
comforts himself at last with the remembrance of what God had done formerly for
them, when he delivered them out of the Egyptian bondage.

1. I Cried unto God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he gave
ear unto me.


1. I Have incessantly made my prayer to God, and I will still most earnestly
entreat his favor: To Him who has justly afflicted us, and can alone relieve
us, have I again and again renewed my importunate suit; which I hope will at
last prevail with Him for deliverance.

2. In the day of my trouble I sought the LORD; my sore ran in the night, and
ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.


2. I have not negligently discharged this Duty; but as the distress is great
wherein we are, so I have restlesly implored help from the Lord: In the night,
when men are wont to bury their troubles in sleep, I have with unwearied
diligence, spread out my hands unto Him (in token that all my dependence is
upon His power alone) resolving to admit of no consolation, till I obtained a
gracious Answer from Him.

3. I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my spirit was
overwhelmed. Selah.


3. I remembered indeed, how kind God had been unto us in former times; but this
only gave me the greater trouble, when I compared it with our present
miseries: and the more I mused on it, the more my spirit was disturbed, and
miserably afflicted.

4. Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.


4. Insomuch that I could not close my eyes, to take a wink of sleep; nor open
my mouth (such was my perturbation and astonishment) to express the heaviness
of my grief.

5. I have considered the days of old, the years of aucient times.


5. All that I could do, was to recount thy merciful Providence over our
Forefathers in times past; and ponder seriously what wonders Thou did for
them, many ages agone.

6. I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart,
and my spirit made diligent search.


6. I called to mind all the Songs I had indicted, to celebrate the memory of
those ancient benefits: and spent whole nights in silent meditations, and
diligent inquiries, which I revolved to and fro in my mind; why He who had
taken such care of our Ancestors, had so long rejected us?

7. Will the LORD cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?


7. Will the Lord, thought I, abandon us for ever? Is He so incensed against
us, that He will never be reconciled, nor intend to show us any more favor?

8. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?


8. Is his infinite mercy, which is the fountain of all his benefits, quite
exhausted? and will He never hereafter speak a word of comfort to us?

9. Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? Selah.


9. Has God, whose property it is to show mercy, quite laid aside all thoughts
of exercising his clemency toward us? or have we so highly provoked Him to
anger, that He has no regard at all unto our miseries?

10. And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most High.


10. But having thus complained, and said within my self, This is the thing
which sorely afflicts me, to see such alterations in the proceedings of the
most High, that the same hand which formerly protected us, now severely
scourges us;

11. I will remember the works of the LORD: surely I will remember thy wonders
of old.


11. I presently considered that there might be a change again: and resolved to
comfort my self with the remembrance of the former works of the Lord; and to go
back as far as the Miracle Thou did for us (in bringing us up out of the Land
of Egypt) when our deserts were as small as in these days.

12. I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.


12. Of all the ensuing wonders I will think, rather then on our present
miseries: I will not omit one of them; but, instead of these complaints, make
them the constant subject of my discourse.

13. Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?


13. From which I cannot but conclude that the method of thy Providence, O God,
is not only perfectly holy and just; but quite out of our reach: nor is thy
Power inferior; but, as Thou do not proceed in the common way of our
thoughts, so none can resist what thy incomparable Majesty thinks fit to effect.

14. Thou art the God that do wonders; thou have declared thy strength among
the people.


14. For Thou art the mighty God, who can do miracles, as easily as the most
ordinary works: and have made all the world sensible, that thy power exceeds,
both the strength and the opinion of all Creatures.

15. Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
Selah.


15. Having delivered thy people, descended from Jacob and miraculously
preserved by Joseph, from the Egyptian bondage; by a long series of stupendous
judgments upon Pharaoh and his Servants, VI. Exodus 6. VI. Deuteronomy. 21, 22. VII. 8.

16. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid; the
depths also were troubled.


16. Which were followed presently with a greater wonder, when the waters of
the Red Sea felt thy Power, O God: They felt thy power to the very bottom of
them; which so disturbed them, that they retreated, as if they had been
affrighted at thy presence; and left a plain way for thy people to march
through, upon dry ground.

17. The clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows also
went abroad.


17. But returned again upon the Egyptians (who pursued after us) accompanied
with a terrible storm of rain, and thunder, and hailstones; which flew about
their ears, and brake the very Wheels of their Chariots, XIV. Exodus 24, 25.

18. The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the
world, the earth trembled and shook.


18. The noise of this thunder filled all the air thereabout; and so did the
lightning that flashed in their faces: which, together with a dreadful
Earthquake, made the very inhabitants of Canaan tremble, II. Josh. 10, 11.

19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.


19. We might well say then, that thy way is quite out of our reach; (Ver. 13.)
who made a passage through the Sea, a broad path through the boisterous
waters: which as none ever trod before or after, so they cannot trace the
footsteps; which the waters have overflown and obliterated, XIV. Exodus 26, 27.

20. Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.


20. Nor did thy care over thy people end there, but by the ministry of thy
servants Moses and Aaron, Thou did conduct them with the same tenderness that
a good Shepherd does his Sheep; through a horrid Wilderness; in which Thou
feddest them, till they came to Canaan [And thither the same Power can, and the
same Goodness will, I hope, restore us: though now we seem neglected by Thee,
as our Fathers were, for a time, in the Land of Egypt.]

PSALM LXXVIII.
Maschil of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
When God gave his Law to the Israelites, He commanded them, not only to be
careful to study it themselves but, to inculcate it upon their Children (as
the Psalmist here remembers, Ver. 5.) that they might propagate the knowledge
of it to all future generations, IV. Deuteronomy. 9. VI. 7, 8, etc XI. 18, 19, etc And
particularly to instruct them in the reason of their Feasts; which were
appointed for the commemoration of several benefits, which he would not have
forgotten, XIII. Exodus 8, 14. In prosecution of which end, as Theodoret well
observes, this Psalm was indicted, by the Prophetical grace; (as his words are)
that they and all their posterity, might preserve in mind the wonderful works
of God. An Epitome of which (for the help of their memory) He here presents
them withal; from the time of their coming out of Egypt, till David's
promotion to the Throne.

Where this Narration concluding, it makes it probable this Psalm was composed
by that Asaph, so often mentioned, as one of the principal Singers in those
days: who, setting before the peoples eyes, as in a Table, the benefits their
Fathers had received, with their shameful ingratitude, and the punishments
inflicted upon them for it, teaches and instructs them who succeeded (for which
reason some will have it called Maschil: see Psalm. XXXII.) to learn greater
gratitude and fidelity to their Benefactour: for fear they should incur his
higher displeasure, if they did not beware by such sad Examples.

1. GIve ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my
mouth.


1. ATtend reverently, O my Countrymen, for whom I have a particular affection,
unto the Admonition, which now I intend to give you: listen diligently I
beseech you to the following instruction.

2. I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:


2. It is no vulgar lesson, which I would have you learn; nor will I be sparing
in my instruction: but I will abundantly inform you in the most remarkable
passages of God's Providence in former times; which are more worthy your
knowledge then the skill of resolving the darkest Riddles.

3. Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.


3. And I will not report uncertain or doubtful things to you; or things done
in another Nation: But such as are of unquestionable credit; which you have
heard and know to be recorded in your holy Books; and our Forefathers, who were
eyewitnesses of them, have faithfully registered and transmitted unto us.

4. We will not hide them from their children, showing to the generation to
come the praises of the LORD; and his strength, and his wonderful works that
he has done.


4. Who will not be so treacherous, as to lose the memory of them in our days;
but diligently propagate them to posterity: endeavoring that all future
generations may understand, how much the Lord deserves to be praised, for the
mighty and stupendous works, which He has done in former Ages.

5. For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel,
which he commanded our fathers that they should make them known to their
children.


5. And indeed, when God gave us the Law, He strictly charged our Forefathers,
and made a particular injunction about it, which He frequently repeated ( Deuteronomy.
IV. VI. XI. see the Argument;) that they should be careful to leave the
knowledge of these things as a sacred legacy, or inheritance unto their
Children.

6. That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should
be born: who should arise and declare them to their children:


6. In order to the conveying them, by their hands, to the next generation; who
were then unborn: who should be taught also when they were grown up, to deliver
them with the same diligence to their descendants; and so preserve the memory
of them to all succeeding generations.

7. That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God: but
keep his commandments:


7. To the end, that they might learn by such wonderful instances of his
powerful goodness, to adhere unto Him, and confide in Him alone; and by the
constant commemoration of his benefits, be provoked religiously to observe his
Precepts.

8. And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; a
generation that set not their heart aright: and whose spirit was not steadfast
with God.


8. And take warning by the punishments inflicted on them, not to imitate the
ingratitude of their Forefathers; who were not only a refractory generation,
but so fickle, that they fell off from God to the worship of Idols, presently
after they came out of Egypt: For they did not lay to heart what He had done
for them, and so were never rightly disposed to his service; or if, in a good
fit, they were inclined to it, they soon revolted from Him.

9. The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the
day of battle.


9. What could be more shameful, then their base refusal to go and engage the
Canaanites, when they were so well appointed for the fight? and were commanded
by God, in whose power they had no confidence, to go up and take possession of
the Land? (I. Deuteronomy. 26.) unless it were their foul cowardice when they did
engage them against his command; (I. Deuteronomy. 43, 44.) and the Ephraimites
themselves, though a valiant Tribe and excellent Archers, ran away, and were
chased in a shameful manner by their enemies.

10. They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law:


10. For they brake their word with God; (who therefore would not be with them,
XIV. Numb. 43.) and would not be governed by his will, but by their own.

11. And forgot his works, and his wonders that he had showed them.


11. Never thinking of the illustrious works, which their eyes had seen; and so
distrusting his power, notwithstanding all the Miracles, whereby He had
demonstrated the greatness of it to them.

12. Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land of
Egypt, in the field of Zoan.


12. Nor were the next Generation any better; though the memory was then fresh
of that heap of wonders, which their Fathers saw him do publicly: not in a
corner, but in all the Land of Egypt: yea, in and about the principal City of
the Kingdom.

13. He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through, and he made the
waters to stand as an heap.


13. From whence when He had delivered them, and they were in great distress at
the red Sea; He made it give way to them, that they might walk through it on
dry ground: the fluid waters swelling into little hills (XV. Exodus 8.) which
stood like a solid wall on either hand, to secure them in that dangerous
passage (XIV. Exodus 22.)

14. In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night with a
light of fire.


14. Through which He conducted them, as He did at all other times, by a
glorious Cloud: whose dark side served also in the daytime, for a shadow from
the scorching rays of the Sun; and its bright side in the night, for a torch to
guide them when they traveled; or if they rested, to light them in their Tents.

15. He clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the
great depths.


15. And when they wanted water in the wilderness, He brought it out of the
Rocks (which He commanded Moses to smite more then once, first at Rephidim
(XVII. Exodus 6.) and then in Kadesh, XX. Numb. 8, 11.) And they had it in such
plenty, both for themselves and their cattle; as if it had been a great pond or
lake.

16. He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down
like rivers.


16. And yet it was no standing, but a flowing water; which ran continually out
of the dry Rock, as out of its Fountain, in several streams: or rather, like
unto Rivers; which followed them in their travels.

17. And they sinned yet more against him, by provoking the most High in the
wilderness.


17. But all these miraculous works, did not alter their depraved Nature; which
broke out into new and greater provocations; in that very place, where, without
the singular Providence of their most high Benefactour, they had all been
starved.

18. And they tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for their lust.


18. For they were not content with the bountiful provision which he had made
for them; (XVI. Exodus.) but muttered within themselves against Him: And wished,
if He was so powerful and kind as was pretended, that He would give them a new
proof of it; by sending them meat to satisfy their wanton appetite.

19. Yea, they spoke against God: they said, Can God furnish a table in the
wilderness?


19. And at last, they openly declared that distrust of his power, which was in
their hearts; saying, Is God able to make us a feast here in this barren
wilderness? XI. Numb. 4, 5, etc.

20. Behold, he smote the rock that the waters gushed out, and the streams
overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people?


20. It is true He has brought water out of a Rock for us in great abundance;
(which perhaps was lodged there before in the caverns of it, and might have
flowed out of it self) but can he give us more substantial bread? (not such
light stuff as this Manna is, which He also has sent us, XI. Numb. 6.) here
where no corn grows? and make an ample provision for all this multitude, of
such flesh as this place does not afford?

21. Therefore the LORD heard this, and was wroth, so a fire was kindled
against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel;


21. Which rude and insolent language highly incensed the Divine displeasure;
so that He sent lightning from heaven (XI. Numb. 1.) to consume those, whom He
had before cherished: and He resolved also to punish them more severely, before
He had done with them (Ver. 33.)

22. Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation:


22. Because they had so mean an opinion of Him, that they durst not confide in
Him, and commend themselves to his good providence; to preserve and conduct
them safe to Canaan.

23. Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of
heaven,


23. No, not after such extraordinary benefits, as they had received from Him:
for He had undertaken in a miraculous manner (as is fit to be more particularly
remembered) to dispense food to them, from above; and to make the clouds their
granary, whose doors he opened to them.

24. And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the corn
of heaven.


24. And, instead of rain (to make the earth with long labor become fruitful)
to send showers of Manna out of the air (XVI. Exodus 4.) which was a kind of
Corn ready prepared for them, XI. Numb. 8, 9.

25. Man did eat angels food: he sent them meat to the full.


25. There was not a man among that vast multitude, but was fed with that
strong and hearty, or rather princely food; brought to them from the
habitation, and by the ministry of Angels: This was their daily entertainment,
as long as their travels in the wilderness lasted; and they had it in such
abundance, that none of them could pretend they were not sufficed, XVI. Exodus
16, 17, 35.

26. He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power he brought
in the south wind.


26. And therefore it was not to satisfy their hunger, but to reprove their
unbelief, that He was pleased to comply with their desires; and, when the wind
blew violently out of the East, turned it by his power into the South:

27. He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.


27. Which brought a great Cloud of Quails (a delicious Bird) from the coasts
about the red Sea: which (either tired with long flight, or beaten down with
the wind) came pouring down like showers of rain; and lay on the ground, as
thick as the dust or the sand on the Sea shore, from whence they came, XI.
Numb. 31.

28. And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their
habitations.


28. There was no need of labor, or of any art to catch them; neither needed
they go far to take them up: for they dropped down in the midst of their Camp;
and lay also many miles round it in such heaps, that they, who would, might
fetch enough to serve them for a whole month, XI. Numb. 20, 31.

29. So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire;


29. So they had not only a taste of his liberality; but were glutted and
crammed with them: for He satisfied their longings to the full.

30. They were not estranged from their lust: but while the meat was yet in
their mouths,


30. And they were not hindered from eating as much as they pleased; nor was
this diet become at all nauseous to them: but they greedily feasted on these
Birds to the end of the month; and at that very time had these sweet morsels in
their mouths, (XI. Numb. 33.)

31. The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote
down the chosen men of Israel.


31. When the Divine vengeance seized on them, by a very great pestilence: (XI.
Numb. 33.) which swept away the strongest and goodliest persons that were in
Israel

32. For all this they sinned still: and believed not for his wondrous works.


32. But these punishments wrought no more change in their hearts, then his
benefits: for they added new sins to all the former; and were not moved by any
of his wonderful works, to believe that He was able to bring them into the
Land of promise, XIV. Numb. 2, 3, 4.

33. Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.


33. For which cause He resolved they should never come thither, but be
consumed in the wilderness: (XIV. Numb. 28, 33, etc.) Where, though they
traveled up and down very much and long, yet it was to no purpose; for they
were never the nearer to their journeys end; nor were ever free from one plague
or other, till they were utterly destroyed.

34. When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired
early after God.


34. They relented indeed sometime; and when God cut off some of them, the rest
began to deprecate his displeasure: (XIV. Numb. 39, 40.) and, by promising
amendment, most earnestly sought to recover his favor.

35. And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their
redeemer.


35. And professed that they would trust in God hereafter for safety and
deliverance: who they acknowledged was superior to all other Gods, and had
been their mighty Redeemer.

36. Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him
with their tongues.


36. But all this was little more then speaking him fair, while they lay under
his correcting hand: and they did not sincerely intend to do as they promised,
when it was removed.

37. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
covenant.


37. For their hearts were not rightly disposed, nor firmly resolved to adhere
unto Him; as appears by their frequent revolts from their engagements: which
they never faithfully observed; but as constantly broke, as they renewed their
Covenant with Him, XVI. Numb. 3. XX. 3, 4. XXI. 5, 7. XXV. 1, 2, etc.

38. But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed
them not; yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all
his wrath.


38. Yet He was so full of compassion, that, after He had threatened utterly to
destroy them, (XIV. Numb. 11, 12.) He remitted very much of the severity of the
sentence: and did not cut them off at once, ( Ib. Ver. 15, 17, 18.) but very
often spared them when they deserved to be punished; or, when He punished them,
did it less then their deserts.

39. For he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that passes away and
comes not again.


39. For He considered how frail they were, and that they could not continue
long (though He did not snatch them away) but would moulder of themselves into
dust; and vanish like a blast of wind, which makes a bustle and noise for a
little time, and then is dispersed and heard of no more.

40. How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the
desert?


40. How many times, before this terrible threatening, did they provoke Him to
anger in the wilderness? (XIV. Numb. 22.) and afterward, did things exceeding
offensive to Him, in other parts of the desert? Numb. XVI. XX. XXI. XXV.

41. Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel.


41. Being so vilely ungrateful, as to talk of returning into Egypt; (XIV.
Numb. 4.) or requiring, upon every occasion, new proofs of his power: Nay,
questioning whether it could do all things, though He had wrought so many
wonders; and appointing Him, who had so often shown Himself to be incomparably
greater then all other Gods, what He should do (as I said before Ver. 19, 20.)
if He intended to have them believe on Him.

42. They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the
enemy.


42. For they quite forgot (this was the reason of their naughtiness, Ver. 11,
12. which is fit again to be repeated) or never laid to heart, the mighty
things He had done for them: especially that memorable time, when He, by his
power alone, delivered them from the tyranny of Pharaoh, who most miserably
oppressed them.

43. How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of
Zoan:


43. They did not seriously ponder the evident demonstration He gave of his
uncontrollable power, in the miraculous judgments which He sent upon the
Egyptians; even upon the Court of Pharaoh, and the principal City of the
Kingdom.

44. And had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they could
not drink.


44. When, for instance, He left them no water to quench their thirst; by
turning the River Nile (VII. Exodus 17, 19, 20.) with all the streams that were
derived from it, and all their Ponds and Pools of water, into blood.

45. He sent diverse sorts of flies among them, which devoured them; and frogs,
which destroyed them.


45. And sent an infinite swarm of the most pestilent (and to them the most
odious) sort of Flies (VIII. Exodus 21, 22.) which bit the Egyptians, as they
used to do their Dogs: As not long before He had sent such an army of Frogs to
invade all places (VIII. Exodus 3, 8, 9, etc.) and so to spoil their meat and
drink, and every thing else; that if this plague had lasted, they must have
left their Country, or not have lived.

46. He gave also their increase unto the caterpiller, and their labor unto
the locust.


46. After which He exposed the Fruits of the Earth, for which they had taken
long pains, to be devoured by various kinds of Locusts; with which the whole
Country was so overspread, that nothing else, but they, were to be seen upon
the face of the earth (X. Exodus 5.)

47. He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomoretrees with frost.


47. Which had been miserably harassed before, by storms of Hail, both small
and great: whereby not only the Grapes and such like Fruit, were smitten down;
but the Trees themselves (for instance, the Vines, and the wild Figtrees) quite
killed, and corrupted at the very root, IX. Exodus 18, 19, 25.

48. He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot
thunderbolts.


48. For there was a dreadful Thunder and Lightning mixed together with it:
which let no living Creature escape, but destroyed even the Cattle and the
Flocks, which were left abroad in the Field, IX. Exodus 22, 23, etc.

49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and
trouble, by sending evil angels among them.


49. Many other ways He plagued them, which were tokens of his severest
displeasure; by a grievous murrain, by fiery boils, by a most dismal darkness,
(IX. Exodus 10.) till at length He sent evil Angels (who had frighted them in
that darkness XVII. Wisd. 3.) as the Ministers of his heavy wrath.

50. He made a way to his anger, he spared not their soul from death: but gave
their life over to the pestilence.


50. Which irresistibly and speedily seized on them, wheresoever He found them;
and spared not their lives: but took away the Firstborn of all their Cattle by
a pestilential disease, XXI. Exodus 30.

51. And smote all the firstborn in Egypt: the chief of their strength in the
tabernacles of Ham:


51. As well as the Firstborn of all their Children, (the prop of their
Families, in whom the hope of future succession was principally laid)
throughout the dwellings of the posterity of Cham, the Father of the Egyptians,
(X. Genesis 6. XII. Exodus 30.)

52. But made his oron people to go forth like sheep: and guided them in the
wilderness like a flock.


52. And by that means brought forth his people from among them, (XII. Exodus
31.) as peaceably as a Shepherd does his Sheep out of their Folds (not so much
as a Dog moving his tongue against them, XI. Exodus 7.) and then directed them
the way they should go in the wilderness (XIII. Exodus 18, 21.) where He
graciously provided for them.

53. And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea
overwhelmed their enemies.


53. He conducted them securely even through the red Sea, without any
apprehension of danger, (XIV. Exodus 19, 22.) but overwhelmed Pharaoh and his
followers, in that very path where they traveled in safety.

54. And he brought them to the border of his Sanctuary, even to this mountain
which his right hand had purchased.


54. And never ceased his care over them (notwithstanding all their
provocations) till He brought them into his holy Land; and (in the issue) to
this Mount Sion: which, not their prowess but, his mighty power, by the hand of
David, won for them, 2 Samuel V. 6, etc.

55. He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance
by line: and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.


55. And, after He had expelled the old inhabitants, who were not able to stand
before them (XII. Josh.) He distributed by lot, to every Tribe their portion of
Land, which they should inherit (XIV. Josh.) and settled them in a quiet
possession of it, XXI. Josh. 43, 44.

56. Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God: and kept not his
testimonies:


56. Yet, after so many and so great benefits, they behaved themselves no
better, in that good Land; then they had done in the Wilderness: but as soon as
Joshua and the Elders were dead (II. Judge. 7, 10.) they disbelieved the
threatenings of their Law, and would make a trial whether they were true or no;
provoking the great Lord of all the world, by slighting his Commandments, which
He had so strictly injoined them to observe.

57. But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were
turned aside like a deceitful bow.


57. They imitated their Forefathers, both in their frequent apostasies from
God, and in their falseness to their promises, when they pretended to repent of
them, (II. Judge. 13, 18, 19. III. 7, etc.) having depraved minds and hearts,
which (like an ill made Bow, that never tends the Arrow to the mark) would turn
aside into crooked ways, and not be directed according to the will of God.

58. For they provoked him to anger with their high places: and moved him to
jealousy with their graven images.


58. For they highly incensed Him, by their Altars and Images, (VI. Judge. 25.)
which they built after the manner of the heathen (XXII. Numb. 41.) in the high
places: where they worshipped a number of false Gods, (X. Judge. 6.) to his
great offense and dishonor.

59. When God heard this, he was wroth and greatly abhorred Israel:


59. Which was so notorious, that the Judge of the world could not but take
notice of it, and severely punish it; by abandoning that people, for whom He
had done such wonders, into the hands of the Syrians, the Moabites, the
Midianites, Philistines, and the Children of Ammon, (see the Book of Judges)
who made them as contemptible unto others, as they were loathsome unto Him.

60. So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed
among men:


60. Insomuch that at last He quite forsook the City of Shiloh, where, in his
Tabernacle, He had been graciously pleased to be present with them, (1 Samuel IV.
3, 4.) and would never return unto it any more, (VII. Jer, 12. and see Arg. of
LXVIII. Ps.)

61. And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
hand.


61. Nay, He let the Ark of the Covenant, the special token of his presence
with them, from whence his power was wont to appear most gloriously for them,
not only fall into their hands; but be carried away captive by the Philistines
(1 Samuel IV. 11, 22. V. 1.).

62. He gave his people over also to the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritance.


62. Whose Sword slew a great number of his people; (1 Samuel IV. 10.) so
exceeding angry was He with those, whom He had formerly taken into his special
care above all other Nations; XXXII. Deuteronomy. 8, 9.

63. The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to
marriage.


63. For it was by his Divine vengeance, more then the Philistines valor, that
they lost abundance of brave young men; the very flower of their Army: by which
means many of their Virgins were constrained to remain unmarried; and they that
found Husbands, were fain to omit all tokens of joy, in a time of public
sorrow.

64. Their priests fell by the sword: and their widows made no lamentation.


64. For some of their Priests, who were peculiarly consecrated to God's
service, were slain in this Battle, (1 Samuel IV. 11.) and their Wives, oppressed
with grief, did not long survive, to make any public Funeral for them; 1 Samuel
IV. 20.

65. Then the LORD awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that
shouteth by reason of wine.


65. The Lord Himself also (who was wont to sight for us) seemed no more
concerned in all these calamities, which befell both us and our Religion; then
a mighty Commander is at that, which is done to his Army when he is asleep, or
overcome with Wine: Till at last, like such a great Warrior (who being awaked
calls for his arms, and charges the enemy with greater fury) He vindicated his
honor in a terrible manner, and made a very great destruction among them, 1 Samuel V. 9, 11.

66. And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual
reproach.


66. For besides the fall of Dagon before the Ark, He smote several Cities of
the Philistines, with a grievous sort of Haemorrhoids; whereof many died, and
the rest languished under most miserable torments: (1 Samuel V. 6, 9, 12.) the
monuments of which they themselves were forced to make, and send back with the
Ark; to his great glory, and their eternal reproach, 1 Samuel VI. 3, 4, 9.

67. Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of
Ephraim.


67. Yet he would not return to Shiloh again (which was in the Tribe of
Ephraim, the Son of Joseph) nor have the Ark of his presence placed there any
more:

68. But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Sion which he loved.


68. But first it was brought to Kiriathaim, (1 Samuel VI. 21.) a City of the
Tribe of Judah, XV. Josh. 6. where He resolved hereafter to have his special
residence: and so from thence (after a short stay at the House of Obed-Edom)
unto Mount Sion (1 Chronicles. XIII. 6. XVI. 1, 3, 29.) which He preferred before
the Hill of Kiriathaim (1 Samuel VII. 1.) or any other place in all the Country.

69. And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he has
established for ever.


69. There Solomon built Him a stately Temple, which, as it was a high and
lofty Fabric, so was not moveable, like his former habitation; but remained
perpetually fixed, like the earth on which it stood.

70. He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds:


70. For as He had rejected Shiloh, and chosen Sion for the place of his
dwelling; so He had likewise rejected Saul, and chosen David (the Father of
Solomon) to be the King of his people: A man who served Him as faithfully in
that Office, as he had done his Father in keeping of his Sheep.

71. From following the ews great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Israel his inheritance.


71. From that mean employment He took him, and raised him to the highest
charge and dignity: that the care he had employed in looking after the Ews, and
their Lambs when they should fall, he might exercise in governing his people;
and endeavoring that they, whom He had chosen for his own peculiar
inheritance, did no way miscarry.

72. So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by
the skilfulness of his hands.


72. And he did not deceive His expectation; but governed them with equal
integrity and prudence: never designing any thing but their good; and
dexterously accomplishing whatsoever he designed.

PSALM LXXIX.
A Psalm of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm was penned, in all probability, upon the same occasion with the
LXXIX. viz. The destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar: see what I have
said there, in the Argument of that Psalm; and it will appear altogether
unlikely, that this should have respect to the times of Antiochus Epiphanes: as
many imagine, and among the rest Theodoret: which is the more strange, because
the same reason he gives there, why the LXXIV. Psalm does not belong to those
times (which he repeats again upon LXXX. Psalm. 17.) lies as strongly against
the application of this Psalm to the fury and rage, wherewith that Prince fell
upon the Jewish Nation. Whose miserable calamity under Nebuchadnezzar we find
bewailed by Jeremiah, who then lived (X. Jer. 25.) in the very words of the
sixth and seventh verses of this Psalm: which is some indication that they both
belong to the same matter: but whether Jeremiah took them from Asaph, or Asaph
from him, I cannot certainly determine. The latter is most likely; because this
Psalm seems to have been written, after that desolation had for some time
continued.

We read indeed in the Book of Maccabees (1. VII. 16, 17.) two other verses of
this Psalm ( viz. 2, 3.) applied to the slaughter of threescore of the devouter
sort of Jews; presently after Antiochus his death. But that Author quotes
them, it is plain, as words which had been written in former days; and by him
only made use of to his purpose: which was to show that the same cruelties
were, in great part, acted over again, which their Fathers had seen at the
destruction of Jerusalem.

1. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy temple have
they defiled: they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.


1. O God, the supreme Judge of the world, Thou art not ignorant, we know, of
our calamity, for it comes by thy order; but give us leave to represent unto
thy Majesty, the sad condition of the people and place, which was once very
dear unto Thee; for profane Nations have not only invaded our (or rather thy)
Country, to which Thou have a peculiar Title; but polluted thy own House, which
was separated to thy service alone; and laid it, together with Jerusalem, in
ruinous heaps.

2. The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls
of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.


2. Under which thy servants the Priests, and other holy men, whom they have
slain, could not have the honor to be buried; nor obtain the common civility
of a Grave: but the dead Bodies of those whom Thou love, they have
barbarously disposed to be devoured by ravenous Beasts and Birds.

3. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem: and there was
none to bury them.


3. For they valued the shedding of their blood, no more then the pouring out
of water: which flowed in such abundance about Jerusalem; that they left not
men enough alive, to take care of the Interment of the dead.

4. We are become a reproach to our neighbors: a scorn and derision to them
that are round about us.


4. And we, that remain, lead a most despicable life; being not only scorned,
and abused, but openly derided, and made the sport of the Edomites and other
Nations, which formerly stood in awe of us.

5. How long, LORD? will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like
fire?


5. And which is saddest of all, we have long complained of this, and find no
relief; but only in our most passionate cries to Thee, O Lord: the effects of
whose just anger and jealousy, we groan under (because we have forsaken Thee,
and been unfaithful to our Covenant with Thee) but hope it will not always
last; nor proceed to make an utter end of us.

6. Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.


6. Pour it out rather (in as full a measure, and with as little pity, as they
did our blood, Ver. 3.) upon the Babylonians: who, though they have conquered
many Kingdoms, do not acknowledge Thee at all, nor ascribe their successes to
thy Power; but to their Idols, whom they serve, and honor with that worship
which is due to Thee alone.

7. For they have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dewlling place.


7. They have been the Instruments indeed of thy vengeance, but have executed
it with such cruelty; that, not content with the conquest of us, they have
sought our total extirpation: having depopulated our Country, and made that
pleasant Land a Wilderness; which Thou gave to Jacob and his Seed for their
habitation.

8. O Remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.


8. O let not his virtue, and the Covenant Thou made with him, be forgotten;
when Thou reckonest with us for the sins of our Forefathers; the punishment of
which we beseech Thee, that we may bear no longer: speed our deliverance, Good
Lord; and how unworthy soever we be, let thy tender compassion prevail with
Thee, to save us from utter ruin; which is very near, so few, so broken and
spent we are, unless seasonably prevented by thy mercy.

9. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us,
and purge away our sins for thy names sake.


9. Send us that seasonable help, O God, from whom alone we expect it, and have
heretofore very often received it; for it will tend much to the honor of thy
almighty Goodness (which in former times was much celebrated, but of late has
been exceedingly disparaged) to save us now, when none is able to preserve us:
upon that account be pleased to pass by our sins, and to interpose for our
deliverance; lest Thou suffer together with us:

10. Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known
among the heathen in our sight, by the revenging of the blood of thy servants
which is shed.


10. While the Idolatrous Nations utter this insolent language (which is
exceeding grievous, nay insupportable to us) If their God be so great in
Himself, and so kind to them, as they pretend; why does He not take their part,
and appear for their deliverance? O that Thou would put them to silence, by
taking such an open, and remarkable vengeance on these blasphemous Nations, for
the blood they have shed; that, not only we but, all the world may see, Thou
have a care of us thy Servants.

11. Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to the
greatness of thy power: preserve thou those that are appointed to die.


11. Let the sighs and groans of those who lie in prison, be as prevalent with
Thee, as thee prayers: and magnify thy power, by preserving the lives of
those, whom they have condemned to die.

12. And render unto our neighbors seven fold into their bosom, their reproach
wherewith they have reproached thee, O LORD.


12. And when Thou have done with the Babylonians, reckon with our neighbors
also, who have insulted over us, and derided us: or rather, have spoken so
reproachfully of Thee, O God, that they justly deserve, not only to be paid
home in their kind; but to be made seven times more contemptible then we have
been.

13. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks for
ever: we will show forth thy praise to all generations.


13. So we thy people, being conducted again to our Land, and happily restored
to live under thy Government there; will never cease to give thanks unto Thee,
for thy benefits bestowed upon us: And be careful to transmit the memory of
them, to those, who shall come after us; that all future Generations may
perpetuate thy praises.

PSALM LXXX.
To the chief-Musician, upon Shoshannim Eduth. A Psalm of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm is something of kin to the former; deprecating the displeasure of
the Almighty in a time of great calamity. Which, as all that I have met withal
think, was either in the captivity of Judah and Benjamin by Nebuchadnezzar; or
of the Ten Tribes, by Salmanassar. But it seems to me rather to have been
penned between these two, in the time of Hezekiah: who had wrote a Letter you
find (2 Chronicles. XXXI. 6.) to the remnant that were escaped out of the hand of
the King of Assyria; especially to Ephraim and Manasseh, the Tribes nearest to
them, that they would come to the House of the Lord at Jerusalem, and keep the
Passover with them: which summons, several of them obeyed, Ver. 11. 18. and
kept the Feast as long again as they were wont, Ver. 23. And when this was
finished, they all went through the Country, and threw down all the High places
and Altars that they found: not only in Judah; but in Benjamin also, Ephraim
and Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 1.

But after this happy settlement you read there, XXXII. 1. that the Land was
invaded by Senacherib, and sorely distressed; to the great discouragement no
doubt of those, who had joined in the Reformation: which moved Asaph (mentioned
2 Chronicles. XXIX. 30. see the Argument of LXXIII. Psalm.) most earnestly to beseech
God (Ver. 2. of this Psalm) that he would be pleased to stir up Himself before
Ephraim, and Manasseh, as well as Benjamin (who was so linkt to Judah, that
part of Jerusalem and of the Temple stood in that Tribe) and let them see, by a
remarkable deliverance, that their zeal for the purity of their Religion, was
acceptable to Him.

Another reason indeed there may be given (which I have not omitted in my
Paraphrase) why these three are joined together, rather then any other, because
they were the Tribes (as we read in the second of Numbers) who, when they were
in the Wilderness, always marched behind the Tabernacle, when it moved; and had
that part, where the Propitiatory was, from whence God sent his Oracles, and
the tokens of his power; just before them. But then there is this to be added,
to make it probable that this Psalm was not penned in the time of the
Captivity; because, as then there was no Ark; nor did God sit between the
Cherubins (concerning which phrase the learned Reader may see Lud. de Dieu,
upon 1 Samuel IV. 4.) as He is said here to do; nor were Ephraim and Manasseh
then mixed with them, that we read of: so, first of all, it is too full of
elegancies for that time of utter desolation; and secondly the Greek expressly
calls it, A Psalm concerning the Assyrian (who is the wild Boar I suppose that
broke into God's Vineyard, mentioned Ver. 13.) and lastly, Hezekiah, I observe,
applies himself to God (in the time of that distress by the King of Assyria) in
the very language of the Psalmist; and begins his Prayer, just as Asaph does
here, to Him that sits between the Cherubins, desiring Him to incline his ear
to his requests, 2 King. XIX. 15, 16. XXXVII. Isa. 16, 17.

It was delivered to the chief Master of Music to be sung as the LX. Psalm,
upon the Instruments of six strings: which were wont to be used in solemn
Thanksgivings (see the Argument of that Psalm) for he nothing doubted God would
hear their Prayers, and destroy Senacherib: Or perhaps it was ordered afterward
to be sung in that manner.

1. GIve ear, O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou
that dwell between the cherubims, shine forth.


1. O Thou, who art the Ruler and Protector of thy people Israel, who did
long ago give a famous instance of thy power; in preserving Joseph, when he
fell, like an innocent Lamb, among a company of Wolves, (XXXVII. Genesis 18, etc.)
and conducting him to the highest preferment; reject not our humble petitions,
which we put up unto Thee, in the like distress: but show that Thou favourest
us, by some illustrious token of thy presence among us, in thy Holy place; from
whence Thou can send Angels to defend and deliver us, 2 King. XIX. 35.

2. Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come
and save us.


2. Let the posterity of Joseph, who beheld heretofore so many enemies fall
before Thee, when they attended upon the Ark of thy presence in the Wilderness,
(II. Numb. 18, 20, 22.) and have lately been very zealous in thy service, (2
Chr. XXX. 1. XXXI. 1.) see thy power to be as great as ever: (though for some
time it has not appeared at all for us) and that Thou art as forward, in due
time, to grant us a glorious deliverance.

3. Turn us again, O God: and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.


3. Restore us, O God, to our former happiness; and for that end restore us
into thy favor: and then there will soon be an end of our calamities.

4. O LORD God of hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy
people?


4. For what can the greatest Armies (2 King. XVIII. 17.) do against Thee, who
art the supreme Lord of all, the absolute Commander of the Hosts of Heaven?
whose help we have most importunately implored, and long waited for, as men
impatient to see our enemies so prevalent; though hitherto Thou have been so
exceeding angry with us, that Thou have not heard the prayers of thy people.

5. Thou feedest them with the bread of tears: and give them tears to drink
in great measure.


5. But have turned our joyful Feasts unto fasting, and weeping; and our
plenty, into scarcity of all things, but only of tears: which we pour out in
large measure; when we think of the danger we are in, to perish by famine and
by thirst, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 21.

6. Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh among
themselves.


6. Our neighbors, the Edomites and others, either pick quarrels with us, or
strive among themselves who shall make the greatest booty of us: while our
enemies, that besiege us, mock at our inability to help our selves; and at our
confidence, which we place in Thee, 2 King. XVIII. 22, 23. 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 15.

7. Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved.


7. Convince them, O Lord, that it is not vainly placed, by restoring us again
to our former happiness: which it is easy for Thee to do, who have all the
Hosts of Heaven at thy command; if Thou will but be pleased to favor us (as we
again beseech Thee, Thou will) and then no harm shall befall us.

8. Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen, and
planted it.


8. We were once very dear unto Thee, when Thou did transplant us, like a
choice Vine, out of Egypt into this Country: from whence Thou did drive out
the ancient Inhabitants; that we might be settled in their place.

9. Thou preparedst room before it, and did cause it to take deep root, and
it filled the land.


9. Thou preparedst the way for us, making our terror fall upon them before we
came (II. Josh. 9, 10, 11.) so that we easily expelled them; and being there
firmly established, like a Vine deeply rooted in a fruitful soil, we increased
and multiplied, till we peopled all the Land.

10. The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly cedars.


10. And as a rich Vine covers the Hill, on the side of which it is planted; or
overtops the lofty Cedars, which support it: so we obscured the splendor of
the greatest Kingdoms; and made mighty Kings, become Tributaries to us, 1 King.
IV. 24.

11. She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river.


11. For our Empire extended it self (just like such a luxuriant Vine which
spreads its branches every way) from the mid-land Sea, to the River Euphrates,
1 King. IV. 21. ( see LXXII. Psalm. 8.)

12. Why have thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by
the way, do pluck her?


12. But now alas! Thou have withdrawn thy protection from us; and we are left
like a Vineyard without its Hedges: All our strong Holds, and fenced Cities are
taken, (2 King. XVIII. 3.) so that we lie open to be made a prey to every one
that has a mind to spoil us.

13. The Boar out of the wood does waste it, and the wild beast of the field
does devour it.


13. The Assyrian King, like a wild Boar, that breaks into a Vineyard, treads
down all under his feet, and seeks to root us up: There is no savage Beast can
make greater havoc among the Vines, then his barbarous Soldiers have done
throughout all the Land; which they have eaten up, 2 King. XIX. 29.

14. Return, we heseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and
behold, and visit this vine;


14. Our only hope is, that Thou, the great Lord of Hosts, on whom the event
of Wars, as of all things else, depends, wilt be reconciled unto us; and drive
him out again: deny us not this request, we beseech Thee, but though we be
destitute of all help on earth, yet send us some from heaven; and, though very
unworthy, yet graciously take us into thy care, and repair the breaches which
they have made.

15. And the vineyard which thy right hand has planted, and the branch that
thou made strong for thy self.


15. Be favorable to the remnant of us, which, by thy powerful preservation,
is still left; like the root or stock of a Vine, which may sprout out again: (2
King. XIX. 30, 31.) and especially to our King, whom Thou have endued with zeal
and courageous resolution for they service, (2 Chronicles. XXX. 32.) and for our
defense, 2 Chronicles. XXXII. 5, 6, 7, 8.

16. It is burnt with fire, it is out down: they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.


16. Great numbers of us are destroyed already; and may be compared to the
numerous branches of that remaining stock, which, being cut off, are burnt with
fire: and all the rest of us must perish; if Thou will not be reconciled unto
us, but still persevere in thy anger toward us.

17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom
thou made strong for thy self.


17. Which we beseech Thee turn away; and be the mighty Helper of our
Sovereign, who is dearly beloved by Thee; of that excellent Prince, whom Thou
have endued with zeal and courageous resolution, for thy service and for our
defense and preservation, (Ver. 15.)

18. So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy
name.


18. Which shall be an everlasting obligation upon us, never to revolt from
Thee to our former Idolatry: Do but free us from these deadly enemies, and we
will worship Thee alone; and never cease to praise Thee, and acknowledge that
we owe our very lives to thy almighty Goodness.

19. Turn us again, O LORD God of hosts: cause thy face to shine, and we shall
be saved.


19. Hear us, O great Lord, who have all the Angels in Heaven at thy command;
hear us, we once more beseech Thee, and restore us perfectly to our former
happiness: and in order to it, restore us to thy favor; and let there be a
speedy end of all these calamities.

PSALM LXXXI.
To the chief Musician upon Gittith. A Psalm of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
There was a special command of God, as the Psalmist here takes notice Ver. 4.
for the making a joyful sound with Trumpets, upon all their solemn days,
especially their New Moons. (X. Numb. 10.) But more particularly upon the first
day of the seventh Month; which is called by this peculiar Name, above all
other days, a day of blowing the Trumpets, i. e from Morning unto Evening,
XXIX. Numb. 1. and a memorial of blowing Trumpets, XXIII. Lev. 24. For this
solemn day I suppose this Psalm was composed; and the reason is apparent why
they were to blow with Trumpets longer on this day then any other, because it
was the first New Moon in the Year, (for according to their old computation
before they came out of Egypt, their Year began on this Day, as appears from
XXIII. Exodus 16. XXXIV. 22. where the Feast of ingathering their Fruits, is
said to be in the revolution or the end of the year) and God intended, it is
possible, to awaken them (as Maimonides conjectures) to prepare themselves, by
strict inquiry into their lives, and by hearty repentance, for the great day of
Atonement, which was the tenth of this Month.

But of what this blowing Trumpets or Cornets was a memorial is not easy to
resolve: the Hebrews themselves being at such a loss about it, that they are
fain to go as far back as the deliverance of Isaac and the offering a Ram in
his stead, for the reason of it. The clearest account of which, it seems to me,
may be fetched from this Psalm; which plainly intimates that the blowing with
Trumpets at that time, related to something which ensued upon their happy
deliverance out of Egypt Which though it began upon the first day of the first
Month, according to their new Computation (which took its original from that
deliverance, in memory of which God ordained the Feast of the Passover, to
begin on that day, XXIII. Lev. 6.) yet they had not a complete body of Laws
delivered to them by Moses till the first day of the seventh Month, which was
the Feast of blowing Trumpets.

Moses received indeed several Laws in the third Month, XIX. Exodus 1, 3, etc.
on the third day whereof (Ver. 11, 16, 19, 20.) God himself appeared on the top
of Mount Sinai, with the sound of a Trumpet exceeding loud and prolonged (to
which I believe this Feast has respect) and spoke the Ten Commandments; after
which Moses delivered them a body of civil Laws, Exodus XXI. XXII. XXIII. But
they did not know the manner of the Divine Service, for which they came out of
Egypt into the Wilderness, till Moses had been twice forty days, one after the
other, in the Mount; and likewise (as several of the Jews understand those
passages in IX. Deuteronomy. relating to this matter) had forty days more bewailed
their sin, in making the golden Calf. Which sixscore days, if we add to the
time between their coming out of Egypt, and the giving of the Law on Mount
Sinai, and to the six days, which passed before Moses was called up into the
Cloud, it will fall out exactly to be the first day of the seventh month, when
he began to give orders for the building of the Tabernacle, and making all
things belonging to God's House; according to the direction he had received in
the Mount. I am sure this was the precise time of their setting up the Altar
and beginning to offer burnt Offerings, after their return from the Captivity
of Babylon; before the foundation of the Temple was laid. For you read III.
Ezra 1, 6. it was upon the first day of the seventh month; in the middle of
which they also kept the Feast of Tabernacles, as Moses had appointed; in
memory of their dwelling in Booths in the Wilderness, under the Government of
the Almighty. The same day also was kept holy by Nehemiah with great solemnity,
VIII. 1, 8, 9, 10. where you find how the Book of the Law was distinctly read
to the people on this day, and the sense of it explained: so that they came the
next day again for further instruction, Ver. 13.

Now that they might be more mindful of those Divine Benefits, which in this
Month they commemorated, more then in any other Month in the Year, Asaph (in
the days of David it is likely) composed this Psalm, and directed it to the
Master of Music to be sung (as the VIII. Psalm upon Gittith) in the beginning
of it, upon the Feast of Trumpets. And he introduces God Himself (before whom
they were summoned, as I said, by these Trumpets to appear) instructing them in
the end of this Solemnity; and complaining of their forgetfulness of his
benefits, in giving them so great a deliverance out of the Egyptian slavery;
and of their hard heartedness, in preferring their own Inventions, and the
miseries they brought thereby upon themselves, before his Counsels, and the
happiness He intended for them. Which happiness is expressed, in the last
Verse, by satisfying them with honey out of the rock: concerning which the
learned may consult Bochartus de Sacris Animal. Part. II. L. IV. c. 12.

1. SIng aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of
Jacob.


1. SIng praises aloud unto God; to whose mighty power alone we owe the
Deliverance which we now Commemorate: shout with the voice of triumph, in
honor of Him; who was so good unto your Forefathers.

2. Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the
psaltery.


2. Offer to Him your cheerful Hymns; and, to complete the melody, and express
the greatness of your joy, let some with Timbrils, others with the pleasant
Harp, and others with the Psaltery, celebrate the memory of his mercies.

3. Blow up the trumpet in the new mood, in the time appointed, on our solemn
feast day.


3. And let the Priests especially (X. Numb. 8.) take care to blow with the
Trumpets, at this sacred Solemnity; on the first day of the seventh month, the
principal New Moon in the year: that all the people may call to mind the Trump
of God (XIX. Exodus 16, 19.) which our Fathers heard; at his dreadful
appearance on Mount Sinai, to give his Law unto them.

4. For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.


4. For thus has the Lord decreed in that Law; where the God of our Father
Jacob requires this service of us, XXIII. Lev. 24, etc.

5. This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the
land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understood not.


5. This He appointed unto the Children of Joseph, as well as the rest of the
Tribes of Israel; for a perpetual memorial of his benefits: when He going out
over all the Land of Egypt, (XI. Exodus 4. XII. 23, 29.) and destroying all
their Firstborn, forced them to let us depart into the Wilderness; where we
heard to our great astonishment (for we were never before acquainted with it)
the voice of God.

6. I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the
pots.


6. Who, considering with Himself what a title He had to our service (having
taken off the heavy burdens which the Egyptians laid upon our backs, and rid
our hands of those sordid and dirty Employments, wherein they made us labor)

7. Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the
secret place of thunder: I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.


7. Admonished us to this effect, saying; You cried to me by reason of your
cruel servitude under Pharaoh's Taskmasters (II. Exodus 23.) and I delivered
you out of it (III. 8.) and again answered your prayers, when you cried unto me
in a new distress, at the red Sea, (XIV. Exodus 10, 13.) but confounded the
Egyptians, with Thunder and Lightning out of the cloudy Pillar (XIV. Exo. 24,
25. LXXVII. Psalm 18.) After all which I might well expect you should depend
upon me: but presently found you full of distrust and infidelity at the waters
of strife; (XVII. Exodus 7.) where I gave you a new proof of my power.

8. Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou will
hearken unto me;


8. Of which if you will still enjoy the benefit, then give ear, O my people,
and I will solemnly declare my will; and give a severe charge unto you, O ye
Israelites, if you resolve to be obedient to my admonitions.

9. There shall no strange god be in thee: neither shall thou worship any
strange god.


9. Then this is the principal thing upon which all the rest depends, you shall
not suffer any other Gods to be acknowledged among you, but only me, (XX.
Exodus 3. 23.) nor shall you worship the Gods of other Nations, XXIII. Exodus 13,
24, 32.

10. I am the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.


10. For I and I alone am the living Lord, the eternal God, who gave a Being to
all things; and who am your peculiar Benefactour; having brought you out of the
Egyptian Bondage: (XIX. Exodus 4. XX. 2.) And if you will be faithful and
obedient to me, enlarge your desires as far as you please, and I will satisfy
them; for all the world is mine, XIX. Exodus 5. XXIII. 25.

11. But my people would not hearken to my voice: and Israel would none of me.


11. But notwithstanding their seeming compliance with Him, and the fair
promises they made Him (XIX. Exodus 8. XX. 19. XXIV. 3, 7.) He presently
complained, (XXXII. Exodus 7, 8, 9. as I hear Him still do at this day) my
people would not be obedient to me; and Israel would not rest contented with me
aalone:

12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and they walked in their own
counsels.


12. So, provoked by their long stubborness, I took no further care of them;
but left them to do as they pleased: saying, let them follow their own
inventions.

13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways!


13. But it had been better for them to have adhered to me; who, out of my
tender affection to their good, still wished, even when they were so
refractory, that my people Israel had been so wise, as to have followed my
directions, and been led by my advice; and not their own foolish imaginations.

14. I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries.


14. Then I should, in a short time, have quelled all their enemies; and, by
one Victory after another, have quite destroyed those adversaries: which (since
I brought them into Canaan) have often miserably afflicted, and oppressed them,
II. Judge. 2, 3, 14, 15, 19, 20. III. 1, etc. IV. 2.

15. The haters of the LORD should have submitted themselves unto him: but
their time should have endured for ever.


15. All that maligned their prosperity, and set themselves against the design
of the Lord to make them victorious over their enemies, should have been so
daunted; that they should have dissembled their inward hatred, and been forced,
at least, to a counterfeit submission: but his people should have seen blessed
days, and enjoyed a substantial and durable happiness without any interruption.

16. He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey
out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.


16. He should have made their Country exceeding fruitful, and fed them with
the richest Wheat: And I my self, says the Lord, would have blessed Thee with
such plenty, that in the Deserts thou should have found the sweetest
refreshments; and without any care of thine, the Bees should have labored
honey for thee, in the Rocks, and holes of Trees, and such like places, XXXII.
Deuteronomy. 13. XIV. Judge. 8. 1 Samuel XIV. 25, 26.

PSALM LXXXII.
A Psalm of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
Though there had been a notable Reformation made by Jehosaphat, (2 Chronicles. XIX.
5, 6, etc.) of those corruptions, which had been growing in the supreme Court
of Judicature at Jerusalem, as well as in the lesser in other Cities, ever
since the times of David and Solomon (who took care to see Justice done, 1 Chronicles. XVIII. 14. 1 King. III. 9, 28.) yet it appears, by the frequent
complaints of Isaiah, that when Hezekiah (in whose days that Prophet lived)
came to the Crown, there was a general depravation again; and that
notwithstanding the amendment he had made in matters of the Divine Worship (2 Chronicles. XXX. XXXI.) and his resolutions and endeavors no question, to reform
the abuses which were in their civil Judicatures, (as I have expounded Psalm.
LXXV. 2, 3.) they continued still exceeding corrupt. Insomuch that Isaiah calls
their Judges Rulers of Sodom, I. Isa. 10. (when he finds no fault with their
religious Services, Ver. 11, 12, etc.) and says their Princes were rebellious,
companions of thieves, loving gifts, and following after rewards, Ver. 23.

Where it is evident he describes the Judges in the highest Court of all; who
are called by the name of Princes in several places: particularly in Jeremiah:
who being condemned by the Priests and Prophets and People, as a man worthy to
die, XXVI. Jer. 8, 9. was brought before the Princes Verse 10, 11. at whose Bar
he cleared himself so well, that they acquitted him, Ver. 16.

And as there they are called Princes, with respect to their superiority over
the people; so here in this Psalm they are called Elohim Gods, in respect to
the fountain of their power, which was from the most High: who honored them
with his own Name; which is so frequent for those of the supreme Court, that
some, not unreasonably, understand those words, IX. Judges 13. which we render,
Cheers the heart of God and man, in this manner, Wine alike cheers both Princes
and People, Judges and Clients, the meaner persons (called in this Psalm Adam
Man, Ver. 6, 7.) as well as the greatest, who in opposition to them are called
Gods. Whom Asaph (who lived in the times of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 30. see
Psalm LXXIII.) admonishes to be more careful in their duty; and to remember
that God observed them, and would judge them.

1. GOD stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among the gods.


1. REmember, O ye Judges, whose Ministers you are, (2 Chronicles. XIX. 6.) and
consider, that you are not so powerful, but GOD who has put you in his place,
and honored you with his Name, (XXII. Exodus 28.) is far greater: and as He is
present in your Court to observe what you do; so will call you to a strict
account, and severely punish you, if you judge amiss.

2. How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked?
Selah.


2. How dare you then pronounce an unrighteous Sentence? Is it not time to
leave off your partiality? and no longer to favor a bad cause, because the man
is rich and great; and can either give you a large bribe, if you will judge it
for him; or do you a mischief, if you give sentence against him.

3. Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.


3. Your duty is, to do equal justice to all men that come before you; and to
take a particular care, that the poor and the fatherless do not suffer, because
they have no money to give, nor any friend to solicit, for the defense of a
righteous Cause: and that the men of low condition, and such as are reduced to
very great want, be not condemned; when they are injuriously prosecuted, by
those who are above them.

4. Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.


4. See that you protect and deliver him, that is quite exhausted and miserably
oppressed with poverty: let them not become a prey to violent men, who have no
conscience; but put it out of their power to undo them.

5. They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness: all
the foundations of the earth are out of course.


5. These are the constant admonitions, which the men of God give the Judges;
but alas! hitherto they have little prevailed. For they will not study the Laws
of God; or if they do, will not think it their interest to be governed by them:
but are blinded by bribes, or by their corrupt affections, to do any thing
that they would have them; insomuch that the Foundations of the Kingdom, which
are Justice and Truth, are shaken; all things are in confusion, and in danger
to come to utter ruin, V. Isa. 23, 24. X. 1, 2, 3.

6. I have said, Ye are gods: and all of you are children of the most High.


6. Hear therefore the sentence of God upon you, (whose words these are) I have
put my Majesty upon you; and, though you be no more then other men in your
selves, have by my constitution raised you to such a dignity on earth, as my
celestial ministers have in heaven:

7. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.


7. Yet this shall not privilege you in your unjust proceedings; but since you
have no regard to me, nor to your Office, I will have as little regard to you:
for you shall perish like one of the common men, without any respect to your
honor; and be thrown down from your seats, like the Tyrants and cruel
Oppressors that have been before you.

8. Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shall inherit all nations.


8. Let us see this sentence fulfilled, O God, the righteous Judge; and do not
suffer the insolent iniquity of these men any longer: but redress all those
evils wherewith such men have filled not only this Nation, but all the world:
which belongs to Thee, and Thou will one day sure vindicate mankind, as the
just owner of them, from the tyranny of those impious Governors; who now abuse
them, as if they had an absolute dominion over them.

PSALM LXXXIII.
A Song or Psalm of Asaph.
ARGUMENT.
It is the common opinion, that the combination of powerful enemies, against
which they here implore the Divine assistance, was that mentioned in the 2 Chronicles. XX. in the days of Jehosaphat. The reason is because the Children of Lot
(Ver. 8.) viz. the Moabites and Ammonites (the ground of whose quarrel with the
Jews is set down in XI. Judge.) seem to have been the principal in this
Confederacy; and the other but assistants; as it is plain they were in that
Invasion 2 Chr. XX. 1. And then the Author of this Psalm, must be either
Jehaziel one of Asaph's posterity (upon whom you read there, Ver. 14. the
spirit of the Lord then came) or some other in those days, whose proper name
this was. Which is much more probable then their conjecture, who think the
Author was Asaph in the days of David; who subdued indeed the Moabites and
Edomites and other neighboring Nations: but we do not read of any Confederacy
they made against him; much less that they sent as far as Assyria for help; or
that they began the War as the people here mentioned did.

The same may be said against the application of it, to the Conquests made in
the days of Uzziah over several people here mentioned, 2 Chronicles. XXVI. 6, 7, 8.
Or to the Invasion made by Senacherib King of Assyria: who did not join himself
(as we read here, Ver. 8.) with other Nations; but by the forces of his own
Kingdom alone, as far as appears, came up against them.

There are those indeed that take in all the attempts made upon them, since
that in Jehosaphat's days; by several Nations: the last of which was Assyria;
whose King came to do that which the rest had not been able to effect. And
then the Author is easily found to be the same, that I have named; in the
Argument of the foregoing, and many other Psalms. And which way soever we are
pleased to determine the matter, it is plain, in general, that many Nations both
near and remote, who had a hatred to the Jews, set themselves together, when
this Psalm was penned, to destroy them: assaulting them not only severally,
but conjunctly; entering into consultation also, and conspiring together how to
effect it. Which hatred continuing after their return to their own Land, from
the Captivity of Babylon, gave occasion to Theodoret to say (both in his
Preface to this Psalm, and upon the twelfth Verse of it) that the Psalmist here
complains of the opposition, which several of their neighbors made to the
rebuilding of the Temple, and of Jerusalem.

But this seems more improbable than all the rest, many of those Countries,
here named, being before that time destroyed: and the Assyrians themselves (as
he himself observes upon Ver. 8.) being not then extant. Though whenever this
Confederacy happened, there was very great reason for that solicitous and
vehement importunity wherewith this Psalm begins.

Why it was called a Song-Psalm see Psalm LXVII.

1. KEep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.


1. O God, the supreme Judge of the World, whose power is so great that the
united forces of all men on earth, or Angels in heaven, are not to be compared
with it, (2 Chr. XX. 6, 12.) who with one word of thy mouth can dissipate
this great Army; do not refuse now to answer our prayers in this sore distress:
O do not shut thy merciful ears to our cries; nor quietly see us perish, most
mighty God.

2. For lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lift up
the head.


2. For we are surprised with a sudden Invasion of numerous Enemies (haters of
Thee, and thy Worship, as much as of our Nation) who make a dreadful noise,
like the waves of the Sea (2 Chronicles. XX. 2.) and proudly promising themselves a
Victory, insult as if they had already won it.

3. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against
thy hidden ones.


3. They have with equal malice and subtilty, carried on a close design against
thy people: and with great secrecy consulted how to destroy, not only us,
whom Thou have hitherto wonderfully protected as thy Jewels; but thy Temple
also, and the secret place wherein Thou there dwell.

4. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation: that the
name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.


4. Come, say they one to another, Let us agree and join all the power we have
together; not merely to make a Conquest of them, but for their utter
exstirpation, (2 Chronicles. XX. 11.) that there may be no mention hereafter in the
world, of such a people as the Commonwealth of Israel.

5. For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate
against thee.


5. And accordingly, Ten several Nations are combined heartily in this design;
and how different soever their inclinations are upon other accounts, they have
all entered into a solemn league, and made a covenant of mutual help, and of
employing their joint endeavors, totally to subvert that Government and
Religion, which Thou have established.

6. The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moah, and the Hagarens.


6. Those warlike Nations the Edomites, and Ishmaelites, who dwell in Tents,
are engaged in this enterprise: and so are the Moabites, and others descended
from Hagar, the Mother of Ishmael.

7. Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek: the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire.


7. With whom are united our neighbors the Giblites, (XIII. Josh. 5.) the
Ammonites; our old enemies the Amalekites and Philistines; and they that dwell
in and about the famous City of Tire.

8. Assure also is joined with them: they have helped the children of Lot. Selah.


8. And to add to their strength they have called the powerful Nation of the
Assyrians, into their association: on whose assistance, the Moabites and
Ammonites (the Authors of this War) do principally rely.

9. Do unto them as unto the Midianites: as to Sisera: as to Jabin, at the
brook of Kison:


9. The greater need we have of thy assistance, and with the greater
earnestness we beseech Thee to make them an example of humane weakness: by
defeating them as Thou did that vast Army of the Midianites and their
Confederates, (VI. Judge. 5. VII. 12.) whom Gideon overthrew with no greater
power then three hundred men, (VII. Judge. 21, 22. compared with 2 Chronicles. XX.
23.) and as Thou did in former times to that famous Captain Sisera (who fell
by the hand of a Woman, IV. Judge. 21.) and to Jabin his King: who, together
with his Army, was swept away in the brook of Kishon, IV. Judge. 21, 24. V. 21.

10. Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.


10. A great slaughter there was of them near Endor (compare V. Judge. 19. with
XVII. Josh. 11.) where their carkases lay, and rotted; and served instead of
dung, to fatten and enrich the earth.

11. Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their Princes as
Zebah and as Zalmunna:


11. Let their Princes and Commanders fall like Oreb and Zeeb: (VII. Judge. 25.)
and their Kings not be able to save themselves by flight; but be taken and
slain, like Zebah, and Zalmunna, VIII. Judge. 12, 21.

12. Who said, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.


12. Who came with a design (VI. Judge. 3, 4, 5.) as these Nations do now (2 Chronicles. XX. 10, 11.) to possess themselves of that pleasant Land, wherein Thou
dwell among us, in thy holy habitation.

13. O my God, make them like a wheel: as the stubble before the wind.


13. O my God, whose goodness has never failed us, in distress, let them not
be able to stand their ground: but put them to flight, and make them run as
swiftly, as a ball down a hill; disperse all their forces like the chafe, when
it is blown about with a furious wind.

14. As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on
fire;


14. Blast and consume them utterly; as the lightning, or the scorching rays of
the Sun in a long drought do the leaves of the forest trees, or the grass upon
the mountains, (I. Joel 19.)

15. So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.


15. Raise a dreadful tempest to affright them; and pursue them so with thy
vengeance, that they may be shattered and driven away uncertainly, as in a
whirlwind: put them into such a pannick fear, that they may not know which way
to turn, but clash against one another, in a terrible confusion, 2 Chronicles. XX.
22, etc.

16. Fill their faces with shame: that they may seek thy name, O Lord.


16. And make those that escape so ashamed, at this disgraceful
disappointment; that they may not be able to hold up their heads, nor deny thy
Power to be superior to theirs: but humbly seek thy favor.

17. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea, let them be put to
shame and perish:


17. This is the worst we wish them, notwithstanding their enmity to us; that
they may be so astonished and confounded at their defeat, as never to recover
any courage to assault us: nay, together with their credit and their courage,
quite lose their power to give us any further trouble.

18. That men may know that thou whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high
over all the earth.


18. And thereby be convinced, which they would not believe before, that Thou
art what Thou art called, the True and Only God: who give Being to all
things; and art the supreme Governor, not only of us but, of all the Nations
upon earth.

PSALM LXXXIV.
To the chief Musician upon Gittith. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
ARGUMENT.
It is uncertain to what times this Psalm belongs: They seem to have most
reason on their side, who think it was composed upon the same occasion with the
XLII. and XLIII. when David, forced from Jerusalem by the rebellion of his Son
Absalom, most passionately longed to be restored to the place of God's worship.
But it may as well, or better, in my judgment, be thought to have been composed
by some pious Levite, in the Country; when Senacherib's Army had blockt up the
way to Jerusalem, and hindered them from waiting upon the service of God, at the
Temple: where he judged the lowest Ministry, that of a Porter (as we read Ver.
10.) to be far more honorable; then the highest preferment among Pagan
Nations. And thus I shall take the liberty to expound it in my Paraphrase:
pointing the Reader to such places, in the History of that sad time, as I think
will explain some passages of this Psalm: which, after their freedom was
restored, by the destruction of Senacherib's Army, the Author of it delivered
to the Master of Music in the Temple, to be sung as the VIII. Psalm. See there.

1. HOW amiable are thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!


1. IT is impossible to express the affection I have to thy Dewlling Place, O
Lord; who art attended there by the ministry of the heavenly host, (XXXVII.
Isa. 16.) and need none of our services:

2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the LORD: my heart and
my flesh cries out for the living God.


2. But we cannot live, with any satisfaction, while we are absent from Thee;
for I am ready to faint away in ardent longings, to tread again in the Courts
of the Lord's House: where my tongue, and my hands, as well as my mind, would
gladly be employed, in the praises of our God; who in this excells all other,
(2 King. XIX. 4, 16, 18.) that He lives for ever.

3. Yea the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O LORD of hosts, my King and my
God.


3. It grieves me, O mighty Lord of all the heavenly hosts, whose Subject I am,
and infinitely engaged to Thee; to see the very Birds who know nothing of Thee,
enjoy that liberty which is denied me: who am here lamenting my distance from
Thee, when the Sparrows and the Ringdoves have their constant residence at thy
House; and there live so undisturbed, that they build their nests, and bring
forth their young, in the rafters of it.

4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee.
Selah.


4. O how happy are they who partake of such a privilege! who live so near thy
House and frequent it so much, as if it were their own! Their delightful
employment is, with neverceasing praises, to pay their thankful
acknowledgments unto Thee.

5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the ways
of them.


5. And happy also is that man (how mean soever his outward condition be) who
relying upon thy Divine protection, (XXXIV. Exodus 24.) goes up three times a
year to the solemn Feast at Jerusalem: or when he is debarred that liberty, as
I now am, is one of those devout persons, whose hearts are more in the
highways that lead thither; then at their own home.

6. Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well: the rain also
fills the pools.


6. Who traveling through the troublesome valley of Bacha, where there is no
water, pass it as cheerfully, as if it abounded with pleasant Springs: and,
depending on God as the Fountain of what they want, receive from Him the
blessing of plentiful and seasonable showers, to refresh them in their journey:

7. They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appears
before God.


7. So that the whole company, go from stage to stage, with an unwearied
vigor; till they all present themselves before God, to receive his blessing in
his Temple, upon the Hill of Sion

8. O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.


8. O mighty Lord, who command all the heavenly hosts, which attend in that
holy place (and are far more numerous then the Armies that invade us, 2 Chronicles.
XXXII. 7.) make me one of that happy number: and restore me, O God, who
deliveredst Jacob out of all his troubles, to the liberty of waiting upon Thee
there.

9. Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.


9. Look graciously upon me, O God, who have hitherto been our protector
against the most powerful enemies: and accept the prayer of our Sovereign, who
petitions Thee still, to be our Defender, 2 King. XIX. 19.

10. For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.


10. For one day spent in thy Courts is far more pleasant, than a thousand in
any other place: and I had rather lie at the Gates of thy House, then live in
the most splendid condition, in Idolatrous Countries.

11. For the LORD God is a sun and shield: the LORD will give grace and glory:
no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.


11. For, though our happiness be sometimes clouded yet, the Lord, like the
Sun, will dispell the darkness of affliction; and, having brought us out of a
disconsolate condition, defend and secure us in a better: (2 King. XX. 6.) The
Lord will give those favor with others, and advance them to great honor, (2 Chronicles. XXXII. 22, 23.) He will never be sparing of his blessings, but heap them
abundantly on those, who sincerely do his will in all things, 2 King. XVIII.
5, 6. XX. 3.

12. O LORD of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.


12. O most mighty Lord, who command all the host of heaven, happy is that
man, who by his integrity, preserves this hope and confidence in Thee; though,
for the present, he be restrained from the delightful enjoyment of Thee, in
thy Temple.

PSALM LXXXV.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
ARGUMENT.
It is thought by many that this Psalm was composed by some of the Sons of
Korah, after David's banishment from Jerusalem by his Son Absalom (called a
Captivity as we rea^ Psalm. XIV. ult.) and his happy restoration to his
Kingdom; though not to such a settlement as they desired. But it may be as
well, or better, applied to the miraculous providence, which drove Senacherib
out of the Land (who had taken many Captives V. Isa. 13.) and restored them to
the happy liberty; whose loss they bewailed in the Psalm foregoing.

Which way soever we understand it, the composure is such; that it might be
much better used by them after their return from the Captivity of Babylon, then
at any other time: when they were infested with many enemies, who disturbed
their peaceable enjoyment, of their Country and Religion. And therefore it is
possible it might be reviewed, if not made, in those days; and delivered to the
chief Master of Music in the Temple: to be sung presently after the Foundation
of it was laid; (III. Ezr. 10, 11, etc.) but the Work hindered from proceeding
by the opposition of their enemies. And so I shall interpret it.

1. LORD, thou have been favorable unto thy land: thou have brought back the
captivity of Jacob.


1. THou have been exceeding kind unto us, O Lord; and we most thankfully
acknowledge the favor Thou have done us: in delivering us, the posterity of
Jacob, out of our sad Captivity; and restoring us to the Land, in which Thou
thy self have chosen to dwell, I. Ezra.

2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their
sin. Selah.


2. Our sins kept us from it, in banishment, a long time; but now Thou have
graciously pardoned, both our Idolatry, and all the other crimes, for which we
justly suffered.

3. Thou have taken away all thy wrath: thou have turned thy self from the
fierceness of thine anger.


3. Thou have put an end to the sore punishments, which in thy heavy
displeasure Thou inflictedst on us: and turned thy severity, which, like sire,
had almost consumed us; into great clemency and mercy toward us.

4. Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease.


4. Complete, good Lord, our deliverance, which Thou have thus graciously
begun: and let not our ingratitude provoke Thee, to continue this new vexation
and trouble that is befaln us, IV. Ezra 4, 5, 21, 23.

5. Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thine anger to all
generations?


5. Which forces us to sigh, and say, in the anguish of our Souls, will there
never be an end of our miseries? Is it not enough that the foregoing generation
has felt the sad effects of thine anger; but it must extend it self to us
also, and our posterity?

6. Will thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?


6. Will it not be more for thy honor, not only to preserve this feeble life
which Thou have bestowed on us but, to give us a perfect recovery? that thy
people may have nothing to damp their joy, and entire satisfaction, in thy
goodness to them?

7. Show us thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy salvation.


7. Make us so happy, good Lord; and, though we deserve indeed to be more
miserable then we are yet, let thy mercy prevail with Thee, to grant us a
complete deliverance.

8. I will hear what God the LORD will speak: for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly.


8. I will wait patiently upon the Lord, the Judge of the world, for a gracious
Answer to these Prayers: hoping that He will not condemn us to further
punishment; but settle his people, who devoutly worship Him, in a prosperous
tranquillity; provided they return not again to their old Idolatry.

9. Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell in
our land.


9. He will be so far from deserting those, who fear to offend Him; that I am
confident the time approaches, when He will finish what He has begun to do
for us: in rebuilding our Temple, (V. Ezra 2, 8. VI. 7, 8, etc.) and restoring
our Country to its ancient dignity and splendor.

10. Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.


10. For, methinks, I see goodness and fidelity, justice and concord (which are
the principal glory of a Kingdom) meeting together, like ancient Friends, which
have been long absent, and embracing each other.

11. Truth shall spring out of the earth: and righteousness shall look down
from heaven.


11. And as Truth and Honesty, with all other Virtues, shall grow and flourish
among us (like Flowers and Herbs in the Spring, after a tedious Winter) so God
shall faithfully fulfill his promises to us, and exercise a most gracious
providence over us.

12. Yea, the LORD shall give that which is good: and our land shall yield her
increase.


12. Yea, the Lord will do us good beyond our expectation: and reward our
fruitfulness in good works, with such a large and plentiful increase of the
fruits of the earth; as shall demonstrate the bounty of heaven to us.

13. Righteousness shall go before him: and shall set us in the way of his
steps.


13. He will govern us with great justice and mercy; having his faithful
promises always before his eyes; from that rule He will never swerve; but
steadfastly proceed by it, as the constant method He will hold, in his Divine
Administrations.

PSALM LXXXVI.
A Prayer of David.
ARGUMENT.
The Title satisfies us that David was the Author of this Psalm; which the
Collectour of this third Book, found, I suppose, after the other two were made
up and published; and so placed it here, among those which belong to the same
subject. For though it was composed by David, when he was so persecuted, either
by Saul or Absalom, that he was stripped of all he had, and left in a most
forlorn condition (Ver. 1.) yet Theodoret thinks it was made with a prospect of
the attempt, which the Assyrians made upon Jerusalem; and the hope which
Hezekiah then placed in God, for deliverance. Which Notion, it is likely he had
from the Jews; who say that this Prayer was made use of by Hezekiah, in the
time of that sore distress: for the first words of this Psalm, are the same
with his in 2 King. XIX. 16. and the eighth and ninth Verses may very fitly be
accommodated to that History (as I have there observed) but the rest a great
deal better to David.

1. BOW down thine ear, O LORD, hear me: for I am poor and needy.


1. THere cannot be a fitter object of thy Mercy, O Lord, then thy poor
Supplicant, who beseeches Thee graciously to condescend to his request: for
else he is utterly undone, being quite destitute of all humane help.

2. Preserve my soul, for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant, that
trusts in thee.


2. And yet my life is in imminent danger, unless Thou do preserve it; as
many reasons make me hope Thou will: for, as Thou the righteous Judge have been
long my benefactour, and I am perfectly innocent of that my enemies charge me
withal; so I my self have been a reliever of others in their need; and besides,
am a faithful servant of thine, who depends entirely upon Thee, and has no
confidence in any thing, but only thy Almighty Goodness.

3. Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.


3. Whose merciful help I have also implored with most importunate and
incessant prayers; which is another reason of my hope, that Thou will take
compassion upon me, O Lord:

4. Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O LORD, do I lift up my
soul.


4. And turn the present sorrow of thy servant into joy and gladness: For I
have placed my hope entirely in Thee, O Lord; and expect nothing but from Thee
alone.

5. For thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee.


5. Who art no less bountiful (which is another exceeding great encouragement
to me) then I am indigent; ready also to pardon those that have offended Thee:
yea to show abundant kindness to every one of them, in their greatest distress;
when with unfeigned devotion they call upon Thee.

6. Give ear, O LORD unto my prayer: and attend to the voice of my
supplications.


6. As I now do, O Lord; most humbly beseeching Thee with repeated entreaties,
to give a favorable answer to these prayers and supplications; whereby I
deprecate thy displeasure, and sue unto Thee for favor.

7. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou will answer me.


7. Which I beseech Thee let me the rather obtain, because my distress is so
great and so urgent; that thy power will now be the more magnified in
delivering me: as heretofore Thou have been wont to do, upon such earnest
petitions, as these are unto Thee.

8. Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O LORD, neither are there any
works like unto thy works.


8. For nothing is too hard for Thee; nor art Thou unwilling to do more
kindnesses for us, because Thou have done so many already: But, as appears by
thy unparalled works, do incomparably excel (whatsoever strangers think, 2
King. XVIII. 15.) all those that are worshipped in the world as gods; who are
not able so much as to help, and preserve themselves.

9. All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee, O
LORD: and shall glorify thy name.


9. Which shall move all our neighboring Nations (2 Chronicles. XXXII. 23.) as all
the rest shall do in the days of that Great King which we expect, XV. Romans 9.)
to acknowledge Thee, O Lord, to be their Creator; and with humble veneration
to submit themselves unto Thee, and to honor Thee with their highest praises.

10. For thou art great, and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.


10. For they shall clearly see, by the magnificence of thy mavelous works,
that Thou art infinitely superior, to all those Powers whom they adore: And
that, in truth, there is no God, but Thou thy self alone.

11. Teach me thy way, O LORD, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear
thy name.


11. Which I so firmly believe, that I desire nothing more, then to be
perfectly instructed in all thy will; which I will sincerely observe: knit my
heart, O Lord, in such pious affections to Thee, that it may never in the least
dissent from Thee; nor be disturbed with any vain cares, but entirely bent to
study this alone, what is pleasing unto Thee.

12. I will praise thee, O LORD my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify
thy name for evermore.


12. Whom I am bound to praise, both as the fupreme Lord of all, and as my most
bountiful Benefactour, with all the powers of my Soul: and accordingly, I do
now most thankfully acknowledge Thee; and will never cease to honor Thee, and
to do Thee service, as long as I have any Being.

13. For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.


13. For the benefits Thou have bestowed on me, are as inestimable, as they are
innumerable: I owe my very life to Thee, which has been often snatched out of
the extremest dangers; wherein I had inevitably perished, if Thou had not
mercifully delivered me, 1 Samuel XXIII, etc.

14. O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men
have sought after my soul: and have not set thee before them.


14. Behold, O God, a new opportunity to glorify that mercy; for proud and
ambitious men, (2 Samuel XV. 1, 2, etc.) have made an insurrection against me,
and raised a most formidable Army (2 Samuel XV. 12, 13.) to take away that life,
which Thou have so miraculously preserved: having no regard to thy Providence;
nor refusing any means, whereby they may satisfy their unjust desires.

15. But thou, O LORD, art a God full of compassion, and gracious:
long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.


15. All our comfort is, that Thou, not they, do govern the world: who art no
less compassionate, then Thou art powerful; readily forgiving offenses, or
bearing long before Thou punishest Them; choosing rather to heap thy benefits
upon us, and never failing to perform thy faithful promises.

16. O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.


16. In confidence of which I humbly beseech thy favor, and gracious pardon,
though I have highly offended Thee: Assist thy poor servant, by thy
irresistible power, against those mighty forces, which are ready to assault me:
O deliver me, who am here humbled in the lowest manner before Thee; looking
upon my self as more absolutely thine, then any slave that is born in our
house, can be ours.

17. Show me a token for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed: because thou, LORD, have helped me, and comforted me.


17. Vouchsafe me now in this great distress, such manifest tokens of thy
favor toward me, that I may not only be delivered; but all may take notice
of it: And good men thereby be encouraged to hope in Thee; but they that hate
me, be utterly confounded; to see him whom they intended to destroy, not only
preserved but, blessed with comforts proportionable to the sorrow he has
endured.

PSALM LXXXVII.
A Psalm or Song, for the Sons of Korah.
ARGUMENT.
It is as uncertain when this Psalm-Song (see LXVII.) was composed, as which of
the Sons of Korah was the Author of it. But it is manifest enough, that it was
written in commendation of Jerusalem, situate in the holy Mountains; of Sion
(where David built his Palace, and afterward settled the Ark) and of Moriah,
where Solomon built the Temple. There are those that think it was composed upon
the Anniversary of the Birth, or Coronation of some great Prince; such as
Hezekiah: in whose days this City was made more famous; by the glorious
deliverance which God gave it, from the power of the King of Assyria's Army.
But this is a mere conjecture; and I shall follow the vulgar opinion: according
to which, the beginning of this Psalm must be looked upon, as very abrupt; but
expresses the greater rapture of joyful admiration, wherein the Psalmist was.

1. HIS foundations is in the holy mountains.


1. GReat is the strength and beauty of this place! which is founded by God in
the high Mountains; which He has peculiarly chosen for the seat of his
Kingdom, and of his Priesthood.

2. The LORD loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob.


2. Though the Lord loves all the habitations of his people; yet none are so
dear unto Him, as those within the Gates of Jerusalem: A principal part of
which is Sion.

3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.


3. There is no City in the world, of which such glorious things are foretold,
or of which any thing can now be said, comparable to what we can truly boast of
thee; that art the City, which God Himself has separated for his own
habitation.

4. I will make mention of Rahab, and Babylon, to them that know me; behold,
Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia: this man was born there.


4. I do not deny the due praises which belong to other places and Countries;
but rather am wont to make honorable mention, among my acquaintance and
familiars, of Egypt and of Babylon; and of those who are nearer to us, the
Philistines, Tyrians, and Arabians: bidding them observe, that such a notable
person was born among them:

5. And of Sion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the
Highest himself shall establish her.


5. But what is this to Sion? of whom it shall be said in future times, that
(not such a single person, but) this and that man; a great many Worthies, and
far more eminent, both in Learning and in Arms, but especially in Piety, were
born in her: for she has no meaner instructour than the most high; who shall
settle her in a flourishing estate, by educating and forming her inhabitants,
to the most excellent qualities.

6. The LORD shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was born
there. Selah.


6. So that when He himself, whose eyes nothing can escape, shall look over the
register of those Nations, and count the famous men they have produced; He
shall find only some one great man, and he comparatively of no great value,
was born among them:

7. As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my
springs are in thee.


7. But in thee, O City of God, He shall find multitudes of excellent persons,
all eminent in their kind, even among those of lower rank, as well as in the
higher: And there shall be a constant succession of such; as there is of water
from a spring.

PSALM LXXXVIII.
A Song or Psalm for the Sons of Korah, to the chief Musician upon Mahalath
Leannoth. Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite.
ARGUMENT.
Who this Heman was is uncertain. Not he who was the famous Singer in David's
time; for he was of the Tribe of Levi (1 Chronicles. VI. 32. XV. 17.) whereas this
was descended from Zerah, who was one of the Sons of Judah, 1 Chronicles. II. 6.
where we find indeed not only Heman, but Ethan (to whom the next Psalm is
ascribed) mentioned as two of Zerah's Sons: But we cannot reasonably think that
they were, in those early times, the Authors of these two Psalms; because
Ethan plainly makes mention of David, and the promise which God had passed to
him of a perpetual Kingdom.

It remains therefore that these two here mentioned, were of the posterity of
those Sons of Zerah (and thence called Ezrahites) and had the Names of their
noble Ancestors given them, to perpetuate the memory of those, who were so
famous for wisdom, 1 King. IV. 31.

But in what time they lived cannot be certainly determined. It is probable
when Jechoniah, otherwise called Jehojachin (or after him Zedekiah) was taken,
and carried captive to Babylon; together with abundance of the Nobility, and
the principal Commanders and Artizans, 2 King. XXIV. 14, 15, 16. In some of
which ranks I suppose this Heman was; who being cast into a dark prison (which
has made some fancy Jehojachin himself to have made it) Ver. 6, 8. or
otherwise as miserably treated as if he had been in a dungeon; bewails his
private calamity: as Ethan in the next Psalm does the public.

Why it is called a Song-Psalm see upon the Title of Psalm. LXVII. It was to be
sung by the Sons of Korah interchangeably which is the meaning of Leannoth)
upon a Flute or Pipe (see Psalm. LIII.) to the known tune of Maschil: see Psalm.
XXXII. Some passages in it may be applied to our Savior's Death and Burial in
his Grave, which the Prophet Isaiah compares to a Prison; and so is used by our
Church upon Good Friday.

1. O LORD God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.


1. O Mighty Lord, by whose gracious care and good providence, I have been
hitherto preserved, and on whom all my hopes of safety still depend; I have not
failed in this sore affliction to implore thy mercy, with most earnest cries,
without any intermission.

2. Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry.


2. Let them at last prevail I beseech Thee; and do not reject my petition,
accompanied with sad moans and doleful lamentations: but vouchsafe a
favorable answer to it.

3. For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draws nigh unto the grave.


3. For my Soul is overcharged with great variety of long continued evils:
which have brought me so low, that there is but a step between me and the grave.

4. I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that has
no strength.


4. All that know my condition look upon me, as utterly lost; and I have no
reason to think otherwise: being quite spent, and having no power at all to
help my self.

5. Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.


5. I am no longer one of this world, from whose society I am quite separated:
there is little difference between me, and those, who being slain in a Battle,
and cast all together into one common grave, are no further regarded; or those
whose families are so wholly exstirpated, that there are none left to preserve
their memory.

6. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.


6. For Thou have thrust me down into a deep and dismal Dungeon (which I can
compare to nothing but a Grave;) wherein I lie neglected, and see no hope of
being delivered.

7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy
waves. Selah.


7. My spirit is ready to sink under the weight of thy displeasure: while my
calamities fall upon me so fast, and so heavily (like the mountainous waves of
the Sea) one after another; that it is impossible to express the soreness of my
affliction.

8. Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: thou have made me an
abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.


8. I am not allowed to have any familiarity with my friends or acquaintance;
no more then if I were in another world: And as for other men, they abominate
to come into such a loathsome place; where I am kept so close, that I have no
means of getting out.

9. Mine eye mourns by reason of affliction: LORD, I have called daily upon
thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.


9. Nor can I do any thing there but weep, till I am almost blind by reason of
the miseries I endure: only I cease not to look up unto Thee, O Lord,
continually, who art my only companion in this solitary and helpless
condition; imploring thy aid with fervent prayers, and longing expectations;
saying,

10. Will thou show wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee?
Selah.


10. Make haste, good Lord, to deliver me, if Thou intendest any kindness to
me; otherwise I shall presently perish, and then, without the greatest Miracle,
there is no help for me: For can I with any reason expect, that Thou should
do wonders for me among the dead, when Thou would do nothing for me, while
I was alive? and raise me out of my grave, when Thou would not bring me out
of prison?

11. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in
destruction?


11. Now is the time to declare the love Thou bear to me; and to perform the
promise Thou have made to them that faithfully serve Thee: For if Thou do
defer thy relief, I die; and what can I hope for, when I am rotten in my grave?

12. Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land
of forgetfulness?


12. Shall thy power be apparent there, where nothing is seen? And will Thou
convince men how good and how just Thou art to thy servants, in the place where
they are no more remembered?

13. But unto thee have I cried, O LORD, and in the morning shall my prayer
prevent thee.


13. Thus, O Lord, I cry unto Thee in the anguish of my soul: which keeps me
awake to present my prayers unto Thee, before the morning light.

14. LORD, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?


14. Though alas! they have no effect; but I see my self deserted,
notwithstanding all my prayers, in these miserable straits: wherein I lie
sighing to think what the reason should be, that Thou deniest me thy help, and
take no notice of me.

15. I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy
terrors, I am distracted.


15. Which is the more strange, because I faint away under my misery, which
has continued many years, and under the sad prospect I have before me, of more
dreadful calamities: which so astonish me, that I know not what to do with my
self.

16. Thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off,


16. I only bemoan over again my forlorn estate, which grows still more
deplorable; I suffer not merely the effects of thy anger (Ver. 7.) but of thy
severest and most terrible displeasure: wherewith I am so overwhelmed and
oppressed, that I am scarce able to fetch my breath.

17. They came round about me daily like water, they compassed me about
together.


17. Which way soever I turn my self, I find that I am environed with them: and
they increase continually, like floods of water, coming from several places,
and at last meeting all together, to enclose and swallow me up.

18. Lover and friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into
darkness.


18. And there is no Friend, no Neighbor comes near me, to give me the least
consolation: But all they whose sweet society was wont to help to mitigate my
sorrow, are either dead; or kept from my sight; or hide themselves for fear of
being thrust down together with me, into this doleful place.

PSALM LXXXIX.
Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite.
ARGUMENT.
The Author of this Psalm was near of kin to him that made the former (see the
Argument there) and they lived I suppose in the same time. Only Heman bewailed
some private affliction, which was befallen himself; whereas Ethan (after a
thankful acknowledgment of the benefits God had bestowed upon them, and
especially of his promise made to David by Samuel, and Nathan, of settling the
Kingdom upon him and his posterity for ever) laments most sadly the public
calamity; by the subversion of the Royal Family and Government, in the days of
Jehojachin or of Zedekiah Whose miserable fate seems in the conclusion of this
Psalm, to be bewailed with the greater passion; because it looked like a breach
of God's promise to David: and gave the Babylonians and other Nations, who
assisted in their destruction, occasion to say; that notwithstanding all the
promises they boasted of, and the fidelity of their God in the performance,
there was now a period put to David's Family and Kingdom.

That Is the clearest account I can give of the meaning of the last clause of
the last verse but one: where we read that they reproached the footsteps of
his Anointed. The word we render footsteps, signifies properly the heel of a
man's foot: and from thence is translated to signify the end of any thing, as
in Psalm. CXIX. 33. Which notion of it, in my judgment, best suits with all that
goes before in this Psalm; concerning the stability of David's Kingdom: which
their enemies now boasted (as we would express it in our present language) they
saw upon its last legs. And the truth is, it was never restored to that Family,
till Christ the great Son of David came: to whom some passages in this Psalm
are applied by the Jews themselves; in both the Beresiths, and in other Books;
to which Abenezra and R. Solomon consent.

Why this Psalm is called Maschil see Psalm. XXXII. But why any should fancy, as
some have done, that it was made by Jehojachin after he came out of Prison (2
King. XXV. 27, 28.) I cannot conceive: unless the first words moved them to
think that he, who in the foregoing Psalm speaks of himself as in a Dungeon,
gives God thanks here for his deliverance.

1. I Will sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever: with my mouth will I make
known thy faithfulness to all generations.


1. THE innumerable calamities that are befaln us shall not blot out the memory
of the innumerable benefits, which the Lord has formerly bestowed on us: but I
will sing of them without ceasing; and endeavor to make all posterity believe,
notwithstanding our present desolation, that Thou art faithful and constant to
thy word.

2. For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shall
thou establish in the very heavens.


2. For I am confident thy Mercy, which is immovable and indures for ever, will
raise us out of these ruins: thy promises being as firm and steadfast as the
heavens; in which we see an image of the unchangeableness of thy Nature, and of
thy will.

3. I have made a convenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant.


3. Which Thou did declare by thy Prophet, saying, (1 Samuel XVI. 13. 2 Samuel
III. 9, 10. V. 2. VII. 15, 16, 28.) I have chosen David my faithful Servant,
to be the Governor of my people; and have made a Covenant with him, confirmed
by an Oath:

4. Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all
generations. Selah.


4. That not only he, but his Children after him shall be settled in the
Throne: which, though it totter sometime, or be thrown down, shall be raised
again; and continued throughout all succeeding generations.

5. And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O LORD: thy faithfulness also in
the congregation of the saints.


5. For which stupendous kindness, if we should forget to praise Thee, or in
this our calamitous condition distrust thy power and fidelity to make it good;
the heavenly inhabitants will not fail to do it: but in their holy Assemblies
confess them both, with their solemn praises.

6. For who in the heaven can be compared unto the LORD? who among the sons of
the mighty can be likened unto the LORD?


6. For there are none of the powers of the air they know (much less any upon
earth) that can resist the Lord, and hinder the fulfilling of his will: The
mightiest among themselves, they are sensible, are not to be compared with his
Majesty, to whom they are but Ministers.

7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him.


7. And when they assemble, in the greatest numbers, and make the most glorious
Court, stand in great fear and dread of Him: attending, with awful reverence,
what commands He will be pleased to lay upon them.

8. O LORD God of hosts, who is a strong LORD like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?


8. With whom I will join, O Lord the Commander of all these heavenly Hosts;
and celebrate thy Name on earth, as they do in heaven, saying: Where is he
among them all, that can equal Thee, O most powerful Lord; whose Faithfulness
is as ready to fulfill thy Promises, as the Angels are to execute thy Commands.

9. Thou rulest the raging of the Sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them.


9. The Sea it self, which submits to no body else, is under thy Government:
who, when it is a calm, make it swell, as if it would overflow the earth; and
reducest it, when it is in its greatest rage, to a perfect stilness again.

10. Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain: thou have
scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.


10. There the Egyptians, who had been wounded before with many other grievous
plagues, were utterly overthrown: and with the like irresistible power the
Canaanites were scattered; at the entrance of thy people, into the promised
Land.

11. The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world, and the
fullness thereof, thou have founded them.


11. For Thou art the owner of things, both in heaven and earth, and have the
justest right to dispose of them, to whom Thou please: because the world, and
all the inhabitants of it, are thy Creatures.

12. The north and the south thou have created them: Tabor and Hermon shall
rejoice in thy name.


12. Whether we cast our eyes to the Southern or Northern parts of the earth;
to the West, toward Tabor, or Eastwards toward Hermon: they all acknowledge
Thee their Creator; and rejoice in thy bountiful Providence, which inriches
them with all things needful for them.

13. Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.


13. And thy power extending it self throughout the whole, always effects in
every place, whatsoever Thou designest: whether it be to punish evildoers, or
to preserve and exalt them that do well.

14. Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.


14. But none shall be able to say Thou do them any wrong: Because Thou do
not rule the world merely by thy absolute power; but have placed thy principal
glory in justice and equity, mercy and fidelity; from which Thou never swervest.

15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O
LORD, in the light of thy countenance.


15. Happy then are the people who live under thy righteous and merciful
Government; and hear the Trumpet sound, which signifies the royal presence of
thy Majesty among them, and calls them to attend upon Thee (X. Numb. 10.) They
shall spend their days most cheerfully, O Lord; being secure of thy favor,
which will let them want nothing that is good for them.

16. In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall
they be exalted.


16. They shall not barely rejoice, but triumph, and that continually; in thy
love to them, and thy power to defend them: and, walking in thy holy Laws,
shall by thy goodness be highly exalted, and made superior to all their
enemies.

17. For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favor our horn shall
be exalted.


17. For they owe not their conquests to their own valor, or forces, though
never so great; but it is Thou who give illustrious Victories, to the
smallest Armies: And therefore by thy favor we hope that our Empire, which is
now broken, shall be raised again to its former splendor.

18. For the LORD is our defense: and the holy One of Israel is our King.


18. For the Lord is still our Protector, though our Prince be taken, and made
unable to defend us: He whom Israel adores, and acknowledges infinitely to
transcend all other Beings, is our King and Governor.

19. Then thou spakest in vision to the holy One, and saidest, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people.


19. Who then did reveal thy mind, in a Vision, to the holy Prophet Samuel,
(1 Samuel XVI. 1.) when the Philistines defied Israel, and grew terrible to them,
(XVII. 10, 11, 24.) saying; I have provided myself a valiant Champion, (1 Samuel
XVI. 18.) to be your deliverer, (2 Samuel III. 18.) I have designed a person of
singular worth, from among the common people, (1 Samuel XVI. 11.) to be promoted
to the Kingdom.

20. I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.


20. I have observed David (1 Samuel XVI. 1.) and find him a man that will
faithfully serve me: Go, and anoint him with the holy Oil; for I intend him for
the Governor of my people.

21. With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.


21. With whom I will always be powerfully present, for his assistance (1 Samuel
XVII. 45, etc.) and never desert him, as I did Saul: (XVIII. 12, 24, 28.) But
my mighty power shall extraordinarily strengthen him, in all his enterprises, 1 Samuel XXX. 6. 2 Samuel VIII. 6, 14.

22. The enemy shall not exact upon him: nor the son of wickedness afflict him.


22. The subtilest of his enemies, shall not be able to circumvent him; nor the
most malicious, how powerful soever, oppress him.

23. And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate
him.


23. But after all their vain attempts I will not only protect him, from their
crafty violence; but subdue all his adversaries under him, and destroy those
that hate him, 2 Samuel VII. 9.

24. But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall
his born be exalted.


24. He shall ever find me, not only faithful in my promise to him but, kind
above his expectation: and, by my powerful assistance, and his confidence in
it, his authority shall be highly exalted, 1 Chronicles. XIV. 17. 2 Samuel VII. 9.
VIII. 13.

25. I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.


25. On one hand he shall conquer the Philistines, and those that live upon the
coast of the Sea, (2 Samuel VIII. 1.) and on the other hand the Syrians, as far
as Tigris and Euphrates, (2 Samuel VIII. 9, etc. X. 16, 19.)

26. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation.


26. For he shall entirely depend on me in all his distresses, and fly to me
for succor, as a Child to his Parent; saying, with more then usual love and
confidence, Thou art my Father, as well as my omnipotent God, from whom alone I
expect protection and deliverance.

27. Also I will make him my firstborn, higher then the kings of the earth.


27. Which I will never fail to afford him, till I raise him to the prime
dignity, among all those whom I call my Sons; and set him so high above all
other Kings in the world, that he shall be a most eminent Type of my Son
Christ, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords.

28. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand
fast with him.


28. Nothing shall alter these kind intentions toward him; but I will always
have a love for him, and faithfully perform my Covenant with him.

29. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days
of heaven.


29. Which is, that his Family shall never be extinct; but, notwithstanding the
changes which all things are subject unto here below, have the royal power
continued in it, as long as the heavens endure, 2 Samuel VII. 16, 28, 29. I. Luke
32, 33.

30. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;


30. If his Successors indeed shall depart from the Law, which I have given
you by my Servant Moses, and not judge my people righteously;

31. If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments:


31. If they profanely neglect, or corrupt my Religion, and observe not the
rest of the Rules of life, which I have enjoined them:

32. Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes.


32. Then will I execute the threatenings which are in my Law, (XXVI. Levit.)
upon them; and punish their transgressions with sore diseases, and their
Idolatries with several plagues, (2 Samuel VII. 14.)

33. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.


33. But I will not so chastise them, as never more to do good to his Family;
(2 Samuel VII. 25.) but will still have a kindness for it, and faithfully keep my
promise with it, 1 King. XI. 34, 36. XV. 4. 2 King. VIII. 19, etc.

34. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips.


34. I will not violate the Covenant I have made with David (2 Chronicles. XXI. 7.)
nor retract the promise, which I have solemnly passed to his Family.

35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.


35. For I have unalterably sworn by my own incommunicable excellencies, that I
will as soon cease to be what I am, as deceive him.

36. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.


36. His Family (as I said Verse 29.) shall never be quite extinct; but always
remain in my favor, and hold the royal dignity, as long as the Sun shines.

37. It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness
in heaven. Selah.


37. The Moon may as well fall from her Orb, as his Authority fall to the
ground and rise no more: Let that be a witness of my fidelity, when you look
upon it; (XXXIII. Jer. 20, 21.) and conclude, that after all the changes and
eclipses his Kingdom may suffer, it shall stand as fast, as that and all the
rest of the heavenly bodies.

38. But thou have cast off and abhorred, thou have been wroth with thine
anointed.


38. But all these promises, alas! so sacredly confirmed, and often repeated,
have not secured it from a dismal subversion: For Thou have rejected, with the
greatest contempt and indignation, our Sovereign; one of the posterity of
David, and his lawful successor in the Kingdom, 2 King. XXIV. 20. XXV. 6, 7.
IV. Lam. 20.

39. Thou have made void the covenant of thy servant: thou have profaned his
crown, by casting it to the ground.


39. Thou seem not to regard the Covenant made with that thy faithful
Servant (which Thou promisedst not to break, Ver. 34.) and instead of raising
his Family higher then all other Kings (Ver. 27.) have suffered it to lose all
its Authority; which, together with the royal Diadem, is vilely trodden under
foot.

40. Thou have broken down all his hedges, thou have brought his strong holds
to ruin.


40. Thou have broken down all the walls of Jerusalem, (2 King. XXV. 10.) and
made all his fortified places a mere desolation.

41. All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbors.


41. So that he has no defense against those who have a mind to make a prey of
him, (2 King. XXIV. 2.) and is now scorned and derided by those, who formerly
dreaded him.

42. Thou have set up the right hand of his adversaries: thou have made all his
enemies to rejoice.


42. Thou have made his adversaries (whom Thou promisedst to depress, Ver. 23.)
far stronger then himself: they have executed all that they designed, and now
triumph in his ruin.

43. Thou have also turned the edge of his sword, and have not made him to
stand in the battle.


43. His forces have done him no service; but, being shamefully routed, durst
never rally again, to make any opposition to their enemies.

44. Thou have made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground.


44. Thou have put out that splendor, which we thought should have been
perpetual; (Ver. 37, 38.) and have utterly overturned his Kingdom.

45. The days of his youth have thou shortened: thou have covered him with
shame. Selah.


45. Thou have made a speedy end of the reign of Jehojachin, who in his youth
is made a slave: (2 King. XXIV. 8, etc.) and suffered Zedekiah to be most
disgracefully condemned as a rebel, to lose his eyes, and remain a prisoner all
the days of his life, 2 King. XXV. 6, 7.

46. How long, LORD, will thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath burn
like fire?


46. O what a sad condition is this, in which Thou seem wholly to neglect
us! But, O Lord, will Thou never appear for us again, and put a period to our
miseries? will Thou let thy anger burn, till we be utterly consumed?

47. Remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men in vain?


47. Our natural weakness pleads for some mercy; and imboldens us to beseech
Thee, that, since we must not only die unavoidably, but a short time will
bring us to our graves, Thou will be pleased to let us spend that little time
in more ease; and not live, as if we were made for nothing else, but only to
be miserable and to die.

48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his
soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.


48. For where is the man, whose constitution is so firm, that he shall not
yield to death? For what ability have we, though our enemies should not thus
destroy us, to defend our selves from the power of the grave?

49. LORD, where are thy former loving-kindnesses, which thou swarest unto
David in thy truth?


49. Lord! what a difference is there between our times, and those, when Thou
wast so exceeding good to David? And swarest, most faithfully to continue to
him for ever thy loving kindness? which we beseech Thee now restore unto us.

50. Remember, LORD, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in my bosom
the reproach of all the mighty people;


50. Show, O Lord, that Thou do not forget the scoffs and jeers; whereby our
enemies augment the sufferings of thy servants: there is nothing I lay to heart
so much, as all the reproaches of many and mighty Nations.

51. Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O LORD; wherewith they have
reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.


51. Who are thy enemies as well as ours; and have blasphemed Thee, O Lord, and
mocked at Thee: as if our slavery were the effect of thy inability to protect
us; and as if there were an end of the Family and Kingdom of David, thine
anointed, which Thou saidest should last for ever.

52. Blessed be the LORD for evermore. Amen, and amen.


52. But let them laugh on; neither their scoffs, nor our calamity, shall
hinder us from praising the Lord, and speaking good of Him continually; in
assured hope that He will at last deliver us. Let it be so, we beseech Thee;
Let it be so, as we desire and hope: that we may ever praise Thee for our happy
restoration.

The End of the THIRD Book of Psalms.
The Fourth BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM XC.
A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
ARGUMENT.
Here begins the FOVRTH Book of Psalms: in this differing from the rest, that
as those of the first Book are most of them ascribed to David, and those of the
second, in great part to the Sons of Korah, and those of the third to Asaph; so
there are few of these, whose Author is certainly known: and therefore, I
suppose, were all put together, in one and the same Collection. The first of
them indeed being made by Moses, the Hebrews have entertained a conceit (which
Saint Hierom and Saint Hilary also follow) that he was the Author also of the
Ten next immediately ensuing. But, as there is no reason for that (it will
appear in due place) so I can see no cause why we should fancy David, or some
of the Children of Moses in his time, or a singer of that name (as Aben Ezra
conjectures) to have composed this present Psalm: when not only the Title
expressly gives it to that Moses who was the Man of God (as their Law giver is
called XXXIII. Deuteronomy. 1.) or that famous Prophet, by whom God spoke to them; but
the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the very matter of the Psalm sufficiently show,
that it was a Meditation of his, when the people offended so highly against God
in the Wilderness (especially by murmuring at the Relation the Spies brought
them of the good Land, XIV. Numb.) that He shortened their lives, to seventy or
eighty years at the most; and suffered them not to arrive at the age of their
Ancestors, or of Moses, Caleb and Joshua: whose lives he prolonged to an
hundred and twenty years.

Which grievous punishment Moses prays God, they may lay to heart seriously,
and so recover his favor, (Ver. 12, etc.) who is the eternal God, as he tells
them (in the beginning of the Psalm) and had been, in a particular manner, kind
to their Progenitors in former Generations.

This is the substance of the Psalm: which the Collectour of this Book, thought
fit to place in the very beginning of it; because of the great antiquity of
this Psalm, and the dignity of its Author.

1. LORD, thou have been our dewlling place in all generations.


1. O Lord, who sustainest and governest the whole world, Thou have been the
constant Protector of our Nation for many Ages: having afforded all things
necessary for the defense and security of our Forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob; when they had no certain dewlling place, but were strangers in the Land
whither we are going: and supported us in the Land of Egypt; where, in a time
of dearth, Thou made an ample provision for us; as Thou have also done
hitherto, in this barren desert.

2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the
earth and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.


2. Where, though we have no Towns nor Houses, we ought to think our selves
safe; and to trust in Thee, who art the same mighty God, Thou ever wast (not
only before we and our Forefathers were made, but before the mountains arose
out of the waters, and Thou commandedst the rest of the earth, and this
beautiful world to appear) and ever wilt be, whatever changes there be here,
without any alteration.

3. Thou turnest man to destruction: and say, Return ye children of men.


3. We have highly offended Thee indeed, and so did our first Parents; who
became thereby most wretched and miserable Creatures, and were doomed by Thee
to return to the dust, out of which they were formed: as all their posterity
must do, whenever Thou summonest them to obey that sentence, Thou have passed
upon them.

4. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and
as a watch in the night.


4. And should we have a reprieve for a longer time, then our first Father
Adam, and some of his successors had, who lived near to a thousand years; we
should be wretched still: especially, when we compared our selves with Thee; in
whose account the longest life is as inconsiderable as one day, and that when
it is spent and gone; nay, as three or four hours, which pass away in sleep.

5. Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as a sleep: in the
morning they are like grass which grows up.


5. But alas! in these ages Thou carriest men away suddenly; as a violent
torrent does those things, it meets withal in its passage: they vanish like a
dream, when we awake; and are as grass, which in the morning is grown higher
and stronger then it was;

6. In the morning it flourishes, and grows up; in the evening it is cut
down and withers.


6. But, how flourishing and fresh soever it then appear, is cut down before
night, and loses all its beauty: such is the frailty of man; who now is in
vigorous health, and anon languishes, and falls to the earth.

7. For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.


7. This, I am sure, is our condition; who have so provoked Thee to anger by
our sins, that we perish in an instant, (XVI. Numb. 35, 46.) and are
perpetually disturbed with dreadful apprehensions of thy heaviest displeasure,
XVII. Numb. 12, 13.

8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.


8. After many threatenings, Thou have proceeded, as a righteous Judge, to call
us to a severe account for all our foul crimes; though never so secretly
committed: and make it appear, by our punishments, to all the world (XIV.
Numb. 20, etc.) that we are a perverse generation; though we pretend to thy
service.

9. For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale
that is told.


9. For we constantly feel some effects or other of thine anger; whereby our
lives decline exceeding fast, and many times, before we can say what is this, is
at an end.

10. The days of our year are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for
it is soon cut off, and we fly away.


10. We fall short of the days of our Forefathers; being now all doomed to
perish in the Wilderness, and not to exceed, commonly, the age of LXX. or (if
men be of a vigorous constitution) at most of LXXX. years: the best part of
which also, is spent in toilsome travels (XX. Number. 14. XXI. 4. XXXI. 11. II.
Deuteronomy. 1, 3, etc.) and much sorrow and vexation; to see the strongest among us,
cut down like grass in a moment, or at least making great haste unto their
graves.

11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath.


11. And yet alas! who is there that seriously considers and lays to heart, the
dreadful effects of thy displeasure; which irresistibly falls upon us? (XXV.
Number. 1, 2, 3, etc.) or with such a pious fear, as it ought to excite, takes any
care to prevent more terrible punishments, then those we have felt already?

12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.


12. Lord, do Thou touch us with a sense of thy judgments; that we may not
presume thus foolishly to offend Thee, as our Fathers have done: but, making a
just account of the shortness and uncertainty of our lives, may wisely apply
our selves to make the best use we can of them, in repenting of our sins.

13. Return, O LORD, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.


13. And then be pleased to turn thy severity into kindness toward us: Let it
suffice, good Lord, that we have endured so many and long punishments; and now
at last revoke or mitigate the sentence Thou have past upon us, who, though
very disobedient, are thy servants.

14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all
our days.


14. O let us see some appearance of thy love to us; which may satisfy and
cheer our languishing souls, like the morning light after a tedious night: and
instead of sighs and groans, fill us with shouts of joy, all the remainder of
our days.

15. Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil.


15. Compensate our past troubles with future comforts; and make our happiness
to equal, if not exceed, the misery we have suffered.

16. Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children.


16. Declare to all the world, that Thou have not quite forsaken us thy
servants: but wilt still work wonders for us; and do more glorious and
magnificent things for our Children, though we have sinned against Thee, XX.
Numb. 17, 18, etc. XXXI. 2. II. Deuteronomy. 25. III. 24.

17. And let the beauty of the LORD our God be upon us: and establish thou the
work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.


17. Let them inherit, by the special favor of the Lord our God, that lovely
and pleasant Land, (XLIX. Genesis 15. VIII. Deuteronomy. 7, 8, etc.) which He has
promised to give us: and, for that end, direct and prosper our arms; that what
we shall attempt in vain, if we be left to our selves, may successfully be
achieved by thy assistence, (VIII. Deuteronomy. 17, 18, etc. XXXI. 6, 7, 8.) O
prosper Thou our undertaking; and make our arms victorious.

PSALM XCI.
ARGUMENT.
The Author of this Psalm is not known: but the occasion seems to have been
some great Pestilence; in which the Psalmist commends an humble confidence in
God, and ardent love to Him, as the best security both in that, and in all
other dangers. Maimonides thinks (as other of the Rabbis also do) that the
Psalmist has a peculiar respect to the incursions of evil spirits, Ver. 5, 6.
as in the following Verses, 7, 8. to those mischiefs which may come from the
hand of evil men. And as far as those Spirits had any hand in the Pestilence
here spoken of, his opinion is true; and his words in general are very
significant, that the Psalmist here treats elegantly of that great Providence,
which protects and keeps us from all evils, both universal and particular, etc.
Thus he discourses in his More Nevochim Part III. Chap. 51. where we have the
reason of that name which is given to this Psalm by the Talmudists; who call it
A Song of evil Spirits. See Buxtorf Lex. Talmud. in the word (...).

Now there is no Pestilence so likely to have given occasion to this Psalm, as
that in the latter end of David's Reign: who having numbered the people, and not
made those acknowledgments to God which the Law in that case prescribed, (XXX.
Exodus 12.) had this sad choice given him by the Prophet Gad, whether he would
be punished for his negligence by Famine, or by the Sword of his Enemies, or by
Pestilence. And submitting to the last (which God sent a destroying Angel to
inflict, 2 Samuel XXIV. 15, 16.) was taught, it is not unlikely, by that Prophet,
called David's Seer, to recommend himself to the Divine Protection, in the
words of this Psalm. For that David himself was the Author, as some conceive,
is not so probable; because there is no such confession of his Sin, and
deprecation of the Divine Displeasure in this Psalm, as we read he made on
that occasion, 2 Samuel XXIV. 1 Chronicles. XXI. unless we will imagine that he made
this Psalm after that Plague; to direct and excite all others, to make God
their refuge, as he had done, in such like calamities.

And this is far more probable, then that it should be made by Moses, as some
of the Hebrews fancy; for none of the plagues in his time were so great as that
in David's: and the most of them fell on those whom God had condemned to die in
the Wilderness, (as he in the foregoing Psalm commemorates) and therefore he
could not promise long life to them upon any terms; as the Psalmist here does
to the man that confides in God, Ver. last.

The ancient Interpreters by Schacal (which commonly signifies a Lion) do so
unanimously understand some kind of Serpent, and not without reason (as
Bochartus has demonstrated) that I have followed them, in my Paraphrase of
Verse 13. and made no mention of those Beasts of prey, but only of venomous
Creatures.

1. HE that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty.


1. IT is an undoubted truth, that he who always makes the Divine Providence
his Sanctuary, and, commending himself to the protection of the most High,
rests in that and troubles himself no further; need not fear any danger
whatsoever: but think himself safe and secure in his custody; who, as He is
Almighty so, will never fail those that piously confide in Him.

2. I will say of the LORD, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God, in him
will I trust.


2. And therefore I will now encourage my soul, to flee unto the Lord for
shelter, saying; I have no confidence in any thing but Him alone: He is a
better defense then the most impregnable fortress; being the Sovereign of the
world, and so good to me upon all occasions, that I will never distrust his
kindness.

3. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler: and from the
noisome pestilence.


3. I doubt not but He will deliver thee from all unseen dangers; particularly
from this most destructive Pestilence: whose venom catches men as insensibly
and suddenly; as the snare does the Bird, when it is laid by a cunning Fowler.

4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou
trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.


4. He will affectionately defend thee, as a Hen does her young ones under her
wings: And therefore trust to his benign Providence, and depend upon his
faithful word; opposing that to all the dangers which threaten thee, as a
Soldier does his Shield and Buckler to the Darts and thrusts of his enemies.

5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day:


5. Then thou need not to be afraid, either of murderers and robbers; whose
sudden attempts in the night, make them more dreadful: nor of insurrections,
and popular tumults, and the open assaults of any adversaries.

6. Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the destruction
that wastes at noonday.


6. No, nor of those infectious diseases, which arise from unknown causes: nor
of those malignant fevers, which rage in the hottest season of the year.

7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come nigh thee.


7. Whereby though whole Towns and Countries be depopulated, a thousand falling
on the left hand, and ten thousand on the right hand of thee; thou shall remain
untouched in that mortality.

8. Only with thine eyes shall thou behold and see the reward of the wicked.


8. And only be a spectatour of the Divine vengeance, in punishing wicked
offenders so visibly; that thou can not but observe his righteous Judgments,
2 Samuel XXIV. 15, 16.

9. Because thou have made the LORD which is my refuge, even the most High thy
habitation:


9. Because I have placed my confidence and hope in Thee, O Lord; who art a
sanctuary, to which no violence can approach.

10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.


10. Therefore rest still assured, O my Soul, that He will suffer no mischief
to befall thee: nor let this plague seize upon thy Family.

11. For he shall give his angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways.


11. But give his Angels, who are always ready to obey his commands, a strict
charge to take care of thee; and to preserve thee whither soever thou go.

12. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.


12. They shall as diligently attend thee, as a Nurse does her Child: guiding,
supporting and defending thee, with such a solicitous affection; that the least
harm shall not befall thee.

13. Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon
shall thou trample under feet.


13. No, should thou come among Serpents, Asps and Dragons, with all the rest
of those venomous sort of Creatures, they shall not be able to do thee hurt:
but thou shall victoriously trample upon them, and triumph over them, X. Luke
19. XVI. Mark 18.

14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my name.


14. For so has the Lord declared his will and pleasure to be, when He gave
commission to his Angels concerning me, saying; Because he heartily loves Me,
and delights in Me, therefore will I deliver him from all present danger, and
raise him above the reach of all future: because he has acknowledged Me, to be
the only safe refuge, and relied on My power for his protection;

15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.


15. I will grant him all his petitions; especially when he is in any distress,
I will be present with him, to afford him suitable comfort: and not only
preserve him from perishing; but, after a happy deliverance, make him great and
illustrious.

16. With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.


16. And more then that he shall have the satisfaction of enjoying his honor
to a great old Age: and when his strength fails him, I will not; but still give
him evident proofs of my care of him, and kindness toward him.

PSALM XCII.
A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day.
ARGUMENT.
If Adam had made this Psalm, presently after he was created in the evening of
the Sabbath (which is a Rabbinical fancy, mentioned in the Midrash upon this
place) sure it would have been set in this fourth Book of Psalms, before that
of Moses: who may more probably be conceived to have composed it; to raise the
hearts of the Israelites to the proper business of the Sabbath Day: which was
to praise God, when they meditated upon his wonderful works, not only of
Creation but of Providence in the government of the world. Several instances of
which, in rewarding the good, and punishing the wicked, they themselves had
seen since they came out of Egypt: and were to see more when they came into the
Land of Canaan; to keep their Sabbath or rest there, after their long travels
in the Deserts: with respect to which, some thing Moses might call this A Psalm
for the Sabbath Day.

But there is no certainty of these things, or rather it is certain that
neither of these conjectures are true. For as Adam in Paradise had no enemies
to rise up against him, nor was troubled with any workers of iniquity (such as
we read of Ver. 7, 11.) and there were no Psalteries, Harps and Instruments of
Music then made, which Moses himself tells us were found out by Jubal: so
those Instruments were not employed in the service of God till the days of
David: who may therefore more reasonably be thought to have made this Psalm for
the Sabbath, then either of the other; after God had given him such Rest round
about from all his enemies, (2 Samuel VII. 1.) that he concluded he should be
able to subdue those who should hereafter adventure to oppose him: such as
those mentioned in the following Chapters, 2 Samuel VIII. X.

1. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the LORD, and to sing praises unto
thy name, O most High:


1. NOW is the proper season to give thanks unto the Lord, for all the benefits
we have received from Him: and it is no less delightful, then it is
profitable, to sing Hymns in the praise of the Divine perfections; which
infinitely transcend all that can be said, or thought of them.

2. To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness
every night;


2. This is the sweetest employment in the morning; and no entertainment equal
to it at night: to commemorate and declare to all, how bountiful Thou art; and
how faithful in performing thy promises to those, who depend on thy Almighty
Goodness.

3. Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp
with a solemn sound.


3. Which ought to be celebrated, with a full Consort, not only of our
cheerful Voices but, of all the Instruments of Music.

4. For thou LORD, have made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the
works of thy hands.


4. For all are too little, O Lord, to express the joy I have in the acts of
thy Providence; by whom, as the world was made so, it is still governed: it
ravishes my spirit, and makes me shout for joy, to think how excellently Thou
orderest and disposest all things.

5. O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.


5. Whose administration, though I cannot fully comprehend; yet, I admire and
applaud the astonishing greatness of thy works: and reverence the unsearchable
depth of thy counsels and designs.

6. A brutish man knows not: neither does a fool understand this.


6. Of which a stupid man, who looks not beyond his senses, is so wholly
ignorant; that seeing himself, and other such like fools, prosper and thrive,
while better men are in trouble and affliction; He presently concludes, Thou
do not meddle in our affairs; but leavest all to chance: For he does not
understand, so much as this secret;

7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity
do flourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.


7. That when the lewdest men grow rich, high and powerful; and their interest
is such, that by their means all the workers of iniquity, and few other men,
are promoted; the reason is: because nothing in this world is of any great
value, nor of any long continuance; but after they have flourished a while in
an empty glory, they shall be cut down like grass; and, which is more, never
rise up again:

8. But thou, LORD, art most high for evermore.


8. And that, Thou, who rulest all things, though far out of their sight, can
as well punish or reward men hereafter, as at present; being the eternal Lord.

9. For lo, thine enemies, O LORD, for lo, thine enemies shall perish: all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.


9. Who show Thou do not intend to let the wicked escape, though now they
flourish; for Thou have begun already to give thy enemies, who have long
prospered, a remarkable defeat: they have received such a notable blow, that I
am confident they shall perish; and all their partakers, though never so
numerous and strongly linkt together, be dispersed and utterly destroyed.

10. But my horn shall thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be
anointed with fresh oil.


10. But my power and authority Thou shall raise to a formidable height: and
crown that dignity with such undisturbed joy and pleasure; as shall prove, the
pious are not always miserable:

11. Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies: and mine ears shall
hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.


11. Nor the wicked always prosperous. For to all other pleasures this shall be
added, that I shall see those deprived of all power, who have long watched to
do me mischief: or certainly hear of the ruin of those malicious men, who set
themselves with all their might to destroy me.

12. The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like a
cedar in Lebanon.


12. Which may be an encouragement to every good man to hope in God, and not
question the justice of his Providence; if at present he be afflicted: for as
He shall overturn all his enemies at the last; so He will make the righteous
flourish (not as the wicked do like the grass, Ver. 7. but) in a durable
prosperity, like the fruitful Palm, and the stately Cedar in Lebanon.

13. Those that be planted in the house of the LORD, shall flourish in the
courts of our God.


13. For they are under the care of the Lord our God; whose House they
frequent: and there partake of his Divine blessing, for the growth and increase
of their happiness.

14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing:


14. Which shall not decay, as the strength and freshness of those Trees will
do with age; but the older they grow, the more happy fruits shall their piety
produce: and they shall abound in wealth and honor; as much as they do in that.

15. To show that the LORD is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.


15. To demonstrate to all the world, that the Lord is a most impartial
Governor; whom I have found my firm unmovable Friend: and, assure your
selves, is so just and kind; that he will never let wickedness go unpunished,
nor virtue be always unrewarded.

PSALM XCIII.
ARGUMENT.
There is no Title in the Hebrew to tell^ us who was the Author of this Psalm:
Nor was there any in Origen's Hexaplus, or in Eusebius as Theodoret confesses:
who found in the Greek Copy which he used, this Psalm called An Ode of David,
in praise of God: To which has been since added, in the day before the
Sabbath, when the earth began to be inhabited. Which Musculus thinks was not
rashly done by the Greeks: but suspects they were moved to it; because they
knew perhaps, that the Jews used this Psalm upon that day. As indeed they did;
for the words of the Talmud, in the Title Kedishim confirm his suspicions:
which are these (as I find them set down by de Dieu, upon the foregoing Psalm.)
The Canticles which the Levites sung in the Sanctuary, were as follow; on the
first day of the week, the XXIV. on the second the XLVIII. on the third the
LXXXII. on the fourth the XCIV. on the fifth the LXXXI. on the sixth the XCIII.
and on the seventh the XCII.

Nor is the matter of this Psalm more distant from the foregoing, then the
sixth day is from the seventh; for it seems to me to have been composed, when
some of those potent enemies began to take heart again, and threaten to disturb
David's peace and tranquillity: which, in the foregoing Psalm, he had said he
was confident, they should never be able to overthrow. Though in the more
sublime sense, it ought to be applied to the stability of Christ Kingdom: which
several of the Jews acknowledge is prophesied of; in this, and in all the
Psalms that follow unto the Hundredth.

1. THe LORD reigns, he is clothed with majesty, the LORD is clothed with
strength, wherewith he has girded himself: the world also is stablished, that
it cannot be moved.


1. LET the Nations boast of the power and splendor of their Kings, and trust
to their military preparations; this is our glory and our confidence, that the
LORD reigns over us: whose royal ornaments are not gold and precious stones,
but Majesty it self; and is not armed with sword and spear, but with almighty
strength, which is ready to fight for us: who have this comfort also, that He
who made the world, will support that excellent order wherein we are settled;
so that it shall not be in the power of man, to disturb what He has
established.

2. Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.


2. This we know, because thy Kingdom O Lord is fixed, and immovable: and did
not begin now, when we were made thy peculiar people; but was, as Thou art,
from everlasting.

3. The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice:
the floods lift up their waves.


3. We will not be afraid therefore, though multitudes of combined enemies
threaten to break in upon us like a flood: though they storm, and rage, and
insolently vaunt, as if they were sure to overwhelm us:

4. The LORD on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea, then the
mighty waves of the sea.


4. Though they roar terribly, and be as numerous as the waters of the Sea;
swelling like its boisterous waves, in a furious tempest: the great Lord is
above them all; and can instantly depress them, as low as He pleases.

5. Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becomes thine house, O LORD, for
ever.


5. And thy fidelity, in performing the promises, wherein Thou have testified
thy good will to us, is as unquestionable as thy power: no age shall find it
fail: for it becomes not Thee to start from thy word delivered to us, by thy
Oracle; but it is thy glory to observe it sacredly for ever.

PSALM XCIV.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm also wants an inscription in the Hebrew, to tell us who was the
Author of it: but the later Greeks entitle David to it; and call it A Psalm of
his for the fourth day of the week: which they had (as I showed in the Argument
of the foregoing Psalm) from the Hebrew Tradition in the Talmud: And he has
little acquaintance with the History of David, who does not see that here is an
exact description of the Court of Saul, who abused their Authority to all
manner of oppression and violence (especially against David) without any fear
of God, or thought that He would call them to any account for it; as he
complains in several other Psalms; particularly LVII. LVIII. LIX.

But it might as well be penned by any other holy man, who lived in times of
general corruption; when (as Theodoret expresses it) their Kings, and their
Princes ( i. e. Judges) loved not to be tied to the Law; but pronounced unjust
sentences, and committed murders; selling the blood of innocents for bribes:
of whom the Prophet Isaiah sadly complains, Ver. 21. of the first Chapter;
where Ver. 10. he calls them Rulers of Sodom. Certain it is, the Psalmist,
whosoever he was, desires he may see justice done upon such Atheistical
Oppressors; and desires good men not to be discouraged under their tyranny:
but patiently expect an happy issue, of all the vexation which they gave them.

1. O LORD God, to whom vengeance belongs: O God, to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self.


1. O Eternal Lord, the Sovereign of the world, in whose power it is to punish
the highest offenders; and to whom alone it belongs, to take revenge on those
who oppress thy people, when they should protect them: make thy justice
conspicuous in a severe vengeance upon them.

2. Lift up thy self, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud.


2. Call them to an account, O Thou righteous Judge of the whole earth: And, by
making them suffer according to the wrong they have done, let those proud men,
who have acted as if they thought none could control them, know they have a
Superior.

3. LORD, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?


3. We can scarce behold these wicked men without indignation: it tempts us to
impatience, O Lord, to see how they prosper and triumph in their injurious
proceedings;

4. How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers of
iniquity boast themselves.


4. And to hear their insolent, and provoking language; for they care not what
they say; but as they intolerably abuse us, so they audaciously blaspheme Thee:
the whole company of them, priding themselves in the mischief they do; and
scornfully deriding those, that tell them thy judgments will overtake them.

5. They break in pieces thy people, O LORD, and afflict thine heritage.


5. They have crushed thy people so, that they dare scarce complain of their
tyranny: which cruelly afflicts those who are dear unto Thee, with all manner
of rapines and extortions.

6. They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.


6. They have no compassion upon the widow or the stranger; but the rather
spoil them, nay condemn them to die upon false accusations (that they may
possess themselves of their estates) because they have no Patron to defend
them: and in the same manner they murder, for it is no better, the poor
fatherless children; whom they ought to protect from violence.

7. Yet they say, The LORD shall not see: neither shall the God of Jacob regard
it.


7. And to harden themselves in their wickedness, they say; what do you tell us
of the Lord? He knows not, or minds not, what we do here: though there are
such evident demonstrations of the Divine providence over Jacob, and his
posterity; yet, for all that, they fancy He does not regard, nor will call them
to any account for their doings.

8. Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise?


8. What stupid wretches are these? who think themselves the wisest, but are in
truth the most brutish of all mankind: whom I would advise, if they have not
perfectly lost their reason, to consider this, (and sure they are not such
fools, but they may soon understand it)

9. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall
he not see?


9. Shall not He hear your blasphemies, who gave you the faculty of hearing?
and shall not He see all you do, who gave you the power of seeing? Is it
possible He should give to others, what he wants Himself?

10. He that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he know?


10. He that taught all Nations his will, shall not He correct them when they
transgress it? To what purpose did he make man to know the difference between
good and evil, but that he should observe it; and expect, if he did not, to
suffer for it?

11. The LORD knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.


11. Let them devise what ways they please, and flatter themselves with hopes
to escape his vengeance: the Lord knows them all; and will make them see one
day, that all such counsels and contrivances are but mere folly and vanity.

12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and teach him out of
thy law:


12. And far better had it been for them to have been punished sooner: For not
he that prospers in his wickedness is happy, but he whom Thou chastenest, O
Lord, when he does amiss; and thereby teach to study and obey thy Law with
greater care and diligence.

13. That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit
be dug for the wicked.


13. Which will quiet his mind under all his troubles, and at last procure the
removal of them: when absolute destruction and ruin, mean time, is preparing
for the ungodly.

14. For the LORD will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance.


14. For the Lord will never abandon the care of his people; nor leave those
whom He owns for his peculiar possession, to be utterly undone by the
oppressions, which for a time they may endure.

15. But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the upright in heart
shall follow it.


15. But how much soever his judgments may seem to depart from the rules of
righteousness, while the wicked flourish and the godly are afflicted; they
shall at last return to such a perfect conformity with them: that all honest
hearted men shall be encouraged thereby still to follow the Lord; and by no
means to depart from their integrity, though all things look as if they were
unequally carried.

16. Who will rise up for me against the evil doers? or who will stand up for
me against the workers of iniquity?


16. Let them learn by my example not to despond; for who is it but He alone,
from whom I have expected, and still do expect to receive protection and help
against these malicious men? who make no conscience of what they do, and
design my utter ruin.

17. Unless the LORD had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.


17. Whose power also is so great, that if the Lord had not seasonably
interposed for my assistance and deliverance, I had not now been praying to
Him; but laid in a silent grave.

18. When I said, My foot slippeth: thy mercy, O LORD, held me up.


18. This was my constant support, if at any time my heart even failed me, and
I was ready to conclude, I cannot subsist any longer; then thy mercy, O Lord,
sent me relief, and preserved me from the danger, wherein I was afraid I should
have unavoidably perished.

19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.


19. I have had innumerable perplexed thoughts, and anxious cares, which have
extremely disquieted me: But as soon as ever I reflected on thy goodness,
justice and truth, they all vanished; and I felt such consolation from thence,
as revived my dejected soul:

20. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee: which frames
mischief by a law?


20. And made me say, I will never imagine it possible, that Thou should
favor the tyrannical proceedings of these unrighteous Judges: who not only
oppress thy people, but do it in a form of justice; and under the color and
pretext of law, make them miserable.

21. They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and
condemn the innocent blood.


21. They assemble themselves together, and in full council combine to destroy
the righteous: upon whom they pass a solemn sentence, though he be perfectly
guiltless, to lose his life.

22. But the LORD is my defense: and my God is the rock of my refuge.


22. But this does not discourage me (whose case this is;) let them decree what
they please, and be too hard for all laws: the Lord, who hates unrighteousness,
will be my defense; He, who has been long very gracious to me, I am confident
will secure me from their violence.

23. And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in
their own wickedness: yea, the LORD our God shall cut them off.


23. And more then that, retort it upon themselves; for the mischief they
intended against me, shall fall upon their own head: He shall cut them off in
their own wicked contrivances; though it be not in our power, yet the Lord our
God, who has undertaken the patronage of those that confide in Him, shall cut
them off.

PSALM XCV.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm likewise is without any Title in the Hebrew, but the Greeks call it
A Psalm of David; because the Apostle to the Hebrews cites a passage out of it,
under his Name, IV. 7. Though that, it must be confessed, is no concluding
Argument of its being composed by him; because it is usual to call the whole
Five Books by the name of the Psalms of David; when it is certain he did not
make them all, but only the greater part.

Whoever was the Author, it looks as if it were intended to be a (...) or
solemn invitation of the people (when they were all assembled together on the
Sabbath or some public occasion) to praise the Lord their God, and hear
instructions out of his Law: And is justly employed still by the Church, in the
entrance of our Morning Service for the very same purpose. For it plainly
relates to the days of Christ, as the Jews confess, and the Apostle proves,
III. IV. to the Hebrews: where he demonstrates to them of that Nation, that the
Rest here spoken of could not be merely that in the Land of Canaan, which their
Forefathers fell short of, by their disobedience to God in the Wilderness: but
another, far better, into which they in that day were to be brought, by the
Messiah, a far greater Captain of Salvation then Joshua. And therefore it
concerned them then, he shows, above all other times, to take care they did not
harden their hearts against Him; when He came to invite them to a participation
of the greatest blessedness: but entertain his holy Gospel, with a cheerful
and joyful obedience to it. Theodoret is of opinion that it was particularly
designed for the times of Josiah; when he made that notable reformation (which
we read of 2 Chronicles. XXXIV. XXXV.) and called them from the worship of Idols,
to the service of the true God. But it could never be more properly used by
that Nation, then when the Lord Christ came to call them to repentance.

1. O Come, let us sing unto the LORD: let us make a joyful noise to the rock
of our salvation.


1. OStir up your selves, all ye that are come hither to worship the Lord, and
with united affections let us cheerfully sing his praises: Let us lift up our
voices and triumphantly laud the Author of all the good we enjoy; and in whom
we may safely confide for ever.

2. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise
unto him with psalms.


2. Let us approach into his presence with thankful hearts, to acknowledge the
benefits we have received from Him: and devoutly proclaim with triumphant
hymns, what a joy it is to us, that we may address our selves unto Him.

3. For the LORD is a great God, and a great King above all gods.


3. For the Lord is infinitely powerful, and has a sovereign authority; not
only over all the Princes on the earth, but all the Angels and principalities
in heaven.

4. In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is
his also.


4. All those Treasures are in his possession, which lie in the deepest and
most secret parts of the earth; whither none of our Monarchs can extend their
power: and the loftiest hills, which none but the clouds can touch, are part of
his dominion.

5. The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.


5. The Sea also obeys Him alone; who has an unquestionable title to it, and
to all the rest of his wide Empire: for He made both it, and the dry Land; with
all the things contained therein.

6. O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the LORD our maker.


6. O be not backward then to comply with this renewed invitation; but let us
all with the lowest prostrations devoutly adore his Majesty: Let it not suffice
us to do it once, but again let us, with humble reverence, bow both our bodies
and souls, in token of our subjection to Him: Let us fall on our knees, and
submissively acknowledge the duty we owe, to the great Lord, who gave us our
Being.

7. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of
his hand: to day if ye will hear his voice,


7. Which we above all people have reason to do, because He has a peculiar
relation to us, and kindness for us; providing for all our wants most
liberally, and continually defending us from all dangers: O that you would
therefore without delay listen to Him, and be obedient to the voice of your
Creator, Conserver and Benefactour, who calls upon you most graciously (by his
own Son, III. Heb. 6, 7. IV. 7) saying;

8. Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness:


8. Lay to heart what I have done for you, and be not so stupidly insensible,
as your Fathers were; at that place, whose Name ( Meribah and Massah) preserves
the memory of their provoking strife with Moses, and temptation of God, in the
Wilderness, XVII. Exodus 2, 7.

9. When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.


9. When they doubted of my power, and demanded new proofs of my presence among
them (XVII. Exodus 7.) though they had seen my wonderful works, in their late
deliverance at the red Sea; and in making the bitter waters sweet; and sending
them bread from heaven, Exodus XIV. XV. XVI.

10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a
people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways.


10. Nor did they then cease their discontented murmurings, and distrust of me;
but continued their stubborn infidelity, vexing, nay tiring my patience for the
space of forty years: long before the end of which I concluded that they were a
people whose heart would never be steadfastly resolved to adhere unto me; for
they did not mind what wonderful things I did for them, nor what I commanded
them to do for me.

11. Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.


11. Which so highly displeased me, that I swear they should wander all their
days, and die at last, in the Wilderness, (XIV. Numb. 28, etc.) and never enter
into that good Land, where I intended to give them rest after all their
travels, XII.

PSALM XCVI.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm also wants a Title in the Hebrew: but the Greeks are justified in
the former part of their Inscription (which calls it An Ode of David's) by the
1 Chronicles. XVI. where we find, that at the bringing up the Ark from the house of
Obed Edom, to the place he had prepared for it on Mount Sion; David delivered
this Psalm (together with the CV.) into the hand of Asaph, to express the joy
he had in God's special presence among them: which, all their neighbors round
about, he foretells, should be made sensible of, as well as themselves.

This Psalm indeed is not exactly the very same with that; but there is a
difference in some expressions: ex. gr. it is called here A new Song, but not
there; which shows it was afterward altered by some divine person, who
accommodated it to other uses. And very probably by Ezra, when they came out of
Babylon: which occasioned the Greeks to add, in the latter part of the
Inscription of this Psalm, these words; when the house was built after the
Captivity. Ezra, that is, made use of it to express their joy at the
re-edification of the Temple.

But it never had a complete fulfilling, answerable to the height of it, till
the Messiah (who was indeed the Temple of God) came to dwell among us; to give
eternal Salvation to us. Several of the Jewish Writers acknowledge that it
belongs to His times: and accordingly we not only may, but ought, to have Him
in our minds, when we say Sing unto the Lord a new Song (for his new Grace,
that is, in sending Him to give Salvation to all Nations) and the Lord
reigns, Ver. 10. and has all things put under his feet. See Eusebius. in his
Demonstrat. Evangelica, L. 1. c. 4.

1. O Sing unto the LORD a new song: sing unto the LORD, all the earth.


1. O Sing praises unto the Lord, for his new and extraordinary benefits, which
He has bestowed upon us: Let all the earth join together with us, to sing his
praises.

2. Sing unto the LORD, bless his name: show forth his salvation from day to
day.


2. We can never praise Him enough; and therefore cease not to bless his Name,
and to spread the fame of his Almighty Goodness toward us: but publish every
day, with joyful hearts, the great deliverances He has wrought for us.

3. Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.


3. Tell the Nations round about how He has glorified Himself: let none of
them be ignorant of the wonderful things He has done among us.

4. For the LORD is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above
all gods.


4. For all our praises fall infinitely short of the greatness of the Lord; who
is worthy of the highest praise of the whole world: and has shown both to us
(1 Chronicles. XIII. 10, 12. 1 Samuel VI. 20.) and to others (1 Samuel V. 3, 4, etc.)
how dreadful He is above all that are called Gods.

5. For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the LORD made the heavens.


5. For all the Gods of the Nations are nothing worth; being able to do
neither good nor harm: But the Lord not only made the earth, but the heavens
too; which abundantly declare the greatness and the splendor of his Majesty.

6. Honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.


6. Whose heavenly Court infinitely out-shines all the state and pomp, wherein
the greatest earthly Monarchs live, (1. Esther 4.) For all the words we have,
are not able to express the brightness and magnificence, the power and comely
order, of so much as his Ministers: an image of which we have in his holy
place; wherein He manifests Himself among us.

7. Give unto the LORD, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the LORD glory
and strength.


7. Ascribe therefore unto the Lord, O ye people, from whatsoever Family ye
come; ascribe unto Him, that incomparable Majesty, and supreme Dominion and
Authority; which you give to imaginary gods.

8. Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name; bring an offering, and come
into his courts.


8. And renounce them all; and acknowledging the Lord alone to be the
omnipotent King of all the world, do Him honor suitable to the excellency of
his Majesty: bring Him an oblation, in token of your subjection to Him; and
humbly worship Him in his Temple.

9. O worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness: fear before him all the earth.


9. O come and cast down your selves before the Lord in his Sanctuary; where He
has fixed his glorious residence among us: Adore his transcendent perfections;
and let all the people approach into his presence, with a pious trembling and
dread, to offend their Sovereign.

10. Say among the heathen, that the LORD reigns: the world also shall be
established that it shall not be moved; he shall judge the people righteously.


10. Go ye, that are already become Proselytes unto Him, and publish every
where, in all Countries; that the Lord [ CHRIST] is the Sovereign of the World,
who alone can make it happy: For He shall settle those in peace that submit
unto his Government; and they shall not be so disturbed as they were wont, with
wars and tumults: He shall administer equal justice unto all; and neither
suffer the good to be unrewarded, nor the evil to escape unpunished.

11. Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar, and
the fullness thereof.


11. Let the whole Universe therefore be filled with joy, at this blessed news;
which the Angels themselves shall gladly receive, (I. Luke 30, 32.) much more
ought all mankind, wheresoever they are dispersed, on the Earth, or on the Sea,
and the Islands thereof, exceedingly rejoice; and fill all places with the loud
sound of their joyful praises.

12. Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the
trees of the wood rejoice.


12. Let the husbandmen, and the shepherds, and all that dwell in the fields,
leap for joy: and the woodmen and foresters shout for joy, to see the happy day
approaching; when all the Idols that are worshipped there, shall be thrown down
together with their groves.

13. Before the LORD; for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he shall
judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.


13. Let them welcome that day; and meet the Lord with forward affection, who
is coming to them: For he comes to reform the earth, and will govern mankind by
righteous and merciful Laws; and faithfully keep his word with all those that
truly observe them.

PSALM XCVII.
ARGUMENT.
Some of the Hebrews conceive (as I observed upon Psalm XC.) that Moses was the
Author of this, as well as the rest of these Psalms which want an Inscription.
And indeed he excelled in this faculty of composing Hymns, as we learn from
Exodus XV. and Deuteronomy. XXXII. and might upon some other occasion, as well as the
overthrow of Pharaoh in the red Sea, make a Song of triumph, after some of
those great victories which God gave them over their enemies. Which was a thing
in use before his time, as it appears by the fragments of ancient Songs
recorded in his Books: particularly that (...) made by some Poet among the
Amorites, after Sihon had taken Heshbon from the Moabites, to whom it formerly
belonged; wherein they triumph over their God Chemosh, as unable to deliver his
worshippers, XXI. Numb. 27, etc. And if we could be sure this Psalm was made by
Moses, I should think it to have been composed after the Israelites had
conquered Sihon and his Land: over whom they triumphed as he had done over the
former possessours of that Country. But the Psalm seems so plainly to have been
composed, in pursuance of what was said in the foregoing Psalm, that the Lord
reigns, and is King, not only over Israel, but all the earth; that one
cannot but think they had the same Author: who shows the truth of that, by the
illustrious Victories, which God, as their King, had given them over all those
that opposed them. For the eighth verse makes it manifest that this Psalm has
respect to some Conquests, they had lately made over the heathen: which, I
suppose, were no other then those which David won over diverse Nations; not long
after (1 Chronicles. XVIII. 1.) he had brought the Ark to Sion, and delivered the
foregoing Hymn to be sung, to put the Israelites in hope, and their enemies in
fear, of the great things which would ensue, upon this special presence of God
among them.

Which moved the Greeks to call this A Psalm of David, after his Land was
restored unto him: that is, after he was made Master of all those Countries,
which God anciently designed to be the inheritance of Israel. For that it
should relate to the restoring his Kingdom to him, after Absaloms rebellion, is
not probable; because the mention of Idolaters and of their gods, Ver. 7. seem
to determine it to other Countries. In the subduing of which, God, it is
likely, fought for them by some such tempest as we read of (2 Samuel V. 20, 21,
24.) whereby their enemies Armies were shat^ered, and so terrified; that they
not only fled, but left their images behind them (such was their haste) and
gave the Israelites an easy Victory over them.

But whatever was the carnal sense, it belongs, in the diviner meaning, to
Christ's triumph over the grave, and all the powers of darkness; at his
Resurrection and Ascension to his throne in heaven: as appears by those words,
which the Apostle to the Hebrews alleges out of the seventh verse, and applies
to Christ's royal power and authority over Angels. Which the Hebrew Doctors
themselves, as Kimchi confesses, take to be there intended: and may be further
justified from that exposition, which we meet withal in Midrasch Tanchuma, of
the words of the Prophet Isaiah LII. 13. Behold my servant shall prosper: He
shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high. This is the King Messiah,
says that gloss; who shall be exalted above Abraham, and extolled above Moses,
and be very high above the Angels of the Ministry.

1. THe LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of Isles be
glad thereof


1. THE Lord, it is manifest, is the Sovereign of the world: under whose happy
Government, not only we, and they who are already become subject to Him in
other places, ought to rejoice; but the most distant Countries have the
greatest reason to be glad thereof.

2. Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his throne.


2. His Majesty is most dreadful; and has appeared in great terror against
those that oppose Him: whom, as he will not wrong so, He will certainly punish;
for He maintains his Authority and supports his Government, by doing exact and
equal justice.

3. A fire goes before him, and burns up his enemies round about.


3. Let none therefore resist Him, for flames of fire proceed^ from his
presence; which make the battle too hot for his enemies: who can turn no way
but they feel them flashing in their faces.

4. His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw and trembled.


4. It was his thunder and lightning, the brightness of which the world lately
saw; and were so amazed, that shivering pains took hold upon them, as upon a
woman in her travail.

5. The hills melted like wax at the presence of the LORD: at the presence of
the LORD of the whole earth.


5. The hearts of the stoutest Kings and Captains failed them; and melted, like
wax before the fire, at this terrible appearance of the Lord: at the appearance
of Him, whose dominion extends over all the earth.

6. The heavens declare his righteousness: and all the people see his glory.


6. For He is the Lord of the heavens: which have declared by this dreadful
tempest (excited by his Angelical Ministers) his severity against his enemies;
and made all the people sensible of the incomparable splendor of his Majesty.

7. Confounded be all they that serve graven images: that boast themselves of
idols: worship him all ye gods.


7. Which may well make them all ashamed (and they shall be confounded by Him,
if they will not renounce their errors) who worship graven Images (though of
gold and silver) 2 Samuel V. 21. and boast themselves in vain gods who can do
nothing for them: Let all that are called gods, whether Princes on earth, or
Angels in heaven, bow down to Him, as the only Savior (1. Heb. 6.) and
acknowledge his supreme authority over them all.

8. Sion heard, and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced; because of
thy judgments, O LORD.


8. Jerusalem the mother City, has received the news of thy Victories with a
joyful heart: after whose example, all the other Cities of Judah are exceeding
glad, O Lord; because Thou have judged righteously, in destroying our
idolatrous enemies, and defending thy faithful servants.

9. For thou, LORD, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above
all gods.


9. Whose hearts are filled with the greater joy; because Thou, O Lord, have
manifested thy self hereby, to be the supreme and only Potentate: who rulest
over all the earth, and art infinitely superior to all that have the name of
gods.

10. Ye that love the LORD, hate evil: he preserves the souls of his saints,
he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.


10. But do not content your selves merely with this passion of joy: if you
truly love the Lord, hate every thing which you know is displeasing to Him: so
shall you have the Lord of all things for your continual keeper; who preserves
the lives of sincerely pious men, and watches over them, with such a careful
providence, that when they are in the power of the wicked, He will not suffer
them to destroy them.

11. Light is sowe^ for the righteous: and gladness for the upright in heart.


11. Be not discouraged, though the world should frown upon you; but rest
assured that God designs you, in due time, more cheerful and happy days:
which, if you continue faithful and serve Him with upright hearts, shall as
certainly come; as the corn, at last, springs up, after it has lain all winter
in the ground.

12. Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness.


12. Let all truly good men rely on this, and rejoice in their worst estate;
that they serve such a gracious Lord: Let them give thanks unto Him for his
benefits, and gratefully commemorate how kind and gracious He has been unto
them; that it may be kept in perpetual remembrance.

PSALM XCVIII.
A Psalm.
ARGUMENT.
There is no Title here but only this, A Psalm: to which the Greeks add, of
David: who it is very probable was the Author; or if he was not, it was made
by some holy man in imitation of what David says in the XCVI. (of many of
whose expressions this Psalm consists) upon occasion of some remarkable
deliverance, which God had newly granted to Israel: as an earnest of future
blessings; especially of the coming of that great blessing, the Lord Christ, to
give complete Salvation to his people.

1. O Sing unto the LORD a new song, for he has done mavelous things: his
right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.


1. O Let the new and extraordinary benefits, which the Lord has bestowed upon
us, provoke you to sing praises unto Him with fresh devotion: for He has done
stupendous things, and by his Almighty goodness alone, and incomparable
strength, has wrought salvation for those; who were as unworthy to be helped
by Him, as they were unable to help themselves.

2. The LORD has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the heathen.


2. The Lord has declared by the wonders He has done, how mighty He is to
save and deliver: He made the Gentile world apparently see, that He is the just
rewarder of all those who piously obey Him; and will not let the wicked escape
unpunished.

3. He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.


3. He has not forgot his ancient Covenant with our Forefathers: but so
faithfully performed, what his mere mercy moved Him to promise, (1. Luke 54,
72.) that all mankind have seen what our gracious God has done, and partake of
his Divine benefits.

4. Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, all the earth: make a loud noise, and
rejoice, and sing praise.


4. Let them all therefore shout for joy; let them cry aloud: and with strong
and cheerful voices sing hymns of thanks and praise unto the Lord.

5. Sing unto the LORD with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a psalm.


5. Let nothing be wanting to express your joyful sense of the goodness of the
Lord: but let the Harp accompany your songs; let the sweet sound of the Harp, I
say, and the sound of your voices be mixed together with your Psalms.

6. With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the LORD the
King.


6. And let the Trumpet also, and Cornet proclaim with a louder sound, the
exceeding greatness of your joy: while you shout with triumphant acclamations
to Him, and acknowledge the Lord to be your King.

7. Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: the world, and they that dwell
therein.


7. Let the noise of his praises be heard like thunder, throughout all the
habitable world: both among those that live on the Sea, and those that are upon
the Land.

8. Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together.


8. Let high, as well as low, applaud their happiness, and join together with
one consent; to express by all the tokens of joy, the singular pleasure and
satisfaction they feel in their hearts.

9. Before the LORD; for he comes to judge the earth: with righteousness shall
he judge the world, and the people with equity.


9. Let them meet the Lord with forward affections; who is coming to reform the
earth: and will govern mankind, by righteous and merciful Laws; distributing
to every man according to his works.

PSALM XCIX.
ARGUMENT.
The Greeks entitle David to this Psalm: which seems to have been made upon the
same occasion, and to the same end, with the three foregoing: only with these
two differences; First that from the consideration of the royal power of the
Lord (who had manifested himself by some notable conquests over his enemies, to
be the only Monarch; whose Sovereignty extends over all the world) they should
mix fear, and trembling together with that joy and exultation, to which in the
former Psalm, he had excited them: And secondly, that he does not so plainly,
as in those Psalms, prophecy of the Kingdom of the Lord Christ.

But there are many passages, as Theodoret observes, which may be applied to
the appearing of our Savior, and the infidelity of the Jews. Saint Austin, and
Saint Ambrose apply to him that passage, upon which the Roman Church builds the
lawfulness of worshipping Images, Ver. 5. where the vulgar Latin reading
adorate scabellum pedum ejus, worship his footstool, those two Fathers think
there is no way to reconcile this, with that command, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve: but by expounding this of the
flesh of Christ; which is the footstool they say, which the Psalmist exhorts
all men to worship (so far were those holy men from allowing adoration to any
thing, that is not God, or has not a personal union with Him) And indeed
Christ was represented by the Ark; which was the Divine footstool (here spoken
of,) but not to be adored, no more then the Hill on which it stood: concerning
which the Psalmist speaks, in the last Verse, just as he does of the Ark in
this; and therefore we ought to understand both passages alike (the particle in
the Hebrew, being the very same before footstool, and before Hill) and
translate them thus, worship at or before, or toward his footstool and holy
Hill: as elsewhere he speaks of worshipping toward his Temple, V. 8. CXXXVIII.
2. And so Menochius very honestly here expounds this passage, in these words;
worship in his Temple, turning your faces toward the Ark; on which is the
propitiatory, which is his footstool; since he sits on the wings of the
Cherubins.

1. THe LORD reigns, let the people tremble: he sits between the
cherubims, let the earth be moved.


1. LET the people fret and be tumultuous, if they please; it will do them no
service; for the Lord is the supreme Governor of the world whether they will
or no, and they had better with a pious fear submit themselves unto Him: Though
the whole earth should be in an uproar, we are safe and secure; for the Lord is
attended with innumerable heavenly Ministers, who are a Guard to his faithful
worshippers.

2. The LORD is great in Sion, and he is high above all people.


2. The Lord, whose Palace is in Sion, is transcendently great: there is no
power on earth able to oppose Him; who infinitely surpasses the united strength
of all people.

3. Let them praise thy great and terrible name: for it is holy.


3. Let them all therefore praise and reverently acknowledge thy mighty and
dreadful Majesty: for that alone is every way most excellent, and has no
equal; and therefore worthy of all veneration.

4. The Kings strength also loves judgment, thou do establish equity, thou
executest judgment, and righteousness in Jacob.


4. For, though none can resist Him yet, He is not a King that uses his power
to wrong or oppress his Subjects; but to do them right, and give them relief,
in which He delights: This is thy character, O Lord, who have established most
equal Laws among us; and hitherto governed the seed of Jacob, with exact
justice and singular mercy.

5. Exalt ye the LORD our God, and worship at his footstool: for he is holy.


5. Do you therefore, above all other people, extol the Lord our God, both in
your thoughts, affections and words; and, turning your faces toward the Ark of
his presence, prostrate your selves before his Majesty, in token of your
absolute subjection to Him: For He is incomparably above all other Beings, and
the proper object of your adoration.

6. Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his
name: they called upon the LORD, and he answered them.


6. Thus did Moses and Aaron, two of his principal, and most famous Ministers,
(XXXII. Exodus 11. XVI. Numb. 45, 46.) and thus did Samuel, one of his greatest
Prophets, that were wont to intercede for you, (1 Samuel VII. 5, 8, 9. VIII. 5.
XII. 19.) These holy men fell down before Him, to make their humble
supplications to Him; and He gave them what they desired.

7. He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies, and the
ordinance that he gave them.


7. He spoke to them in a familiar manner, telling them his mind, out of a
pillar of cloud; wherein He appeared to them (XXXIII. Exodus 9, 10. XII. Numb.
5. XVI. 42. 1 Samuel III. 10.) and they, like faithful servants of his,
conformed themselves to his precepts, by which He testified his will to them;
and worshipped him after that manner, that He appointed them.

8. Thou answeredst them, O LORD our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them,
though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.


8. Whereby they obtained great favor with Thee, O Lord our God; for when they
prayed to Thee, Thou fulfilledst their petitions: passing by, for their sakes,
the sins of those who had highly offended Thee; but taking a most severe
vengeance on all those, who contemned their authority, and were contriving how
to depose them, XII. Numb. 2, 9, 10. XVI. 3, 31, 35. 1 Samuel VIII. 7, 8, 9, etc.

9. Exalt the LORD our God, and worship at his holy hill: for the LORD our God
is holy.


9. Imitate therefore the piety of those admirable men; and raise your
thoughts, and affections, and voices, to extol and magnify the Lord our God,
as much as you are able; for you can never do it enough: And in token of your
absolute subjection to Him, go and prostrate your selves before Him, at his
house on the holy hill of Sion; for the Lord our God is incomparably above all
other Beings, and alone worthy of your adoration.

PSALM C.
A Psalm of Praise.
ARGUMENT.
There is no other Psalm has the like Title with this; which is called a Psalm
of Praise: or rather of Thanksgiving, and acknowledgment, for Divine blessings;
as the word is translated below, Verse 4. and in most other places. For which
reason, I suppose, it is, that the Hebrews imagine (as the Chaldee Paraphrase,
as well as other of their Authors, tells us) it was peculiarly appointed to be
sung, when their sacrifices of thanksgiving were offered; mentioned VII. Levit.
12, 13. The Companies also or Quires of them, who gave thanks to God, are
called by this Name, XII. Nehem. 31, 38. Which makes it probable that the
Levites sang this Song upon that occasion: which the Greeks think was made by
David: who invites all the world to join with the Israelites, in the service of
Him, who was kind and gracious to them beyond expression Accordingly we
Christians now properly use it, in acknowledgment of God's wonderful love to
us in Christ: by whom we offer up continually spiritual sacrifices; for
redeeming us by the sacrifice He made of himself, for making the world anew,
and creating us again unto good works; according to his faithful promises,
which we may depend upon for ever.

I do not know but the word (...) made Ver. 3. may be used here as it is, 1 Samuel XII. 6. for advancing, raising or preferring them (as He is there said to
have done Moses and Aaron) making them to be what they then were, a famous
people, in a good Land: which seems to agree best with the following words, and
not we our selves (and therefore I have not omitted that sense) For to deny
that we created our selves, is altogether needless; but that it is not to be
ascribed to our industry or wit, that we are raised to a happy condition, is a
proper expression of humility.

1. MAKE a joyful noise unto the LORD, all ye lands.


1. LET all the people of the earth lift up their voices, in triumphant Songs
to the honor of the Lord; who deserves all our praises.

2. Serve the LORD with gladness: come before his presence with singing.


2. Make the service of the Lord your delight, nay greatest pleasure; and when
you approach into his Tabernacle, shout for joy that you are admitted into his
blessed presence, to praise Him with your cheerful hymns.

3. Know ye that the LORD he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.


3. Consider that the Lord, whom you worship, is the Creator and the Governor
of the world; who gave us our Being, and all the good things we enjoy: His we
are, and by his power and goodness, not our own, we are become so great and
mighty a Nation; whom out of his own mere good will alone, He has made his
peculiar people, of whom He takes a tender care.

4. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be
thankful unto him, and bless his name.


4. When you enter therefore into the gates of his Sanctuary, present Him, not
merely with the sacrifices of beasts but, with the most acceptable sacrifice of
hearty Thanksgiving; and, as you stand in his Courts, attending on Him, cease
not to sing his praises: Thank Him, I say, for all his benefits, and praise his
incomparable perfections.

5. For the LORD is good; his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures to
all generations.


5. For as his power is transcendent, so is his goodness; as appears by his
never-failing bounty toward us, and his steadfast faithfulness to his word: for
the mercy promised to our Forefathers He has exactly fulfilled in our days;
and will continue to all succeeding generations.

PSALM CI.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
The Title tells us who made this Psalm; and the matter of it is so plain, that
any body may see it is a pious resolution of David to govern first himself, and
then his Court, and then his Kingdom, with so much care; that the good might
expect all favor from him, but no wicked man, of any sort, have the least
countenance or encouragement.

The only difficulty is to know, when he composed it; whether before, or after
he was settled in his Kingdom. The first words of it seem to countenance those,
who think he was possessed of it; and newly entered upon the Government: which
he thankfully acknowledges. But the words that follow, verse 2. O when will Thou come unto me, seem to justify their opinion who think he was now under
Readiness persecution: yet, having confidence in God's promises (which he longed
to see fulfilled) made this religious Vow, of being a good King; and proposed
to himself an excellent form and manner of life, when God should be pleased to
perform them. To reconcile both these, there is a middle way lies open to every
ones view, that reads his history. For upon the death of Saul he was
immediately promoted to the Kingdom; though not entirely: but resolved then
with himself how well he would govern; when God should make him King over all
Israel, as He had done over Judah. And so I shall order my Paraphrase,
supposing him to reign now in Hebron, (2 Samuel II. 1, 2, 3, 4.) and expecting to
reign in Jerusalem, (2 Samuel V. 3, 4, 5.) which I presume he here calls the City
of God, Ver. 8. because there he intended to settle the Ark, as well as to fix
his Court; when he should be possessed of it.

That passage indeed has induced some to think, that he composed this Psalm,
after he had made an attempt to bring the Ark thither; but failing in it, (2 Samuel VI. 9, 10.) sighs here for its enjoyment. Which I shall not dispute;
because I would not prolong this preface unnecessarily. It is sufficient in my
judgment to say; that it does not seem likely, he would defer this resolution
so long after he was installed in his Kingdom. For it required time, to prepare
a place for the reception of the Ark, suitable to the Majesty it represented.

1. I Will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O LORD, will I sing.


1. I Will never forget, but celebrate with perpetual praises, that mercy which
has raised me from a low condition, unto the Throne; and that just punishment,
which I see inflicted upon all my opposers: both which I ascribe, O Lord, to
Thee alone, and not to my virtue or valor; and therefore to Thee will I sing
my grateful Hymns.

2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; O when will thou come unto
me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.


2. Nor will I satifie my self merely with Songs of praise; but study, with all
diligence, integrity of life, and purity of manners: O when will Thou perfect,
what Thou have begun for me? and settle me peaceably in my Kingdom? Then I
shall be able to live more regularly, then now in this state of war and
confusion, (2 Samuel III. 1, 39.) and so I resolve to do; sincerely endeavoring
to make my self an absolute pattern of piety, and virtue to all my Court.

3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that
turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.


3. No pretended reasons of state and politic ends, shall make me so much as
project any thing against the Law; to which I will ever tie my self: For I
abhor the practices of those, who decline that Rule, to pursue their own
private desires; no such corrupt principles shall be entertained in my mind.

4. A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person


4. I will turn him instantly out of my service, who shall dare to suggest to
me any crooked counsels: I will have no familiarity with him, much less make
him my favorite; who makes no conscience how he compasses his ends.

5. Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has
an high look, and a proud heart, will not I suffer.


5. I will be so far from listening to their private whispers, who, by secret
calumnies and detractions, endeavor to supplant their fellow servants; that I
will severely punish, and banish them my Court: nor will I endure those, whose
pride makes them overlook all others, as if they were another sort of
Creatures; or whose unsatiable covetousness and ambition, makes them study
their own advancement, more then the public good.

6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with
me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.


6. I will look out for trusty persons, men fearing God, and of clear
integrity; and, in what part of the Country soever I find them, make them of my
Privy Council: and no man shall bear any other Office in my Court, but he that
lives unblameably.

7. He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that tells
lies, shall not tarry in my sight.


7. No subtle knave, that is made up of shifts and tricks, or that devises
cunning cheats to oppress my subjects, shall remain in my service: Though he
have craftily got into it, under a guise of simplicity; yet no false informer,
flatterer, or any other sort of Liar, shall continue in my favor.

8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land: that I may cut off all
wicked doers from the city of the LORD.


8. As soon as ever I am settled in my Throne, I will use my utmost diligence
to reform the whole Nation; especially the place of thy peculiar residence,
which ought to be an example to the rest of the Kingdom: taking care that all
offenders be severely punished in the Courts of Justice; and, if there be no
other remedy, cutting off those evil members, who have got an incurable habit
of doing wickedly.

PSALM CII.
A Prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his
complaint before the Lord.
ARGUMENT.
A Prayer composed by some pious person (toward the latter end of the Captivity
of Babylon, or rather presently after their return from thence, to their own
Country (Ver. 13, 14.) who was extremely afflicted, and even overwhelmed with
grief, and trouble; to see the Temple still lie in its rubbish, and the
rebuilding of it hindered by many enemies. This was the cause of those sad
complaints and lamentations, wherein he takes the liberty to represent their
condition unto the Lord; and thereby give some ease to his oppressed spirit:
which began to lift up it self in some comfortable hopes, when he considered,
both the faithfulness of God to his promises; and the honor it would be to
Him, when the Nations round about should see their wonderful restoration
happily completed, and thereby be invited to embrace their Religion. Which
proved a lively emblem of the coming of the Gentiles into the Church of Christ:
the eternity of whose Kingdom is here prophesied of, in the conclusion of the
Psalm. Which, as Theodoret well expresses it, may serve for any man's use, who
wrestles with any great calamity; and implores the Divine favor, for his help
and deliverance. It may be applied also to his sad condition, who groans under
the burden of his sins; and cries for mercy: being the Fifth among those Seven
which are called Penitential Psalms.

1. HEar my prayer, O LORD, and let my cry come unto thee.


1. REject not my humble supplication, O Lord; but graciously admit the earnest
request, which, with lamentable cries, I present unto thy Majesty.

2. Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble, incline thine
ear unto me: in the day when I call, answer me speedily.


2. The distress wherein I am is exceeding great; which will move Thee, I hope,
to moderate thy anger, and not absolutely refuse my petition: but rather to
grant me the more favorable audience, and to send me the speedier relief; when
I implore it in a time of the sorest calamity.

3. For my days are consumed like smoke: and my bones are burnt as an hearth.


3. For my days are spent as dismally, as if I lived and breathed in smoke; and
the anguish I suffer is so sharp that it penetrates to my very bones: and makes
them as parcht and dry, as the fire does the hearth.

4. My heart is smitten and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat my
bread.


4. My vital spirits are exhausted; and flag like the grass, when it is struck
with a pestilent blast: For, together with my appetite, I have lost even the
thoughts of my necessary food.

5. By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin.


5. Sadness has seized on me to such a degree, that I do nothing but groan and
sigh: which has wasted me away to skin and bone.

6. I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the desert.


6. I take no delight in the company of my friends; but seek for lonesome
places, like a Pelican in the wilderness: where I may bemoan my self, like the
Bittern in the desert.

7. I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the housetop.


7. Grief and sorrow banish sleep from mine eyes: and make me like those
solitary birds, which spend the night on the tops of houses, in doleful
shrieks and cries.

8. Mine enemies reproach me all the day: and they that are mad against me, are
sworn against me.


8. This has exposed me to the scorn of my enemies, who do nothing but upbraid
me with my misery: and, not content therewith, are so furiously bent upon my
ruin; that they have entered into a combination, and sworn they will destroy me.

9. For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping:


9. Which has still more increased my affliction, and made me lie down in the
ashes: where, while I mourn and weep, they mingle themselves with my bread; as
tears do with my drink.

10. Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou have lifted me up,
and cast me down.


10. Because thy anger still continues in great severity against us; for after
Thou had lifted me up in glorious hopes (I. Ezra 5. II. Ezra 68. III. 10.)
Thou have dashed them all in pieces (IV. Ezra 4, 24.) and thereby given me the
sorer fall.

11. My days are like a shadow that declineth: and I am withered like grass.


11. And whilst I wait for better times, my life declines apace; like a shadow,
which being come near to its utmost length, is ready to vanish: For I have very
little strength remaining; but droop and languish, like the dried grass; which
is ripe for the mowers hand.

12. But thou, O LORD, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance unto all
generations.


12. All my comfort is, that though I die, Thou abidest to all eternity; and
can hereafter remedy all these evils, which Thou do not think fit to
redress at present: and wilt, I am confident; for all generations have
transmitted down unto us, the memorial of thy faithfulness, and the glorious
things Thou have done for thy people.

13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for the time to favor her,
yea the set time is come.


13. It will not be long, before Thou do take pity upon the desolations of
Sion, and raise her out of her ruins: For the time prefixed for her punishment
being expired, (XXIX. Jer. 10, 11.) it is the season now, the appointed season,
for thy mercy in her restoration.

14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof.


14. For her scattered stones are far more dear to thy pious Worshippers, then
the goodliest palaces in Babylon: and therefore they cannot look upon her dust
and rubbish, without the most sensible grief and commiseration.

15. So the heathen shall fear the name of the LORD: and all the kings of the
earth thy glory.


15. Especially when they consider, how thy glory suffers thereby: whereas the
Nations who now contemn Thee, will stand in awe of Thee; O Lord, all their
Kings and Princes will reverence thy glorious power, the fame of which now
seems to lie buried in her ruins;

16. When the LORD shall build up Sion, he shall appear in his glory.


16. When they shall see Sion rebuilt (which the Lord alone can bring about)
and his glorious Majesty there worshipped with the ancient solemnities:

17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.


17. And the prayers of miserable captives, who were stripped of all, prevail
with Him, not only for their liberty; but for their entire restitution to
their former splendor.

18. This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which
shall be created, shall praise the LORD.


18. This wonderful deliverance shall never be forgotten, but remain upon
record to the following generation: who shall transmit the memory of it to
their posterity; that they may also look upon themselves, as a people created
anew to praise the Lord.

19. For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary: from heaven did
the LORD behold the earth:


19. Because, in much mercy, He has been pleased to preserve a miserable
Nation, from utter destruction: and, though He be infinitely exalted above all
our thoughts, yet the Lord has graciously condescended to mind the afflicted
condition of this distressed Country:

20. To hear the groaning of the prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to
death;


20. And to be moved by our groans to deliver us out of a sad captivity: and to
revive us, when we had reason to look upon our selves as dead and hopeless.

21. To declare the name of the LORD in Sion, and his praise in Jerusalem:


21. That we might go, and recount in his Temple the famous things which He
has done: and make the holy City sound with the praises of his power, goodness
and truth; which He has declared in our restoration.

22. When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms to serve the LORD.


22. When all the people shall be gathered together, there to worship the
Divine Majesty: and other Kingdoms join with us unanimously in his service.

23. He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.


23. I had hopes to have lived to see this blessed time; and thought I had been
in the way to it (III. Ezra 8, etc.) But He has stopped our vigorous beginnings,
(IV. Ezra 4.) and thereby so sorely afflicted me, that I feel I am like to fall
short of my expectations.

24. I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are
throughout all generations.


24. Though I prayed most earnestly to Him, and said; O my God, who have so
graciously begun our deliverance, take me not away before it be completely
finished; but let me see thy promise fulfilled, which, Thou who die not (as
we do) I am sure wilt not fail to make good:

25. Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the
work of thy hands.


25. For it cannot be too hard for Thee, to raise Sion out of her ruins; who
have, many ages ago, created this goodly fabric of heaven and earth (by thy
eternal Word, I. Heb. 10.)

26. They shall perish, but thou shall endure: yea, all of them shall wax old
like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.


26. And Thou do neither decay, nor alter, in process of time, as thy
creatures do; some of which shall perish, but Thou shall eternally subsist; and
all of them shall grow old, like our garments with long wearing: even the
heavens themselves, which now enwrap the earth, as our clothes do our bodies,
shall be folded up, (I. Heb. 12.) and laid aside, like a tattered garment, when
Thou shall command that alteration.

27. But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.


27. But Thou (and thy Word) art still the very same: and shall always continue
so, without any, the least, variation.

28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee.


28. Yet all that I conclude from hence is only this; that, though I do not
live to see our perfect restoration yet, according to thy unalterable purpose,
the Temple and Jerusalem shall be rebuilt; and the children of thy servants,
who now are in great distress, be peaceably settled there: yea their posterity
after them, remain unmovable in thy favor; and enjoy the tokens of thy Divine
presence among them.

PSALM CIII.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
The Title tells us this Psalm is one of David's: and the third, fourth and
fifth Verses may satisfy us, that he composed it, after his recovery, from a
dangerous sickness, to such a vigorous health; as the Eagles have, when they
renew their plumes. To that he alludes Ver. 5. as Euthymius and Saint Hierom
understand it. The latter of which says, upon XL. Isaiah, that he had often
taught, the Eagles do no otherway return to youthfulness, when they are old;
but only mutatione pennarum by change of their feathers. I have expressed this
a little more largely then ordinary, in the Paraphrase (as I have done in the
rest of the Psalm) to fit it the better to their use now, that have escaped the
like danger: who should take occasion, when they thank God for such a blessing,
to imitate David; in making a thankful commemoration of the rest of his
mercies: both to him and to others; both in the present and in past ages. And
the more to excite devout souls to this, and that I might make their
thankfulness the more affectionate (if they please to make use of this Hymn for
that purpose) I have often repeated the beginning of the Psalm, which I think
refers to the whole: and likewise put it into a little different form (of a
soul actually praising God) without the least alteration of the sense.

1. BLess the LORD, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name.


1. BLessed, for ever blessed, be the Lord of life and health, and all other
blessings; Blessed be his eternal power, wisdom and goodness: with my whole
heart, do I bless Him; with my most ardent love, and the devoutest affections
of my soul.

2. Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.


2. Which shall be every day thus employed, and praise his name, with continual
pleasure: I will never forget (how should thou prove so ungrateful, O my
soul! as not) to acknowledge the inestimable benefits I have received from his
bounty; which are more then thought can number.

3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: who heals all thy diseases.


3. More particularly, I render Thee, O Lord, my most hearty thanks, for thy
late mercies vouchsafed to me: Blessed be thy merciful kindness, that after a
short correction for my faults, Thou have graciously pardoned them; and healed
all the sores and grievous wounds, which they had made.

4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies.


4. Blessed be God, who has saved me from death; and not only spared my life,
but surrounded it most graciously with, I know not how, many benefits; which
make it exceeding delightful to me. (I owe my friends, lovers and
acquaintance, my careful attendants, my warm and quiet habitation, the
plentiful estate Thou have given me, the liberal provision Thou make for me,
with all the rest of thy mercies, to the bowels of thy tender compassions
toward me.)

5. Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is renewed
like the eagles.


5. Blessed be thy almighty Goodness, that my, mouth (which lately disgusted
all things, or was restrained from what is desired, or was prescribed that
which was disgustfull to it) can now relish its food again; and is satisfied
with many good things: I can never sufficiently bless thy Goodness, who by this
means do restore my strength, and make my youth and freshness return like
the Eagles. (O that I may with fresh delight and joy be still praising Thee!
and be lifted up to heaven, (as they are when they have renewed their plumes)
in more vigorous love, and affectionate desires and endeavors; to employ all
my renewed strength in thy faithful service.)

6. The LORD executes righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.


6. Nor am I alone, obliged to my gracious Lord for his singular favor to me:
but, blessed be his name, He relieves all those who suffer wrong; and does
justice upon their oppressors, who are too mighty for them.

7. He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.


7. Moses and the rest of our Forefathers, are witnesses of this: whom the Lord
delivered, in a stupendous manner, out of the house of bondage.

8. The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.


8. And by other methods of his Providence toward them, and dealings with
them, declared how bountiful his blessed nature is; and how ready to forgive:
forbearing long when men deserve to be punished; and soon releasing them from
their pain, when they heartily repent of their folly.

9. He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.


9. He does not love, blessed be his Name, to be always chastising us for our
faults: And when He does chastise us, He neither loves to prolong our miseries;
nor to inflict them proportionable to our deserts.

10. He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.


10. No, Blessed be his holy Name, there is mercy even in our punishments: our
sufferings are never so great as our sins; but we might justly suffer a great
deal more, then we do, for our faults.

11. For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him.


11. And were we never so obedient, there is not a greater disproportion
between the vast circumference of the heavens, and this little spot of earth;
then there is between his mercies toward us, and our small services.

12. As far as the east is from the west: so far has he removed our
transgressions from us.


12. To those mercies alone it is to be ascribed, that we are not bemoaning our
selves under innumerable miseries: but He has quite taken away his wrath from
us; and, adored be his goodness, perfectly remitted the punishment due to our
manifold offenses.

13. Like as a father pitieth his children: so the LORD pitieth them that fear
him.


13. O what bowels of mercy are these! No father can be more indulgent and
tenderhearted, to his returning children; then the Lord, blessed be his Name,
is to those who so reform by his chastisements, as to fear hereafter to offend
Him.

14. For he knows our frame: he remembers that we are dust.


14. He easily relents and takes compassion on them: considering how frail he
has made them; and how soon of themselves they will moulder into the dust, out
of which He took them.

15. As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes.


15. For what is man that the Almighty should contend with him? He looks fresh
and fair; but alas! is as feeble as the grass, and as a flower in the field;
whose beauty is far greater then its strength.

16. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall
know it no more.


16. Many accidents snatch him away, even in his prime: Just as the biting
wind, to which the field flowers are exposed, blasts them on a sudden; and they
spring up no more, in the place that was adorned with them.

17. But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him: and his righteousness unto childrens children:


17. O how much does this magnify the wonderful mercy of our God! who designs
to be everlastingly kind (blessed be his Goodness) to such short-lived
creatures as we are: rewarding the faithful services of a few years, with
eternal life to our selves; and with many blessings to our posterity, in future
generations.

18. To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments
to do them.


18. There is no doubt of this; which has been verified in those who have
sincerely kept their faith with Him; and, not only promised but, constantly
performed the obedience they owed Him.

19. The LORD has prepared his throne in the heavens: and his kingdom rules
over all.


19. For none can hinder Thee, O most mighty Lord, from being as kind as Thou
please: who art the universal Monarch; the blessed and only Potentate; to
whom, not only the greatest men on earth but, the highest powers in heaven are
subject.

20. Bless the LORD, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his
commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.


20. Let the Angels therefore, who know his greatness, power and gracious
Providence, better then I, bless his holy Name: Let those mighty ones, whose
strength surpasses all the powers on earth, and yet never dispute his sacred
commands, give praise unto Him, with all their might; and with the same
cheerfulness, wherewith they obey his word.

21. Bless ye the LORD, all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his that do his
pleasure.


21. Let the whole company of heaven, all the several hosts of those glorious
creatures, who have been employed by His Majesty so many ways for our good, and
understand how much we are beholden to his love; speak good of his Name, and
bless his Mercy, both to themselves and unto us.

22. Bless the LORD, all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the
LORD, O my soul.


22. Yea let every creature throughout the wide world, proclaim as well as it
is able, the loving kindness of the Lord: let none of them be silent, but all
with one consent bless his holy Name: And thou, O my soul, be sure thou never
forget to make one; O fail not to bear thy part in this joyful quire, that
daily sing his praise.

PSALM CIV.
ARGUMENT.
The foregoing and the following Psalm being certainly composed by David, the
Greeks, and from them several other ancient interpreters, have ascribed this
also to the same Author. For which they had this further reason; that it
begins (as Aben Ezra observes) just as the foregoing Psalm ends: and celebrates
the mighty power and goodness of God, in the fabric of the world; as the CIII.
does his benefits to himself, and to the rest of the children of men.

As for the occasion of it, we may look upon it as a probable opinion, that
when David thought of building a House for the Divine Service, and God sent
Nathan to forbid him; (2 Samuel VII. 5.) he fell not long after into the
contemplation of the Majesty of God; who having built this great world, as his
Temple, needed none of his erecting; though He would be pleased to accept one
for the burning Sacrifice before Him, as Solomon afterward speaks 2 Chronicles. II.
6. To strengthen this conjecture of mine, it may be observed; that he begins
this Psalm, with such an Admiration of God's most excellent perfection, as we
meet withal in David's prayer; immediately after God had certified him of his
love toward him, though he would not let him build Him an House 2 Samuel VII.
22. Thou art great, O Lord, for there is none like unto Thee. In the same
manner he says here, O Lord my God, Thou art very great: as he proceeds to
demonstrate, from his wonderful works. And first he begins with the Heavens,
the Clouds and the Angels: and then comes down to the Earth, the Sea, the
Mountains, Valleys, Fountains and other inferior things: Which depend so much
upon the Sun, the Moon and heavenly Bodies; that all of them together declare
the most admirable wisdom of Him by whom they were composed: and should excite
all mankind to his perpetual praises.

1. BLess the LORD, O my soul: O LORD my God, thou art very great, thou art
clothed with honor and majesty.


1. STir up thy self, O my Soul, with all thy might to meditate the praises of
the Lord. For the highest of all our thoughts are infinitely below thy
Greatness, O Lord, my most gracious God: who have shown in thy most admirable
works, the surpassing excellence of thy Majesty; which we can never worthily
celebrate with all our praises.

2. Who coverest thy self with light, as with a garment: who stretchest out the
heavens like a curtain.


2. The light, which dazles our eyes with its splendor, is the royal robe,
wherein thy invisible and incomprehensible brightness appears unto us: and the
spacious heavens are the royal Pavilion, which thy Sovereign power has
extended, like a Canopy, for thy Majesty, in this great Palace of the world.

3. Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds
his chariot, who walks upon the wings of the wind.


3. The floor of whose Chambers, which the Lord has laid in the upper region
of the Air; O how highly is it advanced above the top of the stateliest piles
that are raised by earthly Monarchs: whose pompous Chariots (whereof they
boast) fall infinitely short of those glorious Clouds, wherein He makes Himself
present to us; as their swiftest Horses are slow-paced, in comparison with the
quick motion, more speedy then the wind, wherewith He visits every part of his
Dominion.

4. Who makes his angels spirits: his ministers a flaming fire.


4. Into which He sends his Angels (and what King is there that has such noble
Ministers?) sometimes in vehement winds, and sometime in lightning and thunder;
whereby they execute his royal pleasure.

5. Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for
ever.


5. Who has settled the massy globe of earth, even in the liquid air, upon
such firm foundations; that none of those storms and tempests, which beat upon
it from without, nor any commotions from within, can ever stir it out of the
place He has fixed for it.

6. Thou coveredst it with the deep, as with a garment: the waters stood above
the mountains.


6. It was all covered over at the first with waters (I. Genesis 2.) which were so
deep, that there was no appearance of the highest Mountains.

7. At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.


7. Till thy omnipotent word charged them to retire (I. Genesis 9.) at which they
started back, and suddenly shrunk away; as an affrighted Slave does, when he
hears the thunder of his Masters threatenings, if his commands be not obeyed.

8. They go up by the mountains: they go down by the valleys unto the place
which thou have founded for them.


8. Immediately the dry land was seen; part of which (by thy wonderful
contrivance, O Lord) rose up in lofty hills; and the rest sunk down in lowly
valleys: where Thou have cut channels, for the waters to run into the main
Ocean; the place Thou have appointed for them.

9. Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over: that they turn not again
to cover the earth.


9. And there, though they restlesly toss and swell yet, they cannot get over
the shores, wherein Thou have enclosed them: nor shall they ever recover their
former liberty, to overflow the earth again.

10. He sends the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.


10. But still, such is the admirable Providence of the Lord, they climb,
through the hollow places of the earth, up the steepest parts of it; and there
break out in springs: which fall down into the valleys, to make brooks and
rivers, that run between the hills; which, on either side, send into them fresh
supplies to enlarge their streams.

11. They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their
thirst.


11. Which afford, not only to us but to all the beasts of the earth such
abundant refreshment, when they are dry; that even the dull Asses, who live in
parched deserts, find them out to quench their thirst.

12. By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing
among the branches.


12. The birds of the air also delight to resort thither: where, having wet
their throats, they sit and chaunt their various notes; among the thick boughs
of the trees, which grow upon the banks.

13. He waters the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the
fruit of thy works.


13. As for the hills, which constantly thus enrich the lower grounds, He
waters them from the regions above: whence dews distill, and showers of rain
come pouring down, by thy mavelous contrivance, O Lord, unto the satisfaction
of them, and of all the rest of the earth.

14. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of
man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth:


14. O bless the Lord, my Soul, who, by this means, provideth the beasts with
grass and hay; and us with all variety of herbs, and roots, and fruit and
pulse: which He causes to sprout out of the earth; that we may never want what
is necessary for our food, or for our physic.

15. And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to
shine, an bread which strengthens man's heart.


15. But rather take our pleasure, and delight in the rich wines, which He
produces to cheer the drooping spirits of miserable men: together with oil to
anoint their heads; and bread to recruit their strength, when it is spent with
toil and labor.

16. The trees of the LORD are full of sap: the cedars of Lebanon which he has
planted.


16. Blessed be the Lord, who by this means also supplies, with abundant
nourishment, the largest trees; which are not planted by the art, nor watered
by the care of men, but by his almighty Providence: who makes whole Forests of
them grow, as the Cedars in Libanus do, even upon the most barren and stony
Mountains.

17. Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir-trees are her
house.


17. In these trees the birds both small and great, build themselves convenient
habitations: and some of them (as the Stork, for instance, who seats her nest
on the top of lofty Pines and Fir-trees) with admirable artifice.

18. The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats, and the rocks for the
conies.


18. And with no less safety the wild Goats deposite their young, in the top of
those craggy Mountains; whither they can climb as easily, as the birds fly to
the tops of trees: and other feeble creatures creep into the rocks; and there
lie secure from the violence, that stronger beasts would offer to them.

19. He appoints the moon for seasons; the sun knows his going down.


19. By his most wise contrivance, the Moon has her full, and her wane: and
the Sun does not always shine; but observes a constant time for its going down.

20. Thou make darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth


20. And then darkness covering the face of the earth, and inviting us to rest,
gives the wolves, and other wild beasts of the Forest (such is thy care, O
Lord, of all creatures) who were afraid to venture abroad before, security and
confidence; to come out of their lurking places, and seek their food.

21. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.


21. Which the ravening young Lions then meet withal; falling upon their prey
with a horrible noise: whereby they express the eagerness of their hunger;
which is not so sharp and devouring, but, by the Divine Providence, it finds
full satisfaction before the morning.

22. The sun arises, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in
their dens.


22. When the Sun again appearing, and rouzing us out of our sleep, they all
return with one consent; and lay themselves down in their several dens.

23. Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening.


23. And so man, refreshed by the nights repose, goes forth, without any
danger, about his business in the fields: and continues his labors, till the
night call him to rest again.

24. O LORD, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all:
the earth is full of thy riches.


24. O eternal Lord! how many and how great are thy works? and with what
admirable wisdom have Thou contrived them all? If we look no further then this
Earth, what astonishing variety of good things do we behold, wherewith Thy
bounty has enriched it?

25. So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts.


25. And this great and spacious Sea also, which seems to embrace the Earth in
its arms, is no less full of thy wonderful works: For there swim Fish without
number; some of which astonish us, as much with the art Thou have shown in
their small bodies, as others do with the prodigious greatness of their bulk.

26. There go the ships; there is that leviathan, whom thou have made to play
therein.


26. There the Ships sail as swiftly, as the Fishes swim; fetching us the
riches both of Sea and Land: and there that great Leviathan (in forming whom
Thou have shown thy mighty power) finds room enough to tumble up and down; and
sport himself, in his absolute dominion over all that the Sea contains.

27. These wait all upon thee: that thou may give them their meat in due
season.


27. O how liberal is thy Goodness, which provides convenient sustenance for
such a vast world of creatures? Every one of which, though they know not their
Benefactour, is duly and seasonably supplied, with the food they seek, by the
care Thou take of them.

28. That thou give them, they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good.


28. For they only gather what Thou, without any care of theirs, dispensest to
them: And Thou art not sparing of thy blessings; but have made a most
plentiful provision, which Thou scatterest every where for them.

29. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled; thou take away their breath,
they die, and return to their dust.


29. If it fail at any time, by the suspense of thy heavenly influences, all
things look most ruefully: they grow weak, nay die; and are dissolved into the
elements out of which they were made.

30. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the
face of the earth.


30. But then Thou sendest forth again thy quickening power; whereby new ones
are produced, in the room of those that are dead: just as the earth, after a
sharp winter has made it bare, looks fresh and green again at the return of
the spring.

31. The glory of the LORD shall endure for ever: the LORD shall rejoice in his
works.


31. Thus the world is still as full, as ever it was; and all future ages shall
praise, as well as we, the same power, and wisdom, and goodness of the Lord:
which appears so gloriously in all his works, that He himself is still pleased,
and delighted in the continuance of them; as He was at first in their
contrivance, 1. Genesis 31.

32. He looks on the earth, and it trembles; he touches the hills, and they
smoke.


32. Else they would all soon vanish, and come to nothing: for at his presence
the very earth trembles; and the mountains, as our Fathers saw at mount Sinai,
are full of fire and smoke.

33. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise unto my
God, while I have my being.


33. I will never cease therefore to sing the praises of the Lord; who as He
created, so supports and maintains the whole fabric of heaven and earth, and
all the creatures contained in them: And I will never forget his particular
kindness to me, among the rest; but acknowledge to my very last breath, the
innumerable benefits I have received from his bounty.

34. My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the LORD.


34. With such affection will I praise Him; that all my thankful meditations
and discourses, shall be, I hope, no less pleasing to Him, then they shall be
to my self: who will take the highest satisfaction, in thinking and speaking of
the Goodness of the Lord; from whom I shall still receive more abundant cause
to rejoice in Him.

35. Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more: bless thou the LORD, O my soul. Praise ye the LORD.


35. But as for them, whose only pleasure it is to satisfy their brutish
lusts, and abuse the many good things they enjoy, (either denying, or never
acknowledging Him who is the donor of them) they shall utterly perish; and be
no longer the care of that Providence, to which they are so ungrateful; O my
Soul never imitate their impiety, or negligence; but be excited thereby to the
greater diligence, in praising thy great Creator and Benefactour. And let all
those, who have any sense of Him, stir up themselves and join with me in his
praises.

PSALM CV.
ARGUMENT.
Though this Psalm have no Title, yet we are assured by what we read in the 1 Chronicles. XVI. 8, etc. that the first part of it, at least (to the end of Ver.
15.) was made by David; and delivered by Him to Asaph and his Brethren, for the
constant service of God in the Tabernacle: when, after several Victories over
the Philistines, (1 Chr. XIV.) he had settled the Ark of God in Sion. And it is
most probable that he afterward enlarged this Psalm (for who else would
adventure to do it?) that it might be a more complete commemoration of all the
mercies of God, toward their Nation; from the days of Abraham to their taking
possession of the Land of Canaan. Into which he shows, their gracious Lord
conducted them by so many miraculous providence, in several ages (according to
his faithful promise, made to Abraham his faithful Servant) that it deserved
their most hearty acknowledgments: to which he excites them, by ten several
expressions, in the five first verses of the Psalm.

To which the Greeks praefix an Hallelujah (for they take the last word of the
foregoing Psalm, and set it on the head of this) as a note how much they were
obliged to praise the Lord, according to that exhortation; when they remembered,
in this Psalm, the benefits, that He had bestowed upon their Forefathers: which
were sufficient to excite and whet their minds, to the imitation of their
virtue.

And it may serve to admonish the new people of God, (as Theodoret speaks) that
is, us Christians, how much we ought to rejoice in God's goodness to us; and
how dangerous it is to be ungrateful to Him: which provoked Him to deprive the
Jews of that fatherly care which He had taken of their Ancestors.

1. O Give thanks unto the LORD; call upon his name; make known his deeds among
the people.


1. STir up your selves, all ye that are here assembled, to make your most
grateful acknowledgments unto the great Lord; who is pleased to come, and
dwell among you: never approach his presence to make your petitions to Him, but
join his praises together with them; and proclaim to all the people round
about, what great things He has done for you, and for your Forefathers.

2. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works.


2. Sing his praise with a cheerful voice, and with all the Instruments of
Music: and let the subject of your hymns, and of your ordinary discourse, be
his many mavelous acts; of which let not one be forgotten.

3. Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the LORD.


3. For nothing can be so great an honor to you, as that you are the servants
of such a mighty Lord; who infinitely transcends all other Beings: triumph
therefore, and make your boast of this, as a greater happiness then all worldly
goods; let it fill the hearts of all his faithful worshippers with the highest
joy and gladness.

4. Seek the LORD and his strength: seek his face evermore.


4. Let it encourage them to address themselves unto Him, upon all occasions;
and, prostrating themselves before the Ark of his presence, (2 Chronicles. VI. 41.)
commend themselves to his powerful protection: let them unweariedly seek his
favor, and implore his gracious assistance.

5. Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.


5. Which you may with the greater confidence expect, if you call to mind, and
thankfully commemorate the mavelous things He has done for your deliverance;
and his terrible executions, (III. Exodus 20.) according to his just sentence
passed, (VII. Exodus 4.) upon your enemies.

6. O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen.


6. The benefit of which you still enjoy, O ye who are the posterity of his
servant Abraham; (whose faith and obedience you ought to imitate) the children
of Jacob, whom He chose (rejecting Esau) to inherit the promised blessing.

7. He is the LORD our God, his judgments are in all the earth.


7. He is still the same mighty Lord, and our most gracious God; who continues
to execute his judgments every where, upon our enemies, (2 Samuel V. 7, 10, 17,
etc.) and therefore let us never cease to praise Him, and cheerfully serve Him,
and faithfully depend upon Him.)

8. He has remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations.


8. For He is never unmindfull of his engagements to us; but punctually
performs in all ages, what He has promised in his Covenant.

9. Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac:


9. Which He first solemnly made, (XV. Genesis 17, 18.) and then swear, (XXII.
16.) unto Abraham: and renewed with his Son Isaac; to whom He promised to
perform that Oath, which He swear unto Abraham, XXVI. Genesis 3.

10. And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
everlasting covenant:


10. And again confirmed it to Jacob, both when he went to Haran, (XXVIII. Genesis
13, etc.) and at his return, when He changed his name into Israel, (XXXV. Genesis
10, etc.) and at last passed it into a Law, in that Covenant which He made with
their posterity, (XXIII. Exodus 22, 23, 31, 32.) never to be altered, if they
keep their Covenant with Him.

11. Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your
inheritance.


11. The sum of which was this; I bestow upon thee, and will bring thee into
that good Land, the Land of Canaan: which according to this faithful Covenant,
you now possess; as by lot it was distributed to your several Tribes, for their
inheritance, XIV. Josh. 1, 2.

12. When they were but a few men in number: yea, very few, and strangers in it.


12. This Covenant He began to make with your Forefathers, (and showed his
intention to perform it, by his singular care over them) when their Family was
very small, (XII. Genesis 1, 5.) and consequently so weak, that they might easily
have been destroyed in the Land, where they were strangers, (XXIII. Genesis 4.)
and had no friends, nor allies to support them:

13. When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another
people.


13. Nor any settled habitation; but were forced to wander to and fro, from one
part of Canaan into another, (XII. Genesis 6, 8, 9.) and then to sojourn in other
Kingdoms; sometimes in Egypt, (XII. Genesis 10.) sometimes in Gerar, (XX. Genesis 1.
XXVI.) and sometimes in the Eastern Country from whence they came, XXIX. Genesis 1.

14. He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their
sakes:


14. And wheresoever they sojourned, He took them into his protection, and
suffered no man to do them any injury, (XXXI. Genesis 24, 42.) but gave severe
checks, even to the King of Egypt, (XII. Genesis 16.) and the King of Gerar, (XX.
3, etc.) to prevent the mischief, which they were designing to them.

15. Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.


15. For He told them, these were sacred persons, whom He designed to make
greater men then themselves: and therefore charged them not to burt them; but
to honor them, not merely as Princes, (XXIII. Genesis 6.) but as Prophets, (XX.
7.) by whose prayers they should receive great blessings, if they were kind to
them.

16. Moreover, he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole staff
of bread.


16. And when, in the days of Jacob, He punished the Land of Canaan, as well as
other Countries, with such a dearth, (XLI. Genesis 54, etc.) that the earth
brought forth no kind of grain, for the support of humane life;

17. He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant.


17. He took a special care, in a most wonderful way, to provide both for him
and for his family: for Joseph (whom his Brethren first conspired to destroy,
but afterward were diverted from their purpose and only sold for a slave) was
brought into Egypt, by the secret Counsel of God, (XLV. Genesis 5, 7, etc.) to be
the instrument of their preservation.

18. Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron.


18. He was oppressed indeed, for a long time, by a most grievous calumny:
which was a sorer affliction to him, then the chains and fetters, that were, at
first, laid upon him in prison.

19. Until the time that his word came: the word of the LORD tried him.


19. Till mention at last was made of him to Pharaoh, by one of his Officers:
who related how exactly Joseph predicted what had befaln him, and another of
his Fellow Servants; as if he were a man inspired, XL. Genesis 21, 22. XLI. 12, 13.

20. The king sent and loosed him: even the ruler of the people, and let him go
free.


20. Whereupon the King presently sent for him, (XLI. Genesis 14.) that great
Prince, whose Dominion extended over many Provinces, commanded him to be set at
liberty.

21. He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:


21. And received such satisfaction from him, about his dream, which none of
his Wise men could interpret; that he not only wholly discharged him from his
imprisonment, but made him the chief Officer in the Court: and, under himself,
the supreme Governor of his whole Kingdom, XLI. Genesis 40, 41.

22. To bind his princes at his pleasure: and teach his senators wisdom.


22. Yea entrusted him with an absolute power, to command all the Rulers of his
several Provinces, what he pleased; and to punish their disobedience according
to his discretion: The most ancient and wisest Counselors in the Realm, were
ordered to repair to him; and to do nothing without his Instructions, XLI.
Genesis 44.

23. Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.


23. By which great Authority he procured not only the leave, but the
invitation of Pharaoh, (XLV. Genesis 16, 17, etc.) to his Father, to come and
bring all his Family with him into Egypt: and accordingly he came, and dwelt in
the best part of all the Country, XLVI. Genesis 26, 28.

24. And he increased his people greatly: and made them stronger then their
enemies.


24. Where, according to his promise, when He bad Jacob accept that invitation,
(XLVI. Genesis 3, 4.) the Lord multiplied them exceedingly, (I. Exodus 7.) and made
them mightier then the Egyptians, (I. Exodus 9.) who, of Friends, were now
become their Enemies.

25. He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtly with his
servants.


25. For the kinder God was to the Israelites, and the more He increased their
Numbers, the greater jealousy it begat in the heart of the Egyptians; which
turned at last into an absolute hatred of them: and provoked their malice to
invent the cruellest ways, first to diminish, (I. Exodus 10, 11, etc.) and then
to destroy them, (Ver. 15, 16.)

26. He sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen.


26. This moved the Divine compassion, when He saw their oppression grew
intolerable, to give commission to Moses, whom He had in an extraordinary
manner preserved from perishing, (III. Exodus 10.) and to Aaron, whom He chose
to be his Assistant, (IV. Exodus 15.) to go and demand their liberty of Pharaoh,
IV. Exodus 23. V. 1.

27. They showed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.


27. And, he disputing their Commission, (and refusing to let Israel go) they
proved it, and persuaded him to obey it, by many miraculous works: which God
commanded them to do, as tokens that He had sent them.

28. He sent darkness, and made it dark: and they rebelled not against his word.


28. Among which the pitchy darkness, which overspread the whole Land three
days (except only where the Israelites dwelt) was a very remarkable punishment
of Pharaoh's blindness: who would not see the hand of God in all those other
plagues, which Moses and Aaron, not fearing his displeasure, but pursuing their
orders, had inflicted on him.

29. He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.


29. As first of all, the Lord commanded them to stretch their hand upon all
the waters of Egypt; which He turned into blood: and made them so putrid, that
the fish which was in the river died, VII. Exodus 20, 21.

30. Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their
kings.


30. And, at the next stroke, produced such a vast number of frogs out of the
stinking waters and mudd; that not only the whole earth was covered with them,
but no house, no room in their houses; no, not the Cabinets of their King and
his Princes, were free from their annoyance, VIII. Exodus 3, 6.

31. He spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies, and lice in all their
coasts.


31. And then followed an infinite swarm of the most pestilent sort of flies,
(see Psalm. LXXVIII. 45.) after a troublesome and filthy plague of lice, which
had infested all the Country, VIII. Exodus 17, 24.

32. He gave them hail for rain: and flaming fire in their land.


32. Which was succeeded (after a murrain upon their Cattle, and a fiery ulcer
on their own bodies) by a dreadful storm of hail, (when fruitful showrs of
rain were most desirable) together with such lightning, as was never seen: for
it ran upon the ground, and burnt up all that was not destroyed by the hail,
IX. Exodus 23, 24, etc.

33. He smote their vines also, and their fig trees: and brake the trees of
their coasts.


33. Which not only struck down the grapes, and the figgs: but shattered the
vines and fig trees themselves; together with many other fruit trees in the
Land.

34. He spoke, and the locusts came: and caterpillars, and that without number,


34. And whatsoever escaped this tempestuous storm (for some things were not
then grown up, IX. Exodus 31.) was, not long after, devoured by an innumerable
army of various sorts of locusts, X. Exodus 5, 12, etc.

35. And did eat up all the herbs in their land: and devoured the fruit of
their ground.


35. Which, by his command, came and covered the whole face of the Country:
eating up the very leaves of the trees, as well as all the grass and herbs upon
the ground, X. Exodus 15.

36. He smote also all the firstborn in their land: the chief of all their
strength.


36. And at last He finished these plagues, in the slaughter of all the
firstborn, both of man and beast: the Angel of the Lord killing, in one and
the same night, (XII. Exodus 29.) the principal prop of every Family; and the
best of all their flocks and their herds.

37. He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one
feeble person among their tribes.


37. Which terrible destruction so affrighted them, that they not only let
Israel go; but were forward to thrust them out of Egypt, and that loaded with
silver and gold, (XII. Exodus 31, 35.) And, which is very wonderful, among so
many thousand persons, (Ver. 37.) there was not one, at that time, so feeble,
as to be unable to travel.

38. Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.


38. And great was the joy at their departure; not only among the Israelites,
but among the Egyptians: who thought themselves not safe till the Israelites
had their liberty; but were in dread of another plague, which they thought
might kill them, as the former had done their children, XII. Exodus 33.

39. He spread a cloud for a covering: and fire to give light in the night.


39. Nor did the Divine providence desert our Fathers after it had brought them
out of Egypt; but lest they should suffer any prejudice by the exceeding great
heats, or mistake their way, in a desolate wilderness, He defended them in the
day, from the scorching rays of the Sun, by a cloud: which it self gave them
light to comfort, and (if need were) to guide them in the night, XIII. Exodus
21, 22.

40. The people asked, and he brought quails: and satisfied them with the bread
of heaven.


40. He provided also a delicate food, for that vast multitude; even when they
were so ungrateful as to murmur against Him: (XVI. Exodus 12, etc.) sending
them, in the evening, such flights of quails, and, in the morning, such showrs
of corn, out of the clouds; as abundantly satisfied every one of them.

41. He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out: they ran in the dry places
like a river,


41. And when they murmured again for want of drink, (XVII. Exodus 2, 6.) He was
so kind as to stop their complaints, by making water to spring out of a rock:
from whence it gusht so constantly, and in such abundance, that it made a
stream; which followed them in all the parched grounds, through which they
marched.

42. For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.


42. For the Lord was resolved punctually to perform his promise, passed in
former ages, (XV. Genesis 18. II. Exodus 24.) which made Him reward the fidelity of
his servant Abraham even upon his incredulous posterity; at that very time
which He had prefixed for it, XV. Genesis 13. XII. Exodus 41.

43. And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness.


43. When, with much mirth and joy, He brought his people out of the Egyptian
bondage; and made them shout to see the difference He made between them and the
Egyptians: who were drowned in the red Sea; while they were conducted safe
through it on dry Land, XV. Exodus 1, 13, 19.

44. And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labor of
the people:


44. And, in conclusion, He cast out seven Nations, to make room for them in
the Land of Canaan: where their posterity took possession of Cities and Towns,
Fields and Vineyards; which the labor of others had built and planted for
them, VI. Deuteronomy. 10, 11. XXIV. Josh. 13.

45. That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye the
LORD.


45. That they might have the more leisure, to purge the Country of all its
ancient superstition, and filthiness: and set themselves heartily to worship
God, after that manner that He prescribed; in a strict observance of all the
rest of his holy Laws.

For which, and all other his benefits, excite your selves to praise the Lord.

PSALM CVI.
Hallelujah, i. e. Praise the Lord.
ARGUMENT.
There is little doubt to be made, but this is the Title of the Psalm, as it is
of many other, (CXI, etc.) whereby the Author excites them to acknowledge
God's bounty to their ungrateful Forefathers. For as in the foregoing Psalm
(they are the words of Theodoret) the Divine Benefits are commemorated; so in
this the Psalmist both commemorates them, and also upbraids the ingratitude of
those that received them. Which magnified the mercies of God the more; in being
so very kind to those wicked people, that when He punished them, He did not
utterly destroy them.

The opinion of that Father is, that the Psalm was composed in the person of
the more pious sort of people; who bewail the common calamities, and implore
the Divine indulgence. And most Interpreters, that I have met withal, imagine
it to have been made in the time of the Captivity of Babylon: but the proof of
it is very weak. For the last verse but one, upon which they ground that
conjecture, may have another construction; and mean no more but this: that God
would be pleased when the Nation, or any part of it, should be carried captive,
to take pity upon them; and restore them again to their Country. Or rather, in
my opinion, it refers to those who, in the days of Saul, or before, were taken
prisoners by the Philistines, and other Nations: whom David prays God to gather
to their own Land again; that they might worship Him in that place, which He
had prepared for the Ark of his presence. For it seems plain enough, that this
was one of the Psalms, which he delivered then to Asaph: the first verse and
the two last being set down in the 1 Chronicles. XVI. 36, 37, as the beginning and
ending of another Psalm, (which can be none but this) which he then gave in
with the other two there mentioned, (XCVI. and CV.) to praise the Lord withal.

1. PRaise ye the LORD, O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever.


1. O Make your thankful acknowledgments, to the great Lord of all the World;
who was exceeding gracious to your Forefathers, and will continue his kindness,
you may hope, unto all succeeding ages.

2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the LORD? who can show forth all his
praise?


2. Praise Him with all your might; for when you have done your best, you must
acknowledge that it is impossible to express your obligations to his omnipotent
Goodness. For who is able to tell how miraculous that power was, which wrought
such wonders for us in Egypt; and in the Wilderness, and in the Land of Canaan?
where shall we find a man, that can set forth, as they deserve, all the
praiseworthy acts of the Lord?

3. Blessed are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness at all
times.


3. Which are so great and many, that they are most happy men, who by faithful
obedience to all his precepts, (not only when they have newly received his
benefits, but throughout the whole course of their lives) preserve themselves
in the favor of so gracious a Lord and Master (which our Forefathers foolishly
lost, by revolting presently from their merciful Deliverer.)

4. Remember me, O LORD, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation:


4. Make me, good Lord, one of this happy number; and let me partake of the
favor Thou still designest for thy people; and find Thee ready at hand, in all
dangers, to preserve and deliver me (1 Chronicles. XVIII. 6, 13, 14.)

5. That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness
of thy nation: that I may glory with thine inheritance.


5. That I may live to see thy chosen people Israel, settled in a peaceable
enjoyment of all thy blessings, (1 Chronicles. XXII. 18.) and have my share in their
joy and felicity, (1 Chronicles. XXIX. 9.) nay triumph together with them, in the
highest praises of thy bounty toward thy own Nation, and peculiar inheritance,
1 Chronicles. XXIX. 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.

6. We have sinned with our fathers; we have committed iniquity, we have done
wickedly.


6. Our sins indeed may hinder these blessings from us; for we are no better
then our Forefathers, but have offended after their example; by which we ought
to have been amended: we are guilty of many iniquities against one another, and
much impiety against Thee.

7. Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea.


7. We are the wicked offspring of those, who were so stupid, as not to be
affected with the prodigious Works Thou did in Egypt; or presently to forget
that long series of miraculous preservations and deliverances, by which they
were brought from thence: But in the very next strait into which they fell (at
the borders of the Sea, that remarkable place, the red Sea) distrusted his
power; and wished He had left them in that cruel servitude, of which before they
so heavily complained, XIV. Exodus 11, 12.

8. Nevertheless, he saved them for his names sake: that he might make his
mighty power to be known.


8. And yet (such was his stupendous Goodness) He would not let them perish in
their ingratitude; but to preserve the name He had gotten of their mighty
Savior, gave them a new deliverance: that the world might not imagine He wanted
power, to complete what He had begun to do for them.

9. He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through
the depths as through the wilderness.


9. On this consideration, He checked the course of that Sea by so strong a
wind, that He made a path in the midst of it: and led them through those depths
on as hard and dry ground, as they trod upon in their march, through the
parched deserts, XIV. Exodus 21, 22.

10. And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them: and redeemed them
from the hand of the enemy.


10. By which means He saved them from Pharaoh's Army; which pressed hard upon
their backs, as the Sea was before their face, (XIV. Exodus 9, 10.) He rescued
them from the power of those implacable enemies, whose hatred carried them, to
pursue them eagerly even into the Sea, (XIV. Exodus 23.)

11. And the waters covered their enemies; there was not one of them left.


11. Where they were drowned, every man of them; the Sea, which had stood fixed
as a wall to save the Israelites, returning back with a mighty violence to
overwhelm their adversaries.

12. Then believed they his words, they sang his praise.


12. Which was so evident a token of his power and goodness, that they were
persuaded by it, at that present, to believe God's promises, (XIV. Exodus 31.)
and to sing a Song of praise to Him, for this miraculous deliverance, XV. Exodus
1, etc.

13. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel:


13. But within three days they grew impatient again, (XV. Exodus 22, 24.) and
forgetting the great and many pledges they had received of his Divine power,
quarrelled with his Servants; and would not expect till He showed, what way He
intended to relieve them.

14. But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.


14. But not long after this, murmured again; (XVI. Exodus.) And though, instead
of punishing them for it, He satisfied them with bread from heaven, and gave
them several other demonstrations of his Divine presence among them, in the
wilderness, ( Exodus XVI. XX. XXIV, etc.) yet, to please their wanton appetite,
they mutined another time, and cried out vehemently for flesh to eat, (XI.
Numb. 4, 5, etc.) and desired new proofs of his power to supply them.

15. And he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul.


15. Which He was pleased to grant in such abundance, that they surfeited of
the Quails, which He sent them: and, instead of being nourished, fell into a
grievous disease, whereby great numbers of them were wasted and consumed, XI.
Numb. 31, 32, etc.

16. They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the LORD.


16. And they that escaped were not cured of their rebellious humor; but
seditiously disputed the Authority of Moses: And accused both him and Aaron,
whom the Lord had consecrated for the service of his Altar, as ambitious men,
that took too much upon them, XVI. Numb. 3.

17. The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of
Abiram.


17. Which moved the Divine Justice to punish their presumption, with a most
terrible vengeance: for the earth opened, and buried alive Dathan and Abiram,
and the faction that adhered to them, XVI. Numb. 32, 33.

18. And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burnt up the wicked.


18. And the other company raised by Korah, were smitten with lightning from
heaven; which burnt up those impious men, who were so bold as to invade the
Office of the Priests of the Lord, XVI. Numb. 35.

19. They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.


19. Whose anger they began very early to incense; for even at that very place
where the Lord had newly appeared to them, in astonishing thunder and lightning
and clouds, (XX. Exodus 18.) and had spoken to them with an audible voice, and
at the second word He spoke had charged them not to make any graven image, (XX.
Exodus 4.) and had called Moses up into the Mount to receive the rest of his
Laws (which He had begun in a most dreadful manner to deliver to them) they
stupidly made a golden Calf, and prostrated themselves before the work of their
own hands:

20. Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that cateth
grass.


20. Slighting that Glorious presence of the Majesty of God, (XXIV. Exodus 16,
17.) which, appearing in the Cloud, had done many wonders for them: and choosing
rathe to commend themselves to the protection of an Image, in which they saw no
glory; the Image of a dull Ox, a creature without reason, a servant of man,
that is supported it self, by so weak a thing as hay, XXXII. Exodus 14.

21. They forgot God their savior, which had done great things in Egypt:


21. The root of which sottish Apostasy was, that they did not keep in mind
what deliverances God had granted them, under the conduct of Moses; whom they
now despised: (XXXII. Exodus 1.) But forgot his great works in the Land of
Egypt, where they never saw any similitude of Him.

22. Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red sea.


22. Miraculous works; which filled the whole Country with wonder and
astonishment; and concluded at last in the fearful overthrow of Pharaoh and
all his host in the red Sea, through which they passed safely.

23. Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach: to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy
them.


23. Which provoked the Divine displeasure so highly, that He resolved to
destroy them, (XXXII. Exodus 9, 10.) and had done it, if Moses, for whom He had
a great respect, had not, by his earnest intercession, made up this breach; and
reconciled Him so far to them, that He did not proceed then to take such
vengeance on them, XXXII. Exodus 11, 12, 14, 35.

24. Yea, they despised the pleasant land: they believed not his word:


24. But when after this they despised (XIII. Numb. 32.) that goodly Country,
to the borders of which He had brought them, (I. Deuteronomy. 19, 20.) which the Spies
themselves confessed was rich and desirable: (XIII. Numb. 27. XIV. 32.) and
would not believe that God intended, or was able to perform his promise to
them, XIII. Numb. 37:

25. But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD.


25. But murmured against Moses and Aaron in their Tents, as if they had
deluded them, (XIV. Numb. 1, 2, etc.) refusing to march, when the Lord
commanded them to go up, and take possession of it, I. Deuteronomy. 21, 26, 32:

26. Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the
wilderness:


26. Then he solemnly swear, that not one of that wicked generation, who had so
often rebelled against Him, should ever come there; but all perish in the
wilderness, XIV. Numb. 21, 22, 35. I. Deuteronomy. 34:

27. To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them in the
lands.


27. And some of them be overthrown by the heathen, whom the Lord would have
delivered up into their hand, (XIV. Numb. 45.) and others dispersed in several
parts of that Country, which they despised, XXI. Numb. 1.

28. They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the
dead.


28. Nor did they grow much better, by these dreadful threatenings and
executions; but, not only most shamefully committed whoredom with the
daughters of Moah but, embraced their Religion: devoting themselves to the vile
service of Baal, whose Temple stood upon Mount Peor; and partaking with them,
in the Sacrifices which they offered to dead men, XXV. Numb. 1, 2, 3.

29. Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague
brake in upon them.


29. Which abominable wickedness incensed the Divine displeasure to such a
degree; that He commanded the Offenders to be killed and hanged up, in the face
of the Sun: and also sent a grievous plague among the people, XXV. Numb. 4, 5,
9.

30. Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was
stayed.


30. Which raged in the Camp, till Phinehas, in a holy zeal, went as boldly to
punish, as others did to commit their crimes: and thrust through the body, one
of the Princes of the people, whom the Judges feared to meddle withal; and
then the plague ceased, XXV. Numb. 5, 6, 7, 8.

31. And that was counted unto him for righteousness, unto all generations for
evermore.


31. Which seasonable piece of Justice, the Lord, not only approved as a
praiseworthy Act but, rewarded also with the promise of the Priesthood: which
He intailed upon his posterity, throughout all generations, XXV. Numb. 12, 13.

32. They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill with
Moses for their sakes;


32. And, before this, they had been so unbelieving and rebellious, as, having
had long experience of God's power and goodness in providing for them, to
murmur for want of water; at that place, which took its name from their quarrel
with Moses, (XX. Numb. 3, 13.) who sadly suffered upon their account, XX. Numb.
12.

33. Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips.


33. For, being exasperated by their frequent mutinies, he let fall some
passionate words; which expressed such distrust and impatience, as did not
become so great a Minister of God, (XX. Numb. 12.) who thereupon resolved, he
should not have the honor to accomplish his promise, of bringing them to their
rest, XXVII. Numb. 24. I. Deuteronomy. 37.

34. They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the LORD commanded them:


34. In which, being settled, they did not destroy those seven Nations, (I.
Judge. 21, 27, 29, etc.) whose abominations were so foul; that the Lord gave
them a strict charge, not to suffer them to live there any longer, XXIII. Exodus
30, 33. VII. Deuteronomy. 2.

35. But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.


35. But, quite contrary, they not only let them live but, against Gods
express commandment (XXIII. Josh. 7, 12.) entered into familiarity, and made a
Covenant and League with them, (II. Judge. 1, 2.) and so at last learnt to do
as they did, and imitated their evil manners.

36. And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.


36. For they forsook the Lord who had brought them thither; and worshipped the
Gods of those people, whom they had conquered, (II. Judge. 11, 12. III. 5, 6.)
which proved their utter ruin, and destruction, VII. Deuteronomy. 16, 26. II. Judge. 3.

37. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils,


37. For they were so besotted with their Idolatry, as to imitate their most
barbarous Rites: sacrificing to infernal spirits, not only their beasts, but
(as the custom of that Country was, XII. Deuteronomy. 30, 31.) their sons and their
daughters.

38. And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was
polluted with blood.


38. Whom they did not merely consecrate to the service of Devils; but offered
their blood, the blood of innocent babes, even of their own sons and daughters
(as I said) upon the Altars of the Idols of Canaan: profaning thereby the holy
Land, with the most impious and unnatural Murders.

39. Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their
own inventions.


39. Besides other abominable works wherewith they defiled themselves; such as
Whoredom, and all manner of beastly lusts: which were the filthy vices of those
Nations, whom God cast out before them, XVIII. Lev. 24, 25, 27, 28, etc.

40. Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled against his people, insomuch
that he abhorred his own inheritance.


40. And so contrary to nature as well as his Law, that the Lord was exceeding
angry with them, (II. Judge. 14, 20.) and the more, because He had made them his
people: whom He now abominated, as impure and unclean; though once they had
been very dear unto Him.

41. And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them,
ruled over them.


41. And thereupon delivered them up to the power of those impious Nations;
with whom they contracted friendship, when they should have destroyed them,
(III. Judge. 3, 5. IV. 2. XIII. 1.) who retaining still their ancient hatred,
exercised a rigorous tyranny over them, IV. Judge. 3.

42. Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection
under their hand.


42. And so did many other of their neighboring enemies, the Mesopotamians and
Moabites, (III. Judge. 8, 12.) the Midianites and Amalekites, (VI. 2, 3, etc.)
and such like, (X. 7, 8.) who not only grievously afflicted them; but
deservedly made those their subjects, nay slaves, who would not serve their
gracious God.

43. Many times did he deliver them, but they provoked him with their counsel,
and were brought low for their iniquity.


43. Who still continued so kind to them, that upon the first sign of their
repentance, He constantly raised up the spirit of some great Man or other; to
rescue them from every one of these Oppressors: though they as constantly
provoked Him again, by relapsing to their former Idolatry; which in the issue
brought them exceeding low, X. Judge. 8, 9.

44. Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry.


44. And yet, such was his tender compassion toward them, He did not
absolutely refuse to help even these base revolters, (X. Judge. 14, 15, 16.)
when, in their distress, they made a lamentable moan and promised amendment.

45. And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the
multitude of his mercies.


45. For He was not unmindfull of the Covenant He had made with their
Forefathers, (XXVI. Levit. 42, 44, 45. XXX. Deuteronomy. 1, 2, 3.) but let them reap
the benefit of it: in ceasing to punish them; and, when they deserved to be
utterly destroyed, bestowing many and exceeding great blessings on them.

46. He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.


46. For He inclined the hearts, even of those who had subdued, and implacably
hated them, unto some compassion toward them: so that they did not endeavor
their total extirpation, XIII. Judge. 1. XIV. 2. XV. 9, 10, etc.

47. Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give
thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.


47. And therefore we humbly hope still in the same great mercies; and beseech
Thee, O most mighty Lord, who have been wont to do our Nation good, to deliver
us, how unworthy soever, from all our present enemies: and to restore such of
us as are fallen into their hands, unto their own Country; that they may join
with us in giving thanks to thy incomparable goodness, and setting forth thy
praises with the greatest joy and triumph, saying;

48. Blessed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let
all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the LORD,


48. Let the great Lord of all the world, who has been so gracious unto
Israel, as to choose them for his own peculiar people, be most heartily blessed
and praised: Let all generations bless Him, as long as the world shall last,
and unto all eternity: and let all his people concur in these desires, and wish
it may be so; let them all praise the Lord, and desire He may be ever praised.

The End of the FOVRTH Book of Psalms.
The Fifth BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM CVII.
ARGUMENT.
The Fifth Book of Psalms (which consists most of Praises and Thanksgivings)
begins here; with an exhortation to those whom God (according to the Prayer
foregoing CVI. 47.) had delivered from Pagan servitude, to acknowledge that
singular benefit with their hearty Thanksgivings: and thence to take occasion
to magnify his merciful Providence over all other men, not only of that but
of all Nations, when they addressed themselves unto Him in their distresses.
For instance, Travelers in the desert who have lost their way, Prisoners, Sick
people, Mariners, Husbandmen, even whole Countries the Psalmist shows are made
strangely prosperous, if they have a regard to God; and on the other side fall
into great misery, if they neglect Him. It had been endless to enumerate all
other cases; but by these any man may understand, if he please (as he observes
in the conclusion) how good the Lord is, and ready to help those who fly unto
Him for succor, whatsoever their condition be.

The Author of the Psalm is unknown; but if I have guessed aright at the
connection of this with the foregoing Psalm, it is most probable it was composed
by David: who having in the CV. put them in mind (as Theodoret observes) of the
promises made to the Patriarchs, and of the blessings bestowed on their
posterity; and in the CVI. of their horrid ingratitude for such benefits, and
the punishments, for that cause, inflicted upon them: declares in this Psalm
the inexplicable kindness of God, in their freedom from slavery; and in his
careful Providence, as I said, over all mankind: which might give them the
greater encouragement to hope in Him, if they served Him faithfully, who had
taken them for his peculiar people.

1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.


1. O Make your grateful acknowledgments to the great Lord of the world; of
whose Goodness you and your Forefathers have had such long experience, that you
may conclude his loving kindness will extend it self to all succeeding ages.

2. Let the redeemed of the LORD say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of
the enemy:


2. Let them especially call upon one another to give thanks unto his Goodness,
whom the Lord has graciously redeemed from a sad Captivity; into which they
were reduced by their prevailing enemies:

3. And gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from
the north and from the south.


3. And has brought them back to their own Country again; from all the Lands,
on every side, into which they were dispersed.

4. They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way, they found no city to
dwell in.


4. And they also, who, traveling through vast wildernesses and sandy deserts,
lost their way, and could find no tract to lead them to a City inhabited;

5. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.


5. But, in this perplexity, wandered up and down so long, that all their
Provision was spent, and they were ready to dye with hunger and thirst:

6. Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he delivered them out
of their distresses.


6. Yet then recommending themselves to the Lord, and earnestly imploring his
help in this miserable strait; He mercifully delivered them out of it, and
freed them from all their anxieties:

7. And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of
habitation.


7. Directing them, when they were in a Maze, into the right path again; which
brought them to a place inhabited, where they found relief for their
necessities.

8. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men!


8. O that such men would never forget to make their thankful acknowledgments
to the Lord, for this singular kindness; but every where proclaim his
wonderful works.

9. For he satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with
goodness.


9. Who thus seasonably preserved them from starving, by providing, in this
languishing condition, drink to quench their thirst, and plenty of good things
to satisfy their hungry appetite.

10. Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being bound in
affliction and iron:


10. They also who have no other dwelling but a dark prison, nay a horrible
dungeon; where, to add to their affliction, they are loaded with iron manacles
or fetters;

11. Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel
of the most High:


11. As a just punishment for the crimes they had rebelliously committed,
against the express commands of God, and the plain dictates and frequent checks
of their own consciences; which were the voice of the most High, giving them
wholesome counsel; though they contemned and despised it:

12. Therefore he brought down their heart with labor, they fell down, and
there was none to help.


12. And thereby provoked Him to throw them into that miserable condition, to
humble their proud hearts by the hardship of a tedious and painful
imprisonment; in which they lay so dejected and helpless, that they saw no
humane means whereby they should be delivered.

13. Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saved them out of
their distresses.


13. Yet they then making their addresses to the Lord, and earnestly beseeching
Him to take pity upon their wretched estate; He was pleased mercifully to hear
their prayers, and free them from those miserable straits:

14. He brought them out of darkness, and the shadow of death, and brake their
bands in sunder.


14. Bringing them out of their sad confinement in that dismal dungeon; and
setting their hands and feet at liberty, from the chains wherewith they were
bound.

15. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men!


15. O that such men would never forget to make their thankful acknowledgments
to the Lord, for his singular kindness; but every where proclaim his wonderful
works:

16. For he has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder.


16. Who when their case was desperate, removed the greatest obstacles; and
made even brazen gates, and iron bars give way to their escape.

17. Fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted.


17. In like manner we see others, who forgetting God, and sottishly giving
themselves up to all kind of debauchery, in an irregular way of living, fall
into grievous diseases:

18. Their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they draw near unto the gates
of death.


18. Which not only quite take away their appetite, but make them nauseate all
manner of food, which they formerly abused; and thereby lay them so low, that
they are at the very brink of the grave:

19. Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, he saves them out of their
distresses.


19. Yet even these men, when they make their addresses unto the Lord, and in
the weak estate into which they have brought themselves pray earnestly to Him,
are wont to find relief from Him; when no Medicines whatsoever will avail them.

20. He sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their
destruction.


20. He orders their recovery, when all the prescriptions of Physicians prove
ineffectual: nay, when they are left for dead, raises them up to life and
health again.

21. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men!


21. O that these men would be so grateful to the Lord, as never to forget his
singular kindness to them; but every where proclaim such wonderful works as
these.

22. And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his
works with rejoicing.


22. And not content themselves with the Sacrifices of beasts (which in their
sickness they were apt to vow unto Him) but offer those far more acceptable
sacrifices of a grateful heart: acknowledging his Goodness, and telling every
body they meet withal, in such a manner as may express how much they are
affected with it, what great things the Lord has done for them.

23. They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters:


23. Who shows no less kindness to those that have occasion to be much upon the
Sea; to fish, or to traffic, upon the main Ocean.

24. These see the works of the LORD, and his wonders in the deep.


24. Where they behold remarkable acts of Divine Providence; in the wonderful
alterations which He makes in that vast collection of waters.

25. For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof.


25. For when they are smooth and still, a sudden tempest arises by his
command; which puts them into such a rage, that they are turned into swelling
waves and billows.

26. They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul
is melted because of trouble.


26. On which the ships are sometimes mounted up as high, as if they would
touch the clouds; and then sink down as low, as if they would be buried in the
bottom of the Sea: to the great astonishment of the passengers, who are ready
to die with fear.

27. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their
wits end.


27. For they are so tossed and whirled about, that as they are not able to
stand upon the decks; so the most skillful Mariners do not know which way to
steer; or what course to take, to save themselves from perishing.

28. Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he brings them out of
their distresses.


28. And yet, when in the midst of this great strait they make their addresses
to the Lord, with earnest prayers for his protection, He is graciously pleased
to hear their cry; and to free them from that anguish of mind, which sorely
oppresses them.

29. He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.


29. For He silences the blustering wind, and makes so great a calm; that the
swelling waves lie quiet and still.

30. Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he brings them unto their
desired haven.


30. Which happy change turns their fear into joy; when they see, not only the
storm appeased but, gentle gales arising to carry them directly to the port,
for which they are bound.

31. Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men!


31. O that they who are thus unexpectedly preserved, would never forget to
make their thankful acknowledgments to the Lord, for this singular kindness!
But every where proclaim what wonders He has done for them.

32. Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him
in the assembly of the elders.


32. Let them magnify his power and goodness in the greatest assemblies of the
people; especially in his Temple: Let them praise Him in the supreme Court of
the Kingdom; that the Judges and Governors may be excited, to make Him their
trust and confidence.

33. He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into dry ground:


33. Who turns well watered Countries into a mere wilderness, and makes moist
and fertile soils become dry and barren ground:

34. A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.


34. Where none of those fruits will grow which before it plentifully yielded;
because of the ill disposition of the inhabitants, who produce nothing but all
manner of vice and wickedness.

35. He turns the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
water-springs,


35. And on the other side He turns a barren desert (for none of these things
come by chance) into rich and fruitful pastures: and sends such plenty of
water into dry and sandy grounds;

36. And there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a city for
habitation;


36. That there they, who lived wretchedly before, find a comfortable
habitation: and are invited to build Towns and Cities in those formerly
desolate places.

37. And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of
increase.


37. Where they sow all manner of grain, and plant vineyards: which recompense
their pains, with a plentiful harvest and a joyful vintage.

38. He blesses them also, so that they are multiplied greatly, and suffers
not their cattle to decrease.


38. His blessing also makes the inhabitants fruitful, as well as their
ground: they grow exceeding populous, together with their flocks and their
herds; which by the increase of people are not diminished.

39. Again they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction,
and sorrow.


39. But when they prove ungrateful to Him, He quite alters the course of his
Providence; and on a sudden sends some grievous pestilence, which lessens their
numbers: or lays them low by tyrannical oppressors, (into whose hands He
delivers them) by dearth, and other calamities, which make them pine away in
grief and sorrow.

40. He pours contempt upon princes, and causes them to wander in the
wilderness, where there is no way.


40. Their Princes and the most eminent persons in their Country, are not able
to preserve themselves from contempt and scorn: To which they are so openly
exposed, that they who had troops of followers and attendants, are utterly
deserted; and forced to walk in solitary places to hide their shame; without
any means, that they can see, to recover their thrones out of which they are
disgracefully thrown.

41. Yet sets he the poor on high from affliction, and makes him families
like a flock.


41. Which he bestows upon some poor despicable person, whom, from a low
condition, He raises to the highest dignity; and gives him a very numerous
istue, to maintain and continue the honor He has conferred on him.

42. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.


42. Which is a great encouragement to the righteous; who herein behold with
joy the wise and just providence of Almighty God: But gives the wicked (who
under those bad Princes were insolent, and full of proud boasts) such a rebuke;
that they hang down their heads, and are confour dedly put to silence.

43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand
the loving kindness of the LORD.


43. And therefore, whosoever will be truly wise, ought to mark and ponder such
passages as these in the Divine Government: that they may make others, who are
less considerate, understand how very kind and gracious the Lord is; to those
who study to please Him, and to obtain his favor by dutiful obedience and
humble submission to Him.

PSALM CVIII.
A Song or Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
The Title tells us this Song-Psalm (see the reason of this name upon Psalm.
LXVII.) was made by David: and was placed here, as I conjecture, because now he
was in a hopeful way to perfect some Victories, which he had begun to win;
whereby some of those Captives in strange Lands (mentioned Ver. 2. and 3. of
the foregoing Psalm) were rescued and set at liberty. What those Nations were,
over whom he was about to triumph, see in the Title of Psalm LX: For the latter
part of this Psalm from Ver. 6. to the end, is the very same (with some light
variations) with the eight last Verses of that; As the former part of it, is
very little different from the five last Verses of Psalm LVII. Which the
Psalmist I suppose here placed instead of those, wherewith the LX. begins
(though he retains all the latter end of it) because now, as I said, he had
made some progress in those Wars, which he was but entering upon, when he made
that LX. Psalm And therefore here he begins with thanks to God for his mercy,
as there he laments the ill condition, wherein he found the affairs of the
Kingdom, when he came to the Crown.

1. O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, even with my glory.


1. MY heart is ready, O most gracious God; it is firmly resolved to give Thee
most solemn thanks: My tongue also, wherewith I ought to glorify Thee, shall
sing of thy Goodness; and, with all the expressions of joy, set forth thy
praise.

2. Awake psaltery and harp: I my self will awake early.


2. Nor shall any of the instruments of Music be silent, but accompany my
Hymns: which I will sing unto Thee so early, that I will prevent the rising of
the Sun.

3. I will praise thee, O LORD, among the people: and I will sing praises unto
thee among the nations.


3. Nor will I merely make Thee my private acknowledgments; but publish thy
praise in the greatest assemblies of thy people, among whom this Song shall be
sung: yea, other Nations shall read therein, how thankful I am for what Thou
have begun to do for us.

4. For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.


4. For it is fit my thankfulness should be as boundless as thy mercy: which
infinitely transcends all my expressions; and has nothing equal to it, but thy
faithfulness and truth.

5. Be thou exalted, O God above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth;


5. Be Thou more and more exalted in these, O God; and raise to thy self
thereby the highest praises: spread the fame of them every where, that Thou
may be glorified throughout the world.

6. That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me.


6. Especially now, I beseech Thee, to grant my humble petitions, that by thy
mighty power accompanying my Arms, I may be an instrument of delivering thy
beloved people from their Oppressors.

7. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and
mete out the valley of Succoth.


7. Why should I doubt of it, and not rather rejoice in assured hope of a
perfect Victory? since God who is most holy and cannot lie, has said He will
deliver them by my hand; (2 Samuel III. 18.) and has already put me in
possession, (as He also promised, Ver. 2.) of all the Country about Samaria;
which I will distribute under such Officers, as I think fit to set over them.

8. Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head, Judah is my lawgiver.


8. Gilead also and Manasseh, who were lately under another King, (2 Samuel II.
9.) have submitted themselves to me; and so has the of Ephraim, which is a
main support of my Authority: These, and all the rest of the Tribes of Israel,
are united to the royal Tribe of Judah; which (according to the prophecy of our
Forefather, XLIX. Genesis 10.) supplies me with wise and able men to administer
the Laws, and order the affairs of my Kingdom.

9. Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: over Philistia will
I triumph.


9. Which shall now extend it self beyond the bounds of this Country; for I
will tread the Moabites under my feet, and reduce them to the vilest servitude;
(2 Samuel VIII. 2.) I will trample also upon the Edomites, and make them my
slaves: ( Ib. Verse 14.) the Philistines also, whom I have begun to smite, (2 Samuel V. 17, etc. 22.) shall add to my Triumphs, and be forced to submit unto
me, as their conquering Lord, (2 Samuel VIII. 1.)

10. Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?


10. These are difficult things indeed, and I may well ask, when I consider how
potent these Nations are, by what power or force I shall be able to enter that
strongly fenced City, in the frontiers of their Country? Who is it that will
conduct me into Idumaea, and make me Master of it?

11. Wilt not thou, O God, who have cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go
forth with our hosts?


11. But I can soon answer my self: For why should I despair of thy presence
with us, O God of all power and might? who formerly indeed did reject us, and
forsake the conduct of our Armies, (1 Samuel XXXI. 1, 7.) but now, I hope, wilt
graciously aid us, and make us victorious.

12. Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.


12. Do not frustrate these hopes; but afford us thy help against the Syrians
also (2 Samuel VIII. 5.) now that they distress us: for no humane force is able
to deliver us; nor have we any confidence in it, but in Thee alone.

13. Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.


13. By whose assistance we will behave our selves courageously, and do
valiant Acts: For God will utterly rout our Enemies; and tread them down, like
the mire in the streets.

PSALM CIX.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
Most Interpreters consent to the opinion of Aben Ezra, and D. Kimchi, that
David (to whom the Title ascribes this Psalm) has respect here, in the first
place, to the grievous persecution which he suffered by Saul, and some of his
Court: who would let him enjoy no rest, but having driven him from his own
house, pursued him so close, wheresoever they heard he was; that he could have
no certain dwelling: but became like a Locust (as he speaks Verse 23.) which
having no nest (as Bochartus observes, P. II. L. IV. de Animal. sac. cap. 2.)
leaps or flies from hedge to hedge; as he did from place to place. To provoke
Saul to this rage against him, as they all loaded him with many calumnies;
(which made David curse them, to Readiness face, 1 Samuel XXVI. 10.) so one
especially among the rest, who is generally thought to be Doeg the Edomite, was
notoriously guilty of this wickedness: whom, by a prophetical Spirit, he here
most solemnly curses, in a direful manner; and pronounces the heaviest
judgment upon him and his Family: his inhumane villainy being so great, that it
made him an exact picture of the Traitor Judas, to whom the Apostle Saint
Peter, I. Act. 20. applies the eighth Verse of this Psalm. The rest of which is
spent in Prayer to God, against such false accusers; and in vows of the Praises
he would give Him, when he was delivered from the mischief, which thereby they
designed to him. Accordingly, when he was settled in his Throne, he sent this
Psalm among others, unto the Master of Music in the Tabernacle; to perpetuate
the memory of God's mercy to him.

Concerning such Imprecations, as we here meet withal, see the Argument of
Psalm XXXV. which is of the same nature with this.

1. HOld not thy peace, O God of my praise.


1. O God, the supreme Judge of the world, who, as Thou have given me hitherto
continual cause to praise Thee so, I hope wilt still vindicate my honor; I
appeal unto thy Majesty: beseeching Thee to declare thy self on my side; and
make it appear that I am innocent.

2. For the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.


2. For men of no conscience, have taken the liberty to invent the most
mischievous lies of me; whereby, though they always spoke me fair to my face,
they have wickedly traduced me to Saul, behind my back.

3. They compassed me about also with words of hatred: and fought against me
without a cause.


3. And spread those false reports so diligently, that I find they have made me
odious every where: and thereupon, without any provocation from me, have levied
war against me, to take away my life, 1 Samuel XXIII. 8, 25.

4. For my love they are my adversaries: but I give my self unto prayer.


4. Who have been so far from doing them any harm, that I have deserved well of
them: (1 Samuel XIX. 4, 5.) and even now, when they requite my kindness with
endeavors to destroy me, do nothing but recommend my self by prayer to thy
protection; refusing to make use of the opportunity I had to revenge my self
upon them, 1 Samuel XXIV. 9, 10, etc.

5. And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.


5. And yet this will not mollify them; but still they are so extremely
ungrateful, as to repay my kindness, with new attempts to do me mischief, (1 Samuel XXVI. 2.) And the more affection I express, with the greater hatred am I
prosecuted.

6. Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand.


6. So implacable is his malice, who is the principal Author of the calumnies
wherewith I am loaded, (1 Samuel XXII. 9, 11.) against whom therefore I implore
thy justice, O most righteous Judge of the world: Let the worst man that can be
found, be appointed to hear his cause when he is accused; and his most
malicious Adversary plead against him.

7. When he shall be judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer become
sin.


7. When sentence is given, let him be condemned to be as guilty, as really he
is: and if he petition for a pardon, let it not only be rejected, but prove an
aggravation of his crimes.

8. Let his days be few, and let another take his office.


8. Let him (and the false Traitor, who in future times will use the Messiah,
as now they do me) be cut off before his time: and his Office, (1 Samuel XXI. 7.
XXII. 9.) wherein he behaves himself with such insufferable insolence and
falsehood, be transferred to a better man.

9. Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.


9. Let not his Fatherless Children succeed him, in any thing that he has: nor
his Widow, have any thing left to maintain her.

10. Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their
bread also out of their desolate places.


10. Let them not have so much as an house, wherein to put their heads: but be
perpetual Vagabonds, supporting a miserable life by begging an Alms; and
seeking where to lodge, because their own dwellings are laid waste and desolate.

11. Let the extortioner catch all that he has: and let the stranger spoil his
labor.


11. Let his Creditour (pretending a judgment) seize on all his estate: and a
stranger, by that means, reap the fruit of all his care and labor.

12. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to
favor his fatherless children.


12. Let no man show the least kindness to his memory; or upon that account
bestow an Alms upon his Fatherless Children.

13. Let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation following let their
name be blotted out.


13. Let them rather be odious for his sake, and the sooner destroyed: so that
they be the last of the name; and, in the next generation, not one of that
family be found.

14. Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the LORD: and let not
the sin of his mother be blotted out.


14. But, according to the just sentence of thy Law, (XX. Exodus 5.) let the
punishments (which were due long ago, but thy patience moved Thee to forbear)
fall all upon him: let him suffer for the sins of his progenitors on both
side; in whose wicked steps he would not cease to tread.

15. Let them be before the LORD continually, that he may cut off the memory of
them from the earth.


15. Let it be seen that their wickedness is not forgotten, though committed
many years ago: but prosecute it with a continued vengeance; till no body
remember, that there were such people in the world.

16. Because that he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and
needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.


16. This will be but a deserved recompense of all his cruelties: For as he let
all benefits slip out of his mind, and was ungrateful to those, who had
obliged him: so he had no sense of that common compassion, which is due to the
calamitous; but when he saw me in a necessitous condition, destitute of
Friends, and dejected in spirit, made no other use of it but to persecute me to
the death.

17. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in
blessing, so let it be far from him.


17. What can be more just, then that the mischief, in which he delighted, and
both wished and designed to others, should fall upon himself? and that he
should never meet with the blessing of those righteous courses, which he always
hated and avoided?

18. As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with his garment: so let it
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.


18. His very business was to slander others every where; taking a pride in the
mischievous effects of his cursed lies: and therefore let him feel the
miserable fruit of this wickedness, spreading himself, like the water he
drinks, into every vein of him; and sticking as close to him, as oil unto the
bones.

19. Let it be unto him as the garment which covers him, and for a girdle
wherewith he is girded continually.


19. Let him be involved in perpetual misfortunes and miseries; and never be
able to shake them off: Let him be hampered in straits and difficulties;
without any possibility of getting out.

20. Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the LORD, and of them that
speak evil against my soul.


20. This shall most certainly be the reward, which the righteous Lord will
give to my malicious adversaries; for all the pains they have taken, by
slanderous reports and calumnies, to take away my life.

21. But do thou for me, O GOD the Lord, for thy names sake: because thy mercy
is good, deliver thou me.


21. Which I commend to thy protection, O Lord, the Governor of all things;
beseeching Thee to take my part, and appear for me: though not for my honor,
yet for thy own; whose kindness is so exceeding bountiful unto all, that for
that reason I am encouraged to hope Thou will deliver me; to whom Thou have
engaged thy self, by many promises of mercy.

22. For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.


22. Which I never needed more then now: for I am so poor, and forsaken of all
my friends, (1 Samuel XXV. 8, etc.) that I am ready to faint away with grief and
sorrow, like one that is wounded at the very heart.

23. I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down as
the locust.


23. The evening shadow does not vanish sooner then I, from the place of my
present abode, (1 Samuel XXII. 1, 3, 5. XXIII. 13, 14.) which I am forced to quit
on a sudden; and to wander like the Locust, which flies, or is driven, with the
wind, uncertainly from place to place.

24. My knees are weak through fasting: and my flesh fails of fatness.


24. And for want of food in those desert places, I am sometimes scarce able to
remove: for my body, which heretofore was plump and fat, (1 Samuel XVI. 12.) is
now grown lank and thin; like one of those miserable lean Creatures.

25. I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me, they shaked
their heads.


25. Which, instead of moving their pity, has exposed me to such contempt and
scorn; that when I am seen by any of them, they deride and scoff at me as an
undone wretch, that vainly hopes to escape their hands.

26. Help me, O LORD my God: O save me according to thy mercy.


26. But my hope is, that Thou, O Lord, who have hitherto been my most gracious
God, wilt seasonably interpose for my relief: and deliver me, out of that
tender mercy, which is wont to extend it self to those who have nothing else to
depend upon.

27. That they may know that this is thy hand: that thou LORD have done it.


27. Whereby they themselves may be convinced, and forced to acknowledge; that,
not by chance, no more then by my small forces, but by thy Almighty power
alone, and thy care of me, O Lord, I am delivered.

28. Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed: but
let thy servant rejoice.


28. Thy blessing and protection I implore; which if Thou will vouchsafe me,
let them go on to curse and slander me as long as they please; it shall not
hurt me: nay, let them assault me with armed force, they shall only be
confounded at their vain attempt; and give thy servant the greater cause, to
rejoice at their disappointment.

29. Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion, as with a mantle.


29. Which shall so increase the confusion of my malicious adversaries; that
they shall not be able to bear the disgrace: but wish they could hide
themselves from the sight of their shame, which their own wickedness has
brought upon them.

30. I will greatly praise the LORD with my mouth: yea, I will praise him among
the multitude.


30. In hope of which defeat, I now beforehand to the Lord the best expressions
of my gratitude, that I am able to make: not only in private, but in the
greatest Assemblies; where I will not cease to praise his Almighty love.

31. For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those
that condemn his soul.


31. And bid them trust in God; who has pleaded my cause, and rescued me from
death: and will ever be the Advocate of him that has no helper; but depends on
his goodness, to deliver him from the hands of those Judges, who prosecute the
unjust sentence, they have passed upon him to lose his life.

PSALM CX.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
There is the same reason to think this Psalm was composed by David (not by
some other concerning David) that there is to conclude all the rest to be so,
which have the same Title. And then, as it is very plain he speaks of some
person much greater then himself, whom he calls his Lord, so it can be no
other, but the Lord Christ, of whom he here prophesies. Not, as he is wont to
do elsewhere, with respect to himself in the first place, as His type and
figure; but in plain words, which can belong to none but Christ alone. For no
other King but He, can be said, in any sense, to sit at God's right hand: nor
was there any Priest of the order of Melchisedek, that could be a shadow of him.

David indeed seems once to have exercised the Office of a Priest, when he
blessed the people, at the bringing of the Ark to Sion, (2 Samuel VI. 18.) and so
to have been then both King and Priest, in one person, as Melchifedek was: but
not a Priest for ever, on whom the Office was perpetually established, and that
by an Oath; as it was on the Priest here mentioned.

And therefore it is in vain, to endeavor to accommodate any part of this
Psalm to David; who conquered many of the neighboring Countries, smote their
Kings, made them bring him tributes, and at last smote the head of the Country
of Rabbah (as some render the last words of the sixth verse of this Psalm) that
is, the King of the Children of Ammon: But still we are to seek, how the rest
can be applied to him; who never had any pretense to such an authority as is
here described; nor can in any sense call himself, my Lord; but as our Lord
Christ has demonstrated spoke concerning Him, (XXII. Matt. 43, etc.) and his
Exaltation, after his Resurrection from the dead, (as Saint Peter and Saint
Paul also show, II. Act. 34, 35. 1 Cor XV. 25. IV. Hebr. 1, 13. V. 6.) when He
set up another Priesthood, and abolished that of Moses: which change is here
predicted.

And though the Jews have taken a great deal of pains, to wrest this Psalm to
another sense; yet they are so divided in their opinions about it, (speaking
inconsistent things, like drunken men, as Saint Chrysostom's words are, or
rather, says he, like men in the dark, running against one another) that from
thence alone we may be satisfied they are in the wrong, and have their eyes
blinded: else they would not have embraced such interpretations, as those which
may be seen in them, that have written upon this Psalm. Which some of the Jews
themselves (such as R. Moses Hadarsan, Saadias Gaon, and diverse others whom I
might mention) have been forced to acknowledge belongs to Christ: and is a very
plain prediction of his Divinity, his royal Dignity, his Priesthood, and his
victories and triumphs; which the Psalmist sets forth as follows.

1. THe LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.


1. THis is the decree of the eternal LORD, that the great person, whom we
expect, and whom I honor as my Lord and Master, shall be advanced (after his
sufferings) to the highest dignity (1 King. II. 19.) in the heavens: and reign
with Him, as the King of all the world; till He have perfectly subdued (X.
Josh. 24.) the most powerful opposers of his Kingdom; and overcome death it
self, by whom all mankind are conquered, 1 Cor. XV. 25, 26.

2. The LORD shall send the rod of thy strength out of Sion: rule thou in the
mids of thine enemies.


2. The eternal Lord, w^ has thus decreed to honor Thee, O most mighty
Prince, will make Sion, first of all, to feel how powerful thy Scepter is, (I.
Act. 8. II. 34, 37.) and thence extend thy Empire over all the Earth: where I
wish Thou may, and foretell Thou will, prevail over all Infidelity,
Idolatry, Superstition and Impiety; which will set themselves against thy
Authority.

3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness from the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy youth.


3. For in the day when thy forces, (2 Timothy II. 3.) completely armed with a
Divine power, (IV. Act. 33.) shall march forth to subdue the world, unto thy
obedience; they that are fit for thy Kingdom (IX. Luke 62. XIII. Act. 48.)
shall cheerfully submit themselves, and present Thee with free will Offerings,
in token of their absolute subjection to Thee: (II. Act. 45. IV. 34.) And great
shall be the number of chosen men, (1 John II. 13.) who, glad to see the night
of Ignorance gone, shall at thy first appearance, by the celestial blessing,
fall unto Thee, as thick as the morning dew.

4. The LORD has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedek.


4. And happy are they who live under thy Government; for the Lord has
unchangeably resolved, that Thou shall be a Priest as well as a King; with full
power to bless all thy Subjects, not only in that, but in all future Ages,
even to all Eternity: For Thou shall not be a Priest like those after Aaron's
order, who die to make room for others; but, like that great King and Priest
Melchisedek, shall neither have any Predecessor, nor Successor in thine
Office; but continue a royal Priest for evermore. Hebr. VII.

5. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his
wrath.


5. Who, as he will be most compassionate to all those, that heartily
acknowledge Him for their Lord, and submit unto His Government; so will break
in pieces the greatest powers on earth that provoke his displeasure, by
obstinate opposal of his Authority at thy right hand.

6. He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies: he shall wound the heads over many countries.


6. From whence He shall demonstrate Himself to all the heathen world, to be
their Lawgiver and their Judge: taking a severe vengeance on those that
persecute his Subjects; and destroying, at last, even that mighty Empire, which
shall then rule over many Countries.

7. He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.


7. But before all this, He shall first humble Himself to the meanest
condition; not living in the state of a King here in this world, but of a
wayfaring man, (IX. Luke 56.) who is content with such provision as he meets
withal: For which cause, after the enduring many hardships, even death it
self, He shall be highly exalted to his Royal and Priestly dignity in the
Heavens; from whence He shall never fall.

PSALM CXI.
Hallelujah, i. e. Praise the Lord.
ARGUMENT.
It is certain this is the Title of the Psalm: which consists of as many short
Metres as there are Letters in the Hebrew Alphabet; and therefore cannot begin
with Hallelujah, whose first Letter is the fifth, not the first Letter in that
Alphabet. In which order it proceeds for the better help of the memory: being
composed thus artificially, that every one, as well as the singers (to whom the
Hallelujah perhaps is particularly directed) might have in their minds a brief
form of thanking God (especially upon festival days) for the wonderful things
He had done for that Nation.

It was a meditation which the Author had in time of peace and quiet; for in
distress, or immediately after a great deliverance, men's spirits are not at
liberty to use such art and curiosity in their composures, as there is in this
Psalm: being full, at those seasons, of such passions, as make them neglect it,
even when they are inclined to use it. (see Psalm XXV.) For which reason I
think Theodoret's opinion has no ground; that the Psalmist has respect to the
great Victory obtained by Jehoshaphat over the Ammonites and other Nations, who
invaded his Kingdom: for which they gave thanks to God, presently after, 2 Chr.
XX. It is more likely that David who composed those larger forms of
commemoration, Psalm CV. and CVI. made this (as I said) for a compendious
remembrance of what is there more largely delivered. And that He might not
exceed the number of the Ten Commandments (as some give the reason of it) in
the Verses of this Psalm, the Metres of the two last are so short; that they
have, each of them, three Letters of the Alphabet in them, whereas all the
former have but two.

1. PRaise ye the LORD. I will praise the LORD with my whole heart, in the
assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.


1. I Will make my thankful acknowledgments to the Lord, not only with my
lips, or with some slight affections of my mind; but with all my heart and
soul: And that not only in the private society of those good ^en, whom I am
more in^mately acquainted withal; but in the public congregation of all his
people.

2. The works of the LORD are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.


2. Who ought to join together to praise the Lord, for his mighty and
wonderful works; which it will not cost them much labor to understand; for
they are easily found out by all those, who take any pleasure in such inquiries.

3. His work is honorable and glorious: and his righteousness endures for
ever.


3. And there is not one of them but is full of majesty and splendor; and the
fruit of his infinite bounty, and faithfulness to his promise: which He still
expresses toward us; and will do so for ever.

4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the LORD is gracious and
full of compassion.


4. And, such is his Goodness, lest we should forget his Benefits, He has
instituted solemn times for the commemoration of the wonders He has done for
us, (XII. Exodus 14. XIII. 3, 9, etc.) which are everlasting testimonies, that
we serve a most gracious and compassionate Lord.

5. He has given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his
covenant.


5. Who gave our Forefathers (whom by his wonderful works He possessed with
the fear of Him, XIV. Exodus 31.) the spoil of the Egyptians, (XII. Exodus 35,
36.) and afterward fed them with Manna in the wilderness, (XVI. Exodus.)
according to his Covenant, which He had made long before, (XV. Genesis 14.) and
will never forget in future Ages.

6. He has showed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen.


6. He has evidently demonstrated to his people the greatness of his power, in
destroying Sihon the Amorite, (II. Deuteronomy. 24, 25.) and Og the King of Bashan,
(III. Deuteronomy. 21, 24.) with the rest of the Amorites and other Nations, in the
Land of Canaan: (X. Josh. 6, 11, 12, etc.) which He took from the ancient
Inhabitants, that He might give it us for our possession.

7. The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are
sure.


7. In which He did them no wrong; but was exactly just in fulfilling his
promise to us, and in executing his judgments upon those wicked wretches: (IX.
Deuteronomy. 5. XV. Genesis 16.) For all his orders of either kind, are in pursuance of
most righteous decrees.

8. They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness.


8. Which He does not alter and change at pleasure; but has settled as eternal
Rules: because there is no partiality, or iniquity in them; but they were
enacted with a sincere respect to all men's good and happiness.

9. He sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his covenant for
ever: holy and reverend is his name.


9. And it was in conformity to these that He at first sent Moses and Aaron, to
bring our Fathers out of Egypt, (VI. Exodus 6.) and then exercised his supreme
authority over them, in giving them a Law, which He tied them by a Covenant
perpetually to observe; (XIX. Exodus 4, 5. XXIV. 8.) Appearing in such Majesty
to them, (XX. Exodus 18. XXIV. 10, 11.) as might possess them with an awful
regard to Him; and make them for ever dread, by any profaneness, to offend Him,
who infinitely excells all other Beings.

10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding
have all they that do his commandments: his praise endures for ever.


10. And indeed, it is the first and principal point of wisdom to fear the
Lord, and carefully observe his Commandments: the practice of which give, men a
better understanding of what is good for them, then any politic maxims can
infuse into them. Therefore let the Lord be for ever praised, who has given us
these good and wholesome Laws; and thereby shown us the way to eternal honor
and praise.

PSALM CXII.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm is composed after the very same manner with the former; and seems
to be intended for a short Commentary upon the last Verse of it: showing how
well and wisely they consult their own good and happiness, who observe God's
Commandments; especially those about Charity, or doing good to others. Of which
that they might be always mindful the Psalm is contrived, for the help of
their memories, into as many short Versicles, as there are Letters in the
Hebrew Alphabet. Hallelujah therefore is no part of them, but the Title prefixed
to the Psalm, (see upon Psalm CXI.) to excite them to praise the Lord; who had
made it their present interest to be religious.

1. PRaise ye the LORD. Blessed is the man that fears the LORD, that
delights greatly in his commandments.


1. HAppy is that man whose chiefest care it is to please the Lord; by
observing his Commandments: which will yield, in the issue, the highest
pleasure and satisfaction of mind to himself.

2. His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be
blessed,


2. And procure a blessing also upon all belonging to him: first, upon his
Children, and those that shall descend from them in future times; who shall
fare the better, and be more powerful and prosperous, for the sincere virtue
of their pious Forefathers.

3. Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endures for
ever.


3. And next on his Estate: which shall not only be rich and plentiful, but
so firmly settled and intailed on his posterity; that they shall reap the
perpetual fruit of his justice and charity.

4. Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness: he is gracious, and
full of compassion, and righteous.


4. Or if any affliction come, it will be so far from making him unhappy; that,
besides the Divine comforts imparted to him for his support, it will make the
virtue of upright men the more illustrious: while one exercises meekness and
sweetness to those that provoke him; another forgives offenses, and pities the
instruments of his trouble; and a third exercises the greater justice or mercy,
and will not be tempted to do any dishonest or cruel thing for his own
deliverance.

5. A good man shows favor, and lends; he will guide his affairs with
discretion.


5. But, above all other men, he leads the most comfortable life, who is so
kind, that he supplies the needs of others; giving to one, and lending to
another, as occasion serves: and yet ordering all his affairs so judiciously,
that he does not impair, but rather maintain, the good estate of his own family.

6. Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance.


6. Sure, it will not be in the power of the most mighty and malicious enemies
(though they may disturb him) quite to overthrow him: and, when they are
forgotten, or mentioned with contempt, the worthy actions of this sort of
righteous men, shall be celebrated with never-ceasing praises.

7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the
LORD.


7. He is not affrighted and discomposed at the false reports that are raised
of him; nor at the rumor of dangers which threaten him: being prepared for
such things as these, by a settled trust and hope in God; that He will take
care of him, who has been as kind as he could to others in their distresses.

8. His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire
upon his enemies.


8. This confidence is the prop and support of his soul; which will not let him
be dismayed: but makes him expect the time, when he shall be able securely to
look upon all his enemies.

9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures
for ever; his born shall be exalted with honor.


9. He does not merely heap up riches for himself; but dispenses them to
others, dispenses them to others, especially to the poor and needy, with a
liberal hand: Nor is he weary of welldoing, but ever producing some new fruit
of his charity; which shall gain him the greatest honor, and raise him to an
illustrious degree of power and authority.

10. The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth,
and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.


10. At the sight of which the wicked (who shall not be able not to observe it)
shall be extremely vexed; or rather furiously enraged: he shall pine away with
grief, envy and impatience, to see himself, and his companions, disappointed in
all that they wished; either of good to themselves, or evil to the righteous.

PSALM CXIII.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm, with the Five next which follow, the Hebrews call by the name of
Hallel, or Hymn: which they recited at their Table (as in the New Moons, and
other Feasts so) in the Paschal Night, after they had eaten the Lamb;
concluding it with Hallelujah: which is the Title of this Psalm (as of the two
foregoing) to excite all God's people, especially those that constantly
attended in the Tabernacle, to the praises of Gods good Providence; which
extends it self, as far as this Earth where we live: several instances of which
the Psalmist here mentions.

1. PRaise ye the LORD. Praise, O ye servants of the LORD, praise the name of
the LORD.


1. O Ye Ministers of the Lord, and whosoever you are that love his Service,
praise his eternal Majesty: be not remiss in this heavenly employment; but,
with your best affections, praise the power, wisdom and goodness of his
eternal Providence.

2. Blessed be the name of the LORD, from this time forth and for evermore.


2. Praise him now in this present Age; and wish that those incomparable
perfections of his, may be celebrated with the praises of those, that live in
future times as long as the world shall last.

3. From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same, the LORD's name
is to be praised.


3. And not only here in this little spot of earth; but wheresoever the Sun
shines, and lets men see how splendid and glorious his Majesty is.

4. The LORD is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.


4. For all the Nations of the earth are his; and but a little parcel of his
supreme Dominion: which extends far beyond the Sun, and Moon, and Stars; whose
light is but a dim resemblance of the brightness of his glory.

5. Who is like unto the LORD our God, who dwells on high?


5. Do not think that any of them (though worshipped by other Nations as gods)
is comparable to that great Lord, and our most gracious God, whom we adore: for
the very place where his glorious Majesty resides, is far higher then they.

6. Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and in the
earth?


6. And it is a great condescension in him, that He will have any respect to
the most illustrious of those celestial bodies: though He be so gracious also,
as to extend his kind and careful Providence, even to us who dwell upon this
earth.

7. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill:


7. Where, among other manifest tokens of his stupendous goodness, He is
pleased to take special notice of those, whom the world despises: and to raise
them out of a mean, nay sordid, condition, to such a pitch of honor and
dignity;

8. That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people.


8. That at last they are advanced to sit upon a Throne; and made the
Governors of his own people: (1 Samuel II. 8. 2 Samuel VII. 8, 9. compared with 1.
XXIV. 14.)

9. He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of
children. Praise ye the LORD.


9. And, which is still more strange, He opens the barren womb, (which
according to the course of nature would have brought forth nothing) and makes a
numerous Family spring from thence; to the great joy of her that bears them, 1 Samuel I. 20. II. 21. Praise the Lord in these, and such like wonderful works of
his.

PSALM CXIV.
ARGUMENT.
As the foregoing Psalm puts them in mind of several works of the Divine
Providence, about particular persons: so this makes a brief narration of some
miraculous works; wherein the Lord declared his power, when He brought the
whole Jewish Nation out of the Egyptian bondage.

1. WHen Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange
language;


1. WHen our Forefathers, with their whole Family were brought out of Egypt;
and not one of them left behind among that barbarous people who had long
oppressed them:

2. Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.


2. There was a most glorious appearance of God among them; by that bright
cloud, the token of his presence: which then had no other peculiar place for
its sanctuary; but stood over the whole Camp of Israel, (XIII. Exodus 21. XIV.
Numb. 14.) whom He then took for his peculiar Kingdom, (XIX. Exodus 6.)

3. The sea saw it, and fled; Fordan was driven back.


3. At which appearance the red Sea forsook its channel, and left a dry path
for them to march through: (XIV. Exodus 21, 24.) and so did Jordan also
afterward; to make way for their easy entrance into Canaan, III. Josh. 15, 16.

4. The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.


4. All the Mountains great and small, which adjoined unto Sinai, trembled and
leaped, like so many affrighted rams, or little lambs; before the same most
dreadful Majesty, (XIX. Exodus 18.)

5. What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou
wast driven back?


5. To what else shall we ascribe that sudden ebb of the Sea? and that, no less
strange, retreat of Jordan, when it overflowed all its banks?

6. Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills like lambs?


6. What made the mountains and hills leap up, like affrighted rams or lambs?
as if they would run away from the place, where they were so firmly fixed?

7. Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God
of Jacob,


7. But only the glorious presence of the Divine Majesty, who was then
bringing his people to the rest He had promised to give them. And let the whole
earth be afraid and tremble before that great Lord; who has honored us so
far, as peculiarly to be our God:

8. Which turned the tock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of
waters.


8. And was so kind as to supply the necessities of our Forefathers, even when
they murmured against Him, by a new Miracle: bringing out of hard rocks, as
hard as flint, such plenty of water; as if they had been dissolved into lakes
or rivers, XVII. Exodus 8. XX. Numb. 11.

PSALM CXV.
ARGUMENT.
There is great reason to think, that this Psalm was made in some time of sore
distress; when their Pagan Enemies began to boast and brag, as if their gods
were too hard for the God of Israel. But by whom it was made, or on what
particular occasion, there are so many conjectures; that it will be no
presumption to interpose mine: which is this. That when Jehoshaphat saw that
vast Army (which we read of 2 Chronicles. XX. 2.) composed of several Nations,
coming against him; and after his prayer to God for deliverance, was encouraged
by a Prophet to hope for it; (Ver. 14, 15.) and had by the Levites given Him
thanks for this hope; he, or that Prophet, composed this Hymn, to quicken and
confirm their faith in God: unto which you read he exhorted them, Ver. 20. And
it is likely that this was the Hymn, which by common consent the Singers were
appointed to use, when they went out to encounter those Enemies: saying not
only those words, which we read there, Ver. 21. Praise the Lord, for his
mercy endures for ever; but these, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy Name give glory; for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake, etc.

1. NOT unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy
mercy, and for thy truths sake.


1. PRosper our arms, O Lord, and give us the victory over these enemies that
invade us: not that we may grow more famous; (no, we have no thoughts of the
glory that will accrue to our selves thereby) but that thy Divine Majesty may
be honored, and thy goodness and faithfulness to thy promises be made the more
illustrious.

2. Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?


2. What a sad thing will it be, to hear the Nations that surround us insult,
not so much over us as, over Thee; saying, what is become of their God, in whom
they trusted? If He be so powerful as they boast, why does He not deliver them?

3. But our God is in the heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased.


3. Let them know that Thou art infinitely superior to them, and all their
gods; being the possessour of the heavens, as well as the earth, (2 Chronicles. XX.
6.) whom no power of theirs can hurt, or so much as restrain; but art able to
do whatsoever Thou please, for their confusion and for our deliverance.

4. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.


4. Their Idols cannot hinder it in the least: who are of no more value, then
the silver and gold of which they are made: and are so far from being the
makers of things, that they themselves are the work of those that adore them.

5. They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not.


5. They are mere lifeless Images; that have mouths, but cannot give a word of
advice, or of encouragement and comfort to their supplicants: and eyes also,
but cannot see the devotion wherewith they look up unto them, or prostrate
themselves before them.

6. They have ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not.


6. Let their worshippers cry to them never so loudly, they cannot hear a word:
All the Frankincense and sweet Odours which they burn to them, are merely lost;
for they cannot smell them.

7. They have hands, but they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not;
neither speak they through their throat.


7. Though they have thunderbolts in their hands, they feel them not; nor are
able to do either good or harm: They cannot stir a foot from the place where
they stand, unless they be carried; nor make so much noise as a fly; being
utterly void of breath, as well as of sense and reason.

8. They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusts in
them.


8. To what then, but to those Idols, shall we compare the makers of them, and
such as confide in them? who are mere Images of men: having eyes, but do not
see that the brutes are more excellent then such gods; and that the least help
is not to be expected from them.

9. O Israel, trust thou in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.


9. O ye Israelites, who by the Divine Favor are better instructed, repose
that confidence in the eternal Lord, which they do in those Vanities: And He
will not only protect and defend you, against all the assaults of your
enemies; but help you to overcome them, 2 Chronicles. XX. 9.

10. O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.


10. O ye Priests and Levites, do you above all others rely upon that eternal
Lord; whose praise you sing, and to whom you offer continual Sacrifice: For He
will never fail, not only to protect but, to assist all such as piously
confide in Him.

11. Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their
shield.


11. And let all that fear the Lord and devoutly worship Him, (of whatsoever
Nation they be) place the like confidence in his Almighty Goodness: For He will
never forsake those that depend on Him alone, (though they be not of the seed
of Abraham) but defend them also in all dangers, and aid them against all their
enemies.

12. The LORD has been mindful of us, he will bless us, he will bless the
house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron.


12. We have had abundant experience of his care over us in all ages; and
therefore, though now for the present, our enemies afflict us yet, let us
believe that the Lord will do us good, and bless us with a glorious
deliverance: All the house of Israel shall see how kind He is; especially they
that minister unto Him in his holy Temple.

13. He will bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great.


13. And He will not forget those pious Proselytes, that are come to worship
Him there, as the only God; but, without any respect of persons, give them his
blessing also: which shall not be denied, either to old or young, to rich or
poor.

14. The LORD shall increase you more and more, you and your children.


14. Nor will He grant you only a single blessing, by sending a present
deliverance: but heap his benefits, and multiply his mercies upon you; and upon
all those that shall succeed you.

15. You are blessed of the LORD, which made heaven and earth.


15. Ye are a happy people, who live under the care, and love, and benediction,
of that mighty Lord; whose power nothing can confine: for He is not made (like
the Gentile gods) but Himself created both the Heaven and the Earth.

16. The heaven, even the heavens are the LORD's: but the earth has he given
to the children of men.


16. In which He cannot be comprehended neither; for his Empire extends further
then you can see; to the heavens, which are above these visible heavens: from
whence his Providence reaches down, even to us the children of men; whom He
has placed upon this earth, to admire and praise his infinite Majesty.

17. The dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into silence.


17. And therefore will not suffer us to be rooted out, as our enemies design,
(2 Chronicles. XX. 11.) for then the earth would have none in it, to sing his
praises: which the dead, who dwell in the silent grave, cannot celebrate:

18. But we will bless the LORD, from this time forth and for evermore. Praise
the LORD.


18. But will continue us still alive, that we may praise the Lord, and speak
good of his Name, as we do at this time, (2 Chronicles. XX. 21, 22.) and leave those
to succeed us, who shall continue his praises in all future generations, to the
worlds end. Hallelujah, Praise the Lord.

PSALM CXVI.
ARGUMENT.
I do not understand the reason why Theodoret applies this Psalm to the times
of Antiochus Epiphanes, when it agrees so exactly to the condition of David in
his flight from his Son Absalom, (which seems to be mentioned Ver. 11.) when
Ahitophel and others proved very false to him; and he had little or nothing to
depend upon, but only the Goodness of the Almighty; who was pleased to plead
his cause, and deliver him. For which he resolved to be very thankful, and to
call all his Friends to rejoice with him, as I have expressed it Ver. 13. where
the first words sufficiently declare the sense; but I have added more to
explain the phrase, which is borrowed from the custom of those days: about
which the Reader may consult Mr. Mede, p. 483. last Edit. In this resolution he
was so serious, that he repeats it again in the conclusion; and says he will
pay his vows in the midst of Jerusalem: from whence the History tells us he was
forced to fly in great haste, to save his life, 2 Samuel XV. 14, etc.

This seems to be the occasion of the Psalm, which may very well befit any
other persons, that receive any great deliverance from God; and accordingly I
will order the Paraphrase, and fit it for the expressing of their devout
affections.

1. I Love the LORD, because he has heard my veice, and my supplications.


1. O How I love the Lord! He knows that I love Him exceedingly: and there is
the greatest reason for it; because He has so graciously heard my prayer, when
in my distress I cried unto Him.

2. Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.


2. I cannot choose but mention again this love of his, in granting so readily
my desires: which incourages, and ingages me, on all such occasions, to address
my self, with thankful acknowledgments, unto Him; and, to the last breath of
my life, to expect deliverance from Him.

3. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me:
I found trouble and sorrow.


3. Great was my misery; exceeding great: Death it self, and the grave were
ready to seize on me; and I saw no way to escape: nay, I my self, in the
anguish of my Soul, inconsiderately cast my self into danger.

4. Then called I upon the name of the LORD; O LORD, I beseech thee, deliver my
soul.


4. Yet I did not despond in these straits; but made the mighty, wise and good
Providence of God my refuge; to whom I cried, saying; O Lord, who wast before
all things, and command them as Thou please; rescue me, I most humbly
beseech Thee, from those dangers, which threaten my destruction.

5. Gracious is the LORD, and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.


5. And it was not in vain that I cried unto Him; for the Lord has shown me
how ready He is to do good, and how faithful in his promises: and withal how
gentle in his punishments, and inclinable to pardon our faults; which
demonstrates that no people serve such a gracious Master, as our merciful God.

6. The LORD preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.


6. I had perished, I am sure, if I had relied only on my own Wisdom, or the
skill and policy of others: But the Lord was my hope, who preserves the most
simple and incautious Souls, when they commit themselves to Him, and wholly
depend on his Providence. I ought to say so; who was reduced to a most forlorn
estate, and then, by his assistance, in a wonderful manner delivered.

7. Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the LORD has dealt bountifully with
thee.


7. What have Thou then to do, O my Soul, who have been so tempestuously
tossed, but to settle thy self again in peace and tranquillity? loving and
praising the Lord, who has very many ways expressed his bounty most liberally
to thee.

8. For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.


8. For when the dangers of death surrounded me, Thou, O my God, did deliver
me: when ever any sadness seized on me, Thou have been my Comforter: and when I
have been in danger of hurts, maims, or bruises (or of falling into the hands
of my enemies) Thou still have been my Protector.

9. I will walk before the LORD in the land of the living.


9. I ought therefore, and I am resolved to employ all that health and
cheerfulness, that soundness of body and mind, that peace and safety, which
Thou have thus graciously bestowed on me, in doing Thee (to whom as my
Sovereign Lord I owe) all faithful service; as long as I stay in this world.

10. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.


10. I had nothing, I will thankfully remember, to depend upon, but only thy
kind Providence: In this I placed my trust; in this I placed my trust; in this
I gloried to others, when I was in my greatest straits: for the truth is I was
extremely miserable;

11. I said in my haste, All men are liars.


11. Pressed on all sides with dangers; from which when I fled as fast as I was
able, (2 Samuel XV. 14. XVII. 16. 22.) I concluded it was vain to rely on the
friendship and help of men: For they in whom I trusted proved so false and
treacherous, (2 Samuel XV. 31.) that I had reason to think the rest would deceive
and fail my expectation; when I was in the greatest need of them.

12. What shall I render unto the LORD for all his benefits toward me?


12. O the greatness of thy love! who even then did interpose and deliver me,
by the assistance of some faithful Friends, who still stuck to me! (2 Samuel
XVII. 13, etc.) What shall I render unto the Lord, who heard my prayer? (2 Samuel
XV. 31.) How shall I show my self grateful to Him, for this, and for all other
his benefits, which He has heaped upon me?

13. I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the LORD.


13. All that I can do, cannot make Him more happy: But, as my duty binds me,
I will praise the Lord, and speak good of his Name, and give Him thanks, in the
best and most solemn manner I am able: I will call all my Friends together to
rejoice with me, and taking the Cup, which we call the Cup of Deliverance,
(because when blessed and set apart, we are wont to commemorate the blessings
we have received) I will magnify the Power, Goodness and Faithfulness of God
my Savior before all the company; and will drink my self, and then give it to
them, that they may praise his Name together with me.

14. I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now in the presence of all his people.


14. And whatsoever I have promised Thee, O Lord, in the time of my distress, I
will faithfully engage my self to perform before them all: They shall see I am
not forgetful of Thee, who wast so mindful of me in my trouble.

15. Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of his saints.


15. As indeed Thou art of all good men, whose lives Thou preservest as a
precious Jewel: and wilt not give them up to the pleasure of their enemies; nor
suffer them to be lost, but by thy special Providence.

16. Oh LORD, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds.


16. Accept, good Lord, of these my resolutions; for I am sensible that I am
thy servant; every way thy servant, and entirely obliged to be faithful to
Thee: both by my Birth, and by my Education; and by this mavelous
Deliverance, whereby Thou have rescued me from the power of death, which had,
in a manner, taken hold of me.

17. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the
name of the LORD.


17. I can never sure prove ungrateful to Thee, unto whom I am tied by so many
bonds; But will always be making Thee my most thankful, solemn
acknowledgments, for the benefits I have received: And together with those
praises, and thanksgivings, wait upon thy Goodness, for the like mercies in
time to come.

18. I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now in the presence of all his people:


18. I resolve again, religiously to make good these, and all other my vows,
wherein I stand engaged to the Lord: and that not only in private; but here at
this solemnity, in the face of all his people:

19. In the courts of the LORD's house in the midst of thee O Jerusalem. Praise
ye the LORD.


19. When they are gathered together at his House, in the midst of the holy
City of our God; where they meet to worship Him, and to do Him honor. There
let them all join with me, to bless and praise the great Creator and Preserver
of all things.

PSALM CXVII.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm (like the CX.) seems to be altogether Prophetical, of the joy that
all the world should conceive, at the coming of the Messiah: to give Salvation,
first to the Jews, and then to all other Nations; according to his faithful
promise. Saint Paul applies the first words of it to this business, Romans XV.
11. and some of the Hebrews justify his application; confessing that this
Psalm belongs to that matter. The brevity of it makes it the more remarkable;
and easier to be remembered both by Jews and Gentiles.

1. O Praise the LORD, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.


1. LET not the praises, which are due to the great Lord of all, be confined to
our Nation; but let all people upon the face of the earth praise Him: Let all
mankind sing thankful hymns unto Him.

2. For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the LORD
endures for ever. Praise ye the LORD.


2. For they are all concerned in his transcendent kindness; which has done
mighty things for us: and the Lord, who changes not, will never fail to perform
his faithful promises to the worlds end. Therefore let us all join our
praises, to our common Benefactour.

PSALM CXVIII.
ARGUMENT.
There is nothing more probable then that David composed this Psalm, after God
had settled him upon the Throne of Israel as well as Judah; and also subdued
the Philistines (who hoped to have crushed him before he grew too powerful, 2 Samuel V. 17.) together with other enemies round about him, who, though they are
not mentioned yet, in all likelihood joined with them; as we may gather from
Ver. 10, 11. of this Psalm, compared with 2 Samuel VII. 1. For that it was
written after he had brought the Ark to Jerusalem, (mentioned there Chap. VI.)
and placed it in the House he had prepared for it; seems very plain from Ver.
19. of this Psalm: Where he begins to praise God in such words, as had not
their complete fulfilling till the Lord's Christ, (whom the Jews rejected, and
said, He shall not reign over us) was made King of the World. For to Him R.
Solomon himself acknowledges those words, The stone which the builders refused,
etc. are to be applied.

And as the latter part of the Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ, in David his
Type; so the former part may be accommodated to all Christians: who, being
persecuted (as Theodoret speaks) and tormented, and disgracefully treated, by
many Princes and their people, by Kings and Governors; got a glorious Victory
over them all, after they had endured a thousand deaths.

It seems also to have been pronounced, at first, in some solemn assembly of
all the people, met together to praise the Lord for his benefits. And, it is
the common opinion of most Interpreters, that they all had a part in this
Psalm. The greatest part of which was spoken by David; who begins with a
declaration how much he was indebted to God, desiring all to assist him in his
praises: And then coming in a solemn procession, I suppose, to the Gates of the
Tabernacle, calls upon the Porters, Verse 19. to open them to him; that he
might praise God in his Sanctuary: which he does in the very entrance, Ver. 20;
and then in the Courts of his House Ver. 21. After which all the people shout,
and magnify the Divine Goodness; in making him, who was banished from his
Country, their King, Ver. 22, etc. And then the Priests come forth, and bless
both the King and people in the Name of the Lord, Ver. 26; and exhort them to
be thankful, Ver. 27: And then David seems to take the words out of their
mouth, and to declare that he will never be unmindfull of God's benefits;
desiring all the people also to remember them, Ver. 28, 29. According to which
account of the Psalm, I have ordered the Paraphrase.

1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: because his mercy endures for
ever.


1. O Make your thankful acknowledgments to the great Lord of all the world:
who, as He is the Author of all good, and has been exceeding bountiful unto
us; so will continue his kindness to all succeeding generations.

2. Let Israel now say, that his mercy endures for ever.


2. Let the Children of Israel who have had such long experience of his love,
and now see his promises fulfilled; let them confess and thankfully
acknowledge, that his kindness continues to all generations.

3. Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endures for ever.


3. Let the Priests and the Levites, whose business it is to attend upon His
service, confess now and thankfully acknowledge; that his kindness extends unto
all ages.

4. Let them now that fear the LORD, say, that his mercy endures for ever.


4. And let all the devout Worshippers of the Lord, of whatsoever Nation they
be, join together with us, (for there is one Lord of all, who dispenses various
benefits to every one of us) and confess now most thankfully, that there is no
end of his kindness.

5. I called upon the LORD in distress: the LORD answered me, and set me in a
large place.


5. You may see an example of it in me, who was in grievous straits and
dangers, (1 Samuel XXIII. 26. XXVII. 1.) but then imploring the Divine
Protection, the Lord not only delivered me; but placed me in a secure estate,
free from all such molestation, 2 Samuel V. 3. VII. 1.

6. The LORD is on my side, I will not fear: what can man do unto me?


6. For the Lord, it is evident, takes my part; and therefore, though I have
many enemies, I am not afraid of them: for, when He is for me, what disturbance
can men, be they never so powerful, give me?

7. The LORD takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon them that hate me.


7. It is sufficient that the Lord, who has done great things for me by weak
instruments, is still aiding to me: therefore I dare look the most malicious
enemies in the face; and doubt not to see them turn their backs upon me, (2 Samuel VIII.)

8. It is better to trust in the LORD, then to put confidence in man.


8. This is my hope; and long experience has taught me, that it is much safer
to rely upon Him, then upon the most numerous Armies.

9. It is better to trust in the LORD, then to put confidence in princes.


9. Far more safe to depend upon his help and protection, (who as He can do
what He pleases, and is constant to his word, so never dies) then to confide in
the aid of the greatest Princes; whose mind may change, or their forces fail,
or they themselves, on a sudden, leave the world.

10. All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the LORD will I destroy
them.


10. All the neighboring Nations, round about (2 Samuel V. 17, etc. VII. 1.)
combined with the Philistines to inviron me: but, by the Almighty power of the
Lord, I was consident, that I should hew them in pieces.

11. They compassed me about, yea, they compassed me about: but in the name of
the LORD I will destroy them.


11. Again they made a new invasion, and beset me with stronger forces; (2 Samuel
V. 22, etc.) but still, by the Almighty power of the Lord, I doubted not, that
I should cut them off, and utterly defeat them.

12. They compassed me about like bees, they are quenched as the fire of
thorns: for in the name of the LORD I will destroy them.


12. Though they were exceeding numerous, swarming about me like angry bees,
and flaming with such rage and fury, as if they would presently consume me: yet
it was but like the blaze of fire among thorns, for, by the Almighty power of
the Lord, I was confident I should destroy them.

13. Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the LORD helped me.


13. They pressed me exceeding hard, and, as one man, conspired with all their
might to throw me down from the Throne, to which I was advanced: But, though
they shaked it and it was ready to fall yet, by the help of the Lord it was
supported.

14. The LORD is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.


14. To Him alone I ascribe my present happiness, saying with our Forefathers
in their triumphant Song, (XV. Exodus 2.) the Lord has armed me with invincible
strength; He, and He alone, is to be praised, who has given me a most glorious
deliverance.

15. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous: the right hand of the LORD does valiantly.


15. Which comforts the hearts of all righteous men; whose houses sound with
such joyful shouts of praise, for my deliverance, as these; The mighty power
of the Lord has done most stupendous things:

16. The right hand of the LORD is exalted: the right hand of the LORD does
valiantly.


16. He has made his mighty power appear to be superior to all other; for not
by man, but by that power we have, again and again, obtained illustrious
victories over our enemies, 2 Samuel XIX. 9.

17. I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the LORD.


17. From whence I conclude, that I shall not fall into the hands of those,
that would take away my life; but still prolong it, to declare what wonderful
works the Lord has done for me.

18. The LORD has chastened me sore: but he has not given me over unto death.


18. Who has let my enemies have power to afflict me very sorely; but not to
proceed so far, as to destroy me.

19. Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go in to them, and I will
praise the LORD:


19. No, instead of that He has brought me to his own House again, from which
I was banished, (1 Samuel XXVI. 19.) where I will return thanks unto Him: And
therefore, O ye that minister in the Tabernacle, open the Gates at which the
righteous enter into the Courts of the Lord; that I may go in, and make Him my
acknowledgments, for bringing me from a most forlorn condition to a (...).

20. This gate of the LORD, into which the righteous shall enter.


20. This is the Gate (which I behold and approach with joy) that leads to the
Courts of the Lord: at which the righteous shall enter together with me, and
hear me say;

21. I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.


21. I will never cease to praise and acknowledge Thy goodness, O Lord: who
have graciously heard my prayer, when I implored thy help; and delivered me out
of all my distresses.

22. The stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the
corner.


22. And let them bear a part with me in this my Psalm of praise, saying; He
whom the great men and Rulers of the people rejected, (1 Samuel XXVI. 19.) as the
builders of a house do a stone unfit to be employed in it; is now become our
King, to whom we must all join our selves, if we hope for safety, (in whom we
see a figure of that glorious King, who shall hereafter be in like manner
refused, (XIX. Luke 14. XX. 17.) and then by God exalted to be the Lord of all
the world, and the foundation of all men's happiness, IV. Act. 11, 12.)

23. This is the LORD's doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.


23. This is the sole work of the Lord, (not the effect of humane counsels, who
opposed and obstructed it) which surprises us with the greatest admiration; to
see a despised person become on a sudden so renowned.

24. This is the day which the LORD has made, we will rejoice and be glad in
it.


24. This is the happy day, which the Lord himself has made illustrious by
this mavelous work; and which it becomes us to celebrate with joyful hearts,
and with all outward expressions of gladness for so great a benefit:

25. Save now, I beseech thee, O LORD: O LORD, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity.


25. Most humbly beseeching Thee, O Lord, to preserve our King, and to advance
and perpetuate his Kingdom: (especially the Kingdom of Christ, which shall be
welcomed into the world with these words, XXI. Matt. 9, etc.) It begins most
gloriously; be pleased now, O Lord, to give it answerable success and
prosperity.

26. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the LORD: we have blessed you out
of the house of the LORD.


26. Which acclamations of the people, let the Priests of the Lord meet with
their approbation, saying; Blessed be the King, which is set over us by the
Divine appointment; and Blessed be all the people, who live under his happy
Government: we, whose Office it is to minister to the Lord, give you his
Blessing from the holy place; into which you are come to worship Him.

27. God is the LORD, which has showed us light; bind the sacrifice with
cords, even unto the horns of the altar.


27. Who is the omnipotent Lord, most faithful to his promise; who has put an
end to our troubles, and made peace among us: O be not ungrateful to Him, but
solemnize this day with festival joys; bind your sacrifices with cords, and
bring them to the corners of the Altar, to be offered, as testimonies of your
love and thankfulness, unto Him.

28. Thou art my God, and I wi^ ^ise thee; the (...) my God, I will exalt thee.


28. And so, for my part, I am resolved; who must own Thee to be my most
gracious God, and almighty Deliverer; to whom therefore I will make continually
my most thankful acknowledgments: to thy almighty Goodness alone I owe this
greatness to which I am promoted; and therefore I will never cease, to speak
the highest things I am able in thy praise,

29. O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.


29. And let all good men join together with me, and make their thankful
acknowledgments to the great Lord of the world: who as He is the Author of all
good, and has been exceeding bountiful unto us; so will continue his kindness
unto all succeeding generations.

PSALM CXIX.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm is contrived so artificially, that one would think, at first sight,
it was made after the foregoing: when God had subdued the rest of David's
enemies, (2 Samuel VIII. X.) and given him leisure for such curious composures.
For it is divided into as many Parts as there are Letters in the Hebrew
Alphabet; each Part containing eight Verses; and every one of those verses
beginning with that Letter, wherewith that Part begins. The Verses, for
instance, of the First Part all begin with Aleph, or A; and all of the Second
with Beth, or B, etc. And thence this Psalm is called in the Masora, the great
Alphabet: which is an indication that David was now in a very sedate condition,
under no extraordinary motions, when he penned this Psalm: but quietly
considered things, as they were represented to his remembrance.

But when we observe how frequently he mentions his affliction as lying
actually upon him, now w^ he wrote these Meditations; it forces u^ (...)
^onclude that it was penned during Sa^s persecution. In which there were, I
suppose, some quiet intervals; (see Verse 54.) either between the time that
Saul, (having his life given him by David) resolved to persecute him no more, 1 Samuel XXIV; and his renewed attempts to destroy him, upon the information the
Ziphites again gave him, 1 Samuel XXVI: or after David's fresh demonstration of
his loyalty to him, before he went to Gath: or while he was in that City: where
he had liberty to meditate on the excellence of God's Laws, and the happiness
of those that kept them; and the comfort they were to him in his affliction:
which he found to be so sweet and so great, that he begs of God little else,
but that he might be more and more in love with them: which were already so
much his delight, that he mentions them, under one name or other, in every
Verse of this Psalm: none excepted, but one Ver. 122; or two at the most Ver.
90: where he celebrating God's Faithfulness, which relates to the stedfastness
of his promise, (called in this Psalm his word) it may well be thought to be no
exception, to that observation.

I shall not be so curious as to examine the nice difference which is made by
some, between Laws, Statutes, Testimonies, Judgments, Precepts, etc. because
they seem here to be used promiscuously: or if there be any peculiar meaning in
some Verses, I shall endeavor to express it plainly in the Paraphrase.

Theodoret has a conjecture concerning David's design in this Psalm, (both in
his preface to it, and upon Ver. 157.) which I shall mention, that the Reader
may take his choice. David, it is well known, had great varieties in his
condition; for he both fled from enemies, and chased them; lived sometimes very
melancholy, and again most pleasantly; ran in God's ways, and stumbled, and
rose again to run that good course. Now all these things, says he (and it is
not improbable) David afterward collected into this one Psalm; connecting all
the Prayers "which He had made to God, at several times and on several
occasions, and putting them together in this admirable Meditation, divided into
XXII. Parts: which propound one and the same most profitable lesson to all men;
and teaches them how it is possible to live virtuously in the worst condition.
Nor does he neglect dogmatical instruction, as he speaks; but adds it to the
other: so that this Psalm is sufficient to perfect those that study exquisite
virtue; and to stir up the diligence of those that are lazy; to comfort those
that are sad; to correct the negligent, and in one word to afford all manner of
medicines for the cure of the various diseases of mankind. And if it would not
have made this Book too big, I should have taken the pains to show the design
of every Part, in an Argument before it.

ALEPH. PART I.
1. BLessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the LORD.


1. HAppy, more happy then can be expressed, are those men, who do not take the
liberty to live as they list: but, making the Law of the Lord their Rule, order
their life in an exact conformity therewith.

2. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the
whole heart.


2. The stricter they keep unto that Rule, (wherein He has testified his will
unto us) most heartily studying to please Him; entirely devoting themselves to
seek his favor, in this way alone; the Happier still they are.

3. They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.


3. Especially when they will not be tempted to do an evil action, though it
were to gain the greatest good in this world: but constantly adhere to Him, in
the way which He has prescribed them.

4. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.


4. We are infinitely beholden to Thee therefore, O Lord, that Thou have
obliged us to be so happy: by requiring us to use our utmost diligence to
observe thy Precepts, (which we our selves know to be good for us) with all
care, and exactness.

5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!


5. O that I may ever be one of those happy men! I have no greater wish then
this; that all the actions of my life, may be ordered and governed according to
thy Will.

6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.


6. Then shall I never be disappointed of my hopes, nor blush at the crimes
which are laid to my charge: when my own conscience tells me, that there is not
one of thy Commandments, but is ever before my eyes, as the rule of my actions:

7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy
righteous judgments.


7. And is so dear unto me; that nothing can give me such a joy, as to have
learnt effectually, how just and how good they all are: for which I will most
sincerely thank Thee, as the greatest benefit.

8. I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.


8. Deal with me, according to the uprightness of my heart in this resolution;
that I will observe even those Statutes, for which I see no other reason, but
only thy will: O do not abandon me too far; (1 Samuel XXVII. 1.) but stick to
me, as I purpose to do to thy Statutes.

BETH. II.
9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word.


9. But how shall a young man, such as I am, (1 Samuel XVII. 33. 2. V. 4.) in an
age that is prone to evil, be able to do as he resolves? keeping himself so
pure in all his ways, that they maintain an exact conformity unto thy Word?

10. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy
commandments.


10. First, I implore, with all my Soul, thy gracious assistence: beseeching
Thee to afford me such a measure of it; that, for want of those heavenly
supplies, I may not be drawn aside at any time, from thy Commandments.

11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.


11. Next, I have laid up thy Word in my heart, as the most precious treasure:
hoping that will be a security to me, and preserve me from offending Thee,
whose promises are no less comfortable, then thy threatenings are dreadful.

12. Blessed art thou, O LORD: teach me thy statutes.


12. And I know also, that Thou, O Lord, art kind, and do not envy thy
favors to any of us; but wilt for ever be praised for thy bounty toward us:
and therefore I expect that Thou will hear my prayer, and enable me effectually
to learn thy Statutes.

13. With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.


13. On which I have so much set my heart; that I have not spared to declare to
others, the great regard I have to every thing, which Thou have pronounced
just, or condemned as unrighteous.

14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.


14. I can safely say likewise, that I have taken more satisfaction, now that I
am poor, in doing that which Thou have testified to be acceptable to Thee: then
I should in all the wealth of the world, were it heaped on me.

15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.


15. I will ruminate also often on thy Precepts, (which will be another means I
trust to preserve me undefiled:) and never do any thing, but consider
beforehand; how it agrees with the Rules which Thou have prescribed me.

16. I will delight my self in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.


16. The study of thy Statutes (see Ver. 8.) shall be my delight: and I will
not let slip any word of thine; but preserve it in faithful remembrance.

GIMEL. III.
17. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word.


17. Let these reasons move Thee to deal graciously with me, who am devoted to
thy service: Render to me according to my integrity; and let not my enemies
take away my life, which I intend to employ in doing whatsoever Thou have
commanded.

18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.


18. For which end, I beseech Thee to illuminate the eyes of my mind: that I
may clearly discern the admirable wisdom, which discovers it self in thy Law.

19. I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy commandments from me.


19. I am no better then a stranger in the Land, wandering from place to place,
(1 Samuel XXIII. 13.) and having no possessions: But do not let me want the
knowledge of thy Will; and then I shall not think my self destitute of an
inheritance.

20. My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times.


20. For which my Soul longs so vehemently, that I am not more broken with the
hardships of my banishment; then with my continual labor, and earnest
application of my mind, to have a full understanding of thy Judgments.

21. Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy
commandments.


21. According to which, Thou have already given a severe rebuke to those
haughty men, who, without any respect to right or wrong, persecute and abuse
thy servant: (1 Samuel XXIV. II, etc. XXV. 10, 37.) And the curse which Thou have
pronounced (XXVII. Deuteronomy. 26.) shall light on all such men, as take the boldness
to transgress those bounds, which Thou have set them.

22. Remove from me reproach and contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies.


22. And thereby remove from me that disgrace and shame, unto which they expose
me; as a Traitor to my King and Country: For I am not guilty of any such
wickedness; but carefully observe thy Testimonies, (Ver. 14.) 1 Chronicles. XII. 17.

23. Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in
thy statutes.


23. Though the Rulers and principal Senators of the Kingdom, sat in
consultation how to ruin me; declaring me guilty of the greatest crimes: the
only care of thy servant has been to study how to behave himself unblameably
according to thy Statutes.

24. Thy testimonies also are my delight, and my counselors.


24. Of which I have not been weary; but made the study of thy Testimonies my
recreation: and never took advice of any other counselors.

DALETH. IV.
25. My soul eleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word.


25. Consider therefore the forlorn condition wherein I lie, struggling for
life and utterly unable to help my self: and be pleased to revive and raise me
out of it, according to thy promise, 1 Samuel XVI. 12.

26. I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.


26. Thou know both my manner of life, and all the dangers to which I am
exposed; for I have ever laid them both before Thee, and found Thee ready on
all occasions to assist and relieve me: And therefore I hope Thou will not now
leave me; but more perfectly instruct me in my Duty, as the surest way to
safety.

27. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works.


27. Give me such a right understanding, that I may ever be preserved in the
way of thy Precepts: then shall I escape the snares of my enemies; and my
ordinary discourse shall be, what wonderful deliverances Thou have given me.

28. My soul melts for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy word.


28. Pity my sad condition; and now that my heart sinks under the weight of my
affliction, support and strengthen me according to thy promise; that I may
never take any undue course for ease and relief.

29. Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.


29. Far be all fraud and falsehood from me, whereby my enemies contrive to undo
me: I desire not to learn any of their wicked Arts; but only beseech Thee to
give me grace to observe thy Laws constantly.

30. I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.


30. That Is the way I have resolved upon, to deal truly and sincerely: squaring
all my actions according to thy judgments; which I have laid before me, as the
most equal Rule of my life.

31. I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O LORD, put me not to shame.


31. And hitherto I have kept my resolution, and never started from thy
Testimonies: Preserve me, good Lord, that I may not hereafter disgrace my self,
by doing any thing contrary to them; nor be disappointed of my hope, by falling
into the hands of those that seek my ruin.

32. I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.


32. And when Thou shall have filled my heart with joy, by freeing me from
these grievous straits, I will do Thee better service; and be more forward
cheerfully to execute all thy Commandments.

HE. V.
33. Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the
end.


33. Instruct me therefore, good Lord, more and more in the right way of
serving Thee; and I will show my self most thankful for it, by keeping exactly
to it all the days of my life.

34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law, yea, I shall observe it
with my whole heart.


34. Illuminate my mind to understand the excellence of thy Law: and then I
shall not only observe it; but set my self to do it, with a watchful,
impartial and most affectionate diligence.

35. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I delight.


35. Be Thou my Leader and Guide; that I may not stray from the path of thy
Commandments: wherein I find the greatest satisfaction.

36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.


36. Incline my heart always to seek its contentment, in thy testimonies: and
suffer it not to be drawn away, by the desire of worldly goods; which, having
no measure, is never satisfied.

37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and quicken thou me in thy way.


37. Help me to overlook those empty honors, and fading beauties; which we are
apt to behold with too much admiration: and with lively affections and vigorous
endeavors, to persist in the pursuit of thy favor, in the way Thou have set
before me.

38. Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.


38. And at last make good thy promise to thy servant, (2 Samuel V. 2.) who fears
to do any thing to offend Thee; though thereby he might win a Crown.

39. Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.


39. Turn from me that disgrace, of which I cannot but be sometime afraid, (1 Samuel XXVII. 1.) and must certainly suffer, if I fall into my enemies hands: for
Thou will proceed I know, according to thy own judgments; which are all
equitable, merciful and gracious.

40. Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness.


40. I appeal to Thee, whether I have not a great zeal for thy Precepts; unto
which I desire above all things to be conformed: let me not perish therefore in
these troubles; but in much mercy, revive me, according to thy faithful
promise.

VAV. VI.
41. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O LORD; even thy salvation according to
thy word.


41. To those infinite mercies of thine, which moved Thee to make me such
gracious promises, I betake my self: and beseech Thee to let me feel the happy
effects of both in my deliverance.

42. So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust
in thy word.


42. So shall I be able to put to silence, those that reproach me for my
confidence in Thee: which they call a vain presumption; but is a humble
reliance on thy own gracious promises to me.

43. And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped
in thy judgments.


43. Which till Thou art pleased to fulfill, do not so far abandon me, as to
let me be disheartened in asserting their truth and faithfulness, (which I am
wont to oppose to all the threats of my enemies) for my whole dependence is on
this, that Thou will not fail me; but pronounce a righteous sentence for me.

44. So shall I keep thy law continually, for ever and ever.


44. And I for my part promise, when Thou shall be so gracious to me, not to
suffer my self to grow more negligent in thy service: but to be more careful
then ever in the observance of thy Laws, to the very end of my days.

45. And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.


45. For then I shall have no such encumbrances on me, as I now have in these
straits and difficulties; from which when Thou freest me, I will do my duty
with the greater cheerfulness and joy: for it is not liberty, no, nor a Kingdom
that I seek, so much as better advantages to fulfill thy Precepts.

46. I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed.


46. Which I will not be ashamed to justify before the greatest persons in the
world, to be the most excellent Rule of life, and the best testimony of thy
love to us: and will do it with such reasons, that they shall never be able to
disprove me.

47. And I will delight my self in thy commandments which I have loved.


47. Nor will I confute my self, by leading a voluptuous life; when I have
liberty to do as I list: but as I have hitherto preferred thy Commandments
before all other things, so then will I take the highest pleasure in them:

48. My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have loved: and
I will meditate in thy statutes.


48. Not only in their study; but show the truth of my love to them, by a
diligent and zealous practice of them: which shall be the end of my meditation
in them.

ZAIN. VII.
49. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.


49. Be pleased therefore in due time, to perform the promise, which Thou have
long ago made unto thy servant, (2 Samuel V. 2.) and, when I thought of no such
thing, given me an assured hope of it, (1 Samuel XVI. 11, 12, 13.)

50. This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.


50. Which as it has been the occasion of many and great troubles to me, so
has comforted me under them all: and, even when I despaired of safety, revived
my spirit, and restored my courage to life again.

51. The proud have had me greatly in derision; yet have I not declined from
thy law.


51. Though my insulting enemies mocked exceedingly at my hope, and, in the
pride of their hearts, attempted by the most unjust means to destroy me; it
never moved me to imitate them, by taking any unlawful method for my
preservation.

52. I remembered thy judgments of old, O LORD; and have comforted my self.


52. But I called to mind, O Lord, how, in all foregoing ages, Thou have
suffered good men to fall into great calamities; thereby to render them, at
last, the more illustrious: and with this consideration also I comforted my
self.

53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy
law.


53. I have been seized indeed sometime with an horrible fear, when I thought
what sort of men were my persecutours: who stuck at nothing, which would serve
their ends; having no regard to right or wrong;

54. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.


54. Yet in all my wanderings up and down, (1 Samuel XXII. 1, 2, 5. XXIII. 13.) I
never tarried long in any place; but I passed the time delightfully, in
composing some such Song as this in praise of thy Statutes.

55. I have remembered thy name, O LORD, in the night, and have kept thy law.


55. When others were asleep, I was calling to mind, how good, how powerful,
and how faithful Thou art: and resolving with my self still to observe thy
Laws.

56. This I had, because I kept thy precepts.


56. Which make those so happy that obey them; that I ascribe this sweet
composure of mind, and cheerfulness of spirit, under all my grievous
afflictions, to my strict observance of them.

CHETH. VIII.
57. Thou art my portion, O LORD: I have said that I would keep thy words.


57. I have no possessions in this world, (I Sam. XXVI. 19.) which I see others
greedily sharing among them: But I do not think my self poor, as long as I have
an interest in thy love, and in thy promises, O Lord; whose words I have
resolved to keep as the greatest treasure.

58. I entreated thy favor with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according
to thy word.


58. For there is nothing comparable to thy favor; which I have besought with
the heartiest affection, and the most importunate prayers: and do again beseech
Thee, to deal mercifully with me, according to thy repeated promises unto me.

59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.


59. For upon serious deliberation, what course of life it was best to take; I
rejected all other, which with specious shows of worldly advantages would have
seduced me: and determined to be guided wholly by thy Testimonies.

60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.


60. And being thus resolved, I admitted no further debate about it; but
instantly, without any delay, set my self to the strict observance of thy
Commandments.

61. The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.


61. Nor has any thing been able to remove me from this resolution; but,
though I have been beset with troops of wicked men, who stripped me of all I had,
(1 Samuel XXIII. 26.) it did not make me forget my duty; nor put me upon any
unlawful means of being revenged of them: (1 Samuel XXIV. 6, 7.)

62. At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.


62. But have blessed Thee, both night and day, and arose at midnight to give
Thee thanks; for those just and good Laws, which Thou have taught me to observe.

63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
precepts.


63. Associating my self willingly, with none but such, as fear to offend Thee;
and do religiously observe thy Precepts: who are all truly dear unto me.

64. The earth, O LORD, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.


64. And no other thing do I desire of Thee, O Lord, whose kindness is so great
that it dispenses its blessings plentifully throughout all the earth, but that
Thou will instruct me still to serve Thee as I ought.

TETH. IX.
65. Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O LORD, according unto thy word.


65. Many other benefits, I will thankful acknowledge, O Lord, Thou have
bestowed upon thy servant: with whom Thou have faithfully kept thy Word.

66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments.


66. And I am not ignorant of thy Commandments, which, by thy grace, I have
believed to be the only way to happiness: but still I need thy further
assistance, to give me a delightful taste and thorough sense of what I know;
which I beseech Thee add to the rest of the benefits I have received from Thee.

67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.


67. And if it be necessary for this end, to deprive me still of all other
delights, I submit unto it: for I must confess I committed many errors before
I was thus afflicted; which since I have corrected, and grown more strictly
observant of thy Word.

68. Thou art good, and do good; teach me thy statutes.


68. Thou art in thy own nature kind and good; and nothing else can proceed
from Thee, who designest our good even when Thou afflictest us: Take what
methods Thou please with me; only teach me effectually, to do as Thou
would have me.

69. The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with
my whole heart.


69. They that disdain to be tied to the common and plain rules of honesty,
have taken a great deal of pains to invent a lie against me: (1 Samuel XXIV. 9.)
but as I am hitherto conscious of no such guilt, so I will always confute them
by an impartial and most hearty observance of thy Precepts.

70. Their heart is as far as grease, but I delight in thy law.


70. Which give me infinitely greater satisfaction in a poor starved condition;
then all the dull delights of sense, which they enjoy in the fullest plenty of
worldly prosperity.

71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted: that I might learn thy
statutes.


71. This they stupidly imagine is the only happiness; but I can truly say, it
was more happy for me that I was afflicted: for thereby I learnt to apply my
self more seriously to thy Statutes.

72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver.


72. Whereby thy will is declared unto us by a voice from heaven: (XX. Exodus
1.) which I prefer before all the gold and silver in the Kingdom.

JOD. X.
73. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: give me understanding, that I
may learn thy commandments.


73. Desert me not then, who am thine own workmanship; that neither has nor
hops for any thing but thy almighty Power: and desires above all things, to
comprehend fully what thy will is, that he may obey it.

74. They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have hoped in
thy word.


74. It will be a very great comfort and encouragement to all good men, when
they see me delivered out of all these troubles: For thereby they will be
confirmed in their belief, of thy faithfulness to thy promises; on which, it
will appear, I have not vainly depended, though I stay long for the performance.

75. I know, O LORD, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me.


75. And I am satisfied, O Lord, that while Thou make me wait for the
performance, Thou do nothing contrary to thy justice, or to thy fidelity:
but that all these cross dispensations of thy Providence, in the heavy
afflictions which have befaln me, are perfectly righteous: and will only make
thy truth and faithfulness, at last, the more illustrious.

76. Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to
thy word unto thy servant.


76. O hasten that happy time; when I shall see thy loving kindness, turning
this disconsolate into a more comfortable condition: according to the promises
which Thou have made unto thy servant, 1 Samuel XVI. 12, 13.

77. Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.


77. Let me feel the speedy effects of thy compassionate mercy; rescuing me
from those that seek my life, and raising me out of this forlorn estate, (1 Samuel XXIV. 14.) For howsoever I am represented, my highest satisfaction is in
obedience to thy Law.

78. Let the proud be ashamed, for they dealt perversely with me without a
cause; but I will meditate in thy precepts.


78. Confound all those proud contemners of it, who, making no conscience of
what they say, have oppressed and overthrown me with lies and calumnies; as if
I studied to disturb the Kingdom, when my only study is to observe thy
Precepts.

79. Let those that fear thee, turn unto me, and those that have known thy
testimonies.


79. Let all pious men, who have a due regard to thy testimonies, be convinced
of this: and be no longer abused by these slanders; but turn to my side, and
become my Friends.

80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.


80. And in order to it preserve me so blameless before Thee, in such integrity
of heart as well as life; that I may not be ashamed of the hope I have, that
Thou and all good men will take my part.

CAPH. XI.
81. My soul faints for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.


81. For which blessing I have now attended so many years, that I am ready
sometime to faint away with vehement desire; to see thy long expected promise
fulfilled, of deliverance from all my enemies.

82. Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When will thou comfort me?


82. That joyful sight I have looked for, till I am in danger to be weary with
expectation; saying, When will the time come, of my deliverance from this
disconsolate condition?

83. For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy
statutes.


83. I hope it will not be long delayed; for I am worn away, and my skin, (like
an empty leathern bag that has hung a great while in the smoke) is shrivelled
up with toil and grief: and yet I have never taken any unlawful course, to rid
my self of all this misery.

84. How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou execute judgment on
them that persecute me?


84. I leave that to Thee, O Lord; beseeching Thee to consider how my days
spend apace in trouble and sorrow: which force me to sigh and say; How long
must thy poor servant still lie in this calamitous condition? O when will Thou
do me right against my persecutours?

85. The proud have dug pits for me, which are not after thy law.


85. Who proudly contrive, by all manner of frauds and treachery, to take away
my life: directly contrary to thy Law; to which they are as injurious as unto
me.

86. All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully; help
thou me.


86. For all thy Commandments teach us to be just and true; being as faithful,
as those men are false and perfidious: therefore make good thy promises to me;
and deliver me from those who persecute me with lies and forgeries.

87. They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy precepts.


87. Which they have employed so successfully, that I escaped very hardly with
my life, when I was in the Land of Judah; (1 Samuel XXIII. 26.) and yet for all
this I stuck to thy Precepts; and would not take away the life of him that
sought mine; when I could have easily done it, 1 Samuel XXIV. 6, 7.

88. Quicken me after thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimony of thy
mouth.


88. Deal as kindly with me, O Lord; and not only spare my life, but raise me
out of this forlorn estate, wherein I lie, like a man that is dead; (1 Samuel
XXIV. 14.) and I will endeavor the more carefully to observe the Testimonies,
which Thou have solemnly (Verse 72.) given us in charge.

LAMED. XII.
89. For ever, O LORD, thy word is settled in heaven.


89. Thou art eternal, O Lord, and changest not; and thy promises are like thy
self, fixed and settled in the heavens: which are a lively emblem of their
constancy, and unvariable truth.

90. Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou have established the earth,
and it abides.


90. One generation goes, and another comes; but thy fidelity is still the same
to all: and alters no more then the earth; which Thou have firmly and
immoveably established, while all those creatures that live upon it, pass away
and perish.

91. They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.


91. All things remain to this day in the order at first appointed; and never
vary from the Laws which Thou have set them: for they are entirely subject to
thy will and pleasure.

92. Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in mine
affliction.


92. Which was a most comfortable Meditation in my afflicted condition: when my
heart would have failed me, and I should have been undone; if thy Laws (which
stand as fast as heaven and earth) had not given me constant consolation.

93. I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou have quickened me.


93. I will never therefore be guilty of neglecting thy Precepts: which have
revived me, (by the faithful promises Thou have annexed to the observance of
them) when I looked upon my self, as a dead man, that could not escape the
hands of those that sought to destroy me.

94. I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy precepts.


94. And be Thou pleased still to deliver me from falling into their hands:
For, though they have driven me from thy inheritance (1 Samuel XXVI. 19.) I still
continue thine, and serve no other God; but have diligently inquired, in my
greatest dangers, what would be most pleasing to Thee, as most advantageous to
my self.

95. The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.


95. Those wicked men, who are combined to destroy me, have long watched for an
opportunity; which they confidently expect to meet withal: but it does not
discourage my study of thy Testimonies; as the best defense against their
bloody attempts.

96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandment is exceeding
broad.


96. For had I greater forces then my enemies, alas! I never yet saw any thing
so complete, but as it had its bounds and limits, so it is exceeding frail; and
when it is arrived at perfection, comes to a speedy end: whereas the wisdom
which Thou have revealed to us, has infinite satisfaction in it, durable and
lasting satisfaction; which never fails those that depend upon it.

MEM. XIII.
97. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.


97. It is impossible to express the love I have to thy Law: which entertains
my Meditation, or inables me to entertain others, with admirable variety, whole
days together.

98. Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for
they are ever with me.


98. My enemies are very crafty, and use many artifices to destroy me: But, by
observing thy Commandments, I have defeated all their subtle devices; and
confounded them, even by refusing (because thy Commandments, which are ever
before my eyes restrained me) to be avenged on them, I Sam. XXIV. 17, 18, etc.
XXVI. 21.

99. I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my
meditation.


99. I have outstripped all the Doctors of the Law, of whom I formerly learnt;
and understand more perfectly then they, the best means of securing my self:
because my mind is still employed in thy Testimonies, as the Rule of all my
designs and undertakings.

100. I understand more then the ancients: because I keep thy precepts.


100. Though I am but young, yet I have more understanding in things, then the
Judges and grave privy Counselors: because my Maxim is, strictly to observe
thy Precepts.

101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I might keep thy word.


101. Whatsoever advantage it promised me, I have never proceeded in any evil
course to obtain my end: but refused the seeming gain; that I might not offend
against thy Word.

102. I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou have taught me.


102. My respect to Thee, has hindered me from doing any injury unto others:
because I know Thou art the Author of those Laws which forbid it; and in the
observance of them, I have learnt, consists my happiness.

103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth.


103. And a happiness it is, I feel already, incomparably above all other: the
pleasure I take in every word of thine, is inexpressibly far to be preferred,
before all the delights of sense; though never so sweet and luscious.

104. Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false
way.


104. And by thy Precepts I am so fully instructed how to behave my self; that
I need not to betake my self to any dishonest ways, which I utterly abhor.

NVN. XIV.
105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.


105. Thy word is my only Guide; whose directions I follow in all the dark and
difficult passages of my life.

106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.


106. I have solemnly resolved, and bound my self by the most sacred ties,
which I will never break but do now confirm; that I will carefully observe thy
Decrees, which I find to be both just and good.

107. I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, according unto thy word.


107. I have suffered very much upon that account, and am still sorely
afflicted: But I comfort my self, O Lord, with thy promise; according to which
I beseech Thee to deliver me from those that seek to destroy me; and raise me
out of this forlorn condition, wherein I can scarce be said to live.

108. Accept, I beseech thee, the free-will-offerings of my mouth, O LORD, and
teach me thy judgments.


108. I have no other sacrifices that I am able in this exile to offer to Thee,
but these of Prayer, and thankful acknowledgments, and vows of sincere and
cheerful obedience; with which I do most freely and heartily present Thee, O
Lord: beseeching Thee to teach me still more effectually thy Judgments; that I
may never fail to be conformed to thy will.

109. My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.


109. To which I have hitherto so closely adhered, that, though I go in
continual danger of my life, (XII. Judge. 3.) it does not move me in the least
(whatsoever shifts I am forced to make) to save my self by forsaking thy Law.

110. The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts.


110. They that make no conscience of their actions, have contrived a subtle
plot to ruin me: But I have never stepped out of the way of thy Precepts, to
avoid the snares they have laid for me.

111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the
rejoicing of my heart.


111. I had rather always continue as poor as I am, then do any thing against
thy Testimonies; which I hold to be my chiefest good, and surest possession:
out of which none can expel me; and which always yield me that inward
satisfaction and joy, which none can take from me.

112. I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the
end.


112. This infinitely outweighs all other considerations; and has inclined my
heart to resolve, to do always as Thou biddest me, (whatsoever I may lose by
it) to the very end of my days.

SAMECH. XV.
113. I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.


113. I hate all double dealing, and crafty devices, that are not warranted by
thy Law: to which I have resolved to stick with hearty affection.

114. Thou art my hiding place, and my shield: I hope in thy word.


114. In that way I will trust to Thee for safety, and protection: having a
firm hope, that Thou will be as good unto me as thy Word.

115. Depart from me, ye evil doers; for I will keep the commandments of my God.


115. Do not persuade me any longer, O ye evil doers, to join with you; but get
you gone from me: for I will follow none of your counsels; but strictly observe
the Commandments of my God, who has hitherto most graciously delivered me.

116. Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
ashamed of my hope.


116. And on whom I still depend, that Thou will support me, O Lord, according
to thy promise, against all the assaults of my enemies that seek my life: and
not let me be ashamed of the hope and expectation I have, that Thou will defend
and deliver me.

117. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy
statutes continually.


117. Be Thou my support in this weak condition, I humbly again beseech Thee:
and then they shall not be able to throw me down; but, in safety and security,
I shall make thy Statutes my perpetual study.

118. Thou have trodden down all them that ere from thy statutes: for their
deceit is falsehood.


118. They shall fall to the ground, and not I; for Thou art wont, I observe,
to abase and lay as low as the mire in the streets, all thsoe that presume to
go out of the plain way of thy Statutes: for all their crafty tricks, and
crooked arts, on which they rely, at last prove false unto them and deceive
them.

119. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I
love thy testimonies.


119. Thou castest all such wicked men out of the Land like dross, that is good
for nothing: which makes me addict my self, with the greater love unto thy
Testimonies:

120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.


120. Trembling all over with fear lest I should, by any disobedience to Thee,
incurr thy severe displeasure; and dreading, above all things, thy judgments:
which are threatened in the Law, and which I see executed upon the contemners of
it.

AIN. XVI.
121. I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.


121. This pious fear laid such a restraint upon me, that I never did any wrong
to them, nor so much as dealt hardly with them, that now injure me: therefore
suffer me not to fall into the hands of those, who oppress me with their
calumnies.

122. Be surety to thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.


122. Their pride is great, and, having power equal to their malice, they hope
to prevail over me: but do Thou graciously undertake my protection, and be my
security, against the mischief they design me; that instead of being my ruin,
their calumnies may turn to my greater good and advantage.

123. Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.


123. I believe they will; but I have looked so long for that happy time, when
Thou will deliver me (and yet am still in apparent danger to fall into the
hands of my enemies) that I am almost tired with expectance of thy promise:
though I know it is faithful and true; and shall certainly be performed.

124. Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes.


124. Pity my infirmity, and, in much mercy, send speedy relief unto thy
servant: and in the mean time instruct me more perfectly in thy Statutes; that
I may make the better use of that deliverance.

125. I am thy servant, give me understanding, that I may know by testimonies.


125. I am devoted to thy service, and designed by Thee to a high employment:
inlighten my understanding therefore, that I may fully know my duty.

126. It is time for thee, LORD, to work: for they have made void thy law.


126. For now is the time to do all I can for the Lord (who may be pleased
then to take this opportunity to perform his promise) when wicked men not only
transgress; but are so profane, that they reject, and would wholly lay aside
thy Law.

127. Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.


127. This inflames my zeal, and heightens my love to thy Commandments: which I
value far more then all the riches in the world; which shall not tempt me to
violate one of them, or suffer them, if I can help it, to be contemned by
others.

128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right;
and I hate every false way.


128. For the more I consider them, the more I approve every one of them, (as
the exactest and best Rule whereby I square all my actions) and abhor all those
base and dishonest ways, whereby others study to advance themselves to riches
and honors.

PE. XVII.
129. Thy restimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.


129. I cannot sufficiently admire and extol the excellent wisdom also of thy
Laws; whereby Thou have testified thy will unto us: which makes me the more
careful faithfully to observe them.

130. The entrance of thy words gives light: it gives understanding unto the
simple.


130. When a man does but begin to be acquainted with thy Word, he finds his
mind marvellously enlightened with such clear and useful knowledge; as directs
the most simple people how to live happily.

131. I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments.


131. Which has excited me to the most eager pursuit of this most excellent
Wisdom: for I longed to have a perfect understanding of thy Commandments;
which at first sight afford such abundant satisfaction.

132. Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy name.


132. Favor my desires, I most humbly beseech Thee; and vouchsafe me the same
grace, which Thou art wont to bestow on those that sincerely love Thee; and
study, as I do, thy honor and glory.

133. Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over
me.


133. And first of all enable me to walk steadily, according to the rule of thy
Word; that I may not be a slave to any sin whatsoever:

134. Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.


134. And then deliver me from the oppression of him (1 Samuel XXVI. 24.) who
unjustly seeks to destroy me; that I may have the greater liberty to study and
observe thy Precepts.

135. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes.


135. Put an end to the troubles of thy servant: who is devoted to thy
obedience; and for this reason, above all others, desires to see better days,
that he may have better opportunities to learn thy Statutes;

136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy law.


136. Which it is a very great grief to me, to behold so universally neglected:
and has cost me many a tear; when I consider, not merely the persecution which
I suffer, but how thereby my enemies violate thy Law.

TSADDI. XVIII.
137. Righteous art thou, O LORD, and upright are thy judgments.


137. I leave it to Thee, O Lord, to redress these evils: who art both just and
good; and governest all things with an unerring equity.

138. Thy testimonies that thou have commanded, are righteous, and very
faithful.


138. For as all the Laws Thou have given us are perfectly righteous: so Thou
do exactly and most faithfully fulfill all the promises or threatenings; which
Thou have made to the observers, or against the breakers of them.

139. My zeal has consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.


139. The consideration of which moves my indignation to such a degree; that I
am tormented to see my enemies so forgetful of their own interest, as not to
regard thy words.

140. Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loves it.


140. Which I know to be infallibly true, and perfectly free from all falsehood
and deceit: which is the reason of that ardent affection thy servant has unto
them.

141. I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.


141. Which will not suffer me, though I am mean and contemptible, in the eyes
of my enemies (who are honorable and mighty) to be guilty of neglecting any of
thy Precepts.

142. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the
truth.


142. For still I think with my self that thy justice, goodness and fidelity
are unchangeable; and whatsoever Thou have said in thy Law is the very truth:
upon which we may certainly depend, and never be deceived.

143. Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my
delights.


143. And therefore, though I am unexpectedly (1 Samuel XX. 3.) involved in very
sore straits and difficulties; yet I do not forsake, but find great consolation
in the study of thy Commandments.

144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
understanding, and I shall live.


144. Especially in this consideration, (which comes often into my mind, Verse
140, 142.) that all the declarations Thou have made of thy will to us, are so
just and true; that they will never fail our expectation: O give me wisdom to
order my life according to them; and then it shall not be in the power of my
enemies, to make me miserable.

KOPH. XIX.
145. I cried with my whole heart, hear me, O LORD: I will keep thy statutes.


145. I have besought thy favor, in this sorrowful and distressed condition,
with most vehement cries and hearty affection: Be pleased to rescue me out of
it, O Lord, and I promise with the greater care to observe thy Statutes.

146. I cried unto thee, save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.


146. I have made it my constant business to cry unto Thee for help; from whom
alone I seek it: deliver me, I again beseech Thee, and I will not fail to make
good my promise of observing thy Testimonies.

147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word.


147. I have sent up early cries unto Thee, before the morning light appeared:
constantly expecting the performance of thy promise to me.

148. Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word.


148. Nor have I been less forward in the study of my duty, then in the
imploring of thy mercy: but have awaked, before all the watches were set, to
meditate in thy word.

149. Hear my voice, according unto thy loving kindness: O LORD, quicken me
according to thy judgment.


149. Let my prayer prevail with Thee, O Lord, for that favor and kindness,
which I have often experienced: and preserve my life, as Thou have done hitherto,
by such means as Thou judge best for me.

150. They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law.


150. I am closely beset Thou see, and in danger to be seized (1 Samuel XXIII.
26.) by those, who as they persecute me and seek my ruin, so care not by what
wicked arts they compass their design: for they have no regard at all to thy
Law.

151. Thou art near, O LORD: and all thy commandments are truth.


151. My only comfort is, that they cannot approach so near to hurt me, as
Thou, O Lord, art to defend and preserve me: and that all thy promises annexed
to thy Commandments (still I think of that Ver. 142.) shall faithfully be
fulfilled.

152. Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old, that thou have founded
them for ever.


152. This has ever been my support, long before I fell into these troubles;
that whatsoever Thou have testified to be thy will and pleasure is firm and
steadfast; and shall never fail those that depend upon it, Verse 144.

RESH. XX.
153. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.


153. Show then that Thou do not neglect me; but art as mindful of me, as I
am of thy Law in this afflicted condition: out of which I beseech Thee to
deliver me; for none of the evils that have befaln me, have made me forget my
duty to Thee.

153. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.


154. I appeal to Thee, whether I have not a righteous cause; beseeching Thee
to do me justice upon my enemies, (1 Samuel XXIV. 15.) and rescue me from their
persecutions: for I am in great danger of perishing; but depend upon thy
promise for my safety.

155. Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.


155. Far be it from Thee to afford any help to the wicked: for they have no
regard to thy Statutes; but seek only how they may satisfy their own lewd,
and cruel desires.

156. Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD: quicken me according to thy
judgments.


156. To which I oppose the bowels of thy compassion, O Lord; whose tender
mercies are many and great: and will preserve my life, I hope, according to thy
wonted care over me, and kindness to me, Ver. 149.

157. Many are my persecutours, and mine enemies: yet do I not decline from thy
testimonies.


157. I am not discouraged, either by the number or the strength (which are
both very great) of those that persecute me, with a deadly enmity: which does
not move me in the least to depart from thy Testimonies (XIX. Lev. 18.) by
seeking their destruction, as they do mine, 1 Samuel XXIV. XXVI.

158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved: because they kept not thy
word.


158. It only provokes my sorrow, to see that there is no faith, nor truth,
nor gratitude in them, (1 Samuel XXIV. 17, etc. XXVI. 2.) and troubles me beyond
measure, that they have no regard to what Thou command, or forbiddest.

159. Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O LORD, according to thy
loving kindness.


159. Such is the love I have to thy Precepts; which, I beseech Thee, let the
world see Thou do observe: and both preserve my life, O Lord, and, according
to the exceeding greatness of thy goodness, deliver me out of this sad
condition.

160. Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous
judgments endures for ever.


160. As I doubt not Thou will; for none of thy promises have ever failed: but
the very first of them which Thou made to our Forefather Abraham (XII. Genesis
2.) has been faithfully fulfilled; and so shall every thing else, which Thou
have resolved and declared to be thy will, be punctually performed to the end
of the world.

SCHIN. XXI.
161. Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in awe
of thy word.


161. The Rulers, and prime Counselors of the Kingdom persecute me, for
pretended crimes: of which as I am not guilty; so I do not fear so much what
they can do against me, as lest I should do any thing, in my own vindication,
against thy word, 1 Samuel XXIV. 6. XXVI. 9.

162. I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoil.


162. I would not purchase my liberty, my peace, or the honor they enjoy, by
any unlawful actions: for I take far more joy in doing thy will, and in what
Thou have promised to do for me; then in the compleatest Victory over all my
enemies.

163. I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.


163. I hate all fraud and deceit; even to the degree of abhorrence and
abomination: but most heartily love those honest courses, to which thy Law
directs me.

164. Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.


164. It is the subject of my perpetual thanks and praise; that I have the
happiness to be acquainted with the justice and goodness of those Laws, whereby
Thou governest us.

165. Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them.


165. The observance of which gives such inward satisfaction, and brings so
many and great blessings to those who truly love them: that they take all
things which befall them in good part; and nothing will tempt them to turn
aside, and leave those virtuous paths wherein they lead them.

166. LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.


166. I have met with the most grievous discouragements: But, Lord, in the
midst of the greatest straits I have expected deliverance only from Thee; and
never done any thing, for my preservation, contrary to thy Commandments.

167. My soul has kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.


167. All my care has been, still most heartily to observe thy Testimonies:
which I prefer infinitely before all earthly enjoyments.

168. I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.


168. There is not one of thy Laws, of any sort, but I have carefully observed;
even then when I might have privily broken them, and been a gainer by it: (1 Samuel XXIV. 4, etc.) for I knew that nothing can be done so secretly, but Thou
art perfectly acquainted with it.

TAV. XXII.
169. Let my cry come near before thee, O LORD: give me understanding according
to thy word.


169. As Thou art also with my most earnest petitions; to which I beseech Thee,
O Lord, vouchsafe a gracious answer: and in the first place teach me, according
as Thou have promised, to walk, not only innocently, but prudently, in the
midst of all the snares that are laid for me.

170. Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.


170. Do not deny admittance to this humble suit; but in due time grant this
further request: that I may, according to the same promise, be perfectly
delivered from this long persecution.

171. My lips shall utter praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.


171. Then will I praise Thee without ceasing: first for instructing me how to
please Thee in all things:

172. My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteousness.


172. And next for fulfilling thy promise to me: which I will loudly proclaim,
with my thankful acknowledgments; that whatsoever Thou have said is truly and
faithfully performed.

173. Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.


173. Let thy Divine power therefore succor me, in this weak and distressed
condition wherein I am: for I rely on that alone; having resolved to be guided
wholly by thy Precepts.

174. I have longed for thy salvation, O LORD: and thy law is my delight.


174. And I have long expected, with most ardent desires, thy help, O Lord, for
my deliverance: delighting my self, in the mean time, in thy Laws; while Thou
art pleased to delay it.

175. Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and let thy judgments help me.


175. O let me not perish in these straits, wherein I am involved; but spare my
life, according to thy wonted kindness, and I will spend it in thy praises:
Send me relief, by executing the judgments, Thou have decreed against my
enemies.

176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant: for I do not
forget thy commandments.


176. Who have so chased me from place to place, during this tedious
banishment; that like a wandering sheep, which has lost its way, I know not
whither to betake my self for safety: But be Thou pleased, like a careful
shepherd, to look after me, and to put thy servant into the right way of
escaping all the dangers to which I am exposed, and of recovering my liberty,
rest and peace again: For, how hard soever my condition has been (I can still
seriously profess it) I have not been careless in the observance of thy
Commandments.

PSALM CXX.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
There can no certain account be given, why this and XIV. other Psalms, which
follow, are called Songs of degrees, or ascents. Their conjecture seems to me
most probable, who think this Title denotes, either the elevation of the voice
in the singing these Songs; or the excellence of the composure, or of the
Music to which they were set; or the high esteem they had of them upon some
account or other: particularly because they were so fit for their use (though
most of them composed in former times) at and after their return from the
Captivity of Babylon. Then, some think, this Title was given to them; because
they sung them, as they went up to their own Country again.

But this present Psalm seems to have been made by David, when the calumnies of
Doeg, and others forced him to flee his Country; and to go as far as the
Kedarens or Arabians (Ver. 6.) whose company was very irksome to him. We do not
read indeed in his History, that he was there: but we may well think he sought
for safety, in more places then are particularly mentioned; and might as well
be there, as among the Moabites, and in the wilderness of Paran, (1 Samuel XXV.
1.) which was not far from them. As for Mesech, I take that to signify not a
place, but the length of time, which he staid there, before he durst stir from
thence; or, which he was forced to spend in exile: as all the ancient
Interpreters, except one, understand it. See Bochart in his Phaleg. L. III.
Cap. 12.

1. IN my distress I cried unto the LORD, and he heard me.


1. I Have had frequent experience of the goodness of the Lord; who, when I
have earnestly implored his help in my straits and difficulties, has
constantly relieved me.

2. Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.


2. May it please Thee, O Lord, still to continue thy mercy toward me: and now
that men strike at my life, by calumnies, and cunningly devised lies, (1 Samuel
XXII. 9. XXIV. 9.) to preserve me from the danger, into which they have thrown
me.

3. What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false
tongue?


3. O thou false accuser! what do Thou hope to get by these specious tales
which thou have forged? what will They add to that heap of wealth, which thou
treasurest up? (LII. Psalm. 7.)

4. Sharp arrows of the almighty, with coals of juniper.


4. They shall be so far from turning to thy advantage, that they shall prove
thy undoing: for the mighty Lord (whom none can resist) shall take a sharp and
a swift vengeance on thee; which shall never cease, till it has utterly
consumed thee.

5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar.


5. For it is but fit thou should smart for the mischief thou have done;
under which I groan most sadly: not only in a tedious banishment from my own
Country; but in that I am forced to seek for shelter, among the barbarous Arabs.

6. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace.


6. Where my mind cannot but perpetually reflect upon the implacable spirit of
my enemies: whose bitter hatred will not suffer them, to come to any terms of
agreement.

7. I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.


7. As I never gave them the least offense; so there is nothing that I more
vehemently desire, then peace and reconciliation: but when I make a motion for
it, they are the more exasperated; and, as if I distrusted my cause, or
craftily sought advantage by a treaty, betake themselves more fiercely and
resolutely to their arms.

PSALM CXXI.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
If David was the Author of this Psalm (and to whom can we with so much
likelihood ascribe it?) it is an expression of the high trust and confidence,
which he reposed in God; when he was in great straits, and saw no hope of
humane help: being either environed by Readiness Forces, or pursued by his Son
Absalom. It is hard to say, to which it belongs; but if by hills, in the first
Verse, we understand Sion, and Moriah, where David's Palace and the Ark of God
were placed; then it must be referred to the latter: for Sion was not theirs,
during Readiness persecution.

There are those indeed, who, following Kimchi, take the first Verse to be a
military form of speech; and suppose David to have looked round about him, as a
Captain in danger does; to see if he could spy any assistance coming to him,
down the neighboring hills wherewith he was encompassed. But the other sense
seems to me more simple; which therefore I have followed: though, if we should
adhere to that conjecture, still it will best agree to the distress into which
Absalom had reduced him. For then he might well look to see if any of his
Subjects, continuing their fidelity to him, would appear to defend him. Why
called A Song of degrees, see, CXX.

1. I Will lift up mine eyes to the hills from whence comes my help.


1. THough I am driven, not only from my own Palace, but from God's Dwelling
place, (2 Samuel XV. 14, 25.) yet my eyes shall be ever directed thitherward:
from whence I expect a powerful aid against those numerous enemies that are
combined to destroy me.

2. My help comes from the LORD, which made heaven and earth.


2. I have no dependence on any other help, but wait for deliverance wholly
from the presence of the Lord: to whom all Creatures are subject, and who has
Angels at his command, to send to the succor of his servants; for he made the
heaven, as well as the earth.

3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keeps thee will not
slumber.


3. And me thinks I hear his Ministers calling to me out of his holy place, and
saying; Fear not; since Thou have placed thy confidence in the Lord alone, He
will not let thee be subverted: thou have a stronger guard, then the most
valiant Army would be to thee; for they may be tired and fall asleep, but He
that has thee in his custody will exercise a most unwearied care over thee.

4. Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep.


4. Be confident of it; He that is the protector of all good men, will never
in the least neglect thee; much less abandon the care of thee: but, by a most
watchful providence, keep thee in safety.

5. The LORD is thy keeper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand.


5. The omnipotent Lord of the world is thy Guardian: the very same Lord that
covered your Forefathers with a glorious cloud (XIII. Exodus 21.) is always
present with thee; to defend and assist thee, against all the enemies that
assault thee.

6. The sun shall not smite thee by day; nor the moon by night.


6. Be not troubled that thou art forced to take up thy quarters in the open
field: for the Sun shall do thee no hurt, by its vehement heat in the day; nor
the Moon by its cold and moisture in the night, (2 Samuel XVII. 1, 6, 22.)

7. The LORD shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.


7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all manner of harm: He will preserve thy
life; and not suffer thee to fall into the hands of those, that contrive to
take it away, (2 Samuel XVII. 1, 2, 14.)

8. The LORD shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time
forth and even for evermore.


8. The Lord shall secure thee, whithersoever thou marchest; and prosper thee
all along, in all thy undertakings, either abroad or within doors: not only
now; but in all future times, to the end of thy days.

PSALM CXXII.
A Song of degrees of David.
ARGUMENT.
The Title satisfies us that David was the Author of this Psalm: who having
settled the Ark (which before had no certain place) at Jerusalem, and being, at
this time, upon some occasion in the Country; heard the good people there speak
one to another, as some of them did to him, of going to worship God; at some of
the three solemn Feasts. Which devotion of theirs, as it rejoiced his heart, so
it moved him, I conjecture, to compose this Psalm for their use; at such times.

If the Talmudists may be believed, they were wont to sing the first Verse of
this Psalm, as they went out of the Country toward Jerusalem, carrying their
first fruits to the House of the Lord; as the Law (XXVI. Deuteronomy. 2.) directed
them. And when they entered within the Gates of the City, they sang the second
Verse. There they were met by some of the Citizens; who, if this be true, sang
the rest of the Psalm, it is likely, together with them; as they went toward
the Temple. Of this custom Mr. Seldom treats L. III. de Synedr. Cap. 13. Of A
Song of degrees, see CXX.

1. I Was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the LORD.


1. I Was exceedingly pleased with the cheerful devotion of those, who came
unto me, before the approaching Feast, and said; Let us go and pay our
thankful acknowledgments to the Lord, in the place where He dwells, and makes
Himself present among us.

2. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.


2. Which motion ought to be the more readily embraced, because now He has
fixed his habitation: and we need not travel further then Jerusalem, to enquire
after the Ark of his presence.

3. Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together:


3. To Jerusalem, I say, that fair and beautiful City; whose buildings do not
now lie scattered and divided: but are all compacted, and united together (as
we ought to be) in a goodly order, 1 Samuel V. 9. 1 Chronicles. XI. 8.

4. Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, unto the testimony of
Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the LORD.


4. Thither all the XII. Tribes of Israel, who own the great LORD for their
God, go up from all the parts of the Country, by his special Commandment:
(XXIII. Exodus 17.) to acknowledge before the Ark of his Testimony, (XXV. Exodus
21, 22.) all the benefits they have received from his almighty Goodness; and
this above the rest, that He thereby testifies his singular care and providence
over them.

5. For there are set thrones of judgment: the thrones of the house of David.


5. Thither also they repair for Justice; for the supreme Judicatory of the
Kingdom sits there, (2 Chr. XIX. 8.) and there is the seat of the Royal Family
(where David and his Sons have their residence, and govern the people, 2 Samuel
VIII. 15, 18.)

6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.


6. O let this be part of your devout prayers, when you come there; that God
would preserve Jerusalem in peace: Happy shall they be, who out of love to the
Religion and Justice which is administered in thee, (O beloved City) contribute
their endeavors, as well as their prayers, for thy safety and prosperity.

7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.


7. Let no enemy (this shall be my constant prayer) approach so much as to thy
outworks to disturb thee: and let plenty of all good things abound within thy
Palaces.

8. For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.


8. The kindness I have for my kindred, and my neighbors and friends, whether
in the City, or the Country, will not let me cease my earnest prayers to God;
that He will confer his blessings on thee.

9. Because of the house of the LORD our God, I will seek thy good.


9. But above all, the love I have to the Lord our God, whose house is here,
(whither all his devout servants resort to worship Him and celebrate his Name)
shall excite not only my prayers, but my study to promote thy welfare.

PSALM CXXIII.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm, it is certain, was composed in a time of great distress; when they
were extremely afflicted by some haughty and insolent enemies, Ver. 3, 4. who
those enemies were, there are several conjectures; And I will add mine: that
this short form of prayer was made by some pious person, when the King of
Assyria (whose pride the Prophet Isaiah describes VIII. 7. and many other
places) sent Rabshakeh and other of his Captains, to besiege Jerusalem: where
they poured out most contemptuous, nay blasphemous words, against God, and his
people, 2 King. XVIII, XIX. It is probable, if this conjecture be admitted,
that it was made by Isaiah, whom Hezekiah desired to lift up his prayer for the
remnant that was left, 2 King. XIX. 4. XXXVII. Isa. 4. Accordingly we read, (2 Chronicles. XXXII. 20.) both he and Hezekiah cried unto the Lord: and we may suppose
lift up his eyes to heaven, and said these words.

1. UNto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens.


1. THough all humane help fail us in this sore distress; yet I do not despair
of relief from Thee, O Lord: whose Majesty and Power, incomparably excells all
earthly Monarchs.

2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the
LORD our God, until that he have mercy upon us.


2. Behold, how, not only I, but the rest of thy faithful people wait upon
Thee: submitting our selves to this severe punishment, as poor slaves do to the
stroke of their offended Master or Mistress; and resolving to bear it
patiently, till Thou our LORD who do inflict it, wilt be pleased to show thy
self our most gracious God; and in much pity toward us remove it.

3. Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly
filled with contempt.


3. O be gracious unto us, good Lord, be gracious unto us; and in much mercy
take away this heavy scourge from us: for we are become so beyond all measure
contemptible, (2 King. XVIII. 23, 24. XIX. 34.) that we can scarce any longer
endure it.

4. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease,
and with the contempt of the proud.


4. We have a long time groaned under the intolerable load of the derision and
contempt of those; whose constant prosperity puffs them up with pride: nay,
makes them insolently oppress all those, who are unable to resist them.

PSALM CXXIV.
A Song of degrees of David.
ARGUMENT.
If the Title had not told us that this is a Psalm of David's; I should have
thought it had been composed by the Author of the former; to acknowledge the
wonderful power and goodness of God in delivering them from Senacherib's Army;
which came in like a flood, (LIX, Isa. 19.) and had overflown all the Country
as far as Jerusalem, (VIII. Isa. 7, 8.) which might well make them be called
proud waters (as the Psalmist here speaks, Ver. 5.) because they fancied
nothing could stand before them. Such it seems were, either the Philistines;
upon whom, when they spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim, the Lord broke
forth as a breach of waters, 2 Samuel V. 19: or the Ammonites and their
Associates, 2 Samuel X. 6, 15, 16. Of A Song of degrees, see CXX.

1. IF it had not been the LORD who was on our side, now may Israel say:


1. IF we had not had such a mighty helper as the Lord; who took our part, may
Israel now most thankfully acknowledge,

2. If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, when men rose up against
us:


2. If it had not been the Lord (whom none can resist) who took our part, when
such numerous enemies united their forces, as one man, to make war upon us;

3. Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against
us,


3. They would then have made but one morsel of our small Army: and in the
furious rage wherein they were, have immediately devoured us; as monstrous
beasts do their prey, which they greedily swallow down alive.

4. Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul.


4. Then they would have overrun all the Country like a violent torrent: and we
should have been buried in the flood.

5. Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.


5. Having once made a wide breach, by the overthrow of our Army; they would
have poured in more numerous forces upon us: till, like an inundation of water,
which swells more and more, they had wholly overwhelmed us.

6. Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.


6. Thanks be to the Lord, to whose infinite mercies we ought to ascribe it;
that He has not permitted them to domineer over us, and execute their cruel
intentions against us.

7. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is
broken, and we are escaped.


7. They thought they had laid their design so strongly, that we could not
escape; no more then a little bird, which a fowler has taken in his snare:
but, blessed be the Lord, who has assisted our weakness; their plot is
defeated, they are broken in pieces; and we thereby most wonderfully delivered.

8. Our help is in the name of the LORD, who made heaven and earth.


8. This was not a work of our wit, no more then of our power; nor were we
beholden to the help of any of our neighbors: but we owe it wholly to his
almighty Goodness; who commands, because He made, all Creatures: in whom we
ought to place our confidence for ever.

PSALM CXXV.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
We may well look upon this Psalm, as a pious Exhortation to the people to
trust in God; when Senacherib's Army threatened to destroy Jerusalem. And
perhaps these were some of the comfortable words, which we read, (2 Chronicles.
XXXII. 6, 7, 8.) Hezekiah then spoke to them; when God chastised them by that
rod of his anger, (as He calls Senacherib, X. Isa. 5.) which the Psalmist here
foretold (Ver. 3.) should not long afflict them. Of A Song of degrees, see CXX.

1. THey that trust in the LORD shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but abides for ever.


1. THere are none so safe, as they that repose a pious confidence in the Lord:
by which they shall both maintain themselves in a settled peace and
tranquillity; and remain for ever, as unmovable, conspicuous and illustrious,
as mount Sion.

2. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the LORD is round about his
people, from henceforth even for ever.


2. For as Jerusalem is surrounded with high hills, which make it not easily
accessible by any enemies; so the Divine providence incompasses his people, who
depend upon Him: to guard and defend them from all dangers; not only now, but
in all succeeding ages, to the end of the world.

3. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous:
lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.


3. The power of wicked Tyrants indeed may heavily afflict the righteous for a
time: but they shall not always harrass their Country, nor continue their
oppression so long; as quite to tire out the patience of the righteous, and
tempt them to forsake their pious confidence in Him, and lay hold on any means,
though never so unjust of obtaining deliverance.

4. Do good, O LORD, unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in
their hearts.


4. To prevent so great an evil, be pleased now, good Lord, to deal well with
those who are truly good: and reward their fidelity; who notwithstanding all
these calamities sincerely persist in thy ways, and preserve their integrity.

5. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the LORD shall lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.


5. But as for those, who, instead of growing bettter by these oppressions,
decline more and more from the ways of piety; unto the most perverse, and
crooked courses: the Lord shall deliver them over to be punished with their
oppressors; when Israel, after all these sore afflictions, shall be settled
again in peace and happiness.

PSALM CXXVI.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm is so universally thought to be a joyful Song composed by Ezra, or
some such good man, when they returned out of Babylon; that I shall seek for no
other interpretation. But observe, with Theodoret; that when Cyrus gave them
all leave to return to their own Land, some were so ill minded that they chose
to continue where they were: But such as had any sense of the piety of their
Forefathers, and desired to see the worship of God, according to the Law,
restored, gladly embraced the opportunity of returning to their own Country.
Where they thought themselves so happy in the liberty which they enjoyed, that
they pray (Ver. 4.) all the rest of the Nation who remained still behind, would
come and partake of it.

This is the most received sense; else I should have thought the deliverance
from Senacherib might be here celebrated: who had carried many of them Captive,
(V. Isa. 13. and other places) and when they were delivered from his
oppression, they were indeed like men that dreamed, as the Psalmist here
speaks. For awaking in the morning and seeing his vast Army to be dead Corpses,
(2 King. XIX. 35.) they could scarce believe, what they beheld with their eyes;
it was so wonderful.

And perhaps it was first made then, and afterward applied, with some
alteration, to their return from Babylon. See CXXXIII.

1. WHen the LORD turned again the captivity of Sion, we were like them that
dream.


1. TO the Lord alone must we ascribe this wonderful change; (which is like
the sudden recovery of health, out of a tedious and desperate sickness) For
when the proclamation unexpectedly came forth, to give us liberty to return to
our own Country, out of a long captivity, (I. Ezra 2, 3.) we could scarce
believe it; but were apt to look upon our selves, as only in a dream of so
great a happiness.

2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then
said they among the heathen, The LORD has done great things for them.


2. Which presently turned our heaviness into such a height of joy, that it
filled all places with our mirth; especially with cheerful hymns: in which the
heathen themselves accompanied us, saying; This truly is the Lord's work, who
has magnified his power in the strange deliverance of this Nation.

3. The LORD has done great things for us: whereof we are glad.


3. And truly so He has (we should be very ungrateful, if we should not
thankful, if we should not thankfully acknowledge the singular benefits, which
strangers admire) the Lord has not only restored our liberty; but declared
the greatness of his power in this deliverance; which justly fills us with joy
and triumph.

4. Turn again our captivity, O LORD, as the streams in the south.


4. O that the Lord would be pleased to perfect what He has begun! and bring
back, in greater numbers, the rest of our brethren that still remain in
Babylon: which would be as welcome to this desolate Country, as streams of
water to the dry and thirsty grounds.

5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.


5. Then this small handful of people, who are come to plant themselves here
again, and have laid the foundation of the Temple, with a great mixture of
sadness and tears, (III. Ezra 12.) shall shout for joy, to see so great an
increase, and this pious work, by their help, brought unto perfection.

6. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.


6. Just as we behold the poor husbandman, going to and fro with a little seed,
which in a scarce year he throws with an heavy heart into the ground, returning
again and again from the field, with songs of joy in his mouth; when the
harvest comes to reward his past labors, with a plentiful crop of corn.

PSALM CXXVII.
A Song of degrees for Solomon. See CXX.
ARGUMENT.
The Hebrew particle which here we translate for, is thought by our
Interpreters, in most other places, to signify of: and so they translate it a
little before, in the Title of Psalm. CXXIV. and a little after, in that of
CXXXI. Therefore I shall look upon this Psalm as composed by Solomon; who, you
read, 1 King. IV. 32. made above three thousand Songs: though none of them
(except that large Poem called the Song of Songs, and as some think Psalm.
CXXXII. and, as I suppose, the next to this) have been transmitted to
posterity, but only this: which is a commentary upon a pious Maxim of his,
often repeated in the Book of his Proverbs; that it is in vain to attempt any
thing, if the Lord do not prosper it. Teaching us therefore in all our ways to
acknowledge Him, (III. Prove. 6. XVI. 3.) and not to presume, that it is in our
power to direct our own way (that is, our designs, enterprises and actions) to
what issue we please. For Though a man's heart devises his way, yet it is the
Lord that directs his steps, XVI. Prove. 9. XX. 24. XXI. 30, 31. A truth to be
deeply pondered by all; especially by Princes: in whose affairs, this
overruling Providence is most visible. Of A Song of degrees, see CXX.

1. EXcept the LORD build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except
the LORD keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.


1. THE success of all our undertakings depends so entirely upon the Lord's
blessing, that it is in vain, by building Houses and Cities, to enter into
Societies; unless He prosper the design: and when they are framed, all the care
of the Soldier and the Magistrate is to no purpose; unless his good Providence
be their guard.

2. It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late to eat the bread of
sorrows: for so he gives his beloved sleep.


2. And as fruitless, unless He favor it, is the toil and solicitude of you,
the Artificers and Tradesmen in the City; who rise betime, and go to bed late,
and fare hardly: when they whom He loves (because they own his Providence, and
depend upon his Blessing, more then their own diligence) live securely, and
want nothing that is fit for them; though they have no such strong guard of
Soldiers to defend them; nor break their sleep with labor and care, to supply
their necessities.

3. Lo, children are an heritage of the LORD: and the fruit of the womb is his
reward.


3. Observe it also; it is not in the power of the strongest and most
healthful persons (though nature designs above all things the propagation of
mankind) to have Children when they please; to inherit the riches they have
got: but the Lord bestows them as freely, as Parents do their estates; and
makes those women fruitful, whose pious reliance upon Him, He thinks good to
reward.

4. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man: so are children of the youth.


4. And yet there is nothing of which we are more desirous, then a numerous
issue; especially in the flower and vigor of our youth: for they will be no
less defense to us in our age; then arrows or darts are in the hand of a
valiant Champion, to beat off his Assailants.

5. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, they shall not be
ashamed: but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.


5. Happy is that man who has obtained so much favor of the Lord, as to have
his house as full of them, as the Champions quiver is of arrows: they will
undauntedly appear for him, to answer any challenge sent him by his Enemies See
Theodoret.
; or any accusation put in against him before the Judges.

PSALM CXXVIII.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
It is not unlikely, that this Psalm was composed by the same Author that made
the former; to excite men to be truly Religious, as the only way to obtain the
blessings there mentioned of the Lord. Which as he there shows we must have
from his free gift, and not think to acquire merely by our own industry: so
here he shows the Lord is wont to bestow on those; who, fearing to offend Him,
sincerely keep his Commandments.

Some think this was a form prescribed to be used at the blessing of their
Marriages: when they wished the new married couple all manner of happiness;
especially a long life in peaceable times, Verse. 5, 6. Of A Song of degrees,
see CXX.

1. BLessed is every one that fears the LORD: that walks in his ways.


1. WHosoever thou art that desire to be happy, be sure to add unto the
devout Worship of the Lord, the practice of Justice and Charity, and all other
Virtues: and thou shall never miss of it,

2. For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.


2. For then He will prosper thy honest labors; and give thee an heart also to
enjoy the fruit of them: yea, this will seem no small part of thy happiness;
that thou art able to live of thy self, and not be beholden unto others.

3. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house, thy
children like olive plants: round about thy Table.


3. He will bless thee also in thy Wife; and make her as fruitful as the Vine,
which spreads it self, laden with full clusters, over all the sides of thy
House: and in thy hopeful Children too; who shall grow up and flourish like
the young Olive plants, that are set in thy Arbor, round about thy Table.

4. Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the LORD.


4. Observe it, that this shall be the comfortable portion of the Man that
religiously serves the Lord: who alone can bless our labors; and continue the
product of them in our Families.

5. The LORD shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shall see the good of
Jerusalem, all the days of thy life.


5. Address thy self unto Him in his holy place; and the Lord shall bestow on
thee, whatsoever blessings thou ask of Him: yea, may thou be so happy, as
to see Jerusalem, the Seat of Justice and Religion, in a flourishing condition,
all thy life long.

6. Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.


6. And long may thou live, to such a good old age, as to see thy Childrens
Children: and the whole Nation, all the time, in a prosperous tranquillity.

PSALM CXXIX.
A Song of degrees. See CXX.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm was made when some new Calamity threatened them: either by
Senacherib, or as Theodoret thinks, by those Nations which combined to destroy
the Jews, as soon as they returned from the Captivity of Babylon. When they
were taught by Ezra, or some such holy man, to recount what God had done for
them, ever since they were a people; and to denounce the divine Vengeance
against those, that now sought their ruin. The former conjecture seems the
truer; because as yet, he says verse. 2. their Enemies had not prevailed
against them: unless we expound that phrase, as I have done in the Paraphrase
(according to the received interpretation of the Psalm) that they had not quite
destroyed them, and made them cease to be a Nation.

1. MAny a time have they afflicted me from my youth: may Israel now say.


1. OUR Adversaries, may Israel now upon this occasion say, have very often,
and very sorely distressed us; ever since we began to be a People.

2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not
prevailed against me.


2. It is hard to number how often, or to tell into how great straits they have
reduced us; ever since we began to be a Nation: and yet, by the special favor
of God, they have not been able to compass their desire, of our utter
extirpation.

3. The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.


3. They have laid us sometimes exceeding low: and not only scourged us so
severely, that the marks of it might be seen as plainly, as the furrows are
which the Plough makes in the ground; but long continued also our vexation and
torment.

4. The LORD is righteous: he has cut asunder the cords of the wicked.


4. But the Lord, at last, in much mercy has made good his faithful Promises,
and broken in pieces the power of wicked Oppressors: that they might not
always hold us under their yoke, and thus miserably tyrannize over us.

5. Let them all be confounded and turned back, that hate Zion.


5. And may all those that still hate us and our Religion, never have better
success: but be shamefully defeated; and forced to desist in all their attempts
upon us.

6. Let them be as the grass upon the house tops: which withers before it
grows up:


6. Let none of their designs ever come to maturity; but be blasted like the
grass upon the housetop: which having no root, withers of it self; and needs
no bodies hand to pluck it up.

7. Wherewith the mower fills not his hand: nor he that binds sheaves, his
bosom.


7. And as it lies unregarded by those that reap or that carry in the fruits of
the Earth; so let these men and all their enterprises become contemptible, and
be looked upon as good for nothing.

8. Neither do they which go by, say, The blessing of the LORD be upon you: we
bless you in the Name of the LORD.


8. Let all their hopes so speedily vanish, that there be none to favor them;
nor so much as to wish prosperity to them: No more then there are gathethers of
such withered grass appear, to whom the Passingers (after the usual form, II.
Ruth 4.) should say; The Lord give you a good harvest; We pray God you may
reap the fruit of your labors.

PSALM CXXX.
A Song of degrees. See CXX.
ARGUMENT.
Some think David made this Prayer, after he had plunged himself into a very
deep guilt, by his sin with Bathsheba. I rather think, when he was persecuted
by Saul, and reduced to so low a condition; that his heart began to sink within
him. For the floods of ungodly men (as he speaks XVIII. Psalm. 4.) made him
afraid, that he should one day perish in them, (1 Samuel XXIX. 1.) and he
complains elsewhere, that he sunk in the mire, where there was no standing,
etc. LXIX. Psalm. 2, 14, 15.

In this condition he implores the divine Mercy with great earnestness: and
beseeches him to pardon his sins, and the sins of all the people: which made
them deserve that ill government, under Saul and his Flatterers.

It is the last but one, of the VII. penitential Psalms.

1. OVT of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.


1. IN the greatest straits, when I can see no bottom, no end of my troubles,
but I still sink lower and lower into them; I never despair of thy mercy, O
Lord: but cry unto Thee most earnestly to deliver me.

2. LORD here my voice; let thi^ ears be att^ to the voice of my supplications.


2. Vouchsafe, good Lord, the Governor of all things, to grant my Petition: Do
not reject it, I humbly beseech Thee; but give me a favorable answer, when I
deprecate thy displeasure.

3. If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand?


3. I do not plead any merits of mine, but rather accuse my self before Thee:
knowing that if I were the most innocent person in the world, yet if Thou,
Lord, should strictly examine my life, and proceed against me, according to
my deserts (Lord, what would become of me?) I should certainly be condemned.

4. But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared.


4. But Thou most graciously invitest us unto thy service, by thy readiness to
pardon all those that are truly penitent: without the hope of which, we could
not so much as think of becoming religious.

5. I wait for the LORD, my soul does wait: and in his word do I hope.


5. This incourages me to wait and expect, when the Lord will deliver me: my
Soul is earnestly bent to expect this happy time: which I believe will come;
because I have his Promise for it, on which I depend.

6. My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning: I
say, more then they that watch for the morning.


6. I direct my thoughts to the Lord alone for safety and relief; which I
implore incessantly with my early Prayers: For they that watch in the Temple
for the break of day; I say the Priests that watch in the Temple for the break
of day; are not more forward then I, to offer up their morning Sacrifice to the
Lord.

7. Let Israel hope in the LORD, for with the LORD there is mercy: and with him
is plenteous redemption.


7. In whom let all his People place their trust and confidence: for the Lord
is very ready to do good; and has more ways then we can imagine, to rescue
those that hope in Him out of the sorest distresses.

8. And he shall redeem Israel, from all his iniquities.


8. And He will at last free them from all those troubles; which He has
inflicted on them, as a punishment for their iniquities.

PSALM CXXXI.
A Song of degrees of David. See CXX.
ARGUMENT.
Though David could not purge himself from all manner of guilt (as he confesses
in the foregoing Psalm verse. 3.) yet in that matter, which he was charged
withal by his Enemies (of affecting the Kingdom) he could safely protest he
was as innocent as a little Child. Which he does in this Psalm particularly;
and in several parts of other Psalms.

1. LORD, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise
my self in great matters, or in things too high for me.


1. O Lord, I am accused of traitorous designs against my Sovereign, and of
aspiring to the Throne wherein Thou have placed him: But Thou, who searchest
the hearts, know that I harbor no such ambitious thoughts; nor has my
behavior betrayed any such intentions: For I never looked upon any man
superciliously; nor meddled with affairs of State; or any thing else, that is
above my place and calling.

2. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his
mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.


2. But have levelled my mind (else let me perish) to an equality with my
condition; and resolved to acquiesce in the present state of things: committing
my self unto thy care, and depending on thy Providence, as a Child that is
newly weaned, does upon its Mother: just so, do I silence my natural desires;
and am content to be disposed of, as Thou please.

3. Let Israel hope in the LORD, from henceforth and for ever.


3. And let all good men, in like manner, modestly place their confidence and
hope in the Lord, as long as they live: and choose rather to be depressed, then
by any undue means raise themselves to greatness and honor.

PSALM CXXXII.
A Song of degrees. See CXX.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm seems to have been composed by some holy man; after God had given
commandment to David, by Gad the Seer, to build an Altar in the threshing-floor
of Araunah the Jebusite; (where the destroying Angel stood) and the Lord had
answered him by fire upon that Altar, 1 Chronicles. XXI. 18, 26. whereby David knew,
what he had till now been ignorant of, that this was the place where God would
be worshipped and have his Temple built, XXII. 1. Accordingly we read
expressly, that Solomon therefore built the Temple in this place; because God
here appeared to David his father, and David designed and prepared this place
for it: (2 Chronicles. III. 1.) that there God's habitation might be fixed; and not
removed, from place to place, uncertainly, as it had been in former times. For
the Tabernacle, which the Hebrews call Mischkan, had been in an unsettled
condition, except one period of time, ever since they came into the Land of
Canaan. It was first pitched in Gilgal, and staid there 24. years. Then it was
removed to Shiloh, where it remained, to the death of Eli, 369. years. After
his death, Shiloh being laid waste, it was translated to Nob: where it
remained, they say, 13. years: (but was now no better then a Cabinet without
its Jewel; the Ark being in another place and never restored to it, after that
desolation of Shiloh; see Psalm. LXVIII.) And then it was carried to Gibeon,
where Solomon found it, and from thence fetched it, when he had finished the
Temple. Which the Hebrews therefore call Beth Olamim, the eternal House;
because it was fixed to a place, and out of it the Ark never departed, as it
had done out of the Tabernacle: but there (as the Psalmist here speaks Verse
14.) the Lord took up his rest for ever: Never to depart, that is, to any other
place, till the Messiah came; who was the Temple of God, in whom the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily.

There are those that think Solomon penned this Psalm; because (in the 2 Chronicles.
VI. the two last Verses) he concludes his prayer, at the consecration of the
Temple, with some part of it, viz. Ver. 8, 9, 10. And truly, since he speaks as
if the Priests were just taking up the Ark to carry it into this resting place,
and there begs that God would not, for David's sake, turn away the face of his
Anointed, ( i.e. refuse to hear his prayer) it is not an improbable conjecture:
which I shall follow in my Paraphrase. And connect also this Psalm with the
former; to which it seems to have respect: if we render the last word of the
first Verse, as the ancient Interpreters do; not affliction, but humility,
meekness or modesty. Yet I have not forgot to take notice of the other
signification: and in like manner, have expounded that phrase the mighty God of
Jacob, two several ways, Ver. 2. and 5.

1. LORD, remember David, and all his afflictions:


1. LET it appear, O Lord, that Thou art not unmindfull of the pious humility
of my Father David (CXXXI. 1.) who chose to endure many afflictions; rather
then by unlawful means to prefer himself to a Kingdom.

2. How he swear unto the LORD, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob.


2. Which when he enjoyed, his principal care was to provide a settled place
for the worship of God: for he bound himself with a solemn Oath unto the Lord,
and vowed unto the mighty One, who had preserved him as He did Jacob, in all
his troubles:

3. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my
bed:


3. Saying, I am resolved, as I hope to prosper, that I will not come into the
new Palace, which I have built for my self, (1 Chronicles. XIV. 1.) much less go to
dwell, and take up my lodging there;

4. I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,


4. Nay, I will not lay my self down to rest, nor take a wink of sleep;

5. Until I find out a place for the LORD, an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob.


5. Until I have found out a convenient place for the Ark of the Lord, (1 Chr.
XV. 1. XVI. 1, 43.) an habitation for that mighty One; who there makes Himself
present to his people, the posterity of Jacob.

6. Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood.


6. And now, behold, the Lord Himself, to our great joy, has told us the very
place; where He will fix his habitation, (1 Chronicles. XXI. 18, 26.) in the
territory of Bethlem Ephrata, (XXXV. Genesis 16, 19.) in the fields of that
Forest, where the Angel stood; and directed David to build an Altar unto the
Lord, 1 Chronicles. XXI. 18. XXII.

7. We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.


7. Let us go therefore into his Tabernacles; and prostrating our selves before
his Majesty, let us take up the Ark, on which his Glory stands, (1 Chronicles.
XXVIII. 2.) with humble reverence: and bring it into the Temple, which is now
built for it, 2 Chronicles. V. 2, 3, 4, etc.

8. Arise, O LORD, into thy rest: thou, and the Ark of thy strength.


8. And be pleased, O Lord, together with the Ark, the token of thy powerful
presence among us, to translate thy Divine Glory thither: (2 Chronicles. V. 13, 14.
VII. 1, 2, 3.) there to settle it self, and stir from thence no more for ever.

9. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints shout
for joy.


9. Guard also thy Priests, who minister unto Thee here, and incompass them
with thy Goodness: (2 Chr. VI. 41.) that they may procure thy blessings for
others; and make all thy pious Worshippers, who are dear unto Thee, triumph in
thy kindness to them.

10. For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine anointed.


10. I beseech Thee, have a respect to the sincere piety of my Father David,
and thy gracious promise to him: (1 Chronicles. XXII. 2, 10, 14. XXVIII. 2, 6, etc.)
and upon that account deny me not; but grant the petitions of thy servant, who
by thy special appointment, succeeds him in the government of thy people.

11. The LORD has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it, Of the
the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.


11. According to that Oath, whereby the Lord secured the Kingdom to his
Family; that faithful Oath, which He will never break, saying; One of thy Sons
will I advance to sit upon thy Throne, when thou shall leave it, 1 Chronicles. XVII.
11. XXVIII. 5. 2 Chronicles. VI. 10.

12. If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony, that I shall teach
them; their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.


12. Yea, I will perpetuate this royal Dignity, to thy Children in all
succeeding generations, (and not take it from them, as I did from Saul, 2 Samuel
VII. 15, 16.) if they prove faithful and constant in their Religion; and
observe all the Commandments, whereby I will teach and instruct them, how my
pleasure is, that they should worship and serve me, 1 King. II. 4. IX. 4, 5, 6.

13. For the LORD has chosen Sion: he has desired it for his habitation.


13. For the Lord has such a love to Sion, the seat of the royal Family, (2 Samuel V. 7, 9.) that He has chosen to place his own dwelling very near unto it,
2 Chronicles. III. 1. VII. 12.

14. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have desired it.


14. Saying, this is the place where my Glory shall fix it self for ever (2 Chronicles. VII. 16.) I will remove no more; but here will I take up my abode: for I
have pitched on this place; and declared that it is acceptable unto me, above
all other, 1 Chronicles. XXI. 26. XXII. 2.

15. I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.


15. From whence I will dispense my blessings so abundantly; that Sion, (which
is become the City of God, as well as of David) shall never be in any want: But
I will make such liberal provision for it, by fruitful years; that the poorest
person there shall be satisfied with food, 2 Chr. VII. 13, 14.

16. I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout
aloud for joy,


16. I will also defend her Priests, and they shall be giving continual thanks
and praise, for the blessings they shall procure for my pious Worshippers: who
shall exceedingly triumph in my kindness toward them.

17. There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for
mine anointed.


17. There will I make the Regal Power and Majesty of David, to put forth it
self afresh in his royal Successors: no sooner shall one be extinguished, but
another shall shine (1 King. XI. 36. 2 Chronicles. XXI. 7.) in such splendor, as
shall give a luster to the name of that anointed Servant of mine; till the
great Prince, the Messiah, appear.

18. His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his crown
flourish.


18. And whosoever they be that go about to destroy this succession, they shall
be so miserably defeated; that they shall not be able to show their faces:
while, with shame and confusion, they behold the regal Dignity in his Family
(notwithstanding all their attempts against it) in an unfading glory.

PSALM CXXXIII.
A Song of degrees of David, see CXX.
ARGUMENT.
When there was no other strife among all the Tribes of Israel, then who should
be most forward in returning to their allegiance; and the Children of Judah
also were inclined as one man to bring back David to his Kingdom, from which
his Son Absalom had driven him, (2 Samuel XIX. 9, 14.) he fell into a rapturous
admiration of that happy unity and concord: which he commended to them
afterward in this Psalm, as their best preservative and security in future
ages. This seems to me more probable to be the occasion of it, then the
concurrence of all the Tribes to make him King after Readiness death, (which is
the common account that is given of it) for then Sion was not in his
possession: and it is not likely he would then have made such mention of it as
he does here, while it remained in the hands of the Jebusites. But whatsoever
was the first occasion, it was aptly applied to their condition after the
return of their Captivity from Babylon; when, as Theodoret notes, the Tribes,
which had been divided by the imprudence of Rehoboam, were then again united:
living under one and the same Government; and worshipping God in the same
place, and the same manner, as the Law prescribed.

It was as fitly used by the first Christians, to express their joy for the
blessed union of Jews and Gentiles; and may now serve the uses of all Christian
Societies, whose happiness lies in holy peace and concord.

1. BEhold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity.


1. O Consider, how beneficial and delightful it is, beyond all expression,
for those that come from the same stock, and are of the same Religion; to have
no differences one with another: but to live together in such a friendly
agreement, as if they had but one Soul among them all.

2. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments.


2. I cannot resemble it to any thing better, then to that excellent ointment
compounded of several spices, (XXX. Exodus 21, etc.) which consecrated the high
Priest to the Divine Service, (VIII. Levit. 12.) and was poured in such plenty,
that running over all his face even to the collar of his garment, (where he did
bear the names of all the Tribes of Israel) it perfumed all the place with its
fragrant odor: for just so does this holy concord make you both dear to God,
and procure you an excellent fame among men; who cannot but be pleased to see
such variety of humors and inclinations all conspiring with one accord, to
promote the common good of the whole Society.

3. As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Sion; for there the LORD commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.


3. The dew of heaven is not more necessary for the parched mountains, which
though never so distant one from another, (as far as from Hermon to Sion) are
refreshed with it, then this is for men of all ranks and conditions, who every
where perceive the comfortable fruits of it: for to this the Divine favor is
immutably annexed, which will pour upon such Societies innumerable blessings;
giving them an happy and long life, (an earnest of endless felicity) in a
constant enjoyment of all manner of good things.

PSALM CXXXIV.
A Song of degrees.
ARGUMENT.
It is uncertain by whom this Psalm was composed, but it seems to have been
made to be sung by some one or more of the Levites, at the shutting up of the
Gates of the Temple: to excite the rest, whose turn it was to watch that night,
to be diligent in their office of singing Psalms, and making devout prayers for
the people. It is the last of those that have the Title of A Song of degrees,
concerning which see CXX.

1. BEHOLD, bess ye the LORD, all ye servants of the LORD, which by night stand
in the house of the LORD.


1. ATtend to your duty, O ye Ministers of the Lord; who not only by day, but
by night also reverently wait upon Him in his House: (1 Chronicles. IX. 33.) cease
not to declare how great, and how good the Lord is.

2. Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and bless the LORD.


2. Be fervent in your devotion; and, disclaiming all dependence on any thing
else, praise the Lord in his Sanctuary with pure hearts and clean hands; and
give thanks for all his benefits.

3. The LORD that made heaven and earth, bless thee out of Sion.


3. Pray also for his people Israel, and say; The great Lord, who, though He
cannot be confined, being the Creator of all things yet, has his special
residence in this place, dispense his blessings both heavenly and earthly from
hence, unto every one of you.

PSALM CXXXV.
ARGUMENT.
This perhaps was the morning Hymn, which the Praecentor (Ver. 4, 5.) called
upon the Levites to sing, at the opening of the Gates of the Temple: as the
former was sung at the shutting up of the Gates in the evening. It recounts
several of the great works of the Lord; especially toward that Nation: whom it
excites to stedfastness in their Religion; and to contempt of Idols and
Idolaters. It both begins and concludes with an Exhortation to give praise to
God; and so was entitled, as several other Psalms are, (CVI. CXI, etc.)
Hallelujah, or Praise the Lord. That is, by this Hymn set forth the most
excellent perfections, and works of the Lord.

There are those who conjecture, from what we read Ver. 14. of this Psalm,
that when it was composed they were (or rather, had been lately) infested by
some of their idolatrous neighbors. Whose gods the Psalmist derides in the
very same manner as he does Psalm CXV. For the four following Verses of this
Psalm (15, 16, 17, 18.) differ very little from the 4, 5, 6, 8. of that: which
it is certain was composed in a time of great distress; as this was, when it
was over.

1. PRaise ye the LORD, praise ye the name of the LORD, praise him, O ye
servants of the LORD.


1. LET all here present, praise the most wise and omnipotent goodness of the
Lord: Let Him especially be praised, by you his Priests, who minister unto his
Majesty:

2. Ye that stand in the house of the LORD, in the courts of the house of. our
God.


2. And by the Levites, who attend upon Him in his House: together with all the
rest of his people, that frequent the Courts of God's House; who is our
constant and most liberal benefactour.

3. Praise ye the LORD, for the LORD is good: sing praises unto his name, for
it is pleasant.


3. Let this excite you all to praise the Lord: For as his Nature is most
excellent, so He is the fountain of all the good we enjoy: and no employment is
so delightful as to acknowledge his perfections, and commemorate the benefits
we have received from Him; by singing Psalms and Hymns of praise and thanks
unto Him.

4. For the LORD has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar
treasure.


4. I invite you above all other people to this heavenly duty: both because the
Lord had a peculiar kindness for Jacob your Forefather; and does still exercise
a special providence over you his Children, as far more dear and precious to
Him, then the rest of mankind, who are under his care:

5. For I know that the LORD is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.


5. And because I am sensible that the Lord, under whose government we are, is
so great and powerful above all other Beings, though called by the name of
gods; that you can never praise his Majesty enough.

6. Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the
seas and all deep places.


6. His own will alone gives bounds to his power: for, as none can act without
his leave, so none can hinder Him from doing what pleases Himself; in the
heavens as well as in the earth, and the seas, and other deep waters.

7. He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes
lightnings for the rain: he brings the wind out of his treasuries.


7. He raises vapors, for instance, from any quarter of the earth, and makes
them go up into the air: where some of them break forth in flashes of
lightning; and that (which is strange) is followed with great showers of rain:
and, from unknown places and causes, strong and violent winds blow with such
continuance; as if they came out of some Treasury, where He had gathered, and
long locked them up, till He had occasion to bring them forth.

8. Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.


8. He made the Egyptians feel how much superior He was to all their gods;
(XII. Exodus 12.) who could not defend them from his stroke: but He sent his
Angel, and, in one night, slew all the firstborn in the Country, both of man
and beast, XII. Exodus 29.

9. Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh,
and upon all his servants.


9. Before which terrible blow, He had given many other wonderful
demonstrations of his power, in several miraculous plagues; which He openly
inflicted on thee, O Egypt; not only on the meaner sort, but upon the King and
all his Court, Exodus VII, VIII, IX, etc.

10. Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings:


10. And after He had by these means brought you out of their bondage, He
overthrew several great Nations, and slew potent Kings: who, presuming of their
strength, opposed the accomplishment of his promises to you.

11. Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of
Canaan:


11. First of all Sihon King of the Amorites, who were esteemed invincible,
(XXI. Numb. 24. II. Amos 9.) and then Og, that giantly King of Bashan, (XXI.
Numb. 33. III. Deuteronomy. II.) and at last all the Kingdoms and Kings of the Land of
Canaan, XII. Josh. 7, 24.

12. And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people.


12. Which He graciously bestowed upon us, the Children of Israel, as an
inheritance we should hold of Him, by a Divine right: of which none, while we
continue his obedient people, shall be able to dispossess us.

13. Thy name, O LORD, endures for ever, and thy memorial, O LORD, throughout
all generations.


13. O Lord, how astonishing is this thy omnipotent Goodness! the fame of which
shall never be forgotten: But an illustrious memory, O Lord, shall be continued
of it, from generation to generation.

14. For the LORD will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning
his servants.


14. For though our enemies may sometimes oppress us, when we offend Him, yet
the Lord at last will take the part of his people, and deliver them: and, being
reconciled unto his servants, will turn his severity into kindness toward them.

15. The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.


15. It is not in the power of the Idols, which the heathen worship, to divert
his kindness from us; for they are of no more value then the silver, and the
gold of which they are made: and are so far from being able to do any thing,
that they themselves are made by those that adore them.

16. They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not.


16. They are mere Images of things, without their life: having mouths; but
cannot give a word of advice, or comfort to their supplicants: and eyes also;
but cannot see, much less prevent, any danger that does approach them.

17. They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their
mouths.


17. Ears they have; but cannot hear a word that is said to them: and noses
also; but they do not so much as breathe, much less can they smell the odours,
that are offered to them.

18. They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in
them.


18. They that make them therefore, or put any confidence in them, are as
senseless as themselves: having eyes, for instance, but do not see, that brutes
are more excellent then such gods; and that no help is to be expected from them.

19. Bless the LORD, O house of Israel: bless the LORD, O house of Aaron.


19. O how much then are we all bound to bless the Lord, the Creator of all!
who has freed us from this stupid blindness. Let the whole Nation of the
Children of Israel, especially the Priests of the Lord, praise Him and give
thanks to Him; who has better instructed them.

20. Bless the LORD, O house of Levi; ye that fear the LORD, bless the LORD,


20. Let all the Levites declare how gracious He is: yea, let all his pious
Worshippers, of whatsoever Nation they be, join in this heavenly employment, of
speaking good of the Lord.

21. Blessed be the LORD out of Sion, which dwells at Jerusalem. Praise ye
the LORD.


21. Let them all say, with one accord, the Lord be ever praised in this holy
place; who, though He be the owner of all the World, yet, makes his special
residence at Jerusalem.

The honor the heathens give to their lifeless Images, ought to excite you
all, with the greater devotion, to praise the Lord of the World.

PSALM CXXXVI.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm, like the former, is a commemoration of the goodness of God,
expressed in his wonderful works: particularly those He had done for that
Nation. And, it is likely, was composed to be sung upon the great Festivals; as
every day I suppose they sung the foregoing: which is of the same strain with
this, and contains much of the same matter: only here, at every half Verse,
one half of the Quire answers to the other in these words; For his mercy
endures for ever. A form of acknowledgment prescribed by David to be used
continually in the Divine Service, 1 Chronicles. XVI. 41: and accordingly followed
by Solomon, 2. Chron. VII. 3, 6. when he dedicated the Temple; and by
Jehoshaphat, when by the encouragement of a Prophet he went out to encounter a
vast Army with small Forces, 2 Chronicles. XX. 21. and here is repeated six and
twenty times, to make them the more sensible that they owed all they had to the
mere bounty of God; and to excite them to depend entirely upon it; and rest
assured it would never fail them if they did piously and most heartily
acknowledge it. Such repetitions we use now in our earnest Prayers, when we
say; Lord have mercy upon us, etc. which are no more vain then these. I have
variously expressed the sense of this repeated acknowledgment, according as the
other part of the several verses seemed to direct me.

1. O Give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endures for
ever.


1. OFfer your thankful Hymns unto the Lord of all; who is as good as He is
great: and will continue his kindness (which has been exceeding abundant
toward us) unto all succeeding generations.

2. O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endures for ever.


2. He is the Sovereign of all the heavenly Hosts; and therefore praise Him,
and give thanks unto Him: for He can employ them all for your help and
protection (as He has in former times) and you need not doubt of his kindness,
which continues unto all Ages.

3. O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.


3. All the Kings and Princes of the Earth are his Subjects; upon which account
also, give Him praise and thanks: For his kindness endures throughout all Ages,
to defend you, as He has done hitherto, from their tyrannical violence.

4. To him who alone does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.


4. He it is, and He alone whose Works are so great that they surprise all
those who seriously consider them, with wonder and astonishment; and therefore
give Him praise and thanks: For his kindness will never fail, still to employ
his infinite Power for the good of those, who are truly grateful to Him.

5. To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endures for ever.


5. Look upon the Heavens, and behold, with admiration and praise, the
splendor and the order wherein his wisdom has contrived and settled them: For
his kindness is as large, and as firm and durable as they.

6. To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy
endures for ever.


6. And then look down to the Earth, and thankfully praise Him; who brought it
out of the waters, and preserves it, in its just extent, from being again
overflowed by them: for his kindness is no less immovable, and by length of
time can never be impaired.

7. To him that made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.


7. Witness those great Lights, which never go out; but always call upon us to
praise, and give thanks to Him: who made them to illuminate the world; and to
be the emblems of his kindness; which sends its benign influences continually
upon us, unto all generations.

8. The Sun to rule by day: for his mercy endures for ever.


8. By day the Sun exerts his power to quicken all inferior Beings; and
excites us to praise Him, and be thankful to Him: whose kindness thereby,
perpetually administers to us all necessary things; and will do so, to the end
of the world.

9. The Moon and Stars to rule by night: for his mercy endures for ever.


9. And by night the Moon, or the Stars supply its place; and let us see how
much we are bound to praise and thank Him: whose kindness is so constant, that,
in the worst condition, it will never quite forsake us.

10. To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endures for
ever.


10. We must needs say so, and think our selves engaged above all others, to
give Him thanks; if we call to mind that memorable night (XII. Exodus 29.) when
He punished the Egyptians with the loss of all their firstborn: For his
kindness still continues, for ever to relieve those that are injured; and to
punish their insolent Oppressors.

11. And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.


11. Let us not forget how after that stroke, He brought our Forefathers out of
the cruel Bondage, wherein they had long held them (XII. Exodus 41, 42.) but
thankfully acknowledge that wonderful deliverance: For it is an argument why we
should never distrust his kindness, in the sorest straits that can befall us.

12. With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endures
for ever.


12. His Power, let us remember, is irresistible, which first by lesser, then
by greater signs and wonders delivered us out of their hands (VI. Exodus 5, 6.
VII, VIII, etc.) to praise and magnify Him, whose kindness is stupendiously
great, and will never cease to succor those who depend upon Him.

13. To him which divided the red Sea into parts: for his mercy endures for
ever.


13. Let us therefore give thanks to him; who when our Forefathers utterly
despaired of safety (XIV. Exodus 10, 11.) commanded the red Sea to retire, and
leave a broad way for them to pass, ( v. 21.) which plainly proves that his
kindness is inexhausted, and always ready to help us in the most dreadful
dangers.

14. And made Israel to pass thorough the midst of it: for his mercy endures
for ever.


14. For he led them safely through the very midst of the Sea (which rose up
like a wall on either hand of them, XIV. Exodus 22.) and will by his kindness
eternally secure all those, that piously confide in Him.

15. But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea: for his mercy endures
for ever.


15. But throw those that oppose Him, headlong into destruction, as He did
Pharaoh and his Host, in the very same place, where Israel was preserved; (XIV.
Exodus 27, etc.) For his kindness loves to complete his favors, and perfect
what He has begun for his people.

16. To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures
for ever.


16. And accordingly, when He had thus delivered them, He led his people by the
direction of a glorious Cloud, through an untrodden Desert; and there (with our
thankful praises let it be remembered) made a miraculous provision for them, (
Exodus XVI.) For his endless kindness, wheresoever they went, still with new
Benefits pursued them.

17. To him which smote great Kings: for his mercy endures for ever.


17. When potent Kings opposed their passage to the promised Land, He utterly
discomfited them (to his praise be it thankfully acknowledged) For his kindness
was not stopped by difficulties, but ever overcame them.

18. And slew famous kings: for his mercy endures for ever.


18. Though they were Kings famous for their prowess; yet, such was his for
ever to be praised kindness toward us, He gave us as easy and as absolute a
victory over them; as He had done before over Pharaoh and his Host.

19. Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever.


19. Over Sihon, King of that fierce Nation of the Amorites, who were thought
invincible, (II. Amos 9.) For his kindness was mightier then they, and gave us
this as an earnest of future conquests over our Enemies.

20. And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endures for ever.


20. Over that huge Tyrant Og the King of Bashan, (III. Deuteronomy. 11.) For his
kindness added that, as a new pledge of what He intended to do for us, when we
came into Canaan.

21. And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for ever.


21. And gave both their Countries to be held of Him, as a perpetual
inheritance: For his kindness does not decay (nor loves to revoke his Favors)
but continues to the latest Posterity.

22. Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for ever.


22. An Inheritance they were, which he settled upon us the Children of Israel,
as long as we continue his faithful Servants: For his kindness has no end;
but delights to perpetuate his Mercies to those, who are worthy of them.

23. Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endures for ever.


23. Nay, when for our Sins we were severely afflicted, and in danger to be
thrown out of this good Land into which at last He brought us; ( Judge. II, III,
IV, etc.) He was pleased graciously to relieve us: For his kindness pardoned
our ingratitude, and was as forward as ever, to bestow fresh Benefits upon us.

24. And has redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever.


24. And rescued us, many a time, when we cried unto Him, from the power of
those that tyrannized over us: For his kindness was not spent, by the frequent
deliverances it had given us; but still granted new matter for our
thanksgivings to Him.

25. Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.


25. Whose Bounty is not confined to us alone, but supplies the wants of all
mankind; yea, of all living Creatures: For his kindness has no bounds; nor
will ever cease to make a plentiful provision for them.

26. O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.


26. O raise your hearts to give Him thanks with the highest praises; whose
power extends it self beyond this Earth, even unto the highest Heavens: For his
kindness is so unwearied; that we may hope from thence to be ever receiving,
more and more of his Blessings.

PSALM CXXXVII.
ARGUMENT.
This is a mournful Song, composed by some of the captive Levites in Babylon;
when he reflected upon their sad parting with their dear Country, and the scorn
wherewith their insulting Enemies treated them, in that strange land. Which he
foresaw God would severely punish, by the hand of some other cruel People: who
should show them as little mercy, as they had showed the Israelites.

The vulgar Latin ascribes this Psalm to Jeremiah: upon which Inscription,
Theodoret (who found it also in some Greek Copies in his time) passes this
censure; that the bold Author of it wanted wit, as the Inscription it self
openly proclaims: for Jeremiah was not carried captive into Babylon; but, when
he had staid some time in Judea, was compelled by the disobedient Jews to go
down with them into Egypt. Yet there are those, who to excuse this, would have
us think that Jeremiah sent this Psalm to the Captives in Babylon: and that it
is called a Psalm of David; (for so it is in the vulgar Latin also) because
made after the example of his Psalms: As Virgil said he sung Ascroeum carmen
among the Romans; when he made his Georgicks in imitation of Hesiod.

In the Paraphrase of the first Verse I have followed a conjecture of Saint
Chrysostom's: that the Captives were not suffered (at their first coming
thither) to dwell within any of their Towns or Cities; but were dispersed all
along several Rivers of the Country; where they built Tabernacles or Cottages
for themselves: and perhaps were forced to drain those moist places, to make
them wholesome.

1. BY the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we
remembered Sion.


1. WHen we were transported from our own Country into the Land of Babylon, and
had the sides of Euphrates, and several of its Rivers (I. Ezekiel. 1.) assigned
for our habitation, there we sat down in a sorrowful posture; and could not
refrain from tears, when we called to mind the happy days which we enjoyed in
the holy Hill of Sion.

2. We hanged our harps upon the willows, in the midst thereof.


2. We brought our harps along with us, wherewith we were wont to praise the
Lord: (1 Chronicles. XV. 16.) But, as our fruitful vines and figtrees, under which
we formerly sat, were turned into barren willows and osiers; so all our mirth
and joy was turned into such heaviness and sorrow of heart, that we let all our
Instruments of Music hang neglected, upon the boughs of those doleful trees.

3. For there they that carried us away, captive, required of us a song; and
they that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of
Sion.


3. For when our new Masters, who had carried us away captive, they that had
laid Jerusalem on heaps, and had power to do what they pleased with us,
required us (between jest and earnest) to entertain them with our Music; and
to let them hear one of those Songs, which were wont to be sung in the Temple;

4. How shall we sing the LORD's song in a strange land?


4. Neither fear nor favor could extort this service from our Levites, but
they resolutely answered; As those Songs were not made for pastime and sport,
but in honor of the great Lord of the world; So how can you imagine that
miserable slaves are disposed to sing? and to sing those Songs in the Land
where we are exiles; which recount the mercies of God unto us, in our once most
flourishing Country?

5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning


5. No (said I then within my self) if I forget thy desolations, O Jerusalem,
(though never so far removed from thee) so as to gratify their desires, by
profaning thy Music and thy Songs; then let my right hand be benumbed, or
quite lose its skill of touching the harp any more.

6. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if
I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.


6. Let me be struck dumb, and never be able to move my tongue; if I be not so
mindful of thee, as never to sing again; till I see Jerusalem, and her holy
Solemnities restored.

7. Remember, O LORD, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem; who said,
Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.


7. Which joyful day I hope will come; when Thou, O Lord, wilt call our
enemies to an account: And, first of all, reckon with the Edomites, (XLIX. Jer.
10. XXV. Ezekiel. 12.) who instead of pitying Jerusalem, as became kind neighbors
and relations, were glad to see the day of its desolations; and encouraged our
destroyers with their acclamations, saying; Lay it flat, lay it even with the
ground upon which it stands.

8. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.


8. And then shall your turns come, O ye Babylonians; who have laid waste so
many Nations, but shall, one day, be made desolate your selves, (XIII. Isa. 19,
etc.) And may that Prince and people prosper and be happy, (L. Jer. 9, 41.) who
shall pay you in your kind; and use you as barbarously, as you used us, (LI.
Jer. 24, 35, 49.)

9. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the
stones.


9. He shall be praised, and thought to have done a worthy work, who shall
snatch your sucking children from their mothers breasts; and have no more mercy
on them, then upon the whelps of wolves, or such like creatures: but shall dash
out their brains, against the walls of your houses, or stones in the street,
(XIII. Isa. 16.) that there may be no remains of such a cruel generation, LI.
Jer. 62.

PSALM CXXXVIII.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
This is one of David's Psalms, (as the Title assures us) wherein he thankfully
acknowledges God's Goodness to him, in advancing him from a low and afflicted
condition to the royal dignity: which remarkable change would invite, he
thought, other Kings and Princes to have a very great regard to his Divine
Majesty: who, he hoped therefore, would support and defend him, in his
new-gotten Kingdom; by the same Almighty power, which raised him unto it.

1. I Will praise thee with my whole heart, before the gods will I sing praise
unto thee.


1. I Will make Thee my thankful acknowledgments, O Lord, with the devoutest
affections of my heart: thy holy Angels shall be witnesses of my gratitude,
which I will express in Psalms and Hymns, in the presence of the great Assembly
of the Judges, (XXII. Exodus 9. LXXXII. Psalm. 1, 6.) that they may remember, to
whom they owe their power and authority.

2. I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, for thy loving
kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy word above all thy
name.


2. I will prostrate my self in the humblest adorations of Thee, toward the
place where the Monument of thy Divine Presence is; and acknowledge how much I
am indebted to thy almighty Goodness: first for promising me, out of thy mere
grace and favor, the royal Dignity; and then for performing thy promise most
faithfully: For Thou have manifested thy most excellent power and goodness to
me in nothing so much, as in punctually fulfilling thy promise, (1 Samuel XVI.
13.) nowithstanding all the opposition which was made to it; nay in raising me
higher then I expected.

3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me: and strengthenedst me with
strength in my soul.


3. I had long ago fallen short of this honor, to which I am advanced, had not
Thou, during all the time of Readiness persecution, as readily relieved me, as I
cried to Thee: and mightily supported my spirit, by a courageous faith and hope
in Thee.

4. All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O LORD, when they hear the
words of thy mouth.


4. Which will move, sure, all our neighboring Kings, who have any knowledge
of my affairs, (2 Samuel V. 11, 12. VIII. 10.) to join with me, in praising Thee,
O Lord: when they shall hear, by how many strange providence Thou have brought
to pass, that which Thou promisedst to me by thy Prophet.

5. Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the LORD: for great is the glory of the
LORD.


5. The wonderful ways, whereby the Lord brings things about, shall be the
subject of their Songs; and they shall think it their greatest happiness to be
guided and governed by Him: for they shall confess, that none can do such
glorious things, as the Lord has wrought.

6. Though the LORD be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: but the proud
he knows afar off.


6. Whose sublime greatness does not make Him neglect (as they see in me) the
meanest persons; especially when their minds are as humble as their conditions:
but will not let Him stoop to the loftiest Princes (as they may see in Saul)
whom He despises, when they are forgetful of Him, and ungrateful to Him for
his benefits.

7. Though I walk in the mids of trouble, thou will revive me, thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me.


7. Which have been so great to me, that should I fall again into the same
straits, wherein I was before, and be encompassed with them; I should hope that
Thou would preserve me, and bring me safe out of them all: Thy power, I am
confident, will repress the violent assaults of my enemies; and by thy almighty
Goodness I shall be delivered from their wrath and fury, 2 Samuel V. 17, etc.
VIII. 1, etc.

8. The LORD will perfect that which concerns me: thy mercy, O LORD, endures
for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.


8. The Lord who has begun, will go on to finish his gracious intentions
toward me: not for my merits (I know they are none at all) but for thy own
mercy sake, O Lord; which as it was the sole motive to what Thou have done for
me, so will I hope (for it is still the same, and ever will be) incline Thee to
preserve and settle me in that dignity; to which not my ambition, but thy own
good will and pleasure has promoted me.

PSALM CXXXIX.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
The two last Verses of this Psalm seem to me a sufficient indication that
David (to whom the Title ascribes it) composed it, when he lay under the
imputation of having evil designs upon Saul, 1. Sam. XXIV. 9. which as he
protests against, in several parts of other Psalms, and calls God often to
witness his integrity; so here he appeals unto Him in a set and solemn
meditation, composed on purposed to represent before Him the clearness of his
intentions: which never suffered such designs to enter into his thoughts. And
who could believe that a man who seriously acknowledged, it was impossible to
conceal any thing from God's all-seeing eye, who forms us in the womb; should
be so impudent as to make this appeal unto Him; if he were conscious to himself
of any such guilt? And which is more, how could he be confident (as he declares
he was Ver. 19.) that God would make his innocence evidently appear, by
destroying his opposers; if he did not know they were calumniatours? whose vile
aspersions when God had effectually confuted, he delivered this Psalm to the
Master of the Music; as a lasting testimony of his sincerity all along before
he came to the Kingdom; and a constant admonishment to himself and others,
never to promote any designs for the future by sinister arts, though managed so
secretly that they lay hid from the eyes of all the world: since God cannot but
be privy to them; who loves righteousness, and hates all iniquity.

1. O LORD, thou have searched me, and known me.


1. I Am accused, O Lord, of grievous crimes; but my comfort is, Thou see I
am not guilty of them: For the exactest survey cannot make any thing so well
known to us, as I am to Thee; who art thoroughly acquainted with me.

2. Thou know my down-sitting, and mine uprising, thou understandest my
thought afar off.


2. Thou know what designs I have, when I sit musing at home; and what I go
about when I stir abroad: nay my inclinations are so perfectly understood by
Thee; that before I have conceived any design, it is visible unto Thee.

3. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways.


3. Nothing can be so narrowly sifted, as all the motions of my body and mind,
both by day and by night, are scanned by thy all-penetrating eye: which
comprehends, and is intimately privy, to all the ends which I pursue.

4. For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O LORD, thou know it
altogether.


4. When I am about to speak, Thou, O Lord (such is thy most admirable wisdom)
need not to be informed what it is: but know before I open my mouth,
every thing I intend to utter.

5. Thou have beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.


5. Whatsoever I have done long ago, is as well known to Thee, as that which is
lately past, or which I am about to do: For I am so environed, by Thee, and so
absolutely in thy power; that I cannot possibly escape thy notice, nor so much
as stir without thy leave.

6. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto
it.


6. O amazing height of understanding! It is in vain to think I can hide any
thing from it: which so far surpasses all I can say or conceive; that it
excells even my admiration.

7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?


7. Into what world shall I go, where Thou art not as present as Thou art in
this? It is impossible for me, should I make never so much haste, to get out of
thy sight.

8. If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell,
behold, thou art there.


8. If I could get up into the highest part of heaven, I should not be out of
thy reach: or go down and lie in the lowest depth of the earth, I should find
Thee still as near unto me.

9. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea:


9. If I could move as swiftly as the light of the rising Sun; and in an
instant fly from hence, and take up my dwelling in the remotest parts of the
world:

10. Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.


10. I should not be a jot the further from Thee; without whom as I could not
get thither, so I should be still subject to thy Government, and beholden to
thy Providence to support me there.

11. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me.


11. If I should have such a thought as this in my mind, that, though Thou art
present every where yet, in the dark I may lie undiscovered by Thee; it would
be very foolish: For when the Sun is gone down, all that is in me is as
apparent unto Thee, as if it were noon day.

12. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee; but the night shines as the day:
the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.


12. The darkness cannot conceal any thing from Thee; who, being the Fountain
of light, feast as well in the blackest night as in the brightest day: the
night and the day, the most open and the most covert practices, are equally
clear unto thy view.

13. For thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.


13. For my very thoughts (and what is there more abstruse then they) my most
retired thoughts and contrivances, and my most secret desires, are apparent to
Thee: whose I am, and by whom I was wrapped up in those skins, which enclosed me
in my mothers womb; then which there is nothing more hidden and dark.

14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.


14. Yet there (such is thy stupendous wisdom, which I will never cease to
praise, and thankfully acknowledge) I was, I know not how, in such a wonderful
manner, formed; that the thoughts of it strike me with astonishment: thy
operations in that work are most admirable; and of that I am exceeding
sensible, but I can say no more; for they are incomprehensible.

15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret; and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.


15. Though I was made in so secret a place, yet not the least joint in my body
was concealed from thy eyes: but I received from Thee there (where no more
light can come, then there does into the lowest depths of the earth) such a
comely distinction of parts, and variety of powers; that no embroidery can be
so curiously wrought.

16. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book all
my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there
was none of them.


16. For when the matter out of which I was made, was without any form, it was
visible to Thee how every muscle, vein and artery, with all the rest of my body
should be wrought; out of the pattern of them, which was in thy mind: and
accordingly in time, when there was not so much as one of them, they were all
fashioned, for the several uses to which they are designed; and not the
smallest of them omitted, or left imperfect.

17. How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of
them!


17. How invaluable also, and incomprehensible (O God, I am not able to express
the high and grateful sense I have of it) is thy tender care and providence,
which Thou have exercised over me ever since I was born! All the secret
passages of it amount to such a sum; that I am not able to give an account of
them.

18. If I should count them, they are mo in number then the sand: when I wake,
I am still with thee.


18. When I attempt to reckon how many they are, I find that I may as well
undertake to number the sand: For, though I continue the whole day in this
employment, and, after a nights rest, begin again the next morning to think how
numerous thy mercies are; I am still as far as ever from seeing any end of them.

19. Surely thou will slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore ye
bloody men.


19. Which makes me consident, O God, Thou will not now desert me; but rather
destroy that wicked man, (CXL. 1.) who, forgetting thy allseeing eye, regards
not by what means he plots my ruin: And therefore it will be best for you all,
O ye men of blood, who have slain the Priests of the Lord, (1 Samuel XXII. 18.)
and now thirst after my life, to make your retreat, and desist from persecuting
me any further.

20. For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in
vain.


20. For it is not so much me that they persecute, as Virtue and Piety; to
which, though they are not open yet, they are the most dangerous enemies,
because they make it serve their wicked ends: having godly pretenses for their
doing mischief; and not sticking (so little belief have they of thy
Omniscience) to call Thee to witness the truth of their lies and calumnies.

21. Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with
those that rise up against thee?


21. And have I not reason then, O Lord, to hate those, who have such an
inveterate hatred unto Thee? and to take the greatest distaste to them, that
oppose themselves so industriously to thy holy Laws?

22. I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.


22. I detest them with all my heart; and as their impiety is the only cause
of it, so I cannot loathe them more then I do: but declare my self upon that
account, to be their utter enemy.

23. Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts.


23. If I have any other ground of my enmity, or am guilty of so much as
designing any evil to them, merely because they have done so much evil to me; I
desire to find it out, and submit my self to the severest trials, which may
discover to me any such thought that lurketh in my heart.

24. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting.


24. For I would not continue in such a pernicious course: But if in any thing
I do I intend them any hurt, or so much as to be grievous to them; my humble
request is, either that I may not live, or live more exactly by the
unchangeable rules of righteousness, sincerity and truth.

PSALM CXL.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
There is no doubt (for the Title ascribes it to him) but this Psalm was made
by David And it is little less undoubted that he composed it (as Theodoret well
judges) when he was persecuted by Saul: who was instigated thereunto by the
calumnies of Doeg, and the information of the Ziphites: whose falseness, and
pestilent malice he here describes; beseeching God to preserve him from the
mischief they intended him, and to turn it upon themselves: as he rests assured
He would. When he came to his Kingdom, and had settled the service of God in
that manner, which we read 1 Chronicles. XVI, XXIII, etc. he delivered it to the
Master of the Music; to be sung at certain times in the Tabernacle. But it was
not found, I suppose (no more then the two foregoing, and the four following)
till some time after the other Books of Psalms were published; and so were
placed here all together, by him that collected this Book.

1. DEliver me, O LORD, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man.


1. DEfeat, O Lord, the wicked designs of that naughty man, (1 Samuel XXII. 9,
etc.) who makes no conscience of what he says or does, to compass his ends:
and let me not fall into the hands of that injurious Prince, (XXIII. 7.) whom I
have never wronged; but done him faithful service.

2. Which imagine mischiefs in their hearts; continually are they gathered
together for war.


2. They are zealously bent to do me all the mischief they are able: which
they studiously plot, and do nothing all the day but contrive how to oppress
me with armed force; which in several places they have laid to intercept me.

3. They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders poison is under
their lips. Selah.


3. And they have so traduced me by their calumnies, and false accusations,
that they have already given my reputation a deadly wound: for the tongue of
the Serpent, or the teeth of the Adder or Viper, does not more effectually
convey their poison into men's bodies; then they have infused these venomous
slanders into the peoples minds.

4. Keep me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me from the violent
man, who have purposed to overthrow my goings.


4. And therefore I most humbly again beseech Thee, O Lord, to keep me from
falling into the power of that naughty man, (Ver. 1.) who instigates his Prince
to the most injurious proceedings against me: Be Thou my preserver, O Lord; for
otherwise I shall never escape the trains they have devised and laid, to
supplant and utterly undo me.

5. The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the
wayside: they have set grins for me. Selah.


5. There is no hunter or fowler, more industrious and cunning, in laying
snares and toils, in spreading nets or setting gins and traps, for the beasts
or the birds in the places which they are wont to frequent; then they are to
trace me in all my motions, (1 Samuel XXIII. 23.) and to invent all manner of
wiles and subtle arts, to surprise me: which they proudly presume will have
their desired success.

6. I said unto the LORD, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications,
O LORD.


6. To which I have neither cunning, nor power of my own to oppose, no Friend
whose aid I can implore; but only commend my self unto the Lord, saying; I
have always owned Thee for my Proteetour, and Thou have hitherto owned me, and
been my merciful deliverer: Do not now, O Lord of all power and might, deny my
earnest request; who depend on Thee alone for succor.

7. O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation; thou have covered my head in
the day of battle.


7. O most mighty Lord, whom no Creature whatsoever can withstand; O Thou who
disposest of all events; I again profess that I look for safety from thy
almighty Power alone: by which I was protected (having no other helmet or
armor, but only that 1 Samuel XVII. 39, 40, 50.) in the day when I fought with
Goliath.

8. Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked, further not his wicked
device, lest they exalt themselves. Selah.


8. Suffer not him, O most mighty Lord, who now seeks my destruction, to effect
his desire; let him not succeed in any of his mischievous designs and projects
against me: lest he and his partakers grow so insolent; as to dare to attempt
all manner of violence against other innocents.

9. As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of their
own lips eover them.


9. Let the poisonous and pernicious calumnies, of those that now beset me
round, retort upon themselves: and let them be overwhelmed by those very
devices, which, with laborious lies, they have contrived for my ruin.

10. Let burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the fire; into
deep pits, that they rise not up again.


10. Let their slanders (which I can compare to nothing better then burning
coals, that are not easily quenched) be the instruments of their own
destruction: let them perish in the flames, which they themselves have kindled;
and be irrecoverably thrown headlong into those dangers and mischiefs, which,
like dreadfully deep pits, they prepared for my destruction.

11. Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt the
violent man to overthrow him.


11. This I am confident shall be their portion; for, though a false Informer
may for a time be believed, and thrive by his lies and slanders yet, Truth will
at last prevail; and not suffer him to establish his greatness by such base and
wicked practices: And as little shall violence and injustice avail him, that
relies upon it; but bring upon him one evil after another: which shall pursue
him to his ruin; as the hounds do the wild beast, which, after all its windings
and turnings, becomes a prey unto them.

12. I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor.


12. For I am sure the Lord, who is stronger then all, will assert the cause of
the Oppressed: and do right to those who are destitute of humane help; by
punishing all that are injurious to them.

13. Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name, the upright shall
dwell in thy presence.


13. Let the righteous rely on this, as an undoubted truth, that they shall
give thanks to thy almighty Goodness, for appearing in their vindication: and,
when these false and violent men shall be extinct, they that are sincerely
honest shall remain in thy favor; and receive the marks of it, in thy constant
care and providence over them.

PSALM CXLI.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
If the Title had not told us that David was the Author of this Psalm, the
matter of it would have led our minds to think of him, and of his many
sufferings; during the persecution of Saul. Which he prays to God (as Theodoret
observes upon the third and fourth Verses) he may be able to bear so patiently;
that it may not exasperate his spirit to speak irreverently of Saul; much less
to do him any mischief: but leave it unto God, to take his enemies in the
snare they had laid for him.

No body need wonder, that there are so many prayers found upon the same
Subject; for that persecution endured long, and they were made upon different
occasions, or to different purposes: and if they had been all to the same
purpose, it would not have been strange to him that considers the pious
disposition of David; who loved to spend his time in such devout Meditations.
And this seems to have been composed about the time of the offering of the
evening Sacrifice, Ver. 2: when his afflictions also pressed him sorely, that
they tempted him to speak some thing, which was (...) (as Theodoret's phrase
is) unbecoming God's Anointed (Saul) and the profession he made of duty to him.

1. LORD, I cry unto thee, make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I
cry unto thee.


1. THE danger wherein I am, O Lord, is exceeding great, (1 Samuel XXIII. 25. or
XXIV. 1, 2.) which makes me double my cries, and beseech Thee, the more
importunately, speedily to succor me (when my distresses call for it) with
seasonable relief.

2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the lifting up of my
hands, as the evening sacrifice.


2. Though I am now in a Wilderness, and thereby disabled from offering Thee
any other Sacrifice but my Prayers; yet they shall be as acceptable to Thee, as
if they were accompanied with the sweetest Odours: and my fervent devotion in
them, with entire dependence on Thee alone for help, be as prevalent; as if I
could now present Thee, at the Tabernacle, with an evening Oblation.

3. Set a watch, O LORD, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips.


3. And, in the first place, I humbly desire Thee, O Lord, to lay such
restraints upon my tongue, and to enable me so vigilantly to observe all the
motions of it; that none of the troubles I endure, though never so grievous,
may make me burst out into any intemperate speeches: which may give a just
offense unto them that persecute me.

4. Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men
that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.


4. Yea, govern all the motions of my will so steadily, that I may not listen
to evil counsels, (1 Samuel XXIV. 4, 6, 7.) much less engage with men, who have
no regard to right and justice, in any evil practices: but always refuse to
partake in their designs; though invited with the specious promises of the
greatest felicity.

5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer
also shall be in their calamities.


5. I had rather much that a righteous man should give me a severe rebuke, then
be enticed by evil doers to accompany them in their sins: For it will do me a
real kindness, and be so far from giving me any vexation, that it will be as
acceptable to me as the most excellent ointments are unto the head; and only
make me continue my prayers with the greater earnestness, that I may not run
into those mischievous courses, from which I am deterred by their pious
reproofs and admonitions.

6. When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words,
for they are sweet.


6. The effect of which their greatest Rulers have seen when, being left by
their Master on the sides of the Rock, (1 Samuel XXIV. 2, 3.) while he went into
a hole of it to uncover his feet, they heard that I spoke not a reviling word
(much less did I stretch out my hand against him) but in the mildest, and most
dutiful language addressed my self unto him, 1 Samuel XXIV. 8, 9, etc.

7. Our bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and
cleaves wood upon the earth.


7. And yet this gentleness has been so far from mollifying their hearts; that
they still persecute me, and the small body of men that follow me: (1 Samuel
XXVI. 2. XXVII. 1.) whom they have reduced to such extremities, that like the
earth, when it is ploughed up, we break in pieces; and are ready to disperse,
and flee for our lives, with little hope of safety.

8. But mine eyes are unto thee, O GOD the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not
my soul destitute.


8. But in this sore distress, I fix my thoughts on Thee, O mighty Lord, the
Governor of all things; in whom I repose an assured confidence, that Thou will
not abandon me to the malice of those, that seek to take away my life from me.

9. Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and the grins of the
workers of iniquities.


9. Preserve me, I beseech Thee, from all the subtle plots, which they have
laid to destroy me: and though they stick at nothing (though never so unjust)
and have various arts to blind the world and hide their perfidious designs;
suffer me not to be ensnared by them.

10. Let the wicked fall into their own nets: whilst that I withal escape.


10. But let all the contrivances of such wicked men prove pernicious to
themselves; and bring upon them the evils which they intended me: whilst I, and
they that are with me, by thy care of us, escape untouched by any of them.

PSALM CXLII.
Maschil of David. A Prayer when he was in the Cave.
ARGUMENT.
When David hid himself for fear of Saul, in the Cave of Adullam, (1 Samuel XXII.
1.) or as others think, more probably, in the Cave of Engaddi, (1 Samuel XXIV. 1,
2, 3.) this was the meditation he had in that disconsolate place; before Saul
came thither to uncover his feet, in it. Which was set afterward to the tune of
Maschil, (See Psalm. XXXII.) or called by that name, because it admirably
instructs Posterity, in the most forlorn, nay desperate condition, to recommend
themselves to God, and to depend on Him with a resolved Faith. Who, by an
unexpected means granted the desire of David, which he makes in the conclusion
of this Psalm (verse. 7.) and brought him out of those straits wherein he was
imprisoned. I say, resolved Faith; because in the Hebrew, the words of the
first and second verses run thus; I will cry unto the Lord; I will make my
supplication; I will pour out my complaint before Him, etc.

1. I Cried unto the LORD with my voice: with my voice unto the LORD did I make
my supplication.


1. THough I am destitute of humane help, I will not despair of safety: but
with the more fervent cries, implore the divine Succor; and with vehement
sighs and groans, deprecate the Lords displeasure.

2. I poured out my complaint before him: I showed before him my trouble.


2. I will lay before Him at large, all the sad thoughts which perplex my
heart: and representing the inextricable straits and difficulties wherein I am,
expose my self unto Him; as an object of his pity.

3. When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path: in the
may wherein I walked, have they privily laid a snare for me.


3. Now that I am utterly at a loss, and ready to faint away in a confusion of
thoughts, Thou know very well a way for my escape: though by the
intelligence they hold with my Enemies, (1 Samuel XXIV. 1.) they have blockt up
all the Passages, which I am acquainted withal; and laid Ambushes for me in
every Rode.

4. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me, refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul.


4. Look about thee, O my Soul, and see if thou can spy any hope of relief
from thy best and most powerful Friends: there are none of them that dare own
thee; nor do I know whither to fly for safety, if any of them would be so kind
as to invent a means, and open a way, for my deliverance from the present
danger.

5. I cried unto thee, O LORD, I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in
the land of the living.


5. All that I can do, is to recommend my self to Thee, O Lord, by fervent
Prayers, saying; I trust my self with thy Almighty Goodness, as in a sure
Sanctuary: I have nothing else in the world to depend upon, but Thee alone; by
whom I will hope to be protected and provided for, as long as I live.

6. Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low, deliver me from my
persecutors: for they are stronger then I.


6. O let my importunate cry prevail for some relief; which will come most
seasonably, in this exceeding great necessity: rescue me now, that I may not
fall into the hands of my Persecutours; who are every way (except in these
cries unto, and confidence in Thee) much too strong for me.

7. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy Name: the righteous
shall compass me about; for thou shall deal bountifully with me.


7. Bring me, with life and liberty, out of this dismal cave, wherein I am pent
up; that I may make my thankful acknowledgments to thy Almighty Goodness:
which shall attract the admiration of all good men, and provoke them
unanimously to join together with me, in praising Thee; when they see that Thou
art the most righteous Judge, and bountiful Benefactour of those, that commit
themselves unto Thee.

PSALM CXLIII.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
To the Title of A Psalm of David, Theodoret says he found, in some Greek
Copies, these words added (to explain the time of its composition) when Absalom
his Son persecuted him. Which he confesses was not then in the Hebrew (no more
then it is now) nor in other Interpreters of the Psalms: but agrees well
enough, he thinks, with the truth of the story. So he that was the Author of
the vulgar Latin thought also: though there are some passages in the Psalm,
which sound as if it had been made during the persecution of Saul; at some
time, when he was in the like distress with that described in the foregoing.
For v. 3, 4. he uses some of the same expressions, which we find there; and
represents himself as in danger to be buried, in some such Cave as that
mentioned in the last verse of Psalm CVLII; where he begs, as he does here, for
a speedy deliverance. Yet, for all this, there are other passages which will
incline us to adhere to the forenamed Addition; and apply the Psalm, to his
flight from Absalom. For then it was he had most reason to fear, lest God
should deal with him according to his sins: which he deprecates (v. 2.) with
such a deep sense of his unworthiness, that it has made this to be numbered
among the penitential Psalms; and is the last of them. The memory of also of
God's former deliverances of him, a great while before (v. 5.) may well refer
to what He had done for him not only against Saul, but before he knew him:
which as he does not forget, so he hoped the Lord would now remember; and grant
him the like again, when he was in the like distresses.

1. HEar my prayer, O LORD, give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness.


1. I Renew my requests, and my earnest supplications unto Thee, O Lord, for
some relief, in these new straits and difficulties into which I am fallen:
hoping, though I am very unworthy, yet in thy abundant mercy, Thou will
faithfully fulfill the promises Thou have made to me.

2. And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.


2. My sins indeed (2 Samuel XII. 9, 10, 11.) have justly brought these troubles
upon me; but I humbly beseech Thee to own me still for thy Servant, and not to
call me unto a severe account for what I have done amiss, but to deal
favorably with me: For if thou should proceed according to the rigor of
the Law, the best man living (much less so great a Sinner as I) will not be
acquitted at thy Tribunal.

3. For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead.


3. And I am not so bad, but my Enemy that persecutes me is far worse: who
without any provocation seeks my life, and has already utterly despoiled me of
all the comforts of it, (2 Samuel XV. 30.) and forced me to seek my safety in
holes and obscure places, in the Wilderness (XVII. 16.) where I seem to be
buried alive, without any hope of a resurrection.

4. Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me: my heart within me is
desolate.


4. Which, as it calls to mind the distress wherein I was, when in my flight
from Saul I hid my self in Caves (see CXLII. 3.) so it has the same effect
upon me: for I am ready to swoun away in this great perplexity; which has
struck me with such astonishment, that I have no strength remaining in me.

5. I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on the work
of thy hands.


5. Till I call to mind, withal, not only what Thou did for me in that
former persecution; but long before in my younger days; when I was delivered by
Thee from the greatest dangers (1 Samuel XVII. 34, etc.) on these wonderful
works I meditate; and consider with my self, that not by my own strength, but
by thy stupendous power I was then preserved.

6. I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsts after thee as a
thirsty land. Selah


6. And then I feel my fainting Spirits return again; and though I despair of
humane help, I make my prayer unto Thee, with a cherefull confidence, for thy
relief: which I long for and expect with as eager desire, as the parched ground
gasps for a refreshing shower.

7. Hear me speedily, O LORD, my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me:
lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.


7. Do not delay it, O Lord, I most earnestly beseech Thee; for I am not able
to hold out much longer in this great extremity: deny not my humble request,
lest I be utterly lost (as I am in danger) without all hope of recovery, 2 Samuel
XVII. 16.

8. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I
trust, cause me to know the way wherein I should walk: for I lift up my soul
unto thee.


8. Though this night be very sad, yet let me hear (according to the confidence
I repose in thy mercy) better news, and see my Affairs in a more comfortable
posture in the morning, (2 Samuel XVII. 22, 23.) show me which way I shall direct
my course, and provide for my safety, (v. 24, 27.) for I depend entirely upon
Thee.

9. Deliver me, O LORD, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me.


9. Let me not fall into the hand of my Enemies; from whom I am now flying: but
know not whither to go, but only to Thee, for shelter and protection.

10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good: lead me
into the land of uprightness.


10. Whose guidance I beseech, as well as defense, that I may do nothing (no
not for my preservation) but what is perfectly agreeable to thy Laws; for thy
favor is my security, which I know is not otherways to be obtained: and
therefore I desire the conduct of thy good Spirit (which is ready to assist
those that seek it) as well to lead me in the plain path of justice and piety,
as to suggest to me the way and means of escaping the snares of my Enemies; and
of coming into an honest Country, where I may be free from the fear of being
betrayed to them.

11. Quicken me, O LORD, for thy Names sake: for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.


11. I have nothing to move Thee to it, but only the honor it will be unto
thy Majesty; in respect to which I hope, O Lord, Thou will preserve me from
perishing, and restore me again to my Kingdom: For though my straits are so
great, that my life is in extreme danger; yet nothing can hinder the
performance of thy just and faithful promise to me.

12. And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict
my soul: for I am thy servant.


12. Thy mercy also surpasses all the malice of my Enemies; whom I trust Thou will cut off, and destroy, rather then let me continue in these hazzards: for I
am thy Minister, and though never so unworthy, am appointed by Thee to govern
thy people; in which office, I will do Thee all faithful service.

PSALM CXLIV.
A Psalm of David.
ARGUMENT.
The Inscription will not let us doubt, that David was the Author of this
Psalm: but that it was a Triumph after his victory over Goliath (as the vulgar
Latin has it) is asserted without ground. For though some Greek Copies have
such an addition to the Inscription; yet Theodoret says, that as he could find
it in the Hebrew, so it was not to be met withal in any other Interpreters; no
not in the LXX. in the Hexaplus. And it plainly appears by the second Verse
that it was composed after he came to the Kingdom: and not then, till he had
got some victories over those that opposed him. Nay, there are so many
expressions here, like to those we meet withal in the XVIII. Psalm; that it
has inclined some to think, it was made at the same time, and for the same
purpose with that: of which it looks like a compendium, and might be intended
for a short form of thanksgiving, for his deliverance from all his Enemies. But
if the expressions be carefully examined, their opinion will appear to be
truer, who think it was composed, not after God had given him rest from all his
Enemies; but after those two victories over the Philistines, mentioned 2 Samuel
V. if not before them: For as he still mentions more opposers, who were
unsubdued, v. 7, 11; so he does not say, as in the XVIII. Psalm, that God had
cast forth lightnings, and shot his arrows against them, etc. but desires Him
here (v. 5, 6.) that He would appear in that manner for him: acknowledging that
not only his Kingdom, but his Courage, his Victories, and Successes were all
to be ascribed unto God.

1. BLessed be the LORD my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.


1. PRaised be the Lord, by me and by all men else; by whom I have been kept in
safety, as in an impregnable fortress: and who has given me both strength and
skill to handle my Arms; whenever I engaged, either in single combat or in
battles.

2. My goodness and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield,
and he in whom I trust, who subdueth my under me.


2. I ever found Him very merciful unto me, when I was in any danger; for He
still preserved me as in a strong hold; nay set me out of the reach of the most
potent Enemies; either making a way for my escape when they surrounded me, or
protecting me in their most furious assaults upon me: and as I reposed a
constant trust in Him, so He has never failed my expectation; but after long
contests, made all Israel submit themselves unto my Empire, 2 Samuel V. 1, etc.

3. LORD, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man,
that thou make account of him?


3. I am astonished, O Lord, at this thy wonderful Goodness; and know not what
to say, but only admire that Thou should take such care of so poor a thing
as man is, at the best: especially of me, a miserable wretch: whom Thou have
honored with most glorious Successes.

4. Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passes away.


4. Man, alas! is but a breath, which presently vanishes: what a marvel is it
then, that I should have strength to atchieve such things? his life is
exceeding short and uncertain; and yet, such is thy stupendous Goodness, I am
not only alive, notwithstanding all the hazzards through which I have run; but
in a little time have performed such memorable acts, that the same of them will
last for ever.

5. Bow they heavens, O LORD, and come down: touch the mountains, and they
shall smoke.


5. Proceed, O Lord, to perfect my conquest, and now that new Enemies are
combined against me, (2 Samuel VIII.) let thy Majesty appear as it has done
formerly (see Psalm. XVIII. 9.) for my assistance and defense: and as soon as
the proudest opposers feel that Thou art present, they will vanish away like
smoke.

6. Cast forth lightning and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows and destroy
them.


6. Let them be dispersed by flashes of Lightning in their faces: and so
terrified with Thunder and Hail, that they may not be able to recollect their
Forces.

7. Send thine hand from above, rid me, and deliver me out of great waters:
from the hand of strange children,


7. Send powerful aid unto me from Heaven (XVIII. Psalm. 16.) for I rely upon
nothing on Earth: relieve me in all my straits; and deliver me out of these
great and manifold dangers, wherewith I am threatened, by a foreign power of
Idolatrous people, which now invade me:

8. Whose mouth speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood.


8. Who, as they have been wont to brag of more then they do, so promise more
then they will ever perform: For whatsoever treaties of peace and leagues of
friendship I make with them, they break them all; and falsify so shamefully
both their words and their oaths, that there is no trust to be given to them,
(v. 11.)

9. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery, and an instrument
of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.


9. I will never prove ungrateful to Thee, for so great a benefit: but here
solemnly vow to compose, with my best skill, new Hymns of thanks unto Thee, O
God; and with the usual instruments of Music sing thy Praises, saying;

10. It is he that gives salvation to kings, who delivers David his servant
from the hurtful sword.


10. It is not merely by the conduct, and valor of our Captains and Soldiers
that we have overcome; but the most powerful Kings owe their safety, and their
victories unto the Lord: To whom I am more particularly bound; first for the
high honor He has done me, in making me his Minister; and now for this
deliverance form these mighty Armies, which threaten my destruction, 2 Samuel
VIII.

11. Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth
speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.


11. Grant my renewed requests therefore, I beseech Thee (v. 7, 8.) and send me
seasonable relief and deliverance from this foreign invasion of an Idolatrous
people: who have no faith nor honesty; but shamefully falsify both their words
and their oaths; and when they shake hands with others, as if they were their
Friends, intend thereby to deceive them.

12. That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our daughters
may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace:


12. Let not our Country be overrun by such barbarians; but be so preserved by
Thee in peace and tranquillity, that our hopeful Sons may grow up like young
flourishing Trees, till they attain their full strength and stature; and our
Daughters be tall and beautiful, like those polished Pillars, which are the
ornaments of a royal Palace.

13. That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that our
sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.


13. Our Granaries also and Storehouses being as full as they can hold, may
afford us all sorts of Provision from year to year: and our flocks of Sheep
bring forth thousands; which may multiply into ten thousands, in their walks.

14. That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor
going out: that there be no complaining in our streets.


14. Our Cows also, being great with young, may neither be driven away by the
irruption of our Enemies; nor cast their Calves at home: but we may be free
from this, and all other causes of crying, or complaining in our streets.

15. Happy is that, that is in such a case: yea, happy is that people, whose
God is the LORD.


15. Happy is that Nation, which is settled in such a prosperous condition! That
is, happy is that Nation, which truly worships the great Lord of the World; who
has promised ( Deuteronomy. XXVIII.) to bless his faithful servants, with these, and
all other, fruits of his love.

PSALM CXLV.
David's Psalm of Praise.
ARGUMENT.
After David had obtained these favors of God for himself and for the Nation,
which he begs in the foregoing Psalm; he composed (according to his promise
there Ver. 9.) this admirable Hymn: which is contrived with such Art, that, it
is manifest from thence, he made it when he was much at leisure; and God had
given him rest from all his enemies: (2 Samuel VII. 1.) For every Verse begins
with a new Letter of the Alphabet in order: which are all here, except the
Letter Nun; which is wanting, Verse 13. I suppose it was lost, when this Psalm
came to the hands of the Collectour of this Book: and he would not adventure to
supply it, with one of his own inventing. The Greek indeed (that is, the
present Greek Copies; for Theodotion, and Aquila, and the ancient LXX. had it
not) and Latin and Arabic (which in effect are but one and the same) have
another Verse, which we may well think, if it ever were in the Hebrew, began
with that Letter Nun: But it differs so little from the seventeenth Verse (when
there is no repetition, in any other part of the Psalm) that it does not, in my
opinion, look like the true original Verse. And it may be doubted, whether
there ever was any such Verse in that place (where we suppose one wanting) for
the Psalmist might be carried (see Psalm XXV.) by the strength of the
inspiration, which was upon him, out of the method he had at first proposed to
himself.

Certain it is, this Psalm was always esteemed so excellent, that the Title of
the whole Book of Psalms, is taken from this: which is wholly spent in praising
God, with such admirable devotion; that the ancient Hebrews were wont to say
(as Valentine Schindler has long ago observed) He could not fail to be a child
of the world to come, who would say this Psalm three times every day. And for
that reason perhaps it was composed Alphabetically; that so useful a Psalm
might be the more easily learnt, and remembered by every body.

1. I Will extol thee, my God, O King, and I will bless thy name for ever and
ever.


1. I Will proclaim to all the world, O my God, the supreme Governor of
heaven and earth, how excellent thy Majesty is; infinitely surpassing the
highest of our thoughts: and will never cease to express the delightful sense
I have of all thy glorious Attributes; whereby Thou art made known unto us.

2. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.


2. This shall be my daily employment; and I will sing joyful Hymns in praise
of thy glorious perfections, without any end.

3. Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is
unsearchable.


3. For the Lord is immensely great, in power and dominion, and all other ways;
and therefore to be honored with our highest, and with our endless praises:
But when we have said all we can, our best praise of Him will be, to confess
that his transcendent excellencies cannot be comprehended.

4. One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.


4. For there are none of thy works, which we see, that we are able to
understand; but, though this Age transmit its observations to the next, and
that recommend the study of them to posterity yet, still we are ignorant and
cannot praise them enough: no, nor sufficiently declare the prodigious acts of
thy miraculous Providence, for the preservation of thy people, which shall be
perpetually commemorated.

5. I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous
works.


5. It shall be my business, in this present age, to speak of the dazzling
splendor and beauty of thy Majesty: which I want words to express, but appears
in thy stupendous works.

6. And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare
thy greatness,


6. Which they that come after shall rehearse; and, from the narratives that I
shall make of thy magnificent greatness, declare to their posterity, what
dreadful things were done by thy irresistible power, for the subversion of our
enemies.

7. They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall
sing of thy righteousness.


7. And with the same diligence shall they continue the constant memory of thy
numerous benefits to us: which they shall no more cease to celebrate with their
praises, then a spring does to pour out water; but publish, in their perpetual
Hymns, how just and faithful Thou art to thy word.

8. The LORD is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger and of great
mercy.


8. For the Lord (this shall be the subject of their, and of my Song) is
exceeding propense to do us good; and very indulgent when we do amiss: which
makes Him that He does not presently punish, but rather chooses to bestow new
and greater benefits upon us; if we repent of our faults.

9. The LORD is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works.


9. Nor is his goodness confined unto us; but extends it self in various acts
of bounty to all mankind: who need not doubt of his kindness; when they see He
takes so tender a care of all his Creatures,

10. All thy works shall praise thee, O LORD, and thy saints shall bless thee.


10. Who all in their several kinds declare, O Lord, throughout all
generations, how great, how wise, how powerful and provident Thou art: which
such as we, who are particularly bound unto Thee for special favors bestowed
upon us, ought most sensibly to acknowledge with thankful praises.

11. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.


11. It is their duty to discourse of the incomparable wisdom, and goodness,
and care, which Thou exercisest in the government of the whole world;
especially of us: and to recount the memorable acts of thy invincible power
among us.

12. To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty
of his kingdom.


12. That all mankind, who regard not such things so much as they ought, may be
made sensible how mighty the Lord is: and adore the amazing splendor of his
illustrious works; and the admirable order He observes in his government of all
things.

13. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures
throughout all generations.


13. Which as they are all entirely subject to Him, so his Empire over them is
immovable; and neither ends nor decays: but, when earthly Kingdoms fail and
are transferred from one to another, his dominion is still the same throughout
all successions.

14. The LORD upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all those that be bowed
down.


14. In which He does not neglect any of his subjects that depend upon Him (as
mortal Princes too frequently do) but supports and comforts the meanest of
them, that are oppressed with grievous afflictions: and gives them a seasonable
deliverance; when they are in danger to sink and perish under the heavy weight
of their burdens.

15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due
season.


15. He makes a constant provision also for them: which every Creature, when
their necessities call for supply, daily receive from Thee, O Lord; in the
proper season for it.

16. Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.


16. And Thou art not sparing of thy blessings; but dispensest them with such a
bountiful hand, that there are none of them live without satisfaction: but
have all their appetites filled; by thy liberality to the smallest of them.

17. The LORD is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.


17. And therefore let us not doubt, but thankfully acknowledge, that the Lord
is not only just in all the dispensations of his Providence to us; (though
perhaps we do not apprehend it) but exceeding merciful, and kind, in every
thing that befalls us.

18. The LORD is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in truth.


18. We need do no more but piously commend our selves to Him, and He will
take care of us: for He is ready on all occasions, to relieve every one that
addresses himself unto Him; with a sincere heart, truly disposed to be
faithful to Him.

19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.


19. He that satisfies the appetite of all Creatures, (Ver. 16.) will not fail,
we may be confident, to gratify in their desires, such religious persons as
fear to offend Him: But though He let them fall into troubles and straits, in
due time will be moved, by their importunate prayers, to send them a seasonable
deliverance.

20. The LORD preserves all them that love him: but all the wicked will he
destroy.


20. For since they love Him so well, that they had rather suffer any thing,
then disobey Him; the Lord undoubtedly will preserve them: and destroy all
those impious men, who have no regard to his Laws; nor make any scruple to
abuse and oppress such virtuous persons.

21. My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD: and let all flesh bless his
holy name for ever and ever.


21. For which, and all the rest of his benefits, I will never cease to sing
Hymns of praise unto the Lord: and let all mankind (remembering how weak and
frail they are) join together with me in this employment, (as the greatest
support, and comfort, and security they have) to bless his incomparable
Goodness, and Power, and careful Providence, for ever and ever.

PSALM CXLVI.
Hallelujah.
ARGUMENT.
This Psalm and the other four, which follow, both begin and conclude, with the
word Hallelujah, i. e. Praise ye the Lord. And therefore might, if the Jews had
pleased, have been called The great Hallelujah: being all of them exhortations
and incitements to the people; to stir up themselves unto that heavenly
employment: which this Psalm recommends to them, from the consideration of
several of the Divine Excellencies: which make Him the proper object of our
confidence in all conditions. The vulgar Latin, and the present Greek entitle
it to Haggai and Zachariah: but there is no such thing in the Hebrew, nor in
other ancient Interpreters, nor in the LXX. in the Hexaplus, as Theodoret tells
us. And we might rather think it not unlikely, to have been composed by David;
when Saul, who at first had a great kindness for him, afterward turned his most
bitter enemy: were it not for one word, viz. the mention of Sion; which was not
then in David's possession. This it is possible inclined those that made the
foregoing Title, to think it was not composed till aftertimes; and they could
find none so likely as that after the Captivity: when they soon found it was in
vain to rely upon the favor of Princes; some of which hindered the building of
the Temple, as much as Cyrus at the first had furthered it. I shall not trouble
the Reader with any other conjectures: but only note that the eighth Verse was
most exactly and literally fulfilled in our Lord Christ; when he came to give
Salvation to us.

1. PRaise ye the LORD. Praise the LORD, O my soul.


1. STir up thy self, O my Soul, to give the Lord, who gave Being to all
things, those affectionate praises which are due unto Him.

2. While I live will I praise the LORD: I will sing praises unto my God, while
I have any being.


2. The best resolution Thou can make is this; I will praise the Lord all my
life long: and never cease to give thanks unto my God, who never ceases to
bestow his benefits on me.

3. Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help.


3. And let all mankind, if they would be happy, preserve his favor, by being
grateful to Him; and not (with the neglect of his service) court the favor of
Princes, and settle upon them their dependence: For the greatest King on earth,
though never so just, never so bountiful, as well as rich and powerful, is
still but a man; who cannot be present every where when we are in danger, nor
be able always to help us in our greatest needs.

4. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his
thoughts perish.


4. For there is a time when he cannot help himself, nor by the whole power of
his Empire keep his soul from leaving his body: nay a small accident may carry
him away suddenly; and then a clod of earth can do as much as he, and
whatsoever designs and projects he had laid, (for any man's preferment, suppose)
they all die together with him.

5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
LORD his God:


5. He, and he alone, is the truly happy man, who expects help from the mighty
God, by whom Jacob was fed all his life long, (XLVIII. Genesis 15.) who trusts to
Him that is Lord of the World; and has made Him his Friend so much, that he
can call Him his God.

6. Which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which
keeps truth for ever:


6. For, as He never dies so, there can be no defect in his power, nor want of
his presence in every place; the heavens, the earth and the sea, and all that
is in them, being his own works: and, as nothing can hinder Him from doing what
He pleases so, He will never alter his mind, nor go back with his word; but
faithfully keep his promises for ever, with those that rely upon them.

7. Which executes judgment for the oppressed, which gives food to the
hungry: the LORD loses the prisoners.


7. There are innumerable instances of the careful Providence of this great
King; who does not slight or forget the cries of his grieved Subjects; but in
due time asserts the right of those who are oppressed, and can find no relief
in other Courts of Judgment: He supplies also the needs of poor hungry
wretches, who are ready to famish: and is so gracious a Lord, that He sets them
at liberty, who by unjust or pitiless men have been held in miserable Captivity.

8. The LORD opens the eyes of the blind: the LORD raises them that are
bowed down: the LORD loves the righteous.


8. The Lord sends help, when there are no hopes of humane cure: for He
restores sight to the blind, (as we shall see most remarkably when the Lord
Christ appears) and lifts up those who are bowed together, by tedious
weaknesses, (XIII. Luke 11.) or crushed under other insupportable burdens: and
above all the Lord delights to do good to them, who have done good to others.

9. The LORD preserves the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow:
but the way of the wicked he turns upside down.


9. The friendless strangers are preserved by the Lord, from those injuries
which men are apt to do them; when they commit themselves to his protection:
And so do the disconsolate Widows and Fatherless Children find support and
relief from Him, against the injustice and violence of their wicked
oppressors; whose designs and practices He utterly confounds.

10. The LORD shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Sion, unto all generations.
Praise ye the LORD.


10. Be of good comfort then, O ye inhabitants of Sion, who sincerely worship
this great Lord, that does all these wondrous things: For his power and
authority never fails; but from age to age will ever succor those pious souls,
who are destitute of humane help: therefore praise perpetually this everlasting
King.

PSALM CXLVII.
Hallelujah. See CXLVI.
ARGUMENT.
Saint Chrysostom and Theodoret think this Psalm has respect to the return of
the Jewish Nation from the Captivity of Babylon; and the instauration of
Jerusalem, which followed upon it. And the second and thirteenth Verses, may
well incline us to be of the opinion, that it was made by some holy man at that
time, ( Haggai or Zachariah some ancient Interpreters imagine; or rather
Nehemiah, who built the Walls and set up the Gates) especially if we observe
that there are some phrases in it, which savor of the Chaldaean language. And
though this can be no more then a conjecture; yet it is very certain and
evident that in that deliverance, God gave such illustrious proofs of his
power, wisdom, mercy and justice, as the Psalmist here exhorts the people to
celebrate with their thankful praises. I shall follow it therefore in my
Paraphrase; it being reasonable to suppose that devout persons would be as
forward to acknowledge the wonderful Providence of God in their restoration,
as they were to bewail (which they do Ps. CXXXVII.) the ruin of their Country;
and that posterity would be no less careful to preserve what was composed in
memory of the one, then they had been to continue the memory of the other: And
there is no Hymn, we can find, so suitable to that occasion as this.

1. PRaise ye the LORD: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely.


1. LET all the Nations praise the Lord; who will send us new benefits, when we
are truly thankful to Him our great Benefactour, for the old: For it is a
thing highly acceptable to Him, as well as delightful to those who are
employed therein; and best becomes us of all other things, there being nothing
so decent as to see men grateful to Him that has obliged them.

2. The LORD does build up Jerusalem: he gathers together the outcasts of
Israel.


2. To which we stand bound above all other men; for the Lord has not only
delivered us out of a sad Captivity; but, in spite of all the opposition our
enemies have made to it, (IV. Ezra 12.) has raised Jerusalem out of its
ruins: whereby He invites the rest of our Brethren, who remain behind, to
return to their own Country from whence they are expelled.

3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.


3. He comforts us after our long sorrows, which had in a manner broken our
heart with grief and sadness: and has in some measure repaired our breaches,
which like a festering wound, endangered the life of our Nation.

4. He tells the number of the stars: he calls them all by their names.


4. Whom He knows how to gather, out of all their dispersions, and to find
every one of them wheresoever they are, though as numerous as the stars of
heaven: (XV. Genesis 5.) which He as distinctly and exactly understands (how
confusedly soever they seem to us, to be scattered in the sky) as we do those
things, which we call by their proper names.

5. Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.


5. Let us not despair of it; for nothing is impossible with our Lord and
Governor: who is not like earthly Kings, that rule over a few petty Provinces;
but the great Sovereign of the whole world; whose power and wisdom are so
unlimited, that He is able to do whatsoever He pleases, and knows how to
compass whatsoever He designs.

6. The LORD lifts up the meek: he casts the wicked down to the ground.


6. And does not, because He is so great, despise the afflicted: but, if they
meekly commit themselves to his care, will raise them up to a better condition;
and throw down the mightiest Princes that proudly oppress them, as low as the
very ground.

7. Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving: sing praise upon the harp unto our
God.


7. Celebrate therefore with your thankful Songs (you cannot make a less
return unto Him) this infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness: Begin now,
with the usual Instruments of Music, to sing Hymns of praise unto our God, for
all his benefits.

8. Who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who
makes grass to grow upon the mountains.


8. Particularly for the great plenty He has given us by his almighty
Goodness; (II. Haggai 1.) which shows it self, first in raising vapors from
the earth; and then turning them into clouds, wherewith He covers the face of
heaven; and then bringing forth rain out of those clouds: which He sends back
to the earth again; and makes not only the green pastures, but the parched
mountains and desert places, become fruitful.

9. He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.


9. By which wonderful Providence He provides food, even for the wild goats
and suck like beasts; that live upon the top of craggy rocks: For He neglects
not the vilest creatures, but satisfies the hunger of the young ravens; though
it be so ravenous, that they are continually crying for new supplies.

10. He delights not in the strength of the horse: he takes not pleasure in
the legs of a man.


10. Let us not doubt then, but He that takes care of crows, will much more
take care of us; and not be afraid, though we are of little force, (IV. Nehem.
3, 4. VII. 4.) and have no armies of horse and foot to defend us: For the Lord
(who fights for us, IV. Nehem. 20.) has no need of these; and will not take
part with our enemies, because they are superior to us in the strength of
their horses, and the nimbleness of their soldiers.

11. The LORD takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy.


11. But delights to give those his assistance and protection, who, worshipping
Him devoutly, fear to offend Him: and, having no help in themselves, nor any
earthly refuge to fly unto, depend notwithstanding with a steadfast faith on his
infinite mercy.

12. Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.


12. Praise the Lord, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; sing joyful Hymns unto
your God, O ye people of Sion, (XII. Nehem. 27, 31, 40, 43.) who have seen this
truth abundantly demonstrated in your days.

13. For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates: he has blessed thy
children within thee.


13. For He has made this City, which was lately without Walls and Gates, so
strong a place; that no enemy dare assualt it, (VI. Nehem. 15, 16.) and has
increased the number of thy Citizens which were but few, (VII. Nehem. 4. XI. 1,
2.) by the manifold blessings He has poured on them.

14. He makes peace in thy borders, and fills thee with the finest of the
wheat.


14. Which are not confined within the Walls of that City, but He has settled
all the Country in peace: no enemy appearing to infest thy borders, and to
disturb the husbandmen in their labors; which have produced so rich a crop,
that plentiful provision is made for all our satisfaction.

15. He sends forth his commandment upon earth: his word runs very swiftly.


15. This we ought to ascribe to his merciful Providence, who shows by the
fruitful seasons He sends, after all things seem to be killed by a hard
winter, that He does not intend by our affliction to destroy us; and that He
can easily bring all our Brethren hither, who remain still in Captivity: For
when He would have any alteration made in the earth, it is done as speedily as
we can speak.

16. He gives snow like wool: he scatters the hoar frost like ashes.


16. He sends, for instance, a sudden cold: which sometimes turns the moist
vapors, in the air, into flakes of snow, to cover the earth as with a fleece
of wool, and defend the corn from the biting winds; and sometimes into hoary
frost, which He gently scatters and straws, like ashes, upon the earth.

17. He casts forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?


17. And sometimes congeals them into ice; which He breaks into bits, and
throws down in violent hail: accompanied with such extremity of cold, that
neither man nor beast nor the fishes in the ponds and rivers are able long to
endure it.

18. He sends out his word, and melts them: he causes his wind to blow,
and the waters flow.


18. But then, to prevent the hurt that might ensue by its continuance, He
issues forth another command, which as suddenly (Ver. 15.) makes a thaw; and,
by the warm breath of softer winds, loosens the waters which were bound up; and
causes them to flow again.

19. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.


19. In such things as these the whole world see how powerful, and how good He
is: But we have more peculiar reasons to depend upon Him for a happy return of
our Nation; whom He does not teach merely by the snow, the hoar frost, and the
ice; but by another sort of word then that which sends them upon the earth:
(Ver. 15.) even by His Ten Commandments delivered from heaven (XX. Exodus 1.) in
a most glorious and astonishing manner, (Ver. 18.) and by Laws of all sorts,
which He has given us for the government of our life.

20. He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have
not known them. Praise ye the LORD.


20. This is a privilege which no other Nation in the world enjoys, (IV. Deuteronomy.
32, 33.) For, though they all receive the showers and snow out of the clouds
yet, Laws from thence they have no acquaintance withal. Therefore let not us
dishonor Him so much, as to distrust his Providence; but continually praise
the Lord, and acknowledge his bounty to us.

PSALM CXLVIII.
Hallelujah. See CXLVI.
ARGUMENT.
It does not appear who was the Author of this Hymn, nor upon what occasion it
was composed. But the last Verse sufficiently shows the Nation was then in a
very flourishing condition; and therefore probably it was made by David; when
God had given him rest from all his Enemies: which filled his heart with such
love to God, that it transported him into this rapture. Wherein, finding how
short his own praises were, he wishes all Creatures in heaven and earth would
conspire in a sweet symphony, as Theodoret speaks, of singing Hymns unto Him.
And first he calls upon the world above, and all that is therein from the first
Verse to the seventh: where he descends to the world here below; and calls upon
all things on the earth to praise the Lord: concluding (v. 13.) that as there
is one Maker of both; so all that they can say of Him, when they have joined
all their powers together in one Quire, falls infinitely short of his most
excellent Majesty. Who has set forth his most transcendent wisdom, power, and
munificence, in such variety of stupendous work, that there is not the
smallest of them, but ministers such matter of praise, nay admiration, to those
that attentively consider them; that they cannot but wish with the Psalmish
here, that every one of them were able to tell us, how much skill, and kindness
He has shown in their contrivance: or that we were able to find it out, and
comprehend it. Thus He is to be understood when he calls upon all Creatures to
praise the Lord: or it is as if he had said, The Lord is to be praised by or in
all these things, as long as the world lasts.

This I take to be the true account of this Psalm, which I refer to the times
of David, because the two following seem to have been then made; and there is
no other we can so well fix upon: unless we will conceive that it was a
Meditation, when they were perfectly settled in a peaceable enjoyment of their
Religion, after the Captivity; of which there is not the least intimation in
the Psalm.

1. PRaise ye the LORD, praise ye the LORD from the heavens: praise him in the
heights.


1. LET all Creatures praise the Lord. First, let the Celestial Quire begin,
and sing their thankful Hymns to Him: who has raised them so high above us in
power and might, as well as in dignity and place.

2. Praise ye him, all his Angels, praise ye him all his hosts.


2. Praise Him all ye Angels, who have the honor to be the prime Ministers of
his most excellent Majesty: O let their several Hosts and Companies, in
whatsoever rank or order they stand, praise Him; whose Sovereign Authority
commands them all.

3. Praise ye him Sun and Moon: praise him all ye stars of light.


3. Praise Him ye Sun and Moon, who are his greatest visible Ministers, and
unwearied in his service: Praise Him all the rest of the shining Stars; and
declare to all future generations, as ye have done for so many Ages past, how
glorious He is.

4. Praise him ye heavens of heavens: and ye waters that be above the heavens.


4. Let all the heavenly Regions praise Him: particularly the Clouds; which
hang in the Air, and disstill in fruitful showers to enrich the Earth.

5. Let them praise the Name of the LORD, for he commanded, and they were
created.


5. Let all these set forth the adorable wisdom, and power, and goodness of
the Lord: For by his omnipotent word, these, whom the mistaken world calls
Gods, were created; not to be worshipped, but perpetually to proclaim his
praise.

6. He has also established them for ever and ever: he has made a decree,
which shall not pass.


6. who has made them not only illustrious, but everlasting monuments of his
splendor and glory: having fixed and settled them in an admirable order, which
they constantly observe; and prescribed them Laws, which they never transgress.

7. Praise the LORD from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps.


7. O Let all Creatures here below accompany those celestial hosts, in their
praises of the Lord: whose power the vast Whales in their several kinds, and
all that moves in the profound depth of the Sea, abundantly declare.

8. Fire and hail, snow and vapor: stormy wind fulfilling his word.


8. Let the Lightnings, Thunder, and Hail; the Snow, hoary Frost, and Ice; the
Winds, Storms, and Tempests; all make a part of this Song: for they constantly
execute his Sovereign Will, and serve his wise Designs.

9. Mountains and all hills: fruitful trees, and all cedars.


9. The lofty Mountains also, and the lesser Hills; the Fruit-bearing Trees,
with the stately Cedars; the Pines, the firrs, and all the rest (which He has
created for several ends and uses) let them all be called upon to tell, how
great, and how bountiful He is.

10. Beasts and all cattle: creeping things, and flying fowl.


10. The wild Beasts also of the Forest, and all the Cattle that feed in the
Fields; whatsoever creeps upon the Earth, or swims in the Sea, or flies in the
Air; let it join in this Hymn of praise to Him: who has shown his manifold
wisdom, and diffusive goodness in them all.

11. Kings of the earth, and all people: Princes, and all Judges of the earth.


11. But especially let Mankind praise Him; who (after He had made these
things) brought them into the world, last of all, to contemplate his wonderful
works: And first let Kings (who here on Earth resemble the Angels or the Sun in
Heaven) and then let their Ministers of State and Lieutenants in their several
Provinces; and next, all the Judges of the Earth (who are like the Moon and the
Stars) give a good example unto all the Subjects; and stir them up, to meditate
his praise.

12. Both young men and maidens: old men and children.


12. Let no Sex, no Age think themselves exempted from this heavenly
employment: But let the Young men praise Him for their strength, and the
Virgins for their beauty; they that are going out of the world, for all that
they have seen and heard of Him; and they that are newly come into it, for all
the goodly spectacles that are before them.

13. Let them praise the Name of the LORD, for his Name alone is excellent: and
his glory is above the earth and heaven.


13. Let them praise the incomparable Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of the Lord:
For how great soever any other Beings are, there is no other God but He; whose
most excellent Majesty, infinitely surpasses, all that the Earth or the Heavens
can tell us of Him.

14. He also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints,
even of the children of Israel, a people near who him. Praise ye the LORD.


14. And yet so great is his condescension unto us (who are bound therefore
more particularly to praise Him) He takes a peculiar care of us; and has set
over us a powerful Prince, for the defense and safety of his People, (LXXXIX.
Psalm. 19.) Whose fame He has thereby raised to the highest pitch of honor;
having obliged the Children of Israel by many peculiar benefits, especially
this; that they are a people more nearly related to Him, then any other
whatsoever: for He dwells among them, in his holy place, where they approach to
Him. O praise Him there, for this singular favor.

PSALM CXLIX.
Hallelujah. See CXLVI.
ARGUMENT.
Theodoret thinks this Psalm was made for them, that, after their return from
Captivity, had many opposers; but, by the Divine Assistance overcame them: And
that it is a praediction of those great things, which were done by the
Maccabees. Certain it is, that some signal Victory was the occasion of it; and
thence Saint Chrysostom has here given us a full account, I think, of the
meaning of A new Song: which, according to the use of the word new in other
places, (when they would express a thing very wonderful, such as has not been
seen or heard of before, XVI. Numb. 30. XXXI. Jer. 22.) he takes to denote An
illustrious and famous Hymn, made for Victories, for great Achievements and
Trophies. Which were never more remarkable in this Nation, then in the days of
David; and therefore this Psalm may very well relate to his reign: who subdued
several Kingdoms; which had stood out, and would not submit to Israel till his
time, though God had promised to give their Countries to them, XV. Genesis 18.
XXIII. Exodus 31. 2. Sam. VIII. 1, 2, etc. X. 19.

The interpretation which I have given of the sixth Verse, need not seem
strange to any one; who considers that it has been, and is the custom of all
Nations, to stir up themselves to fight by the sound of some musical Instrument
or other. "The ancient inhabitants of Etruria, says Clemens Alexandrinus (in
the second Book of his Paedagogus, chap. 4.) used the Trumpet for this purpose;
the Arcadians the Whistle; the Sicilians an Instrument called Pectids; the
Cretians the Harp; the Lacedaemonians the Pipe; the Thracians the Cornet; the
Egyptians the Drum; the Arabians the Cymball: But it was proper to the
Israelites to go forth against their Enemies, singing Psalms of Praise to God,
(as we read, 2 Chronicles. XX. 21, 22.) who had given great Victories to their
Ancestors, and had promised never to forsake their Posterity; while they
served Him only, and piously confided in Him.

1. PRaise ye the LORD: Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise in the
congregation of saint^.


1. SIng a new Hymn unto the Lord, for the fresh and singular benefits He has
bestowed upon us: Let Him be praised not only in private, but in the public
assemblies of those, who have received special marks of his favor to them.

2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Sion be
joyful in their king.


2. Let all the Israelites rejoice in Him, that made them his peculiar people;
and has now raised them to great splendor among the Nations of the world: let
the inhabitants of Sion, more particularly, be exceeding glad, that the Lord,
who is our King, has there settled his royal Throne, 2 Samuel V. 9. VI. 12.

3. Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
the timbrel and harp.


3. Let them leap for joy, and unanimously praise his most excellent Majesty,
in their Dances to the Flute: (2 Samuel VI. 16.) let them testify their
gratitude to Him, by singing Psalms, with the Timbrel and the Harp.

4. For the LORD takes pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with
salvation.


4. For the Lord takes pleasure in doing good unto his people: and will not
only deliver them after they have been oppressed many years; but, if they
meekly depend upon Him, make them as great and illustrious, as they have been
contemptible and mean, 1 Chronicles. XIV. 2.

5. Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds.


5. Which shall fill the hearts of good men (who are dear to Him) with the
highest triumph, in the honor that He has done them: and make them shout for
joy, in the security and peace He shall bestow upon them.

6. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in
their hand;


6. Which they shall not doubt to maintain against all opposers; for in assured
hope of Victory they shall go to War, with Psalms, and Hymns in their mouths,
concerning the great acts of the Lord: which they shall courageously sing with
a loud voice, when they fall upon their enemies; and prefer to the two edged
sword which they carry in their hand.

7. To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people;


7. Wherewith they shall take a just revenge upon the heathen, for all the
injuries they have done us: and so chastise the insolence of the people, that
they shall fear again to molest us, 1 Chronicles. XIV. 17.

8. To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron;


8. For their Victories shall be so complete, that they shall not only rout
their enemies and put them to flight; but lead away their Kings captive in
chains; and take their great Captains and Commanders prisoners, and keep them
fast in fetters of iron.

9. To execute upon them the judgment written: this honor have all his saints.
Praise ye the LORD.


9. In order to the executing upon them the judgment, which God has long ago
decreed, and is recorded in his Law, VII. Deuteronomy. 24. XXXII. 41, 42, 43. This is
the honor which all Israel shall have, when they are in favor with God; and
such shall be their glorious Victories, and such Hymns and melodious Songs
shall they sing, saying; Hallelujah, praise the Lord, by whose power and might
we have done all this.

PSALM CL.
Hallelujah. See CXLVI.
ARGUMENT.
Theodoret takes this also to be (...), a Song of Triumph after some Victory:
and the mention of the mighty acts of the Lord Ver. 2. seems to countenance
this conjecture: which consists well enough with what others conceive; that it
was at first particularly directed to the Levites, (by David I suppose) whose
office it was to praise the Lord with musical Instruments, (1 Chronicles. XVI. 4,
5.) and excite others to his praises, not only for Victory; but for all other
his benefits. For if the Tradition of the Jews be true, which we read at large
in Maimonides, (in a Treatise on that subject) when the people of any place
brought up their first fruits to present them to the Lord at Jerusalem
(according to the Law, XXVI. Deuteronomy.) with a pipe going before them; as soon as
they came to the mountain of the Temple, every one took his basket into his
hand, and sung this whole Psalm: till they came to the courts of the Lord's
house; where the Levites met them singing the XXX. Psalm.

And indeed it might well be used upon occasion of any exceeding great joy; for
it seems to be intended (by the repetition of these words praise the Lord, or
praise Him; thirteen times; and by the calling for no less then ten Instruments
of Music) to express the height and fullness of their joy, and thankfulness to
God for his benefits: nor can Music be so well employed to any other use, as
this Divine and heavenly exercise of praising God, by Hymns, and Psalms, and
spiritual Songs: to which the Psalmist seems to me to excite all Creatures, in
heaven and in earth; from the highest to the lowest. And with this the
Collectour of these five Books of Psalms, thought good to conclude the whole;
and not unfitly: For in whatsoever condition we be (as there are Psalms adapted
to several purposes) we should never forget to praise the Lord; but after we
have prayed, or complained, etc. still end with thankful acknowledgments to
God for his goodness to us.

Here are several sorts of musical Instruments mentioned; which I have not
adventured to explain: because the Hebrews themselves acknowledge they do not
understand them. We have no way (says Aben Ezra upon those words Ver. 5. which
we translate loud Cymbals) to know what these musical Instruments were: there
being many found in the Country of the Ismaelites (i. e. Mahometans) which are
not among the men of Edom (i. e. Christians) and others among them, which the
wise men of Ishmael never heard of.

1. PRaise ye the LORD. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the
firmament of his power.


1. PRaise the mighty God, ye Angelical Ministers that attend upon Him in his
celestial Sanctuary: Praise Him all ye inhabitants of heaven, where you see the
brightest demonstrations (and most lasting monuments) of his power.

2. Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.


2. Praise Him all ye Ministers of his upon earth; for the miraculous things
which He has done, for our deliverance and exaltation: let your praises bear
some proportion to the excellence of his Majesty, and the multitude of those
great and magnificent acts of mercy toward us.

3. Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and
harp.


3. Let the Priests of the Lord (X. Numb. 8.) praise Him with the sound of the
Trumpet: and let the Levites (1 Chronicles. XXV. 6.) praise Him with Psalteries and
Harps.

4. Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed
instruments, and organs.


4. Let some praise Him with the Timbrel and the Flute; and others praise Him
with the stringed Instruments and Organs.

5. Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high-sounding cymbals.


5. Let all sort of Cymbals accompany their Psalms and Hymns in his praise:
both those of daily use, and those that are wont to be employed in times of the
highest joy and triumph.

6. Let every thing that has breath, praise the LORD. Praise ye the LORD.


6. Finally, Let every man living join himself to this sacred Quire; and at
every breath praise the Lord, the giver of life and of all good things. To Him
let all the world, with one consent, give perpetual praise.

THE END.

