OR SOLOMON'S SONG PARAPHRASED: A PINDARICK POEM.

Carmina secessum Scribentis, and otia quoerunt:
Me mare, me venti, me fera jactat hyems.
Ovid. de Trist. Lib. 1. Eleg. 1. LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for Henry
Faithorne, and John Kersey, at the Sign of the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1681.

OR SOLOMON'S SONG Paraphrased.
CHAP. I.

Which Jesse's Grandchild to the People sang.
CHVRCH.
Whilst glances darted from his eyes
Outstrip the numerous Army of the Skies,
And to a larger Audit rise
Than all the Sand upon the Ocean bound,
Or Spires of grass on Palaestina's ground:
Whilst thus about each others necks we twine,
Our Sacred flames outvie the heat of Wine.

With Rosy Odours on thy youthful head,
(Yet not so fragrant as thy Name)
Which trickling down with Spikenard meet
(Spikenard sent up from thy Triumphant feet)
The Virgins love thee with a purer flame
Than those which newly from the Altar came.

With (more than Adamantine Ties)
The prosperous glances of thy youthful eyes,
And then we'll never part.
Blessed Union Mystical! The King
Has placed me underneath his Wing.
Thrice happy Soul so caught,
And to so fair a Palace brought!
To him we dance, to him we sing.
The sprightly Goblet now no more shall move:
The righteous Kiss, and thus they pledge thy Love.

That too too heedful ray;
Lest my discolored cheeks offend thy sight;
(Grown duskie from the Suns officious light.)
Alas! by Brothers hatred I was sent
To labor in another Tent,
(Unmindful of mine own) and thus grew old
Under the Summers heat and Winters cold:
Yet Blackness has its Beauty, and the shade
Was as a Masque for Lovers made.
Thus from the Soultrie plain
The Arabian Swain
Ore-powred by Heat to Kedar creeps,
And Selomoh beneath his Banner sleeps.

O thou to whom my Soul is bound so fast,
Where, in the night of miseries oppressed,
Thou make thy wearied flocks to rest.
Where thou do Benjamin and Joseph's sheep
(Beside thy Tents) in ample Pastures keep?
For why
Should only I
From thy Protection and my Safety fly?

CHRIST.
Whose unpois'd glories greater are
Than all the blooming pride
Sprung from the Font of Adams side;
Haste with thy Staff and Pilgrims Weed,
And when from far thou do epsy
The numerous footsteps of the Passers-by,
There take thy road, for fear thou stray
In an ill-trod, uneasy way:
And when the Shepherds Tents appear,
They Will show thee where I feed,
And when my flocks are near.

Of Pharaohs Host before his Overthrow.
Those Troops which did before Baal-Zephon shine,
Must vail their luster when compared to thine:
May,
Adorn thy Cheeks more fresh than they:
And thy bright Neck stands circled in
With wreaths of Gold beneath thy tender Chin.

And studs of Silver shall embrace thee round.

CHVRCH.
The King takes his repast,
By all the numerous Armies graced,
That brood an Oriental light
From Michael to the meaner Might,
My Box of Spikenard does its Odor send
In fragrant moistures, which return at last
With sweeter breath than they could ever lend.
Thus Odours are each others grace,
And Spikenard borrows scent from his perfuming Face.

Which the rude Indian or Arabian sells:

Twixt Zephyr and Engeddi's spicie bed,
Can equalize that passionate delight
We find betwixt each others breasts all night.

CHRIST.
Thine eyes with those of Doves compare.

CHVRCH.
How pleasant art thou seen
Upon our beds of Green,
Whose Odours far exceed the sweets of Myrrh!


CHAP. II.
CHRIST. Sharon see
Spreading his Virgin Colors to the Sun
(When he has almost half his Circuit run)
Opening his untoucht lips to kiss that ray
By whom he does his leaves display?
It Is I am he.
Or the fair Lily of the lower ground
( Shoshannah) with more glories crowned
Than those with which the mighty Kings appear
In the great Triumphs of the year?
You have him here.

With a beseeming blush renews it pride,
Though compast round with an unfruitful thorn,
And all the Forest-Brakes beside;
Such is my Bride,
When placed amidst the Virgin Quire:
So fairly do her eyes appear,
So charming are her looks, so clear,
So gay, so pleasing her attire,
That whosoever comes near
Must pant in flames, and languish in desire.

CHVRCH.
To those unthrifty Shrubs you see,
Those withered boughs, which too too long have stood
The scandal of the Wood,
Without the product of or Fair, or Good:
Such, such is he for whom my wounded heart
Resents a strange and lasting smart
Which vies with the Physicians Art.
I crept on (silent as the shades) for fear
It might offend him if he saw me near:
And loath I was a while to prove
My self Ambassadress of my own love:
But still his Beauty led me on;
Till heedless of the paces I had gone,
I came beneath his blessed shade
(Hid by a Gourd which kinder Love had made)
And reached, and plucked, and eat such fruits as never fade.

And with a Princely grace
(Lest I should surfeit with my New-got Fruit)
He gave me Wine, and taught me to digest:
He smiled upon my suit,
And granted my request.

Am sick at heart, and if you help not, die!

And reaches forth his aidful hands:
The one arm circles round my Bed,
Whilst the other helps support the feeble head,
And Vails of Love are round about me spread.

CHRIST. Sions Daughters fair)
And you, whose Sires of Salem were,
Within whose Borders Wars do cease
(Whilst Jire constitutes a lasting Peace)
I charge you by the swift-pac't Roe
And by the Hinds which in your Pastures go;
By all the brisker herds abroad
Who cross your interrupted Road;
If my Beloved slumbering lies,
If softer sleep have locked her tender Eyes,
You offer not to break her Ease
Or stir her from her pillow, till she please.

CHVRCH.
Whose trembling Echo strikes my tender Ear:
From Mountains top it reaches to the Plain,
Beat by the little Hillocks back again.

He skips, when the swift Enemies are near!
His glories at a distance fade,
And set, as in a shade:
He Is only seen by halves, as placed
Beside some Wall which early Time has ras't:
He creeps behind the Reverend Ruins; then
He shows himself, and so retires again.
As through a Lattice we behold his Face,
Or darkly through the glass.

'My Fair, my undefiled One,
'And let us be gone.

'And all its fury spent at last,
'Whilst Zephyr softly creeps along,
'(Weak in himself, but in his Odours strong)
'The Clouds in dismal blackness cease to fly,
'They're all grown white,
'Empti'd and thinn'd by an ore-pow'ring light:
'Those subtle Cisterns are all dry,
And slowly wave beneath a lovely sky.

'And blushing ushers in the Youthful Year.
'Those Embrions which the frost did once intomb,
'And held with icy chains within the womb,
'Now peep out of their clods again,
'Brought forth by a successful rain.
'The Trees rejoice, they clap their hands and sing,
'And yield their buds to the Officious Spring.
'The feathered Quire in Chorus mix their notes,
'And chant aloud with uninstructed throats.
'The loving Turtle (well compared to me)
'Calls out, and woes his Mate from yonder Tree.
'They flourish in their infant Green,
'And every where a New Creation's seen.

'And bids defiance to the Winters flood.
'A fragrant smell, a glorious show,
'Attend our steps wher'ere we go.
'Arise, my Love, and make no stay,
'My Fairest haste, and come away,
'The Eastern Herald has proclaimed the day.

CHRIST.
Mount'st up on high,
(Unmindful of these earthly things)
And have a consecrated place
Immured with Rocks, wherein thou hid'st thy Face;
Let me thy Countenance descry:
Thy Face is Love, thy Voice is Melody.

The spreading branch, the Gardeners only joy:
Those little Foxes, those who undermine
The Daughter Cluster, and the Mother Vine.
Our Vine has tender branches; O forbear,
Lest Herod's cruelty should harbor here,
And Rachel shed an unresented tear.

CHVRCH. Whilst thou remainest, O thou Fair,

(The Lilies once than Snow more white,
But now scarce pale before so great a light)
About each others necks we twine,
Until the wished for day
Has chas't the shades away:
I Am his, and my Beloved's mine.
Haste thee from Bether like the nimble Heart:
Bether which Jordan does from Jury part.

CHAP. III.
CHVRCH.
The Sullen Moon obscured her head;
A melancholique gloomy night,
(The most unhappy relict of a day
In which the nighted Traveller could stray)
When over-charg'd with passions on my bed,
And freight with fear,
I sought my Love, but he was fled;
I called aloud and knocked, but no one near.

Distressed Lover thus give over?
Are all these breathings spent in Vain?
I Will wander out, and call again;
Sure he will pity, since he made the pain.
I Will haste, and bend my pace
Unto the holy place,
Whither the Tribes go up to bless
The Testament of Holiness:
How know I what may there be done?
'Twas there the Blessed Virgin found her Son.
Perhaps we once again may meet
Amidst some crooked silent Street,
Whilst thus he wanders up and down
The by- Maeanders of the Town.
It Is but for once to try;
Or if he is withdrawn, I Will trace
His footsteps to some wider place,
Or seek him out if nigh.
Ah! so I panting did,
But found him not, for he was hid:
Hid from the reach of purblind Natures Eye,
Which takes no species from the Deity.

(The Watchmen of the Sacred Tower
Armed with his Sword, and guarded with his power)
I took my humble flight.
Tell me, O can you tell, (said I)
When he past by?
Can no good Oracle declare
How he demeans himself, and where.
But they were all grown dumb:
Then sure, said I, Messiah must be come.

Proved true; I heard a voice, 'twas his:
When straight I caught him in my Arms,
And held him fast; (successful were my Charms)
Till through the private passages we went,
And came into my Mothers Tent:
That Tent in which the Almighty once did give
That life to her who gave me life to live.
Jerusalem,
I charge you by the Roes, the Hinds; by them
To whom ye frankly yield
The ample Pastures of your floury field,
That when my best Beloved slumbring lies,
Ye cease to chase the shadow from his Eyes.
Beside his Temples let a Vail be spread;
And Banners circle round his head.

CHRIST.
Of the wild Desert crowns the Plain?
It flies in Triumphs ore the fields
Perfumed with Myrrh, with Frankincense; the best
Of Odours which the Drugster yields;
Like some new rising clouds of rain.

Held up by threescore Heroes mighty hands,
Girt with their Swords, and fit for fight,
Zamzummims, Chieftains of the night,
Apt to pursue, but not to take a flight.
Selomoh go's bravely on,
Guarded with beams of Lebanon;
Beams of those Cedars which so fairly stood
The daring glories of the Wood;
But now grown more Majestic by their fall,
Than when they flourisht green and tall.

(Cut out by some Bezaleel's hand)
On a firm basis of the purest Gold
Which Ophir boasted of, of old;
Sheltred beneath a purple Shrine:
(Purple once common, now Divine)
And lest defiance should be seen above,
The Motto underneath was LOVE.
Love for the fairest Damsels; Love for them
Who love the Daughters of Jerusalem.

Ye hopeful darlings of old Sions breast,
See Selomoh clad in his best attire;
It Is a Triumphing day; the Espousal Feast,
More Solemn, more observed than all the rest:
A day in which his aged Matron spread
Her Arms about his youthful head;
Blessed him with all the blessings from above,
And gladly did impart
The largess of a Mothers heart;
Crowned him with Diadems, and sheltred him with Love.

CHAP. IV.
CHRIST.
Which from the circles of thy hair
Pierce the thin Vails of interambient air?
What sprightly Beauties from that sacred Shrine
Do we behold? compared to thine
Doves eyes are dull: the lustre's all divine.
Whilst thy disshevel'd locks are whither far
Than Gileads new-washt fleeces are:

Their light, like Stars placed near the Milky-way;
Which in a Semicircle stand,
Set in due distance by the Almighties hand:
More white than wool, more glorious than the throng
Of Ews when all are big with young.

Flows from thy lips, where Scarlet spread
Reflects upon thy Face
A fainter Virgin Red,
Which to thy lofty Temples makes a way
As blushing mornings hasten to the day.
Those Temples which at distance seen
Are like Pomegranats ripened from the Green.

Than ere was David's warlike Tower;
A thousand Bucklers there were spread
(Shields for the breast, and Armor for the head)
Little enough to stop the fretful foe:
But when thou do thy Beauty show,
Unto thy Trophies all must yield
And quit the Field;
Thine Arrows wound the heart, and pierce the stoutest shield.

Maintain this Castle's foot below;
The youthful breasts which like two Twins appear,
(Roes of the self same year)
Roes which amidst the Lilies stray

And the pale Morn'-star ushers in the day.
Up to the mountains height
I Will take my flight,
And view those Pastures which dispense
The sweets of Myrrh and Frankincense.

Thy trembling foot on Aaron's reverend head,
I thy descent unto these times should trace;
Tho round about thee there were spread
So many garments rolled in Red
(Dipped in that blood on which the Martyrs fed)
No spot* no wrinkle would be seen:
Thou bloom'st afresh, and art for ever green.
Lebanon, no more to dwell
In Lebanon, tho of so sweet a smell.
Look from Amana's clouded height,
Shenir and Hermon, Hills of might,
(The glories of the Amorite;)
Judea's narrow Confines are too small;
(Tho there was the Messiahs Birth)
Hear a rebounding call
Echoed from the utmost Caverns of the Earth,
From Lions dens, and from the treacherous Cell
Of those rude beasts which in the Desert dwell.
What new, what unaccustomed smart
Possesses this my Captived heart!
A strange insinuating flame
(That found a Conquest wheresoere it came)
Has scattered in its powerful heat,
And here it acts as in its proper seat:
One of her chains, one of my Sisters Eyes
Have bound me fast, and rendered me her prize.
If One of these so much could do,
How should I be subdued, and overcome by Two!
If this small Glimps be such, then what shall be
The Blisses of Eternity!

To kindle flames, and render 'em Divine,
Flames of a nobler heat than those of Wine.
Whilst near those Milky Paps above,
Those famous Treasuries which sed
The scattered Sheep before their Pan was dead,
Dodim appears, and Metonymick Love.

To me so closely knit,
When thou do thy best Oracles declare
By Priests, and not by murmuring air,
To thy soft voice the mystic Wit
Of busy Spirits, and of gentile Lies
Must with their flatteries submit.
So healing are thy words, so calm
When thou the pious heart do meet,
That tears of Balm
Or drops of Honey are not half so sweet.

(A plat of Palaestina's Land)
Fenc't and encircled by the Almighties hand.
Fenc't from the subtle Fox, and ranging Bore,
Who'ld overturn the wall, or undermine the door:
Within whose borders we behold
A Fountain fairer than the Springs of old
Made for the Nations Weal,
But shut from Beasts by the great Gardeners Seal:
Those Beasts who their ungodly pastime take
In striving how to mud the Crystal Lake.

And steal in by- Maeanders from the Deep;
Till (safe in covert passages) they breath
Their subtle moisture from beneath;
Unmindful of the paces they have gone,
From Carmel, from the top of Lebanon:
Their Donor's frank, and they are tree;
As they receive they give;
By them the Spikenard and the Cypress-tree,
Pomegranats, and the Saffron live:
Alike their Bounties they dispense
To Myrrh, to Aloes, and the Frankincense.

CHVRCH.
And when thou do of these thy Dainties taste,
O let thy Glory shine
Upon this Fountain, and these Shades of thine!
Then shall the North Wind wake, the South Wind blow,
And from these beds the balmy Spices flow.

CHAP. V.
CHRIST.
As boundless as the Great Jehovah's Love,
My Fathers Beatifick breast,
Where thou must shortly (when Triumphant) rest,
I thy Beloved, guarded with a Quire
Of Angels, with an Host of fire
To give thine Enemies their doom,
Am to my Garden, to my Sister come.
I Have cropped my Myrrh, and plucked my fill
From every Spicy quill:
I Have eat my honey, and have made a Feast
Upon the Treasures of thy Milky breast.
You who with famine pine,
Or by tradition fast
From untaught Sires, who never understood
The virtue of a thing or sweet or good,
Come, come, and take a full repast,
The Feast forbids a modest taste.
A mighty Feast made up of things Divine,
Honey with Milk, Milk mingled with Wine.

CHVRCH.
And every Captive took his soft repose;
The stretcht-out Arms, which lately did complain
Of slavery in vain,
Now seemed to clasp a breast
Made up of liberty and rest.
But this was but a fancied sleep;
(Grief, like to Water, silent is when deep)
For in my dreams the heat of Love
(Like Vapors cloistered in the chilly Earth,
And struggling for a Birth,)
Insensibly began to move:
My wakeful heart did only panting lie
Beneath the Covert of a closed up Eye;
Whilst from below I seemed to hear
(As tho the Souls knew how to woo,
And had a cunning Language too)
A fainting voice, which hardly reached mine ear.

CHRIST. 'Sister awake, what from above,
'Mine undefiled One, my Love,
'No voice! or is her Charity
'More cold than I!
'I'le call again -- What from above,
'Sister awake, arise my Dove,
'Unbar the closed up doors, and see
'Who it is that calls and knocks so loud: It Is he
'Who drawn by thine ore-powring Arms
'Has marched the Desert from afar,
'Without the conduct of one happy Star:
'Undaunted ventured all the spite
'Of Wind, of Storm, and of a gloomy Night;
'And tempted more than common harms
'To find a Shelter in thy tender Arms.
'And can thou pass these Hazards by
'With so small Love, and so much Cruelty?
'See how the curled, and well compacted hair
'Fan'd by fresh gales, and moved by milder air,
'Now hangs disshevel'd by the Tempest torn,
'And on my Locks the Evening dews are born.

CHVRCH.
I laid me down to sleep again.
Alas; my cast-off coat was folded by,
My new-washt feet were scarcely dry:
Should I defile them then? what boot to rise,
And chase that sleep that had but seized my eyes?

Upon the stubborn door:
When straight (the check of mine ungrateful Love)
A sudden qualm did in my bowels move.
Oh how I sight! my swoln-up heart
Was big with Passion; and upbraiding smart
Struck through my panting breast,
Who for a sleepless rest
Had sold the bounties of so fair a Guest.

And marched through darkness to the wonted place
Where Lovers met, where Lovers do embrace;
But mist the entry to the door.
Alas! my Breast, tho all a flame,
Could give no light
To guide me in the depth of night,
Until a cloud of Odours came,
Sent from his graceful fingers, such
Which tho the fainter relics of a touch
Impressed upon the lock, were sweeter far
Than Gilead's balms, or India's Spices are.

(Said I) that interrupts my rest?
No voice, but all was silent as the night,
For he had newly took his flight.
Oh how I trembling stood!
No Tongue can tell the smart
That seized my heart
Under the swift recoilment of the blood:
I stood and called, and called, but all in vain,
The very Echo scarce returned again.

Unarmed, ungirt, unblesst,
I roam'd abroad to meet the wandering Guest:
But straight the busy Watch drew near;
From whose stern looks I pity did implore:
And when a storm of sighs
Had tied my Tongue that it could plead no more,
Begged silent pity with my weeping Eyes,
Then stopped, and wooed again: but all
Their pity was but Wormwood mixed with Gall.
O how they checked my folly, how they strove
Each to upbraid my but pretended Love!
[Unhappy Hypocrite, thy crime
Was soon found out; the darkest night,
The obscurest time
Exposes that as quickly as the light.]
But this was but the first degree
Of their inhuman Cruelty;
For when I ventured on to plead my Cause,
And little feared, but that a weak
And helpless Woman might have leave to speak;
Instead of Reason, and of equal Laws,
They answered me with Wounds to every Clause:
Which when I strove to close again,
(Lest the sad Weather should augment my pain)
And bind up with my Vail (the height
Of their unmanly spite!)
They ravished that away by an ore-powring might.
Unhappy Soul, who will pity thee
In depth of all thy misery?
I once the Peoples joy, am now their scorn,
By my best friends, nay by my Love forlorn:
Can this black midnight ere expect a morn!
Sions Daughters then
To see if Women were more kind than Men:
I charge you, O ye Fair (said I)
If my Beloved passes by,
You tell him how I lie
Wounded, and at the point to die.
Tell him -- Oh tell him this:
And much, much more -- But yet above
The rest, the deepest Wound was his,
And I am sick of Love.

CHORUS. Daughters of Sion.
With whom may he compare?
What Is thy Beloved more than others are?
What is he more, Fairest of Queens, than them
Who bear the glories of Jerusalem?
Are his Encomiums so large,
That thus thou giv'st so strict a charge?
What is he? Speak --

CHVRCH.
The Beauties of his goodly Face,
And see how strangely they are spread
Betwixt the White and Red,
(Parted by light, not by a shade)
The Lilies would appear but pale, and fade,
Like bashful Stars before the rising Sun,
And Roses blush to see their Red outdone.
If thousands, nay ten thousand Loves you see,
Of all the rest you will tell me, This is he.

Than Ophyrs Treasures were of old,
Or Babylonish Dura's Gold.
Round which his black curled locks are set,
Which in their circles fitly met
Make him appear like Or begirt with Jet.

With watery clearness, and with milky White:
From whose transparent balls the flashes fly
Swifter than Lightning darted through the Sky.

Upon his Cheeks, where is seen a lasting Day
With flowr's more fresh, more gay
Than those in May;
And from his Lips the fragrant Ointments flow.

With Tarshish; [ Ashers Crysolite]
His Belly's like to Ivory ore-laid
With Sapphyrs, white and blew displayed.

These structures; Marble Pillars rimm'd with Gold.
His looks are like to Lebanon, but far
More glorious than those Cedars are.

His Mouth's most sweet:
From whence a stream of Rhetoric flow's; such Speech
As seems at once to threaten and beseech.
He Is altogether lovely, this is he:
Him if you happily see,
Good Sions Daughters send him home to me.

CHAP. VI.
CHORUS. Daughters of Sion.
Speak, Fairest of thy Sex, that we
May seek him too; it is ill to walk alone.
What dark, what unfrequented place
Can hide the Glories of so fair a Face?
Let Us march along: The Traveller may see
(Tho now he wanders in obscurity)
That brightness which the Sun a while does shroud,
(Before it is Set) tho from a distant Cloud.

CHVRCH.
This glorious but ungrateful Town.
I Have sought him sighing, big with care,
Yet met with nothing but Despair:
And with my nimble feet
Have measured out each space,
Trod every Street
Of this unthankful place.
No Watchman but has heard my woeful call
Rebounding from the circuit of the Wall.
But all in vain.
Who now shall Sions praises Sing?
( Sion too proud to entertain the King.)
He Is gone down to the Plain
(Humble and meek) to view the Plants below,
Brought forth by a successful rain;
Those pleasant Valleys where the Spices grow:
To gather Lilies, and to spend his hours
Amongst the dew-bespangled flowers.

He feeds beneath a shrine
Of Lilies, where the Banquet's all Divine.

CHRIST.
More beautiful than Tirzah's Turrets are;
( Tirzah where Grandsire-Princes used to sing
The praises of their King:)
The Sons of Sion shall no more admire
The Hill of Jebus in its best attire.
But whilst these Troops of Beauty shine so bright,
They Are mixed with, not ore-powr'd by might:
And tho so terrible, the World may see
(Tho it is alone in thee)
True Love enthroned in Majesty.

Turn, turn away those powerful Eyes:
No need to conquer that which is thy Prize.
The Tresses of thy bright disshevel'd Hair
Are whiter than the milky Coats
Of Gileads new-washt Goats.

No one that is injured in a throng;
The Ews that graze in Palaestina's ground
Are not so comely when they are big with young:
When from the Silver streams they have drawn their fill,
And sunn'd their Fleeces in the Sacred Hill.

To match Pomegranats when the blushing Red
Is fitly shed
Upon the chaster Green.
How glorious will thou once appear
In thy Triumphant Kingdom, who have stood
So beautiful so lovely here
Amongst green wounds and garments rolled in blood?

Of evil-will would swell to such a height
As to deprive thee of thy Golden bell,
And leave the fair Pomegranat but a shell;
Yet in thy borders Threescore Queens are fed,
And Fourscore Concubines do spread
Their Arms about the Bridal bed.
And tho so many Worthies have been slain,
Ten thousand Virgins Constitute thy Train.

It Is only Thou that art my Friend;
Mine undefiled One, my Love,
The Daughter of Jerusalem above.
The Wiser saw thee from a far,
And blessed thee as the Magi did the Star:
The Concubines in holy order cried,
Hail Queen of Nations; Hail, the Maids replied.

Fair as the Morning from her purple Birth?
The darkened Sun's amazed; the Planets shroud
Their useless Light;
The Moon's confounded at the dreadful Sight,
Hiding her spotted horns behind a Cloud.
The frighted Orbs in fearful distance stand,
No longer turned by an ore-powring hand:
They neither Light nor Virtue can dispense,
But stand in need of greater Influence.
Thy Rays outshine them all: thou art brighter far
Than burnisht Spears and warlike Banners are.

Lest too much light
Should overcome the sight,
I hasted to the Vales below,
To see the new Plantations of my Bride,
(The Peoples scorn, but Sions pride)
Those fruitful Vines, which by their senseless paces
Hugged the sweet product of their soft Embraces:
To view the Nut-trees, and to know
How the Pomegranate did begin to grow.

My heedless Soul had been aware:
But overcome with the Surprising Sight
(Unable to remain a Guest
Where so much Plenty made so great a Feast)
I took me to my flight.
Amazement added Wings unto my heels,
The swiftest Gale of Wind;
Aminadab himself was left behind,
And his hot Chariot-wheels.
Shulamite,
That we may see the goodly sight
Of Selomoh, and the Shulamite.
What would you see in her and him?
The goodly Forces of Mahanaim.

CHAP. VII.
CHRIST.
Shod with the Preparation of the Word,
Thou Daughter of the mighty Lord,
Espoused to his only Son
Before he put his fleshy Garments on!
How fairly do thou tread the Stage
Of every froward Street
In this unluckie latter Age
Of thy distressed Pilgrimage!
The well-compacted juncture of thy Thighs
(By which the once divided Train
Of Jew and Gentile meet again)
Is made with Jewels of no common price;
Whilst Prophets, Pastors, Teachers all combine
To close the Sacred Tie, and render it Divine.

With Consecrated Water; whence
The Newborn Child
Receives a newer Influence:
By that blessed Lover he is born again,
And all the former Enmities are slain.
Thy Belly like an heap of Corn appears
(The lasting Food of ancient years)
Beset with Lilies [ Innocence best
Befits a Loving Feast.]
That Treasury which all along has fed
Thy Proselytes with Sacramental Bread.

The Old with the New Testament.

Supports the higher roof, and crowns the lower.
Thine Eyes are fair to look upon,
Clear as the Streams of Heshebon;
Where poor Bath-rabbim quits her self of fears,
And dews her Cheeks with penitential tears.
Thy Nose is lifted to the sky,
Fixed on those Stars to which of late
Messiah mounted up in State:
The Spire of Lebanon is not so high,
Which points where Syria's chiefest City stood,
Whilst poor Damascus heard the cry
Of injured Abel's blood.

Than the Phoenicians pride,
Or what they boasted of beside
Height Carmel was of old.
Whose Crest an Host of Martyrs do adorn,
Like some bright Cloud dropped from the purple Morn:
Kings are encircled in it, and above
In a Triumphant Seat appears the God of Love.

Which charms the Eyes with new delight,
And treats the curious Appetite!

(Tho compast round with weights, and all
Those Plagues which would fore-run another fall,)
To spread thy boughs, and crown thy self with green.
Under these Shades thy Breasts appear
Like Grapes in the Noontide of the year.

The goodly Tree;
But straight each branch began to bow the head,
And beckon me to a ne're-fading bed.
Thy Breasts are like two clusters of the Vine,
Where Milk is sweetly mingled with Wine.

Are sweeter than the Canaanitish Grape;
Of which thy Best-beloved drinks his fill,
And draws new Oracles from every Quill.

CHVRCH.
How his desires are centered all in me.

The Day Star sinks before a greater light
Than that by which it traveled all the night.
Let Us view the fields, and feast in brisker air:
Those little Villages which heretofore
Were humble, destitute and poor,
Shall now lift up their Turrets, blessed
And fitted for so fair a Guest.

The once despised Pastures of the Plain
(From which the wealthy traveled in disdain)
Shall now the Summers Garb display
In green and purple fresh and gay,
Under a never-ending day.
Amidst Pomegranats and the Vines, I Will yield
Each Vow that I have made;
And every Shade
Shall be a Witness in the blooming Field.
Mandrakes give a lovely Smell,
Balsam beneath our Gates does dwell;
Where well-replenisht baskets hold
The Bounties of the former year,
And Treasures of the old.
All sorts of Sweets are here,
All wholly thine. That favour's let in vain
Which minds not how to gratify again.

CHAP. VIII.
CHVRCH.
And dwell as one of these my Brethren here
That thou would rend the Firmament above,
And from an Everlasting Throne
Descend in State
To conquer this unruly Fate,
And take possession of thine own!
How Sweetly would we kiss,
How great should be the Bliss
That Crowned a Brothers and a Sisters Love!

Should shelter thee from harm.
I Would bring thee to my Mothers house, that shade
Which Sion for her Honor made:
Amidst those Mansions we would stay
Till thou had taught me how to Pray,
And offer up what thou do never despise,
An humble Heart, a lively Sacrifice.
Under that Consecrated Shrine
I Would treat thee with my Spiced Wine;
Where Grapes with the Pomegranate pressed
Should make a Sacramental Feast.

Of Honor, Wealth and Peace)
Should like a never-fading Garland spread
It Is tutelary Guardship round my head.
Thy right hand should embrace my Heart,
And Crown the Intellectual part.
All Treasures should be ours; the choicest things
Of the upper and the nether-Springs.

Of old Jerusalem;
I charge you by your Modesty, nay more,
By all that is Good, by all that you adore,
If my Beloved slumbring lies:
If deep,
If unaccustomed Sleep
Has shut his wakeful Eyes;
You pass by gently, lest an ill-bred noise
Should chase away his interrupted joys.

CHORUS. Daughters of Jerusalem.
Inhospitable Multitude?
And leaves the Wilderness a more
Unhappy Desert than it was before?
See how she-leans on her Beloveds Breast,
And in the midst of travail finds a rest!

CHVRCH. It Is I am she,
Who raised thee from beneath the Apple Tree.
There where thy Mother brought thee forth, to tread
Upon the crooked Serpents head.

Beyond the reach of undermining Art.
Place me as thou would place a Sacred tie
Upon thine Arm, for Jealousy
Is unrelenting as the Grave;
Bitter as Death: Like an insulting Wave
Beat by the stubborn Tempest from the Sound,
It still recoils the more
It Is tossed upon the shore,
Till in its lawful scope it overflows the bounds.
Like an aspiring flame
That left destruction wheresoever it came,
It marches on with full Success,
And flies in Triumph ore the Wilderness.

Tho all the numerous Fountains from above,
And every nether-Spring should creep
To join in private with the unfathomed Deep:
The mighty Lakes should all their Treasures yield,
And March their Forces to the watery field:
Tho Seas were heapt on Seas, and every flood
In open and offensive posture stood:
Their Prowess would appear but small,
This Fire from Heaven would soon consume them all.
If with a fair impartial hand
You bring the Bounties of the flowery Land;
All the Creator did produce
For Human use,
And fix them in the trembling Scale; They Will prove
Less ponderous than Love.

That knows not us; a stranger to her God:
An innocent, an uninstructed Maid,
By Ignorance and blinded Zeal betrayed.
Good Brother speak, what Argument shall we
Propose, to tempt her from Idolatry?
She never heard of trembling Sinai's flame,
Or knows she whence Prophetic Visions came.
Alas! she has no Breasts
To entertain her Guests:
And she her self is pined; a longer stay
Amidst her empty husks may make her faint away.

CHRIST.
'His Tables stand
'Throng'd with the Treasures of a bounteous hand:
'There she may fairly taste
'Or (if she please) may take a full repast
'Without or cost or charge.
If her Foundation's fit for Sions Towers,
The silver Superstructure shall be Ours.
If she be strong enough to bear't, we'll press
The deepest Mystery of Godliness.
But if the barren Desert left her more
A feeble Virgin than she was before,
We'll lead her to a Sacramental door,
And show her where Religion's Basis stands;
Why the Messiah must be slain
By ruder Jews, and by the Gentiles hands.
There we may boldly tell
The tiding of Immanuel:
And then (lest happily she revolt again)
We'll there Baptize her and her numerous Train.

[Gentile Church.]
The Common Law of Nature was my Guide:
'Twas then I had no Breast,
'Twas then I went aside.
But now can humbly hear a Teachers Tongue.
Whilst thus I spoke, and with a blush confessed
My Gentile Folley, all the famous Lies
The Learned could devise;
He smiling pittid them, and granted my request.

CHVRCH. Solomon to show the matchless height
Of Glory, Splendor and Delight,
Prepared a Sacred place
Which he himself might grace:
A Vineyard 'twas, encircled with a Wood,
Not far from Salem, where Baal-Hamon stood:
But this he let to Keepers, who should bring
A thousand pieces for an offering.

CHRIST.
That looks to that: My shoulders bear
The Summers Toil, and heave the Winters care.
But, Solomon, to thee
The Sacred Court pays tribute, whilst they bring
Two hundred pieces to the Priests, one thousand to the King.

CHVRCH.
Which for the living Soul at first was made,
But now the quickening Spirits choice;
Whilst all thy blessed Companions hear thy Voice,
O let not me with slothful Ear
Pass by regardless and unapt to hear!

Wait for the promised Jubilee?
And when thou rend'st the Sky,
With such a speed on thy winged Chariots fly,
That the chased Roe-buck with his Wounds
May seem to Travel slowly from the Hounds;
And on the Spicy Hills the Heart may be
No more the Pattern of Agility.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. line 10. its. page 13. l. 24. thy. page 19. l. 6. Who Is. page 32. l.
29. Tidings


