THE PSALMS OF DAVID. Translated from the Vulgat.

M.DCC.

PREFACE.
IT would be superfluous to say any thing in commendation of the Psalms of
David; every body knows in what veneration they have been with the whole Church
of God in all times and places. Most of the holy fathers observe, that they
alone contain the whole substance of the old Testament; for all that Moses
delivers by way of history, or by way of precept; and all that the rest of the
Prophets have writ to exhort to virtue, and to deterr from vices or to prophecy
things to come, is to be found in the Psalms succinctly and distinctly set
forth: And this, I may say, is not only the sense of all the holy Fathers in
general, but even of Jesus Christ himself, and of his Apostles, who upon all
occasions of establishing their Doctrine, And proving him to be the Messiah,
most usually cite texts out of the Psalms S. Basil says They are a perfect
sum of all Theology, S. Bas. Praem. in Psalm. To. 1.
They prophe^y things to come, They are a history of things past; They
prescribe rules how ^e wought to live, and how we are to be saved: Much more
to the same purpose is said by that holy Father. S. Austin tells us that David
was inspired by the holy Ghost to teach all the faithful the language they are
to use in addressing themselves to God: They are to pray as he prays, S. Aug.
in Psalm. 30.
to greive as he greives, to rejoice as he rejoices, to hope as he hopes, to
fear as he fears, etc. All the rest of the holy Doctors and Fathers are full of
such expressions as these, concerning the Psalms: For which reason it is, that
the Church of God in all ages has made the Psalms to be the principal part of
Christian devotion, by making daily use of them in the public liturgies, and
by obliging all Ecclesiastics to recite them all over once every week, and
also by recommending them to the faithful in general for their private
devotions.

The more generally they are used the more necessary it seems to be that they
should be well understood; since light in the understanding contributes much to
fervor in the heart and in the will, wherefore the labor (Gods grace assisting
thereunto) may prove not unprofitable which has been employed in this present
Translation of the Psalms out of the vulgate, to render them as clear and
intelligible in our language, as the letter of the Text will permit: for in
every Translation of sc^ipture there is an obligation of sticking close to the
Letter when ever it can be done without losing the sense of the Text; But so it
is that in some places the Latin Text of the Psalms rigouroutly translated
word by word would yield a scarce untelligible sense in the language, into
which it is translated; and where that happens, it seems reasonable that such a
latitude and liberty should be allowed, as is necessary to make the sense of
the Text, as it is generally understood by the most approved Authors,
intelligible to the Reader, espicially in a Translation intended only for the
private devotions of Lay persons. This Translater thought he could not choose a
better guide to direct him in giving such passages their due sense, then the
learned Card. Bellarmin in his excellent Treatise upon the Psalms; And that he
has accordingly followed his Guide, may be seen by any who will take the pains
to compare one with the other. I may also add that this work has been revised
and corrected by some persons who are the most propper judges of such writings;
yet still it may very well be, that the faults were too many to be all of them
spied and amended: however if the defects which still remain may prove a motive
to some abler hand to undertake the work, and translate the Psalms in a more
exact and perfect manner, this Translater will think himself verz happy, and
his pains well bestowed.

A TABLE OF THE PSALMS.
Reduced under several heads, according to the different matters principally
contained in each of them; that so they may be more useful for the private
devotion of every Christian, as his occasions shall require.

PSALMS HISTORICAL.
OF the creation of the world. Of the actions of the Patriarks. The captivity
in Egypt. The passage of the children of Israel thorough the red sea. Their
peregrination in the desert; and their entrantrance into the land of promise.
Ps. 8. 77. 103. 104. 105. 113. 134.
PSALMS PROPHETICAL.
Of Christ's first coming, and his spiritual Kingdom. Ps. 2. 44. 71. 84. 88.
92. 109. Of his passion and death. Ps. 21. 40. 108. Of his resurrection and
Ascension. Ps. 15. 17. 23. 67. 96. Of the conversion of Nations and
establishment of the Church. Ps. 28. 46. 47. 64. 66. 67. 75. 86. 110. 146.
PSALMS OF INSTTUCTION.
For all the faithful in general. Ps. 1. 14. 36. 77. 100. 118. For Kings and
Judges in particular. 74. 81. 10.
PSALMS.
Of thanksgiving to God for his benefits. Ps. 9. 17. 29. 33. 88. 115. 117. 143.
Of praising him for all his works and mercys. Ps. 8. 65. 74. 91. 102. 144. 145.
Of raising up our hearts to God. Ps. 41. 83. 94. 118. 136. Of comfort. Ps. 24.
36. 65. Of Gods protection of the just. Ps. 30. 62. 63. 120. 124.
PSALMS.
In time of affliction and persecution. Ps. 7. 11. 12. 16. 24. 43. 53. 56. 59.
68. 76. 79. 85. 87. 139. 141. To appease Gods anger. Ps. 6. 37. 73. 76. 40. To
deplore the sufferings of the Church. Ps. 78. 79. 82. To implore the mercy of
God. Ps. 25. 27. 38. 69. 76. 85. 142. Against prefering creatures to God the
Creator. Ps. 48. 51. 54. 55. 113. Against calumnys. Ps. 25. 30. 34. 51. Against
being scandalized at the prosperity of the wicked. Ps. 72. A Psalm of
resignation to the will of God Ps. 61. The seven Penitential Psalms. 6. 31.
37. 50. 101. 129. 142.
APPROBATIO.
OMNIS scriptura divinitus inspirata utilis est ad docendum, ad Tim. 2. c. 3.
n. 16.
si qua tamen sacrarum paginarum pars prae caeteris utilior dici queat, hoc
Psalmorum libri singular privilegium videtur: quaecunque enim utilia sunt,
inquit sanctus Basilius, ex omnibus continet. Cum historicis gesta praeterita
narrat, Praefafatime in Psalmis ex interpretatione Rufini.
cum prophetis futura predicit; cum Ecclesiaste concionatur, cum Evangelistis
profundissima fidei arcana revelat and exponit; nulla est virtus ad quam non
hortatur, nullum vitium a quo non deterret, verbisque ignitis legentium corda
divina amoris flamma passim accendit: nulla est aetas quam non dirigit, nullus
status quem non suffulcit, incipientibus, ut docet idem S. Basil. primum
efficitur elementum, proficientibus incrementum, perfectis stabile firmamentum,
totius Ecclesiae vox una. ut ergo tam sancta documenta, tamque divina
praesidia, veluti nocturna, and diuturna magisteria, ut Psalmi a S. Amb.
appellantur, Praefac. in Psalm.
fideles semper prae manibus haberent: hunc librum ab initio christiani nominis
prae caeteris elegit Ecclesia, quo inter orandum, and in publicis, and privatis
oratoriis, ejus ministri uterentur; hac disciplina, Davidis Psalmos proponit
sancta matter, tanquam praestantissimam orandi formam, omnibus aliis
anteponendam, ideoque a fidelibus eosdem quotidie evolvi and recitari exoptat.
Hinc praecipui Ecclesiae Doctores, tam Graeci quam Latini, plus in Psalmorum,
quam in cujuscumque scripturae sacrae libri expositione, elaborarunt. S.
Hieronimus bis latinum textum, suo tempore usitatum, juxta septuaginta
versionem emendavit, and tandem rogante sophronio, Psalterium integrum ex font
hebraeo latinitate donavit: S. S. Augustinus, Ambrosius, Hilarious, ex graecis
Origines, Basilius, integra volumina conscripserunt, ut caelestibus his
thesauris, populum christianum ditarent; notatu vero dignum est, hoc iis
temporibus praestitum, quando praecipuae orbis parts, non alia lingua
vernacula, praeter graecam and latinam utebantur. Ex tot tantisque S. S. PP.
elucubrationibus, ad Psalmos Davidis elucidandos, docentur quotquot S.
Ecclesiae Catholicae funt mumbra, quanti rei christianae interesse, hi Sancti
viri existimarunt, ut populus sidelis haec sacra cantica, non solum evolve^ent
and legerent, in lingua tunc omnibus nota, sed ut legerent and psallerent
sapienter, ut ipsemet Regius Psal^es monet, hoc est intelligenter, juxta
septuaginta versionem; eo nimirum fine, ut men's simul and spritus secundum
Apostoli monitum, 1. Cor. 14. 14.
fructum percipiant. Merito ergo laudandus hujus versionis author, qui
nostratium utilitati consulens, hanc novam translationem juxta vulgatam
latinam, Anglico idiomate adornavit. Prodiit, centum fere ab hinc annis, cum
reliquis Sacrorum Bibliorum partibus, Psalmorum Editio Anglicana, a quibusdam
viris admodum doctis, tunc temporis Duaci commorantibus, elaborata; at
progressu temporis, communi omnium linguarum vulgarium fato, evenit, praedictam
versionem, ob verba obsoleta quibus scatet, ob traductionem, de verbo poene ad
verbum, ex Latino textu vulga^o, iisque temporibus forsan necessariam, adeo
perplexam tandem evasisse, ut hodie, propter obscuritatem parvo cum fructu, and
propter phrases jam inusitatas magno cum tedio legatur. Hac versione publici
juris facta, non est quod ulterius haec causentur fideles; styli enim elegantia
gravitati verbo divino dignae cunjuncta, severiores inter criticos ad legendum
alliciet; sensusque claritas, quantum fert rerum obscurissimarum, tantorumque
mysteriorum Majestas, vulgi captui videtur accommodata, hujus ergo nobilissimi
autoris singularis laus est, ut quamvis claritati studuisse praecipue videatur,
leges tamen transferenti praescriptas non neglexit; fate or enim post acuratum
examen, non tantum legendo and relegendo hanc versionem, eandemque cum aliis
quam plurimis conferendo, me vix ullam invenisse, quae literae magis religiose
adhaereat, and simul locorum tot difficillimorum sensum, minus involutum
exhibeat: proinde nostratibus, doctis quam indoctis, opus pergratum, and
utilissimum fore, ideoque luce publica dignissimum, judico.

Datum in palatio Regio Sancti Germani die quinto Martii 1700. JOANNES BETHAM
S. Th. Doctor Parisiensis and Serenissimi Principis walliae Praeceptor.

ALTERA APPROBATIO.
MErito olim optabat Hieronimus ut Psalterium ad verbum discatur. Haec enim est
perfecta quaedam Theologia, ut ait Basilius, seu omnium scripturarum epitome,
and vera illa scientia sanctorum quam Ecclesia Christi ab infantia didicit, and
tot saeculorum usu ac studio consecravit. Quae autem conditio, quis rerum
humanarum status, quem Psalmista non instruat aut arguat? peccantibus praedicat
poenitentiam, poenitentibus fervorem, ferventibus autem majorem adhuc
charitatem, ac meliora charismata proponit. In prosperis rebus moderationem, in
adversis docet patientiam. Cum afflictis and lugentibus vere luget, cum
gaudentibus gaudet cum infirmis infirmatur, cum perfectis loquitur sapientiam.
Hanc igitur Psalmorum versionem nostro idiomate adornatam, omnium votis diu
expectatam, post varias catigationes summo Authoris studio emendatam laeti
accipimus and approbamus. Nihil in ea sacris scripturarum interpretibus
dissonum, nihil quod pietatem non nutriat and confirmet esse judic^. Ita
litterae inhaeret Author, ut a sensu non deviet. Et si a rigore illo judaico
aliquantisper recedat, id Linguae Anglicanae phrasis, aut textus obscuritas
plerumque postulat. Det Deus legentibus cor docile, and spiritum
intelligentiae, ut quae legunt intelligant; quae intelligunt vita and moribus
exprimantur.

Datum in palatio Regio Sancti Germani die quinto Martii. 1700. JOANNES
INGLETON S. T. Doctor Parisiensis, and Serenissimi Principis walliae
Subpraeceptor.

Praecedentium Approbationum verificatio.
FIdem facimus hanc Approbationem S. M. N. Joannis Betham Doctoris Parisiensis
manu esse obsignatam, ipsumque eum esse cui prosua summa pietate parique in
sacris litteris peritia non possit non haberi fides cum de Libri Doctr nam
Christianam spectantibus testimonium fert. Nihil amplius de hac Psal^erii in
Linguam Anglicam versione, potui testari, cum linguam non calleam; ille Anglus
Serenissimi walliae principis Praeceptor Doctrissimus eam legit cujus
testimonio Tuto potest quisque credere etiam si novum alterum S. M. N. Ingleton
Subpraeceptoris and S. M. N. Doctoris Parisiensis quod and legimus non
accederet.

In Sorbona die Martii 26. 1700. PIROT.

THE PSALMS OF DAVID, Translated from the Vulgat.
PSALM I.
Beatus vir qui non abiit.
This Psalm has no title in the original, it shows that the good and the pious
are the only happy, And on the contrary, that sinners, and the Impious, are
miserable and wretched. The greatest part of the Interpreters be^eive David to
be the Author.

1 BLESSED is the man who has not walked in the Counsel of the Impious, Psalm.
1.
Nor has stood in the Way of sinners, Nor has sat down in the chair of Heb.
d^^iders of Gods law.
Infection.

2 But his delight is in the law of God, And he meditates on it day and night.

3 And he shall be like the tree planted upon the banks of a running stream,
That will not fail to bear fruit in the season.

4 His leaf shall not fall; And all that he does shall prosper.

5 Not so, not so shall it be with the wicked, For they shall be like the dust
driven by the wind from the face of the earth.

6. Therefore the wicked shall not rise in the Judgment, Nor sinners in the
Council of the Just.

7 For our Lord knows and approuves the way of the Just, But the way of the
Impious will end in destruction.

PSALM II.
Quare fremuerunt.
This Psalm tho without a Title as the former, has David for the Author, and is
cited as his Act. 4. v. 5. where it is applyd to Christ and the Church. So
likewise S. Paul applys those words, Thou art my son, J this day have begot
the, to Christ, Heb. 1. v. 5. and the Jews themselves think this Psalm. relat^s
to their Messiah. Certain it is that under the figure of David and his Reign,
Christ and his Kingdom are represented, the firmnes of his Empire and of his
Church are described, together with the vain conspiracies of men against it.
All Kings and Princes are invited to be obedient to it.

1 WHy are the Gentiles in a rage, Psalm.
And the Nations in a vain conspiracy?

2 The Kings of the earth have stood up, And the Princes have assembled against
our Lord, and against his Christ, saying.

3 Let us break their bonds, And let us throw of their yoke.

4 But he who dwells in the heavens, will laugh at them, And our Lord will turn
them to derision.

5 Then he will speak to them in his anger, And in his fury he will confound
them.

6 But I am constituted by him King over Sion, his holy Mountain, To hold forth
his Law.

7 Our Lord said to me, Thou art my son, I this day have begot thee.

8 Ask it of me and I will give thee the Nations for thy Inheritance, And the
whole earth shall be in thy possession.

9 Thou shall rule them with a rod of iron, Psalm. 2.
And like a potters Vessel thou shall break them in pieces.

10 And now you Kings be wise, Learn well your duty, you that judge the earth.

11 Serve our Lord with fear, Rejoice and tremble before him.

12 Embrace discipline, Least out Lord should be angry, and you perish by
leaving the way of the Just.

13 When his Indignation shall break out on the sudden, Happy are they who
confide in him.

PSALM III.
Domine quid multiplicati.
This in the Title is called the Psalm of David when he fled from the face of
Absalon his son, as it is related 2. Reg. 15. v. 14. he declares that he puts
his hope only in God, and describes how powerful his assistance is, and on the
contrary how vain the designs of the enemies are.

1 WHy o Lord! Psalm. 3.
does the number increase of those who persecute me? Many are they who rise up
against me.

2 Many say to my soul, in vain she seeks for safety from her God.

3 But thou o Lord! art my protector and my glory, by thee my head has been
raised.

4 I have cried out with a loud voice to our Lord, and he has heard me from his
holy mountain.

5 I slept and took my rest, and have rose up again, because our Lord has
protected me.

6 I shall not fear those thousands of people that incompass me: rise up and
save me O Lord, my God!

7 For thou have struck down all that oppose me without cause, thou have broken
the teeth of sinners.

8 There is no safety but from our Lord; by thee, my God! thy people are blessed.

PSALM IV.
Cum invocarem exaudivit.
This Psalm is upon the same subject with the former, and seems to have been
made much at the same time. David implores the help of God, exhorts the Princes
that revolted, to desist from their rebellion, and to acknowledge him for King,
as having been so constituted by God.

1 WHen I called upon him, Psalm. 4.
the God of my justice did hear me, thou did enlarge me when I was in
distress.

2 Still have mercy on me, and hear my prayer.

3 Ye sons of men, how long will your hearts be stupid? Why do you love
vanity, and seek after lies?

4 Know that our Lord has done wonderful things for his holy one; he will hear
me when I cry out to him.

5 Be angry, and sin not: what you have said in your hearts repent upon your
beds.

6 Offer a sacrifice of justice, and put your confidence in our Lord; many say,
who will show us good things?

7 The light of thy countenance, o Lord! is printed on us, thou have powered joy
into my heart.

8 They by their plenty of wheat, of wine, and of oil, increase and grow rich.

9 I at the same time in peace will sleep, and be at rest.

10 Because thou, o Lord! in a singular manner have strengthened me with hope.

PSALM V.
Verba mea auribus.
This Psalm shows to have been made by David when he was set upon, by the
wicked. He begs of God to hear his prayers; he imprecates the Impious, wishing
them deserved punishments, and conforts the pious and the just with the hope of
reward.

1 GIve ear o Lord! to my words; Psalm. 5.
understand my cry!

2 Be attentive to the voice of my prayer, my King, and my God.

For to thee I will pray; early in the morning, o Lord! thou shall hear my
voice.

4 Early will I stand before thee; and I shall know that thou art not a God
that loves iniquity.

5 Nor shall the wicked dwell near thee; nor the unjust remain in thy sight.

6 Thou hate all doers of injustice, thou will destroy all that speak lies.

7 The bloody and the deceitful man our Lord will abominate; but I, through
the abundance of thy mercy.

8 Will enter into thy house; I will adore in thy holy Temple with fear and
reverence.

9 Conduct me, o Lord! in the way of thy justice; look after me, and direct my
ways in regard of my enemies.

10 Because there is no truth in their mouth; vain and hollow is their heart.

11 Their throat is an open sepulcher, they have dealt deceitfully with their
tongues; judge them, o God!

12 Let them miscarry in their designs; according to the multitude of their
iniquitys, expel them, because they have provoked thee, o Lord!

13 And let all rejoice who hope in thee; for ever they will be filled with
joy, and thou will dwell in them.

14 And all will have glory in thee who love thy name, for thou will bless the
just one.

15 With thy mercy, o Lord! as with a shield, thou have incompas'd us.

PSALM VI.
Domine ne in furore.
In this Psalm David first sets forth the violence of his sickness. In the next
place he begs God to free him from it, and lastly he describes the
consternation of his Enemies upon his prayers being heard, and his health
restored to him.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 6.
rebuke me not in thy indignation, nor chastise me in thy anger.

2 Have mercy on me, o Lord! because I am infirm, heal me, o Lord! for my bones
are all in disorder.

3 My soul is extremely afflicted; but thou, o Lord! Say, how long.

4 Turn to me, o Lord! and rescue my soul; save me for thy mercies sake.

5 For the dead have no remembrance of thee; and in hell who will praise thy
holy name?

6 I am tired with sighing, every night, I will wash my bed, and water with my
tears the place, where I ly.

7 My eye is wasted with grief; I have grown old, in the midst of all my
enemies.

8 Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity, for our Lord has heard the
voice of my tears.

9 Our Lord has heard my supplication, he has received my petition.

10 Let all my enemies blush and be confounded; quickly let them be driven
back, and be covered with shame.

PSALM VII.
Domine Deus meus.
This Psalm was made by David, as most interpreters believe, in the time of his
persecution under Saul: It contains excellent instructions for repenting
sinners.

1 O Lord, Psalm. 7.
my God! in thee have I hoped; save me from all that persecute me, and set me
free.

2 Least at any time the enemy, like a lion, should snatch my soul, when there
is no body to rescue me, and save me.

3 O Lord, my God! if I have done that thing, if there be any iniquity of which
my hands are guilty.

4 If I have rendered evil for evil let me deservedly fall with disgrace under
my enemies.

5 Let the adversary seek my life, and take it; let him tread it on the ground;
let him lay my glory in the dust.

6 Rise up, o Lord! in thy anger; and be exalted in the borders of my enemies.

7 Rise up, o Lord my God! in regard to the precept thou have given, and all
the people will come and assemble about thee.

8 For their sake, re-ascend on high; it is our Lord who judges the people.

9 Judge me, o Lord! according to my justice, and according to my innocence.

10 The malice of sinners, will at last have an end, and the just will be
directed by thee, o God! the searcher of hearts and reins.

11 Just is my assistance from our Lord, who saves the upright of heart.

12 God is a just judge, powerful and patient, Will his anger always continue?

13 Unless you be converted, he will brandish his sword; he has bent and made
ready his bow.

14 And prepared in it instruments of death; of fiery matter he has made his
arrows.

15 Behold! the sinner has hatched injustice, he conceived sorrow, and has
brought forth iniquity.

16 He has opened and dig'd a pit; and is fallen into the ditch which he made.

17 His mischief will return upon his own head, and his iniquity will fall
heavy upon him.

18 I will praise our Lord for his justice, and I will celebrate with Canti^les
the name of God, the most high.

PSALM VIII.
Domine Dominus noster.
According to the opinion of the most learned interpreters, which the Scripture
seems to confirm, this Psalm principally regards the person of Jesus Christ
risen from the dead, in whom God did manifest his greatest glory and power. Tho
it may also be applied to other men.

1 O Lord, Psalm. 8.
our Lord! how admirable is thy name over all the earth?

2 For thy magnificence is raised above the heavens.

3 Out of the mouths of infants and sucking babes thou have accomplished
praise, for the confusion of thy enemies; that thou may destroy the foe, and
the revengfull man.

4 When I consider thy heavens, the works of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars, which thou have created.

5 What is man, that thou should be mindful of him? Or the son of man, that
thou should visit him?

6 Thou have made him but little inferior to the Angels; thou have crowned him
with glory and honor; and placed him over the works of thy hands.

7 Thou have made subject to him and put under his feet every Creature, the
sheep, the oxen, and all the beasts of the f^ild.

8 The birds of the air, and the fishes of the sea, that walk in the paths of
the deep.

9 O Lord, our Lord! how admirable is thy name over all the earth?

PSALM IX.
Confitebor tibi Domine.
This Psalm of David in the figurative sense relates to the Incarnation of the
son of God, and to the Church planted by him upon earth.

1 I will praise thee, Psalm. 9.
o Lord! with my whole heart, I will relate all the wonderful things thou have
done.

2 I will rejoice, and be overjoyed in thee; I will sing praises to thy holy
name, o! the most high.

3 My enemy being driven back, They will sink and fall before thee.

4 For thou have undertaken my cause, and judged it for me; Thou have sat upon
thy throne, thou who do justly judge.

5 Thou have rebuked the Gentiles, And the wicked one is destroyed; Their name
thou have blotted out to all Eternity.

6 The weapons of the Enemy are disabled for ever, Thou have razed their Cities.

7 They fell with noise, Their memory is extinguished, And our Lord remains for
ever.

8 He has prepared his Throne, on which he will give Judgment; And he himself
will judge the whole earth with equity, And all Nations with justice.

9 Our Lord is become a Refuge to the poor, A helper in necessitys, and in
tribulation.

10 And let all hope in thee, who know thy name, Because o Lord! thou have not
forsaken those, who seek thee.

11 Sing praises to our Lord you, who dwell in Sion; Publish amongst the
Nations the wisdom of his Counsels.

12 For he has remembered, and required the blood of the Just, And has not
forgott the cry of the poor.

13 Have mercy on me, o Lord! See how low I have been brought by my enemies.

14 Thou, who have raised me from the gates of death, That I might declare all
thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

15 I will rejoice in thy mercy, that has saved me; The Gentiles are stuck fast
in the ditch they made for my destruction.

16 Their foot is caught in the snare they laid for me.

17 Our Lord will make himself known by his judgments; whilst the sinner
remains caught by the work of his own hands.

18 Let the wicked be turned over into hell, And all the Nations that forget
God.

19 For the poor will not allways be forgotten by him, The patience of the
distressed will at last be remembered.

20 Rise up, o Lord! Let not man prevail; Bring the Nations to judgment
before thee.

21 Place over them a Legislator, to make them know they are but men. Here ends
this Psalm according to the Hebrew.


22 Why, o Lord! art thou retired so far from us? Do thou despise us in the
time of our tribulations?

23 Whilst the Impious swells with pride, the poor just man burns: They are
deceived in their cogitations.

24 For the sinner is applauded in his ways, and in the desires of his heart,
And the wicked man is well spoken of.

25 Because the sinner has exasperated our Lord, And in the severity of his
anger, he looks not after him.

26 God is quite out of his sight; he allways walks in the ways of iniquity.

27 Thy judgments are removed from before his eyes; he will have dominion over
all his Enemies.

28 For he has said in his heart, I will stand firm from generation to
generation, untouched by any evil.

29 His mouth is full of malediction, of bitterness, and of deceit; Labor and
grief lurk under his tongue.

30 He sitts plotting with the rich in private, how he may destroy the innocent.

31 He watches the poor with his eyes; he lies in ambush like a Lion in his
den.

32 He lays snares, that he may catch the poor man, And carry him off, when he
has drawn him in.

33 Then he will tumble him down in his net, he will stoop and fall upon him
when he has him fast

34 For he has said in his heart, God minds nothing of this, he looks another
way, will he ever take notice of it.

35 Rise up, o Lord God! Lift up thy hand, and forget not the poor.

36 For why has the impious man provoked God? Is it not because he has said in
his heart, God will not call me to account.

37 This thou see, for thou do consider the labor and grief of the Just,
That the sinners may be deliverd up to thy justice.

38 For the poor are left to thy care, Thou art the Guardian of the Orphan.

39 Break the arm of the sinner, and of the malicious man; his sin will be
required, and will not be found.

40 Our Lord will reign from age to age for ever and ever, And you Gentiles
shall be exterminate out of his land.

41 Our Lord has heard the desire of the poor, Thou have been attentive to the
preparation of their heart.

42 To do justice to the pupil and to the humble, That Man may no longer
presume to magnify himself upon the earth.

PSALM X.
In Domino confido.
This Psalm contains a Dialogue between David and those who counseled him, to
save himself from the fury of Saul, by flying away. It is also proper for all
those who are under o^pression and put their confidence in God.

1 I Confide in our Lord; Psalm. 10.
Why do you say to my soul, fly over to the mountains like a sparrow?

2 For behold, the sinners have bent their bows, They have their arrows ready
in the quiver, That they may shoot in the dark, the upright of heart.

3 They have destroyed what thou have made. But what has the just man done?

4 Our Lord is in his holy Temple, our Lords Throne is in heaven.

5 His eyes look favorably upon the poor; His eyes examine the sons of men.

6 Our Lord examines both the just and the Injust; But he that loves iniquity
hates his own soul.

7 He will rain down snares upon sinners, Fire and brimston, and tempests will
be the portion of their Cup.

8 For our Lord is just, and he loves justice; Equity is lookd upon by him.

PSALM XI.
Salvum me fac Domine.
In this Psalm the Author describes the corrupt manners of his age. He prays
that God would purge the land of all wieked and proud men, And in the last
place, he assures that the Impious shall perish, and the Just shall be saved.

1 SAve me, Psalm. 11
o Lord! for there is scarce a holy one remaining, there is little truth to be
found amongst the sons of men.

2 They speak vanitys one to another, Their lips are deceitful, and they talk
with a double heart.

3 May our Lord confound all deceitful lips, And every boasting tongue.

4 Who have said, our tongues shall magnify us, our lips are our own, And who
is our Lord?

5 In consideration of the misery of the poor, And of the sighs of the
distressed, Now I will rise up, says our Lord.

6 I will provide for their safety, And I will do it effectually.

7 The words of our Lord are pure and sincere, Like silver tried by the fire,
purged from all dross, and seven times refined.

8 Thou, o Lord! wilt preserve us, And protect us for ever from this depraved
generation.

9 The wicked walk in a round. In thy deep wisdom thou have multiplied the sons
of men.

PSALM XII.
Usquequo Domine.
David being in great straits first complains of his own misery, and the
rejoicing of his enemies, Then he implores the assistance of God, which he
hopes will suddenly be given him, and promises to make grateful acknowlegments
for the mercy which he expects. The occasion of writing this Psalm, seems
rather to be the persecution of Saul, then the rebellion of Absalon.

1 HOw long, Psalm. 12
o Lord! will thou forget me? Will it be for ever? How long will thou turn away
thy face from me?

2 How long will my thoughts perplex my soul? And fill my heart the whole day
with grief.

3 How long must my enemy be exalted over me? Look upon me, and heat me, o
Lord, my God!

4 Inlighten mine eyes, that I may not sleep the sleep of death, Least my enemy
should say, I have prevaild against him.

5 They who persecute me, will triumph if I quitt my ground; But I have
confidence in thy mercy.

6 My heart will be ravishd with joy, when I am saved by thee; In songs, I will
praise our Lord for the good things he has bestowd on me; In Hymns I will
celebrate the name of our most high Lord.

PSALM XIII.
Dixit insipiens in cord.
When ever this Psalm was writ, or whoever was the writer of it, about which
Interpreters differ in their opinions, yet all agree that the spiritual
deliverance from the Captivity of the Devil, which Jesus Christ procured for
mankind, is clearly figured in it.

1 THe fool said in his heart, Psalm. 13
There is no God.

2 They are corrupted, and become abominable in all their ways, There is none
that does what is good, No not one.

3 Our Lord from heaven has lookd down upon the sons of men, That he might see
if any were to be found that had understanding, or sought God.

4 They all have gone out of the way, They all are become unprofitable; There
is not any that does good, No not one.

5 Their throat is an open sepulcher, They have dealt deceitfully with their
tongues; The poison of aspicks lies under their lips.

6 Their mouth is full of malediction and bitterness, Their feet swift toward
the shedding of blood.

7 In their ways there is affliction and desolation; They know not the way of
peace, The fear of our Lord is not before their eyes.

8 Will they not one day know me? They who work iniquity, and devour my people,
like a morcel of bread?

9 They have not called upon our Lord; There they trembled with fear, where
there was no reason to fear.

10 For our Lord sides with the generation of the Just; But you have put shame
on the counsel of the poor, because they put their confidence in our Lord.

11 Who is he that out of Sion will bring salvation to Israel? When our Lord
shall put an end to the Captivity of his people, Jacob will rejoice, And Israel
will be overjoyed.

PSALM XIV.
Domine quis habitabit.
This Psalm according to the opinion of many Interpreters was made by David
about the time that he placed the Ark upon Mount Sion. In the literal it has
reference to the City of Jerusalem, And in the spiritual sense to the heavenly
Jerusalem, whither none but the Just must pretend te come.

1 LOrd! Psalm. 14
who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? Or who shall rest in thy holy mountain?

2 He whose ways are without blemish, And who acts according to Justice.

3 Who speaks truth from his heart, And in whose tongue there is no deceit.

4 Who has not injured his neighbor, Nor hearkened to reproaches against him.

5 He looks with contempt on the man that is wicked, But he honors those who
fear our Lord.

6 He never deceives when he swears to his neighbor, not puts out his money to
usury, nor receives bribes to oppress the innocent.

7 He that acts so, shall be established for ever.

PSALM XV.
Conserva me Domine.
This Psalm of David is full of mystery and prophecy, and under the literal
sense, applicable to David's own person Jesus Christ was principally intended by
it. So that our savior, the son of David, seems to speak in it, and declare
that God his father by his omnipotent power will raise him from the dead.

1 PReserve me, Psalm. 15
o Lord! because I have hoped in thee; I have said to our Lord, thou art my
God, for thou have no need of any thing that is mine.

2 To the saints that are in his land, he has wonderfully made appear all my
good intentions toward them.

3 Their infirmities increased upon them, and then they made have.

4. I will not call together their conventicles, where blood is offered, nor
shall my lips so much as name them,

5 My share of inheritance is our Lord; he is the portion of my cup; it is thou
o Lord! that wilt restore my inheritance to me.

6 The lines have measured it to me in the richest soil, and I have an
excellent inheritance.

7 I will bless our Lord, who has given me understanding, and that even at
night my reins reprove, and instruct me.

8 I have allways had our Lord present before me, he is still on my right hand
to make me stand firm.

9 It Is for this that my heart is glad, that my tongue expresses joy, and also
that my flesh will rest in hope.

10 Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor will thou suffer thy holy
one to see corruption.

11 Thou have made known to me the ways of life, thou will fill me with joy in
beholding thy countenance; endless delights are on thy right hand.

PSALM XVI.
Exaudi Domine justitiam.
David relying upon his innocence earnestly asks from God his peculiar
assistance against his enemies.

1 ATtend, Psalm. 16
o Lord! to the justice of my cause; hearken to my petition.

2 Give ear to my prayer, that comes not from deceitful lips.

3 Be thou thyself my judge, let thine eyes behold the equity of my cause.

4 Thou have examined my heart, and searched it by night; thou have tried me by
fire, and there has been no iniquity found in me.

5 That my mouth might not speak according to the works of men; I have in
obedience to the words of thy lips, kept my self in hard and painful ways.

6 Make firm my steps in thy paths, that I may never tread out of the way.

7 I have cried out to thee, because thou, my God! art accustomed to hear me;
incline thine ear toward me, and hearken to what J say.

8 Make thy mercys to be admired, thou who savest those who hope in thee.

9 From all that resist thy right hand, preserve me, o Lord! as the apple of
thine eye.

10 Protect me under the shadow of thy wings, from the wicked who persecute me.

11 My enemies have beseiged my soul, their bowels are closed up with fatt;
they talk with insolence and pride.

12 After having cast me off, they now besiege me; they have fastened their
eyes upon the ground.

13 They ly in wait for me, as a lion for his prey, or the lions whelp lurking
in his covert.

14 Rise up, o Lord! prevent him, and defeat him; rescue my soul from the
wicked one; wrest thy sword out of their hands who are enemies to thy power.

15 O Lord! separate them in their life time from the small number of those,
who are thine upon the earth: their belly is filled with the things hidden in
thy treasures.

16 They have abundance of children, and what remains of their goods, they
leave to their little ones.

17 But J with justice will appear before thee; I shall be satiated when thy
glory does appear.

PSALM XVII.
Diligam te Domine.
The title of this Psalm denotes the occusion in which it was made. viz when
God had deliverd David from the hands of Saul. But tho it agrees according to
the historick and literal sense wi^h David, yet it may very well be applyd to
Jesus Christ himself, as S. Paul does the last vers^ of it.

1 J will love thee, Psalm. 17
o Lord who art my strength; our Lord is my support, my refuge; and my
deliverer.

2 He is my God, and my upholder, and I will hope in him.

3 He is my protector, and the strength of my safety; he is my defender.

4 With praises J will call upon him, and I shall be safe from my enemies.

5 I have been surrounded with the sorrows of death, and torrents of iniquity
have filled me with trouble.

6 The greifs of hell have encompassed me, and the snares of death have been
laid for me.

7 But in my tribulation I have called upon our Lord, J have cried out to my God.

8 And he has heard my voice from his holy Temple, and my loud cries in his
presence have penetrated his ears.

9 The earth was moved, and trembled, the foundations of the mountains were
stirred and shaken by reason of his anger.

10 His indignation raised up a smoke, fire broke out from his countenance, and
coals were kindled thereby.

11 He bowed the heavens and came down, and a thick cloud was under his feet.

12 He mounted upon a Cherubin, and has taken his flight, he has flow'n upon
the wings of the wind.

13 He has covered himself with darkness, he has enclosed himself in a tent of
black and watery clouds.

14 At the brightness of his presence the clouds broke in sunder; hailstons and
burning coals fell down.

15 And our Lord thunderd from heaven, the most high made his voice heard,
hailstons and burning coals fell down.

16 He has thrown his darts, and scatterd them; he has redoubled his lightning,
and struck them with terror.

17 The sources of waters have been laid bare, and the foundations of the earth
have been uncovered.

18 By the lowdnes of thy threatenings, o Lord! and by the breath of thy anger.

19 He has sent from above, and has taken me into his protection; from a deluge
of water he has drawn me out.

20 He has rescued me our of the hands of my powerful enemies, and of those who
hated me; for they were become too mighty for me.

21 They first set upon me in the day of my affliction, but our Lord became my
protector.

22 He has set me at liberty; he has saved me because he loved me.

23 Our Lord will render to me according to my justice, and according to the
cleanes of my hands.

24 Because I have kept the ways of our Lord, and have not been guilty of
impiety toward my God.

25 For all his judgments are before my eyes, and I have not rejected his just
laws.

26 And I will keep my self unspotted before him, and will watch my self least
I fall into iniquity.

27 Our Lord will render to me according to my justice, and will recompense me
according to the cleanes of my hands in his sight.

28 Heb. with the merciful thou vvilt be merciful.
With the holy thou will be holy, and with the innocent man thou will be
innocent.

29 Heb. and vith the sincere thou vvilt be sincere.
And with the elect thou will be elect; and with the pervers thou will Heb.
wrestle.
be perverted.

30 For thou will save the people that are humble, and thou will humble the
eyes of the proud.

31 It Is rhou, o Lord! that do light my lamp; my God! illuminat my darkness.

23 By thee J shall be delivered from temptation, and in the strength of my God
I will make my way over the wall.

33 The ways of my God are clean without spot; the words of our Lord are tried
as it were by fire; he is the protector of all that hope in him.

34 For who is God but our Lord? or what God is there but our God:

35 The God who has begirt me with fortitude, and made my ways to be free from
blemish.

36 Who has bestowd on my feet the swiftnes of staggs, and has seated me on
high places.

37 Who has taught my hands to fight in battle, and has made my arms like a
bow of brass.

38 And thou have given me, o Lord! thy protection for my security, and thy
right hand has held me up.

39 Thy discipline has thoroughly amended me, and by that I will allways be
instructed.

40 Thou have widen'd my steps under me, and have made my feet to tread firm.

41 I will pursue my enemies, and catch them, and will not go back till they
are defeated.

42 I will break them, nor shall they stand before me, they shall fall under my
feet.

43 For thou have given me strength, and enabled me for war, and has brought
under me all those that rose up against me.

44 Thou have made my enemies turn their backs to me, and all that hate me thou
have destroyed.

45 They cried out for help, but there was none to save them, to our Lord they
cried, but he did not hear them.

46 And I will bruise them as small as dust before the wind, and like dirt in
the streets they shall be cast out.

47 Thou will deliver me from the contradictions of the people, thou will
establish me chief over nations.

48 A people whom I did not know have served me, as soon as they heard of me
they obeyed me.

49 The degenerate have been false to me, the degenerate children are grown
rotten; they have halted, and are gone out of the way.

50 Our Lord lives, and blessed be my God; let the God of my safety be exalted
above all things.

51 Thou, who have revenged my cause and subdued nations under me, thou who
have deliverd me from all my enraged enemies.

52 Thou will likewise raise me above those who rise up against me, from the
injust men thou will rescue me.

53 Therefore, o Lord! J will make known thy glory amongst the nations, and to
thy name I will sing a Psalm.

54 May he still increase the safety of his king; may he show mercy to David
his anointed, and to his seed for ever.

PSALM XVIII.
Coeli enarrant gloriam.
This Psalm consists of two parts: in the first we are taught that the power
and glory of God may be known by contemplating the celestial bodies, and
especially the sun. In the second part is described the perfection and efficacy
of the Divine law. The Psalm concludes with a prayer for the pardon of hidden
sins.

1 THe heavens speak the glory of God, Psalm. 18
and the firmament sets forth the works of his hands.

2 Each day relates it to the next day, and night to night imparts the
knowledge of it.

3 Not in words or speches, whose voice is not heard.

4 For the sound of them is gone through the whole earth, and their words from
one end of the world to the other.

5 He has placed his tabernacle in the sun, and he himself is like a
bridegroom, coming out of his wedding chamber.

6 He setts forth with triumph as a gaint to run his career; from one end of
the heavens he begins his progres.

7 And proceeds to the other end, and the whole world does feel his warmth.

8 The law of our Lord is perfect without blemish, it converts souls; the
testimony of our Lord is faithful, it gives wisdom to little ones.

9 The decrees of our Lord are just, they comfort the heart; the precepts of
our Lord are bright, they illuminat the eyes.

10 The fear of our Lord is holy, and remains for ever; the judgments of our
Lord are true, and justifyd in themselves.

11 And are more to be desired then gold, and all precious stones; and more
delitious then honey, and the honey comb.

12 Therefore thy servant carefully keeps them, and for keeping of them great is
the reward.

13 But who is he that well knows his trangressions? Cleanse me, o Lord! from
my hidden sins, and from the contagion of strangers preserve thy servant.

14 If they have not dominion over me, then I shall become pure, and shall be
cleansed from the greatest sin.

15 Then will the words I speak become pleasing to thee, as also the meditation
of my heart, which is allways in thy sight.

16 Thou, o Lord! art my helper and my Redeemer.

PLALME XIX.
Exaudiat te Dominus.
It is believed that David composed this Psalm to be sung by the people when he
was ready to march against the Ammonites. It contains a prayer for the happy
succes of his war.

1 MAy our Lord hear thee in the day of tribulation, Psalm. 19
may the name of the God of Jacob protect thee.

2 May he send thee succor from his Sanctuary, and defense out of Sion.

3 May he be mindful of thy sacrifice, and may thy holocaust be grateful to
him.

4 May he give thee the desire of thy heart, and prosper all thy designs.

5 We shall rejoice in thy safety, and we shall have glory in the name of our
God.

6 May our Lord grant all thy petitions; now I know that our Lord has saved his
anointed.

7 He will hear him from his holy heaven; from his right hand comes the safety
of Princes.

8 Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will call upon the name
of the Lord our God.

9 They have been entangled, and are fallen; but we have rose up, and stand
upright.

10 Lord! save the king, and hear us in the day in which we call upon thee.

PSALM XX.
Domine in virtute tua.
This Psalm follows the other which went before, both in time and in history:
for as in the first he prayed for victery over his enemies, he now thanks God
for having obtaindit.

1 IN thy strength, Psalm. 20
o Lord! the king will rejoice; he will be transported with joy for the safety
thou have given him.

2 Thou have given him the desire of his heart, thou have not made frustrate
the prayer of his lips.

3 Thou have prevented him with the blessings of thy bounty, thou have put on
his head a crown enriched with precious stones.

4 He asked life of thee, and thou have bestowd upon him length of days that
never will end.

5 Great is his glory by the means of thy saving mercy, thou will cloth him
with glory and majesty.

6 Thou will make him a subject of thy blessings for all posterity, thy
countenance will replenish him with joy.

7 For the king hopes in our Lord, and the mercy of the most high will make him
firm for ever.

8 Let thy hand be felt by all thy enemies, let thy right hand find them out
who hate thee.

9 Thou will make them become like a flaming oven in the day of thy anger; our
Lord in his indignation will confound them, and fire will devour them.

10 Thou will exterminate their race from the face of the earth, and their
posterity from amongst the sons of men:

11 Because they would have brought evils upon thee; they have framed designs,
which they could not execute.

12 For thou will make them turn their backs, and prepare the remainder of thy
punishments to meet them in their faces.

13 Be exalted, o Lord! in thine own strength, then shall we celebrate with
Hymns and Canticles the wonders of thy power.

PSALM. XXI.
Deus Deus meus.
This Psalm seems to have been consecrated by David, inspired by the holy
Ghost, to the passion of our Savior, who himself made use of the words
contained in it, when he hung upon the cross. It also fortells the conversion
of kings and nations to the church of Christ.

1 O God, Psalm. 21
my God! look toward me; why have thou forsaken me? my sins put safety at a
distance from me.

2 My God! I cry by day and thou will not hear me, I cry by night, nor is it to
be reputed folly in me.

3 Thou dwell in thy holy habitation, the praise of Israel.

4 In thee our fathers have hoped, they have hoped, and thou have deliverd them.

5 They cried out to thee, and thou did save them; they did put their trust
in thee, and they were not confounded.

6 But J am a worm, and not a man, the reproach of men, and the contempt of the
people.

7 All that looked upon me derided me, they insulted me with their lips, and
shaked their heads at me, saying,

8 He has trusted in the Lord, let the Lord come to deliver and save him, since
he loves him so well.

9 And true it is, that thou, o Lord! have brought me out of my mothers womb;
and have been my hope ever since I was sucking at her breast.

10 Out of her womb I was thrown into thy arms, thou have been my God from my
first coming into the world, depart not from me.

11 For my sufferings are near at hand, and there is no body to help me.

12 ^ am surrounded with a multitude of young bullocks, And fatt bulls have
beseiged me.

13 They have opened their mouths upon me, like a lion roaring and seizing his
prey.

14 I am powered out, like water, and all the strength of my bones is dissipated.

15 My heart is become like melted wax in the middle of my body.

16 My natural vigor is dried up like an earthen pot, baked by the fire, my
tongue sticks to the roof of my mouth; thou have reduced me even to the dust of
death.

17 For I have been beset by a company of dogs, a congregation of wicked ones
has besieged me.

18 They have peirced my hands and my feet, and they have counted all my bones.

19 They considered me all over, and inspected me, they divided my clothes
amongst them, and upon my garment they cast lots.

20 But let not, o Lord! thy succor be far from me, take care of my defense.

21 O God! deliver my soul from the sword, and my only one from the power of
the dog.

22 Save me from the mouth of the lion, and from the horns of the unicorn, in
this my low condition.

23 And I will make known thy name to my brethren; in the middle of the
assembly I will publish thy praises.

24 Praise our Lord all you that fear him, let all the seed of Jacob give glory
to him.

25 Let him be reverenced by the whole race of Israel, because he has not
neglected nor despised the prayer of the poor.

26 Nor has he turned away his face from me, when I cried out to him he heard me.

27 I will utter thy praises in the great Congregation, I will pay my vows in
the sight of those who fear thee.

28 The poor shall eat and be filled, all that seek our Lord shall praise him;
their hearts shall live for ever and ever.

29 From one end of the earth to the other, they will call to mind our Lord,
and be converted to him.

30 And all the familys of the nations, shall adore before him.

31 For supreme power only belongs to our Lord, he will rule over the nations.

32 All the great ones of the earth have eaten, and have adored; all mortals
shall fall down before him.

33 And my soul shall live to praise him, and my posterity shall serve him.

34 The generations to come shall belong to our Lord, and the heavens shall
declare his justice, to the people that are yet to be born, who are of his
making.

PSALM XXII.
Dominus regit me.
David under the similitude of a shepherd leading his flock, shows what care
God has had over him, and what great benefits he had received from the divine
Majesty.

1 OUr Lord governs me; Psalm 22
nothing will be wanting to me, he has put me into a place of excellent pasture.

2 He has led me to waters of refreshment, he has revived my soul.

3 He has conducted me in the paths of justice, for the glory of his name.

4 Should I walk in the middle of the shade of death, I would fear no harm,
because thou art with me.

5 Thy rod, and thy staff have been a comfort to me.

6 Thou have prepared, and set before me a table, to strengthen me against
those who persecute me.

7 Thou have powered oil upon my head, and my inebriating cup how admirable is
it?

7 And thy mercy will accompany me, all the days of my life.

9 That I may dwell for ever in the house of our Lord.

PSALM XXIII.
Domini est terra.
Most believe that David made this Psalm to be sung by the people when the ark
was carryd to mount Sion: but all interpreters agree that the holy Prophet had
principally in his view the ascension of our Savior Jesus Christ into heaven.

1 THe earth is our Lords, Psalm. 23
and all that it contains; the whole world, and all that dwell in it, are his.

2 For he it was, that founded the earth above the seas, and provided, it
should be above the rivers.

3 Who shall ascend to the mountain of our Lord? or who shall stand in his holy
place?

4 He whose hands are innocent, whose heart is clean; who has not in vain
received his soul, and who has not deceitfully sworn to his neighbor.

5 This is he who shall receive blessings from our Lord, and mercy from God his
Savior.

6 This is the race of men who seek him, who seek the face of the God of Jacob.

7 Princes! lift up your gates; eternal gates! be ye lifted up; and the king
of glory will enter.

8 Who is the king of glory? our Lord the strong and the mighty, our Lord the
powerful in battle.

9 Princes! lift up your gates; eternal gates! be ye lifted up; and the king
of glory will enter.

10 Who is the king of glory? the Lord of all power he is the king of glory.

PSALM XXIV.
Ad te Domine levavi.
It is probable that David made this Psalm in the time of the rebellion of
Absalon. It contains the prayer of a man in great straits, begging ye
assistance of God against his enel mies, and the pardon of his sins.

1 TO thee, Psalm 24
o Lord! I have raised up my soul; in thee my God, I confide, and I shall not
be ashamed.

2. Nor let my enemies deride me; for none who wait for thee, will be put to
confusion.

3 Let all those be confounded, who void of reason act unjustly.

4 Show to me, o Lord! thy ways, and lead me in thy paths.

5 Direct me in thy truth, and teach me, because thou art my God and my
Savior; the whole day I wait for thee.

6 Remember, o Lord! thine own mercy's, the mercy's which thou have shown from
the beginning of the world.

7 But call not to mind the sins of my youth, nor my ignorances.

8 Remember me according to thy mercy, o Lord! for thy goodness sake.

9 Our Lord is mild and just, and therefore he will prescribe a law to those who
are out of the way.

10 The meek he will guide in Judgment, and he will teach the mild his ways.

11 All the ways of our Lord are mercy and truth, in respect to those who
carefully seek his will and his laws.

12 For the sake of thy holy name, pardon, o Lord! my sin; for very great it is.

13 Who is the man that fears our Lord? for him he has provided a law to
guide him in the way he has chosen.

14 His soul shall dwell in plenty of goods, and his seed shall inherit the
land.

15 Our Lord is a firm support to those that fear him, and he will make his
covenant manifest to them.

16 My eyes shall allways be lifted up to our Lord, for he will pull my feet
out of the snare.

17 Look upon me, and have mercy on me; because I am alone and poor.

18 The griefs of my heart are multiplyd; deliver me from my necessitys.

19 Behold my low condition, and the pain I am in; And pardon all my offenses.

20 Consider how my enemies are increased, And how unjust a hatred they have
toward me.

21 Preserve my soul, And deliver me; I will not be ashamed because I have
hoped in thee.

23 O God! deliver Israel from all its tribulations.

PSALM XXV.
Judica me Domine.
The author of this Psalm appeals to God as his Judge both of his own
innocence, and of the injustice of his enemies. Interpreters differ in their
opinion whither it was made by David in the time of Readiness persecution, or of
Absalom's rebellion.

1 BE my Judge, Psalm. 25.
O Lord! because I have proceeded with innocence; And having hoped in our Lord,
I shall not be weakened.

2 Try me, O Lord! And put me to the test; try my reins and my heart by fire.

3 For thy mercy is allways before my eyes; And I have delighted in thy truth.

4 I have not sat down in the assemblys of vanity, nor will I enter amongst the
workers of iniquity.

5 I have detested the conventions of malicious men, nor will I ever sit in
company with the Impious.

6 I will wash my hands with the innocent, And will still keep about thy altar,
O Lord!

7 That I may hear the voice of thy praises, And that I may relate all thy
wonders.

8 I have loved the beauty of thy house, O Lord! And the place where thy glory
does reside.

9 Let not my soul, O God! be lost with the Impious, nor my life with the men
of blood.

10 Whose hands are stained with iniquity, And whose right hand is full of
bribes.

11 But I will still proceed in my innocence, redeem me, and have mercy on me.

12 My feet have stood firm in the right way; in all assemblies I will praise
thee, O Lord!

PSALM XXVI.
Dominus illuminatio mea.
In this Psalm David mentions the dangers which by Gods assistance he has
overcome, and the assurance he has of being protected for the future; he also
begs of our Lord that he may without disturbance serve him night and day in the
Tabernacle.

1 OUr Lord is my light, Psalm. 27.
And my safety, whom shall I fear?

2 Our Lord is the protector of my life, who shall make me tremble?

3 When the wicked came up against me, to devour me.

4 Those enemies that persecuted me, were themselves weakened, And fell to the
ground.

5 Should armies be drawn up against me, my heart would be void of fear.

6 Should they give me battle, my hope in this would still be firm.

7 One only thing I have askd of our Lord, And this I will require, that I may
dwell all the days of my life in the house of our Lord.

8 That I may contemplate the delights of our Lord, And visit his temple.

9 For he has hid me in his Tabernacle; Psalm. 26.
in the days of my tribulation he sheltered me in the secret part of his
Tabernacle.

10 He has set me up upon a rock; And has now raised my head above all my
enemies.

11 I have gone round, and I have offered in his Tabernacle a sacrifice of joy,
I will sing hymns, and Canticles to our Lord.

12 Hear, O Lord! my voice, with which I cry out to thee, be merciful to me,
and hear me.

13 My heart has spoken to thee, my eyes have sought thee, thy face, o Lord! I
will allvvays seek.

14 Turn not thy face from me, turn not away in thy anger from thy servant.

15 Be still my helper; forsake me not, nor despise me, o God my Savior!

16 For my father and my mother have abandoned me, but our Lord has taken me to
himself.

17 Set me a rule, o Lord! to guide me in thy way, And conduct me in the right
path, in regard of my enemies.

18 Deliver me not up to the will of those, who persecute me, because false
witnesses have risen up against me, And iniquity has belied it self.

19 I believe that I shall see the good things of our Lord in the land of the
living.

20 Wait for our Lord; act manfully; comfort thy heart, and wait for our Lord.

PSALM XXVII.
Ad te Domine clamabo.
David asks of God that his prayers may be heard, that he may not perish with
the Impious, against whom he makes many imprecations. He celebrates the
powerful assistance of God, and lastly makes a vow for the safety of the
people.

1 TO thee, Psalm. 27.
O Lord! I will cry, answer me, my Cod! least if thou say not any thing to
me, I be come like those who descend into the pit.

2 Hear, o Lord! the voice of my supplication, when I pray to thee, And when I
lift up my hands toward thy holy Temple.

3 Drag me not along with the wicked, And with the workers of iniquity let me
not be lost.

4 Who speak peace to their neighbor, And have mischief in their hearts.

5 Treat them according to their deeds, And according to the malice of their
designs.

6 Let them receive what the works of their hands deserve, give them the
recompense, that is due to them.

7 Because they have not understood the works of our Lord, the works which his
hands have wrought; thou will destroy them, And build them no more.

8 Blessed be our Lord, because he has heard the voice of my prayer.

9 Our Lord is my helper and my protector, in him my heart has confided, And I
have been relieved.

10 My flesh is restored to vigor, And I will praise him with a willing heart.

11 Our Lord is the strength of his people; he is the protector and Savior of
his anointed.

12 O Lord! save thy people, And bless thy inheritance; govern them, and raise
them up for ever.

PSALM XXVIII.
Afferte Domino.
David upon the occasion of a violent tempest which he describes, invites all
to sing the praises of God who is the raiser and layer of tempests.

1 Bring to our Lord, Psalm. 28.
you children of God, bring to our Lord the young ones of your rams.

2 Give to our Lord glory and honor, give to our Lord the glory due to his
name, adore our Lord at his holy Tabernacle.

3 Our Lords voice has been heard upon the waters, the God of Majesty has
thundered; our Lord upon many waters has made himself heard.

4 The voice of our Lord is full of power, the voice of our Lord is full of
magnificence.

5 The voice of our Lord breaks the Cedars, And the Cedars of Libanus he will
break to pieces.

6 He will tear them into bits as easily as a calf of Libanus, or as the tender
faune of an unicorn may be torn.

7 The voice of our Lord divides flames of fire, the voice of our Lord shakes
the desert, the desert of Cades our Lord will shake.

8 The voice of our Lord prepares the hinds to calve, And he will lay open the
thick groves; And in his Temple all shall give glory to him.

9 Our Lord makes deluges upon the earth; And our Lord will sit in his Throne
King for ever.

10 Our Lord will give strength to his people, our Lord will bless his people
with peace.

PSALM XXIX.
Exaltabo te Domine.
This Psalm contains the prayer of David, Psalm. 29.
in which he gives thanks o God for his health restored, and his purpose of
allways celebrating the praises of God!

1 I will magnify thee, o Lord! because thou have raised me up; And have not
delighted my enemies with insulting over me.

2 O Lord my God! I have cried out to thee, And thou have healed me.

3 Lord! thou have brought my soul out of hell; thou have saved me from being
one of those who descend into the pit.

4 Sing praises to our Lord, you that are his Saints, And celebrate the memory
of his holiness.

5 For in his anger there is destruction, And in his favor there is life.

6 In the evening we shall be in tears, when morning comes we shall be in joy.

7 I said in my prosperity, I shall stand firm, and never be moved.

8 But the firmnes of my happiness O Lord! came only from thy goodness toward me.

9 Thou did but turn away thy face from me, And I was presently brought into
trouble.

10 To thee, O Lord! I will ever cry, And to my God I will offer my prayers.

11 What advantage will my death be to thee! when I fall into corruption.

12 Will dust and ashes praise thee, or publish thy veritys?

13 Our Lord has heard me and taken pity of me; our Lord is become my
protector.

14 Thou have turned my mourning into joy, thou have cut my sackcloth, And
clothed me with gladness.

15 That in my glory I may sing thy praises, And may no more be in affliction,
O Lord my God! I will praise thee for ever.

PSALM XXX.
In te Domine speravi.
In this Psalm David prays to God for safety, and thanks him for having
delivered him out of the hands of kis enemies. He describes his own sufferings,
and fortells the destruction of his en^mys. Lastly he exhorts all good men not
to despond in adversity, since G^d never forsakes those who serve him.

1 IN thee, Psalm. 30.
o Lord! I have put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, releeve me
according to thy justice.

2 Hear me graciously; speedily rescue me.

3 Be to me a protecting God, a sanctuary, that I may be saved by thee.

4 For thou art my strength, and thou art my refuge, And for the glory of thy
name thou will conduct me and nourish me.

5 Thou will bring me out of the snare they have laid for me, because thou art
my protector.

6 Into thy hands I recommend my soul; thou have redeemed me, O Lord! the God
of my truth.

7 Thou hate all observers of vanitys, that signify nothing.

8 But I have confided in our Lord; I will rejoice and be comforted in thy
mercy.

9 For thou have considered my low condition, thou have delivered my soul from
the straits she was in.

10 Thou have not shutt me up in the hands of my enemy, thou have left my feet
at liberty.

11 But still have mercy on me, O Lord! for I am in tribulation; by anger my
eye, my soul, and my bowels are in disorder.

12 For my life wast's in sorrow, And my years are spent in sighs.

13 My natural strength is weakend by poverty, And my bones have lost their
vigor.

14 More then all my enemies, I am very much reproched even by my neighbors;
and my old acquaintance are afraid of me.

15 All that see me, fly away from me; I am blotted out of their memory, and
their heart, like one of the dead.

16 I am become like a broken pitcher; for I have heard the injurious things
said of me by many, that dwell about me.

17 When they met together against me, they held a Council for the taking
away my life.

18 But I have put my trust in thee, O Lord! I have said thou art my God, my
destiny is in thy hands.

19 Rescue me from the hands of my enemies, And my persecutors.

20 Let thy countenance shine upon thy servant; save me according to thy mercy.
I will not be confounded, O Lord! because I have called upon thee.

21 Let the wicked be covered with shame, let them be brought into their grave;
let all deceitful lips be struck dumb.

22 That speak injuriously against the just, with pride and contempt.

23 How great and many are the delights, O Lord! which thou have laid up for
such as fear thee?

24 Thou have made perfect those who hope in thee, even in the sight of the
sons of men.

25 Thou will hide them in the privacy of thy countenance, from the disturbance
of men.

26 Thou will protect them in thy Tabernacle, from the contradiction of tongues.

27 Blessed be our Lord, for he has made wonderful his mercy toward me in a
fortified city.

28 I said when I was out of my self, that thou had quite cast me out of thy
sight.

29 Thou nevertheless have heard the voice of my prayer, when cried out to thee.

30 Love our Lord all you, who are his holy ones, for he is a searcher of
truth; And he will abundantly render to the proud what they deserve.

31 Act manfully, And strengthen your hearts, all you that hope in our Lord.

PSALM XXXI.
Beati quorum remissae.
David declares those men to be happy, whose sins are forgiven. He invites all
by his own example to have recours to the mercy of God.

1* BLessed are they whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 31.
And whose iniquity is covered.

2 Happy is the man to whom our Lord has imputed no sin, And in whose soul
there is no guile.

3 Because I had been silent, my bones did wither, as it were with old age;
when afterward I cried out all the day.

4 For thy hand by day and by night has been heavy upon me; in my affliction I
was converted, when the thorn was struck into me.

5 I have now confessed to thee my sin, And my iniquity I have not concealed.

6 I said, I will accuse my self of my iniquity to our Lord, And thou have
remitted the impiety of my sin.

7 For this every holy one will pray to thee, in a seasonable time.

8 But in the deluge of many waters, they will not approach to him.

9 Thou art my refuge in the tribulation which has incompas'd me, my only joy:
rescue me from those who besiege me.

10 I will give thee understanding, and instruct thee in the way thou must
walk; I will allways have mine eyes upon thee.

11 Become not like the horse and the mule, that are void of understanding.

12 With the bitt and the bridle curb them hard, who approach not to thee.

13 Many are the scourges of sinners, but mercy shall incompas him who hopes in
our Lord.

14 Rejoice in our Lord, be transported with joy, all you that are just;
glorify him all you, who are upright of heart.

PSALM XXXII.
Exultate justi in Domino.
This Psalm invites the just to celebrate the praises of God, and sets forth
many powerful motives for the so doing. It shows the confidence which the just
ought to have in God when they implore his mercy.

1 YOu that are just, rejoice in our Lord; Psalm. 32.
it becomes the righteous to celebrate his praises.

2 Praise our Lord upon the harp; praise him upon the psalter of ten strings.

3 Sing to him a new Canticle; sing with music loud and harmonious.

4 For the word of our Lord is sincere, And he is faithful in all his works.

5 He loves mercy and justice, the world is replenishd with the mercy of our
Lord.

6 By the word of our Lord the heavens were established, And from the breath of
his mouth came all their perfection.

7 Who has gathered together the waters of the sea, as it were in a vessel, And
laid up the abysses in his store house.

8 Let all the earth fear our Lord, And let all the inhabitants of the earth
tremble before him.

9 For he spoke, and all things were made; he commanded, And every thing was
created.

10 Our Lord brings to nothing the designs of the Nations; he makes vain the
cogitations of the people, And defeates the counsel of Princes.

11 But the counsel of our Lord remains for ever, the thoughts of his heart
subsist from generation to generation.

12 Happy is the Nation who has our Lord for their God; happy the people whom
he has chosen for his inheritance.

13 Our Lord has looked down from heaven, And beheld all the sons of men.

14 From his habitation which he prepared for himself, he cast his eyes upon
all the inhabitants of the earth.

15 It Is he who formed all their hearts; And who penetrates into all their
actions.

16 A King will not be saved by the greatness of his power, nor a giant by his
mighty strength.

17 Who relys on his horse for safety, will be deceived, by his great strength
and speed he will not be saved.

18 But our Lord has his eyes upon those who fear him, And upon those who
confide in his mercy.

19 To deliver their souls from death, And to nourish them in a time of famine.

20 Our soul rests in expectation of our Lord, for he is our supporter and
protector.

21 For in him our heart will rejoice, And in his holy name we confide.

22 Let thy mercy, O Lord! be bestowed upon us, accordingly as we have hoped
in thee.

PSALM XXXIII.
Benedicam Dominum.
David praises God for his late deliverance out of the hands of Achis the King
of Geth. He exhorts others by his example to hope for safety, if they fear God.
He teaches what the works are of one that fears God.

1 I will bless our Lord at all times, Psalm. 33.
his praise shall be continually in my mouth.

2 My soul shall have glory in our Lord, let the humble and the mild hear this,
and rejoice.

3 Let them join with me to magnify our Lord, And let us altogether celebrate
the glory of his name.

4 I have sought our Lord and he has heard me, he has rescued me out of all my
afflictions.

5 Approach to him and be inlighten'd, And your faces shall never blush for
shame.

6 The poor man cried out, and our Lord heard him, And delivered him from all
his tribulations.

7 The Angel of our Lord will guard them round, who fear him, and bring them
out of danger.

8 Taste and see how sweet our Lord is; happy is the man who hopes in him.

9 Fear our Lord all you, that are his Saints, for no want can afflict those
who fear him.

10 Rich men have fallen into necessity, and have felt hunger, but they, who
seek our Lord, shall abound in all that is good.

11 Come children, and hear me; I will teach you the fear of our Lord.

12 Who is the man, that covets to live, And desires to see happy days?

13 Keep thy tongue from speaking evil, And thy lips from being deceitful.

14 Decline from evil and do good, seek after peace, and persever so to do.

15 The eyes of our Lord are upon the just, And his ears are open to receive
their prayers.

16 But the countenance of our Lord is upon the doers of evil, to exterminate
their memory our of the earth.

17 The just have cried out, and our Lord has heard them, from all their
tribulations he has delivered them.

18 Our Lord is allways near to those, whose heart is afflicted, And the humble
of spirit he will save.

19 Many are the tribulations of the just, but from all these our Lord will
deliver them.

20 Of every bone of them our Lord takes care, not one of them shall be broken.

21 The death of a sinner is dismal, And they, who hate the just, will be
guilty of sin.

22 Our Lord will redeem the soul of his servants, And none shall fail who
trust in him.

PSALM XXXIV:
Judica Domine nocentes.
David implores the speedy assistance of God both against his open enemies, and
his calumniators in private, whose perfidiousnes he describes, and detests
This^ Psalm he writ^ when he was persecuted by Saul and his courtiers.

1 JUdge, Psalm. 34.
o Lord! those who hurt me; vanquish those who set upon me.

2 Take thy arms, and thy buckler, And rise up to help me.

3 Draw out thy sword, and stop their passage, who pursue me; say to my soul, I
am thy safety.

4 Let them all be confounded, and covered with infamy, who seek my life.

5 Let all, that intend evil against me, be driven back with shame, and
confusion.

6 Let them be like the dust before the face of the wind; And let the Angel of
God closely pursue them.

7 Let their way be dark and sllippery, whilst the Angel of God is in pursuit
of them.

8 Because unprovoked they have laid a hidden snare to destroy me, And they
have unjustly calumniated me.

9 Let him fall into a snare which he does not foresee, even in the snare which
he laid for me, let himself be caught.

10 But my soul shall rejoice in our Lord; And be delighted in the salvation
which comes from him.

11 All my bones shall say, Lord! who is like to thee?

12 Who do rescue the poor out of hands that are too strong for them, the
feeble and the indigent from those, who prey upon them.

13 Corrupt witnesses rising up against me, have questioned me for matters I
was ignorant of.

14 They did render unto me evil for good, And put my soul into desolation.

15 But I when they afflicted me, clothed my self with sackcloth.

16 I humbled my soul with fasting, And my prayer will return into my own
bosom.

17 I behaved my self toward them as to a neighbor, and to a brother; I
humbled myself as a sorrowful mourner.

18 And they rejoiced at my misery, they met together, and provided scourges
for me, and I was ignorant of it.

19 They are now dissipated, but not penitent; they still provoke me; they
insult me with mockerys, and gnash their teeth at me.

20 Lord! when will thou look toward me? deliver my soul from their malice, my
only one from these lions.

21 And I will magnify thy name in the great assembly, in the multitudes of
people I will publish thy praises.

22 Let them not triumph over me who unjustly rise up against me, and hate me
without cause, And yet flatter me with their eyes.

23 For to me indeed they spoke peaceably, but when they spoke in a mutiny of
the people, they studied to betray me.

24 They opened their mouths wide against me, And said, let us rejoice; now our
eyes have beheld what we lookd for.

25 This, O Lord! thou have seen; be not therefore silent; O Lord! depart not
from me.

26 Rise up, and mind the doing me justice; my God, and my Lord! embrace my
cause.

27 Judge me according to thy justice, O Lord my God! And let them not triumph
over me.

28 Let them not say in their hearts, we have our soul's desire; nor let them
say, we have devoured him.

29 Let all, who take joy in my misery, blush and be confounded.

30 Let all who speak of me with pride and disdain, be covered with shame and
confusion.

31 Let those be glad, and abound with joy, who are well wishers to the justice
of my cause.

32 Let them allways say, glorified be our Lord, who desire the peace of his
servant.

33 And my tongue shall celebrate thy justice, And all the day thy praises.

PSALM XXXV.
Dixit injustus.
It Is believed that David made this Psalm after he had spared Saul, who fell
into his hands, and after that ceased not to persecute him. He takes occasion
from this obstinacy of Saul in his injustice to show the guilt of those who
persevere in evil. And withal he sets forth the providence and mercy of God.

1 THe injust man resolves within himself to offend. Psalm. 35.
The fear of God is not before his eyes.

2 For in his sight he has acted deceitfully, so that his iniquity has made him
worthy of hatred.

3 The words of his mouth are full of injustice and fraud, he would not
understand how to do well.

4 He meditates mischief on his bed; he follows all bad ways, and has no hatred
of evil.

5 Lord; thy mercy is in heaven, And thy truth reaches to the clouds.

6 Thy justice like the highest mountans is elevated; thy judgments are of a
profound depth.

7 Thou will preserve, O Lord! both men and beasts, according to the great
extent of thy mercy, O God!

8 But the sons of men shall place their hope, in their being protected under
thy wings.

9 They shall be inebriated with the flowing plenty of thy house, And thou will
make them drink in the torrent of thy delights.

10 For the fountain of life is in thee, And in thy light we shall see light.

11 Hold forth thy mercy to those who know thee, And thy justice to the upright
of heart.

12 Let not the foot of pride come at me, nor let me be moved by the hand of
the sinner.

13 There have they falln', who work iniquity, they are driven out, and could
not stand their ground.

PSALM XXXVI.
Noli aemulari.
'This Psalm seems to have been made by David when he was in some great
affliction, and probably when Absalom rebelled against him. He fortify's
himself and likewise others, against the scandal which the prosperity of the
wicked does usually cause in the minds of those who do not live by faith.

1 BE not troubled at the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 36.
nor shall thou envy the workers of iniquity.

2 For they will soon wither like hay. And will fade like herbs in the field.

3 Hope in our Lord, and do good, then shall thou inhabit the earth, and be
nourished with the plenty of it.

4 Place thy delight in our Lord, And he will grant thee the petitions of thy
heart.

5 Lay open thy way to our Lord; hope in him, and he will do for thee.

6 And he will make thy justice appear as a shining light, And thy equity as
the noon day; be subject to our Lord, and pray to him.

7 Envy not the man, who prospers in his ways, the man whose ways are full of
injustice.

8 Lay aside anger and indignation, And be not provoked to do evil.

9 For the wicked shall be exterminated; but they who wait with patience upon
our Lord, shall inherit the land.

10 Stay a little, and the sinner shall be no more; you shall look in the place
where he was, and not find him.

11 But the meek shall possess the land, And shall be delighted in the fullnes
of peace.

12 The sinner will watch and observe the just, And grind his teeth at him.

13 But our Lord will laugh at him, because he foresees his day is coming.

14 The sinners have unsheathed their swords, And they have bent their bows.

15 To overthrow the poor and the needy, And to slay the upright of heart.

16 Let their swords pass into their own hearts, And let their bows be broken.

17 Happyer is the just man with a little, then sinners with their overflowing
riches.

18 For the arms of sinners shall be broken, but our Lord strengthens the just.

19 Our Lord knows the days of those who live without stain, And their
inheritance will last for ever.

20 In evil days they shall not be confounded; in the time of famine they
shall be filled; the sinners are they who shall perish.

21 The enemies of our Lord, after they have been honored and raised up in the
world, shall suddenly fall and vanish like smoke.

22 The sinner shall borrow and never pay, but the just shall have compassion,
and give.

23 For they that bless and praise God, shall inherit the earth, but they who
blaspheme him shall be brought to nothing.

24 The hopes of the just man shall be guided by our Lord, And he will be
pleased with his way.

25 When he falls, he shall not be bruised, because our Lord lays his hand
under him.

26 I have been young, and now I am old; And I have not seen a just man
abandoned, and his children begging bread.

27 The whole day he is compassionate and lends, And his posterity, shall be in
benediction.

28 Avoid evil, and do good, And thou shall live for ever and ever.

29 For our Lord loves justice, and will never forsake his holy ones: eternally
they shall be preserved.

30 The unjust shall be punished, And the race of the Impious shall perish.

31 But the just shall inherit the land, And shall dwell in it age after age.

32 The mouth of the just man shall utter wisdom, And his tongue shall speak
according to justice and equity.

33 The law of his God is in his heart, And he shall not be supplanted in his
way.

34 The sinner watches, and observes the just one, And seeks how to destroy him.

35 But our Lord will not leave him in his hands, nor will condemn him when he
comes to be judged.

36 Wait for our Lord, and keep his way, and he will raise thee, that thou
may possess the land by inheritance; when the Impious shall have perished,
then thou will see this.

37 I have seen the wicked man mightily exalted, Psalm. 361
And elevated like the Cedars of Libanus.

38 And passing by again, behold^ he was no more; I looked for him, And the
place where he sto^d was not to be found.

39 Preserve thy innocence, and judge uprightly, for there will be still
remains of the man, that loves peace.

40 But the Impious shall fall all at once, And all that remains of him shall
perish.

41 The preservation of the just is from our Lord, he is their protector in the
time of tribulation.

42 And our Lord will assist them and deliver them, he will rescue them out of
the hands of sinners, And save them because they have hoped in him.

PLALME XXXVII.
Domine ne infurore.
All agree that this penitential Psalm was made by David after the two crimes
of adultery, and murder which he had committed. It contains the true and just
sentments of a penitent heart.

1 O Lord rebuke me not in thy indignation, Psalm. 37.
nor chastise me in thy anger.

2 For thy arrows are struck fast in me, And thy hand is heavy upon me.

3 At the sight of thy anger all my flesh is diseased, at the sight of my sins,
I have no rest in my bones.

4 Because my iniquitys are grown up above my head, And like a heavy weight
they press me down.

5 My old wounds are putrified and are full of corruption, by reason of my
extreme folly.

6 I am become wretched and bowed to the very ground, the whole day I walked in
sorrow.

7 For my loins are full of illusions, and there is no soundnes in my flesh.

8 I am afflicted and exceedingly humbled, my sighs did roar through the
oppression of my heart.

9 Thou see, o Lord! what I desire, And my sighs are not hidden from thee.

10 My heart is full of trouble, my strength has forsaken me, and the ligh of
my eyes, even that has failed me.

11 My friends and my relations came toward me, And stood up against me.

12 They who have been nearest to me stood far from me, And they used violence,
who sought my life.

13 And the contrivers of mischief against me, spoke things void of truth,
their daily study was to deceive.

14 But I, as if I were deaf, heard them not, And like a dumb man I did not
open my mouth.

15 And so I became like one that had lost his hearing, And was unable to give
any answer.

16 But since, O Lord! I have put my whole confidence in thee, thou will hear
me, O Lord my God!

17 For I have said within my self, let not my enemies insult over me, who
seeing me ready to fall, already speak of me, with pride and contempt.

18 Yet I am still prepared for suffering, And my sorrow is never out of my
sight.

19 I will openly declare my iniquity, And allways think of my sin.

20 But in the mean time my enemies live, And are strengthened against me, And
they increase who hate me unjustly.

21 They who render evil for good, speak ill of me, because I have followed
goodness.

22 Forsake me not, O Lord my God! do not depart from me, be mindful to help
me, O Lord, God of my salvation.

PSALM XXXVIII.
Dixi custodiam vias.
David probably made this Psalm about the same time with the former, viz. When
he was pursued by Absalom* and outraged by Semei. He describes the vanity and
shortness of this life, and the necessity of patience to attain peace and quiet.

1 I have said, Psalm. 38.
I will watch my ways, that I may not offend with my tongue.

2 I have put a guard upon my mouth, when the sinner stood up against me.

3 I was silent, and humbled my self; even the good things I could say, I
suppressed; And my grief did augment.

4 My heart was in a great heat, And whilst I meditated, a flame rose up with
in me.

5 I said with my tongue, Lord! make known to me my end.

6 And what is the number of my days, that I may know what is wanting to me.

7 I see that thou have stinted my days, And that my being is, as it were
nothing before thee.

8 True it is, that every living man is vanity all over.

9 True it is, that man passes away like a shadow, and like an image, And yet
he vainly disquiets and troubles himself.

10 He gathers, and hoords up wealth, And yet knows not, who after him shall
enjoy it.

11 But now where lies my hope and expectation? is it not in our Lord? all my
treasure is in thee, my God!

12 Deliver me from all my iniquitys, thou have made me a subject of derision,
even to fools.

13 I have held my tongue, and have not opened my mouth, because thou have done
it; remove thy chastisements from me.

14 The force of thy hand has made me sink under thy corrections; it is for his
iniquity that thou dos't punish man.

15 And thou have made his soul wither, and dry up like aspider; And indeed
vain is the trouble, and solicitude of mankind.

16 O Lord! hear my prayer, and my supplication; hear the voice of my tears.

17 Be not silent; for I am but a stranger, and a traveller before thee, as all
my progenitors have been.

18 O Lord! grant me remission, that I may be refreshed, before I depart, and
shall be no more.

PSALM XXXIX.
Expectans expectavi.
Interpreters say that this Psalm contains two different senses, the one which
regards the person of David persecuted by Absalom, and the other, which regards
the person of the son of God, born according to the flesh of the race of David.
Thus it is applyd by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews. David thanks God
for having delivered him from so many dangers, and begs his further assistance
in that which he at this time was in. Jesus Christ in the name of all his
members gives thanks to God his father for the many benefits they have received
from him, and some times he speaks in hi^ own name, clearly denoting the
mystery of his Incarnation, which has made ce^se all the sacrifices of the old
law.

1 I have waited with perseverance on our Lord, Psalm. 39.
And at last he has hearkened to me.

2 He has heard my prayer, And has brought me out of a lake of misery, And out
of dirt and mire.

3 And has set my feet upon a rock* And he has directed my steps.

4 And has put into my mouth a new song, a song in praise of our Lord.

5 Many will see this, and they will fear, And they will hope in our Lord.

6 Happy is the man who has placed his hope in the name of our Lord, And has
not looked after vanitys, and deceitful follies.

7 Many wonderful things have thou done, o Lord! my God! nor is there any body
like thee in thy designs.

8 I have told them, and I have spoke of them, they are multiplied above number.

9 Sacrifice, and offerings did not please thee, but thou have given me ears to
hear and obey thee.

10 Thou did not require a holocaust, or sin-offering, then I said, behold I
come.

11 In the first place of the book, it is written of me, that I should do thy
will; my God! so I will do; And thy law shall allways be in the middle of my
heart.

12 I have declared thy justice in the greatest assemblys, I will not shut my
lips; Lord thou know it.

13 I have not concealed thy justice within, my heart, but have published thy
truth and thy saving mercy.

14 In great assemblies I have made known thy truth, and thy mercy.

15 Remove not therefore, O Lord! thy commiseration from me, thy mercy, and thy
truth have allways been my protection.

16 For innumerable evils have encompassed me, my iniquities have beset me
roun'd, and I was not able to discern them.

17 They are more in number, then the hairs of my head, And my heart has quite
failed me.

18 Be pleased, O Lord! to deliver me: o Lord! look upon me and help me.

19 Let them be covered with shame and confusion, who seek to take away my life.

20 Let those who intend evil against me, be driven back with infamy.

21 Let them suddenly be brought to confusion, who scoffingly insult me with
their words.

22 But let all those who seek thee, triumph, and rejoice in thee; And who love
thy salvation, let them allways say, glorified be our Lord.

23 But I am poor and needy, our Lord is solicitous for me.

24 Thou art my helper, and my protector, my God! make no delay.

PSALM XXXX.
Beatus qui intelligit.
David in the time of his affliction fulls sick* and has recourse to God: All
the fathers have applied this Psalm to Jesus Christ, and with a great deal of
reason, since our Savior himself cites one of the verses of it as predicting
the treason of Iudus. So that David in being persecuted by his son, betrayed
and abandoned by his friends, was a plain figure of Jesus Christ in the time of
his passion, when the Jews, who were the people of God, and called his
children, rose up against him, and when his Apostles all abandoned him, and one
betrayed him.

1 BLessed is the man who considers the poor and the distressed; Psalm. 40.
in the evil day our Lord will deliver him.

2 May our Lord preserve Him, give him life, and make him happy upon the earth,
And not deliver him up to the will of his enemies.

3 May our Lord bring him help, when he ly's in pain on his bed; thou have
turned, and made easy his bed for him in the time of his sickness.

4 I said, Lord! take pity on me, heal my soul, for I have sinned to thee.

5 My enemies with evil minds have said of me when will he die, and his name be
extinct?

6 If any of them came in to visit me, he spoke deceitfully to me; his heart
was full of iniquity.

7 Which, as soon as he went from me, he uttered to his accomplices.

8 All my enemies whispered against me, And they conspired to do me mischief.

9 They came to a wicked resolution against me; but he that sleeps, may he not
rise up again?

10 Even the man with whom I lived in peace, on whom I relied, and who eat my
bread, was the foremost in betraying me.

11 But thou, O Lord! take pity on me, raise me up again, and I will repay them.

12 In this I have known thou do love me, because thou will not suffer my
enemy to triumph over me.

13 For thou have taken me to thy self in regard of my innocence, thou have
established me in thy sight for ever.

14 Blessed be our Lord, the God of Israel, from age to age without end; so be
it, so be it.

PSALM XXXXI.
Quemadmodum desiderat cervus.
Some doubt whither David be the author of this Psalm; but nothing hinders why
we may not follow the opinion of some others who believe, that this Psalm
agrees perfectly with the time of David's exile, whither it be applied to the
time when he was absent from the Tabernacle, and suffering persecution, or to
the whole time of his life, which he lookd upon as a true banishment in regard
to which he aspired with all his heart, and this last sense, is lo^k^d upon by
Bellarm* at learned author to be the true literal sense of the Psalm.

1 AS the stagg longs for running waters, Psalm. 42.
so does my soul ardently desire thy presence, O God!

2 My soul thirsts after the mighty, and the living God; when shall I come, and
appear before the face of God?

3 My tears have been my bread both day and night, whilst they continually
upbraid me, with saying, where is thy God?

4 These things I have called to mind, and I have powered forth my soul within
my self; because I will go into the place of the admirable Tabernacle, even to
the house of God.

5 With loud cry's of joy, and praise, the sound of a feast.

6 Why art thou sad my soul? And why do thou disquiet me?

7 Confide in God, for still I will praise him, who is my Savior, and my God.

8 My soul within me is greatly disturbed; I will therefore call thee to mind
from the land of Jordan, and Hermoniim* and the little mountain.

9 Deluge comes upon deluge, when with loud voise, thy floodgates are opened.

10 All thy high swelling billows, And waves have gone over me.

11 Our Lord by day has dispensed his mercy, And by night I will sing a
Canticle to him.

12 I have allvvays ready my prayer to the God of my life; I will say to God,
thou art my protector.

13 Why art thou forgetful of me? And why do I walk in sorrow, afflicted by my
enemy?

14 Whilst my bones are broken, I am upbraided by the enemies who persecute me.

15 With saying continually to me, where is your God? O my soul! why art thou
afflicted? And why do thou disquiet me?

16 Confide in God, for I will still praise him, who is my Savior, and my God.

PSALM XXXXII.
Judica me Deus.
This Psalm seems to be an abridgment of the former, so that it is to be
explicated in the same sense. Many interpreters have thought that David in this
Psalm does not speak in his own person, but in the name of his people
afterward carried captive into Babylone which he as a Prophet foresaw. But
there seems no necessity of having recourse to this prophetic explication,
since the Psalm may very well be understood of David himself, either when he
was persecuted by Saul, or assaulted by the temptations of the Devil.

1 BE my judge, Psalm. 42.
O God! and give sentence in my cause against an ungodly people; deliver me
from the unjust, and the deceitful man.

2 For thou, O God! art my strength; why have thou cast me off? And why do I
walk in sorrow, persecuted by my enemy?

3 Send forth thy light, and thy truth, those have conducted me, and brought me
up to thy mountain, and into thy Tabernacle.

4 And I will enter to the altar of God, of God who gives joy to my youth.

5 Thy praises, O God, my God! I will sing upon the harp; why, my soul! art
thou afflicted? And why do thou disquiet me?

6 Confide in God, for still I will praise him, who is my Savior and my God.

PSALM. XXXXIII.
Deus auribus nostris.
If David be the author of this Psalm, he speaks in it according to the holy
fathers, by a spirit of prophecy either in the person of the Machabees, and
the fews oppressed by the tyranny of Antiochus, or in the person of the holy
Martyrs of the* Church of Christ, persecuted by the fury of Tyrants,
accordingly as S. Paul himself seems to have understood it, in citing one of
the verses to show the violence, which the enemies of the church exercised
against the faithful. This Psalm may be properly applied to all afflicted and
persecuted persons, who, may find therein matter of comfort in regard of the
mercys of our Lord* as also reasons of humiliation and fear, when they consider
the rigor of his justice.

1 We have heard, Psalm. 43.
O God! with our ears, And our fathers have told us.

2 What works thou have done in their days, And in the ages past.

3 Thy hand extirpated Nations, and thou have planted us in their room, the
people of the country thou did afflict, and drive forth.

4 Not by their own swor'd did they possess the land, nor was it their own arm,
that saved them.

5 But it was thy right hand, thy arm, and the favor of thy countenance,
because it pleased thee to choose them for thy people.

6 Thou art also my King, and my God, by whose command Jacob has been, so often
saved.

7 By the strength, which comes from thee, we will drive away our enemies, And
in thy name we will make nothing of those, who rise up against us.

8 For not in my bow will I hope, nor is it my sword, that will save me.

9 For thou only have saved us from those, who persecuted us, And have
confounded all that hated us.

10 The whole day our glory shall be in God, And thy holy name we will praise
for ever.

11 But now thou have cast us off, and put us to shame, And thou will not, O
God! go forth with our armies.

12 Thou have made us turn our backs to the enemy, And we are become a prey,
and a booty to those who hated us.

13 Thou have exposed us, as sheep for the shambles, thou have dispersed us
amongst the Nations.

14 Thou have sold thy people for for nothing, And there was little given in
exchange for them.

15 Thou have made us the reproach of our neighbors, And the scorn and
derision of all, that are about us.

16 Thou have made us become the fable of the Nations, And a mocking stock
amongst the people.

17 All the day my ignominy is before my eyes, And the confusion of my
countenance covers me all over.

18 At the voice of those who insult and reproach me, And at the sight of my
enemy, who persecuts me.

19 All these things are come upon us, and yet we have not been forgetful of
thee, nor have we acted unjustly against thy covenant.

20 And our heart has not gone backwards, And thou have not turned aside our
steps from thy way.

21 Thou have humbled us in a place of affliction, And the shadow of death has
covered us.

22 If we have forgotten the name of our God, if we have stretched forth our
hands to a strange God.

23 Will not God ask an account of these things? for he knows the secrets of
the heart.

24 But since for thee we are every day put to death, And looked upon as sheep
destined for slaughter.

25 Rise up, O Lord! why do thou sleep! rise up, and do not cast us off for
ever.

26 Why do thou turn away thy face? do thou forget our poverty and
affliction?

27 For our soul is brought down even to the dust, And our belly's are glued to
the earth.

28 Rise up, O Lord! and help us, for the glory of thy name redeem us.

PSALM XXXXIV.
Eructavit cor meum.
S. Chrysostom, S. Austin, and almost all the interpreters agree that this
Psalm is a kind of a spiritual Epithalamium, representing the sacred union
between Jesus Christ, and his spouse the Church. S. Paul likewise in his
Epistle to the Hebrews makes use of this Psalm to show the everlasting reign of
the only son of the father, over his Elect. Some have thought that Solomon is
the author, and that it was made upon the occasion of his marriage with the
daughter of Pharah, tho others attribute it to David. But all agree in this
that the true sense of it, intended by the holy Ghost, regards the mystery of
the Incarnation, and the union sf the word with human nature.

1 MY heart has thrown out a good word, Psalm. 44.
I adress my works to the King.

2 My tongue shall move like the pen of a fastwriting scrivener.

3 Shining thou art in beauty above all the sons of men, grace is diffused over
thy lips, therefore has God blessed thee for ever.

4 Gird thy sword on thy thigh, thou who art all powerful.

5 Armed with thy majesty, and thy beauty, go on prosperouslly, and reign.

6 According to truth, mildnes, and justice, And thy right hand shall make
wonderful progres.

7 Thy arrows are sharp, Nations shall fall under thee, into the hearts of the
Kings enemies thy arrovvs shall light.

8 Thy Throne, O God! is established for ever, the scepter of thy Kingdom is
the scepter of equity and, justice.

9 Thou have loved justice, and hated iniquity, therefore has God, thy God,
anointed thee with the oil of gladness preferably to all that partake with thee.

10 The sent of Mirrhe, Cinnamon, and cashia issued from thy garments, and from
thy yvory mansions, for which the daughters of King have delighted thee in thy
splendour.

11 At thy right hand stands the queen, in cloth of gold, with variety of
ornaments.

12 Hearken daughter, and see, and be attentive with thy ears; And forget thy
country, and the house of thy father.

13 And the King will be taken with thy beauty, for he is thy Lord and God, and
Nations shall adore him.

14 And the daughters of Tyrus, and all the rich of the la^d shall come before
thee with presents, And offer their petitions.

15 The chief glory of this daughter of the King is from within, in fringes of
gold, and imbroider'd attire.

16 After her, Virgins shall be brought to the King, those that are nearest her
shall be brought to thee.

17 They shall be brought with joy and triumph, they shall be led into the
Temple of the King.

18 In room of thy fathers, sons shall be born to thee, thou shall make them
Princes over all the earth.

19 They shall remember thy name, from generation to generation.

20 And therefore through out all ages, the people shall publish thy praises.

PSALM XXXXV.
Deus noster refugium.
Since almost all the fathers agree that this Psalm according to the litterall
sense regards the Church persecuted* by the Infidels, and deli^er'd from
persecutions by the assistance of our Lord, we ought rather to adhere to this
opinion, then to that of some other interpreters, who apply this Psalm only to
David victorious over h^s enemies.

1 GOd is our refuge, Psalm. 45.
and our strength, he is our support in our afflictions which ly heavy upon us.

2 Therefore we will not fear, should the earth shake, And should the mountans
be overturned into the middle of the fea.

3 The waves in a violent commotion have roared, the force of the tempest made
the mountains tremble.

4 The river abounding with water, brings gladness to the city of God, the most
high has sanctified his Tabernacle.

5 God is in the middle of it, and it will remain firm: from the beginning of
the morning God will protect it.

6 The Nations are in commotion, and the Kingdoms are tottering, at the voice
of our Lord the whole earth did tremble.

7 But the Lord of hosts is with us, And the God of Jacob is our protector.

8 Come, and see the works of our Lord, the wonders he has done upon the earth,
in making war cease from one end of it to the other.

9 He will break the bow, and the weapons in pieces, And the bucklers he will
cast into the fire.

10 Be at rest, and behold that I am God; I will be exalted amongst the
Nations, and I will be exalted over all the earth.

11 The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our protector.

PSALM XXXXVI.
Omnes gentes plaudite.
All the interpreters agree that the sense of the holy Ghost in this Psalm is
concerning the triumph of Jesus Christ in his Ascension, and the conversion of
all the faithful that are to follow him. Tho some there are, who think this
Psalm was made upon the solemn translation of the ark into the Temple, which
Solomon had built for it.

1 ALl ye Nations! Psalm. 46.
clap your hands; with Jubily, and exclamations of joy, give praise to God.

2 For our Lord is the high, and the terrible one, the great King over all the
earth.

3 He has subdued the Nations for us, And laid the Gentiles under our feet.

4 He has given us an inheritance of his own Choosing, the beauty of Jacob,
which he loved.

5 God is ascended in triumph, And our Lord with the foun'd of trumpets.

6 Sing praises to our God, sing; sing praises to our King, sing.

7 For God is the King of the whole earth, sing with understanding.

8 God will reign over the Nations, God sits upon his holy Throne.

9 The Princes of the people are assembled, and united with the God of Abraham,
because the potent Gods of the earth have been excessively elevated.

PSALM XXXXVII.
Magnus Dominus.
S. Ambroise and S. Austin apply this Psalm to the holy city of the Church, of
which that of Jerusalem was the figure, tho S. Chrysostom and some other
interpreters thi^ it relates to the reestablishment of the city of Jerusalem
after the Captivity of Babylon.

1 GReat is our Lord, Psalm. 47.
and worthy of all praise in the city of our God, upon his holy mountan.

2 With the joy of the whole earth, mount Sion is founded; on the side of the
north stands the city of the great King.

3 In the houses thereof God will make himself known; when he takes upon him to
defend it.

4 For behold the Kings of the earth did assemble, And conspire against it.

5 But when they saw it so defended, they were astonished, were frighted, were
driven away, And were seized with trembling.

6 They felt the pains of a woman in labor; with a violent wind thou will
break to pieces the ships of Tharsus.

7 As we have heard, so now we have seen in the city of the Lord of Hosts, in
the city of our God, that God has founded her to last for ever.

8 We have received thy mercy, O God! in the middle of thy Temple.

9 As is thy name, so is thy praise spread to the ends of the earth; thy right
hand is full of justice.

10 Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be overjoyed, at the
sight of thy judgments, O Lord!

11 Go round about Sion, and incompass it, relate those things from the top of
its towers.

12 Consider well its strength, take a view of every house, that you may make
it known to the next generation.

13 For he is God, our God for ever, and ever, And he will reign eternally over
us.

PSALM XXXXVIII.
Audite haec omnes gentes.
It is needles to be iniquisitive into the occasion of composing this Psalm,
since there is nothing certain to be said of it; and on the other side it
consists only of moral instructions. The Prophet represents the vanity of
riches, the unprofitablenes of worldly wisdom, and shows that tho it often
happens that the just are afflicted in this life, and that the wick^d are in
prosperity, yet when death comes there will be an equal distribution made.

1 HEar what I say all you Nations, Psalm. 48.
be attentive all you inhabitants of the world.

2 All that are born of the earth, all sons of men, both the rich and the poor.

3 My mouth shall utter wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall bring
forth prudence.

4 I will give attention to parables, And my proposition I will explain upon
the harp.

5 Why shall I be afraid in the evil day! least I be found involved in the
iniquity of my ways.

6 They who confide in their strength, And who glory in the abundance of their
riches, let them hear this.

7 A brother will not redeem a brother, will a man who is a stranger redeem
him? he can not give for himself wherewith to appease God.

8 Nor pay the ransom of his own soul: he will allways toil and labor, and so
live on to the presixt end of his days.

9 He will not look upon death, tho he sees wise men dying before him: but the
insensible man, and the fool at last must perish.

10 And they will leave their houses to strangers, And their sepulchers will be
their houses to the world's end.

11 Their places of habitation pass from one generation to an other, they have
left their names to their lands.

12 Man, when elevated in honor, loses understanding, he is compared to
brute beasts that have no reason, and he becomes like them.

13 This way of theirs is the occasion of their fall, And yet they please, and
applaud themselves.

14 Like sheep to the shambles, they are driven into hell, And death will
devour them.

15 And the just will have dominion over them in the morning; And all the props
of their vvorldly glory will sink, and fail them in hell.

16 But God will redeem my soul from the power of hell, when he has taken me
into his protection.

17 Be not concerned, when the unjust man becomes rich, And his house is in
great glory.

18 For of all this, when he dies, he will carry nothing with him, nor will his
glory accompany him, when he goes below.

19 During his life, he shall be said to be happy, And he will praise thee, as
long as thou do well with him.

20 There he will enter where his fathers went before him, And for ever he will
not see light.

21 Man when he is elevated in honor, loses understanding, he is compared to
brute beasts, that have no reason, and is become like them.

PSALM XXXXIX.
Deus Deorum.
Many of the holy fathers and interpreters think this Psalm relates to the
comings of our Savior, the one of mercy, when he called mankind and
established his Church, the other of justice, when he will come to judge the
world. Others apply it to the Israelites who vainly confided in their
sacrifices, and at that same time violated his law and neglected to obey his
will. Those two opinions may easily be reconciled in taking the Israelites to
be the figure of the Christians, and the judgment which God prononces against
them to represent that which he will prononce at the last day against all who
break his divine law.

1 THe God of Gods, Psalm. 49.
our Lord has spoken, And has summoned the earth.

2 From the rising to the setting of the sun, the splendour of his glory shines
out of Sion.

3 God will come, our God will manifest himself, And he will not be silent.

4 Fire will flame out before him, And a violent tempest will incompass him
round.

5 He will call to him the heavens from above, and the earth from below, to
distinguish his people.

6 Bring before him all his Saints, who make a covenant with him by sacrifices.

7 And the heavens shall proclaim his justice, for God is the supreme judge.

8 Hear me, my people, and I will speak; hear me, Israel, and I will testify to
thee, that I am God, thy God.

9 I will not accuse thee as to thy sacrifices, for thy holocaustes are allways
in my sight.

10 I will not take your calves from your houses, nor your goats from your
herds.

11 For all the beasts of the woods are mine, All the cattle in the mountains,
and the oxen.

12 I know all the birds of the air, And the fruitful beauty of the feilds
comes from me.

13 If I want meat, I shall not tell you, for the whole world is mine, and all
that it contains.

14 Will I eat the flesh of bulls? Or will I drink the blood of goats?

15 Immolate to God a sacrifice of praise, And pay your vows faithfully to the
most high.

16 And call upon me in the day of tribulation, I will set you free, and you
shall honor me.

17 But to the sinner God has said, why do thou declare my laws? And why
do thou assume into thy mouth my covenant?

18 Thou that have hated discipline, And have cast behind thee my precepts?

19 When thou see a theif, thou did run in with him, And with adulterers
thou did take thy share.

20 Thy mouth has abounded with malice, And thy tongue has forged deceits.

21 Thou do sit and talk against thy brother, And do lay snares for the
son of thy mother, these things thou have done, and I have been silent.

22 Thou in thy iniquity have thought that I would be like thee; I will call
thee to account, and will lay before the thy evil deeds.

23 Mind these things all you that forget God, least he should hurry you away
on the sudden, when their is none to relieve you.

24 I will be honored by sacrifices of praise, And in that way it is, that I
will lead man to salvation.

PSALM L.
Miserete mei Deus.
This Psalm contains an excellent prayer of a penitent Prince, made to God to
ask pardon of his Crime, and to beg his grace to preserve him from the like
temptations. And it contains not only the sentments of his own penitence, but
also admirable rules, which the holy Ghost gives by his mouth to all sinners.

1 HAve pity on me O God! Psalm. 50.
According to the greatness of thy mercy.

2 And according to thy infinite commiseration, Blot out my sins.

3 Still more and more wash off my iniquity, And thoroughly cleanse me of my ^n.

4 For I know my transgressions, And my sin always stands up against me.

5 To thee only have I sinned, and have done evil in thy sight, That thou may
be justified in thy words, and overcome when thy judgments are tried.

6 Thou know that at my conception I was defiled with iniquity, And that my
mother conceived me with the stain of sin upon me.

7 But thou art a lover of truth, And have laid open to me the hidden secrets
of thy wisdom.

8 Thou will sprinkle me, O Lord! with hysop, and I shall be cleansed, Thou will wash me, and I shall be made whiter then snow.

9 Thou will let me hear words of joy, and comfort, And my humbled bones will
be filled with gladness.

10 Turn away thy face from my sins, And wipe off all my iniquity.

11 Create in me a clean heart, O my God! And renew a true spirit within me.

12 Cast me not out of thy sight, Nor take from me thy holy spirit.

13 Restore to me the joy of thy saving mercy, And strengthen me with thy
soverain spirit.

14 And I will teach the wicked thy ways, And the impious shall be converted to
thee.

15 Free me from the guilt of blood, O God, the God of my salvation, And my
tongue shall magnify, thy justice.

16 O Lord! thou will open my lips, And my mouth shall set forth thy praises.

17 For if sacrifice would have satisfied thee, I should willingly have offered
it, But burnt offerings will not content thee.

18 A soul penetrated with sorrow is the sacrifice, that is acceptable to God,
A contrite, and an humble heart, my God! thou will not despise.

19 Show thy mercy, O Lord! and thy good will to Sion, That the walls of
Jerusalem may be built.

20 Then will thou accept a sacrifice of justice, oblations, and burnt
offerings, Then will Calves be laid upon thy Altar.

PSALM LI.
Quid gloriaris.
This Psalm was made by David in detestation of the cruel malice of Doeg, who
was the cause of the death of the high priest, and of the slaughterr committed
in the t^won of Nobe, when he informd Saul of the assistance given by Abimelech
to David, in presenting him with the sword of Golias, and ^he holy bread of the
Tabernacle.

WHy do thou glory in Mischief Thou that art power full in Wic kednes? Psalm.
^1


2 The whole day thy tongue contrives injustiee, And like a sharp razor thy
deceits have cut

3 Thou have loved wickedness more then goodness, And to speak with injustice,
rather then with equity.

4 It Is thy delight, deceitful tongue! By all thy words to precipitate and
destroy.

5 Therefore will God finally destroy thee; he will pluck thee out, and drive
thee from the place of thy habitation, And extirpate thee out of the land of
the living.

6* The just will look on, and be in dread: and they will laugh at him, and
say, behold the man who did not take God for his protector.

7 But did put his trust in the abundance of his wealth, and relied upon his
own vanity.

8 I on the contrary, like a fruitful olive tree in the house of God, have
placed my hope for ever, and ever in the mercy of God.

9 I will eternally praise thee, for what thou have done; and I will expect the
blessings to be bestowed in thy name, Because it is so good in the sight of thy
(...)

PSALM LII.
Dixit insipiens.
Some interpreters think this Psalm relates to the time when Sennacherib King
of the Assyriams wasted Judea, and sent Rabases to Ezechias to speak blaspemy
against God. Others refer it to the persecution that Saul rai^'d against David,
or to the rebellion of Absalom. Some also probably enough think it rather
regards the Captivity of Babylon, and that it was composed by Aggeus or Some
other Prophet of that time, Bat in this diversity of sentiments all of them
agree in this, that the spiritual delivrance from the Captivity of the Devil
which Jesus Christ was to procure for men is therein clearly figured.

1 THe fool has said in his heart, Psalm. 52.
There is no God.

2 They are corrupted and become abominable in their iniquitys, There is not
one that does what is good.

3 Our Lord From heaven has looked out upon the sons of men, That he might see
if any were to be found that had understanding and sought God.

4 All have gone out of the way, and are become unprofitable, There is not any*
that does good, no not one.

5 Will they not understand? all they who work iniqnity, and who devour my
people, as a morcell of bread?

6 They have not called upon our Lord, there they trembled with fear, where
there was no reason to fear.

7 For God has broken the bones of those, who study to please men, they are
confounded, because God has despised them.

8 Who out of Sion will give salvation to Israel? when God shall put an end to
the captivity of his people, Jacob will be overjoyed, and Israel will rejoice.

PSALM LIII.
Deus in nomine tuo.
David seeing himself surrounded by the troops of Saul, Psalm. 53.
who was advertised by the inhabitants of Ziph, that David had made his retreat
in their country, o^^ered* his prayer to God in so extreme danger, out of whick
the divin power could only rescue him.

1 IN thy name, O God! save me, and by thy power judge my cause.

2 O God! hear my prayer, Give ear to what I say.

3 For strangers have risen up against me; The powerful have sought my life;
and they have not had God before their eyes.

4 But behold, God comes to my relief, And our Lord is the protector of my
soul.

5 Turn upon my Enemies the evils they intend me, And according to thy verity
exterminate them.

6 With a willing heart I will offer sacrifice to thee, And I will celebrate
thy name, O Lord! because it is all good.

7 Because thou have delivered me from all my afflictions, And now my eye can
look with assurance upon my ennemys.

PSALM LIVE.
Exaudi Deus orationem meam.
It is believed that David composed this Psalm in the time of Absaloms
conspiracy against him. It also perfectly agrees in the spiritual sense with
the passion of our Savior. And the prayer which it contains, is very proper
for all Christians when they find themselves beseiged by the several
temptations of the Ennemies of their salvation.

1 HEar my prayer, Psalm. 54.
O God! and do not despise my petition; Have regard to me, and hear me.

2 My meditations fill me with sadness, And I have no rest from the clamor of
the enemy, and from the persecution of the finner.

3 For they have wrongfully laid iniquitys to my charge, And in their anger
have afflicted me.

4 My heart is disturbed within me; And the fear of death is fallen upon me.

5 Terror and trembling have seized me, An darkness has covered me round.

6 And I have said, who will give me the wings of a dove, that I may fly away,
and find a place to rest in?

7 Behold! I am already fled a far off, And I have remained in solitude.

8 Still expecting him; who has hitherto preserved me from loosing courage, And
from the storm.

9 Tumble them down, O Lord! and divide their tongues, For I have seen nothing,
but injustice and dissension in the City.

10 Iniquity surrounds it upon the walls, both day and night; Oppression and
injustice reign within it;

11 In the streets therofe there is never wanting usury, and fraud.

12 The malediction of my enemy, I could have born with patience.

13 And if he who professed hatred toward me, had spoken insultingly against
me, I might perhaps have Kept out of his sight;

14 But it is you, who have been all one with me, my leader, my old acquaintance,

15 Who have so often delightfully eaten at my table, And walked with me hand
in hand in the house of God!

16 May death on the sudden come upon all such, And may they alive go down into
hell.

17 For wickedness dwells in their houses, And in the middle of them.

18 But I have called out to God, And our Lord will save me.

19 Both evening, and morning, and at noon day, I will tell and set forth my
sufferings; And he will hear my voice.

20 He will redeem my soul in peace from those who come upon me, for they
amongst many have been with me, who are now against me.

21 God will hear me, and he will humble them, He who subsists before all ages.

22 For there is no hope of their changing; They have no fear of God, and he
has stretched out his hand, to give them their due.

23 They have contaminated his convenant; in his anger he has dissipated them;
And he has set his heart upon it.

24 Their speeches are softer then oil, But they pierce like darts.

25 Leave the care of thy self to our Lord, and he will maintain thee; He will
not suffer the justman to be allways in a tottering condition.

26 But, as to the wicked, thou will cast them, O God? Into the pit of
destruction.

27 The bloody and the deceitful men shall not live half their days; But I
will hope in thee; O Lord!

PSALM LV.
Miserere mei Deus quoniam.
David forced to fly, and abscond, and bes^t^ round with enemies, prays to God,
that he may he delivered out of their hands. Next he conceives certain hopes
that his enemies shall perish, and the be saved, and therefore vows thanksgiving
to God.

1 HAve mercy on me, Psalm. 55.
O God! for man has trod me under foot; All the day he setts upon me, and
persecutes me;

2 All the day my enemies trample upon me, For they are many, who make war
against me.

3 So that I fear the light of the noon day, But yet I will hope in thee.

4 I will praise God, for what he has said to me, I have put my trust in God; I
will not fear, what flesh can do to me.

5 The whole day they execrated all that I said; all their thoughts are bent to
do me hurt.

6 They keep about me, and lie in ambush; They watch all my steps.

7 Whereas they wait to take my life, Thou will have no regard for saving of
them; In thy indignation thou will break that people in pieces.

8 O God! I have laid open my life to thee, And my tears thou have admitted
into thy sight.

9 According to what thou have promised, my enemies will at that time be
overthrown, and driven back.

10 In what day soever I shall call upon thee, Behold, I Know, that thou art my
God.

11 I will praise God for the word he has given me, I will praise our Lord for
what he has said; I have hoped in God, And I will not fear, what men can do
against me.

12 The vows I have made to thee, my God! are still present in my mind, I will
render praises to thee;

13 For thou have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling, That
in the light of the living I may appear acceptable to God.

PSALM LVI.
Miserere mei Deus, miserere.
David implores the mercy of God, he gives thanks for being delivered out of
the hands of his Enemies, and he celebrates God's praises.

1 HAve mercy on me, Psalm. 56*
O God! have mercy on me, for my soul confides in thee.

2 And I will rest in hope under the shadow of thy wings, Till iniquity shall
be quite gone off.

3 I will cry out to God the most high, To God, who has been my benefactor.

4 He has sent me succor from heaven, and has delivered me, He has made
infamous all those who trod upon me.

5 He has sent forth his mercy and his truth, And has rescued my soul from the
midst of young Lions; I have slept unquietly.

6 The teeth of the sons of men are weapons, and arrows, Their Tongue is a
sharp-edged sword.

7 Be exalted, O God! above the heavens, and let thy glory shine over all the
earth.

8 They have laid a snare for my feet, And they bent down my soul.

9 They have dug a pit fall in my way, But they themselves have fallen into
it.

10 My heart is prepared, O God! my heart is prepared, I will sing and praise
thy name in a Psalm.

11 Rise up my glory, rise up the psalter, and the harp, And I will rise up
early my self.

12 I will praise thee, O Lord! in the middle of the people, And I will sing thy
glory amongst the nations.

13 Because thy mercy is raised up to the heavens, And thy truth up to the
clouds.

14 Be exalted, O God! above all the heavens, And over all the earth let thy
glory shine.

PSALM LVII.
Si vere utique justitiam.
David takes occasion from the fury of Saul against him, and the malice of his
Enemies, to reprehend in this Psalm all wicked men. And S. Austin observes that
we ought with respect to hear the truths herein declared, as a sermon made to
all mank^nd.

1 IF you say truly what is Just, Psalm. 57.
Judge also, according to justice, ye sons of men!

2 But you form iniquitys in your hearts, And your hands execute injustice upon
the earth.

3 Sinners are perverted, as soon as they come into the world, From their
mothers womb they have gone wrong, They have spoken false.

4. Their rage is like, that of a serpent, like that of a deaf aspe, stopping
his ears.

5 Which will not hear the voice of the charmers, nor of the magician, Let him
charm never so skillfully.

6 God will break their teeth in their mouths, the laws of these Lions our Lord
will tear in sunder.

7 They will come to nothing, like water that flows; His bow remains bent, till
they be quite defeated.

8 Like wax that melts, they will drop away; Fire fell upon them, and they saw
the sun no more.

9 Before your sprouting thorns grow up to a tree, as it were alive, he will
swallow them up in his anger.

10 The just man will rejoice when he sees vengeance executed; he will wash his
hands in the blood of the sinner.

11 Man will then say, if there be a reward for the just, there is certainly a
God, who judges mankind upon the earth.

PSALM LVIII.
Eripe de inimicis meis.
David implores the help of God against his Enemies, he describes the snares
that were laid for him, he magnifys the divine assistance, impre^ats his
Enemies.

1 REscue me, Psalm. 58.
my God! out of the hands of my Enemies, And defend me against those that rise
up against me.

2 Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 57.
And save me from the men of blood.

3 For behold! they have my life in their power, and with a mighty force they
set upon me.

4 Nor is it for any iniquity of mine, O Lord! or for my sin; My courses, and
my conduct have been without crime.

5 Rise up, and come toward me; and behold my condition; Thou O Lord! The God
of all power, the God of Israel!

6 Set thyself upon visiting all the Nations, And take no pity of any that
work iniquity.

7 Thy will return in the evening famished like hungry dogs, And they will run
about the city.

8 They will open their mouths; And there is a sword in their lips; They will
say who has heard us?

9 But thou, O Lord! wilt laugh at them, Thou will bring to nothing all the
Nations.

10 For thee I will preserve the strength thou have given me, Because thou, O
God! art my defender; the mercy of my God will go before me. Psalm. 58.


11 God will let me see how he will, dispose of my enemies; Let them not dye,
least my people should grow forgetful.

12 But disperse them by thy power, And pull them down, O Lord! who art my
protector.

13 For the sins of their tongue, and speeches of their lips, And let them be
apprehended and caught in their pride.

14 And their Lies, and execrations will be charged upon them in the
consummation, In the wrath of consummation, And they will wither to nothing.

15 And they shall Know, that God will rule over Israel, And from one end of
the earth to the other.

16 They will return in the evening, and be famished like hungry dogs, And they
will run about the city.

17 They will be dispersed to seek their meat, And if they are not filled, they
will murmur.

18 But I will sing the praises of thy power, And early in the morning, I will
magnify thy mercy.

19 Because thou art become a protector to me, And my refuge in the day of
tribulation.

20 I will praise thee, my defender! with voice and instruments, For thou art
my merciful God.

PSALM LIX.
Deus repulisti.
This Psalm made by David before his expedition against the Moabites, and the
Idumeans, sets forth in the first place the danger, and fear of the Israelites
upon having so many enemies round about them ready to fall upon them. Next he
implores the divine assistance in confidence of which he foretells his victory
over all his Enemies.

1 O God! thou have rejected us, Psalm. 59.
thou have undone us, thou have been angry with us, And at last thou have taken
pity of us.

2 Thou have shaked the land, and put it into confusion; Heal the breaches of
it, for it is all out of order.

3 Thou have made thy people feel hardships, Thou have given them the wine of
sorrow to drink.

4 To those who fear thee, thou have given a sign, that they should fly before
the bow.

5 That thy beloved ones may be preserved; Protect me with thy right hand, and
hear me.

6 God has said by his holy Prophet, that I shall receive and share out the
land of Sichem, And shall measure the valley of the tents.

7 Galaad is mine, and Manasses is mine, And Ephraim is the chief of my
strength.

8 Judah is the seat of my Empire, Moab the vessel of my hope.

9 I will march on into Idumea, And foreigners shall become my subjects.

10 Who will lead me to their fortified City, who will conduct me into the
middle of Idumea.

11 Is it not thou my God! who a while since rejected us; And will thou not go
forth with us at the head of our armies?

12 Relieve us, O Lord! in our distresses; For vain is the safety, which comes
from man.

13 With the help of our God we will perform great actions, And it is he, who
will bring to nothing all that afflict us.

PSALM LX.
Exaudi Deus deprecationem.
This Psalm seems to have been composed by king David, in the time of Absalom's
conspiracy. And whereas he was then a fugitive, and gone from Jerusalem, the
holy fathers have proposed the prayer which he makes as an excellent model of
that which the Church of Jesus Christ should offer to God in the banishment of
this world, and in the middle, of all the temptations of his life.

1 HEar O God! Psalm. 36.
my supplication, Give ear to my prayer.

2 From one end of the land to the other, I have cried out to thee; when my
heart was full of anxiety, thou did raise me up, upon a firm rock

3 Thou have led me forwards, and art become my Hope, My tower of strength
against all my enemies.

4 I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever, I will be shelterd under the cover
of thy wings.

5 Because thou, my God! have heard my prayer, Thou have b^stowed an
inheritance upon those who fear thy name.

6 Thou will add days upon days to the life of the king, Thou will make his
years reach from generation to generation. Psalm. 90.


7 He will remain for ever in the presence of God; who can search to the
bottom his mercy, and his truth?

8 Therefore will I praise thy name in Psalms from age to age, That I may never
fail from day to day to perform my vows.

PSALM LXI.
Nonne Deo subjecta erit.
It is believed that David made this Psalm about the same time with the former,
he exhorts himself and all his to put their confidence in God, and to expect no
relief but from him. Above all he warns men, not to rely upon riches, nor
unjust actions.

1 SHall not my soul be subject to God, Psalm. 61.
since from him comes my salvation?

2 For he is my God, and my Savior; He is my protector, and I shall never more
be disturbed.

3 How long will you all set upon a single man, and combine to kill him, And
run him down as if he were a bending wall, and a building ready to fall.

4 They have conspired to deprive me of my dignity; I have run with great
thirst; Their mouth did bless me, and their heart did curse me.

5 However, my soul! be thou subject to God, For my patience comes from him.

6 Because he is my God, and my Savior; He is my supporter, and I will not
move out of my place.

7 In God is my safety, and my glory; My succor is from God, and in God is my
hope.

8 Let the whole congregation of the people hope in him, Pour forth your
hearts before him, God is our defender for ever.

9 But vain are the sons of men; The sons of men are liars in their balances;
They conspire together by vanity to deceive.

10 Build not your hope upon injustice; cover not wealth got by rapine; And if
riches do abound, set not your hearts upon them.

11 Once God has spok^ and I heard these two things; That power belongs to God;
and that to thee, o Lord! mercy belongs, For thou will render to every body
according to their works.

PSALM LXII.
Deus Deus meus, ad te de luce vigilo.
The most part of the interpreters apply this Psalm to the time of Saul, and
believe that David made it when he fled into the desert of Siph to avoid Readiness
fury. Tho some are of opinion it may have been made in the time of Absalom's
revolte, when he was likewise forced to retire into a desert. He deplores his
exile and his absence from the Tabernacle and the Ark: at the same time
considers in a higher sense his absence from his true country' which (...)
heaven? And* therefore the prayer which he makes is very proper for all the just
who look upon this life but as a banishment.

1 O God, Psalm. 62.
my God! from the break of day I watch for thee.

2 Both my soul, and my body, exceedingly thirst after thee.

3 In this desert land, unpassable, and without water, I present myself before
thee, as if I were in thy sanctuary, to contemplate thy power and thy glory.

4 Because thy mercy is more to be esteemd then life, My lips shall pronounce
thy praises.

5 I will praise thee in this manner during my whole life, And with hands
lifted up. I will call upon thy name.

6 Let my soul be replenished, as it were with marrow and fattnes, And with
joyful lips I will offer thy praises.

7 If on my bed I have been mindful of thee, I will likewise in the morning
meditate on thee, Because thou have assisted me.

8 And I will rejoice under the shelter of thy wings; My soul sticks fast to
thee; Thy right hand has held me up.

9 In vain have they sought my life, They shall themselves go into the lowest
part of the earth; They shall be deliverd up to the sword, and shall be meat
for foxes.

10 But the king shall rejoice in God; All shall be praised, who swear by his
holy name; For their mouths are stopped, who spoke iniquity.

PSALM LXIV.
Exaudi Deus deprecationem.
This Psalm may have been composed by David either in the time of Readiness
persecution, or in that of Absalom's rebellion. The holy Fathers in the
spiritual sense apply it to Jesus. Christ, and to the faithful that are
members of his Church.

1 HEar my prayer, Psalm. 63.
O God! when I offer it to thee, Free my soul from the fear of my enemy.

2 Thou have protected me against the convention of wicked men, Against the
multitude of the doers of injustice.

3 For they have made their tongues as sharp as a sword, They have bent their
bow with bitterness, That they may secretly strike an innocent man.

4 They will wound him all on the sudden, and fear nothing; They are fixed in
their wicked resolutions.

5 They have consulted how to cover their snares, And they have said, who can
find them out?

6 They searched about for crimes to charge me with, They unprofitably tired
themselves in the scrutiny.

7 Man will form deep designs in his heart, But God will be glorified.

8 Their arrows strike no deeper then those of children, And their tongues have
not any force, but against them selves.

9 All were amazed, that saw them, And every man was in fear.

10 And they published what God had done, And they understood his works.

11 The just will rejoice in our Lord, and will hope in him; And all the
upright of heart will have praise.

PSALM LXIV.
Te decet hymnus Deus.
This Psalm according to the letter of it seems to be made about the time of
the Israelites going out of Babylon and returning to Jerusalem. It is to be
applied in the spiritual sense to the church delivered from the Captivity of
the Dev^^ by the death of our Savior Jesus Christ.

1 A Hymn in Sion becomes thee, Psalm. 64.
O God, And our vows to thee shall be performed in Jerusalem.

2 Graciously hear my prayer, All flesh will come to thee.

3 The words of the wicked have prevailed against us, But thou will mercifully
pardon our sins.

4 Happy is he whom thou have chosen and taken to thy self, He shall dwell in
thy house.

5 We shall be filled with the good things of thy house, Thy temple is holy,
and admirable for justice.

6 Hear us, O God! thou, who art our Savior, who art the hope of the whole
earth to the farthest end of the sea.

7 Who with mighty power have established and made firm the mountains, who have
stirred up the sea to the very bottom, and made the waves to roar.

8 The nations will be seized with terror, and they who live furthest off, will
dread the wonderful effects of thy power; The evening and the morning are made
delightful by thee.

9 Thou have visited the earth; Thou have made it drink of thy rain, and
increased the riches thereof.

10 The river of God is filld with waters; whereby thou have provided food for
all creatures, and prepared the earth to bring it forth.

11 Plentifully water the furrows; Multiply the productions; What springs up
will flourish with thy waterings.

12 The whole year round will be blessed by thy bounty, And thy fields will
abound in plenty.

13 The plains of the desert will become fertile, And the hills will rejoice
being covered with fruit.

14 The rams will be well clothed with their fleeces, And the vailes will
abound with corn; All with a loud voice will sing hymns of joy.

PLALME LXV.
Jubilate Deo omnis terra.
The subject of this Psalm is the same with the former with this difference
that it seems to have been made after the return from captivity, whereas the
former suites to the time of their coming away.

1 ALl ye people of the earth, Psalm. 65.
Praise God with outcrys of joy, sing a psalm to his name, and magnify his
glory.

2 Say to God, how terrible are thy works, O Lord! The greatness of thy power
will make even thy enemies feign obedience to thee.

3 Let all the earth adore thee, and publish thy praises, Let them sing hymns
to the glory of thy name.

4 Come and behold the works of God, how terrible he is in his conduct over the
sons of men.

5 Who turns the sea into dry land, makes us walk dry foot over rivers; Heerin
we will rejoice in him.

6 Who rules for ever in virtue of his own power; he has his eyes upon the
Nations; They who provoke him, let them not be exalted within themselves.

7 But all ye nations, bless our God; Make your voice heard in publishing his
praises.

8 Who has given life to my soul, has not sufferd my feet to be moved.

9 For thou, O God! have tried us, Thou have examined us by fire, as silver is
tried.

10 Thou have brought us into the nett, thou have laid tribulations on our
back, Thou have placed men over our heads.

11 We have passed through fire and water, And at last thou have brought us into
a place of refreshment.

12 I will enter into thy house, where I will offer holocausts; I will acquitt
myself of the vows, which my lips have pronounced.

13 And which in the time of my affliction, My mouth has declared.

14 I will offer fat holocausts to thee, with the incense of burnt rams; Oxen,
and goats I will offer to thee.

15 Come, and hear all you, that fear God, And I will tell what great things he
has done to my soul.

16 To him I have cried aloud with my mouth, And I have magnified him with my
tongue.

17 If I am conscious of iniquity in my heart, God will not hear me.

18 Wherefore God has heard me, And has been attentive to the voice of my prayer.

19 Blessed be God, who has not rejected my petition, Nor turned away his cy
from me.

PSALM. LXVI.
Deus misereatur nostri.
This Psalm seems also to have been made when the Israelites were going, but
not gone out of Babylon. All the interpreters agree that it represents in the
spiritual sense the ardent desire which the Prophet had to the coming of the
Messiah, and the redemption of mankind, According to what Iosus-Christ said to
his disciples, that many Prophets and many Kings had desired to see what they
saw, but had not seen it.

1 MAy God be merciful to us and bless us, Psalm. ^6.
May the light of his countenance shine upon us, and may he be merciful to us.

2 That we may Know thy way upon the earth, And that thy saving mercy may be
made Known to all nations.

3 Let the people praise thee, O God! Let all people praise thee.

4 Let the nations be glad, Let them be filled with joy, For thou judge the
people with equity, and do rule the nations upon the earth.

5 Let the people praise thee, O God! Let all people praise thee; The earth has
yielded its fruit.

6 May God, our God, give us his blessing; May God give us his blessing, and
may the whole earth fear him from one end to the other.

PSALM LXVII.
Exurgat Deus*
Some notwithstanding the title inscribed with David's name, apply this Psalm
to the defeat of Sennacherihs army King of the Assyrians. Others think it made
by David at the time when the Ark was brought into the City of Jerusalem. But
most interpreters agree that the incarnation of the son of God, his Ascension,
and the conversion of the Gentiles, with the destruction of the Devils empire,
were the things which the Holy Ghost principally intended in it.

1 LEt God rise up, Psalm. 67.
and his Enemies be dissipated, Let all that hate him fly before his face.

2 As smoke does vanish, so let them vanish; And as wax melts before the fire,
so let sinners perish in the sight of God.

3 But let the just feast and rejoice in the presence of God, Let them be
^ill'd with joy, and delight.

4 Sing canticles to God, recite hymns to the glory of his name, Prepare the
way for him who, ascends on the west, Lord is his name.

5 Rejoice you in his presence; they will be confounded, when he appears, who
is the father of orphans, and the Patron of widows.

6 God is present in his sanctuary, God who makes those live in one house, who
are of one mind.

7 Who by his power brings forth, those who were bound, and likewise those who
provoked him, and dwell in sepulchers.

8 O God! when thou did go forth before thy people, when thou did pass
through the desert.

9 The earth did tremble, and the heavens did let fall their drops, In the
presence of the God of Sinai, in the presence of the God of Israel.

10 Out of thy good will, O God! thou will provide rain for thy inheritance;
It was decayed, but thou have restored, and made it perfect.

11 Thy living creatures will dwell in it; Thou O God! mercyfully have provided
food for the poor.

12 Our Lord will give his word with mighty power to those whom he sends his
heralds to declare his will.

13 The all-powerfull king of his most deerly beloved will also give him power
to divide the spoils, of the Enemy for the ornament of his house.

14 If you sleep in the middle between the inheritances, you shall be like the
dove, whose wings are of silver, and whose back is of the color of gold.

15 When he that is in heaven shall judge the kings upon the earth, they will
turn white like snow in Selmon. The mountain of God, is a fertile mountain.

16 A mountain that flows with milk, a rich mountain; Why have you a suspicion
of mountains that flow with milk?

17 A mountain in which God is well pleased to dwell, And our Lord for ever will
inhabit there.

18 The chariot of God is attended by ten thousands, Millions rejoice about it;
Our Lord is amongst them in Sinai, in his holy place.

19 Thou have ascended on high; Thou have led along a great number of captives;
Thou have received gifts to be distributed to men.

20 That even amongst those who were unbelievers, Our Lord God may come to
dwell.

21 Blessed be our Lord from day to day, he who is the God of all our safety,
will make our journey prosperous.

22 Our God, is the God who has the power to save; The Lord, our Lord, has the
dominion of death.

23 But God will crush the heads of his Enemies, The proud heads who go on in
their iniquitys.

24 Our Lord has said, I will bring you out of Basan, I will fetch you out of
the bottom of the sea.

25 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine Enemy, And thy dogs may
lick it with their tongues.

26 They have seen, O God! thy marches, The marches of my God, and my king, who
resides in his holy place.

27 The Princes went before, and the singers of canticles in the middle of the
virgins, that played upon timbrels.

28 Bless God the Lord in your assemblies, you that spring from the fountains
of Israel.

29 There was the youth of Benjamin, in an ecstasy of mind.

30 The Princes of Judah, that were their Leaders, The Princes of Zabulon and
the Princes of Nephtali.

31 Exert thy power, O God, Confirm what thou have wrought in us.

32 From thy temple in Jerusalem, Kings shall offer presents to thee.

33 Tame the wild beasts sheltered amongst the reeds, A people resembling a
herd of bulls and heffers, That conspire to drive out those, who have been
tried like silver.

34 Scatter the nations that love war. The Ambassadors will come out of Egypt;
Ethiopia will go before, and lift up their hands to God.

35 Ye king domes of the earth! sing praises to God, sing to our Lord, sing to
God, who is ascended above the highest heaven toward the East.

36 Behold! he has made his voice, to be a voice of power; Give glory to God
for what he has done in Israel; his magnificence and mightines have been
manifested in the Clouds.

37 God is wonderful in his Saints, The God of Israel will give strength and
virtue to his people, Blessed be God.

PSALM LXVIII.
Salvum me fac Deus.
Many of the fathers and of the best interpreters have thought this Psalm made
by David in a pr^pheti^k vi^w of the passion of Jesus Christ, of the
establishment of the Church, and the ruin of the Jews: In which sense the
Apostles themselves have explicated many places of it.

1 SAve me, Psalm. 68.
O God! For the waters have entered even into my soul.

2 Jam stuck fast in deep mud, where I feel no bottom.

3 I have fallen into the depth of the sea, And the tempest has owerwhelm'd me.

4 Jam tired with crying out, my throat is grown hoarse, my eyes have failed
me, Whilst I wait for succor from my God.

5 They who hate me without cause, are become more in number then the hairs of
my head.

6 My Enemies, who persecute me unjustly, are strengthened; What I never took, I
was forced to pay.

7. O God! thou know my folly, and my sins are not hid from thee. Psalm. 86.


8 O Lord, the Lord of hosts! let not those who wait for thee, be ashamed upon
my account.

9 Let me be no cause of confusion to those who seek thee, O God of Israel!

10 For I have sustained reproach for thee, Confusion has covered my face.

11 I have been made a stranger to my brethren, And an alien to the sons of my
mother.

12 For the zeal of thy house has devoured me, And the outrages of those who
insulted thee, are fallen upon me.

13 I humbled my soul with fasting, And this was made a reproach to me.

14 I changed my garments, and put on sackcloth, and I became their fable, and
their jest.

15 In all their meetings at the City gates, their whole discourse was against
me, And the drinkers of wine made me the subject of their songs.

16 But I, O Lord! will offer my prayer to thee; This is the time of showing
thy goodness.

17 Hear me according to thy great m^rcy, And according to the truth of thy
promises to save me.

18 Draw me out of this mire, that I may not allways stick in it; Deliver me
from those who hate me, and from the bottom of the waters.

19 Let not the tempest drown me, no^ the deep abyss swallow me up; Nor let the
mouth of the well, into which I am thrown be shutt upon me.

20 Hear me, O Lord! for thou art merciful, and benign; According to thy
boundles compassion look toward me.

21 Turn not thy face from thy servant, Quickly hear me, for I am greivously
afflicted.

22 Have a care of my soul and deliver it, Rescue me in regard of my Enemies.

23 Thou know the reproaches, the shame, and the confusion, which I suffer.

24 All those, who afflict me, are in thy sight; My heart has been still
prepared for reproach, and misery.

25 And I have long waited for some body to take part in my grief, and there was
not any that did it, I looked for a comforter, but he was not to be found.

26 And they have given me gall for my meat, And when I thirsted they gave me
vinegar to drink.

27 Let their table become a snare to them, a revenge upon them, and an
occasion of their fall.

28 Let their eyes be darkened that they may not see, make their backs stand
allways bent.

29 Power forth thy wrath upon them, And let them feel the rigor of thy
indignation.

30 Let their place, or dwelling become a de^ert, And let their tents be
without inhabitants.

31 Because they have fallen upon him, who was wounded by thee, And have added
to the pains of my wounds.

32 Lay to them iniquity, upon iniquity, And let them have no share in thy
justification.

33 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and let them not be
enrolled amongst the just.

34 I am poor, and full of sorrow; Thy mercy, O God! has protected me.

35 I will praise the name of God in canticles, And with praises I will magnify
his glory.

36 And they will be more acceptable to him then, the offering of a young calf,
with hoofs and horns newly sprouted.

37 Let the poor behold, and rejoice; seek God, and your soul shall live.

38 For our Lord has heard the poor, And he has not despised his captives.

39 Let the heavens, and the earth praise him, The sea, and all that it
contains.

40 For God will save Sion, And the towns of Judah shall be built.

41 And his servants shall dwell there, And have it for their inheritance.

42 And the race of his servants shall possess it, And all who, love his name
shall dwell in it.

PSALM LXIX.
Deus in adjutorium.
The subject of this Psalm, and almost the very words are (...) same with that
of the 39, to the title of wh^^h the Reader is re^err'd.

1 COme to my assistance, Psalm. ^9.
O God! Make have, O Lord! to succor me.

2 Let them be confounded, and struck with fear and shame, who seek my life.

3 Let them be driven back, And let them blush, who intend evil toward me.

4 Let all those who insolently insult me with their words, be forthwith driven
back with shame.

5 But let all who seek thee, be filled and transported with joy in thee; And
they who love the salvation that comes from thee, Let them allways say,
glorified be our Lord.

6 But I am needy and poor, O God, help me.

7 Thou art my only helper and deliverer; Tarry not, O Lord!

PSALM LXX.
In te Domine speravi.
It is the general opinion, that David made this Psalm in the time of
Absaloms rebellion, tho the sons of Ionadab made use of it afterward in the
first captivity of Babylon. S. Austin directs us to consider principally in it
the necessity of Gods grace, which is only capable to deliver us from the
slavery of the Devil, in the Same manner that David acknowledges that his
delivery could proceed only from God.

1 IN thee, Psalm. 70.
O Lord! I have hoped, nor will I ever be confounded; According to thy justice
deliver me, and save me.

2 Graciously hearken to me, and make me safe.

3 Become a protecting God, a place of strength, that by thee, I may be saved.

4 Because thou art my strength, And my refuge.

5 Rescue me, my God! out of the hands of the sinner, and out of the hands of
those who break thy law, and act unjustly.

6 For thou art, O Lord! the sustainer of my patience, From my youth, O Lord!
my trust hash been in thee.

7 Since I first came into the world, thou have still been my support; From my
mothers womb, thou have been my protector.

8 I have allways sung thy praises; I have been looked upon by many, as a
wonder; But thou art my powerful deffender.

9 Let my mouth be ever filled with thy praises, That I may the whole day
publish thy greatness.

10 Cast me not off in the time of my old age, When my strength leaves me* do
not thou forsake me.

11 For my enemies have spoke against me, And they who lay in wait for my life,
have conspired to-gether.

12 Saying: God has forsaken him, pursue him, and take him, For there is no
body to deliver him.

13 O God! depart not from me; Look upon me, and help me.

14 Let those who calumniat me, be confounded, and destroyed; Let them be
covered with confusion and shame, who design evil against me.

15 But I will allways be in hope; And I will every day praise thee more* and
more.

16 My mouth shall declare thy justice, And the whole day magnify thy saving
mercy.

17 Because I am ignorant of worldly learning, I will betake myself wholly to
consider the power of our Lord; O Lord! I will only carry in my mind thy
justice.

18 Thou have taught me, O God! from my youth, even to this very day: I will
declare thy wonderful things.

19 And do not abandon me, O God! in my old age, and in the extremity of my
life.

20 Whilst I make known the strength of thy arm, to all ages that are to come.

21 And thy power, O God! and thy justice, which are raised above the heavens,
by the mighty things thou have performed. O God! Who is like to thee?

22 How many, and how great afflictions and dangers have thou made me under go?
and yet turning toward me, thou have restored me to life, and from the lowest
parts of the earth thou have brought me up again.

23 Thou have still more, and more made appear thy magnificence, and turning
toward me, thou have filled me with comfort.

24 Wherefore I also will still praise thy name, and thy truth with the sound of
musical instruments; O God! I will sing to thee upon the harp, who art the
holy one of Israel.

25 My lips will be transported with joy, when I sing to thee, as also my
soul, which thou have redeemed.

29 And my tongue the whole day shall be employed to declare thy justice, when
my enemies shall be covered with shame, and confusion.

PSALM LXXI.
Deus judicium tuum.
David made this Psalm at the very end of his life, after he had established
Solomon his son upon the ^hrone of Israel. It seems designed by him to give his
son his last instructions, as also to ask of God wisdom and justice to direct
him. But (...) he proph^tically ma^es a ^ransition from the reign of Solomon
to that of Iesus-Ch^ist, of which the other was but the type, and figure.

1 GIve, Psalm. 7
O God, thy judgment to the king, and thy justice to the king's son.

2 To judge thy people with justice, And thy poor with Equity.

3 Let the mountains bring Peace to the People, and the l^sser hills justice.

4 He shall judge the cause of the poor of the people, he shall protect the
children of the poor, And shall humble the calumniator.

5 And he shall last equaly with the sun, and above the moon, from generation
to generation.

6 He shall descend like rain upon a fleece of wool, And like gentle showers
dropping upon the earth.

7 Justice shall spring up in his days, with the plenty of peace, which shall
continue as long, as the moon.

8 And his dominions shall reach from sea to sea, And from the river to the
extremi^y of the earth.

9 The Ethiopians shall fall down before him, and his Enemies shall lick the
earth.

10 The kings of Tharsis, and the Islands shall offer him presents, The kings
of Arabia, Psalm. 71.
and Saba shall bring their gifts.

11 And all the kings of the earth shall adore him, All the nations shall serve
him.

12 For he will deliver the poor from the hands of the mighty, The poor who
have none to assist them.

13 He will be indulgent, to the indigent, and to the needy, And he will save
the souls of the poor.

14 He will redeem them from usury, and injustice, And their names will be
honorable with him.

15 And he shall live. The Gold of Arabia shall be given to him; There will
allways be adorations for him, And the whole day ^hey will bless him.

16 And there shall be corn in the ground upon the tops of the mountains, and
the fruit thereof shall be extolled above Libanus, And they in the Cities
shall flourish, like the grass of the field.

17 Let his name be blessed for ever, be fore the sun his name does subsist.

18 And all the Tribes of the earth shall be blessed in him, All the nations
shall give glory to him.

19 Blessed be our Lord, the God of Israel; Who alone does wonderful things.

20 And blessed be his mighty name for ever, And the whole earth shall be
filled with his Mightines; so be it, so be it.

PSALM LXXII.
Quam bonus Israel Deus.
The intent of this Psalm is to fortify the just that are in persecution,
against the temptation of mistrusting the goodness and providence of God, when
they see the wi^ked in prosperity.

1 HOw good is God to Israel, Psalm. 72.
And to those who are upright of heart?

2 But my feet can hardly stand their ground, at every step I am ready to fall.

3 By reason of my zeal against the wicked, When I behold the peace of sinners.

4 For they have no prospect of death, Nor dos any punishment last upon them.

5 They are exempt from the labor of other men, And are not scourged like the
rest of mankind.

6 Therefore they are possessed with pride, They are covered all over with
injustice, and impiety.

7 Their iniquity, as it were, grows out of their fatnes, and plenty, They are
abandoned to the passions of their heart.

8 Their thoughts, and their words are full of malice, And in high places they
speak iniquity.

9 They have set their mouth against heaven, And their tongues go about the
earth, sparing none.

10 Therefore my People will turn their thoughts, to consider these things, and
find the days, of sinners to be many and happy.

11 And they will say, how can God know this? or does the most high know all
things?

12 See these sinners, how they abound with the goods of this world, what
riches they possess.

13 And I myself have said, Therefore to no purpos I have made it my business to
keep my heart clean, and to wash my hands with the innocent.

14 For the whole day I have been afflicted, and from the beginning of the
morning I have been chastised.

15 But if I shall judge so, I have condemned the whole race of thy children.

16 I thought to penetrate into the secret; but I labored in vain,

17 Till I entered into the sanctuary of God, and learned there, what their
last end will be.

18 This prosperity proved a snare to them, and when they were raised up, thou
have cast them down.

19 Into what desolation are they fallen? they sunk down all on the sudden,
They have perished by their own iniquity.

20 Thou will make their image vanish out of the Ci^ty, O Lord! like the dream
of a man waking out of his sleep.

21 But in regard that my heart is inflamed; and my reins in disorder, And that
I am brought to nothing, and am in utter ignorance.

22 And that being become as it were a dumb creature in thy presence, I have
never^heless not departed from thee.

23 Thou have taken me by the right hand, and thou have led me according to thy
will, And thou have received me into thy arms with glory.

24 For what have I to wish for in heaven, Or what is there upon the earth for
me to desire, but only thee?

25 My flesh, and my heart have failed me, but God is the God of my heart, God
is my portion for ever.

26 For they who depart from thee shall perish, And thou have doomed to
destruction all that are unfaithful to thee.

27 But it is good for me to be united to God, To place my hope in our Lord God.

28 That I may proclaim thy praises, at the gates of the daughter of Sion.

PSALM LXXIII.
Ut quid Deus repulisti.
This Psalm deplores the calamity of the Iewos; and the destruction of the
temple.

1 O God! why have thou wholly cast us off? Psalm. 73.
why art thou so incensed against the sheep of thy pasture?

2. Remember thy congregation, which thou have possessed from the beginning.

3 The scepter of thy inheritance which thou have redeemed; Mount Sion in which
thou have been pleased to dwell.

4 Lift up thy hand to beat down their pride for ever. What outrages has not
the enemy committed in the sanctuary?

5 And they who hated thee, have insolently boasted, in the middle of thy
solemnitys.

6 They placed (without regard) their standards, as trophys upon the high
places art the gates.

7 Like so many fellers of wood, they all joined with their axes to cut down
the gates; with the axe, and the hammer, they demolished thy City.

8 They have set fire to thy sanctuary, They have defiled thy tabernacle upon
earth, where thy holy name was praised.

9 The whole herd of them said in their hearts, let us abolish all the
festival days of God upon the Land.

10 We see no more of our former signs, Now there is no prophet, And we shall
be a people forgotten.

11 How long, O God! shall the Enemy reproach? Shall the Adversary provoke thy
name for ever?

12 Why do thou withdraw thy hand, even thy Right hand? Pluck it at last out
of thy bosom.

13 God is our king from the beginning; He has wrought salvation in the middle
of the earth.

14 Thou by thy power did make firm the sea. Thou did crushe the heads of
the Dragons in the waters.

15 Thou did crush the heads of the great Dragon, Thou have made him meat for
the people of Ethiopia.

16 Thou have made fountains and torrents break out of rocks; Rapid rivers thou
have dried up.

17 Thine is the day, and thine is the night, The morning, and the sun are of
thy making.

18 Thou have framed the earth from end to end; The summer and the spring thou
have created.

19 Remember this, that the enemy has reproched thee, O Lord! And that a people
without sense have blasphemed thy name.

20 Deliver not up to wild beasts the souls of those who worship thee, And
forget not for ever the souls of thy poor ones.

21 Have regard to thy covenant; for the most abject of the earth have unjustly
possessed, and filled our houses.

22 Let not the humble be turned away with confusion; The poor and the needy
will praise thy name.

23 Rise up, O God! judge thy cause, Remember the outrages done to thee, And
which are continued the whole day by a senseless people.

24. Forget not the speeches of thy Enemies, the pride of those, who hate thee,
grows higher, and higher every day.

PSALM LXXIV.
Confitebimur tibi Deus.
This Psalm is a kind of dialogue in which some times the just, some times the
Prophet, and some times God himself speaks. In it the pride of men is humbled
by the wholesome fear of the last judgment.

1 We will praise thee, Psalm. 74.
O God! We will give thee thanks, And we will call upon thy holy name.

2 We will relate thy wonders; when my time shall come, I will judge uprightly.

3 The earth is dissolved and all that is in it, It is I that have established
the pillars of it.

4 I have said to the wicked, give over your wickedness, And to the sinners, be
not elevated with pride.

5 Extol not yourselves with insolence, Nor speak impiously against God.

6 For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the mountains of the
desert, Will any support you; For God himself is the sole jndge.

7 This man he humbles, and the other he exalts, For our Lord holds in his hand
a cup filled with a mixture of different wines.

8 He powers out one into the other, but the dregs still remain, All the
sinners of the earth shall drink thereof.

9 But I will declare, and will sing for ^ver the praises of the God of Jacob.

10 And I will destroy all the force of ^he wicked, And the just shall be
exalted in glory and power.

PSALM LXXV.
Notus in Judea Deus.
Theodoret, and many others think this Psalm was made upon the miraculous
defeat of the Assyrians, which happened in the Reign of Ezechias, when a
hundred and fourscore thousand men of the army of Zenach^rib were killed in one
nigh^ by the angel of our Lord: But it appears that the subject of this Psalm
i^ of a more large extent, And that it regards not only the town of old
Jerusalem delivered at that time from such formidable Enemies, but also the n^w
Jerusalem, the Church, every day delivered from visible, and invisible enemies
by the hand of the angel of the great Council, who is Jesus Christ.

1 GOd is known in Judea, Psalm. 48.
Great is his name in Israel.

2 His dwelling is in a place of peace, And his habitation is in Sion.

3 There he has broke in pieces the bows, and the arrows, the buckler, the
sword and war it self.

4 By thy wonderful coruscation from the eternal mountains, All ^he senseles
of heart have been confounded.

5 They have slept out their sle^p, And waking, these men of riches found
nothing in their hands.

6 By thy loud threatenings, O God of Jacob, Psalm. 75.
all those that were mounted on horses have slept their last sleep.

7 Thou art terrible, And who can resist thee in the time of thy anger.

8 From heaven thou have made thy judgment to be heard; The earth trembled,
and was silent.

9 When God rose up in jugment to save the meek, and the humble upon the earth.

10 Therefore the thought of man shall be taken up with thy praises, And the
memory which remains of them, will be a continued festival to thee.

11 Make vows, and fulfill them to the Lord your God, All you that approach
his altar to make your offerings.

12 To the dreadful God, To him that takes a way the lives of Princes, who is
^errible to the kings of the earth.

PSALM LXXVI.
Voce mea ad Dominum.
There is nothing certain concerning the time in which this Psalm was made.
The opinion of those authors seems probable, who think the Prophet had in view
the delivrance from the Captivity of Babylon. But with S. Austin it may well be
applied to the just, and the perfect who looking toward heaven, suffer with
pain the banishement of this present life.

1 WIth a loud voice I have called upon our Lord, Psalm. 76.
I have called upon God, and he has hearkened to me.

2 In the day of my tribulation I have sought God, By night I have lifted up my
hands to him, and I have not been disappointed.

3 My soul has refused all other comfort; I have called God to mind, and I
found joy; With continual meditation my soul has languished.

4 My eyes prevented the night watch, I was disturbed within myself, and I was
silent.

5 I called to mind the ancient days, And the years eternal have possessed my
thoughts.

6 By night I have been in deep meditation, My thoughts have been in labor,
and I have swept my soul.

7 Will God eternally cast us off? And will he never think of being more
favorable to us?

8 Will he for ever, from generation to generation cut off his mercy from us?

9 Can God forget his mercy, Or will his anger allways keep back his
commiseration?

10 And I said, Now I begin to understand, This change is wrought by the right
hand of the most high.

11 I called to memory the works of our Lord; And I will still have in my
thoughts the wonders thou have done from the beginning.

12 And I will meditate on all thy works, and I will consider with attention
the secrets of thy conduct.

13 Thy way, O God! is allways holy; What God is there so great, as our God?
^hou art the God that does wonderful things.

14 Thou have made Known thy power amongst the nations; By the strength of thy
arm thou have delivered thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph.

15 The waters have seen thee, O God! the waters have seen thee, and they were
afraid, and the depths were troubled.

16 Great was the noise of the waters, and the clouds made their voice heard.

17 For thy darts were thrown, And the wheels of the Egiptians felt thy thunder.

18 Thy lightning did flash over the whole earth, the earth was in commotion
and trembled.

19 Thou did make a way for thy self throw the sea, Thou did pass throw the
middle of the waters, and none can trace thy footsteps.

20 Thou did lead thy people like a flock of sheep, in the hands of Moses and
Aaron.

PSALM LXXVII.
Attendite, Popule meus.
S. Jerome and some other interpreters observe, according to the citations of
S. Matthew, and S. Paul, that under the historical sense which appears in this
Psalm, there lies a spiritual sense, which is the reason that the Prophet
says in the beginning, he will speak mysterys in paraboles.

This Psalm therefore in the spiritual sense has a reference to Jesus Christ
born according to the flesh of the tribe of Judah, o^ which it is said that God
has chosen Judah, and not Ephraim; This proph^tically denotes that he who was
to be born of the race of David and consequently of the tribe of Judah, would
establish a new kingdom, which should put an end to the kingdom of Israel
figured by Ephraim.

1 MY people, Psalm. 77.
give attention to my law, hearken to the word I shall speak.

2 I will open my mouth in parables, I will speak misterys of things done from
the beginning.

3 What we have heard and known, And what our fore fathers have related to us.

4 And what has not been hidden to their children, nor to the following
generations.

5 They have published the praises of our Lord, his great power, and the
wonders he has done.

6 He has made Known his will in Jacob, and he established his law in Israel.

7 Which he has commanded our fathers to make known to their children, That the
succeeding generations may also know them.

8 The sons that shall be born and rise up, that they may also deliver them to
their children.

9 To the end that they may put their trust in God, that they may not forget
his works, and that they may mind and seek after his commandments.

10 Least they become like their forefathers, a depraved and provoking
generation.

11 A generation whose heart was not set right to God, And whose soul was
unfaithful to him.

12 The sons of Ephraim formerly so dexterous to bend the bow, and shoot their
arows, have now turned their backs in the day of battle.

13 They did not keep the covenant made with God, nor did they walk in the way
of his law.

14 They forgott the benefits they had received from him, and the wonderful
things he had shown to them.

15 Their fathers beheld with their eyes the wonderful things, he did in the
land of Egypt, in the plains of Janes.

16 He divided the sea, and brought them through it, He shutt up the waters, as
it were in a vessel.

17 With a cloud he led them by day, and by night with an illumination of fire.

18 He cleaved the rock in the desert, and gave them to drink as plentifully,
as out of the deep.

19 He brought water out of the rock, and made it flow like a great river.

20 And after all this, they fell again to sinning against him, and provoked
the anger of the most high in the dry desert.

21 And they tempted God in their hearts, in asking him for meat they longed
for.

22 And they spoke evil of God, saying, can God provide a table for us in the
desert.

23 Because he struck the rock, and the water gushed out, and the torrents did
ove^flow.

24 Is he likewise able to give us bread, and provide a table in the wilderness
for all his people?

25 Therefore our Lord hearing this suspended his blessings; and a fire was
kindled in Jacob, and he powered his wroth over Israel.

26 Because they did not believe God, and did not trust to his powerful
assistance.

27 And he gave his command to the clouds above, and he opened the gates of
heaven.

28 And he rained manna for them to eat, and he gave them the bread of heaven.

29 Man did eat the bread of angels, he sent them food in great abundance.

30 He removed the southerly wind out of the air, and by his power brought in a
westernly wind;

31 And he rained meat upon them, as thick, as the dust, that flies in the air,
and birds innumerable, as the sands of the sea.

32 And he caused them to fall in the middle of their camp, and round about
their tents;

33 And they did eat, and they were filled with them, he gave them their
desire, And they had what they longed for.

34 The meat was still in their mouths, when the anger of our Lord rose up
against them.

35 And he killed the strongest amongst them, and the choicest of Israel he
overthrew.

36 After all this they sinned still, and his wonders wrought no faith in them;

37 And their days vanished like a shadow, and their years were suddenly at an
end.

38 When he punished them with death they sought him, They returned, and made
have to come to him.

39 They remembered that God was their defender, that God the most high, was
their redeemer;

40 And in their words they loved him, but their tongue ly'd to him.

41 For their heart was not right toward him, and they were found unfaithful
in observing his covenant.

42 But he is merciful, and he pardoned their sins; and did not wholly destroy
them.

43 And in great measure he did moderate the rigor of his justice; and would
not kindle his whole anger against them.

44 He remembered that they were flesh; and that their life was like a breath of
wind, passing away, and never returning.

45 How often did they exasperat him in the desert, and provoke his anger in
places without water?

46 They still relapsed to tempt God, and to irritate the holy one of Israel.

47 They did not remember with what might and power, he had delivered them out
of the hands of their persecutor.

48 What signs he had showed of his mightines in Egipte, and what miracles he
had wrought in the plains of Tanis.

49 How he turned the rivers into blood, and left them no waters that they
could drink.

50 He sent them swarms of flys that devoured them, and frogs that destroyed
them.

51 He gave their fruit to the Caterpiller, and their labor to the grashoper.

52 With hail he killed their vines, and with frost their mulbery trees.

53 And with hailstones he destroyed their cattle, and their possessions with
fire.

54 He made them feel the effects of his anger, and indignation is punishments
of all kinds, by the ministry of evil angels.

55 He opened the passage of his ange^ to fall upon them; He spared not the
lives of them, nor of their cattle.

56 And he destroyed every first born in the land of Egipte, and all the first
fruit of their labor in the tabernacle of Cham.

57 And he brought away his people like sheep, and conducted them like a flock
in the desert.

58 He led them on with hope, and they feared nothing, And their enemies were
overwhelmed in the sea.

59 And he brought them up to the-mountaine which he had made' holy, To the
mountain acquired with his right hand.

60 And he drove out the nations, before them, And divided by lot the land
amongst them, measured out by the line.

61 And he established the tribes of Israel in the dwellings of these nations.

62 And still they tempted, and irritated God the most high, and his precepts
they did not observe.

63 They turned away from him, And did not keep his covenant, as their fathers
before them, they became like a bow that never carrys true.

64 Upon their hills they provoked him to anger, and by their idols they raised
his jealousy.

65 This God heard, and he despised them, And brought Israel even to nothing.

66 And he abandoned his Tabernacle at Silo, his Tabernacle where he had dwelt
amongst men.

67 And he delivered up the ark, their strength, into captivity, And their
glory into the hands of the Enemy.

68 And he exposed people on all sides to the sword, And he contemned his
inheritance.

69 Their young men were devoured by fire, ad their virgins were not lamented.

70 Their priests fell by the sword, and there was none to mourn for their
widows.

71 Then our Lord rose up as it were waked out of a long sleep, Or like a
strong man, after being drunk with wine.

72 And he struck the enemy in their hinder parts, and gave them a lasting mark
of infamy.

73 And he rejected the Tabernacle of Joseph, nor did he choose the tribe of
Ephraim.

74 But he made choice of the Tribe of Judah, The mountain of Sion, which he
loved.

75 And he built his sanctuary in a high place upon the earth, which he has
founded to last for ever.

76 And he chose David his servant, and took him from the flocks of sheep, and
from following the breeding yews.

77 To feed Jacob his servant, And Israel his inheritance.

78 And he led them with integrity of heart, And with skillfull hands he
conducted them.

PSALM LXXVIII.
Deus venerunt gentes.
Some interpreters think that by this Psalm is meant the cruel persecution,
which the Jews suffered under Antiochus and his successors according to what is
cited in the history of the Mabees, showing that what is here fortold was there
accomplished. Others maintain that this Psalm speaks of the ruin of Jerusalem
caused by Nabuchodonosor. Whither it be the one or the other, what is said in
it may be very well applied in general to the Church, and to the faith full in
persecution.

1 O God! Psalm. 78.
the nations have entered into thy inheritance, They have defiled thy holy
temple, They have made of Jerusalem a houell to keep fruit in.

2 They have lef the dead bodies of thy servants to be meat for the fowls of
the air, And the flesh of thy saints to be devoured by the beasts of the earth.

3 They spylt, and powered out the blood of thy servants, like water round about
Jerusalem, And there was none to bury them.

4 We are become a subject of reproach to our neighbors, The scorn and
mockery, of all that dwell about us.

5 How long, O Lord! will thy indignation continue against us! how long will
thy anger be kindled like fire?

6 Power out hy wroth upon nations who know the not, and upon kingdoms, which
never called upon thy name.

7 Because they have eaten up Jacob, and have made desolate the place of his
habitation.

8 Remember not our past sins, quickly let thy mercy overtake us, for we are
brought to the last degree of misery.

9 Help us o God! who only can save us; And for the glory of thy name, o Lord!
deliver us, and pardon our sins for the sake of thy name;

10 Least it should be said amongst the Gentiles, where is their God? let us see
thee manifest to the nations.

11 Thy revenge for the blood of thy servants, which has been spilt. Have
regard to the sighs of those, who remain in fetters.

12 Take into the protection of thy powerful arm the sons of those, who have
been slain.

13 And refund into the breasts of our neighbors seven times over the
reproaches, which they have cast upon thee, O Lord!

14 But we, thy people, and the sheep of thy pasturs, will for ever praise
thee.

15 From generation to generation, we will praise thy holy name.

PSALM LXXIX.
Qui regis Israel Intend.
This Psalm contains a prayer which the Prophet puts into the mouth of the
Israelites, when they were to be carried away to Babylon under the reign of
Nabuchodonozor in which he teaches them how they should render God favorable to
them, and Prevail upon his mercy. At the same time, it also contains a
prophecy of the deliverance, which Jesus Christ was to bring to all mankind by
freeing them from the slavery of the Devil; figured by the Captivity of
Babylon.

1 HAarken to us, Psalm. 79.
Thou who do govern Israel who do lead Joseph, as thy sheep;

2 Who do sit upon the Cherubins; manifest thy self to Ephraim, Benjamin,
and Manasses;

3 Exert thy power, And come, that we may be saved by thee.

4 Turn us to thee, O God! and show thy face to us, And we shall be safe.

5 O Lord, the God of hosts! how long will thy anger make thee deaf to the
prayer of thy servant?

6 How long, will thou feed us with the bread of tears, and give us tears in
abundance to drink?

7 Thou have laid us open to the assaults of our neighbors, And our enemies
have derided us.

8 O God of all power! turn us to thee; show us thy face, and we shall be safe.

9 Thou have transplanted thy vinyard out of Egypt, thou have cast forth the
nations, and planted us in their room.

10 Thou have been the guide in the journey to conduct it, thou have made it
take root, and it has filled the whole earth.

11 The shadow of it has covered the mountains, And the branches of it the
highest cedar.

12 The boughs extend, as far as the sea, and the shoots thereof reach to the
river.

13 Why have thou destroyed the fence, And laid it open to the pillage of all
that pass by?

14 The bore of the wood has rooted it up, and the wild beast of the field has
devoured it.

15 Turn toward us, o God of Hosts! Look down from heaven and see, and visit
once more thy vinyard.

16 Repair, and make perfect what thy right hand has planted, And look upon
the son of man, whom thou have establishd and chosen to thy self.

17 That is burnt, and rooted up; both are ready to perish by the threatening
anger of thy countenance.

18. Stretch forth thy hand upon the Man of thy right hand, and upon the son of
man, whom thou have established and chosen to thy self.

19 And we will no more depart from thee, Thou will give us new life, and we
will call upon thy name.

20 O Lord, the God of Hosts! make us return to thee, show us thy face, and we
shall be safe.

PSALM LXXX.
Exultate Deo.
Whither it be David that composed this Psalm and gave it Asaph to sing, or
whither Asaph him self made it, as the title seems to import, The people are
therein exhorted to celebrate with joy and acknowledgments to God for his
benefits, the festivitys appointed the first days of the month, especially of
September, to renew the memory of the covenant which God had made with his
people.

1 WIth outcrys of joy celebrate the praises of God our Protector, Psalm. 80.
And rejoice in the presence of the God of Jacob.

2. Prepare a Psalm, Bring us the timbrill, the harmonious psalter, and the
harp.

3 Sound the trumpet in the new moon in the great day of your solemnity.

4 For this is a precept in Israel, and an ordonance established by the God of
Jacob.

5 He ordained it as a memorial to Joseph, when he went out of the land of
Egipte where he heard a language he did not understand.

6 He freed him from carrying burdens on his back; his hands had long served in
carrying baskets.

7 In thy tribulation thou did call upon me, and I delivered thee, I heard
thee when I was hid in the tempest, I made trial of thee, at the waters of
contradiction.

8 Hearken my people, and I will declare my will to you; O Israel if thou do
listen to me, there wll be no new God amongst you, Thou will adore no strange
God.

9 For I am the Lord thy God: who brought thee out of the land of Egipte; open
thy mouth, and I wll fill it.

10 But my people did not hearken to my voice, And Israel minded me not.

11 Where upon I abandoned them to the desires of their heart; They will follow
their own inventions.

12 If my people would have heard me, If Israel had walked in my ways,

13 I could easily have humbled their Enemies, and I would have laid my hand
upon those, who afflicted them.

14 The Enemies of our Lord have broke word with him, And the time of their
calamity will last for ever.

15 And yet he has nourished them with the flower of the purest wheat, And has
fed them with honey flowing from the Rock.

PSALM LXXXI.
Deus stetit in Signagoga.
Without determining the time'When this Psalm was made, which is much
controverted, It is enough to say, that it contains an exhortation made by the
Prophet to all judges to do equal justice, by telling them that God, as a
suprem Judge, presides in the middle of them, and will call them to account for
the judgments they shall give.

1 GOd is present in the assembly of the Gods, Psalm. 81.
and being in the middle of them, he judges the Gods.

2 How long therefore will you judge unjustly? how long will you have partial
respect to the persons of sinners?

3 Judge the cause of the poor, and of the orphan, and do justice to the
oppressed, and the needy.

4 Rescue the poor, and deliver the indigent from the oppression of the sinner.

5 But they are ignorant and void of understanding, they walk in the dark, For
this reason the fundations of the world will be shaken.

6 I have said, you are Gods, and all of you sons of the most high.

7 But you shall die like men, and shall fall like other Princes.

8 Rise up, O God! and judge the earth, for all the nations will become thy
inheritance.

PLALME LXXXII.
Deus quis similis erit tibi.
The time, when this Psalm was made is also much controverted amongst
interpreters. It was certainly made upon the occasion of some great, and
dangerous war which threatened the Jews, and it is very proper to excite in us a
confidence in God, in the middle of the greatest dangers.

1 O God! who shall be like to thee? Psalm. 82.
Be not silent, nor de lay any longer showing thy power.

2 For behold, thy enemies have made a great noise, And those who hate thee have
lifted up their head.

3 They have formed malicious designs against thy people, and have conspired
against thy saints.

4 They have said, Come Let us exterminate them from amongst the nations, that
the name of Israel may be quite forgott.

5 To this end, they have conspired together, and are joined in confederacy
against thee with the Tents of the Idumeans, and of the Ismaelites.

6 Moab, and the Agarens, Gebal and Ammon, and Amalech, and the strangers,
together with the inhabitants of Tyrus.

7 Also the Assyrians are come up to them, And are become auxiliarys to the
sons of Lot.

8 Do by them, as thou have done by the Madianites, and by Cicera, And as thou
have done by Jabin near the torrent of Cisson.

9 They were destroyed in Endor, and they became, like dung upon the earth.

10 Dispose of their Princes, as thou did of Oreb, and Zebel, and Salmena.

11 All those Princes, who have said, Come let us possess the sanctuary of God,
as our own inheritance.

My God! turn them about like a wheel, and like chaff before the wind.

13 As a fire kindled burns down the wood of a forest, and as a flame consumes
the mountains.

14 So will thy tempest drive them before the, And thy anger put them to an
utter route.

15 Fill their faces with Ignominy, And they will seek thy name, O Lord!

16 Otherwise Let their confusione, and their terrors last allways, Let them
be covered with shame, and perish.

17 And let them know, that thy name is Lord, And that thou art the only most
high upon the earth.

PSALM LXXXIII.
Quam dilecta tabernacula.
The subject of this Psalm seems to be the same with that of the 41. ch
wherein David expresses his great desire of seeing again the tabernacle of our
Lord, at the time ^hen his persecutions had removed him at a distance from it:
But principally it ought to be applied to the ardent desire which the faithful
in the banishment of this life have of enjoying God in heaven, which is their
true country.

1 HOw lovely are thy tabernacles, Psalm. 83.
O Lord of hosts! my soul does languish with ardent desire of entering into the
house of our Lord.

2 My heart, and my whole body with transports of joy seek the living. God.

3 Even the sparrow finds a lodging for itself, And the turtle a nest wherein to
place its young ones.

4 Thy Altars, O Lord of hosts, my king, and my God! are my place of rest.

5 Happy are they, who dwell in thy house, O Lord; For ever and ever they will
praise thee.

6 Blessed is the man, whose help is from thee; he disposes his heart in this
veil of tears, to be still rising upward to the place, he has proposed to
himself.

7 For the maker of the law will give his benediction; They will rise from
virtue to virtue, They will see the God of Gods in Sion.

8 O Lord, the God of Hosts! hear my prayer; hearken to me, O God of Jacob!

9 Look upon us, O God our protector! and cast thine eyes upon the face of thy
Christ.

10 For better is one day in thy tabernacles, then a thousand any where else.

11 I have chosen rather to be the lowest in the house of my God, then to dwell
in the tents of sinners.

12 For God is a lover of mercy and of truth; our Lord is the giver of grace
and glory.

13 He will not deprive those of his goods, who walk in innocence. O Lord of
Hosts, blessed is the man who hopes in thee.

PSALM LXXXIV.
Benedixisti Domine.
This Psalm may be said to contain a double prediction, v^z of the return
from the Captivity of Babylon, and of the general redemption of mankind, which
was to proceed from the incarnation of the word.

1 THou have given thy blessing, Psalm. 84.
O Lord! to thy Land, thou have delivered Jacob from captivity.

2 Thou have pardoned the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their
sins.

3 Thou have wholly appeased thy anger, And have diverted from us the rigor of
thy indignation.

4 Convert us to thee, O God our savior! and turn away thy anger from us.

5 Will thou for ever be incensed against us? will thou extend thy anger from
generation to generation?

6 O God! in turning toward us thou will give us life, And thy people will
rejoice in thee.

7 Show thy mercy to us, O Lord, and give us thy saving assistance.

8 I will hearken to what our Lord God shall speak within me, for he will speak
peace to his people.

9 And to his saints, And to all those, who are converted at heart.

10 His salvation is certainly near at hand to those who fear him, that so glory
may dwell in our Land.

11 Mercy and truth have met together, justice and peace have kissed each other.

12 Truth is sprung up fom the earth, And justice has looked down from heaven.

13. For our Lord will power down his blessing, And out Land will yield its
fruit.

14 Justice will walk before him, And in the way will direct his steps.

PSALM LXXXV.
Inclina Domine.
It appears by this Psalm, that David was pressed with some great affliction,
possibly the persecution of Saul, when he made this Psalm, which contains a
fervent prayer to God to hear him, and assist him in his mercy. This Psalm
also contains a clear prophesy of the conversion of the gentiles.

1 BOw down thine ear, Psalm. 85.
O Lord! hear me, for j am poor and in necessity.

2 Preserve my soul, for j am holy, my God! save thy servant who trusts in thee.

3 Be merciful to me, O Lord! for all the day I have cried out to thee, make
glad the soul of thy servant, because to thee, O Lord! I have lifted up my soul;

4 For thou, O Lord! art mild and benign, And full of mercy toward all that
call upon thee.

5 Give ear, O Lord! to my prayer, And listen to the voice of my supplication.

6 In the day of my tribulation I have cried out to thee, Because thou art wont
to hear me.

7 There is none amongst the Gods like to thee, O Lord! and none whose works,
are like to thine.

8 All the nations whom thou have created, shall come and adore thee, O Lord!
and shall give glory to thy name;

9 For thou art truly great, and the doer of wonderful things, Thou art the
only God.

10 Lead me, O Lord! in thy way, And I shall enter into thy truth; Let my heart
rejoyee in reverencing thy name.

11 I will praise thee, O Lord my God! with my whole heart, and I will give
glory to thy name for ever.

12 Because thy mercy has been great upon me, and thou have rescued my soul
from the lowest hell.

13 O God! the wicked have rose up against me, and a convention of powerful
men have not had thee before their eyes.

14 But thou art compassionat and tenderhearted, slow to punish, and full of
mercy and truth.

15 Look toward me, Psalm. 86.
and have mercy on me, indow thy servant with power from thee, save the son of
thy handmaid.

16 Give a sign of thy goodness toward me, that they who hate me may see it,
and be confounded; For thou, O Lord! have been still my helper and my comforter.

PSALM LXXXVI.
Fundamenta ejus.
David in this Psalm celebrates the praises of the City of Jerusalem, which
in the Prophet^ck sense may very ^ell be applied to the Church of Christ, of
which that City was the figure.

1 THe foundations thereof are laid in the holy mountains, Psalm. 85.
Our Lord Loves the gates of Sion more then all the tents of Jacob.

2 Glorious things are said of thee, O City of God.

3 I will remember Rahab and Babylon, who shall know me.

4 Behold the strangers, and those of Tyrus, and the people of Ethiopia, they
have been there.

5 Will it not be said to Sion, Psalm. 86.
that multitudes of men have been born there, And that the most high himself was
the founder of it?

6 Our Lord will say it in the writings, wherein are registered the people, and
the Princes that have lived there.

7 All thy inhabitants, O Sion! shall be replenished with joy.

PSALM. LXXXVII.
Domine Deus salutis.
The Author of this Psalm describes, and Laments his misery, and prays to God
to commiserate and help him, that so he may praise his holy name.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 87.
the God of my safety! I have cried out by day, and by night before thee.

2 Vouchafe to look upon my petition, And give ear to my prayer.

3 For my ^oul is oppressed with evils, And my life is on the brink of the
grave.

4 I am reckoned as one of those that are to be let down into the pit, I am
become forlorn, and destitute of all help, free amongst the dead.

5 Like the wounded that sleep in their sepulchers, who are forgotten by thee,
and whom thy hand has rejected.

2 They have laid me in a deep pit, In a place of darkness, and in the shade of
death.

7 Thy fury lies heavy upon me, and thou have made all thy waves overwhelme me.

8 Thou have separated fom me all my friends, and they have me in abomination.

9 I have been shutt up without being able to get out, my eyes languish with
misery.

10 To thee, O Lord! I have cried out the whole day, I have stretched forth my
hands to thee.

11 Is it amongst the dead that thou will show thy wonders? Or will physicians
raise them to life, that so they may praise thee.

12 Will any in sepulchers relate thy mercy, and thy truth in the grave?

13 Will thy wonders be known in the region of darkness, and thy justice in the
land of oblivion?

14 But I, O Lord! have cried out to thee, and early in the morning my prayer
shall come before thee.

15 Why, O Lord! do thou reject my prayer? why do thou turn away thy face
from me?

16 I am poor, and from my youth have been in labor and hardship, And after I
was exalred, I was humbled again, and am full of trouble.

17 All thy anger has gone over me, And the terrors thereof have almost
distracted me.

18 The whole day they have surrounded me like a flood of water, And all at
once they have beseig'd me.

19 My friends and my neighbors thou have removed far from me, And all my
acquaintance fly me by reason of my misery.

PSALM LXXXVIII.
Misericordias Domini.
The Psalmist praises God for his wonderful power, for his care of his
people, for his favor shown, and promises made to David, and his posterity;
Then complaining of contrary events, he expostulats, pray^th, and blesses God.

1 THe mercys of our Lord, I will eternally sing; Psalm. 88.


2 My mouth shall make known thy truth from generation to generation.

3 Because thou have said, mercy shall be built up in heaven to last for ever;
Thy verity will there be firmly established.

4 I have made a convenant with my Elect, I have sworn to David my servant; I
will preserve thy race for ever.

5 And I will erect thy throne, which shall continue from age to age,

6 The heavens shall declare thy wonders, O Lord! And in the assembly of saints
thy truth will be magnified.

7 For who in the heavens can equal our Lord, and who amongst the sons of God,
shall be like to God?

8 To God, who is glorified in the assembly of his saints, who is great and
terrible above all that are about him.

9 O Lord; the God of Hosts! who is like to thee? Thou art all powerful, O
Lord! thy truth does incompasse thee round.

10 Thou do govern the rage of the sea, and thou do moderate the violence
of the waves.

11 The proud thou have tamed, like a man that is wounded; by the strength of
thy arm, thou have dispersed thy Enemies.

12 Thine are the heavens, and thine is the earth; thou have founded the
univers, with all it contains; the north and the southern sea thou have created.

13 Thabor and Hermon with the praises of thy name. Thy arm is all powerful.

14 Show the might of thy hand, and let thy right hand be exalted; justice and
equity are the bases of thy throne.

15 Mercy and truth will march before thee. Happy the people, that knows to
celebrate thy praise.

16 They will walk in the light of thy countenance; O God! and all the day will
joyfully praise thy holy name, and by thy justice they will be exalted.

17 For the glory of their strength is derived from thee, and to thy bounty,
and goodness we owe our elevation.

18 For it is our Lord, who has taken us into his protection, and the holy one
of Israel, our king.

19 Then did thou speak in a vision to thy saints, saying, I have given
assistance to a man that has strength, And I have raised up one chosen out of
my people.

20 I have found out David my servant, and with my holy oil I have anointed
him.

21 My hand shall be assisting to him, And my arm shall support him.

22 The enemy shall have no advantage over him, and the son of iniquity shall
have no power to hurt him.

23 And I will cut in pieces his enemies before him, And I will mak^ them fly
who hate him.

24 My mercy, and my truth shall allways be with him, and in my name his power
shall be exalted.

25 And I will lay his hand upon the sea, And his right hand upon the rivers.

26 He shall call upon me, and say, Thou art my father, my God, and the author
of my safety.

27 And I will constitute him my first begotten, and I will raise him above all
the kings of the earth.

28 I will for ever preserve my mercy toward him, And my covenant with him
shall be inviolable.

29 And I will make his race continue all ages, And his throne last as long as
the heavens.

30 But if his sons shall deparr from my Law, and shall not walk according to
my precepts.

31 If they shall violate my ordonances, and shall not keep my commandments.

32 I will visit with a rod their iniquitys, and with stripes I will punish
their sins;

33 But my mercy I will not wholly withdraw from them, Nor will I violate the
truth of my promises.

34 I will not break my covenant, And the words which come from my mouth shall
not be made void.

35 Once I have sworn by my own Holiness, and I will be true to David; That his
race shall continue for ever.

36 And his throne shall allways remain in my sight, like the sun, And like the
moon in perfection, a faith full witness in heaven.

37 Thou notwithstanding have rejected, have despised, and laid aside him, whom
thou have anointed.

38 Thou have reversed the covenant made with thy servant? thou have thrown
down to the ground, and profaned the sacred ensigns of his dignity.

39 Thou have destroyed all his fences, all his strong places, thou have filled
with terror.

40 All that pass by the way have pillaged him; he is become the reproach of
his neighbors.

41 Thou have exalted the right hand of those who oppress him, and thou have
made joyful all his enemies.

42 Thou have taken from him the help of his sword, And thou have not succor'd
him in war.

43 Thou have deprived him of Purification, and thou have dashed in pieces his
throne upon the ground

44 Thou have shortened the number of his days, thou have covered him with
ignominy.

45 How long, O Lord! willt thou turn away from me? will thy anger always burn
on lik a fire?

46 Remember how much of my life is consumed. Is it in vain that thou have
created the sons of men?

47 What man is there alive that must not see death? who shall save his life
from the power of the grave?

48 Where, O Lord! are thy former mercys, which in thy truth thou have sworn to
David?

49 Remember, O Lord! the reproach of thy servants cast upon t^em by many
nations, which I have contained within my breast.

50 Thy Enemies (O Lord) have reproched us; They have reproched us, that, thou
art changed toward thy anointed.

51 Let our Lord be eternally blessed, so be it, so be it.

PSALM LXXXIX.
Domine refugium.
This Psalm contains the prayer of Moses (as the title shows) to God for the
people, in which he complains of the miserys, and shortness of life, and asks
from God happier times.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 89.
thou have been our refuge from generation to generation.

2 Before the mountains were made, and the earth, and the univers were formed;
From all Eternity thou art God.

3 Let not man be cast down by thee, thou who have said, Be converted ye sons
of men.

4 For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday that is past;

5 And as the night watch, which is reckoned for nothing, so will their years
be.

6 Like the grass, which in the space of one morning fades away; at break of
day it flourishes, then decays, and in the evening it drops down, it hardens,
and withers.

7 For we have fainted under thy anger, And thy indignation has put us into
confusion.

8 Thou have laid our iniquitys before thy eyes, and exposed the whole course
of our life to the light of thy countenance.

9 Thus all our days are wasted, And we ourselves are consumed by the rigor of
thy anger.

10 Our years pass away like those of a spider in cobweb designs, The number of
our days seldom exceeds seaventy years;

11 And in the strongest, if they arrive to eighty, all that is beyond that, is
pain and sorrow.

12 But it is an effect of thy mercy, that we are so corrected.

13 Who knows the force of thy anger, and how much it ought to be feared?

14 Show the power of thy right hand, that our heart may be instructed in true
wisdom.

15 Turn toward us O Lord! how long will thou neglect us? Be exorable toward
rhy servants.

16 We have been filled in the morning with thy mercy, And we have rejoiced,
and have been dilighted all the days of our Life.

17 We have rejoiced for the days in which thou did humble us, And for the
years in which evils did befall us.

18 Look upon thy servants, and upon thy own works, and be a guide to their
children;

19 And let the splendour of the Lord our God, be upon us; direct all the works
of our hands, Let the work of our hands be directed by thee.

PSALM LXXXIX.
Qui habitat.
This Psalm which most probably is of David's making; tho some attribute it to
Moses, is full of useful instructions. It was upon the occasion of some great
danger, that David made this Psalm in the manner of a Dialogue, ^her the
Prophet, the just man, and our Lord speak by turns.

1 HE who dwell's under the shelter of the most high, Psalm. 90.
shall allways be protected by the God of heaven.

2 He shall say to our Lord, Thou art my deffender and my refuge, he is my God
and I will hope in him.

3 For he has delivered me from the snare of the hunters, And from the sharp
word.

4 Under the shadow of his shoulders he will cover thee, and under his wings
thou shall be full of hope.

5 His truth will fence thee round like a buckler, And all that is frightfull
in the night, thou shall not fear.

6 Nor the arrow that flys by day, nor the machinations contrived in the dark,
nor the assault of the noon day devil.

7 A thousand shall fall by thy side, and ten thousand on thy right hand, But
no hurt shall come at thee.

8 But thou shallt consider, and look round with thy eyes, and see the just
recompense of sinners.

9 Because thou have said in thee O Lord! is my hope; And thou have chosen the
most high for thy refuge;

10 Evil shall not approach to thee, And the scourge will not come near thy
habitation.

11 For he has given thee in charge to his Angels, that they may preserve thee
in all thy ways.

12 They will bear thee up with their hands, least thy foot should stumble
against the stone.

13 Thou shall safely walk over the aspic and the basilisk, And thou shall
trample upon the Lion, and the Dragon.

14 Because he has trusted in me I will deliver him; I will protect him because
he has known my name.

15 He shall call upon me, and I will hear him; I am with him in time of
tribulation; I will rescue him, and make him glorious.

16 I will fill him with length of days, And I will show him my salvation.

PSALM LXXXXII.
Bonum est confiteri.
It is believed that this Psalm may have been made by David after he was
delivered from the war of Absalom, he gives God thanks, admires the profoundnes
of his wisdom in all his works, and compares the false felicity of the wicked
with the solid and everlasting happiness of the just.

1 IT is good to praise our Lord, Psalm. 91.
and in Psalms to celebrate thy name, that art the most high.

2 To set forth thy mercy in the morning; And thy truth by night.

3 Upon the instrument of ten strings, in concert with the voice, and the harp.

4 For thou have delighted me, O Lord! in the things thou have made, And in the
works of thy hands great will be my joy.

5 How magnificent are thy works O Lord! Deep and impenetrable are thy thoughts.

6 The man without sense will not know, and the fool will not understand these
things.

7 Whilst the sinners spring up like grass, And the wicked flourish in the
world.

8 To perish at last for ever, Thou O Lord! for all eternity art the most high.

For behold, O Lord! thy enemies, for behold! thy enemies perish; And all the
workers of iniquity will be scattered.

10 And like the horn of an unicorn my power will be raised up, And my oldage
will be supported by thy plentiful mercy.

11 My eye has looked upon my enemies with contempt, And my ear will hear what
becomes of those who maliciously have risen up against me.

12 The just shall flourish like the Palm tree, And shall grow up like a Cedar
upon Libanus.

13 Planted in the house of our Lord; They shall flourish in the house of our
God.

14 Still they shall be multiplied in a fruitful old age, and shall have
vigor and strength to declare

15 That our Lord God is full of equity, and that there is no injustice in him.

PSALM LXXXVIII.
Dominus regnavit.
The Author of this Psalm represeuts God's everlasting Kingdom, setts forth
his power, and the truth of his promises.

1 OUr Lord reigns, Psalm. 92.
and is clothed with Majesty, Our Lord has put on strength, and has begirt
himself.

2 For he has fixed the globe of the earth, which shall not be moved.

3 Even then thy throne was established, Thy being is before all ages.

4 The rivers, O Lord have raised, The rivers have raised, their voice;

5 The rivers have raised their waves, with the sound of many waters.

6 Wonderful are the swellings of the sea, wonderful yet more is our Lord in
the heavens.

7 Thy testimonys are most undoubtedly credible 3 Holiness becomes thy house, O
Lord; for ever.

PSALM LXXXXIII.
Deus ultionum.
The Prophet in this Psalm represents the blindness and uniustice of those who
abusing the patience of God persecute, and oppress the just: These he incourages
in their sufferings to rely upon the mercy of God, which sooner or later will
never fail them, and this he confirms by his own exemple.

1 GOd is the Lord of revenge. Psalm. 93.
The God of revenge acts with full liberty.

2 Be exalted thou, who judge the earth; Render to the proud what they
deserve.

3 How long, O Lord? shall sinners, how long shall sinners triumph?

4 How long shall they vant, and utter their iniquitys? How long shall they
boast, who act unjustly.

5 They have humbled thy people, O Lord! They have afflicted those of thy
inheritance.

6 They have killed the widow, and the stranger, They have slain the orphan;

7 And they have said, The Lord will not see it, and the God of Jacob will know
nothing of it.

8 Understand, all ye senseless amongst the people, And all ye fools at last
grow wise.

9 He that formed the ear, will he not hear? and he who made the eye, will he
not see?

10 He that chastises whole nations, will he not reprehend you? he that gives
knowledge to man will he not know?

11 Our Lord knows the thoughts of men, how vain they are.

12 Happy is the man, whom thou shall teach, O Lord; and who shall be
instructed by thee out of thy Law;

13 That thou may make the evil days easy to him, until the pit is dug for
the sinner.

14 For our Lord will not cast off his people, nor will he abandon his own
inheritance.

15 But preserve it, until his justice be manifested in his judgments; And
all shall adhere to it, that are upright of heart.

16 Who in the mean time will take take my part against the wicked? Or who will
stand by me against the workers of iniquity?

17 If our Lord had not helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in Hell.

18 If J said, my foot did fail me* Thy mercy, O Lord! at the same time held
me up.

19 In proportion to the many sorrows that have oppressed my heart, Thy
consolations have filled my soul with joy.

20 Will the seat of injustice have communication with thee, who have made thy
precept painful, and laborious?

21 They will ly in wait to take the life of the just, and they will condemn
innocent blood.

22 But our Lord is become my refuge, And my God is the prop of my hope.

23 And he will make their injustice return upon themselves, The Lord our God
will destroy them.

PSALM LXXXXIV.
Venite exultemus.
This Psalm without doubt was made by David, since saint Paul cites it as his
in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Some think it was made at the time when he
carried the Ark to mount Sion. It contains a lively exhortation to praise God
with our heart, our voice, and our works, and to submitt to his holy laws.

1 COme, Psalm. 94.
Let us rejoice in the presence of our Lord; Let us sing the praises of God our
savior.

2 Let us make haste to present ourselves before him with thanksgiving, and
with voice, and instrument let us celebrate his glory.

3 For God is the great Lord, And the great king over all the Gods.

4 For the whole earth from one end to the other is in his hand, And the
highest mountains belong to him;

5 For his is the sea, And he made it; And his hands formed the dry Land.

6 Come, Let us adore, and fall down, And let us weep before our Lord, who has
made us.

7 For he is the Lord our God, and we are the people nourished in his pastures,
and the sheep guided by his hand.

8 If today you shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

9 As in the time of provocation, and in the day of temptation in the desert,
where your fathers tempted me, they made trial of me, and beheld my works.

10 For forty years together I was offended with that generation, and said, The
heart of this people goes allways wrong.

11 And they have not known my ways, Therefore I swore in my anger, they shall
not enter into my place of rest.

PSALM LXXXXV.
Cantate Domino.
Under the litterall sense of this Psalm, which expresses the greatness of God,
raised infinitely above the Gods of the Nations, and Victorious over all the
Enemies of his people, All interpreters agree, that in the prophetic sense it
contains the mystery of the coming of the Messiah, and of the establishment of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ, which is his Church upon the earth.

1 SIng to our Lord a new canticle, Psalm. 95.
sing to our Lord over all the Earth.

2 Sing to our Lord, and bless his holy name; From day to day set forth his
saving mercy.

3 Proclaim his glory amongst the people of the earth.

4 For great is our Lord, and infinitely praiseworthy, he is terrible above all
the Gods.

5 For all the Gods of the Gentiles are devils, But our Lord is the Creator of
the Heavens.

6 Glory and beauty shine out before him; sanctity and magnificence are in his
sanctuary.

7 Ye Countries and nations I make offerings to our Lord of glory, and honor;
offer to our Lord the glory due to his name.

8 Take your victimes, and go into his house, Adore our Lord at the entrance of
his holy Tabernacle.

9 Let the whole earth tremble before him. Tell the nations, that our Lord is
he who reigns.

10 For he has settled the earth, And it shall not be moved, The people thereof
he will judge with equity.

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be transported with joy. Let the sea
alike be moved, and all that fill it, The feilds will have gladness, and all
that is in them.

12 Then will all the trees of the woods show their joy in the presence of our
Lord, Because he comes, because he comes to judge the earth.

13 He will judge the whole earth with equity, And all nations according to his
truth.

PSALM LXXXXVI.
Dominus regnavit.
It is probable that David made this Psalm after some signal victory gained
upon his Enemies for which he magnifys the power and mercy of God At the same
time he does very plainly foretell the establishment of the spiritual kingdom
of Jesus Christ, And he exhorts all men to prepare themselves for it, by hatred
to sin, and love to justice.

1 OUr Lord does reign, Psalm. 96.
let the earth rejoice; Let all the Islands be glad.

2 Clouds, and darkness are round about him; justice and judgment support his
Throne.

3 Fire will go before him, and he will consume his enemies round about him.

4 His lightnings appeared over all the earth, at the fight thereof the earth
trembled.

5 The mountains melted like wax in the presence of our Lord; so did the whole
earth in the presence of our Lord.

6 The heavens have declared his justice, And all people of the earth have seen
his glory.

7 Let all be confounded, who adore graven images, And who glory in their jdols.

8 Adore him all his Angels! Sion has heard, and has rejoiced;

9 And the daugherts of Juda have been filled with joy, by reason of thy
judgments, o Lord!

10 For thou art the supreme Lord over all the earth, Thou art infinitely raised
above all the Gods.

11 All you that love our Lord, be haters of evil; our Lord takes care of the
souls of his saints; he will deliver them out of the hand of the sinner.

12 Light is risen upon the just, And joy upon the upright of heart.

13 Let all the just rejoice in our Lord, And celebrate the memory of his
Hollines.

PSALM LXXXXVII.
Cantate Domino.
This Psalm seems to have been made upon the same occasion, and upon the same
subject with the last, And has the same spiritual, and prophetic meaning.

1 Sing to our Lord a new hymn, Psalm. 97.
For he has done wonderful things.

2 We are saved by the might of his right hand, and by the strength of his holy
arm.

3 Our Lord has made known his saving power; in the sight of the nations he has
manifested his justice.

4 He has remembered his mercys, and the making good his promises to the house
of Israel.

5 The whole earth has seen, the saving mercy of our God.

6 Joyfully sing all ye inhabitants of the earth, the praises of God: sing and
be transported with joy; sing and play upon your instruments.

7 Sing to our Lord upon the harp, and the Psaltery, with trumpets, and cornets

8 Sound forth your joy in the presence of our Lord, our king: Let the sea
rejoice, and all it contains, and the whole world with the inhabitants thereof.

9 The rivers will join their applause, and the mountains will show their joy
at the sight of our Lord, because he comes to judge the earth.

10 He will judge the earth according to justice, And the people thereof with
equity.

PSALM LXXXXVIII.
Dominus regnavit irascantur.
It is probable David made this Psalm at the time when the Ark was placed upon
mount Sion. It contains an exhortation to the people that they should reverence
the glory of God residing in the Ark, and adore him with humble fear, as the
holy Prophets in former times had done.

1 OUr Lord reigns, Psalm. 98.
Let the Nations be angry: he reigns, who sits upon the Cherubins; Let the
earth tremble.

2 Our Lord is great in Sion, And supreme over all the people of the world.

3 Let them give glory to thy great name, because it is terrible, and holy; And
the glory of a king is love of justice.

4 Thou have established just laws, Thou have executed judgment, and justice
in Jacob.

5 Magnify the glory of the Lord our God; And adore his footstool because it is
holy.

6 Moses and Aron were of the number of his priests, Samuel was amongst those,
who called upon his name.

7. They called upon the Lord and he heard them, in the pillar of the Cloud he
spoke to them.

8 They Kept his ordinances, and the precept which he gave them.

9 O Lord our God! thou did hear them: O God: thou wast propitious to them;
And yet did take revenge of all their evil deeds.

10 Glorify the Lord our God, and adore him upon his holy mountain, Because the
Lord our God is holy.

PSALM LXXXXIX.
Jubilate Deo.
This also is a Psalm of praise and thanks giving, Psalm. 99.
which invites all the people of the Earth to enter into the holy temple, which
mistically, and truly is the Church of Christ.

1 ALl you of the earth sing praises to God, serve our Lord with joy.

2 Go in, And present yourselves with gladness of heart.

3 Know that our Lord he is God: he made us and not we ourselves.

4 You that are his people, and the sheep of his pastures, enter within his
gates praising his holy name: Enter into his house with joyful hymns; worship
him with thanksgiving.

5 Praise his name, for our Lord is full of mildnes: his mercy is everlasting,
and his truth remains from generation, to generation.

PSALM C.
Misericordiam and judicium.
David (or rather the holy Ghost speaking by the mouth of David) represents in
his own person to all Princes a model of the conduct, which they ought to
observe in the gouvernment of their subjects.

1 MErcy and justice will sing to thee, Psalm. 100.
O Lord?

2 I will sing, And I shall understand the way of perfection, when thou come
to me.

3 I have walked within my house with innocence of heart.

4 I have not proposed to myself any unjust thing: I have hated all breakers of
thy Law.

5 The man of a depraved heart has had no society with me; Nor would I know
the wicked one, that turns a side from me.

6 I persecuted the man, who in secret calumniated his neighbor.

7 With the proud eye, and the insatiable heart, I have avoided to eat.

8 I have cast my eyes upon the faithful of the land; to have them sit by me;
Nor would I be served by any, but those of an untainted life.

9 The proud, and the insolent man shall not dwell under my roof: he that
speaks unjust things, is never welcome in my sight.

10 Be times I did cut off the sinners of the land, That I might abolish all
wickedness in the city of God.

PSALM CI.
Domine exaudi.
Whoever was the Author of this Psalm about which the Interpreters do not
agree, certain it is that it contains an excellent prayer, which is proper in
general for all those, who are under any great affliction, either spiritual,
or corporal. In the siguratif sense the fathers apply it to Jesus Christ,
following the example of S. Pa^l, who accordingly explicats some verses in it.

1 O Lord! hear my prayer, Psalm. 101.
And let my cry reach to the.

2 Turn not away thy face from me; In what day soever Jam afflicted incline
thine ear to me;

3 In what day soever I call upon thee, instantly hear me.

3 Because my days have vanished like smoke; And my bones are parched like the
hearth of a chimny.

5 J am withered like hay, And my heart is dried up within me: For I have
forgot to eat my bread.

6 My bones cleave to my skin throw the loud nes of my groans.

7 J am become like a pelican in the wilderness, And like a night-crow in a lone
building.

8 Whole nights I have watched, like the solitary sparow on the roof of the
house.

9 All the day my enemies upbraided me; And they who praised me, conspired
against me.

10 For I did eat ashes in stead of bread, And mingled my tears with my drink.

11 At the sight of thy Anger, and indignation; For after having raised me up,
thou have dashed me on the ground.

12 My days are vanished like a shadow, And like hay J am withered.

13 But thou, O Lord! remainest for ever, And thy memory continues from
generation to generation.

14 Thou will rise up, and have mercy on Sion, For the time is come to take
pity of it, For the time is now come.

15 For the ruins of it are still precious with thy servants, And they have
compassion for the ground thereof.

16 And the Nations shall fear thy name O Lord; And the kings of the earth
shall dread thy glory.

17 For Sion was built by our Lord; And he will be there seen in his glory.

18 He has had regard to the prayers of the humble, And has not despised their
supplication.

19 Let these things be writ for the generations to come; And the people to be
created shall praise our Lord.

20 For he has looked out from his sanctuary above, our Lord from heaven has
cast his eyes upon the earth.

21 To hear the groans of the captitives, And to unbind the sons of those who
have been slain;

22 That they may again set forth the name of our Lord in Sion, And his
praises in Jerusalem.

23 When the people, and the kings shall meet together to serve our Lord.

24 He said to him in the vigor of his age, show me ^he fewnes of my days;

25 Call me not away in the middle of my days; Thy years reach from generation
to generation.

26 In the beginning, O Lord! thou did found the earth; And the heavens are
the works of thy hands.

27 They shall perish, thou art still the same: And they shall all wear ou^
like a garment,

28 And thou will change them like a Cloak, and they will be changed: But thou
art still the same, and thy years will never have end;

29 The sons of thy servants shall have a fixed habitation; And their race
shall remain for ever.

PSALM CII.
Benedic anima mea.
This Psalm of David contains his thanks for the favors he had received from
God, and particulary for the pardon of his sins. He also has regard to the
mercys bestowed upon his people by our Lord; and therein are concerned all
those, who in futur times shall find the effects of his bounty.

1 BLess, Psalm. 102.
O my soul! our Lord, And all that is within me bless his holy name!

2 Bless, O my soul! our Lord, And never forget all his benefits.

3 It is he that pardons all thy iniquitys, who heals all thy infirmitys.

4 Who has redeemed thy life from the grave, Who does incompass thee with his
mercy, and his goodness;

5 Who fills thee with all goods, thy heart can desire? who renues thy youth
like that of an eagle.

6 Our Lord shows his mercy, And does justice to all that wrongfully suffer.

7 He made his way known to Moses, And his will to the children of Israel.

8 Our Lord is merciful and full of tenderness; he is patient, and full of pity.

9 He will not be angry for ever, Nor will his threatenings eternally last.

10 He has not treated us, as our sins deserved; Nor has he punished us in
proportion to our iniquitys.

11 For as much, as heaven is raised above the earth, so much has his mercy
been confirmed upon those, who fear him.

12 And as far as the East is distant from the West, so far he has removed our
iniquitys from us.

13 Even as a father has compassion for his children, so does our Lord take
pity of those who fear him; For he knows what earth, we are made of.

14 He remembers that we are dust, And that the life of man, like the grass
and the flower in the field, does flourish, and pass away.

15 For a wind will come upon it, and it will drop down, And the place where it
stood will no longer be known.

16 But the mercy of our Lord remains. from ever to ever upon all that fear him;

17 And his justice will protect the sons of their sons, who observe his
Covenant,

18 And who remember his Commandments, to keep them.

19 Our Lord has prepared his throne in heaven; And all things shall be subject
to his Empire.

20 Bless our Lord all his Angels! Mighty in strength, That execute his
Commands, And are still ready to receive his orders.

21 Bless our Lord all ye militia of heaven! That are Ministers to execute his
will.

22 Bless our Lord all his works in every place of his Dominions. My soul!
bless thou our Lord.

PSALM CIII.
Benedic anima mea Dominum.
This Psalm contains the praises, and thanks of David to God in consideration
of all the works of nature, and of the w^nders wihch appear both in the
heavens, and on the earth.

1 MY soul, Psalm. 103.
bless thou our Lord! O Lord my God! thou have made thy greatness wonderfully to
appear.

2 Thou have put on Majesty and Glory; Thou art clothed with light, as with a
garment;

3 Thou have extended the heavens as a skin, and covered the upper parts of
them, with water.

4 Thou art he, who ascends upon a cloud, And walks upon the wings of the wind.

5 Who makes use of spirits to be thy messengers, and Angels; And of burning
flames to be thy ministers.

6 Who has founded the earth upon its own solidity, which will not be
overturned for ever.

7 The sea like a garment covered it; And the waters overtopd the mountains;

8 But at thy threatening voice they did retire, And when thy thunder spoke,
they were terrified.

9 Then the mountains rose, and the plains descended Each into the situation,
thou have alloted to them.

10 Thou have set bounds tothe waters, which they shall not pass, Nor shall
they return to cover the earth.

11 Thou make fountains flow in the valleys, And waters to run in the middle
between the mountains.

12 There all the beasts of the field shall drink, And the wild asses shall
quench their thirst.

13 On the top of them the birds of the air shall dwell; the middle of the rocks
their notes shall be heard.

14 Thou waterest the mountains with rain from above, And the earth will be
replenished with the fruit of thy works.

15 Thou have made the grass grow up for the beast, And herbs to spring for the
use of man.

16 That out of the earth thou may produce bread, And wine to exhilerate the
heart of man.

17 That his face may be cheered with ovle, And bread may strengthen his heart.

18 The trees of the plains will be filled with sap, as also the Cedars of
Libanus which he planted, There the birds will build their nests.

19 That of the stork will be the chief amongst them. The high mountains will
be for the stags, And the rocks will be a refuge for the Irchins.

20 He made the moon to mark the times; The sun knows when to go down.

21 Thou did order darkness, and it became night. Then all the beasts of the
wood will range about,

22 The roaring whelps of the Lions to catch their prey, And seek the food
which God destined for them.

23 At the sun rise they gather together, And return back to their couches
again.

24 Then man will go out to his work, And to his labor till the evening comes.

25 How magnificent, O Lord! are thy works; Thou have contrived all things
according to thy profound wisdom; The earth is filled with thy riches.

26 See the wide sea of a vast extent, There swim fishes not be numbered;

27 Creatures of all sizes little and great; There ships sail to and fro.

28 There is that sea Dragon, which thou have formed to play in thee sea. All
expect from thee their nourishment in due season.

29 When thou do distribute it to them, they will gather it up, when thou
openest thy hand, all will be filled with thy bounty.

30 But when thou shall with draw* thy countenance from them, they will fall
into confusion; Their breath thou will take from them; And they will sink down,
and return to their primitive dust.

31 Thou will send forth again thy spirit, and they will be regenerated; And
thou will renew the face of the earth.

32 Let the glory of our Lord last for ever; Our Lord will take pleasure in his
works.

33 He looks upon the earth, and he makes it tremble; he touches the mountains,
And they smoke,

34 I will sing to our Lord during my life, with voice and Instrument I will
set forth his praises as long, as I am in being.

35 May my words be agreeable to him; On my part my delight shall be in our Lord.

36 Let sinners, and unjust Men be consumed upon the earth, that they may no
longer be. O my soul! bless thou our Lord.

PSALM CIV.
Confitemini Domino.
In this Psalm God is praised for the benefits bestowed by him upon the
people of Israel, both when he first brought them into Egipte to avoid the
famine, and when he led them back again into the land of Canaan.

1 GIve thanks to our Lord, Psalm. 104.
And call upon his name; set forth his works amongst the Nations.

2 With voice, and instrument celebrate his praises; Relate all his wonders.

3 Place your glory in his holy name; Let all hearts rejoice that seek our Lord;

4 Seek our Lord, and be strengthened; allways seek his face;

5 Remember the wonderful things he has done, his prodigys, and the judgments
pronounced by him,

6 You that are of the race of Abraham, The sons of Jacob his elect.

7 He is the Lord our God; he gives judgment over all the earth.

8 He has all ways been mindful of his Covenant, And of his word established
for ever.

9 Which he gave to Abraham; And of the oath he made to Isaac,

10 Which he confirmed to Jacob, to be a law inviolable, And to Israel, to be
an everlasting Covenant,

11 Saying, I will give to thee the land of Canaan for thy inheritance.

12 At the time when they were few in number, A small family, And strangers in
the land.

13 They passed from Country to Country, And from one Kingdom to another
people.

14 He suffered none to do them hurt; he punished kings for their sake.

15 Touch not (he said) my anointed, And do no hurt to my prophe^s.

16 He caused famine to come upon the land; And all their sustenance of bread
he took from them.

17 He sent a man before them; Joseph whas sold for a slave.

18 They put fetters upon his feet; his irons penetrated his soul, till his
prophecy was accomplished.

19 He was inspired by revelation from our Lord. The king sent, and caused him
to be unbound; The ruler of the people set him at liberty.

20 He gave him absolute authority over his house, And made him the chief over
all his dominions.

21 That he might instruct his Princes, as well as himself, And give rules of
wisdom to his Elders.

22 Then Israel came into Egypt, And Jacob resided in the land of Cham;

23. And God exceedingly increased his people, And made them stronger, then
their Enemies;

24 Whose hearts he turned into hatred against his people, so that they
contrived to ensnare his servants.

25 Then he sent Moses his servant, And Aron, whom he had chosen to himself.

26 He endowed them with the power of doing miracles and prodigies in the land
of Cham.

27 He sent darkness And Egypt was covered with it; All his words had their
effect.

28 He turned their waters into blood, And destroyed all their fishes.

29 Their land brought forth frogs, Even in the private lodgings of their king.

30 He said the word, And swarms of flys of all sorts came upon them; And lice
were spread over all their Country.

31 In stead of rain he sent them hail, and a consuming fire on their lands.

32 He killed their vines, and their fig trees, and destroyed all the trees on
the ground.

33 He spoke, And the Locusts came, and the Caterpillars, that were innumerable;

34 And they did eat up all their grass in the feilds, And devoured all the
fruit of their Country.

35 And he killed every first born in their land, And the first fruits of their
childbed labors;

36 And he brought forth his people loaded with gold, and silver; And there was
not an infirm person in all their Tribes.

37 Egypt rejoiced at their departure, For they were in great dread of them.

38 He extended a cloud to be a cover to them, And lighted them by night with a
pillar of fire.

39 They asked him meat, and he sent them quails; And he fed them with the
bread of heaven.

40 He broke open the rock, and the waters did run; In the dry ground rivers
did flow.

41 For he was mindful of his sacred word, which he gave to Abraham his
servant.

42 And he brought forth his people with joy, And his chosen ones with gladness.

43 And he gave them the lands of the Gentiles, And they possessed, and enjoyed
the labors of the Nations.

44 That they might observe his precepts, And carefully mind his law.

PSALM CV.
Confitemini Domino quoniam.
In this Psalm the people are excited to praise God, and to put their trust in
his mercy, To which end the benefits of God formerly bestowed upon the
Israelites are comemorated: Their sins are discribed, and the divine mercy
toward them is extol. ed. This Psalm ends with a short prayer for the safety
of the people, and the coming back of their dispersed br^thren. So that it
seems to have been writ in the time of the Captivity of Babylon.

1 PRaise our Lord, Psalm. 105.
for he is good: For his mercy is everlasting.

2 Who shall relate the wonders of our Lord? who shall publish all his praises.

3 Happy are they, who keep the rules of justice, and in all times do what is
right.

4 Remember us, O Lord! according to the love thou bear thy people: visit
us with thy saving mercy.

5 That we may enjoy the good things reserved for thy Elect, That we may have
part in the enjoyments of thy people; And that thou may be praised by all
those of thy Inheritance.

6 We as well as our Fathers, have sinned: We have acted uniustly, And we are
guilty of iniquity.

8 They provoked God even when they were entering into the sea, Into the red
sea.

9 Yet he ceased not to preserve them, for the glory of his name, And to
manifest his power.

10 He threatningly commanded the red sea, And it instantly became dry: And he
led them through the middle of the waters, as if it had been through a dry desert.

11 He rescued them out of the hands of those, who hated them, and delivered
them out of the hands of Pharaoh their Enemy.

12 And the water overwhelmed those, who pursued them; Not one of them escaped.

13 Then they believed his words, and they celebrated his praises.

14 But soon after they forgott what he had done for them, And had not patien^e
to wait for the execution of his designs.

15 They were carried away with their inordinat desires in the defert, And
tempted God in the place without water.

16 He gave them what they petitioned for, And filled them with what their
souls desired.

17 Again they provoked Moses in the Camp, And Aron the holy one of our Lord.

18 The earth opened, and swallowed Dathan, and devoured Abiram with his
associats.

19 A fire rose up in the assembly of them, And the flames consumed the sinners.

20 They made a Calf in Horeb, and they adored the graven Image.

21 They transfered the glory belonging to him, To the image of an Ox that eats
grass.

22 They forgott God, who had saved them, who had done such great things in
Egypt, such prodigys in the land of Cham, And such terrifying wonders in the
red sea.

23 And he resolved to destroy them, which he had done, if Moses his chosen one
had not stood in the breach, and presented himself before him.

24 To divert his anger from destroying them. Then again they despised the land
so much to be desired.

25 They gave no credit to his word, And they murmured in their tents; They did
not hear the voice of our Lord;

26 And he lifted up his hand upon them, to exterminate them in the desert.

27 And to scatter the race of them amongst the nations, And to disperse them
into several Countries.

27 They worshipped Belphegor, and did eat of the sacrifices offered to dead men.

29 They irritated God in all their actions; And great numbers of them were
destroyed.

30 Then Phin^es rose up, and appeased God, And the mortality ceased.

31 And this was imputed to him, as justice, for all the Ages to come.

32 Again they provoked him at the waters of contradiction: And they brought
great vexation upon Moses, for they embittered his spirit.

33 And he spoke diffidently: They did not destroy the Nations, which our Lord
had commanded them to exterminat.

34 They mingled amongst the Gentiles, and learned their ways, and works: They
adored their Idols; and this was the occasion of their fall.

35 And they immolated their sons, and their daughters to Devils.

36 They did spill innocent blood, even the blood of their sons, and daughters,
which they sacrificed to the Idols of Canaan.

37 And the land was infected with blood, and contaminated with their works:
And they prostituted them selves to Idols of their own making.

38 And our Lord was enraged against his people, And he abominated his
inheritance.

39 And deliverd them up into the hands of the Nations, And put them under the
power of those, who hated them.

40 They were oppressed by their Enemies, and humbled under their Dominion.
Many times did God deliver them.

41 But they still held on to exasperat him in their evil ways; And their own
iniquitys brought misery upon them.

42 Yet he had a regard for them in their affliction, And he heard their prayer.

43 And he remembered his Covenant, And he relented according to the greatness
of his mercy;

44 And he raised compassion toward them in all those, who held them in
captivity.

45 Save us, O Lord, our God! And gather us again into a body out of the
Nations.

46 That we may honor thy holy name, And have glory in praising thee.

47 Blessed be our Lord, the God of Israel, now and for ever; And all the
people shall say, Amen, Amen.

PSALM CVI.
Confitemini Domino quoniam honus.
This Psalm is all praises, and tranksgiving. In the litterall sense it sets
sorth the delivery of the Israelites from the Captivity of Egypt* And from that
of Babylon; and in the Spiritual sense is discribed the redemption of mankind
from the slavery of the Devil by the death* of our savior.

1 PRaise our Lord, Psalm. 106.
for he is good, For his meecy continues for ever.

2 Let those speak who have been redem'd by our Lord, who have been delivered by
him out of the hands of the Enemy, And who have been brought together again out
of the Countries, where they were dispersed.

3 From the east, and the west, From the north, and From the south.

4 They have wandered in a wilderness without water; And they have not found any
way to a City of habiation.

5 They wanderd hungry, and thirsty; Their souls fainted within them.

6 And in their tribulation they cried out to our Lord, And he delivered them
from all their necessitys.

7 And Brought them into a right way, by which they might come to a City of
habitation.

8 Let them thank our Lord for his great mercy, And let them publish his
wonders to the sons of men.

9 For he has filled the empty soul, And with his good things has satiated the
hungry soul.

10 They sat in darkness, and in the shade of death, straightened with poverty, and
bound in irons;

11 Because they had been rebellious to the word of God, And had despised the
Counsel of the most high.

12 And their heart was brought low with labor, and misery; They sunk down
throw weakness; And there was no body to help them.

13 And in their tribulation they cried out to our Lord, And he delivered them
from all their calamitys:

14 And brought them out of darkness, and out of the shade of death; And broke
their chains in sunder.

15 Let them praise our Lord for his wonderful deeds to the sons of Men.

16 For he has made the brazen gates fly in pieces, And the iron bars he has
broke in sunder.

17 He received them when they returned from the way of their iniquitys: For
their injustices were the cause of their humiliation.

18 Their soul loathed all nourishment, Aod they were come to the very gates of
death.

19 And in their tribulation they cried out to our Lord, And he delivered them
from all their Calamitys.

20 He sent his word, and he healed them, And delivered them from death.

21 Let them praise our Lord for his Mercys, And for his wonderful deeds to
the sons of Men.

22 And let them offer him a sacrifice of praise, And with loud joy let them
set forth his works,

23 Who in ships made voyages upon the sea, Driving their trade on the great
waters,

24 They have seen the works of our Lord, And his wonders in the deep.

25 He said the word, and the wind blew a storm! and the waves were raised up:

26 They rose even to heaven, And fell again to the lowest depth: At the sight
of so much danger their souls were in an agony:

27 They were terrified, and reeled about like a drunken man; And all their
skill did q^i^e forsake them:

28 And in their trbulation they cried out to our Lord, And he deliverd them
from all their Calamitys:

29 And he changed his storm into a gentle gale, And his waves instantly were
quiet:

30 And they became joyful, because they were appeased: And he brought them
into their desired harbor.

31 Let them praise our Lord for his Mercys, And for his wonderful deeds to
the sons of Men.

32 Let them glorify him in the assembly of the people: And in the session of
the Elders, let them celebrate his praises.

33 He has changed rivers into dry deserts, And made dry ground where fountains
did spring:

34 He has made fruitful land become barren, for the wickedness of the
Inhabitants.

35 He has turned the barren desert into a place abounding with waters, And has
made fountains rise in the dryest land;

36 And there he has placed those, who wanted food; And they built themselves a
City to dwell in;

37 And they sowed the feilds, and planted vinyards, which yielded plenty of
fruit.

38 And he gave them his blessing, and they multiplied exceedingly; And their
stock of cattle did also increase.

39 And when they sinned again he reduced them to a small number; Evils came
upon them, and they were oppressed with sorrow.

40 He let their Princes fall into contempt, And made them wander about in
wilderneses, when there was no way.

41 Yet he raised the poor out of their needy condition; And increased their
familys, as a flock of sheep.

42 The just will see these things, and rejoice; And the mouth of iniquity will
be stopped.

43 Who is the wise man, that will keep in memory these things? And the mouth of
iniquity will be stopped.

PSALM CVII.
Paratum cormeum.
In The first part of this Psalm the mercys of God are praised, and in the
second his promise to preserve his kingdom is set forth with an invocation of
his assistance.

1 MY heart is prepared, Psalm. 107.
O God! my heart is prepared; In all my glory I will celebrate thy praises with
voice, and instrument.

2 Rise up my glory: Rise up the Psalter, and the harp, And I myself will rise
up betimes.

3 I will praise thee, O Lord! in the middle of the people, And I will sing thy
glory amongst the Nations:

4 Because thy mercy is raised above the heavens: And thy truth up to the
clouds.

5 Be exalted, O God! above all the heavens; And over all the earth let thy
glory shine: That thy beloved may be delivered.

6 Protect me with thy right hand, and hear me; God has said by his holy
Prophet;

7 I shall rejoice, and divide the land of Sichem, And measure out the valley
of the tabernacles.

8 Galaad is mine, and Manasses is mine, And Ephraim is the chief of my
strength.

9 Judah is the seat of my Empire; Moab vessel of my hope.

10 I will march into Idumea: strangers are now become my friends.

11 Who will lead me to the fortifyed City? who will conduct me into the middle
of Idumea?

12 Is it not thou, My God? who a while since rejected us? And will thou not go
forth with us at the head of our armies?

13 Releeve us, O Lord! in our distresses; For vain is the safety, which comes
from man.

14 With the help of our God we will perform great actions, and he will bring
to nothing all our Enemies.

PSALM CVIII.
Deus laudem meam.
David in this Psalm describes the malice of his Enemies, he imprecats them,
and sets forth his own affliction, imploring the help of God. But David as a
Prophet inspired by God had in his view the persecution, which the Jews raised
against Jesus Christ, and the treason of Judas one of his Apostles, as it
appears by the testimony both of St. Peter, and St. John; who cite verses of
this Psalm to that purpose.

1 O God! conceal not my praise, Psalm. 108.
for the mouth of the sinner, and the mouth of the deceiver are opened against
me.

2 They spoke against me with a deceitful tongue, And the expressions of their
hatred were heard on all sides; And they have set upon me without Cause.

3 In stead of loving me, as they ought, they have calumniated me; But J still
have prayed to thee.

4 And they rendered to me evil for good; And hatred for love.

5 Place the sinner over him, And let the devil stand upon his right hand.

6 When he comes to be judged, Psalm. 108.
let him go off condemned; And let his prayer become his sin.

7 Let his days be shortened; And let another take his ministry.

8 Let his children become orphans, And his wife a widow:

9 Let his children be vagabonds and beg, And let them be driven out of their
habitations.

10 Let the Usurer lay hold on his Estate: And let strangers seize upon the
fruits of his labors.

11 Let there be no body to help him* Nor to take pity of his orphan children:

12 Let all that is born of him be destroyed, And in one generation let his
name be extinguished.

13 Let the memory of his Progenitors iniquitys be still revived in the
presence of our Lord: And let not the sin of his mother be ever blotted out.

14 Let their crimes be still in the sight of our Lord, And let their memory
perish upon the earth: Because he did not remember to do mercy.

15 But persecuted an indigent, and poor man, and sought his life, whose heart
was peirced with sorrow.

16 He loved malediction, and it will come upon him: He rejected benediction,
And it will not come near him:

17 And he covered himself with malediction, as with a garment: It enterd into
his bowels like water, and like oil penetrated even to his very bones,

18 Let it be to him, as a garment, that covers him, And like a girdle that
allways go's round him.

19 Thus will my detracters be treated by our Lord, And they who conspire
against my life.

20 And thou O Lord, O Lord! assist me for the sake of thy name, Because thou
art full of mercy, and goodness.

21 Deliver me, for J am poor, and indigent, and my heart is disturbed within
me.

22 Like the shadow which declines, I pass away, And like the Locust J am
driven from place to place.

23 My knees are weakened with fasting: And my flesh is all changed for want of
oil.

24 J am become a subject of mockery to them: They have looked upon me, and
shaked their heads at me.

25 O Lord my God! succor me; save me according to thy mercy.

26 Let them see thy hand in it; And And that it is thou, O Lord? that have
done it.

27 They will curse me, and thou will bless me. Let those, who rise up against
me be coverd with shame, But let thy servant be filled with joy.

28 Let those, who calumniat me be clothed with confusion; And let them be
wrapped up in their own infamy, as with a double cloak.

19 I will praise our Lord with the whole force of my voice; And I will sing
his praises in the middle of the great assembly.

30 Because he has stood by me in my poverty, to save my life from those who
persecuted me.

PLALME CIX.
Dixit Dominus.
This prophetic Psalm both by the Title, and by what our savior himself said
of it, is certainly of David's making. It contains a prophecy concerning the
Messiah, as the Jews themselves did own, when our savior confuted them out of
it. It declares that the Messiah shall sit at the right hand of God, and shall
reign amongst the Nations; That his preis thod shall be eternal, That kings
skall fall before him, and that all shall be overcome by him.

1 THe Lord said to my Lord, Psalm. 109.
sit on my right hand,

2 Until I bring thy enemies to be thy foot stool.

3 Our Lord will send forth the scepter of thy Kingdom out of Sion: Go and
rule in the middle of thy Enemies.

4 Thy Empire will appear in the day of thy strength, in the splendour of thy
saints. Before the morning I begat thee.

5 Our Lord has sworn, and he will not repent; Thou art a Priest for all
eternity, according to the order of Melchisedeck.

6 Our Lord on thy right hand has destroyed Kings in the day of his Anger.

7 7 He will judge the Nations, he will fill all with ruin, he will crush on
the ground the heads of many.

8 He will drink out of the Torrent in the high way; therefore in glory he will
exalt his head.

PSALM CX.
Confitebor tibi Domine.
This Psalm contains praises, and thanks givings to God for the great wonders
he has done in favor of the People of Israel, which are much more applicable
to what he has done in favor of his Church.

1 I will praise thee, Psalm. 110.
O Lord! with my whole heart, In the assembly and Congregation of the just.

2 Great are the works of our Lord, exquisite in all his designs.

3 His works are glorious, and magnificent: his justice abides for ever.

4 Our merciful, and indulgent Lord has perpetuated sustenance for all that
fear him.

5 He will all ways remember his Covenant, he will make known to his people the
mightines of his works.

6 That he may give them the inheritance of the Nations: All his works are full
of truth and justice.

7 All his precepts are inviolable; established for all ages? Formed according
to truth and equity.

8 He has sent a redeemer to his people; he has made a Covenant with them for
all eternity.

9 Holy and terrible is his name: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom.

10 They who fear him are truly wise: His glory remains for ever and ever.

PSALM CXI.
Beatus vir.
This Psalm contains the praises of the virtuous and charitable man, and the
happiness which will attend him.

1 HAppy is the man who fears our Lord; Psalm. 111.
his whole pleasure will be to keep his Commandments.

2 His posterity shall be powerful upon the earth; The race of the just shall
be blessed.

3 Glory and riches will abound in his house; and his justice will remain for
ever.

4 A Light in Darkness is risen upon the just. Mild merciful and just is our
Lord.

5 He who takes pity and lends, and shall order his words with judgment, is a
joyful man, for he shall never be moved out of his place.

6 The memory of the just will eternally last; he will not fear any ill to be
said of him.

7 His heart is allways p^epar'd to hope in our Lord, his heart is firmly fixed;
he will remain unmoved, till he despises his Enemies.

8 He has liberally distributed his alms to the poor: his justice remains
recorded for ever: his power will be exalted in glory.

9 The sinner will see it, and be enraged, he will gnash his teeth, and wither
with envy; The desires of sinners shall come to nothing.

PSALM CXII.
Laudate pueri Dominum.
This Psalm contains an Exhortation to praise God for his greatness and glory,
and above all for his goodness toward the sons of men in taking care even of
the meanest amongst them, and raising them some times to the degree of Princes,
as it happened in the person of David himself.

1 PRaise our Lord all you that are his servants: Psalm. 112.
Praise the name of our Lord.

2 Let the name of our Lord be blssed both now and for ever.

3 From the rising to the setting of the sun all praise is due to the name of
our Lord.

4 Our Lord is raised above all the Nations, And above the heavens his glory is
exalted.

5 Who is like the Lord out God? who dwells on high, And looks upon all that is
humble, both in heaven and upon the earth.

6 Who raises the poor from the dust, And lifts up the needy from the dunghill,

7 To place him with Princes, even the Princes of his people;

8 Who makes the barren woman in the house, become a joyful mother of children.

PSALM CXIII.
In exitu Israel.
The Prophet in this Psalm makes an abrigement of the wonders which God
performed in bringing his people out of Egypt into the land of Canaan. The
chief defign of it is to print an aversion in the minds of the people against
the Idols of those Nations, And to settle them in the service of the true God.

1 WHen Israel went out of Egypt, Psalm. 113.
The house of Jacob out from a barbarous Nation.

2 Judea became the place of his sanctification, And Israel the seat of his
power.

3 The sea beheld him, and fled; Jordan was driven backwards.

4 The mountains leaped like rams, And the hills like the lambs of the flock.

5 O sea! what made thee fly? And thou Jordan! what drove thee back?

6 Why did, you mountains! leap like rams? And, you hills! like the lambs of
the flock?

7 At the sight of our Lord the earth did tremble; At the sight of the God of
Jacob,

8 Who changes rocks into pools of water, and quarys of stone into fountains.

9 Not to us, O Lord! Not to us, But to thy name give glory;

10 By making manifest thy mercy and thy truth, Least at any time the Nations
should say, Where is their God?

11 But our God is in heaven; what ever pleased him to do, he has done.

12 The Idols of the Nations are made of gold and silver, The handy works of
men;

13 They have a mouth, and can not speak, They have eyes, and can not see;

14 They have ears and can not hear, They have nostrils and cannot smell:

15 They have hands and can not feel, They have feet and can not walk; They
have a throat and can not cry out.

16 Let all be like them, who make them, and who confide in them.

17 The house of Israel confides in our Lord, he is their helper and their
protector.

18 The house of Aaron confides in our Lord, he is their helper and their
Protector.

19 All that fear our Lord confide in our Lord, he is their helper and their
Protector.

20 Our Lord has been mindful of us, and has given us his blessing.

21 He has blessed the house of Israel, he has blessed the house of Aaron.

22 He has blessed all who fear him, Both little and great.

23 May our Lord increase his blessings upon you, and upon your children.

24 Be ye all blessed by our Lord, who made heaven and earth.

25 The heaven of heavens belongs to our Lord; The earth he has given to the
sons of men.

26 The dead will not praise thee, O Lord, Nor all those, who descend into hell:

27 But we who live, bless our Lord now, and for ever.

PSALM CXIV.
Dilexi quoniam
The Prophet in this Psalm gives thanks to God for having delivered him from
an eminent danger, And promises sacrifices of praise to God for his mercy
shown to him.

1 J have loved, Psalm. ^^4.
Because our Lord will hear the voice of my prayer.

2 Because he has inclined his ear to me, And J will call upon him all the days
of my life.

3 The sorrows of death have besett me, And the dangers of hell are come upon
me,

4 J have met with tribulation and grief, And J have called upon the name of
our Lord.

5 O Lord! free my soul: our Lord is merciful and just: Our God is full of
pity.

6 Our Lord takes care of little ones: J was humbled, Psalm. 114.
and he delivered me.

7 Return my soul to thy rest, Because our Lord has been bountiful to thee.

8 Because he has freed my soul from death, my eyes from tears, and my feet
from falling.

9 J will please our Lord in the land of the living.

PSALM CXV.
Credidi propter quod.
This Psalm in the hebrew is a continuation of of the former, and it contains
the thanks of the Prophet to God for having loosened his bonds and delivered
him from a great danger.

1 J Have believed, and therefore J did speak; Ps^lm. 115.
But J have been exceedingly humbled.

2 J said in my transport of mind, Every man is a liar.

3 What shall J render to our Lord for all the benefits J have received from
him? J will take the cup of salvation, And call upon the name of our Lord.

4 J will perfom my vows to our Lord in the presence of all his people.
Precious in the sight of our Lord is the death of his saints.

5. O Lord! because J am thy servant, Because J am thy servant and the son of
thy hand maid.

6 Thou have broken my bonds, And J will sacrifice to thee a victime of praise,
And J will call upon the name of our Lord.

7 J will perform my vows to our Lord in the sight of all his people, At the
entrance of the house of our Lord, in the middle of thee, Jerusalem!

PSALM CXVI.
Laudate Dominum.
This Psalm is to be undertood of the vocation of the Gentiles, and the uniting
all the people of the earth Jews and Gentiles in one society viz. The Church of
Christ.

1 PRaise our Lord all ye Nations! Psalm. 116.
All people, give him praise!

2 Because his mercy is confirmed upon us: And the truth of our Lord remains
for ever.

PSALM CXVII.
Confitemini Domino.
This Psalm is a Canticle of thanksgiving which some think David sung, when he
was delivered from all his Enemies and settled upon the throne of Israel. But
tho this Psalm according to the letter is fitted to the person of David, yett
all agree, and even some of the Rabins, it ought also to be understood of the
Messiah: which evidently appears by the application which our savior himself
makes of it, and after him S. Peter.

1 GIve glory to our Lord, Psalm. 117.
because he is good, Because his mercy continues for ever.

2 Let Israel now say, that he is good, That his mercy continues for ever.

3 Let the house of Aron now say, That his mercy continues for ever.

4 Let them all say who fear our Lord, That his mercy continues for ever.

5 When J was in straits and in tribulation I called upon our Lord, and our
Lord heard me, and set me free.

6 Our Lord is my protector, I will not fear what man can do to me,

7 Our Lord is my protector, And I will despise all my enemies.

8 Much better it is to confide in our Lord, Then to confide in Man.

9 Much better it is to place our hope in our Lord, Then to place our hope in
Princes.

10 All the Nations have besett me round, But in the name of our Lord I have
been revenged upon them.

11 They have encompassed and beseiged me; But in the name of our Lord I have
been revenged upon them.

12 They have swarmed round me like bees, and have been inflamed like thorns
set on fire, But in the name of our Lord I have been revenged upon them.

13 I have been run upon and pushed so violently, that I was ready to fall, But
our Lord held me up.

14 Our Lord is my strength, and my praise, And he is become my savior.

15 Avoice of joy, and of ^alvation is heard in the tents of the just.

16 The Right hand of our Lord has shown its power, The right hand of our Lord
has raised me up, The Right hand of our Lord has shown its power.

17 I shall not die, but I shall live, and relate the works of our Lord.

18 Our Lord has punished and chastised me, But he has spared my life.

19 Open to me the gates of justice; when J am entered, I will praise our Lord:
This is the gate of our Lord, and the just will enter thereat.

20 I will give thee thanks, because thou have heard me, And art become my
savior.

21 The stone which the builders rejected, is made the corner stone.

22 This is the work of our Lord, And it is wonderful in our eyes.

23 This is the day, which our Lord has made; Let us triumph and rejoice therein.

24 O Lord! save me! May thy reign O Lord! be prosperous; Blessed is he who
comes in the name of our Lord.

25 We have blessed you from the house of the Lord. God is our Lord, And his
light has shined upon us.

26 Make this a day of solemnity, with thick covering of bows even to the horn
of the altar.

27 Thou art my God, and I will praise thy holy name, Thou art my God, And I
will celebrate thy glory.

28 I will celebrate thy holy name, because thou have heard me, and have saved
me.

29 Praise our Lord, because he is good, Because his mercy continues for ever.

PSALM CXVIII.
Beati immaculati.
This Psalm is all in praise of the law and ordonances of God wherein the
Prophet shows his own love and zeal for the observance of the Divine precepts,
Psalm. 118.
and also exhorts all people to do the like. Tho this Psalm be without any
Title, yet by the ressemblance of the style and the expressions, with those
that bear the Title of David's, it appears to have been made by the Royal
Prophet.

ALEPH.
1 BLessed are they whose ways are free from sin, And who walk according to the
Law of our Lord.

2 Blessed are they, who make his Commandments their inquiry, And who seek him
with all their heart;

3 For the doers of iniquity have not walkd in his ways.

4 Thou have commanded that thy laws shall be exactly kept.

5 Grant, O Lord! that my ways may be set right, And may only tend to the
performance of thy precept.

6 I shall not fall into confusion, If I have allways thy Commandments before
my eyes.

7 I will praise thee with an upright heart, Because I have been instructed in
the rules of thy justice.

8 I will keep thy ordinances, Do not forsake me for ever.

BETH.
9 Man in his youth how shall he correct his ways, but by following thy
precepts?

10 I have sought the with my whole heart; Deny me not grace to fulfill thy
law.

11 All thy words I have laid up in my heart, That I may never offend thee.

12 Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy justifiing precepts.

13 I have pronounced with my lips all the judgments which have proceeded from
thy mouth.

14 I have taken as much joy in following the way prescribed by thee, as in all
the riches of the world.

15 I will meditate on thy precepts, And study thy ways.

16 My thoughts shall dwell upon thy law, And I will never forgett thy words.

GIMEL.
17 Bestow thy grace upon thy sevant, Give me new life and I will keep thy
precepts.

18 Unveille my eyes, and I will contemplate the wonders of thy law.

19 J am but as a passenger upon the ear^h, Let me not remain in ignorance of
the p^ecepts.

20 My soul in all times has ardently desired thy justifications.

21 Thou have shown thy anger against the proud; Cursed are they, who disobey
thy Commandments.

22 Deliver me from reproach and contempt, since I have diligently sought thy
ordinances;

23 For the Princes have set in consultation against me, whilst thy servant
was busy in performing thy law.

24 Thy law is my only meditation, In all my actions I have consulted thy
precepts.

DALETH.
25 My soul has stuck to the earth; Give me life, according to thy word.

26 I have laid open to thee my ways, And thou have heard me; Teach me thy
saving Truths.

27 Lead me in the path of thy precepts, And I will meditate on thy wonders.

28 My soul is tired and become drouzy, strengthen me with thy words.

29 Keep me out of the way of iniquity, And let me obtain thy mercy by
observing thy law.

30 I have chosen the way of truth, I have not forgot thy judgments.

31 I have adhered to thy testimonys, O Lord, Let me not be put to confusion.

32 I ran with alacrity in the way of thy commandments. When thou were pleased
to enlarge my heart.

HETH.
33 Make thy precepts, O Lord! my only law, And I will allways seek it.

34 Give me understanding, and I will study thy law, And I will keep it with
all my heart.

35 Lead me in the path of thy Commandments, which are the desire of my soul.

36 Incline my heart to the love of thy law, And not to avarice.

37 Turn away my eyes, that they may not look upon vanity, Make me live in thy
way.

28 Establish thy word in thy servant, by the fear of thee.

39 Free me from the reproach which I have dreaded, For thy judgme^ts are f^ll
of mildnes.

40 Behold! I have ardently desired thy law: According to thy equity bestow
life upon me.

VAU.
41 And let thy mercy come down upon me, O Lord, And thy saving assistance
according to thy word;

42 And I will answer to those who reproach me, That I have put my trust in thy
promises.

43 Take not at any time the word of truth out of my mouth, Because I have put
my whole confidence in thy judgments.

44 And I will keep thy law continually, for ever and ever.

45 I have walked at liberty, Because I sought thy precepts.

46 And I have declared thy law in the presence of Kings, And was not
confounded.

47 I have meditated upon thy commandments, which are dear to me:

48 And I have lifted up my hands to execute thy precepts, which I have loved;
And I have made thy law my daily exercise.

ZAIN.
49 Remember thy promise made to thy servant, In which thou did give me hope.

50 This has been my confort in my distress, For thy word has revived me.

51 The proud have never ceased to do wickedly, But I have not declined from
thy law.

52 I have called to mind, O Lord! thy judgments from the beginning, And I have
been conforted.

53 I have been ready to sink down with grief, When I beheld sinners transgres
sing thy law.

54 Thy just decrees have been the subject of my Canticles in the place of my
pilgrimage.

55 I have been mindful by night of thy name, O Lord, And I have kept thy law.

56 This good has befallen me, because I made thy Ordinances my whole inquiry.

CHETH.
57 I have said, It is my portion, O Lord! to keep thy law.

58 I have implored thy assistance with all my heart, Take pity on me according
to thy promises.

59 I have examined my ways, And I have directed my steps according to thy
precepts.

60 J am prepared, without being disturbed, to keep thy Commandments.

61 Sinners have laid their snares round about me, But I have not forgott thy
law.

62 I have risen in the middle of the night to praise thee for the Equity of thy
judgments.

63 I take part with all who fear thee, And who observe thy precepts.

64 The earth is full of thy mercy, O Lord, Teach me thy just Law.

TETH.
65 Thou have been good to thy servant, O Lord! According to thy promises.

66 Instruct me in goodness, discipline, and science, because I have faith in
thy Commandments.

67 Because I was humbled, I sinned, And therefore I have kept thy Law.

68 Thou art good, and according to thy goodness, Teach me thy saving precepts.

69 The injustice of the proud increases against me, But I with my whole heart
will seek to obey thee.

70 Their heart is curdled like milk, but I have allways meditated on thy law.

71 It is good for me, that thou have humbled me, That I may learn thy saving
truths.

72 The Law, which thy mouth has pronounced, is better to me then thousands of
gold and silver.

JOD.
73 Thy hands have made me and formed me, Give me understanding, that I may
learn thy precepts.

74 Who fear thee, will see me, and rejoice, Because I have entirely confided
in thy words.

75 I have known, O Lord! that thy jugdments are equitable, And that according
to thy justice thou have humbled me.

76 Let thy mercy also appear to comfort me, According to what thou have said
to thy servant.

77 Let thy compassion come toward me, and I shall live For thy law is my only
study.

78 Let the proud be confounded, because they have unjustly persecuted me; But
I will be employed in performing thy Commands.

79 Let them turn on my side, all who fear the, And who understand thy law.

80 Let my heart be pure and sincere in keeping thy commandments, That I may
not be confounded.

CAPH.
81 My soul has languished in expectation of thy saving mercy, I have built my
hope upon thy word.

82 My eyes languish with longing after thy promises, saying, when will thou
comfort me?

83 For J am become like a bottle of leather, exposed to the frost; But I have
not forgott thy ordinances.

84 How many are the days of thy servant? when will thou judge those who
persecute me?

85 The unjust have told me fables, But they were not like thy law.

86 All thy Ordinances are truth it self; They have persecuted me unjustly,
Come and relieve me.

87 They have almost brought me to nothing upon the earth; But I have not
forsaken thy precepts.

88 According to thy mercy give me life, And I will keep the law pronounced by
thee.

LAMED.
89 Thy word, O Lord! does eternally subsist in heaven;

90 Thy truth will last from generation to generation; Thou have founded the
earth; And it will allways remain.

91 The day subsists by thy order, For all things are subject to thee.

92 Had not thy law been my meditation, I should perhaps have perished in my
affliction.

93 I will never forgett thy just laws, For by them thou have given me life.

94 J am thine, save me, Because I have carefully minded thy precepts.

95 Sinners have watched me, that they might destroy me; But I have kept my
self attentive to thy law.

96 I have seen an end of all perfect things here below. But thy law has no
end.

MEM.
97 How have I loved thy law, O Lord! It is my meditation the whole day.

98 Thy precepts have made me wiser then my enemies, For they are a rule to me
for ever.

99 J am become more knowing then all my teachers, Because thy law is my study.

100 J am become more intelligent then the old men, Because I have made
diligent inquiry into thy ordinances.

101 I have keept my feet out of every evil way, That I might observe thy
precepts.

102 I have not swarued from thy rules, For thou have thy self prescribed me a
law to go by.

103 How delightful to my taste are thy oracles! More delicious then honey to
my mouth.

104 Thy precepts have given me understanding, And therefore I have hated the
ways of iniquity.

NUN.
105 Thy word is a lamp to my feet, And a light to my path.

106 I have sworn, and have resolved to observe thy just decrees.

107 I have been humbled, O Lord! on all sides; Make me live, according to thy
promises.

108 Mak^ acceptable what my mouth does voluntarly offer to thee, And teach me
thy judgments.

109 My Expli. My life is all^ays in danger.
soul is allways in my hands, And I have not forgotten thy law.

110 The sinners have laid a snare for me, But I have not deviated from thy
precepts.

111 I have made thy law to be my inheritance for ever, Because it is the joy
of my heart.

112 I have disposed my heart allways to keep thy Commandments, Because the
reward is great.

SAMECH.
113 I have hated the unjust, And I have loved thy law.

114 Thou art my helper and my protector, And I build my hope upon thy word.

115 Depart from me all you that are wicked, For I will make the law of my God
my whole inquiry.

116 Receive me into thy protection according to thy word, and I shall live;
And let me not be confounded in failing of my expectation.

117 Help me, and I shall be safe, And I will allways Meditate upon thy just
decrees.

118 Thou have despised all that depart from thy law, Because their thoughts
are unjust.

119 I have looked upon all sinners of the earth as Prevaricaters, Therefore have
I loved thy testimonys.

120 Penetrat my flesh with thy fear, For thy judgments are terrible to me.

AIN.
121 I have proceeded with justice and equity, Give me not up to those who
calumniat me.

122 Receive thy servant into thy good protection: Let not the proud oppress me
with calumnies.

123 My eyes languish in expectation of thy saving mercy, And of the decrees of
thy justice.

124 Deal with thy servant according to thy mercy; Teach me thy ordinances.

125 I am thy servant give me understanding, that I may know thy will.

126 It is time for thee, O Lord, now to act; They have annulled thy law.

127 Thy precepts are dearer to me then gold and Topazes.

128 Therefore have I directed my steps according to thy Commandments, And have
detested all wicked ways.

PHE.
129 Thy testimonys are wonderful* Therefore has my soul searched into them.

130 The manifestation of thy words gives light, And affords understanding to
little ones.

131 I Have opened my mouth and panted, Because I longed for thy Commands.

132 Turn thine eyes toward me, and have mercy on me, As thou usually have on
those who love thy name.

133 Set my steps right in the way of thy precepts, And let no injustice rule
over me.

134 Deliver me from the Calumnies of men, That I may keep the Commandments.

135 Let thy countenance shine upon thy servant, And teach me thy ordinances.

137 Fountains of tears have flowed from my eyes, Because they have not kept
thy law.

TSADE.
137 Thou art just, O Lord, And thy judgments are full of equity.

138 Thou have commanded the keeping of thy laws, which are justice and truth
it self.

139 My zeal has consumed me, because my enemies have forgott thy words.

140 Thy words are sincere and tried by fire, And thy servant has loved them.

141 J am little and contemptible, yet have I not forgott thy precepts.

142 Thy justice is eternal justice, Thy law is truth it self.

143 Affliction and distress are come upon me, And I still meditate upon thy
precepts.

144 The equity of thy law is eternal, Give me understanding, and I shall live.

COPH.
145 I have cried out with my whole heart, Hear me, O Lord! I will seek thy law.

146 To thee I have cried out; Preserve me, that I may keep thy Commandments.

14^ I have made have and I have cried out betimes, Because all my hope is in
thy promises.

148 My eyes before the morning are lifted up to thee, That I may meditate upon
thy law.

149 Hear my voice O Lord! according to thy mercy, And according to thy justice
give me life.

150 They who persecute me, approach to iniquity, and are at a great distance
from thy law.

151 Thou, O Lord! art near at hand, And all thy ways are truth it self.

152 From the beginning I have known that thou have established for ever the
testimonys of thy law.

REZ.
153 See how low J am brought, and deliver me, For I have not forgott thy law.

154 Judge my cause and redeem me, Give me life according to thy promise.

155 Salvation is far from sinners, Because they have not observed thy just law.

156 Many are thy mercys, O Lord; According to the equity of thy judgment give
me life.

157 Many are they who persecute and afflict me, But I have not declined from
thy precepts.

158 I have beheld the breakers of thy law, And I have pyned with grief,
because thy transgressed thy ordinances.

159 See, O Lord! how I have loved thy Commandments, Let thy mercy make me live.

160 Truth is the principle of thy words, The justice of thy judgments is
eternal.

ZIN.
161 Princes have persecuted me without cause, And my heart is kept in fear by
thy words.

162 I will how ever rejoice in thy decrees, like one who finds rich spoils.

163 I have hated and abominated iniquity, But I have loved thy law.

164 Seven times in the day I have offered praises to thee for the rightiousnes
of thy judgments.

165 Much peace is enjoyed by those who love thy law, And nothing shall, make
them fall.

166 O Lord! I have waited for thy saving mercy, And I have loved thy
Commandments.

167 My soul has kept thy precepts, And has ardently loved them.

168 Thy Laws and thy ordinances I have carefully observed, Because all my ways
are seen by thee.

TAU.
169 Let my prayer have access to thee, O Lord; Give me understanding
according to thy word.

170 Let my petition come before thee, Deliver me according to thy promise.

171 My lips shall sing hymns, when thou shall vouchafe to teach me thy
ordinances.

172 My tongue shall publish thy words, Because thy precepts are justice it
self.

173 Hold out thy hand to save me, Because I have chosen thy law.

174 O Lord! I have earnestly sought thy saving mercy, And thy law is my
meditation.

175 My soul shall live and praise thee, And thy judgments will support me.

176 I have wandered like a Lost sheep; seek thy servant, for I have not
forgott thy Commandments.

PSALM CIX.
Ad Dominum cum tribularer.
This Psalm and fourteen more that follow are called by The Title of graduall,
tho the reason does not appear why they are so called. David seems to have
made this Psalm in the time of his banishment; he begs of God to deliver him
from the treachery of his Enemies, and deplores his exile amongst barbarous
people.

1 I called out to Our Lord in my affliction, Psalm. 119.
And he heard me.

2 Deliver my soul, O Lord! from unjust lips, And from the deceitful tongue.

3 What will be the just reward of a deceitful tongue?

4 The peircing Arrows of the mighty, desolating coals.

5 I greive, because my banishment is prolonged; I have dwelt with the
Inhabitants of Cedar, My soul has been a long while a stranger.

6 I was peaceful with those who hated peace, when I spoke to them, they
without any reason fell upon me.

PSALM CXX.
Levavi oculos meos.
The Author of this Psalm teaches, that hely is only to be expected from God
who allways takes care of the safety of his people.

1 I Have lifted up my eyes to the mountains, Psalm. 120.
whence assistance will come to me.

2 My assistance is from our Lord, who made heaven and earth.

3 Let him not suffer thy foot to be moved, And let him not slumber who has
thee in his custody.

4 Behold he will not slumber, nor will he sleep, who has the care of Israel.

5 Our Lord has thee in keeping, Our Lord is thy protection, he is on thy right
hand.

6 The fun shall not scorch thee by day, Nor the Moon hurt the by night.

7 Our Lord preserves thee from all evil, our Lord preserve thy soul.

8 Let our Lord guard thee at thy coming in and at thy going out, From this
time forwards and for ever.

PSALM CXXI.
Laetatus sum.
This Psalm in the literal sense expresses the joy of the people of Israel,
when they went to offer their sacrifices in Jerusalem; And in the spiritual
sense it ought to be applyd to the desire the faithful should have of entering
into the heavenly Jerusalem.

I Have rejoiced in what has been said to me, Psalm. 121.
That we shall go into the house of our Lord.

2 Our feet have formely stood within thy gates, O Jerusalem!

3 Jerusalem; a City so built, that all may in it meet together;

4 For thither have come up the Tribes, The Tribes of our Lord, according to
the Command given to Israel, There to celebrate the name of our Lord.

5 For there are seats of judicature, The seats belonging to the house of David.

6 Ask the things which make for the peace of Jerusalem, And may they enjoy all
plenty, who love thee, holy City.

7 Let there be peace within thy walls, And plenty within thy Towers;

8 For the sake of my brethren and of my neighbors I have spoken for thy peace.

9 For the sake of the house of the Lord our God, I have sought thy good.

PSALM CXXII.
Ad te Levavi.
This Psalm contains an excellent prayer made to God by the just when they
are oppressed by their Enemies.

1 TO thee I have lifted up my eyes, Psalm. 122.
who dwell in heaven.

2 As the eyes of servants watch their Masters hands.

3 As the eyes of the handmaid are fixed upon the hand of there Mistres, so are
our eyes upon the Lord our God, till he takes compassion of us.

4 Have mercy on us, O Lord! have mercy on us; For we are in the lowest degree
of contempt.

5 Our soul is full of confusion being reproch'd by the rich, and despised by
the proud.

PSALM CXXIII.
Nisi quia Dominus.
This Psalm appears to be a thanks giving, vhich the Prophet put into the
mouth of the Jews after their return from Babylon.

1 HAd not our Lord been with us, Let Israel now say, Psalm. 123.
had not our Lord been with us.

2 When men rose up against us, we might have been devoured alive.

3 When their fury was raised against us, We might have been swallowed up in
the Deep.

4 Our soul has passed through a torrent, In which we might otherwise have
been drowned.

5 Blessed be our Lord, who has not given us up as a prey into their teeth.

6 Our soul is delivered like a sparow out of the nets of the fowlers.

7 The net was broken, and we have been set free.

8 We have been succor'd in the name of our Lord, who made heaven and earth.

PSALM CXXIV.
Qui confidunt in Domino.
In this Psalm God declares himself the Protector of his people of Israel, and
promises to support them against all their Enemies, Which chiefly is to be
understood of the Church, which comprehends the true people of God, and which
our Lord has promised to preserve to the end of the world.

1 THey who confide in our Lord, Psalm. 124.
shall be like mount Sion: He who dwells in Jerusalem shall never be moved.

2 Mountains incompasse Jerusalem, And our Lord does incompass his people, now
and for all ages.

3 For our Lord will not permit the scepter of the wicked to continue over the
Inheritance of the Just, Least the just should be brought to stretch forth
their hands to iniquity.

4 Bestow thy benefits, O Lord! upon the good, And the upright of heart;

5 But such as turn aside to crooked ways, our Lord will treat like those who
committ open iniquity; Peace be to Israel.

PSALM CXXV.
In convertendo Dominus.
This Psalm seems to relate to the time when the Jews were brought back from
the first Captivity of Babylon, And therefore the Author congratulats the people
upon the greatness of so unexpected a felicity; after which he prays God to
finish the work he has begun, and fortells that happy days are at last to
succeed.

1 WHen Our Lord restored Sion out of captivity, Psalm. 125.
great was our consolation.

2 Then was our mouth filled with Jubily, And our tongue with outcrys of joy.

3 Then it was said amongst the Nations, The Lord has done great things for
them.

4 Our Lord indeed has done great things for us; And we are become full of joy.

5 Make our Captivty, O Lord, come back like a torrent in the south.

6 Who sow in tears, with joy shall reap.

7 They went forth weeping when they sowed their seed,

8 They shall return with joy, when they carry their sheaues.

PSALM CXXVI.
Nisi Dominus.
This Psalm declares that vain are the labors of men, unless God give succes
to them.

1 UNless our Lord puts his hand to the building of the house, Psalm. 126.
In vain they labor who build it.

2 Unless our Lord does guard the City, In vain they watch who have the
keeping of it.

3 It is to no purpose for you to rise before day; Rise after you have reposed,
you who eat the bread of sorrow.

4 When to his beloved he shall give sleep, Children are the inheritance which
our Lord bestows; The fruit of the womb is his reward.

5 The Children of those who have been driven out, Will prove like arrows in the
hands of the mighty.

6 Happy is the man, who has plenty of them according to his wish; he shall not
be put to confusion, when he speaks to his Enemies in judicature, at the gate
of the City.

PSALM CXXVII.
Beati omnes.
In this Psalm the prophet shows that by fearing God we become happy even in
this life. Figuratively is meant the happiness of the Church of Jesus Christ.

1 HAppy are all who fear our Lord, Psalm. 127.
who walk in his ways.

2 Thou shall eat the fruit of the labor of thy hands; Thou art happy, and it
shall be well with thee.

3 Thy wife shall be like a fruitful vine on the sides of thy house.

4 Thy children shall sit round thy table, like young olive trees.

5 So shall the man be blessed, who fears our Lord.

6 May our Lord bless thee from Sion, And may thou see the good things of
Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

7 And may thou see the sons of thy sons, And peace over Israel.

PSALM CXXVIII.
Saepe expugnaverunt.
This Psalm foretells the punishments which shall fall upon those, who
persecute the Just.

1 OFten have they set upon me from my youth, Psalm. 128.
Let Israel now say.

2 Often have they set upon me from my youth, But they have not prevailed
against me.

3 Sinners have laid loads upon my back, They have long continued their
injustice against me.

4 But our Just Lord will cut in sunder the necks of sinners; Let them all be
confounded and driven back, who hate Sion.

5 Let them become like the grass that grows on the tops of houses, which
withers before you can pluck it,

6 with which he can not fill his hand who cuts it, Nor he his lap, who gathers
it.

7 Nor did they say, who passed by, the blessing of our Lord be upon you: we
bless you in the name of our Lord.

PSALM CXXVIX.
De profundis.
This Psalm is an excellent Model for sinners that implore the Mercy of Lord:
And it is particularly applied by the Church to beg his mercy for the dead as
well as for the living.

1 FRom the lowest depth I have cried out to thee, Psalm. 129.
O Lord! O Lord! hear my voice.

2 Let thy ears be attentive to the voice of my prayer.

3 O Lord, if thou take a strict account of our iniquities, O Lord! who can
stand before thee?

4 But mercy dwells with thee, And thy law, O Lord! make me hope in thee.

5 My soul is supported by his word, The hope of my soul is in our Lord.

6 From the morning watch to the close of the evening, Let Israel hope in our
Lord;

7 For our Lo^d is full of mercy, And in him is found plentiful redemption.

8 And he will redeem Israel from all their Iniquitys.

PSALM CXXX.
Domine non est exaltum.
It is generally believed that David made this Psalm when he was accused by
Saul and his Courtiers of ambitious dessigns to make himself King, He appeals
to God, that he was uniustly accused, and that his heart was free from any such
ambition.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 130.
my heart has not been lifted up, Nor have my eyes been elevated with pride.

2 Nor have I gone busying my self with great and high things, that are above
me.

3 If I have not had humble thoughts of myself, And if pride has puffed up my
soul.

4 May I be reduced to the helples condition of an infant newly weaned from the
breast of the mother.

5 Let Israel hope in our Lord now and for ever.

PSALM CXXXI.
Memento Domine David.
Some say this Psalm was made by David when he translated the Ark to mount
Sion; Others that it was made by Solomon when it was translated into the Temple
which he built.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 131.
remember David, And all his mildnes;

2 How he swore to the Lord, And made a vow to the God of Jacob,

3 If J enter into the lodgings of my house, if J ascend into the bed whereon J
use to lie.

4 Jf J permit my eyes to sleep, or my eye lids to slumber.

5 Jf J lay down my head to rest, Till J find a place for our Lord, a
Tabernacle for the God of Jacob.

6 We have heard it said that the Ark was in Ephrata; we have found it in the
plains of the forest.

7 We will enter into his Tabernacle, we will adore in the place, where his
feet have stood.

8 Rise up, O Lord! and go into thy place of rest, Thou, and the Ark sanctified
by thee.

9 Let thy priests be clothed with justice, And thy saints filled with joy.

10 For the sake of David thy servant, Turn not thy face away from thy Christ.

11 Our Lord has sworn the truth to David, and he will not go from it I will
place upon thy throne the issue of thy body.

12 If thy children do keep my Covenant, And the precepts which I will teach
them.

13 They and their children for ever shall sit upon thy Throne.

14 For our Lord has made choice of Sion, he has chosen it to be a habitation
for himself.

15 He has said, Here I will rest for ever, here I will dwell, because it is a
place of my own choosing.

16 The widow there shall abundantly find my blessings; The poor I will
plentifully feed with bread.

17 The priests I will cloth with my saving mercy, And the saints shall there
sing Canticles of joy.

18 There I will manifest the power of David: I have prepared a lamp for my
Christ.

19 His Enemies I will cover with confusion, But upon him my sanctification
shall flourish.

PLALME CXXXII.
Ecce quam bonum.
This Psalm declares the happiness of unity amongst the faithful.

1 BEhold how good and how dilghtfull it is, Psalm. 132.
for brethren to dwell in unity together.

2 It Is like the precious ointment powered upon the head, which dropped down upon
the beard, the beard of Aron;

3 And descended to the hem of his garment, It Is like the dew of Hermon, the
dew, which falls upon the mountain of Sion.

4 For it is there, that our Lord has established benediction and life for ever.

PSALM CXXXIII.
Ecce nunc benedicite.
All those who serve God are exhorted to pray to him, And bless him both by day
and by night.

1 COme now and bless our Lord, Psalm. 133.
all you that are servants of our Lord;

2 You who attend in the house of our Lord, In the Courts of the house of our
God.

3 Lift up your hands by night in the sanctuary, And praise our Lord.

4 Let our Lord bless thee from Sion, who made heaven and earth.

PSALM CXXXIV.
Laudate nomen Domini.
The Priests and the Levites are exhorted in this Psalm to sing the praises of
God upon the subjects of his mercy, of his power and Majesty. vanity of Idols
is also set sorth.

1 PRaise the name of our Lord; Psalm. 134.
you that are his servants, praise, our Lord.

2. Who attend in the house of our Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.

3 Praise our Lord, because our Lord, is good; With voice and instrument praise
his name, because it is full of sweetness.

4 For our Lord has chosen Jacob for himself, And Jsrael for his own possession.

5 J know that our Lord is great, And that our God is above all the Gods.

6 Whatever he would do, our Lord has done, both In heaven and in earth, In
the sea, And all the deep places.

7 He raises clouds from the extremitys of the earth: he makes thunder produce
rain;

8 He draws forth winds out of his Magazins. He struck dead the first born of
Egypt, both men and beasts;

9 And he made his signs and prodigys appear in the middle of thee, O Egypt;
Against Pharaoh and all his servants.

10 He defeated several Nations, And killed powerful Kings.

11 Schon King of the Amorheans, And Og the King of Basan, And all the
Kingdoms of Canaan.

12 And he gave their land to be the inheritance of his people of Israel.

13 O Lord! thy name will last eternally; Thy memory, O Lord! will continue
from generation to generation.

14 For our Lord will judge his people, And he will hearken to the prayers of
his servants.

15 The Idols of the Nations are made of gold and silver, The works of men's
hands.

16 They have a mouth, and can not speak, They have eyes and can not see.

17 They have ears, and can not hear; Nor is there breath in their mouths.

18 Let all that make them be like to them, And all that confide in them.

19 House of Israel! bless our Lord; house of Aron! bless our Lord.

20 House of Levi! bless our Lord; All you that fear our Lord, bless our Lord.

21 Blessed be our Lord in Sion, who dwells in Jerusalem.

PSALM XXXV.
Confitemini Domino.
All are invited to praise God for the benfites he has bestowed upon, And the
wonders h^ has done, for the people of Israel.

1 PRaise our Lord, because, he is good, Psalm. 135.
Because his mercy continues for ever.

2 Praise the God of Gods, Because his mercy continues for ever.

3 Praise the Lord of Lords, because his mercy continues for ever;

4 Praise him, who alone does great and wonderful things, because his mercy
continues for ever?

5 Who by his wisdom made the heavens, because his mercy continues for ever;

6 Who settled the earth above the waters, because his mercy continues for ever.

7 Who made the great luminars, because his mercy continues for ever;

8 The sun to preside by day, because his mercy continues for ever;

9 The moon and the stars to preside by night, because his mercy continues for
ever;

10 Who struck Egypt and killed their first born, because his mercy continues
for ever.

11 Who brought forth Israel from the middle of them, because his mercy
continues for ever.

12 With a strong hand and a strecht out arm, because his mercy continues for
ever.

13 Who divided in sunder the red sea, because his mercy continues for ever,

14 And brought out Israel through the middle of it, because his mercy continues
for ever;

15 And over threw Pharoh with all his host in the red sea, because his mercy
continues for ever;

16 Who conducted his people in the desert; because his mercy continues for
ever.

17 Who defeated great Kings because his mercy continues for ever.

18 Who slew strong Kings, because his mercy continues for ever,

19 Sehon the King of the Amorites, because his mercy continues for ever,

20 And Og the King of Basan, because his mercy continues for ever.

21 And he gave their land for an inheritance, because his mercy Continues for
ever,

22 For an inheritance to Israel his servant, because his mercy continues for
ever.

23 In our humiliation he was mindful of us, because his mercy continues for
ever.

24 And he redeemed us out of the hand of our Enemies, because his mercy
continues for ever.

25 Who gives food to all living creatures, because his mercy continues for
ever.

26 Praise the God of heaven, because his mercy continues for ever.

27 Praise the Lord of Lords, because his mercy continues for ever.

PSALM CXXXVI.
Super flumina Babylonis.
This is a Canticle which the Prophet puts into the mouth of the people of
Israel when they were in Captivity, to deplore the misery of their banishment,
an^ to desire their return to Jerusalem. The Church makes use of it to
represent to her Children the miserys of this life, And to raise holy desires
in them of going to heaven which is their true Country.

1 UPon the banks of the rivers of Babylon we have sat down and wept, Psalm.
36.
when we remembered Sion.

2 We hung up our harps on the willows in the middle thereof;

3 For there did the men who had made us Captives, Ask us to sing songs of joy.

4 They, who had carried us away, said, sing to us one of your Canticles of
Sion.

5 How shall we sing a Canticle of our Lord in a strange land: Psalm. 136.


6 If I ever forget thee, O Jerusalem! Let me forget my right hand;

7 Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, If I remember not thee.

8 If I do not make Jerusalem the principal subject of my joy.

9 Remember, O Lord! the sons of Edom, what they did in the day of Jerusalems
desolation;

10 They cry, destroy it, destroy it to the very fundation.

11 Wretched daughter of Babylon! blessed be he, who shall render to thee the
evil thou have done us.

12 May he be blessed, who takes thy little ones, and dashes them in pieces
against the rock.

PSALM CXXXVII.
Confitebor tibi Domine.
In this Psalm David thanks God for all the benefits received from him, and
expresses his assurance in the Divine assistance for the future.

1 I Will thank thee, O Lord! with my whole heart, Psalm. 137.
because thou have heard the words of my mouth.

2 In the presence of thy Angels I will sing thy praises; I will adore thee in
thy holy Temple, and celebrate thy name.

3 In acknowlegement of thy mercy; and thy truth, because thou have magnified
thy holy name above all names.

4 In what day soever I shall call upon thee, Vouchafe to hear me, Thou will
strengthen my soul still more and more.

5 Let all the Kings of the earth celebrate thy praises, O Lord; because they
have heard all the words of thy mouth.

6 And let them sing in the ways of our Lord, That great is the glory of our
Lord.

7 For our Lord is above all, And he regards low things; And the high he looks
upon at a distance.

8 If I walk in the middle of tribulation, thou will give me life; Thou have
stretched out thy hand against the rage of my Enemies, And thy right hand has
saved me.

9 Our Lord will revenge my cause, Thy mercy, O Lord! is everlasting; Despise
not the works of thy own hands.

PSALM XXXVIII.
Domine probasti me.
In this Psalm David setts forth the infinite ex^ont of Gods knowledge, and how
nothing from the beginning to the end of the world is concealed from him,
according to which knowledge he will judge Mankind.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 138.
thou have tried me, and thou have known me; Thou have known my sittings down,
and my risings up.

2 A far off thou have discovered my thoughts, And thou have traced all my
steps.

3 Thou have foreseen all my ways, and every word that my tongue shall speak.

4 O Lord! thou know all that is to come, and all that is past; Thou have
formed me, and thou have laid thy hand upon me.

5 Wonderful is thy knowledge concerning me, It is above my reach, And I can
not comprehend it.

6 Whither can J go to be concealed from thy spirit? And whither shall I fly to
be out of thy sight?

7 If I go up to heaven, thou art there; If I go down into hell, there also thou
art.

8 If I take wings early in the morning to go and dwell in the extremest parts
of the sea,

9 Even thither thy hand will conduct me, And thou will hold me with thy right
hand.

10 I then said, perhaps darkness will cover me; But I found that night was not
dark to the, but discovered me to thee in my pleasures:

11 For darkness hides nothing from thee, to whom the night is no less
illuminated then the day: The Darkness of the one, and the light of the other
are both alike to thee.

12 For thou have possessed my Reins; Thou did receive me from my Mothers
womb.

13 I will praise thee, because thou have in a terrible manner shown thy power;
Thy works are wonderful, and my soul is penetrated with them.

14 There is not a bone within me, formed by thee in a secret place, that is hid
to thee, And my whole substance was known to thee, when it lay below in the
earth.

15 Thy eyes beheld me when I was but half finished. All will be registered in
thy book, They will be formed from day to day, And non of them will be missing.

15 But I see, my God! how exceedingly thou have honored thy friends, how
firmly thou have established their dominion.

17 If I go to reckon them, I find they exceed in number the grains of sand. I
have rose up, and J am still with thee.

18 O God! since thou will destroy sinners, Depart from me all you men of blood!

19 Because you say within your selves, In vain they will take possession of
thy Cittys.

20 Have I not, O Lord! hated those who hate thee? And been almost consumed with
Zeal against thy enemies.

21 I hated them with a perfect hatred, And they became my Enemies.

22 Search me, O Lord! and sound my heart; Examine me, And look into all my
ways,

23 And see if J am in any way of iniquity, And lead me right in the way of
eternity.

PSALM CXXXIX.
Eripe me Domine.
This Psalm seems to have been made by the holy prophet David when he saw
himself beseiged on all sides, and persecuted to death by Saul.

1 DEliver me, Psalm. 139.
O Lord, from the wicked man; From the unjust man deliver me.

2 They who formed wicked dessigns in their heart, have made continual war
against me.

3 They have sharpened their tongues like serpents: The poison of aspes lies
under their lips.

4 Preserve me, O Lord! from the hand of the sinner, Deliver me from unjust men,

5 Who have dessign'd to supplant me, and make me fall: The proud have Laid a
secret snare for me.

6 They have spread their nets, and have set their traps in my way.

7 I have said to our Lord, Thou art my God; O Lord! hear the voice of my
prayer.

8 O Lord! by whose power I have been saved, Who have covered my head in the
day of battle.

9 O Lord! do not deliver me up against my will to the sinner; They have
designs against me, forsake me not, least their pride should triumph over me.

10 All their circumventions, and studied Calumnies of their lips, will return
upon themselves.

11 Burning coals will fall upon them, Thou will cast them into the fire; They
will sink under their misery.

12 The lavish tongue shall not thrive upon the earth, And the unjust man will
make a wretched end.

13 I know that our Lord will do justice to the afflicted, And that he will
revenge the cause of the poor.

14 The just shall praise thy name, And the upright of heart shall enjoy thy
presence.

PSALM CXL.
Domine clamavi.
It is believed that this Psalm was made by David upon the same occasion, and
near the same time with that which went before.

1 O Lord! Psalm. 140.
I have cried out to thee* Vouchafe to hear me: Listen to my voice when I call
upon thee.

2 Let my prayer, like incense, ascend to thee; as an evening sacrifice,
receive the holding up of my hands.

3 Place a watch, O Lord! upon my mouth, and a door to guard my lips.

4 Suffer not my heart to be inclined to words of malice, to seek excuses for
my sins.

5 I will have nothing to do with the workers of iniquity, nor with any thing
that is pleasing to them.

6 The just man will admonish me with charity, and will reprehend me; But let
not the sinner grease my head with his oil of flatery.

7 For I will still pray against the things, which they delight in, Their
Judges shall be splitt upon the rock, and swallowed up.

8 They will hear my words at last, because they are powerful. As clods of the
earth are borken by the plow and scattered about the ground:

9 So are our bones dispersed even to the brink of the grave Wherefore to thee O
Lord! my Lord; I lift up my eyes: I have putt my hope in thee, Let not my life
be taken away.

10 Preserve me from the snare, which they have laid for me, And from the
trapps of the workers of iniquity.

11 Sinners shall fall into their own net, stand alone, till the time of my
passage comes.

PSALM CXLI.
Voce mea ad Dominum.
This Psalm contains David's prayer ^hen he was in the Cave beseiged by Saul.
He setts forth the greatness of the danger he was in: he expects, and hopes for
his deliverance only from God.

1 I Have raised my voice, Psalm. 141.
and cried out to our Lord; I have raised my voice, And prayed to our Lord.

2 I power forth my prayer in his presence, And I lay before him all my
sufferings.

3 Whilst my spirit sinks down within me: But thou, O Lord, know all my
stepps.

4 In the way J used to walk they have laid a hiden snare for me.

5 I looked about on my right hand, and I considered, And there was no body that
knew me.

6 I can not escape by flying away, And there is not any that takes care to save
my life.

7 O Lord; I have cried out to thee: I have said, thou art my hope, Thou art my
portion in the land of the living.

8 Be attentive to my prayer, For J am humbled to the last extremity.

9 Deliver me from those who persecute me, Because J am overpowered by them.

10 Deliver my soul out of this prison, that J may praise thy name: The just
wait for me, expecting the releif thou will give me.

PSALM CXLII.
Domine exaudi.
This Psalm David made when God punished him by the rebellion of his son
Absolon for his former sins of adultery and murder. He humbles himself before
God, and begs his pardon and mercy And by his example teaches all sinners how
they ought to humble themselves before God for their sins.

1 LOrd! Psalm. 142.
hear my prayer; Give ear to my supplication, according to thy truth; hear me
according to thy equity.

2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant; For no man living can be
justified in thy sight.

3 For the Enemy has persecuted my soul: he has humbled my life even to the
earth.

4 He has lodged me in a obscure place, like the dead; And my soul is full of
anxiety, my heart is disturbed within me.

5 I have called to mind the days of old, I have considered the great things
thou have done, and J have meditated upon the works of thy hands.

6 J have stretched forth my hands to thee; J present my soul before thee a^
earth without water.

7 Hear me quickly, O Lord! my spirit is quite sinking

8 Turn not thy face from me, Least J become like those, who descend into the
lake.

9 Let me speedily find thy timely mercy, Because J have hoped in ^hee.

10 Make known to me the way, in which J am to walk, For to thee J have lifted
up my soul.

11 Rescue me, O Lord! from my Enemies; to thee J fly for refuge: Teach me to do
thy will, for thou art my God.

12 Thy good spirit will lead me into the right way: For the glory of thy name,
O Lord! thou will give me life according to thy equity.

13 Thou will bring my soul out of tribulation, And in thy mercy thou will
defeat my enemies.

14 And thou will destroy all who afflict my soul, because J am thy servant.

PSALM CXLIII.
Benedictus Dominus.
David gives thanks to God in this Psalm for the assistance he has allways
received from him. In the second place he prays that all the Kings, and
Nations, that oppose him, may be overthrown.

1 BLessed be our Lord, Psalm. 143.
my God; who teaches my hands to fight in battle, And my fingers to wage war.

2 He is merciful toward me; he is my refuge, my defender, and my deliverer.

3 He is my protector, and my hope is in him, who makes subject my people to me.

4 O Lord! what is man that thou should m^ke thy self known to him? Or the
son of man, that he should merit thy consideration?

5 Man is become like to nothing, his days pass away like a shadow

6 Bow thy heavens, O Lord! and come down: Touch the mountains, and they will
smoke.

7 Dart forth thy lightenning, and thou will dissipate them. Shoot thy arrows,
and thou will confound them.

8 Stretch forth thy hand from above, and rescue me: Deliver me out of the deep
waters, out of the hands of the sons of strangers Rebellious children*
.

9 Whose mouths speak lies, And whose right hand is the right hand of iniquity.

10 O God; J will sing a new song to thee, J will sing it upon the instrument
of ten strings.

11 Thou, who give safety to Kings, who have redeemed David thy servant from
the sword of the Enemy; Now also deliver me;

12 Deliver me out of the hands of the sons of strangers, whose right hands are
the right hands of iniquity;

13 Whose children flourish in youth, like new plantations;

14 Their daughters are finely decked, And adorned like a Temple;

15 Their store houses are full, and overflown out of one into the other;

16 Their yews are fruitful, and come out of their folds in great flocks;
Their oxen are fat.

17 There are no breaches nor open passages in their enclosures, Nor any outcrys
in their streets.

18 Happy, they have said, are the people to whom these things befall; But happy
is the people, who have our Lord for their God.

PSALM CXLIV.
Exaltabo t^ Deus.
The Title of this Psalm shows that David made it to serve upon occa^ions for
praising and thanking our Lord.

1 J will glorify thee, Psalm. 144.
my King, and my God: J will bless thy name for ever and ever.

2 Every day J will bless thee, And J will praise thy name eternally.

3 Great is our Lord, worthy of all praise; His greatness is infinite.

4 All ages to come shall praise thy works, And shall declare thy power;

5 They shall celabrate the magnificent glory of thy holiness, And shall relate
^hy wonders;

6 They shall make known the force of thy terrible judgments; And set forth
thy greatness;

7 They will publish the memory of thy abounding sweetness, And they will
rejoice in thy justice.

8 Our Lord is compassionat and merciful, he is patient and full of mercy.

9 Our Lord is Benign to all: And his mercys are above all his works.

10 Let all thy works praise thee, O Lord! And let thy saints bless thee.

11 They shall publish the glory of thy Kingdom, And shall declare thy power.

12 That they may make known to the sons of men thy Allmightynes, And the
magnificent glory of thy Kingdom

13 Thy Kingdom is a Kigdome of all ages, And thy Empire is from generation to
generation.

14 Our Lord is true in all his words, And holy in all his works;

15 He lifts up all that fall, And raises from the ground all that are bruised.

16 The eyes of all creatures hope in thee, And thou give them food in
seasonable time.

17 Thou openest thy hand, and fillest every living creature with benediction.

18 Our Lord is just in all his ways, And holy in all his works.

19 Our Lord is near at hand to those, who call upon him, And to all that invoke
him in truth.

20 He will perform the desires of those, who fear him; he will hear their
prayers, and will save them.

21 Our Lord takes into his protection those, wholove him, And will destroy all
sinners.

22 My mouth shall speak the praises of our Lord: And let all flesh bless his
holy name for ever and ever.

PSALM CXLV.
Lauda anima mea.
In this Psalm are comm^morated the benefits of God bestowed upon men, and it
declares that we onght to put our trust in him alone.

ALLALUIA.
1 O My soul! Psalm. 145.
Praise thou our Lord; Whilst I live I will praise our Lord; I will sing the
praises of my God, as long as J am in being.

2 Confide not in Princes, not in the sons of men, in whom there is no safety.

3 Their soul will depart, and they will return to the earth, whence they came:
In that day all their designs will vanish.

4 Blessed is he, who has the God of Jacob for his defender, whose hope is in
the Lord his God, who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things that are
in them.

5 Who preserves truth for ever; Who does justice to those, who suffer injury,
and gives food to thee hungry.

6 Our Lord loosens the bonds of prisoners, Our Lord gives sight to the blind.

7 Our Lord lifts up those, who have been bruised; Our Lord loves the just;

8 Our Lord will defend the stranger, And take into his protection the orphan
and the widow, And he will confound the ways of sinners.

9 Our Lord will reign for ever, Thy God, O Sion! will reign from generation to
generation.

ALLELUIA.
PSALM CXLVI.
Laudate Dominum.
This Psalm was also made to praise God for his universal providence toward
all creatures and for his particular care of the people of Israel,

ALLELUIA.
1 PRaise ye our Lord, Psalm. 147.
for it is good to sing his praise: Let us offer praises to our God, that may be
acceptable and worthy of him.

2 Our Lord, who built Jerusalem, will gather together the people of Israel,
that have been dispersed.

3 It Is he who heals those, whose hearts are broken, And binds up their wounds.

4 Who numbers all the stars, And calls them by their names.

5 Great is our Lord, And great is his power, his wisdom is infinite.

6. Our Lord takes the meek into his protection, he humbles the sinners down to
the earth.

7 Sing to our Lord with thanksgiving, sing upon the harp praises to our God.

8 Who covers the heaven with clouds, And prepares rain for the earth;

9 Who produces grass upon the mountains, ad herbs for the use of men;

10 Who provides food for their cattle, And for the young ones of crows, when
they cry out to him.

11 Our Lord loves not the man, who confides in the strength of his horse, Or
in the swiftnes of his legs;

12 Our Lord is pleased with those, who fear him, And who hope in his mercy.

ALLELUIA.
PSALM XLVII.
Lauda Jerusalem.
This Psalm was made when the jews had rebuilt the walls of Jerusalem in
praise of Gods providence over all his creatures, and of his particular mercy
toward the Israelites.

ALLELUIA.
1 JErusalem! Psalm. 147.
praise thou our Lord; Sion! praise thou thy God;

2 For he has made strong the locks of thy gates, Psalm. 148.
he has blessed thy children within thee;

3 It is he who has settled peace in thy borders, And fills thee with the
choicest wheat.

4 Who sends his word of command to the earth, And his words runs suiftly about.

5 Who makes snow fall like wool, And scatters the hoary frost like ashes.

6 He casts forth his ice like morsels: Who can endure the rigor of his cold?

7 When he says the word, they will all be melted: his wind will blow, and the
waters will flow again.

8 It is he who holds forth his word to Jacob, The rules of his justice, and
his judgments to Israel.

9 He has not done so to any of the Nations, Nor has he manifested his
judgments to them.

ALLELUIA.
PSALM CXLVIII.
Laudate Dominum de celis.
This Psalm also invites all creatures to celebrate the praises of God.

ALLELUIA.
1 PRaise our Lord all you that are in heaven, Psalm. 148.
Praise him in the high places.

2 Praise him all his Angels, Praise him all his heavenly hosts;

3 Sun and moon praise him, stars and light join all to praise him,

4 Praise him the heaven of heavens, And let all the waters above the heavens,
praise the name of our Lord:

5 For he spoke, and they were made, he commanded, and they were created.

6 He has established them for ever to last all ages; he has set a rule, and
he will not go from it.

7 Praise our Lord all Creature of the earth, Dragons and all in the Deep.

8 Let fire, Psalm. 118.
hail, snow, ice, storms of wind, which execute his will,

9 Let the mountains, and all hills, fruitbearing trees, and all Cedars,

10 Let all beasts and cattle, all that creep, o^ fly with wings,

11 Let the Kings of the earth, and all the people, The Princes and the judges
of the earth,

12 Let the young men, and the virgins, All the old men, and the Children,
praise the name of our Lord; For his name alone is great and high.

13 Both heaven and earth proclaim his praise; And he has exalted the power of
his people.

24 Let hymns be sung to him by all his saints, By the Children of Israel by
the people, that are near to him.

ALLELUIA.
PSALM XLIX.
This Psalm also invites the Israelites to sing the praises of God, And
foretells, that they shall prevail over their Enemies.

ALLELUIA.
1 SIng to our Lord a new Canticle, Psalm. 149.
Let his praise be celebrated in the assembly of the saints.

2 Let Israel rejoice in him, who made them, Let the sons of Sion glory in
their King.

3 Let them praise his name with Concerts of music, With the drum, and the
harp let them sound forth his praises;

4 For our Lord is well pleased with his people, he will raise up, and save the
meek.

5 The saints shall rejoice in glory, They shall be filled with joy in their
places of rest.

6 The praises of God will^ be allways in their mouths And they will have two
edged swords in their hands.

7 To take revenge upon the Gentiles, And to chastise the Nations;

8 To bind their Kings with fetters, And their Nobles with manicles of iron:

9 That so they may execute upon them the judgment signed by God; This will be
glory to all his saints.

ALLELUIA.
PSALM CL.
Laudate Dominum in sanctis.
This Psalm is upon the same subject with the former.

ALLELUIA.
1 PRaise our Lord in his sanctuary, Psalm. 150.
Praise him in the firmament of his power.

2 Praise him for the mighty things he has done; Praise him for his greatness
which has no bounds;

3 Praise him with the sound of trumpets, Praise him with the Psalter and harp;

4 Praise him with the drum and the flute, Praise him with strung instruments,
and the Organ.

5 Praise him with loud aad harmonious Cimballs, Praise him with Cimballs of
Jnbily; Let every thing that breaths, praise our Lord.

ALLELUIA.

