THE BOOK OF THE SONG OF SOLOMON IN MEETER.

WITH Some Brief Observations from the Text, something pleasant, but more
profitable to the Unprejudiced Reader, who loves the knowledge of God, and has
his heart inflamed with the Love of the Lord Jesus.

By T. S. Who loves, and could willingly serve any that Loves our Lord Jesus
in Sincerity.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Sign of the Elephant and Castle
near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1676.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis is the first time ever I came forth
To public view: I now was very loath
To have appeared: but being often pressed
By several Friends, at last at their request,
What by these Poems, was my first intention
I find (by theirs) does meet with its prevention;
For now and then according to my leisure,
I thought to read, what I had writ with pleasure;
For to delight my self it was my end,
When first of all these Poems I had penned;
But further here and there, now they must go,
For why? it is providence, does order 't so:
They must abroad, though entertainment kind
I do not say that they shall always find;
For why? I know it is the common guise
Of worldly wisemen others to despise
That are unlearned, although they have their learning
From Christ alone, whereby they have discerning
'Twixt things that differ: and for all the schools
Of humane learning, men are still but fools
Till Christ be learned: nothing do they know
And knowing nothing nothing can they do,
As they should do it: answering Gods command;
May then the worldly wise man understand
That he is the wise man that obeys the Lord,
And with his laws, his life does still accord;
Such promis't are to know the fathers mind,
When worldly wisemen seek, and cannot find:
Yet do I not in this in the least despise
Learning it self: nor yet the learned-wise;
I hope no wise man then will take offense
For unto both I give due reverence:
Let none that reads these lines the same despise,
B'cause in high flourishes I do not rise;
For it is a task a deal beyond my pains
To soar aloft in such affecting strains
As some that curious are would have: but I
Am well content much lower for to lie.
And since the subject of this my discourse
It is divine: what can I make it worse,
Because I do not paint it in that dress
Of Eloquence? what can it be the less
Sacred for that? such eloquence but feeds
The outward our: none such as that is needed
For of it self it is garnisht with such glory
To parallel the same there wants a story;
The highest strains, the most sublimest wit
Must lowr their topsayl, and bow down to it.
The style, the matter, method, and the words
Are high and acurate, the world affords
No Volumes that with it may once compare,
It is more excellent then all they are:
Here may thou see that great transcendant love
Christ bears his Church; which does surmount above
All other carnal earthly love as far
As the sun ascends above the lowest Star;
The great delight and pleasure he takes in
The souls that are purged thoroughly from their sin:
Here may thou see also the special care
He takes of them, each good thing to prepare,
To fill their hearts with comforts and with joy,
And bear them up in depths of misery,
And when they have done what they have here to do,
He will bestow upon them heaven too;
Here may thou see also how ready still
Each gracious soul is daily to fulfill
What Christ commands: for love does them constrain
He loves them first, they love him back again:
They love him so, they will both suffer and do
Whatever thing he is pleased to call them to:
Here may thou see the presence of their Lord,
The greatest comforts to their souls afford:
But if at any time away he is gone,
The soul that wants him then does sigh and groan:
And seeks, and sues, and never is at rest,
Till with his presence he again is blessed;
Here may thou see how that Christ's lovely spouse,
Does sleep and slug sometimes, till be do rouse,
And raise her up: she does a slumber catch
But raised by Christ; she stands upon her watch:
Here see also the love that truly ties
A soul to Christ, it lives and never dies:
And how with earnestness such pray to be
With Jesus Christ in full felicity.
Read soberly, and ponder what thou read'st
Digest it well, and then thou wilt find it feeds
Thy inner man, but if thou foolishly
Look on these Poems with a wanton eye,
To please and satisfy a carnal mind
No good unto thy soul then thou shall find;
Take heed, and prove neither profane nor loose,
Bringing these Poems into great abuse:
Of wanton love they treat not in the least,
But of that love divine; which Christ is pleased
In signs, in tipes, and figures to make known,
Then read full soberly; or else read none:
Well, I have done, I am exposed unto
The censures of them all; these papers view,
If I have erred in any thing, then know
That every son of Adam may do so:
Since Adam fell, infallibility
Is found in none, much less not found in me.
If any one that reads some profit gains,
Then am I well rewarded for my pains.
If any scoff or jeer, go on and spare not,
For some men's scoffs and jeers know that I care not,
I am not raised by any flatteries,
Nor yet cast down because some do not prize
What I have writ: no, there is nothing less
Shall trouble me, for still I am
T S.

The Reader is Desired to Correct these several Escapes in Printing this Book.
IN the Preface p. 2. l. 20. for is needed r. it needs. In the Book p. 1. l.
3. after Gods put in good. p. 6. l. 15. for are r. me. p. 7. l. 1. for the r.
though. ib. l. 19. for the r. thy. p. 10. l. 29. in marg. for comes r. comers.
p. 19. l. 1. for fairest r. fairest. l. 12. for beaury r. beauty. l. 25. for
madst r. made. p. 21. l. 2. for love r. low. l. 17. r. it. p. 13. in the marg.
l. 19. for his r. her. p. 15. l. 5. in the marg. for refrain r. restrain. p.
25. l. 39. for treasure r. treasury. p. 28. l. 16. put in this heats, p. 31 l.
17. put in it. p. 32. l. 2. for may r. must. p. 36. l. 16. for whether r.
whither. l. 34. after purposes r. of ours. p. 38. l. 18. for single r. sinful.
p. 39. l. 18. for ere r. art. p. 40. l. 20. for account r accounts. p. 43. l.
31. for satisfy r. testify. p. 46. l. 5. for clearest r. clearer. p. 47. l.
29. for thee r. unto thee. l. 30. for from thee r. fro thee. p. 49. l. 2. for
so r. to. l. 22. for stops r. stoops. p. 50. l. 21. for God r. Gods. p. 52. l.
1. for diverse r. drivers. l. 35. for bear r. bare. l. 39. for not r. out. p.
54. l. 13. for heavy r. hairy. l. 29. for do r. to. p. 57. l. 18. for from r.
fro. p. 58. l. 4. for excel r. exceeds. p. 61. l. 4. for best. r. breast. l.
19. for would r. could. l. 31. for of falsehood r. or falsehood.

Also take notice, That whereas in many places on Jona there is no distinction
between that part of the history, and what is observed from it, therefore to
avoid confusion know, that where you find it thus marked l --, there the
Observation begins, and where it is again thus marked l -- there it ends.

CHAPTER I.
1
THe Song of Songs (most excellent)
Of Solomon, who by the guide
Of Gods spirit does represent
Christ and his Church, the lovely bride.
2
Saints do desire to enjoy more simptomes, seals and assurances of the love of
Jesus Christ.
Oh let him come and me embrace,
And with his mouth let him me kiss,
For my soul's longing for the grace
That flows from that sweet spirit of his:
In adversity and prosperity the fruition of Christ is better then the
choicest, chiefest of all things beside
For why thy loves are better far
And night and day make me more glad,
Then all the choicest wines that are
Or were, or ever shall be had.
3
The graces of Christ, and the anoyntings of his holy spirit, are sweet,
precious, pure and powerful in working.
Thine ointments Lord all of the best
Are sweeter then the choice perfume,
Their virtue heals the soul oppressed,
That sin and Satan would consume.
His blood powered out and life spilt upon the cross:
Thou wast poured out like ointment pure
Thou emptied wast, me for to fill;
A fountain set open for sin and uncleanness Zach. 13.1. a well of water
springing up to life everlasting
Yet thou art full, and shall endure
An overflowing fountain still.
The love of Christ constrains souls to be obedient.
Thy grace diffused, the virgins move,
Thy love shed forth 's the only cause,
The pure in heart and life thee love,
True love is made manifest, in keeping Christ's precepts.
And loving thee they keep thy laws.
4
The Church of Christ sensible of her own and members nothingness, weakness,
backwardness, and remisness, prays for assistance, and promises a good
improvement.
Draw me and mine (to goodness slack)
Perswad's to come to thee in have,
Put forth thy power when we draw back
We Will run and follow thee full fast.
There is a special intimacy between Christ and saints: he will show them his
secret, which angels desire to peep into, Psalm. 25.14.
The Royal king, just, strong, and wise
Not only outward kindness shows,
But all his chamber secresies
To them that fear him he will disclose.
Christ is the object of a Christians joy: a divine contemplation of Christ,
begets divine affection unto Christ.
Much more then wine thy love we mind
With joy most pure it glads our heart,
More we think on thee more we find,
Thou by the upright loved art.
5
A sensibleness of deformity works deep humility, ingenious confession.
I now deformed am, and black,
As black as kedars tents by name,
Afflictions great, and sin (alack)
Has brought me to confess the same.
The saints are beautiful through grace; without spot through Christ, yet their
glory is within.
Yet daughters of Jerusalem,
Like to the curtains bright and fair,
Which once surrounded Solomon,
I comely am through Christ as they are.
6
The Churches discoulorings last not always: it is but for a moment in wrath the
Lord hides his face, therefore divide not, despise not enemies, dispare not
friends.
With evil eye behold me not,
Though beauty mine be turned to stain,
The suns hot beams has caused this spot
And time will wipe it off again.
Friends degenerate, do often if not always turn the most implacable enemies.
My mothers children angry were
To keep the vinyards (when they stepped
Aside;) they made me (oh severe)
The Churches devastation gives cause of sad complaint.
Therefore my vineyard is not kept.
7
A fense of ignorance and weakness drives to Christ, for strength and direction.
Oh tell me where thy flock does feed
Thou whom my soul does dearly love,
Christ is a Christians sweetest shade in the hottest persecution.
Where they lie down in the days of dread
When scorching heat their faith does prove.
Christ's sheep are careful to follow him John 10. and fearful of false teachers
and corrupt and false assemblies.
For fear lest I should go astray,
After the flocks (to turn aside)
Of thy companions in the way
Thy faithful followers never tried.
8
They that abase themselves shall be exalted and they that ask shall receive
directions, Mat. 7.7.
If thou know not that art so fair
My word and spirit shall thee guide,
New converts are as meek lambs Joh. 10. gathered into flocks, must keep from
those folds Christ has not appointed.
Thy tender kids them take with care,
And feed the shepherds tents beside.
We must follow the faith and good works of those before us, and make their
pattern our example.
Go thy way forth, get out with speed
From all false ways and worships go,
To the footsteps of the flock take heed,
Conform thy ways, their ways unto.
9
The Church of Christ is orderly powerful and speedy in executing the good
pleasure of Christ her head.
Much like to Pharaohs chariot horses
My love, my dear, I thee compare
Who goodly are, and keep their courses
Through me you are as choice as they are.
10
A conversation becoming the Gospel is the Churches duty and outward beauty
Phi. 1.19. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
Thy cheeks with jewels thou do deck
A sight most comely to behold,
The Church observing Christ's appointments, is not enthrald thereby, but in
glorious freedom.
And thou have round about thy neck
Chains, that are wrought of purest gold.
11
The three and yet but one, are engaged by promise to make the Church very
glorious through diverse precious spiritual Gospel endowments.
Both father, son, and holy Ghost
Will make for thee borders of gold,
With studs of silver; things that most
Will make thee glorious to behold.
12
True grace is not idle, cannot be hid but is powered out like the sweetest
perfume or most precious ointment; in our solemn approaches to God; to the
pleasing of him greatly: and the good and benefit of our brethren.
That I may please the King full well
When at his table he sits there,
My spiknard shall send sorth its smell
In love, in mercy, praise and prayer.
13
My welbeloved is to me
(For mine he is, and one we are)
Nothing can be more sweet then Christ to that soul that once tasted how
gracious the Lord is.
More sweet then bags of mirrh can be
Or precious gums or things most rare.
The greatest troubles worst of times and things, cannot draw a Christians love
from Christ, but still in his heart he has his lodging place.
In darksome night, in time of fear
When others leave him, yet will I
'Twixt my breasts lay him, because there
Within my breast he loves to lie.
14
The fruit received from Christ as redeemer is both abundant and full; durable,
and lasting.
Much like the clustring camphire-tree
In Engedi her vineyards grows,
My welbeloved's such to me
Virtue from that more from him flows.
15
A Christians holiness is his chiefest comeliness, and Christ does ever praise
and delight in that grace which himself bestows.
Thou Art fair my love thy comeliness
Does far exceed the brightest day,
Doves eyes thou have: not wantonness
But chastity they do bewray:
16
A soul enriched decked and beautified with grace from Christ cannot but be
affected with praise and delight in him, who is the fountain and welspring of
all grace.
Behold beloved thou art fair
Yea and most pleasant to be seen
With thine no beauty may compare
Where Christ can joins in spiritual union great increase follows thereon.
Also our fruitful bed is green.
17
The Church of Christ which is the house of the living God is both firm and
stable, built upon the rock: and cannot be moved to decay.
Our glorious house is very strong,
The beams thereof sweet Cedar tree
The rafters firr: both lasting long
And stand it shall, though shaken be.
Chapter II.
1
I Christ describes his glorious excellency, which the worldling despises, but
is owned and honored by the godly.
Am the rose in Sharon grows,
Decking each heart that does me wear
And lilly white, pure sweet and bright
The heart of the humble and lowly person is a fit habitation for Christ.
In lowest valleys am found there.
2
The way to heaven is a thorny way: sin affliction and wicked men are always as
thorns in the sides of the godly.
As lillys fair, when found they are
Among the thorns by thorns are rent:
Yet them exceeds as lillys weeds,
In beauty, bravery, sweetness, sent.
So my love she: must galled be
With vexing thorns which her surround,
The spouse and true Church of Christ excels all other assemblies in grace
here; and shall exceed them in glory hereafter.
Yet she is alone: and like her none
Amongst the daughters can be found.
3
Nor angels nor men comparable to Christ, he is the only one that surpasses all
other.
Him I love best, excels the rest
Of all the sons; though never so good,
As apples do; the fruits that grow
Upon the wild trees of the wood.
Christ is a Christians sweet refreshment, when most weary and heavy laden.
When I am spent: what great content
I take to sit me down and rest,
Under the shade, which he has made
For weary souls, and sore oppressed:
Every true believer by a living faith does pluck from this tree of life both
remission of sin, sanctifying grace, inward peace, and the comforts of the holy
Ghost flow in continually.
How various are the fruits so rare
That on this living tree still grows?
Their vertu's much; there is none such,
The sweetness he that tastes knows.
4
Christ in and through his holy appointments affords gracious souls sweet
refreshment, thereby filling the heart of every true believer with joy and
comfort.
He did me lead my foul to feed
With his fine dainties, choice and rare
Into the place: of sweetest grace
Where purest joys and comforts are.
Christ does guide preserve and encourage all his servants in what he requires
at their hands, though they meet with never so many difficulties in the
performance.
For to protect: and me direct
His banner over me is displayed
When strength abates it animates,
None fighting under it are dismayed.
5
The comforts of Christ are full, satisfying, and yield the greatest
refreshment to the thirsty soul, broken in heart, and languishing spirit.
Let thy comforts be my supports,
With flagons full me overflow,
With apples stay me from decay,
That on the tree of life do grow.
The glorious excellencies, transcendent beauty, and unparalled love of
Christ, does so deeply strike and wound the heart of a Christian, that nothing
can cure it but the enjoyment and possession of Christ himself.
Why, there is need, my heart does bleed
Thy love it gave my heart the wound,
And wounded I lovesick do lie,
To cure me none else can be found:
6
The dear embraces of Christ, his vehement affection and almighty power is the
preservation and restoration of souls, when sinking, or falen into the lowest
state.
His left hand's laid under my head,
To bear it up each day and hour;
And he does cover me all over,
With his right hand of love and power:
7
Each gracious soul will be very careful of displeasing Christ, and use all
lawfal means to prevent the sins of others and stir them up to their duty.
Church members all; both great and small
I charge you (as you will answer me)
By roes and hindes: or any kinds
Of things besides, that lovely be;
That my dear love ye do not move,
Provoke, stir up, nor's spirit greive
By evil ways: nor till he please
Awake him not but still believe.
8
Christ's sheep know his voice from a strangers, they hear and follow him.
Lo he appears: my soul now hears
The voice of my beloved one,
When Christ will save his people and destroy his and their enemies, he will be
both speedy therein and successful.
Lo he does come my foes to doom,
And judge them to perdition.
He leaps in have: and skips full fast
Ore hills and mountains in his way
When he will save: no let he will have
Nor enemy to make him stay:
9
The Lord Christ is both ready and present in time of trouble.
No roe can be more swift then he,
No heart though young can run so fast;
He ways to be gracious.
He stands and calls behind our stalls
Knocking to let him in at last.
And takes a strict survey of all things done whether good or evil.
Oh do not sin: for he looks in
As at a window he espies
What we are doing, while he is showing
Himself so plain to open eyes.
10
The best of Saints have an aptness to and sometimes are found upon the bed of
security.
My best beloved, with mercy moved
Seeing me sluggish and secure,
And in my mind to sin inclined
(A thing his grace cannot endure);
The voice of Christ, and his gracious call does strongly move a sleepy soul to
arise from sinful rest to have communion with himself.
He calls and cries to me, arise
My love my fair one come away,
Forsake thy rest: vain things detest,
Make have and have no longer stay.
11
No affliction nor presecution should keep from Christ for they are but for a
moment, of no continuance.
The winters blast is gone and past,
Tempestuous storms no more arise,
Gods wrathful shours no more he pours
On friends but on his enemies:
12
The hearts of men are like barren earth, till planted by the spirit, and sown
with grace, then they are fruitful.
the flowrs appear show summer's near
There is a time to mourn and a time to rejoice, Saints know it, and in due
season warble forth Gods praises.
Each chirping bird does fit and sing,
The turtles voice does make a noise,
All which bespeak a glorious spring.
13
The figtree puts forth her green shoots,
Her unripe figs are sweetened well
The vines also do dangling grow
With graps that give forth a good smell.
Each token says that summer days,
Are hasting on without delay,
though men be unwilling to come, yet Christ is not weary to call to them over
and over by many moving arguments, to come to him.
Wherefore arise: from worldly toys
My love my fair one come away.
14
Christ's spouse is both harmless, and pure neither without presecution, nor
then without a hiding place in God.
Now oh my dove, what can thee move
Since thou art in the secret stairs,
And rocky clifts: free from the drifts
And storms of foes, and other fears.
The barbarous foes do thee enclose,
And thou lie hid in secret place
Faith and prayer the best practice, and very requisite in time of affliction.
Yet let me hear thy voice in prayer:
Good works joined with prayer and a conversation becoming the Gospel is
acceptable to, (and lovely in the eye of) the Lord Jesus.
And see the beauty of thy face.
For there is no creature has a feature
Like thine, so comely to behold
Thy praying voice: it has a noise
More sweet, then by words can be told.
15
Those that hurt the Church by fraud or force, doctrine or manners, ought to be
reproved, punished.
The foxes take: that spoil do make
Upon our vines: for every tree
The weak and infirm in Christ's Church must be cared for, for they are equal
with others in his love and Favor.
Young grapes do bear: and with great care
Such tender plants preserved must be.
16
Every true Christian is given up wholly to Christ, and by faith makes Christ
his own.
Mine my love is: and I am his
My all on him I will bestow,
Christ is much delighted, with the sweet and beautifying graces of his people.
He rests and feeds: not among weeds
But where the purest lillys grow.
17
Till Christ the sun of glory, break in upon a soul it sits in darkness and
shadows of death.
Whilst it is night: and till the light
Of day do break, and it grow clear
Whilst shady clouds, the brightness shrouds
Till they disperse and thou appear.
The true Church begs Christ's speedy and special presence to support her under
all her pressures, and to put an end to all differences.
Be like a roe, young heart or do
On mountains where divisions are,
Turn dearest one, and be thou known
Of me to take a special care.
CHAP. III.
1
Carnal security will give Christ cause to withdraw and hide himself.
WHen I had lost the present sight
True love is always working and puts thee upon to seek for Christ when
withdrawn.
Of him whom my soul loves best
I sought him in the darksom night
His absence gave me such unrest.
I sought him, and must seek him still
be found at first he seldom will.
2
That soul that makes Christ her beloved, will rise and rouse up to seek him
without delay.
I will arise up from my ease
And seek my love in every street, Fallen Christians are not easily restored,
and those that do desert Christ do not quickly see the light of his countenance
shining upon them.

Christ is not always found in those places that men seek him in, yet must we
not leave to seek him in any of his appointments.
From thence I Will pass to the broadways
To seek him where the assemblies meet.
I sought him there, to please my mind
But seeking there, him could not find.
3
Thus restless I still wandering was
Sometimes gracious souls wanting Christ do enquire for him of those that know
not how to direct to him.
Till by the watchmen I was found,
As they along the City pass
Tending their watch walking the round,
To whom I said, (for grace did move)
Saw ye him whom my soul does love.
4
We must leave men and their devices and wayt upon the Lord in his own ways,
and he will soon discover and manifest himself gracious to us.
No answer good they gave to me
Direction from them I had none
How my soul satisfied should be
But when I left them, and was gone
Away from them a little time,
I found him that was wholly mine.
We must hold what we have of Christ, stand fast in that liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free.
When I of him fast hold had caught,
Again I would not let him go,
A Christian desires to enjoy Christ in the inner man mostly: and to see his
goings in his sanctuary also.
Till my late-found dear love was brought
My mothers dwelling house into,
And till my souls most secret place
Were lodging chambers for his grace.
5
Every true Christian has a care lest he should offend Christ, and will use
his best endeavor that others also do neither provoke nor displease him.
Ye daughters of Jerusalem
I charge you have a special care,
(By roes and hindes and each of them
Or other things that lovely are)
That ye wake not by wicked ways
Nor stir my love until he please.
6
Those souls delivered from a lost and bewildered estate by Christ their
redeemer, must needs rise up heavenward in fervency of spirit and dear
affection.
What glorious one, oh who is this
Like smoaky pillars does ascend
Out of the desert wilderness
Sure it is my love, my dove, my friend,
The prayers praises and all the spiritual sacrifices of Saints are exceeding
sweet when perfumed by the intercession of Christ the mediator.
Who Is all persumd (as it is meet)
With mirrh and frankincense so sweet.
7
Each true believer beds his beloved in his bosom which is Christ Jesus.
Behold the bed, that bed of his
The great and mighty Solomon,
Each gracious heart a lodging is
For him to take his rest upon,
A Christians privilege is to be kept by Christ, and he as a good soldier
does resist the adversary.
There valiant Israelites and stout
Compass this princely bed about.
8
Gods people have many enemies to withstand are always in danger to be
surpised, and therefore have need of skilfulness and courage.
As valiant so they many are
They all hold swords within their hand,
Skilful likewise expect in war
Their enemies for to withstand,
Each has his sword on's thigh outright
Because of terrors in the night.
9
The Chariot which king Solomon
Did make was glorious to behold,
10
The Church of Christ excels in glory at the present, through Christ's
righteousness and a life without rebuke and blame in the world, they have a
right to all now, for all is theirs, and shall be set in full and actual
possession hereafter of all those good things, which God has laid up in store
for them that love him.
The wood the choice in Lebanon
Silver were pillars, and pure Gold
Did bottom it, things of great worth
The Churches glory to let sorth.
A purple veil of crimson red
(Such bloody veils do hide our sin)
Was for a covering over it spread,
And flames of love pave it within;
This is ordained only for them
The daughters of Jerusalem.
11
The faithful are called out of sin, self and world, that so they may have the
full enjoyment of Jesus Christ.
O Sions daughters go ye forth
Leave sin and carnal vanities
And see the king of precious worth
Whose sight will fill and glad your eyes:
Every gracious soul will put the crown upon the head of Christ, by a willing
subjection unto him, suffering him to reign and rule over him, subduing his
lusts, and overthrowing all that is at enmity against Christ within him.
Behold the king of great renown
Has on his head his glorious crown.
True believers are Christ's mother and dear relations, their holy walking as it
is their glory and an honor to the Gospel, so it is as a crown put upon the
head of Christ.
Who by his mother crowned was
When souls are spiritually conjoynd to Christ, and espoused by faith and
obedience, great are heavenly joys at that espousal.
On his heart-gladding marriage day
Now all his foes cry out alas
But sing ye friends that him obey;
For with the scepter of his power
His, and your foes he will devour.
CHAP. IV.
1
BEhold thou art fair my love behold thou art fair
The Church of Christ is knowing, chaste, comely and pure, and so keeps her self
that he may delight and take pleasure in her.
Doves eyes thou have lie veiled within thy locks
Saints graces within, where lies most of their strength, and a holy well
ordered comely conversation without makes them shine in the eyes of all
beholders.
And to complete thy beauty, thou have hair
Resembles well the smooth and glistring flocks
Of goats, that from mount-gilead do appear
And grazing in due order are found there.
2
Thy teeth the instruments, (which food prepare)
Are like a flock of sheep, new clipped and shorn
Christ's flocks or followers are fruitful, his branches bearing, sterrility and
barrenness inconsistent with that spirit that makes them grow and increase in
all the increasings of God.
As they from washing come, white clean they are
And purged from filthiness, thee to adorn
With glorious beauty, and amongst them there
None barren is, but each one twins does bear.
3
Our services done to God, are all acceptable, perfect and complete, through
the blood of Christ.
Like to twisted thread of Scarlet red
Such are thy lips; the portalls of thy prayers
Gracious speeches and words is comely for Christians, a holy language is their
ornament, and others edification.
And praises too, thy speech is garnished
With grace and sweetness, fitting gracious ears;
It is required of Christians, and it is the property of all truly such to be
humble, chaste and modest.
Thy blushing temples hid with hairy fleeces
Like a pomegranate are, when cut in pieces:
4
That Christian that draws life from Christ by faith, stands stiffly against all
opposition, conquers all comes, latches every fiery dart of the devil, submits
to Christ's will and perseveres in his ways.
Thy neck the glorious emblem of thy power
Is stretched out to each beholders eye
Resembling well the high and lofty tower
Of David, builded for an armoury
Whereon a thousand bucklers fixed are
All shields of mighty men prepared for war
5
The Church of Christ has within her self like a tender mother both feeders
and feeding, both pure and wholesome, to nourish and strengthen, all that are
born in her.
Like to the twins of young and tender roes
Which among lillies feed and take repast
Not among filthy weeds, sure like to those
Are thy two holy breasts, wherewith thou have
Nourisht thy children, like a tender mother
That they in strength of grace excel all other.
6
Christians, till the everlasting day swalow up their darkness must expect
bitter as well as sweet, through many tribulations they must enter in the
kingdom of God.
Now will I get me to the mountain high
Of bitter mirrh, and hills of frankincense
Till break of day and till the morning sky
Expel the dark and shady clouds from thence;
Christ will never leave nor forsake his in their forlorn state, but will
protect them, preserve them, provide for them until he bring them to glory.
There shall my gracious presence thee attend
Until thy sorrows in sweet joy shall end.
7
Justification by faith hides all sin, we are beautiful in him who is perfect
beauty, holy, beloved and accepted and through him who is holiness, love, and
accepted of the father.
Nothing offensive no imperfect stain
My eye sees on thee (though some happily are)
My righteous covering always stands between
Thy worst and me therefore I do declare
Thou art all fair my love and there is not
A blemish found on thee, nor any spot.
8
Christians when called to have communion with Christ willingly leave their
greatest, goodliest highest honors, profits, pleasures for Christ, and in
loosing all with and for him do gain much.
Now come with me from Lebanon my spouse
Amana, Hermon, Shenirs hills refrain,
For they that follow me can never loose
But in their losses will be found their gain.
He that walks with Christ has his filthiness cleansed, his Lyon-like cruel
nature changed, neither will he have any more fellowship with the workers in
(or works of) darkness.
From the Lions dens and Leopards mountains flee
With sin, and sinful bruits, can thou agree.
9
The grace of the holy spirit working powerfully in and upon the hearts of Gods
people carrying them out to a holy submission to Christ's will and obedience to
his commands does beget in Christ unspeakable unparaled affection.
My sister spouse, oh what great influence
Has thy eye on me like a piercing dart,
Thy faith or love, or both has taken hence
From me to thee my ravished vanquished heart,
Besides, the chains that have thy neck surrounded
Makes me complain my heart with love is wounded.
10
Christ does extol and magnify the spiritual beauty of his Church, and her
love to him is more acceptable then the choicest of things.
My sister spouse thy love is wondrous fair
And in my eye beyond all imitation
The choicest wines, that ever were or are
Like thy love are not in my estimation:
Saints have received of the anointing from the father, who by diffusion into
all actions spiritual and civil makes them have a fragrant and sweet savor
every where.
Thy ointments smells so odoriferous,
The sweetest spice is not so sweet as those
11
The words of the Lord in the mouths of his servants, are not only pure,
precious, and sweet in themselves, but also pleasing to God and profitable to
them that receive them.
Thy lips drop like an honey comb my spouse,
Each open ear thy gracious words are filling
Beneath thy tongue honey and milk it flows
Much like a fountain pleasantly distiling.
Christ's righteousness is the saints raiment, and spiritual clothing, who by
faith puts it on, is of incomparable redolency, admirable sweetness.
The garments pure that I have put thee on
Smells sweeter then the scent of Labanon.
12
The Church of Christ is as a garden fruitful, and delectable, beset with
enemies on each side, yet encompast with the power and presence of Christ, so
that they cannot waste nor spoil it.
Thou art a garden both for fruit and flower
My sister spouse a garden well enclosed
And fenced with walls of my almighty power
T'keep thee from foes, to which thou art exposed.
In the Church of Christ there does always rise up a fresh-spring of spiritual
life and grace from Christ the head, to water and refresh it.
A spring shut up a fountain sealed, casting
Up waters in thee to life everlasting.
13
Those plants set by Christ, fenced by his power, and watered by his grace,
cannot be barren but bring forth much fruit, by which the father is glorified
here, and they with the father and son glorified hereafter.
Thy plants an orchard of pomegranats are
Thy branches are a paradise of pleasure
All sorts of fruits most excellent and rare
Are found in thee without compare and measure.
Camphire with spiknard, oh what fruits are growing
There where my grace is always overflowing.
14
Christ out of his fullness, does communicate freely, abundantly, and in diverse
kinds, his graces, to his Church, so that nothing can be wanting for his
edification and comfort.
There Is spikenard sweet and cordial saffron too
Mirh, aloes, calamus and cinnamon,
All trees of frankincense in it do grow
Each thing it has a precious operation;
Her spices choice for virtue and for worth
Nor man nor angels tongue can set them forth.
15
A garden full of fountains, precious pure,
Christ the living fountain set open for sin and uncleanness, is to be found in
his Church, with grace in abundance, ready and willing to supply, succor,
support and comfort every soul that waits for him.
A well of living waters springing still
Each sinful sickly silthy soul to cure
And all are called to wash and drink that will:
And as the streams do flow from Lebanon
So flows all streams of grace from Christ alone.
16
A gracious soul does earnestly desire and much long after the powerful
workings of the spirit of Christ, producing its diverse, yet all glorious
effects in the soul.
Breath holy spirit on my garden now
That every spicy flower may bloome and spread
Nor will expect solid sound comfort before some Gospel breakings, and
spiritual castings down.
For as the north wind thou make me to bow
And with thy southern gales lifts up my head
From Christ we have all, of his fullness we receive, we must therefore return
him his own, for it is not ours or that from as, but his own, and that which
proceeds from himself that is acceptable to him.
Come my beloved I have thee invited
And eat the fruit in which thou art delighted.
CHAP. V.
1
The prayers of saints are very prevailing, Christ is prone and ready to hear;
no sooner can we call but we have our answer.
NOw I am come my spouse
Into my garden gay
Thy call it did me rouse
I hear when thou do pray;
It does suffice
Christ does enable and empower his people to labor and bring forth pious,
pure, precious fruits of faith, love, holiness; self-denial and suffering for
his sake, all very pleasant unto him.
I gathered have: that which I gave my mirrh with spice.
No comb of wantingness, weakness, imperfection in grace or dutys, can harm the
saints while there is the honey of sweet sincerity and truth of grace to be
found.
Oh with what great delight
My honey comb I eat
And feed my appetite
With sucking honey sweet.
And though the best
May fail, or fall: yet sincere, all
Of them are blessed.
As wine and milk are to us, so the pure, holy, sincere services of saints are
unto Christ.
My wine and milk together
Being my delightful fare
I took and drunk; for neither
Of them that I can spare.
Christ prepares his table, sets on his spiritual daintys, invites his friends;
and feasts their souls with his fat things in great abundance.
Sure 't none offends
That ye eat such: with me drink much
That are my friends.
2
A gracious soul is ever sensible of its security and will ingenuously confess
it.
I sleep and slug; which makes
Me sorely to complain,
Finds an opposition between flesh and spirit the part regenerate and wakefull
heart is always working upward toward Christ; though lust and the part
unregenerate would refrain.
But yet my heart it wakes
Though lust would it restrayn.
Christ's sheep both know and hear the voice of Christ which does powerfully
awaken and rouse up the sloathful sleepy soul.
His voice does move
Who knocks and says, clear thou my ways
My spotless dove.
When Christ begs and sues for admission he gives power to open, it is then the
wisdom and duty of every Christian to let him in.
Oh let me enter in
And lodge within thy breast
Ingratitude's thy sin
Receive me as thy guest.
The more and greater things Christ has suffered for us, the greater obligation
lies upon us to love and serve him, and the greater is the sin to refuse and
neglect him.
For my head's filled
With dews of wet, and vapors great
Cold night does yield.
3
Man is apt to frame vain excuses, and cast in small obstructions to prevent
the kindly entertainment of Christ, though the chiefest of ten thousand, and
none so worthy to be received.
I am disrobed quite,
And may not take the cold
My feet are washen white
If I rise they will be foulld;
I Will take my ease
Sad are the shifts: when fleshly drifts
Are flesh to please.
4
When Christ puts forth his spiritual power, he breaks in sunder the strongest
bars, sets wide open the closest heart, and makes way that the king of glory
may enter in.
My well-beloved put
His hand in at the door
And opened what I shut
That kept him out before.
The more a soul feels and discerns Christ in his most inward workings, the
more it is inflamed with love to Christ, less love to self, and grief for
former failings.
(O rare effect)
My bowels move: for my dear love
And my neglect.
5
Where there is true repentance, that soul is rouzd up from sleepy security,
and is found readily and graciously acting the thing that is good.
When I did rise and stir
To open to my dear
My hands did drop with mirrh
That on the lock was there
who 'f grace partake
Those souls will never want endeavor
When once awake.
6
Christ being slighted and neglected withdraws his spiritual presence and so
leaves a soul in darkness and misery.
I opened now in huste
It was no time to stay,
But now the time is past
My lover's gone away;
A just reward
For he that su'd: and begged and wooed
Had no regard.
A refusing the sweet and gracious words of Christ, when seriously considered
will break the heart with sorrow.
But when I heard him speak
My soul did melt away
That heart with grief must break
That ever said him nay.
Those that stop their ears when Christ calls unto them, they shall cry and
call (yea his own dear ones for a time) and not be heard.
I sought in vain
My prayers and cries, he still denis
To entertain.
7
The watchmen they are found
Of whom I looked for aid
They smote me and my wound
By them was deeper made:
Each one of those
That did pretend: to be my friend
are turned my foes.
Sinful security breaks the Churches staves of beauty and bands; robs her both
of her glory and defense, exposes to great shame and misery.
The keepers of the walls
They took my vail away,
What mischief them befalls
That err and go astray
Alack alack
How soon our fame, is turned to shame
When we draw back.
8
Under spiritual desertions, there is want of consolation, it is a mercy to have
the faithful to pray for us, and our duty to call in for their help.
Jerus'lems daughters ye
That loving be and kind
Who seek in the right way
That you my love may find;
Love and zeal warm the heart, the prayers of the faithful are fervent, and so
avail much.
I charge ye when
Your hearts desire, ascends in fire
To mind me then.
A gracious soul languishing in love to Christ, grieves for former neglect,
longs to be sensible of reconciliation to Christ, calls and cries to the
faithful to present in prayer its sad condition to him.
Oh tell him be ye sure
That I am sick of love
My heart cannot endure
Unless his bowels move;
For though I were
To slumber bent, and negligent
My heart's sincere.
9
The more a Christian knows of Christ the more he desires and longs to know
him, and therefore enquires of those that have experience what beauty,
loveliness, excellency, glory, and worth, they see. know and have found to be
in him.
Why what is thy beloved
More then another is
That thou so much art moved
For this absence of his?
Why do so charge?
Is he of worth, then set thou forth
His praise at large.
10
Those that are affected with Christ spiritual glory; and have tasted the
sweetness that is in him; are fittest to describe it to others, and will fully
and freely communicate what they know, feel and are affected with; that others
may love and admire him as themselves.
My wel-beloved then
Which ravished has my heart
Chief of ten thousand men
Is glorious in each part;
A mixture fine
Of red and white, to breed delight
In him does shine.
11
His head whereon he wears
And's glistering crown does hold
In glory it appears
Much like the finest gold:
His locks together
Are bushy set: as black as jet
Or ravens feather.
12
Christ is meek, humble, holy, perfectly pure, who cannot look on sin with the
least allowance, teaching us hereby, that as he is so should we be in this
world.
As are the eyes of doves
In springs that take delight
So are his eyes who loves
No evil in his sight;
His gentle eyes
With milk are wet: and even set
Impartiall-wife.
13
The face of Christ is transcendantly comely, blessed are all such who live in the
light of his countenance, and whose souls are sweetened and delighted with his
presence.
His cheeks much like the bowers
Or beds of spices are
The sweetest of all flowers
With his may not compare;
The words of Christ have a distastful relish to the misled sinner, but to the
obedient believer are pure and precious, being hid in his heart, preserves it
from all rottenness, corruption, sin and filth whatsoever.
His lips distills
Sweet smelling mirh: sure none can err
Whose heart it fills.
14
Christ is always ready abundantly to supply the wants of his people, and to
help them by his power in time of need.
His hands like to gold rings
Set with a precious stone
The choycest of good things
He freely gives his own:
Christ's Compassions are great to all, and his heart is most affectionately set
upon his own humble and holy ones.
His belly much
Like ivory bright: with saphirs dight
And heart is such.
15
Christ by his almighty power has overcome and vanquished all for the good and
sakes of his, and they shall vanquish and overcome all that opposes them by the
same power of the Lord Jesus.
His legs his feet and thighs
Like marble pillars are,
Whereon such strength there lies
None may with it compare;
And more behold,
His feet are set: in sockets neat
Of finest gold.
The spiritual glory of Christ surpasses all glory; beheld only by those whose
eyes are opened to look into those abstruse and hidden things of the Gospel.
His countenance whereon
To look does dim the eye
Is like to lebanon
Sweet, glorious, comely, high.
It does excel
The cedars tall: and also all
That tongue can tell.
16
Every word proceeding from the mouth of Christ was a word of grace peace and
comfort, and sweeter then the honey comb.
Most gracious are his words
That from his mouth distills,
Great comfort it affords
Each gracious heart it fills.
Christ in every part absolutely perfect, or the rare and excellent perfection
of Christ, is all that a gracious soul can desire, ravishing the heart of a
true believer.
my whole desires
He is alone: and there is none
My heart so fires.
CHAP. VI.
1
A powerful and plain description of Christ drawn out to the life in truth and
reallity is of great efficacy, or Christ powerfully preached to the hearts and
consciences of men is of great force to draw them out to enquire and seek after
him.
WHere is he gone, fairest of women
Where Is thy beloved turned aside
Do not deny, our company
In seeking him who is our guide.
2
Those that have found Christ themselves, are very free and willing to instruct
those that are desirous to seek after him.
My dear love he, is gone to see
Christ is much delighted in Christian assemblies, where their persons are
holy, their services are sweet and spicy.
The gardens where he does delight
And much rejoice, in the beds of spice
And gathering the lillies white.
3
Every true Christian is resigned and wholly given up to Christ, by faith makes
Christ his own with all his benefits.
Mine my love is: and I am his
(What comfort from this union flows)
The Lord Christ takes great pleasure in the sweet pure and lovely graces which
he himself bestows upon his people.
He rests and feeds: not among weeds
But where the purest lillys grows.
4
Great is the glory riches and honor of the Church of Jesus Christ.
Thy beaury bright: is like (in sight)
To royal Tirzah of great fame
Thy comeliness is nothing less
Then is the fair Jerusalem.
The Church of Christ in right order, and daily observing the same, thereby is
and becomes a terror to all that hate her on every side.
Thou terrifi'st thine enemies
And make them full sore afraid
As armed men: do others when
Their banners be in field displayed.
5
Jesus Christ does yield up himself as one captivated by, and to the faith of
every true believer.
Now turn aside: my lovely bride
For with thy eyes I Am vanquished quite
And conquered I: do wounded lie
With that which is my hearts delight.
See, chapter 4th ver. 1.
Thy well-set hair: that made thee fair
Most fitly I may it compare
Unto the flocks: that on the rocks
And mounts of Gilead, grazing are.
6
See chap. 4. ver. 2.
Thy teeth appear, like sheep when they are
New washed and clipped and even shorn
Amongst whom there is no barrenness
For each one of them twins have born.
7
See chap. 4. ver. 3.
Thy temples bright: (are like insight)
To a pomgranate cut in pieces
And thou do cover them all over
Within thy locks and hairy fleeces.
8
The queens that be: ate full sixty
And fourscore Concubins in count
The virgins fine: that with them join
All numbers far they do furmount.
9
Believers though of never so many persuasions, yet are all one in Christ
Jesus, should labor after oneness amongst themselves, and preserve the unity
of the spirtt in the bond of peace.
But my dear love and spotles dove
She is but one the choice alone
Of her dear mother and there is no other
That did for her in travail groan.
The spiritual glory of Christ's Church bespeaks her blessedness, is worthy of
admiration and praise from all others.
When they beheld her that excelled
Both daughters queens and concubines
Themselves did raise to bless and praise
Her, that so much in glory shines.
10
The Church of Christ in all states has a spiritual brightness, sometimes more
dim, sometimes more clear, and shines more and more unto the perfect day.
Oh who is she that we do see
Like to the morning looking bright
Fair as the moon which light full soon
Expels the darkness of the night.
The sun so clear does not appear
More glorious and beside what is said
See ver. 4.
She terifies her enemies
As armies do with flags displayed
11
The Church of Christ is his garden in which he is conversant, delighted much
with the good fruit brought forth thereby, has a special eye over her, looking
for her fruitfulness, growth and increase.
I went to see the fruits that be
In The valleys and the gardens too
The fruitful vine to flourish fine
And the pomegranates bud and blow.
12
Such was my care that ere aware
Like th'chariots of Aminadad
My soul did drive me for to strive
T'express the love I ever had.
13
The best for want of care and watchfulness may slip and fall, but it is both
their duty and property to return from evil when rowzed up and called upon.
If thou have been inclined to sin
Return, return oh Shulamite
It Is bad to stray worse there to stay
Return we dearly thee invite.
The Church of Christ and so consequently every Christian is both lovely and
humble, has enemies fighting without, and two contrary parties opposing each
other within.
What would ye see in me to be
Poor love debased Shulamite
But companies of two armies
Who with each other daily fight.
CHAP. VII.
1
OH princes daughter great
Heir to the king of kings
Thou gloriously complete
It is no small part of a Christians glory, to continue patiently in well
doing, and for the same bear to and undergo all things imposed upon them.
Appearest in all things.
Thy feet are shod
With Gospel peace that thou with ease
May walk with God.
The Church of Christ a spiritual body, fashioned formed knit and compacted
together by the worker of all things, acting in all things according to his
apoyntments.
The joints within thy thighs
Like jewels are and chains
All wrought in curious-wife
By th'cunning workmans pains
Each several joint
Of my body does supply
As I appoint.
2
Blessed is he that believes and is baptized: for he is washed from his sins
and shall have life everlasting.
Thy navel firm and sound
That liquor wants none
Is like a goblet round
Refreshing every one
Whose hearts I raise
To pass the flood that shows my blood
For sins release.
The ordinances of Christ in his Church do nourish refresh succor support,
comfort and edify the saints, when spiritually, carefully, conscientiously they
feed upon them.
Thy belly like to wheat
With lillys white set ore
Affords most precious meat
In great abundant store
To be kept still
That all my Saints that be in wants
May feed their fill.
3
See chap. the 4 and ver. 5.
Thy breasts are like two twins
Of young and tender roes
From whence because of sins
Rivers of comforts flows
To souls oppressed
For there is no other but thou their mother
Can give them rest.
4
Those whose souls are freed from spiritual slavery and bondage by Christ
Jesus, become powerful, and able to do or undergo whatsoever he calls them unto.
Thy neck that shows thy power
Being freed from slavery
Is like an ivory tower
Raised up most strong and high
(Sins cruel bands
Are like a yoke but they are broke
By Gods commands.)
See chap. 4 and ver. 1.
Thy eyes that give thee light
Transparent are and clear
Like to the fishponds bright
In Heshbon that appear
Close by the gate
Of Bethrabbin where men go in
And out thereat.
The Church of Christ is of a discerning spirit vigilant and watchful, wisely
foresees the evil and in a prudent way delivers her self from it.
Thy nose is like the tower
Of Lebanon so high
From whence the foes great power
From Siria men did spy
Thou cry'st arm arm
Lest enemies when they do rise
Should do thee harm.
5
Christ is the head of his Church he both rules and governs her, is also her
defense and glory.
Thy head that rules well.
The rest of thy body
Is like unto Carmel
In glorious dignity
Thy hair also
Upon thy head: like purple red
Does neatly grow.
The spiritual glory which Christ has put upon his Church, is a thing that
holds him in continual delight, and greatest pleasure.
The beauty which thou have
It does me captivate
That I am held full fast
In a delightful state
Of sweetest pleasure
Each sight of thee affects me
Above all measure.
6
Christ still affected with the Churches beauty continues or rather renews his
praises of her.
How fair art thou my dear
For pleasure of each kind
Such beauty any where
I yet could never find
I must admire
Thy comelines: which I profess
My heart does fire.
7
The Church of Christ holds fast what she has received; will grow in grace and
spiritually flourish, though adversarys rise up against her to depresse, keep
down or root her up.
Thy stature's like the tree
Whereon the palms do grow
That flourishing will be
Though men will keep it low
Like grapes well filled
Thy breasts are such: and comfort much
To souls they yield.
8
Christ being ascended on high will have a special eye to his Church; preserve
her from evil, comfort in and under her trouble and make her abundantly
fruitful in good.
To the palm tree I will go
For it is my decree
To comfort mine, and to
Protect and oversee
Each bough so green
I Will take and dress: that fruitfulness
May there be seen.
Those cannot be barren but abandant in all good fruit over whom Christ has a
spiritual eye with whom he is in sweet Communion.
Like clusters of the vine
Now shall thy breasts be such
There is not one of mine
But fruit is yielding much
They do abound;
In heavenly grace: that have my face
And favor found.
Those that are faithful laborers in the Lords work shall not be without
honor here and a great reward hereafter.
Thy nose like apples sweet
Does send it is smell abroad
Great fame is for them meet
That watch the flock of God
Their memory
It shall be blessed: when they in rest
And silence lie.
9
Saints of all sorts have learned the language of Canaan, their mouths filled
with words full of goodness, speeches gracious, tending to edify all that hear
them.
The palate of thy mouth
Is like the purest wine
Thy words are for thy growth
And edifying mine
It glads their heart
And does enlive; like wine revive
Them in each part.
The word of the Lord is quick and powerful; of a piercing dividing discerning
nature so known to those that feel the virtue thereof.
How efficacious then
Are words thou give forth
They please me and all men
That taste their precious worth
Their power is much
If men digest: what is soundly pressed
Their souls to touch.
Those that have tasted of the good word of the Lord and felt the working power
thereof will not cannot be be silent but declare to others; what God has done
for their souls.
For it the sleep does break
Of those that sleepy are
Causing their lips to speak
In praises and in prayer
They Will publish soon
And tell abroad: the things that God
For them has done.
10
When souls partake of the sweetness of Christ's love, they are then carried
forth to give up themselves to him, becoming wholly his.
Now my assurance is
(From it i will not be moved)
That I am wholly his
That is my best beloved
And yet more see
His whole desire: which I admire
Is toward me.
11
Christ is a Christians best companion whose presence they beg and ^^ize above
all things else.
Now come with me my dear
Let Us go into the field,
Gospel fruit is most pleasing to, and acceptable to Christ Jesus.
The fruit, that is gathe'rd there
Does great contentment yield
The poor low and humble in spirit, and places mean and poor are fit
receptacles for Jesus Christ.
Let Us lodge and rest
In places poor: for they full sure
By thee are blessed.
12
Those souls that have miscarryed, and are once humbled for it, will be
diligent for time to come.
Oh let us rise betime
And to the vinyards go
Much sleeping was the crime
That made my heart full woe
Let Us up and see.
(Though some repines) whether the vines
Flourishing be.
The stronger the Christians are and most endued with grace, the greater care
will they have of those that are weak and tender in the growth of Christianity.
Whether the grape so young
And tender be in growth
And pomgranate among
The other fruits bud forth
All that the saints have or can do is too little for Christ; hence it is they
resign all they have unto him; who is worthy of more then they have or can
give.
There I am free
For to resign: all that is mine
My loves to thee.
13
The saints are always ready and prepared; with oil in their lamps furnished
with all things excellent, to meet and entertain Christ Jesus.
The mandraks sweetly smell
And at our gates be there
Such things as most execl
And for thee ready are
Fruits of all kind
That can be told: both new and old
Thou may there find.
Saints do all they do for and unto Christ, have received of his fulness and
return to him, and lay up for him as it is their duty, obedience thankfulness
and love.
Which I lay up and save
As in a treasure
The choycest that I have
Is not too good for thee
None can me move
But had I more: I would it store
For my dear love.
CHAP. VIII.
1
The Church of Christ is ever desirous Communion with him, do readily embrace
him, cheerfully obey him, not mattering the worlds reproaches.
OH that thou werst, even as my brother dear
That sucked the breasts, of her that did me bear
Where I should find thee, there I would thee kiss
And should not be despised a jot for this.
2
Christians having found and laid hold on Christ, hold him fast, will not let
him go: still desirous of his presence.
I would thee lead, and bring thee to no other
But to the mansions of my own sweet mother
Thither full readily, I will conduct thee
The truths of Christ for instruction correction and comfort are.
And there full readily, she will instruct me,
Kept and to be found in his Church every true Christian has the pure juyces
of faith obedience and love to please and delight Christ.
There of pure spiced wine; I Will make thee drink
And of pomgranate juice, for why I think
Thou well deserve to drink the sweet'st of all
Though some once gave thee vinegar and gall.
3
Saints as they want and stand in need of Christ's power to support and
strengthen them: they may be assured to have and enjoy in all seasons.
Now that I may not want my full comfort
His left hand shall my feeble head support
To cheer my heart, his right hand shall embrace me
That neither sin nor weakness do disgrace me
Such close embraces: I can tell by trying
They will revive a fainting soul a dying.
4
See chap. 2 and 7 ver.
I charge, adjure, and do forbid all them
That are called daughters of Jerusalem
They stir not up my love, by wicked ways
Nor him awake until himself do please;
For whosoever does him so provoke
Must feel the force of his most angry stroke.
5
See chap. 3 and 6 ver.
Oh who is this, we cannot but admire
That does ascend; and rise up daily higher
Out of the desert forlorn wilderness,
Into a state of happiness and bliss;
For she both lies and leans, and still depends
Upon her best beloved as she ascends.
She rests, she rowls she hopes, on him she stays
That her upholds, and keeps in all her ways
By Jesus Christ all his are spiritually raised from a dead and filthy state to
live a new life here and shall by him be raised again at the last day.
When thou wast fallen my spouse; I pittyed thee
And raised thee from under the apple tree
There did thy mother, bear and bring thee forth,
In such uncleanness as my soul did loath;
But through my blood and passion, thou and she
From sin and death, are perfectly set free.
6
Christ's favors conferd upon Christians are strong obligations to love and
thinkfulness.
Now since thou have, for me so great things done
My heart thou have, for everlasting won;
And now I beg and pray, dear love to be
Yet more assured; how well thou love me
To be in, and upon the heart of Christ is the great privilege, and earnest
desire of every Christian.
And therefore set me as a seal is set,
Upon thy heart that thou may not forget
Thy kindness to me and t'free me from harm
Set me also, as seal upon thine arm.
That true divine spiritual love which is shed abroad in the hearts of the
saints, is powerful, conquering, and of a durable lasting nature.
For why, the love I bear to thee my dear
It is for strength much like the king of fear
Whose deadly fatal stroke kills all; but I
If thou deny my suit for love must dye;
For like the grave that cruelly devours
And every living creature overpowers,
Such is the zeal and love within my breast
It quite consumes me, I can have no rest
The coals thereof; are coals of heavenly fire
Whose burning flames do mount my soul up higher
This works, this shines, this upward flys
This burning lies, and lives when the other dies
7
There is no calamity misery or affliction, no persecution so great that can
extinguish the fire of divine love to Christ Jesus.
Though men and devils daily go about
Thinking to quench, extinguish and put out
This heavenly flame of love by often trying
By feirce affliction whether 'twill be dying
Though many floods and waters overflow it;
The more the Church of Christ is persecuted the more it flourishes.
The more they seek to quench the more they blow it
Into a perfect flame of love divine
To him, that loves not less, for ought that is mine.
Where there is true love to Jesus Christ, it will make them to contemn,
despise, yea to hate all things in comparison of him.
Such is the strength of love, and more behold
Not pearls nor precious stones nor purest gold
Can force or flatter me to be disloyal
My love is stronger and can bide the trial
It hates, it scorns, it loathes that man's great riches
Or substance of his house which some bewitches
To turn aside: yet though 'twere offered to me
I would condemn and put it away from me
So high is my resolve I do disdain
All things for Christ for whom all loss is gain.
8
True love to Christ, draws out the heart to love others also, to pity them,
pray for them; and seek by all means their everlasting welfare.
Thus unto thee my love I have expressed
And yet with thee alone; it must not rest
I am constrained by it to make petition
For our poor sister whose yet low condition
Requires thy pity for she is but small
And little too: having no breasts at all
To yield refreshment: oh what shall we do
What grace desire; what furtherance yield unto
Our little sister for whom it is our care
That she, and we at last, alike may fare;
Oh think upon her; do her not forget
She now is low but thou her time have set
When thou will for her speak, and something say
To show thy grace, in her appointed day.
9
The Church of Christ has a wall for defense, a door for entrance, admission
and exclusion, is distinct from others by obedience to Christ's laws and
holiness: surrounded on every side with the never fading mercys and favors of
God.
If that she be a wall for so we would
Have her to be: then upon her we could
As on a firm foundation raise and build
Such palaces, as silver pure does yield
Let Us her divide, from others by a name
And then increase her glory to her fame:
And if she be, or have a door which shows
The building perfected as each man knows
Oh when we can but see her this complete
Then will we compass her, with mercys great
Which will endure, and are more lasting far
Then all, or any boards of cedar are
No gates, or strength of hell shall once prevail
To do her any harm: though they assayl
Her with great force: for she is the habitation
Of him that makes her gates; and walls Salvation.
10
Christians are then both amiable and useful when grown well in grace being
united by faith and obedience are steadfast and immovable.
Now I am grown; into a perfect wall
(Such growth all have, that hearken to Christ's call)
My breasts like towers, they are erected high
Others to help, my self to beautify
Now I am knit unto the corner stone
My ground-work's sure, and cannot be overthrown.
Men in a natural state are filthy impure unpolisht rough, unlovely but
partaking of the grace of God in Christ Jesus unto conversion and faith are
most precious and so esteemed by him.
From that time I found favor in his eyes
(Though once I was, like stones that men despise
When they among the rubbish lie unsquar'd
Such was my state, and so it with me fared
But now being hewn, and squared, and polisht bright)
I am become so precious in his sight.
11
Those Christ imploys in his vineyard ought to be both vigilant, laborious
diligent.
At Baalhamon, a fertile fruitful plot
A fruitful vineyard Solomon had got
Which vineyard he lets out unto his keepers
Which must be watchmen, and not drowsy sleepers
And every one of them must yearly bring
Forth fruit thereof, a thousand silverling.
12
The Church of Christ, and so every Christian is Christ's own and ought to be
devoted wholly unto him.
The vineyard t'wich I have a proper right
It is my own and always in my sight.
He has promised his presence with his people and will make provision for them.
My watchful eye her wants shall still be spying
And when discerned my grace shall be supplying
Those wants of hers: that she may fruitful be
To the end they may abound in Gospel fruit in good works.
And in great measure bring forth fruit to me
Her blessing is prosperity and peace
And I expect and look for much increase,
Not for my self alone nor for my sake
The laborers in Christ's Church are blessed if faithful, for they shall have a
great reward.
But fellow laborers, that pain do take
To dig, and plant and prune without regard
Unto themselves: sure I will them reward
If I a thousand do look for at least
Two hundred to allow them I am pleast
They shall partake o'th glory that is mine
And like the sun in brightness ever shine.
13
The true Church of Christ and the pastors thereof teach and instruct others
with saving doctrine and sound speech such as cannot be condemned.
O thou that in the gardens, have thy dwelling
Regard this thing, which to thee I am telling
Thou have companions, which do hear thy voice
And thou must them instruct, for therein lies
Thy duty to them: thou must set before them
The good and evil too, not Lord ore them
For they partake of the same precious faith
And what the one have, still the other has
To be much in prayer is the duty of Saints, it is the precept of Christ, and
pleasing to him if they do so.
And furthermore, thou may cause me to hear
Thy voice also, in humble hearty prayer
It is a sacrifice, right pleasant sweet
And for the saints to offer it is meet
My soul also with it is much delighted
Remember how to it thou art invited.
14
Every gracious soul longs and prays for Christ's second coming in glory, that
they may be freed from all that is grievous here and reign with him in heaven
hereafter: amen, come Lord Jesus come quickly.
My soul dear love's impatient of delay
Make have, make have, and do no longer stay
Be thou for swiftness like the roe or heart
My only dear who on the mountains art
Of spicy pleasures and all rare delight
That ravish will the heart: and dim the sight
Of all beholders from those glorious hills
The swetest pleasures evermore distills;
While I am here below I am oppressed,
Lord Jesus quickly come, to give me rest.
THE BOOK OF JONAH IN MEETRE.
CHAP. I.
The Argument.
How Jonah's sent to Niniveh
But he withstood Gods call,
In turning off another way,
And's swallowed by a whale.
IN ancient times as Scriptures do record
In Israel dwelt a prophet of the Lord.
Jona by name, son of Amittais youth,
To whom the Lord sent forth his word of truth,
He long had preached to Isra'ls ten tribes
Converts them not, but gains their mocks and gibes;
Now God does see by means they do not profit
When they should hear the word, they rather scof it,
Their hearts are hard, means makes them not amend
Another way God will their prophet send:
The light from heaven must not always shine
What God does give he sometimes takes again. Observation from Gods sending
Jonah to Niniveh out of Israel when he preached but did not profit.

When trees are barren, do not bring forth fruit
The gardener will pluck 'em up by the root,
When men have means for growth, but do not grow
God will not ta^^y but away will go,
When truth appears but truth men do not love
Nor means nor mercies, carefully improve
For their chief good: their day is turned to night
And darkness covers them instead of light;
The means they had before God will remove it,
And give it those that better will improve it;
When by the means they do not bring forth fruit
Those shall have means, that by the means will do it
On mine embassage Jona thou must go
And have away the assirian city to
That is so great, so full, and of such fame
Through all the world: it is Niniveh by name.
And when thou come there in herald-wise
Declare thy message, though they do despise
Both it and thee: lift up thy voice on high
And like a trumpet, sound a fearful cry
Against the city, lest it does repent
And let it know, for what end thou art sent.
For why, I judge them not without a cause
The people are found bteakers of my laws,
They have not lern'd to fear nor to adore me
Their wickedness and sin, it lies before me,
As Sodoms sins once cried loud in mine ears
So Ninivehs before my face appears,
For which I will the city overthrow
Commission now thou have, see that thou go;
The greatest monarchs that the earth does bear
Nor Citys of most fame that ever were
Nor might nor greatness gives immunity
But all exposed to judgment just they ly; Observation from Gods not sparing
the greatest places nor persons.

If they mind not their maker for to know
Their makers mind is them to overthrow.
But Jona now as one amazed no doubt,
With this strange heathen news does cast about
What course to take, that so he may not be
A bringer of this news to Ninivee;
For why, in Israel he had taken pain
And preached long; but's preaching was in vain
Does those elaborate pains, convert no Jews
What hope is there that this unwelcome news,
This dreadful, direful sermon should find place
Among the people of the heathen race
And if it should then God was gracious bent
And of the threatened judgment would repent
That so his reputation he must lose
Another way therefore the prophet goes.
When doubts arise and dangers stand before
Seeming to cross the way we should go ore
When at the stake our carnal interest lies
And self must suffer by the enterprise
How apt are we poor weaklings to suggest
Our own devices, not Gods ways the best. Observation from Jonah's turning
aside because he thought God would not make good his word against Niniveh.

Sin blinds men's eyes, now Iona thinks to flee
Out of his presence who does view and see
Each step he takes: from his all-seeing eyes
He posts away; and unto Tarshish flies
Having cast off obedience to Gods word
He steals away from serving of his Lord
Thinking that by this unadvised flight
To hide himself from Gods most peircing sight.
To a sea port or to a haven town
Iopa by name, this passenger went down,
At his arival there he quickly sound
A ship prepared; fitted, ready bound
To Tarsus city: there her voyage was
Thither the rebel Prophet thought to pass;
And that his passage might not be prevented
To pay his fare, aforehand he is contented
Which having done he quickly goes aboard
To flee away from serving of the Lord.
When self sits uppermost and bears sway
That selfish soul will quickly disobey
Gods just commands: Observation from Jonah's care and diligence to effect his
carnal intention.
and every holy test
For to promote a selfish interest.
No let nor rub that stands in the way
Of erring man; when once he goes astray
From Gods command: but he with diligence
Will use endeavor, to remove it thence
What care he takes for fear his game be lost,
Although at last full dear it do him cost.
Now Jona hasts away, he is under sail
Looking each minute for a prosperous gale
Of pleasant wind to further his intent,
And quickly waf't him ore whether he went.
But that great Lord whom Jona did displease
Sent out his wind and did a tempest raise,
A mighty tempest is upon the main
So that the ship the clouds do seem to gain:
Those milder streams are curled, rough and unkind
And rage and swell by reason of the wind
The Ship it reels like to a drunken man,
The mariners they do all that they can
To lowr the top-sail, and take in the sails
Yet all they do or can nothing avails
For still the hideous tempest on them lies
And to lose ship and all, now each man cries.
How vain are we to think our counsel will
Take place: Observe. from Gods crossing Jonah in his way of disobedience and
rebellion.
when we consult for to fulfill
Unruly lusts, and foolish fond intent,
Thinking Gods blessed will for to prevent
Then to our grief, our detriment and loss,
Such purposes, he will quickly cross;
All men's endeavors then are at a stand
When they endeavor to bind up God hand
Or to divert the course of a just rod,
When streached forth by a displeased God
The seamen all are now full sore afraid
The strongest hearts of men may be dismayed
Fear with the smart of heavens chastizing rod
Drives every man to call upon his God:
Unto their heathen gods they make their suit,
Fear makes men pray, when nothing else will do it,
And now as men possessed with dreadful cares
To save themselves and ship: they take the wares
And cast it over board; in hope their pains
May be rewarded in the use of means.
Some that confess a God: Observe. from the heathen Seamens praying in danger
no more God knows
Then did these heathen rude and barbarous,
Who in the time of their great misery
Do all confess there is a deity.
But they that do confess the true God must
Fear, love, obey, and always in him trust.
But where is Jona all this dreadful while
The Seas do roar and rage and foam and boil,
And whistling winds a fearful noise do keep
Our Jonas gone aside the ship to sleep,
His senses are locked fast, and conscience too
And neither wakes for all the seas can do.
A man would think no heart could now endure
But sin makes men most desperately secure.
When into dangers men are plunged deep
They many times do fall full fast asleep
Lul'd in the cradle of security
Till their small thread of life be cut, Observe. from Jonah's security in time
of so great danger.
whereby
They hold their lease, then they awakned be:
Eyes that were shut, are open now to see
How Satan like a jugler, did deceive them
And of true happiness did quite bereave them,
Who being fooled into this dismal state
Must pay for pleasures at a woeful rate,
The master of the Ship then to him came
And says what meanest thou (O fie for shame)
What meanest thou O sleeper void of fears)
How can thou, dare thou rest, now death appears?
Are not we sinking all into the deep
Why do not rather watch: but ly and sleep?
Is this a time for thee to be secure
Now death is waiting for thee at the door?
Art thou of sense and reason quite bereft
Or of the world to come, all thoughts have left?
Arise O sluggard, do it not delay
Have thou a God, then unto thy God pray
And call upon him with an earnest cry
Perhaps he will hear and will us not destroy:
Thus did the heathen to his duty move him
And for his negligence sharply reprove him.
Come near and take a veiw; Observe. from the prophets sluggishnesse who was to
have been a watchman unto others.
but do not wonder
To see a Boanarges son of thunder;
Whose office is to cry to men, arm, arm,
Lest through security your souls take harm:
Stand fast, quit you like men, be strong and watch:
And yet himself a single slumber catch
His light, his life, his grace a while to smother
In ashes raked, till kindled by another.
O most prodigious, he that is the keeper
Of's own and others souls to turn dead sleeper.
The seamen now aghast, with horrid fear
Did think some wicked person was come there
Who had committed some more huinous crime
And for whose cause the evil of that time
Had now befaln them: hence with one consent
They all agree to find the delinquent.
Come let us now cast lots into the lap
Thereby to know for whose cause this mishap
And evil is upon us: so they fell
To casting lots: till that time none could tell
Who was the man so sorely had offended,
The lot was cast, and Iona apprehended;
When God will execute his judgments just
It Is a vain thing in a vain thing to trust; Observe. from Jonah's being found
out by the Lord and his sin discovered.

When God a sinner will bring to the trial
(...) thing to bid the Lord denial
When God will search it is vain to go about
To hide from God; for God will find it out.
Shall vain man sin? in sinning think to hide
Himself from God; whose eyes cannot abide
To look on sin, what does he think he can
Deal with his God, as he deals with man?
Nay God has ways and means to bring to light,
Things done in secret and the darksome night,
Sometimes by this means, and sometimes by the other
God will discover what vain man does smother.
Now let us know, we pray thee hide not from us
The very cause why this is come upon us,
Thou see wee're brought into an exigent
And till we know the cause are not content;
Have thou a calling, then what calling have?
Art thou not one that wilfully does wast
Thy precious time and live in idleness,
And for that sin ere brought unto distress?
What is the country now from which thou came?
And of what people art tell us by name.
Now danger great had opend Ionah's eyes
Therefore he says to them in humble wise
as for my nation it is of the Jews
Distinct from others by the name Hebrews;
I am an hebrew from the loins descended
Of him that was of God so much befreinded.
As for Religion I do fear the Lord,
And worship him who by his powerful word,
Did frame and fash'on both sea and dry land,
That governs all things at his own command:
To God alone and t'none else am I bound,
Yet at this time in base rebellion found.
When men are brought into some great distress
Though not before yet then they will confess
Their evil deeds, Observe. from Jonah's confession and acknowledgment, of God
and his rebellion.
the hearts that stubborn were
Are bruised and broken in a time of fear;
God in his wisdom, often thinks it fit
To whip a frantic person into's wit,
And sure, at such a time ^ells his best
To use and to improve what interest
He has in God, if any such thing be,
And to his uprightness for comfort flee.
Then were the men afraid, with greater fear
When so much of the true God they do hear,
And see for sin he does due vengeance take
And will not spare it for a prophets sake;
Then did they say, why have thou done this thing?
How dare thou disobey thy Lord and King?
What could thou turn away, when he says go?
Dare you professing Hebrews once do so?
What fond conceit possessed thee, did thou think
That for so great a fault thy God would wink?
For he had told them, and thereby they knew
That from the presence of the Lord he flew.
Thus he that disobeyed Gods command
Does now convict, condemned, Observe. from the heathens reprehending Jonah.
and censured stand
Among, and by the barbarous heathen crew
In silent wise account it all his due;
So every one that fears not Gods name
One time or other he will clothe with shame
And make them stand as men all in a maze
Dumb like a stock on which others do gaze;
And by the words of others are reproved
Cause by the words of God they were not moved:
The Seamen say Jona thou have undone us
The seas still rage and tempest lies upon us,
Our souls are filled with dreadful fears and care
And still increasing as the tempests are;
The lot's fallen on thee, conscience tells thee too
Thou art the man that does us quite undo;
By which two things thou plainly art detected
To be the cause yet let us be directed
What we shall do unto thee that the seas
May rage and foam no more and winds may cease.
Then Iona answered, it is not you but I
That have provoked God so mightily
It Is for my sake not yours the seas are raging
And tempest still is on you not asswaging:
Now take me up and cast me overboard
For that is appointed for me of the Lord,
That is the sentence, I must undergo it
And silently submit my self unto it;
Then shall there be a calm upon the main
And boystrous waves shall smoothly glide again.
Though God in justice seem to be severe
And strict in punishing for sin: Observe. from Jonah's so patiently submitting
to Gods will: accepting the punishment of his iniquity.
yet here
A gracious soul submits in any wise
And suffers not one grudging thought to rise
Against Gods dealing so: but will submit
Knowing his sin is the just cause of it:
For to excuse himself he will not do
But say, it is righteous Lord, that thou do so:
He Will take unto himself deserved shame
Thereby to honor Gods most glorious name.
Come take a view how these rude heathen men
Behaved themselves in love to Jonah; when
They saw his patience, and did hear his word
And knew he was a prophet of the Lord;
Sure greater love then theirs could not be shown
They seek to save his life dang'ring their own,
They fain would save him, and therefore they try
The best of means and skill before he dye:
They row full hard; now each man lays his hand
To work: thinking to bring the ship to land
They toil, they sweat, they labor in great pain
And when they have done their labor's all in vain.
For now as though the elements conspire
To vex them still: the waves they mount up higher
The sea still works, the windy tempests roar
The seamen cease there rowing and give ore.
From hence we see that a mere humane soul
Has so much pity others to condole
That God of nature, Observe. from the heathen men's endeavor to have saved
Jonah.
so much reason gave
To teach one man another life to save;
More when a beam divine has influence
On them: they give the greater reverence.
These men that worshipped idol gods before
Have quickly learned the true God to adore;
And now like unto new converted Saints
They go to God alone, with prayer and plants:
And lest the guilt of blood should on them ly,
They make to heaven and list up their cry.
We do beseech thee Lord destroy us not
For this man's sake: but leave us without spot:
We do beseech thee Lord, and humbly pray;
Blood innocent on us thou will not lay,
For we perceive Lord that it is thy will,
And we as executioners do fulfill
Even as thy blessed pleasure has designed,
For all is done according to thy mind.
Men in affliction earnestly will cry, Observe. from the heathen men's addressing
themselves to God in this strait.

The worst of men then unto God will fly
Self guides the stern ofttimes, and bears sway;
For love to self and not to God; they will pray:
But every one that is a convert true,
In every season yeildeth God his due,
Unto his God he prays, to him he will cry,
Not only when afflictions on him lie,
And when some difficultys stand before,
But when all such with ease he can get ore:
If this or that befall, he is moved by neither,
He Will pray as well in fair as fouler weather.
So they took Jonah as it pleased the Lord,
Into the sea they cast him overboard,
Whereat the sea it seemed well satisfied
The stormy tempest now is laid aside:
No token of displeasure now appears
Nor nothing seen to usher future fears;
Now all is done, even as the Lord did please
His anger now is calm: so are the seas.
If judgment at Gods house do first begin, Observe. from Gods not sparing his
own servant.

And God not wink, though at a prophets sin:
If God his dearest ones he will not spare
But they of this and the other stripe must share,
As God in justice pleases to pass sentence,
Then those ungodly ones without repentance
Those fearless graceless wicked wretches; who
From one rebellion to another go;
The devils drudges, driving on sins trade
Must pay full dear for it; when th'reckoning's made.
The seamen seeing all things that had past
They cannot choose but stand like men aghast
They cast off idols; greatly fear the Lord,
And offer sacrifice, while yet aboard:
And lest these wonders, should slip out of mind
Themselves by vows and oaths full fast they bind,
To praise the Lord that saved them from the deep
And all their day's, this vow they mean to keep.
When God in wondrous manner does appear
And to men's souls in mercy does draw near, Observe. from the sea-mens devoting
themselves to God.

When he puts forth his power to touch the heart,
Men are made willing from their sins to part:
Till by the fear of God their souls are moved
They will not leave what they so long have loved:
But when Gods power does form a creature new
The devil, world and flesh they bid adieu;
They break their bonds with them that tied them fast
And cleave to God with purposes to last.
Come view the care and providence of God
Who though he did chastise, with his angry rod
Yet mercy shows when justice might take place
And after frowns, shows forth a pleasant face.
And now to satisfy his love and care
A mighty whale before hand did prepare,
For to devour and in devouring save:
His belly now it must be Jonah's grave,
In which dark vault the Lord did him imbarque
Three days and nights, as safe as in an arc
Where deaths black terrors do surround his soul
His passing bell in's ear does always toul
Where now we leave him, thus begirt with fear
Till in another wonder God appear.
CHAP. II.
The Argument.
How Jonah unto God did pray
Now he is in his grave
God heard, and in a wondrous way
How he did Jonah save.
NOw see how good afflictions often prove
They are not only tokens of Gods love, Observa. from Jonah's reducement by his
affliction.

Sins past correct, and future sins prevent
But for some other causes they are sent,
The wandering roving steps for to bring back
And quicken souls to duties, that are slack.
Then Jona in the depth of misery
Who seeks not God in time of liberty
But runs and flees, and hides him from his face
Does now cry to him in this dismal case,
He now is cast into deaths darksome bed
Its sable curtains wrap about his head,
The king of terror, terrible appears
And Jonah's heart, does melt away with fears,
Out of the fishes belly Jonah's grave
Jonah had hope that God would Jonah save,
His faith begets prayer; he prays in faith
And to the Lord his God these words he says
When faith gets strength, and hope takes ancor hold
The soul that feared before, does now grow bold
With great and grievous troubles being pressed,
He knocks at heavens gates and will not rest
Until his suit do find acceptance there
And gracious answer be returned to prayer;
He Will seek, he will sue, he will cry, and not give ore
Till God do open what was shut before.
Oh Lord my soul is brought into distress
I have deserved it; yet a great deal less
Then what I do deserve I undergo;
Thou art a gracious God then mercy show;
'Twas my affliction great that made me cry
And 'twas thy mercy t'hear so speedily
My earnest suit, thou did it not say nay
When I out of this hellish grave did pray:
Thou heardest me, when I thy face had sought
And thou have for me great salvation wrought.
No labor's lost when we are in distress
To make to heaven by humble address
With hearts all melting, Observa. from the good success Jonah had in turning
cleaning to God in his affliction.
broken and contrite
A thing in which God takes so much delight,
When in this frame of spirit we make suit,
To God alone in Christ, then that will do it,
When we confess our sins with grief and shame,
And do reform our lives the flesh to tame
Such blessed endeavors, never proves in vain,
Though God were gone; it brings him back again.
'Twas not the seamen but it was the Lord
That took me up, and cast me overboard
They did fulfill even as thou Lord did please
'Twas thou by them, cast me into the seas
Into the midst and heart of them: where those
Proud waters did me secretly enclose
The floods the seas, raised high with wind and tide
They do encompass me on every side
All thy proud billows, which do mount on high
At thy command: yet else do smoothly lie,
And towering waves which I poor fool alas!
Thought to get ore: yet now all ore me pass.
When gracious souls are brought under the rod
That is in the hand of a displeased God, Observation from Jonah's looking at the
hand of the Lord and not at the instrument be made use of.

Nor this, nor that, who is the instrument,
But God they eye, who has affliction sent,
Not like the dog, that gnawing is the stone,
Regarding not the hand, by which its thrown.
And then I said, for I was in great fear
And laboring was, betwixt hope and despair,
(The darkness having dimmed the clearest light)
Then said I, Lord I Am cast out of thy sight;
Yet notwithstanding, all the grace thou have,
Seems to me, as if 'twere locked up fast
And that no beam of light I can espy,
Yet will I look again with steadfast eye
Toward thy temple, and that holy place,
Where Lord thou promised have, to show thy face.
Two contraries are in the best of men
The party vanquished, Observa. from the war between the flesh and spirit in
the best.
fain would rise again
The flesh and spirit, do oppose each other,
The elder's loath to serve the younger brother
Great contestation is twixt faith and doubt
Hopeless despair, strives hard true faith to rout
These two opponents bicker in the field
Nor one nor other of these two will yield
Till faith puts forth at last, and strikes home
With blows, that doubting fear do overcome;
A man that's brought into a woeful state
Will oftentimes his misery relate
And will enlarge himself to tell his grief
Thinking by telling it, to find relief.
So Jonah does his misery repeat
And says the water's plentiful and great,
They did inviron me they did me wrap
As swaddling bands the babe in mothers lap;
Three days and nights they do about me roll,
And deaths black hearse encompasses my soul:
The waters deep were daily ore me spread,
And stinking weeds did wrap about my head:
Unto the bottom of the mountains steep,
Then I went down still fathoming the deep
Sometimes I was aloft upon the main,
And soon plungd down into the depths again:
I was in prison and the earth did bar me
And horrid fears, do every minute scar-me,
For ever hopeless to set foot on shore,
Unless thou by a wonder me restore:
Yet thou O Lord my God, was pleased to save
And brought my life again up from the grave,
That cruel corrupt loathsome stinking pit
Where death had almost swallowed me in it.
There Is no condition that can be so sad, Observa. from Jonah's obtaining
deliverance and his thankfulness for the same.

Nor state of man that ever was so bad,
There is no burden can so heavy lie
Nor vexing grief nor pressing misery,
But God almighty by his mighty strength
He can deliver: and he will at length
Deliver those that do on him rely,
And pray to him in faith with earnest cry;
From their low state he can and will them raise
And when it is done they will ever give him praise;
They will confess that he salvation wrought,
And heard as soon, as they his face had sought.
When my heart broke and soul it fainting lay
To ease my self I could devise no way,
My thoughts to this and then to that were led,
But still they did return upon my head;
Then did I think upon (for it was time),
The mercys Lord thou ever have shown thine,
My hope was ancor, and it took fast hold
And to the throne of grace now I make bold,
My humble prayer for to present to thee,
Though like a rebel lately I fled from thee,
Thou did not shut it out: (oh wondrous grace)
But it came in, unto thy holy place. Observa. from Jonah's encoraging himself
to rely on God and cry to him from consideration of former mercys.

When we poor creatures know not what to do
To one shift and another are put to,
And find no means of help to avoid our trouble
Instead of help, they are returned double:
When every vessel leaks and refuge fails,
And every hold we have nothing avails:
When each proud wave and billow does pass ore-us
And death with all his terror stand before-us,
Then it is time, full time to call to mind,
Each thing of God, that we did ever find
To strengthen faith and give encouragement
Our prayers in heavens court for to present.
All ye that hunt and follow after lies
And are observing idle vanities
That have dependency on false deceits
That evermore the silly sinner cheats
As long as ye these sinful courses take
In choosing these; your own mercys forsake
Both present happiness and future bliss
And I by sad experience tell you this.
Those that at any time have gone astray
Turning aside out of Gods holy way
And are whipped for it till their backs do bleed, Observa. from Jonah's giving
warning to others from woeful experience.

Can best of all warn others to take heed.
Now as for those that follow vanities
And unto idol-gods do sacrifice,
Ascribing to them each deliverance
Accounting all things as they came by chance,
Both the one and the other always come to naught,
But as for my part I am better taught,
And unto thee O Lord my heart will raise
And sacrifice unto thy name with praise;
I will give thanks unto thy holy name
From thee and none else my deliverance came,
And now I Will pay to thee that I have vowed,
Because I know by thee I am allowed;
For why I know there is no salvation wrought,
But what thy hand, O Lord to pass has brought. Observa. from Jonah's
thankfulness for his deliverance.

When God appears to us in love and grace
And shows again the beauty of his face
When he unfolds his arms to let us in,
And draws a mantle ore to hide our sin,
When he puts forth his power not to destroy,
But save; and fill our hearts with perfect joy,
Surely it is an obligation strong
To bind our hearts: but so unloose our tongue
To speak in praise, talking to others abroad
'Oth wisdom, goodness, mercy, power of God;
But when his grace is turned to wantonness
And mercy move men neither more nor less,
Lives to reform and manners to amend
Those mercys turn to judgments in the end.
Then spoke the Lord that has the sole command
Of all the crearures in the sea and land
He spoke unto the whale within the sea
The whale no sooner heard but did obey,
He said to him, Jonah I mean to save,
Thy belly has been long enough his grave
My mighty power, now he shall understand
Therefore go bring him quickly to the land;
Then did the fish launch forrh, away he went
Unto the place whether the Lord him sent,
He splits the seas with have until they roar
And vomits Jonah safely on the shore.
What shall a fish that in the seas does dwell
Hear and obey Gods voice and not rebel, Observa. from the whales obedience to
Gods command.

One void of reason and religion too,
At the first bidding; as God bids him do.
God speaks but once unto the mighty whale
At his command he stops: then hearken all
To whom God speaks not only once nor twice
But ore and ore he comes with new supplys
Of precepts mingled, with entreatise dear,
To stir them up his holy name to fear,
Crying aloud, Oh do this thing and live,
But yet for all that, no attendance give.
Shall the queen of Sheba, travail from the south
To hear the wisdom, dropping from the mouth
Of a mere man; shall Niniveh repent,
As soon as Jonah unto them was sent,
Then Sheba's queen the Ninivites and whale
Shall rise in judgment, and condemn them all.
CHAP. III.
The Argument.
How Jonah unto N^niveh
A s cond time is sent
They hear: in hearing do obey
The Lord did then repent.
NO sooner were all these things done and past
But God his mercy (which does ever last)
To Jonah shows: Observa. from the prophets declaring that and only that the
Lord commanded him and not going before the Lord sent him.
to grace he does receive him
And though he did provoke he will not leave him.
Though from his office he might be degraded
Yet for his fault, he is not now upbraded.
But now a second time their comes a word
Sent unto Jonah from the highest Lord
Saying arise, begone and do not stay
Mine anger will arise, if thou delay
Thou art commanded make no more excuses
Know thou my patience brooks no more abuses.
Unto that famous City Niniveh
I again send thee and see that thou say
The word I bid thee, when thou come there
Preach that, whether they hear or do forbear.
And though of thee not one would have regard
And for such news can look for no reward,
Yet be thou strong, take courage, see thou do it,
I charge thee turn not off, but go unto it.
I am resolved of this, and they shall know
That within forty days i will overthrow
Their City great, if they within that space
Do not repent that I may show them grace.
All those that run when God says no such thing,
Not God but their own errand they will bring,
The message God commands they will not impart
But what is devised in their own foolish heart,
Or that which man commands, with zeal they press
But what God bids them preach: a great deal less
Of care and zeal they spend; which does declare
That not the true but prophets false they are:
But he is the prophet true goes not before
God send him furnished with a heavenly store
What he commands him still he keeps to that,
To speak and do; regardless always what
Men do oppose, nor love nor fear that draws him
To fail his trust; for'ts love and fear that aws him.
Now Jonah does arise away he gets
And toward Niniveh his face he sets,
He trudges on, regards not wind nor weather,
Nor takes not up his rest till he come thither;
For God had strictly charged him by his word
And now his care is therewith to accord.
Men for their sins do often feel the rod
And heavy hand of a displeased God, Observe. from Jonah's hasting now to
perform what God gave him in charge.

Before affliction comes they go astray
But learn by it their master to obey.
Now this same great Assirian city where
The prophet with his sermon must appear,
It was exceeding great, greater then other,
And of all cities well might be the mother;
It was so long, so broad, spacious and wide,
Three days to travail it from side to side
Might be a journey for a man most fit,
For so recorded it is in holy writ.
Besides some say, that humane histories
Do make report, some say they are not lies,
That threescore miles would but this city round,
And fifteen hundred towrs in it were found;
The walls in height, full thirty yards and more,
The like was surely never seen before;
The breadth o'th walls was equal to the rest
They say two chariots might well pass in breast,
And space enough for diverse left between,
Such walls in height and breadth besides, nere seen
And sixscore thousand infants were found there,
As the next chapter makes it to appear.
Unto this city mighty and of fame
At last full tired and weary Jonah came,
Passes the streets one day, begins to thunder
Out his unwelcome news: makes them to wonder
And stand like men afright, with ghastly fear,
Their ears do tingle at the news they hear;
With fainting fits they are ready to drop down,
Each tells another news that's come to town.
All thus alarmed they stand as in a maze
And every one at other seems to gaze;
The larum runs apace through every street,
And all that hear tell others whom they meet.
For Jonah went along with doleful cry
Yet forty days and then God will destroy
This city great, then he will overthrow it
And charged me straightly unto you to show it,
To threaten you with judgment I was sent
My errand I have said, repent, repent.
If that a hand appear but on the wall
Debaucht Belshazers countenance will fall
His joints unloose, his knees together dash: Observe. from the Ninivits
disponding as the judgment threatened by Jonah.

When God puts forth his rod to scourge and slash.
Oppressing Pharoahs heart, it will come down
When God in ferious manner 'gins to frown.
Let churlish Nabal hear what might come on,
His heart within him's cold like to a stone.
The proud and lofty Ninivites do fear
When God in threatened wrath does but appear.
The wicked, great, proud persecuting ones
That naught regard the poor man's sighs and groans,
If God come forth and bear his powerful arm
And cause his trumpet, give them one alarm,
When time is not and judgment cannot stay,
Their hearts do faint, and fainting melt away
Much more proud wretches when they once do feel
The force and smart of his sharp-glitt'ring steel.
The Ninivits no sooner heard the word
And dreadful judgments threatened by the Lord,
But they believe him and think he had sent
Jonah to warn each person to repent.
Wherefore they do agree with one accord
To turn from sin unto the living Lord:
And to prepare them fitly for the same
A Solemn fast the people do proclaim;
Of pleasant food they will not now partake
Their joviall feasting they do now forsake;
Of dainty delicates they taste no more
Instead of mirth and music now they roar:
Each face grows pale, and blackness now does gather
Instead of play and sports now they had rather
Sit in the dust; with heavy sighs and groans
And tears in eyes to heaven making moans:
Their brave attire, and gorgeous rich array
In which they proudly decked themselves each day
Their broydred shining garments: and such things
As hoods and cauls their jewels and their rings
Are laid aside by all; and there is none
That does adventure now to put them on.
Instead whereof they put dust on their head
And sackcloth on each person now is spread
Wherewith to cloth themselves now they think fit
And all in sable wise in ashes sit.
Their eyes distill; their cheeks are wet with tears
And hearts no doubt, are swallowed up with fears.
when Jona had scarce three days among them taught
His sermons on them wonderfully wrought, Observe. from the Ninivits believing
Jonah and humbling themselves.

May be he preached three years in Israel
And's Sermons never wrought on them so well
when God puts forth his power men's hearts to reach
They soon are touched with what his prophets preach
And when they lie under a fearful sentence
O then or never they fall to repentance,
And then great present changes will be found
Yet such repentances ate seldom sound
When men repent for fear or smart o'th rod
It Is more for love to self, then love to God.
No sooner did this news arive at court
But then their king leaves of his princly sport,
This mighty monarch glorious and high
Descends the throne of his great majesty.
His golden chain and kingly robe so royal
He now puts off and puts on self denial,
He rents his clothes: and sits in ashes too
And now the king does as his subjects do.
In heavy sackcloath he is humbly dressed
Expressing grief thereby, as do the rest.
This heathen king, Observe. from the heathens kings patient reception of
Jonah's sad tidings.
takes all full patiently
Though judgment judgment still was Ionah's cry,
He neither frets nor fumes, nor rails nor rages
As others that have lived in clearer ages
Who would imprison him that tidings brought
Of their destruction, but he is better taught;
May all in power and place learn to submit
And hear the rod, and him that 'pointed it.
Now with consent of all his nobles great
That do attend upon his royal seat
His privy Counsel great Assirian Lords;
With whom in this sad junto he accords.
Be it enacted let it be decreed,
That from this time not any one do feed
On any thing their natures do sustain
But from all kind of food they do refrain;
Our pleasure is nor good nor bad they taste,
So long as this our royal act does last:
Let all take notice both the great and least;
Not men alone we say but every beast,
And flock and heard that grazeth in the field,
To gain the succor grass and herbs do yield;
Shall taste no food nor water drink no more
Until for pining want each beast does roar.
With bellowing cry: that they may us excite
To lay aside all pleasures and delight
To weep and wayle, and mournfully lament
Thereby to signify we do repent.
O what is sin so much to be abhorred, Observe. from not only sinful man
repenting but the beasts of the field mourning also.

O it is sin so much provoks the Lord
To punish man and beast; not man alone
But for the sins of men the creatures groan.
The sinless beast, nor need, nor can repent
Yet with the sinner, needs they must lament:
May sinful man stand then all in a maze,
When on the sinless creature he does gaze;
Groaning with grief; for the just God therein
Shows how he is displeased with men for sin.
And further by the foresaid thority
We do decree; and to all signify
That every man put off his rich array,
And every beast, his ornaments this day,
This darksome day, wherein none can be glad
Let man and beast in sackcloath rough be clad;
And while that all thus sadly mourning ly,
Let every one to God lift up his cry
With earnest powerful prayers, now make your suit
For weak, nor feigned prayers now will not do it*
By sins we have displeased God on high
And if he show not mercy we must die,
We guilty are of many great offense,
And most of all we have used violence
Within this city; it cleaves to our hands
Let Us cleanse our selves from it now he commands,
And with our prayers and tears and outward mourning
Let every of us from our sins be turning.
When thus by king and Counsel 'twas decreed
Signed and sealed, Observe. from the kings decree for repentance and have to
the execution thereof.
it hasts with winged speed
It flys abroad and runs through every street
Each tells another of it whom they meet,
For why it was proclaimed in his name
And heralds fit to execute the same;
Where true repentance gods there goes confession*
Repentance true, nere goes without contrition;
Self judging too, repentance does call in
Whereby t'escape Gods judgments due for sin;
Unfeigned prayer does assistance lend,
And reformation life for to amend,
For where ^mendment, joins with hearty grief
Hope may be had that it will bring relief.
And cary'd on with strength of resolution
To spend and have the work to execution;
The penitent he can no longer stay
But meets an angry God half on his way,
When God against him comes tho's pace be flack
He mends his pace, and runs to turn him back.
But now behold what moved this heathen king
To constitute, ordain, appoint this thing,
It was not only thoughts of present fear
But God in mercy also might appear,
For who can tell, says he, or who does know,
Whether this city he will overthrow
If we persist not on but do repent;
May be for this end Jona he was sent;
Perhaps returning, we shall mercy find
For I have heard to mercy he is inclined;
We do not know therefore let us make trial,
But if we turn from sin and be found loyal,
But God may turn away from his feirce wrath
And will repent of what the prophet has
Pronounced against us that we may not die,
Although he says that he will us destroy.
Gods mercys great, Observe. from the Niniv^^s encouragement to turn of to God,
because he is a merciful God.
they ^ave been eve^ found
Good ancre-hold for souls: hopes surest ground;
Poor sinner; when at loss, then do make bold
To graspe at mercy and there take fast-hold
(...) ^oul to save from horrid desperation,
(...) get a blessed expectation:
(...) means for to escape the fire
(...) ^nkindled wrath and burning ire)
Mercy to find: yet it is but peradventur
Thy soul had wasted all thy mercy lent-her,
And now it is come to this, I do not know
Whether I shall find mercy yea or no:
What though it be to thee a doubtful thing,
Thy soul into the hands of mercy fling,
Concerning Niniveh see how't appears,
Who now sit mourning all bedewed with tears,
Nor mirth, nor music heard; not one is glad,
But every one in hairy sackcloath clad;
Yet this is judged to be the smallest part
Of works that manifest a trve convert:
With it they turned from all their evil ways
God saw they did it; and they did him please
For it is not sorrow much nor protestation
Against sin that pleases God but reformation.
The evils all God said he would do to them
Are now removed, and turned away from them,
They are suspended upon this condition
That they amendment joined with contrition,
For the most gracious God repents of what
He said that he would do, and does it not.
Great is the force of faith and true repentance
Though judgment pass, Observe. from Gods forbearing to punish upon their
turning to him.
it will reverce the sentence
When sin is left that sinful souls beguiles,
Gods frowns are turned into pleasant smiles:
His threatened judgments, often are suspended,
When as the people threatened are amended.
CHAP. IV.
The Argument.
How Jonah's angry cause the word
He preached had not success,
As he would have: God by a gourd
Reproves his foolishness.
BUt now when Jona saw the strange event
His sermon had it made him discontent
He now is angry and does take displeasure
His angers great and does excel all measure;
He frets, he pets, he peevishly fume o^ (...) blu^
Cause God does not, as he will have ^n^ do
For God repents; the Sirians escaped his ^and,
And enemies they will be to Judahs land,
May Jonah think; and so his country men
Abundantly had fared better then
If they had been destroyed; as was the word
That Jonah preached to them from the Lord.
Blind ^eal and carnal ends do often misguide
The best of men and cause them turn aside
Time after time: Observe. frow Jonah's b^ing angry at the Lords sparing Niniveh.
their lust they will fulfill
If God his actions steare not as they will;
Self would be served whether God will or no,
If God say yea self never will say so;
Gods will and man's each other often opose,
It Is hard for man's with Gods will for to close.
What this is strange, a prophet be displeased
That to'ards a people God is now apeas'd,
And shows them mercy whom he might destroy,
Turning their days of mourning into joy.
Can any soul but Jonas be offended,
Instead of judgment to see grace extended?
But that is not all: why Jonah he is crossed
His fame, his name, and honor now is lost.
To be a prophet false he is afraid
Lest that among them such a thing be said;
And now unto the Lord he does address
Himself by prayer that signifies no less:
In it he does the Lord his God accuse
To be in fault, when as he did refuse
To hear his voice at first: and did rebel
Pleading as if thereby he had done well.
Unbridled passion is a thing that will
Transport the soul of men so long; Observe. from Jonah's casting his rebellious
fault on God thinking to clear himself.
until
God and themselves they totally forget
And go beyond the bounds that reason set,
And reasonless, they foolishly will reason
And think it is loyalty, when it is but treason
They think and speak, and act against the Lord
Such fruits self-love and passion do afford.
For this he says, I pray thee Lord hear me,
While I expostulate the case with thee;
Have I not cause to be in angry mood?
Was any man so served that ever stood,
His credit with thy glory to maintain?
If none were so then well may I complain.
Ere I went out of my own country dear,
This was the very thing that I did fear:
Not only fear it but I said it too,
For why? I thought full well what thou would do:
Thou would not bring to pass what I must say,
And preach and cry aloud at Niniveh.
I thought full sure that thou would soon repent
Yet to denounce their doom I must be sent.
I know O Lord what these men now do find
That thou art gracious merciful and kind
Full slack thou art, and slow paced unto wrath
But winged speed always thy mercy has;
And if a people truly do lament,
For sin, and do reform: thou will repent.
Consid'ring then it would not be avoided
By heathen ones thy word would be derided
And my embassage too, they would despise
And say I thundered out a heap of lies;
For which so saying I must bear the blame
And be called prophet false, to my great shame:
This is the reason, it seems right to me
Why formerly to Tarshish I did flee:
And thou have judged it for a heinous crime,
But whose the fault, whether it is thine or mine.
These things so sadly do my spirits grieve
No earthly thing O Lord will me relieve:
It is far better for me for to dye,
And in the dust in silent darkness lie
Then longer live: since nothing but disgrace
My portion is whilst I am in this place;
I do beseech thee let my life expire
And take it from me that is my desire.
Thus when fond passion sways and goes uncurb'd
The minds of men thereby are soon disturbed
Soon out of order gotten out of frame, Observe. from Jonah's pettish choosing
death rather then life; because God did not act according to his mind.

They glory in the things should be their shame.
The Lord in patience all this while did bear
With Jonah's angry passion: and did hear
His words reflecting on his Majesty
Yet like a loving father passes by
His great offense: seeing him frais and weak
Did thus in gentle manner to him speak.
How now? what Jona? dare thou angry prove?
Do thou not think it will my patience move?
How dare thou once presume to be so bold?
Do think with wickedness that I will hold?
Or do thou think that this is well in thee?
Oh wondrous strange, what Jonah angry be?
Did not my mercy, and my justice strive
To kill thee, else for to keep thee alive?
Have thou forgot, how mercy did thee save,
When justice would the whale should be thy grave?
Mercy prevaild and thou can not deny it,
Then cease thine anger, can thou justify it?
Have thou not learnd and been taught in the schools,
That anger rests in the best of fools.
Thus God in goodness labored to convince
The pettish prophet of his foul offense, Observe. from Gods patience and
forbearance though provokt by Jonah.

Imputing all to his infirmities
As parents do to children whom they prize,
Jonah is angry: yet it did not move
God to be angry cause he did him love:
So great is love: love, cannot find its like
So great is love, love spares when it should strike:
So great is love not easy to provoke,
Love suffers long before it give one stroke;
So great is love: so high and broad it grows,
It covers sins; all, multitudinous.
Now Jonah had a longing great desire
To see th'vent, when the forty days expire
For at this time, he would not come to know
Whether God would destroy them yea or no;
Perhaps for one or other end God may
The execution of the judgment stay
For this a maxim is received of many
Forbearance never yet acquitted any.
Out of the city great and populous
Jonah departs and now away he goes
And when he came to the east side of the town
He goes not further but there sits him down;
He makes a booth, and in it is his seat
The shade thereof defends him from the heat,
Until the truth of falsehood shall be tried
Of his late message there he does abide;
But now perhaps soon after he comes thither
His booth he made begins to dry and wither,
The Country's hot, the sun with mighty heat
On Jonah's head continually did beat
By reason of which heat, his soul is greiv'd
Then God in mercy, wills he be releiv'd.
The Lord's a present help in time of trouble
And mercy upon mercy he does double
And treble too: Observe. from Gods compassion providing shelter to relieve
Jonah.
always in time of need
His power and pity is put forth with speed
To save and succor his distressed ones
His bowels yearn to hear their sighs and groans;
Fear we not then in depths of misery,
To help us then is his opportunity.
For he then brought an herb out of the earth
Turns Jonah's sorrow into pleasant mirth
A mighty plant he quickly made to grow
With boughs and branches on it high and low
That they might shade and shelter him all over
And from the scorching heat be Jonah's cover.
Under the shadow of it he does rest
Thinking thereby that he is greatly blessed
Such great refreshment he has lately found,
In his new house springing out of the ground;
He does rejoice he is exceeding glad
So great his joy is all the grief he had
Sustaind by reason of the heat before
Seems as though he thought on it no more.
A sudden change begets experience sad
To day he mourns that yesterday was glad,
His sudden joys are turned to sudden grief,
His plant it dies, that gave him such relief.
For now alas before he was aware
In readiness a worm God did prepare
Who with his sharp teeth and his cruel jaws,
As bit with hunger, eagerly he gnaws
Who smote the gourd, and now the gourd is dead
And with it Jonah's joys are withered.
Such is the nature of all earthly things
Which for a while so great contentment brings
They fade, they vanish, perish and decay: Observe. from the withering of
Jonah's gourd, showing the fickle state of all things.

With winged haste, they are gone and pass away.
They Are but a puff, a blast a watery bubble
That soon is gone: or like a fiery stubble
That in a moment, is consumed and past,
Or like a post, that on the way makes have;
Or like the dusky clouds that break before
The sun appears and then are seen no more;
Or like the flower or herb or fruit that is sown,
That wither will as soon as it is mown;
Or like the vapors drawn into the air
Or like the thing that is gone when it does appear.
Such are the things in which men take such pleasure
And too too much account their chiefest treasure
The sweetest joys that are upon the earth
Are dying still so soon as they draw breath,
To day they are enjoyed; but ere to morrow
They often take wing and leave poor men to sorrow;
They neither last nor cannot satisfy,
As Jonah by his gourd in part did try.
The Sun arose and with it rose the wind
From the eastern quarter vehement, unkind,
God had prepared it to rise wondrous high
That he might Ionah's patience further try;
The sun and wind they both conspire together
To make it hot and very soultry weather,
They beat on Jonah: Jonah he does faint
And breaks into this passionate complaint.
My life's a burden to me, let me die
For I have lived to see thee falsify
Thy word and mine which is my daily trouble
And yet O Lord thou do my sorrows double;
My body is afflicted as my mind
Then life it is better for me death to find,
O let me be shut up within the grave
And closed in silent darkness: then I have
That thing I wish and in my self desire,
And cannot have it till my life expire.
Man's days on earth most variously are spent
Sometimes he is pleased, sometimes he is discontent, Observe. from Jonah's
passionate complaint upon his sudden change.

Sometimes his joys do mightily abound,
E^e while again they cast him to the ground:
For joy he laughs sometimes for sorrow weeps,
Nor reason nor religions bounds he keeps;
When man's transported with his lawless passion
Not to Gods will but his own he will fashion
Himself in all things be it good or bad,
Anger, joy, sorrow, often makes wise men mad.
Then God replied to him a second time,
Mine anger might arise as well as thine
Then thou a greater cause I have besure,
And yet my patience still it does endure;
So manifold affronts I have had fro' thee,
Where judgment might yet mercy is showed to thee.
Is this a thing worthy thy commendation?
Angry to be after this dispensation,
Did thou regard my acts of providence
Shamed thou would be; to take so great offense
At so small matter; is this well in thee
To be displeased at what is done by me?
How dare thou let thy anger rise so high
As in it wish so desperately to die?
Thus God with Jonah argues the case
To bring his soul again into its place
When we run from him he still seeks us, Observe. from Gods reasoning so
lovingly with Jonah to bring his soul into its place and set him straight again.

And says return again; why is it thus?
When man is minding naught but self concerns
The wise and gracious God full soon discerns
His swift destruction usherd in a pace,
If not prevented by his special grace.
Now Jonah answ'ring said to God again
My angry passion I will still maintain:
My cause is good I can it justify,
And if I angry be until I dye
Until my soul is from my body going
It Is well, and weldone by me for so doing.
Gods dealings whether they are rough or mild
Does little good when passion grows wild, Observe. from Jonah's ill use of
Gods gentle dealing with him; answering foolishly again.

Nor sharp reproof nor exhortation kind,
Will any kindly entertainment find:
Where lust uncurbed goes, and gets the reins
It bootless proves for to use the means
Of betterment; men thereby rather turn
Away from God and at his counsel spurn.
Once more the Lord replied, and to him said
With thy own practice I will thee upbraid,
What? have thou not for thy own self much cared?
And glad had been; if I the gourd had spared
Had not thou pity on that fading thing?
Which I out of the earths-large-womb did bring
Up in one night without the help of day,
And in one night it perished quite away:
Thy labor on it thou did not bestow
No art nor skill of thine did make it grow.
This plant this gourd, fain thou wodst have preservd
It pleasant was to thee: and so deserved
Thy care and diligence to nourish it
Since in its shade thou did delighted sit:
Which was a thing of very small renown
Compared with that great Assirian town.
What reason then that I should not take pity?
Upon that famous, great, populous City,
Wherein the little ones besides the old
Were more then sixscore thousand fully told,
All persons for their age unapt to learn
'Twixt right and left hand they cannot discern.
The cattels much, that does about it feed,
To be preferred before a stinking weed;
I made them for my service and my use
Yet me they did provoke by their abuse;
To threaten judgment therefore thou wast sent;
And when they heatd, they feared and did repent.
How could I choose, but on them pity take?
And show them favor for my mercy sake;
For why in mercy thou know I abound
And not them only but thy self have found,
As great forbearance at my gentle hand,
When thou rebeld against my just command;
And now like to a frantic furious fool
Art discontent because I do not rule
According to thy pleasure: not thy will
But mine be done: thou oughtst it to fulfill;
Then up, be gone, and get thee home with shame
And study more to know my glorious name:
Regard my voice, and answer when I call thee,
And sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee.
FINIS.

