THE PSALMS OF DAVID IN English Meter; Translated from the ORIGINAL, And Suited
to all the TUNES now Sung in CHURCHES: With the Additions of several NEW.

By LUKE MILBOURNE, A Presbyter of the Church of England.

(...)

Adag. Arab. Thus by the Streams, the Spring is clearly shown;
And the Translation makes the Author known.
Lord Falkland None can condemn the Wish or Labor spent,
Good Matter in good Words to represent.
Bishop King, to Mr. Sandys. London, Printed for W. Rogers at the Sun, R.
Clavill at the Peacock, and B. Took at the Middle Temple Gate, all in Fleet
street. J. Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry, and J. Tailor at the Ship in
St. Paul's Churchyard, School.



TO His Highness THE DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.
May it please Your Highness,
THis little Book wants a Protector; And where could it find a Better, than in
Our other Hope? Your Highness has here the greatest King, and the best of
Poets, to excite Your Courage, and enliven Your Devotion. You have the Wit and
Spirit of a Court, without the Follies of the present Age; Fineness of Thought,
without Looseness of Fancy; Rapture, without Extravagance; and Piety, without
the Extremes of Superstition or Idolatry. These Hymns contain nothing but what
may adorn the Innocence of Youth and the Vigor of a Manly Age. The Masters of
Music may try their Skill here, and sing God's Praises in as charming Notes as
common and despicable Amors; and advance the Love of their Redeemer, above all
the Atchievments of a fancied Hero.

From Your Highness's Hand this Work may be acceptable to His most Excellent
Majesty, and find Admission into the Closet of Your Royal Mother: If read by
Your Self, it will be a Divine Monitor in Your Diversions, a Companion in Your
Privacy, a Support under Uneasiness, and a Security to Your Religion: Those
Holy Truths, conveyed through the Channels smooth and easy Verse, will, with
God's Blessing, make You wiser than Your Enemies, more knowing than any Earthly
Teachers, and more apprehensive than those of Elder Years. May the God of
Heaven bless Your Highness's Pregnant Youth with advancing Virtues, and
unfading Years: May He crown You with Love and Honor here, and with Love and
Happiness hereafter: Which is the most earnest Prayer of

Your Highness's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, Luke Milbourne.

To the Most Reverend Fathers in God the Archbishops, the Right Reverend the
Bishops, and the Reverend Clergy of Great Britain and Ireland; especially such
as now do, or hereafter may represent that whole Body, in Convocation:
The Preface of Luke Milbourne, Presbyter, and Author of this Translation of
the Psalms of David.
Most Reverend, Right Reverend, and Reverend, Fathers, and Brethren!
THat Psalmody was, amongst the Jews, a considerable Part of Divine Worship
that Book, of which this calls it self a Translation, is a sufficient Evidence;
That it was used among Christians of old, is unquestionable. And perhaps it is
no Disparagement either to the Jewish or the Christian Church, that a great
part of the old Heathen Worship consisted in Singing Hymns and Praises to their
Gods. There is somewhat so truly Divine and Charming in Well-set Notes, and
Vocal and Instrumental Harmony; they are so apt to cheer and revive languid and
drooping Spirits, so likely to make strong Impressions on the Memory, and so
extremely affecting to the devout Soul, that as the Agreeableness of their
Numbers made Poets of old the sit Treasures of Divine Knowledge, so the
Softness and Sweetness of their Notes may make the Masters of Sacred Music
among our selves (were but their Lives as Heavenly as their Art) the fittest
Companions for happy Souls, and Blissful Angels: With respect to whom, our
excellent Waller says; All that we know of those above,
Is, that they sing, and that they love.


What Thoughts our first Reformers in this Nation had of this part of Divine
Worship is not easy to conjecture; But whether they judged Singing of Psalms
by the whole Congregation no necessary part of a Public Liturgy, or supposed
that the Reading Psalms, chaunted in Recitative, or sung as at present in
Cathedrals, (which seems favored by that Title they carry in our
Common Prayer Book, The Psalter or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be
Said or Sung in Churches,) was enough to answer that part of Worship, it is
certain they took no Care for any Metrical Translation of those sacred Hymns,
for public Use. And though some pious and learned Men had taken pains to put
them into Verse, the settled Liturgy took no notice of the Matter. Nor could I
ever find any Authentic Allowance for singing them in public.

However, the Practice of Singing prvail'd here every Day, in Imitation the
Reformed abroad, and certainly tened very much toward the advancing the
Reformation it self; but, after all was only connived at, or tolerated And
after the Restoration of our Religion, and our Government, never Authorized,
or so much as mentioned, a^ a Part of our Public Service: And the present and
constant Practice of our Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches, and our Colleges,
not to mention the Chape^ Royal, and other Places where Choir^ are fixed,
intimates, that such Psalms were never designed to be settled by Authority;
Prose-Anthems being there generally sung, taken out of the Reading Psalms; some
short Parts of other Scriptural Hymns; some of private Composure; and, by
chance, sometimes a Verse or two out of Sternhold and Hopkins; as,
particularly, out of the 68th Psalm, Let God arise, etc. Set, I think, by Mr.
Laws. Now the Cathedrals being patterns to our Parochial Assemblies, at least
in the main parts of solemn Worship, they having no Example of such a Nature
from them, could pretend to no Right of Singing Psalms in Verse by the entire
Congregation.

Hence, though the great Sir Philip Sidney translated the whole Book of Psalms
into Rhyme; and the pious Bishop Hall, and the renouned Lord Bacon, and, it may
be some others, turned several particular Psalms into Verse, more correct,
doubtless, than the former, yet there, never was any Motion toward introducing
them into Churches. And since our Convocations, to whom that Work properly
belongs, never took any such Cognizance of these, or of the Ancient Version, as
to recommend them, with the Liturgy, to the Parliament, our Common Psalmody
remains a Matter of Liberty: And it never yet was made an Article of Enquiry at
any Episcopal Visitation, Whether, any Psalms were sung, or what Versions of
them were used in Parochial Churches.

On this Account it was, that whereas no Man better understood his own
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs than Charles the First, of blessed Memory,
yet, though he designed the utmost Honor to the Memory of his Father, when the
new Translation of King James the First was made public, he only allowed and
recommended it to common Use; which, as Experience showed, was not enough to
break in upon Inveterate Custom, or, to exclude that which had for so many
Years, gotten Possession of our Bibles and Common-Prayer-Books of all Volumes,
and of our Worshipping Assemblies.

The Standart of our English Language having been so much altered of late; and
Poetry especially having reached its utmost Height, by that noble Genius
appearing in the Writings of Sir John Denham Mr. Waller, and Mr. Cowley, and
some later Authors, the Roughness: and Uncorrectness of the Ancient Version has
appeared the more evident and notorious: The Observation of which made Mr.
Sandys, Mr. May, Mr. Burnaby, Bishop King, Mr. Barton, Sir John Denham himself,
Mr. Smith, Mr. Goodridge. Dr. Patrick, Dr. Woodford, and Dr. Ford, and now very
lately. Mr. Brady and Mr. Tate, make their several Translations with different
Success. Mr. Burnaby's Book and Mr. May's Essay, I have seen: Mr. Sandys's and
the Reverend Dr. Woodford's are above our ordinary Music, the last especially,
whose Author seems to breath with David's Spirit, and to aspire to Raptures
almost equal with that Divine Psalmist; and whose Steps are as nobly followed
by that Masculine Poet, as well as Painter, the incomparable Mrs. Beal. Mr.
Barton's Version is generally apposite enough to the Text, but exalted little
above the Old. Sir John Denham's I have not seen, but find the admirable Dr.
Woodford (a sufficient Judge) giving them a noble and, doubtless, a deserved
Character. That of the Right Reverend Bishop of Chichester labors under the
unhappy Choice of his Rhyme (as Others have observed) so far, as to render,
that otherwise excellent Work ungrateful to the Ear. Mr. Smith is very gay, and
perhaps too affected, if the Reverend Doctor Patrick may be Judge, whose own is
pious indeed, and generally plain; but an almost Unpoetical Translation of the
most exalted Poetry. For Mr. Brady's and Mr. Tate's, since they are now
publishing a New and Corrected Edition of their Translation, I shall pass no
Judgment on that Work, whose Errors and Excellencies I must be content to be
ignorant of till it is published. Among those which I have hitherto seen, which
are fitted to common Tunes, the best, the most Elaborate, and the most Musical,
is, that of Dr. Ford; that Reverend Person having a truly Poetical Genius,
attended with great and solid Learning, and Exemplary Piety; excellent
Qualifications for a complete Paraphrast. Nor ought Mr. Goodridge, for his Zeal
and Piety in promoting more Correct Church Music, to be passed without a just
Commendation.

What might be said of the Use and Excellency of Psalmody, is so exhausted by
Dr. Woodford, Mr. Goodridge and Dr. Ford, as to supersede any thing I can say.
The Question only recurrs now, Is Psalmody a real Part of Divine Worship, or is
it not? If not, it is no matter whether David's Psalms, or only Arbitrary
Spiritual Philadelphian Hymns, be sung; whether any, or none at all. If it be a
Part of Divine Service, how comes it to pass that our Ecclesiastical
Representative have not thought Uniformity in singing of Psalms as beautiful,
and as valuable, as in any other Part of the Public Service? Why not in the
Poetical, as well as in the Prose-Version? This would take the Choice of them
out of the Parish-Clerk's Power, and make it the Priest's Business, whose
Discretion might be farther relied on in it. Admit the Translation of Sternhold
and Hopkins was rejected by the Convocation or Commissioners of Edward the
Sixth, as appearing too mean; that could not preclude a more agreeable One. And
though it might seem a very hard Work, which few of the Clergy (though the
fittest for it) durst undertake; yet, since at this time there are several
Versions of the Psalms extant, why may not some One, or a choice Collection out
of All, be made by Learned and Judicious Persons, skilled in Divinity and
Poetry too, appointed for that purpose, in a Convocation? Why may not such a
Committee examine them severely as to Clearness of Sense, Purity and Decency of
Language, Agreeableness of Style, Orthodoxy of Doctrine, Suitableness to the
Original Text, and Smoothness and Musicalness, of Numbers? And may not these,
after such an Examination, be approved by the Convocation, as the whole Liturgy
formerly was, and so be recommended by them to the Three Estates in Parliament,
and to His Majesty as Head of the Church; and so receive a Just and Legal
Sanction, and become one Part of our Public Unity and Uniformity? Would such
an Action bring them under a Praemunire, merely because it was not particularly
commanded by His Majesty? I may, perhaps, be too fond of my own Thoughts; but I
conclude, this Piece of Uniformity would give less Offense to Dissenters of all
sorts, than some other Things which are yet justly stood upon; for they are not
about Laying down the last Translation of the Bible: The nicest Pretenders to
Conscience would have no-nothing to object to pure Scripture-Forms: Nor would
they, when commanded under a Penalty to sing David's Psalms, of the best
Version, complain of the Mischief of Impositions.

This is such a Point of Uniformity, as all Churches, our own only excepted,
agree in: The Scots have theirs; the Dutch and French, theirs; the last,
indeed, corrected by Mr. Conrart, the Standart of their Language having been
much altered by the Academy, since Marot and Beza translated them; yet their
Work being still good and intelligible, Monsieur Conrart's has taken only among
particular Persons, without any Intrenchment upon the general Harmony. The
Lutherans too keep up this Uniformity; though, besides David's Psalms, they
have about 750 Spiritual Songs and Hymns, Stated, and Occasional. And who
knows, but now that Singing of Psalms by Rule grows so much in Fashion, this
Settlement might somewhat temper and cicurate the Humor of Separation in other
Matters?

If such a thing should be thought fit, there is no doubt but that, of
particular Versions, the best ought to be chosen: Of all in general, the best
particular Psalms; for one Man's Spirit might be raised, where another drooped;
and Men would commonly perform best, where they were most affected by the
Matter. But to enjoin Unity or Uniformity in a worse Translation, where a
better might be had; or to cull out meaner Performances, where, out of our
present Variety of Choice, excellent Things might be drawn, would dash us upon
the same Rock again; and the next Age might complain, that the Names of our
Psalmographers were altered indeed, but the Defects continued: This is a
Failure which a Convocation, assisted by the good Spirit of God, could not
easily fall under the Suspicion of.

That I, as now an Ancient Presbyter of the Church of England, might contribute
my poor Offering to the Adorning of this part of Sacred Worship, I put this
into your Hands, Most Reverend, Right Reverend, and Reverend Fathers and
Brethren! A Work of some Pains and Care; and on which my most serious Thoughts
were for a considerable time engaged, God's Honor, and the Church's Service,
was my End; and his Grace, earnestly and humbly implored, both in the Beginning
and Continuance of the Work, my Assistance. The Original was my Text; the
Polyglot Bible and Critics, my Interpreters, where needful; and the Double
Translation of the Reading Psalms, in that called the Bishops Bible, and the
last in our common Bibles, my Correctors: Though I have not tied my self so
superstitiously to any, as not to use my own Judgment sometimes; and in some
Things to stem the Current of Paraphrasts, and other Writers on that Divine
Book. Particularly, I have adhered to those Applications made of several
Passages here, by the Inspired Penmen of the New Testament; whom to quit for
over nice and Socinianizing Critics, I think absurd and dangerous. I have, in
general, made the Sense and Coherence so plain, that this Version, perhaps may
be as serviceable to some as a Commentator.

The Measures I have used are the Old, neither so hard, nor so harsh as some
have thought: The Rhymes are every where double, sometimes more; such being,
when unforced, more pleasant, and more grateful, I have generally avoided the
Clashing of Consonants, as Unmusical. About 50 are twice Translated, some
thrice; by that Means sometimes taking in those different Senses of particular
Texts, of which it is hard to fix the best; Paraphrasing some lofty Psalms more
fully, and using higher Expressions than a single Version could have admitted
of. Hence every Psalm has one Translation so close and plain, as may be sung in
the plainest Country-Congregations; and yet I have used such Variety of
Measures, as may answer all the Tunes in Playford's Edition: And that the Work
might be the more complete, I have given all such of Mr. Sandys's Measures,
with their Tunes in Two Parts, which could not be sung by the common Notes. The
whole, indeed, may be an entire Body of Church-Musick: No Old Tune lost several
New are added; and the Words so sitted, as to be more agreeble both to the
Dutch, French and English Tunes, as sung in any of our Churches, than any
former Version has ^een.

I have generally followed the Style of the Original, rising and falling with
That. The Measures of Cheerful Psalms are fitted to Cheerful Tunes Those more
Melancholic, to Slow Tunes, and of a sadder Air. The Repetitions in the Hebrew
are so charming, that I could not but think they would be very beautiful in
English; as particularly, in the 118th Psalm. I have industriously avoided both
Obsolete an Newfangled Words; I have invented none, nor used any harsh
Transposition of Words: Though I doubt not, but, after all my Care, many
Mistakes may have escaped me, which whosoever with charitably point out, will
lay the greatest Obligation upon me. That we might use Doxologies as well to
the Singing as the Reading Psalms, I have suite One to every Measure, through
the whole Book. A Right Reverend Prolate of our Church did me the Honor to
read the whole over very carefully; whose Encouragement was a great Motive to
this Publication. If it be acceptable to others, and blessed by God, so as to
promote his Honor, I have my End: And,

Non nobis, Domine; non nobis:
Advertisement.
THat this Version of the Psalms may be the more useful to those who delight
in Church-Musick, I have translated them to such variety of Measures, that
there is no Tune in Playford's Editions, either in the Psalms themselves, or in
the Hymns before or after, to which there is not some particular Measure
appropriated here: That the Compass of Church-Musick might be the larger and
more entertaining, I have tuned some to Mr Sandys's Measures, the Music of
which was composed by that great Master Mr. Laws, for the private use of his
pious Master Charles the First of blessed Memory: The whole then presents you
with one Version of every Psalm to be sung in Common Tunes, if at least we may
call those of the 113 and 148 Psalms such; and they are to be sung to the same
with those of the same denomination in the old Version, unless where the
Measures are different, and the Proper Tunes referred to. Such as are not in
Mr. Playford's Book, are here set down with the proper Notes from Mr. Laws's
and Ravenscroft's and the whole, if encouraged, shall be reprinted with the
Notes throughout. And that we may have a just Opportunity, at such a time as
this, to remember that Faith into which we are Baptized, in every part of
Divine Worship, I have suited particular Doxologies to every particular
Measure, in due Order, at the end of the Book, with what Psalms they refer to,
besides some in the Body of the Version.

Benedicat Deus Operi and Authori.
The Tunes of the Psalms.
^ A Thousand Blessings crown his Head,
^ Whose Heart all impious Counsel flies;
^ And hates those Paths where Sinners tread,
^ Who God and all that is Good despise.
This serves indifferently for any Stanzas of Eight Syllables; which have no
proper Tune of their own.

For the 8th Psalm 2d Meter.
^ LOrd, how Illustrious is thy sacred Name;
^ How blessed, great God of Hosts, E -- ter -- nal King;
^ Whose Honors all the lower World proclaim,
^ Whose Honors all the Heavenly Armies sing.
Psalm 11th. 2d Meter.
^ MY Faith is fixed on God most high,
^ Why then should Fools to vex me cry;
^ As Birds afraid by noises made,
^ Hence to the Mountains fly.
Psalm 15. 2d Meter.
^ Blessed Lord, how glorious is the place
^ Thy Altars grace: how is the hovly Temple blessed,
^ By thee possessed! But O what happy Man is he,
^ Who there a dai -- ly Guest may be?
Psalm 18, or 78.
^ HOW shall I praise my God, my King,
^ Thus ex -- ta -- sy'd with Joys and Love!
^ What worthy Hal -- le -- lu -- jahs sing,
^ To his great Name who rules above?
Psalm 23. 2d Meter.
^ THe Lord's my Shepherd, I the Sheep,
^ Whose Soul his Cares in safety keep.
^ Through flowery Meads, He gent -- ly leads
^ Me on where I se -- cure -- ly sleep:
^ Or by His guidance go, where silent Waters flow.
Psalm 24. 2d Meter.
^ THE Earth is God's, her Fullness, too;
^ Earth and all of Earth possessed:
^ For on the Seas he poised it true;
^ On the Floods secured its Rest*
^ But who, o who, Can, Lord, pursue
^ Paths to reach thy sa -- cred Hill?
^ Or see thy Face in that blessed Place,
^ There, unmoved, a -- by -- ding still?
Psalm 33. 2d Meter.
^ YE Righteous in the Lord rejoice,
^ It Is sweet, when with a cheerful voice,
^ The Just his Praises sing:
^ O let no Tongue or Hand be mute,
^ But with the Voice, and Harp, and Lute,
^ Praise out Im -- mor -- tal King.
Psalm 43. 3d Meter.
^ JUdge me, my God; revenge my Cause
^ On cruel Hands, and faithless Hearts.
^ Save me from him who from the Laws
^ Of Truth, and so -- ber Virtues starts:
^ Who bold -- ly acts the falsest Parts,
^ With strange Success, and vast applause!
Psalm 53. 2d Meter.
^ THE Fool, the senseless Fool,
^ Thus in his Heart has said;
^ God's but an aw -- full Tool,
^ By crafty Preachers made.
^ Thus all cor -- rup -- ted are,
^ And all in Sins de -- light:
^ But none for Truth de -- clare,
^ None e -- ver practice right.
Psalm 58. 1 st Meter. Psalm 72. Psalm 106.
^ WHen you in private Council sit,
^ Are all your Con -- sul -- ta -- tions just?
^ May others your De -- ci -- sions trust?
^ Their Lives to your pure Hands submit?
Psalm 72. 2 d Meter.
^ LOrd let the king thy Judgments find!
^ Enrich the Prince's Royal Mind,
^ For Crowns and Governments designed.
^ Then shall He sentence wisely give;
^ And safe in his Pre -- to -- ga -- tive
^ Shall all the poor af -- flict -- ed, live.
Psalm 76. 1 st Meter.
^ GOD's Name in Judah's known, It Is great in Is -- ra -- el:
^ His House in Salem's shown; His Smiles on Sion dwell
^ For there his Stroke, Swords, Bows and Shields,
For Martial Fields, and Arrows broke.
Psalm 81. 1st Meter.
^ To God, our Strength, your Voices raise!
^ Aloud the God of Ja -- cob praise!
^ A Psalm toth' mer -- ry Timbrel suit,
^ The pleasant Harp, or charming Lute.
Psalm 95. 2d Meter.
^ COme, O come, and let us sing,
^ To our Lord, and to our King!
^ Let us make a joyful Noise,
^ To that God whose Love employs.
Psalm 98. 2d Meter.
^ O sing to God, the Lord;
^ His wondrous Works record!
^ Sing, sing an Anthem new. Return his Praises due,
^ Whose Hand, whose ho -- ly Arm
^ Dissolved Hell's fa -- tal Charm.
Psalm 132.
^ REmember Da -- vid's Troubles, Lord,
^ How in Af -- fli -- ction He,
^ With faithful Vows engaged his Word,
^ O Ja -- cob's God to Thee!
^ High though my lof -- ty Pa -- lace rise,
^ With Ce -- dars no -- bly ceil'd.
^ And Beds with Golden Ca -- no -- pyes,
^ Would downy Slumbers yield.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 20. for Too, read As. p. 12. 1. 6. f. the, (...) thy. p. 35. 1.
4. f. gain, r. claim. p. 46. 1. 23. f. These r. Whose. p. 51. 1. r. after Truth
and Mercy, dele s. p. 64. 1. 2. r. the voice. P. 89, 1. 1. r. outshine. 1. 17.
f. the, r. thy P. 90. 1. 31. f. the, r. thy. p. 103. 1. 21. r. thou would. p. 104
1. 27. r. sacrifice. p. 108. 1. 18. f. the, r. thy. p. 142. 1. 13 f. thy, r.
the. p. 183. 1. 28. f. the, r. thy. p. 185. 1. 22. (...) sweet. 1. ult. f. on,
r. in. p. 209. 1. 5. r. skies. p. 218. 1. 23 r. bring. p. 222. 1. 20. f. the,
r. thy. p. 231. 1. ult. r. Wrath etc;. d., p. 232. 1. 23. r. betrayed. p. 234.
1. 12. f. the' (...) though. P. 238. r. Part 5 th. Meter 5th. P. 240. 1. 1. r.
quickly p. 265. 1. 4. r. And me with. p. 266. 1. 7. r. Thy Law's the Truth. p.
267. 1. 11. d.; p. 292. 1. 7. r. cheer. p. 295. 1. 20. d. the. p. 296. 1. 29.
r. Thoughts. p. 297. 1. 17. f. my, r. thy P. 298. 1. 1. f. them, r. them. p.
309. 1. 6. r. Seed.

DAVID's PSALMS PARAPHRASED, IN ENGLISH METER;
Agreeably to the TUNES commonly Sung in CHURCHES, etc.
Psalm. 1. as the 100th; or Mr. Sandys's 3d.

Whose Heart all impious Counsel flies;
And hates those Paths where Sinners tread,
Who God, and all that is good, despise.

He spends his happy Days and Nights;
And thence, by Meditation, draws
Both what instructs, and what delights.

His Hopes, and every Action thrives:
And when his mouldering Clay's at rest,
His fragrant Memory survives.
So fruitful Trees, near gentle Streams,
Their Burdens to Perfection bring,
Unhurt by Summer's scorching Beams,
And flourish with a constant Spring.

With faithless Joys to please his Mind;
His Roots, his Fruits, his cursed Gain,
All fly like Chaff before the Wind.

The Just, his Head undaunted rears;
While Woes the sinful Soul confound,
With Terrors racked, and torn with Fears.
His Own their mighty Master knows;
And loves, and keeps, and wisely guides;
But Man, who sins through various Woes,
To Hell's dark Pains, unminded; slides.
Another Meter, Psalm. 1.

Never took that cursed Way,
Where Atheists and Blasphemers meet,
And God and Truth betray:
Who never stood by, to countenance
What bold Transgressors dare;
Nor, that he might in Guilt advance,
Assumed the Scorner's Chair.

To search his Maker's Laws;
And thence Instructions and Delights
By Meditation draws.

Their Justice calmly tries,
And then on Mercy's boundless Store
For good Success relies.
So Trees near gentle Rivers placed,
Their Fruits in Season bear;
With Leaves unfading always graced,
And flourish all the Year.

The Godless Crowd shall bear;

Nor with the Just appear.

The Just, and all their Ways:
But Ruin where the Sinner goes,
And sure Destrucion sways.
PSALM. ij.

As his Eternal Throne:
Why then should Heathen Fools so long
His sacred Power disown?
Vain are their Hopes, vain every Thought;
And all their Words are vain:
For what God's mighty Hands have wrought,
God's mighty Hands maintain.

And fret with groundless Rage;
Against their God their Counsels join,
Against his Christ engage.
they say:
Throw off their slavish Yoke:
Why should we unknown Lords obey?
Or unknown Powers invoke?

Above the lofty Skies,
Laughs at their Madness, and their Pride,
And scorns their Policies.

Distracts their trembling Souls:
And in his Wrath their Plots destroys,
And thus their Rage controls.

Your envious Thoughts in vain:
My King sits high, on Sion crowned;
And I Will his Crown maintain.
Part 2.

His Awful Silence breaks;
And thus, to Pity reconciled,
With gentle Language speaks;
Hear me, ah stupid World! declare
The unchangeable Decree.
Thus my Eternal Father swear,
Before Time's Birth, to Me.
Thou art my Son, begot by Me,
On this Eternal Day:

The whole Creation's Sway.

Thee all its Host adore:
All Nations shall thy Rights allow,
Thy Goodness all implore.
Thy Rod the Rebel Tribes shall feel,
Thy Scepter, forced, obey;
Crushed by thy Hand, as hardened Steel
Would dash the mouldering Clay.

All who on Earth command:
Adore your Lord with humble Eyes;
With Awe before Him stand;

And early Homage pay,
Lest in Rebellion's wild Excess
You lose the perfect Way.

In angry Tempests rise,
Happy, o happy's he, whose Faith
On Him secured relies!
PSALM. iij.

What Crowds against me rise?

A thousand Ways devise?
God is his only Help, they cry;
On God his Hopes depend:
Yet see that God can Help deny,
And leave his sinking Friend!

My Strength: And when to Thee

Thy Goodness answers me.

In thy Protection sure:

Nor my Defeat procure.

And as thy Anger broke
My Rebels Teeth; and as they bow
Beneath thy dreadful Stroke.

Let all thy Blessings flow:
And still to Israel's faithful Race
Thy promised Favor show!
PSALM. iv.

My Innocence of old;
O let my present Prayers succeed,
Thy Help my Cause uphold!

My solid Faith disgrace;
And Vanities your Shelter make,
And empty Lies embrace:

His own peculiar Choice!
See how my God rewards my Trust,
And hears my suppliant Voice!

Your own false Hearts survey;
Examine all your Actions over,
Your secret Crimes display.

And for an Offering give
An upright Heart, without Deceit;
And on his Promise live!

And fading Wealth embrace.
But grant us, Lord, thy Countenance,
And thy Enlight'ning Grace!

My Breast more Joys contain,
Than theirs whom Wines and Oils o'er-charge,
And who in Plenty reign.

No Fears disturb my Sleep,
While me thy powerful Arms invest,
And safe from Dangers keep.
PSALM. V.

My Meditations weigh:

When I devoutly pray!

To Thee my Prayers direct;
And with my longing Heart and Eyes,
Thy kind Returns expect.

Thou hat'st Iniquity:

Nor Sinners dwell with Thee.

And those who thirst for Blood;
Or on deceitful Arts presume,
Too rarely understood.

Safe in thy Mercies store;
And towered thy sacred Altars bow,
And in thy Fear adore.

To escape my watchful Foes:
To me thy Wisdom's Rules display,
Thy happy Paths disclose!

Their inward Parts are vile;
Their Throats devouring Graves conceal,
Their flattering Tongues beguile.

The Rebel Crew confound:

In lasting Hymns shall sound.

In mighty Streams descends:
Thy Goodness all who on Thee trust,
Like some firm Shield, defends.
PSALM. vj.

Nor in thy Wrath correct:

My wretched State respect!

Must I no Answer have!

My Soul in Mercy save!

No Thanks our Graves disclose:
And, oh! my Strength, dear Lord, decays,
Quite spent with wasting Woes!

With Tears my Couch o'er-flows;

Through my prevailing Foes.
But see one Beam of cheerful Light!
Be gone, ye sinful Crew!

And all my Tears in view:

For God has heard my Cries:

My Strength, my Safety lies.
PSALM. vij.

My Foe, dear God! control!

He tear my helpless Soul.

My very Thoughts rebelled;
If I his Crown unjustly wear,
Or ever against him swelled:

Nay, if my Filial Care
My King, my Foe unjustly made,
Did never kindly spare;

And hurl my Glories down;
My Life with due Success assail,
And spurn my envied Crown.

Such Imputations free,
O now to my Assistance come,
Redeem and rescue me!
O'rouze thy Fury, Lord! and break
My Adversaries Rage!
Rouse it, and in thy Judgment speak,
And for my Rights engage!

Thy Courts with grateful Praise:
Rise the^, with awful Glories crowned;
And thy Tribunal raise.

By thy impartial Laws;
Then cleared my Innocence shall be,
And vindicate my Cause.
Part 2.

The Just more firmly stand:
The Hearts and Reins severely try,
And righteous things command.

The Heart sincere protects;

His daily Wrath reflects.

His Sword he fiercely whets;
And of this deadly Bow-string proves,
His Bow as often sets.

His Arrows pointed right
At such who dare, though kindly spared,
Against their Maker fight.

And Lies, and Mischief, goes;
The monstrous Birth brought forth, we see,
With Hellish Pangs and Throws.

In Nets himself had spread;
His Pains and Rage recoiling hard
On his contriving Head.

My lofty Praise shall sly:
I Will sing to his Immortal Name,
Who ever lives on high.
PSALM. viij.

Through every Climate flies!
Thy spreading Praise, thy glorious Fame,
Surmounts the lofty Skies.

To quell thy senseless Foes;
To crush the Rebel-World's Designs,
And all their Rage expose.

Raised by thy curious Hand;
How Moon and Stars thy Rules obey,
And fixed, in Order stand:

Lost Man thy Smiles obtained!
Who sinned; yet, with a Savior blessed.
New Hopes of Mercy gained!

Less than an Angel's State,
All Graces in his God-like Look
With humble Greatness sat

And at his Footstool bow:

His Sovereign Rights allow.

And his Commands obey.
And Fish, which through the Ocean's Brine
Divide their wondrous Way.

Through every Climate flies;
O how thy Praise, thy glorious Fame
Surmounts the losty Skies!
Another M^re, as Mr, Sandys's 17th.

How blessed, great God of Hosts, Eternal King!
Whose Honors all the lower World proclaim!
Whose Honors all the Heavenly Armies sing!

Affront thy Honors, or thy Name defy,
Poor Babes, weak Infants, on thy Part engage,
And quickly make the boasting Monsters fly.
More Strength, more Truth, from Infant-Language flows,
Than haughty Learning, or presuming Pride.
The meanest Wretch, by thy best influence, grows
A faithful Preacher, a victorious Guide.

Whose moving Arch thy curious Fingers spread;
When to the Changing Moon I raise my Eyes,
The Stars with inexhausted Brightness fed;

So pitied yet, so kindly owned by thee?
How could he hope for such unbounded Grace,
That for his sake, God should Incarnate be?

Beneath Himself, beneath his Angels found;
Tho God-like Beauties graced his Heavenly Look;
His Sacred Head Majestic Glories crowned.

His Handy-works their great Creator knew:
And to adore his Feet, the impatient Crowd
On the swift Wings of just Obedience flew.

On Him rough Lions fawned, and Panthers gazed:
Weak Sheep with hungry Wolves all fearless played;
And with fierce Tigers Kine securely grazed.

With strange Delight the feathered Chorus hung;
Over Him their fanning Pinions gently spread,
And in their native Tunes his Praises sung.
When over the Seas their King triumphant passed,
Beneath his Feet the Billows silent lay;
The finny Herd his wondrous Footsteps traced,
And with their Silver Scales described his Way.

Thy Honors thus all Nature's Armies sing.
Lord, how illustrious is thy Sacred Name!
How blessed, great Lord of Hosts, Eternal King!
PSALM. ix. As the First.

His great, his wondrous Actions praise:

Thy Name in Songs Triumphant raise.

And sink before thy Glorious Face;

And now my Cause obtains the place.

Thy Hand the sinful World subdues;
Their Names Eternal Blots confound,
And dark Forgetfulness pursues.

To lay huge Towns and Countries waste;
Thy Rage our burning Cities bore,
Thy Rage their very Names defaced.

His Bar prepared for Judgment stands;

His wise Decrees, and just Commands.

With mighty Cares and Woes oppressed:

And in his constant Presence blessed.
Part 2.
Sion's God your Praises sing,
His Acts through all the World declare!

He Will grant the Poor's accepted Prayer.

My Sufferings, Lord, in Mercy view:
Sion praise,
And Joys in thy Salvation show.

Their own strong Nets their Feet have caught;

So wisely God's Designs are wrought.

Whose Heathenish Souls their God forget;

Their Hopes, or all in Darkness set.

But rise, and judge the Nations round!

Not Gods, but Men, and mortal found.
PSALM. x.

In my afflicted State?

And all our Woes create?

Who boast: of Crimes they love,
Who bless the Covetous, and dare,
What God abhors, approve!

God never his Thoughts employs;

Which all Her Peace destroys.
Thy Judgments, Lord, exalted far
Above his Sense appear;
Which makes him scorn his Foes in War,
And puff at Dangers near.

Can change my certain State:

His Tongue, mischievous Hate.

To kill the Innocent;
Blood revels in his furious Eyes,
On their Destruction bent.

To seize the trembling Prey;
And would God's holy Saint surprise,
And tear their Souls away.
A thousand Traps and Snares he sets
Where harmless Virtue goes;
And to the Tangled in his Nets
No Truth nor Mercy shows.
Part 2.

And feigns Humility;
That, by his harmless Air misled,
The Meek may fall, and die.

Forgets what Mortals do:
He cannot discern our crafty Ways,
Our secret Actions view.

Afflicted Souls to save!

Thy dreadful Vengeance brave?
Why should they cry, God minds it not?

Look through their dark mischievous Plot:
Re-pay their secret Spite!
On Thee the Poor for Help depend;
To Thee sad Orphans fly.

And Sin it self shall die.

Our Land from Gentiles freed:

And makes their Prayers succeed.

And quells the Sinner's Rage,
Left they, our Ruins to procure,
Shoold all their Force engage.
PSALM. xj.

Why then should Wretches cry?
Fly! fly to Hills, or foreign Lands!
Like Birds affrighted fly.

And Nock their Arrows sure!
That they with unexpected Blows,
May Death to thine procure.

By wicked Hands destroyed,
Oh, how shall Men of Justice fare!
Or how their Force avoid?

Enthroned above the Sky,
And all the Faults weak Man commits,
His pierceing Eyelids try.

Who Sin and Rapine love;

And Terrors from above.

In Justice takes Delight:
And Upright Men may safely trust
In His reviving Sight.
Another Meter, as Mr. Sandys's 4th

Why then should Fools to vex me cry,
As Birds afraid,
By Noises made,
Hence to the Mountains fly!

Their Arrows on the strings dispose,
At Men upright
In Woes dark Night,
They make their deadly Blows.

The Governments Foundations down.
Where then, o where
Can those appear,
Who Truth and Justice own?

The Lord enthroned on High remains,
And with His Eyes
Severely tries
What Sins the Soul retains.

But His Eternal Vengeance must
With Death pursue
That Impious Crew
Who dare in Rapine trust.

Like dismal Storms on Sinners fall;
Strange Terrors will
Their Fancies fill,
And Fears confound them all.

Has ever fixed his whole Delight;
Only the Man
Whd's Righteous can
Procure his favoring sight.
PSALM. xij.

And Truth from Earth are flown!
None Honesty nor Mercy show,
They Are all Deceiful grown.

When with their Friends they speak;

And haughty Boasters break.

Our Words at Random fly;
And when we use that Liberty,
What Lord shall ask us why?

To hear the Needy's cry,
I Will rise, says God, and set him free
From Scorn and, Cruelty.

As Silver often refined,

From Men to Vice inclined.

But when Exalted high
Grief on each Humane visage dwells,
And Blushes Crimson Dye.
PSALM. xiij.

No more behold thy Face?

And Woes my Heart embrace.
Still shall my Foes my strength assail,
And still above me rise?

Unclose my failing Eyes!

Presume they have conquered me!
If they my smallest Trip disclose,
They Will all Triumphant be.

Thy saving Health adore.

My doubting Soul restore.
PSALM. xiv.

The World's great God denies;
Hence all from Ways of Virtue start,
And horrid Crimes devise.

And Humane Actions reads,
To see who common Sense obeys,
And God, or Goodness heeds.

And in his Nostrils stink,
None, None at all on Truth's Divine,
Or sober Virtues think.
"Their Throats like gaping Graves appear, [Ex^ Septuaginta
"Their oily Tongues deceive,
"Their Lips more dealy Poisons bear,
"Then biting Aspies leave.
"Their Mouths with bitter Curses stored,
"Their Feet to Murders fly,
"Destruction all their Paths afford,
"And certain Misery.
"No Ways of Charity, or Peace,
"Their Pride; or Malice knows,
"And they as still their Crimes increase,
"No Fear of God disclose.

Their Understanding power,
That they like Bread my Saints abuse,
And all at once devour.
To God no Sense can make them pray:

Their Souls a thousand Terrors sway,
And causless senseless Fears.
But God who loves the Righteous Race,
Among the Just remains,

He still their Hope sustins.
Israe^'s safety rise?
If God their mournful State
Restore, in Them the kind surprise
Will boundless Joys create.
PSALM. XV.

Where thy great Name resides!
How blessed the Man whom there thy Grace
From impious Crowds divides!
But, Lord, what Gifts can six him there?
What wondrous Virtues raise
His Soul to love thy House, and there
To sing thy daily Praise,

Of that Celestial State,
Who hides no Envy in his Breast
Nor deadly lurking Hate:
But all his Thoughts are fixed and true,
And all his Actions right.
Faith to his Word is always due,
His Lips in Truth delight.
No Falsehood ever perverts his Heart,
No Lies defile his Tongue;

Contrive his Neighbor's Wrong.
He scorns those Tales by Malice raised,
To blast his fragrant Name;
And all those senseless Scandals blazed
Against his rising Fame.
Part 2.

His great Creator's Laws;
Whose Wit against his Maker fights,
And backs a Godless Cause;
That vile, that despicable Slave
His nobler Thoughts despise,
But smiles the Good shall always have,
And Kindnefs in his Eyes.
No Loss, no Gain his Justice bows,
His Words Assurance speak;
He Will never his Oaths, nor sacred Vows,
Nor just Engagements break.

And vile Extortion hates.
Large as Men's Wants his Mercy grows,
And all their Wealth creates.
He loves the Innocent, and strives
Their Virtues to protect:
From him no Bribe can buy their Lives,
Nor Falsehood gain Respect.
Thus shall he reach thy holy Place,
There grow, and flourish there:
And in the Glories of thy Face
No Loss nor Dangers fear.
Another Meter as Mr. Sandys's 7th.

Thy Altars grace!
How is that holy Temple blessed,
By Thee possessed!
But, O, what happy Man is he
Who there a daily Guest may be!

Whose Life is pure,
Who never lets Contagions Sin
Prevail within;
For Right and Justice only cares,
And from his Heart the Truth declares.

Nor will his Eye
With Malice, or an envious View,
His Friend pursue;
Nor to his Neighbor's Hurt proceed,
Or break his Peace, by Word or Deed.

Abhor their Sight;
And with a just Contempt despise
Their shameless Lies.
But Reverence and Respect afford
To such as love and fear the Lord.
If to his Neighbor's Profit ever
He kindly swear,
Though to himself a Prejudice
From thence may rise,
Falsehood on him shall never prevail;
His Gain, but not his Faith, may fail.

A vast Estate;
And will not, for Bribes, quit the Defense
Of Innocence.
The Man whose Life is thus approved,
Shall never by Fears or Pains be moved.
PSALM. xvj. As the First.


Thou art my Lord, but can not be
More blessed by my Submissions made.

In Saints, in such as Goodness mind:

On Men to other Gods inclined.
I Will never, though kindly called, partake
Of their detested Sacrifice;
Nor Mention of their Idols make,
They never from my Lips shall rise.

My Right his mighty Arm sustains:

For me a goodly Let remains.
Part 2.

I nightly feel his gentle Hand;

I still unmoved, unshaken stand.

My Tongue's with glorious Praises blessed:
Though Death my Mortal State destroys,
My Flesh in certain Hope shall rest.

Death quit his Triumphs over my Soul.
Tombs sha'n't thy Holy One Confine,
Nor Worms my mouldering Corpse control.

Lord, in thy Presence Joys abound;
With thee Eternal Pleasures flow,
And lasting Bliss, with Glories crowned.
PSALM. xvij.

Accept my earnest Cry!
Thy Justice to his Prayers afford,
Who hates Hypocrisy!

My Sentence come from Thee!

By Night to visit me.
Yet thou have found me pure
When in thy Furnace tried:
My Lips, by Resolutions sure,
Are to thy Precepts tied.

I know thy Word's Divine:
And from destructive Paths, with Care,
My wandering Feet confine.

To tread thy sacred Way!
And never let my Footsteps wide
From Paths of Virtue stray!

Who hear'st the Cries of thine:
Lord, bow thy gracious Ears to me,
And to my Words incline!

To those who trust in thee;
And save them from the Rage of those
Who would their Ruin see!

And guard the tender Eye,
That I beneath thy Wings may sleep.
Beneath thy Shade may lie!
Part 2.

Who now enclose me round;
And all those cruel angry Bands,
Which would my Life confound!

Speak big with lofty Pride;

With down-cast Looks can hide.

Surprise the trembling Prey;
Or Lions Whelps, which mad for Blood,
In Thickets lurking stay.

And break their Insolence!
From wicked Men, thy deadly Sword,
Be thou my Soul's Defense.

To scourge a careless Age;
Men who with Earthly Blessings cloyed,
Their Hearts on Earth engage;
Whose craving Bellies all
The secret Treasures fill;
Whose Sons are fat, whose Lordships fall
Down to their Children still.

Thy glorious Face shall see
Which, when I Am raised again, shall bless
Me to Satiety.
PSALM. xviij. as the 100 th, or Mr, Sandys's 9 th.

Thus ecstasy'd with Joys and Love?
What worthy Hallslujahs sing
To his great Name who rules above?
He, by a thousand sacred Bands,
Has made my greatful Heart his own.

His Forse in my Deliverance shown.
My God, my solid Hope, my Shield,
Against my fierce insulting Foes:
Safe in his Strength I keep the Field,
My Crown his mighty Arm bestows.

And so from all my Foes be free,

And Floods of Horror compass me.

Death's cruel Chains opposed my Way;

And from his Seat He heard me pray.
Part 2.

Which all the World's Foundations shook,
And Mountains from their Bases heaved,
Unhinged by his revenging Look.

His Wrath the streaming Vapor showed,
Devouring Flames before him blazed,
And Bolts with living Sulphur glowed.

His Steps thick Darkness covered over;

On Wings of rapid Tempests bore.

And where he fore'd his wondrous Way,
His Way Majestic Darkness showed,
And heavy Clouds obscured the Day.

The Clouds, the Clouds dissolved around;
And Drops to monst'rous Hail congealed,
With burning Bolts, raked over the Ground.

The Air returned the dreadful Sound;
And Drops to monstrous Hail congealed,
With burning Bolts, raked over the Ground.

Nor could his Foes their Force avoid,
While his sure Hand thick Lightnings threw,
And all their scattered Hosts destroyed.
Part 3.

Distracted Nature trembling lay;
And the unfarhom'd Deep, deformed
Through horrid Ruptures, felt the Day.
The Seas old Parent Springs appeared,
And the great World's Foundations torn;
The tottering Hills their Doom's day feared,
By thy impetuous Wrath o'er-born.

His Brows with softer Glory shined;
He saved me from the Gulphs enraged,
And all the greedy Floods combined.

From all my Foes insulting Hate,
That Arm which me alone can free,
And their prevailing Force abate.

But God was then my Guard, my Stay;
He loved, he loved my Soul, and snatched
From hungry Jaws the fainting Prey.

And with his bounteous Love pursues;

Nor would, his just Commands refuse.
Part 4.



And all my craving Lusts denied.

Repaid my righteous Innocence,
And to my Hands thus guiltless made
He Will still His kind Rewards dispense.

His Mercy meet's the tender Heart,
Where Man to perfect Deeds inclines,
His Smiles a perfect meed impart.

God's Blessings are unmixed and plain,
Where Man deceit and falsehood loves,
False Hopes, false Joys, are all his gain.

Bring down the Looks which proudly swell

And all my darker thoughts dispel.

Through rallied Hosts I force my way,
Scale losty Walls, till all alarmed
My ever conquering Sword obey.
Part 5.

His Word; His Strength a certain Shield.

What Lord so firm a Shelter yield?

And makes my Ways and Counsels plain,

And I set high securely reign.

To throw the Spear and lift the Shield,
To break steel Bows with ease, and fight
The Duel, or, the Marshalled field.

And Greatness gain, and kind support,

My Foes my Conquering Armies sport.

And seize, and soon confound them all:

And Dead beneath my feet they fall.

With strength thy Spirit girds me round,

Their humbled Necks to kiss the ground.
Through Thee my Hands with ease destroy
Those Crowds whose spite my Glory crossed.

Their Prayers, their empty Cries are lost
Part 6.

Like Dust before the stormy Wind,
Or like vile Dirt in streets are thrown,
And I tread down their hated kind.

But I Will by joined Agreement reign,
And over strange Heathen Lands preside,
And Realms unknown shall drag my Chain.

And Strangers smooth pretenses make,

When all their strongest Frontiers quake.

My ever-living Rock! may He,

More honored still, more glorious be!

And He the subject Nation's leads;
Me from their cruel Envy takes,
And sets me high above their Heads.
And though Man's heady Fury still
Fly out, thy Arms my Safety bring;

Thy Praise, in grateful Anthems, sing.

And sure of his protecting Grace
His David, his Anointed lives,
And all his long succeeding Race.
PSALM, 19. As the 18th.

The Heavens, the far extended Skies:
See what those sacred Volumes lay,
Before thy Unbelieving Eyes.
To prove our God's Existence, there
A thousand starry Beauties shine,
A thousand glorious Marks appear,
Of Providence and Love Divine.

Neglect thy great Creator's Praise,
Yet wiser Nature's grateful Care
His Being speaks, his Might displays.
There, Days to Nights, and Nights to Days,
Instructive Wisdom's Lectures read.

They neither Voice nor Language need.
Orders prodigious Eloquence,
Over all the seeing World prevails;
And with strong Truth, and weighty Sense,
Their willing Eyes and Hearts assails.

So far from Light or Sense removed,
But they our God's Existence see,
And Atheistic Lies disproved.
Part 2.
Above in open Skies He blessed

Like some Illustrious Bridgroom dressed;
Or well-breathed vigorous Youth should run.

And sheds his Influences round,
And as He runs disperses Lives,
His Heat's with vast Productions crowned.

So plain the Majesty Divine,
Though Nature speak her Maker's care,
And God in every Creature shine.
More happy we, to whom his Grace
Imparts his Will, and sacred Laws;
Where, through each Word, the Poor may trace
His Works, and Him, their mighty Cause.
Thy Laws in full Perfection shine,
Great God, thy Statutes firmly stand;
Those, sinful Thoughts to Good incline;
These make the Simplest understand.

Give Joy, and clear the Cloudy Eyes;

Thy Judgments all are just, and wise.
Part 3.

That, for its Sweetness; this, its Price.
But nobler Sweets thy Laws contain;
More worth, thy Word's Divine Advice.

Dangers which Health and Lust create;
And then conduct me safely where
Rewards on just Obedience wait.

What Guilt his inmost Thoughts attends,
Who weighs his Words, his Actions who?
Or on their Innocence depends?
Cleanse me, o cleanse my Soul, my God,
From Sins o'er-look'd, and Guilt unknown:

Of Madness or Presumption groan!
So from great Guilt, great Errors, free,

Till all my Thoughts and Words with Thee:
May Favor and Acceptance gain.
PSALM. xx. As the 12th.

The Lord accept thy Prayers,
Thee with his glorious Name defend!

Come from thy Holy Place;
His Strength from Sion's Hill descend!

Right from his Altars rise,
Consumed at once by Flames Divine!

And all thy Counsels bless,
While we in Thanks and Praise combine!

Thy great Salvation see:
In God's great Name our Standards high,
With humbly grateful Praise,
And cheerful Hands, we'll raise:
May God to all thy Prayers reply!

Will his Anointed own;
On him his God's Salvation flows:
That Health and Safety strong,
Which to our God belong,
God's mighty Arm alone bestows.

And some in Horses boast;
But we, in God's more powerful Name.

In weighty Ruins fall,
While we our Savior's Strength proclaim:
Through that we strongly rise,
And with erected Eyes,
The Spring of all our Strength adore.

Accept the Vows we bring,
When we thy needful He'p implore!
Another Meter. As the 100th.

Thy Prayers; his Name defend thee still

And help thee from his sacred Hill!

Consume thy grateful Sacrifice:

And bless each mighty Enterprise!

Will raise our happy Standards high
In God's great Name, while kindly he
Shall to thy servent Prayers reply:

on his Anointed King bestows;
Whose Strength, whose Happiness, and Wealth,
From his Celestial Treasure flows.

In Horses, and in Horse-men's Force:
In God's more powerful Name we come;
To him alone's our who'e Recourse.

We rise more high, and stronger stand;

For us thy Royal Aids command!
PSALM. xxj. As the 100th,

And in thy saving Health rejoice,

And thou have heard his humble Voice.

And crowns his Head with envied Gold:

He long may live, and never be old.

With all Majestic Glory crowned:

Thy Heavenly Joys his Heart surround.

And in his Mercy firmly stands:

Nor scapes his long revenging Hands.

Its Flame their Stock at once consumes,

And all their wretched Pride intombs.

Such Plots as no Effect could take.

Thine Arrows sharp against them make!

Arise, exalt thy lofty Name,
While we with Songs thy Might record,
And all thy wondrous Acts proclaim.
PSALM. xxij.

Have thou Forsaken me!
How long so distant from my Cry
Shall thy Salvation be!

To thee by Night I cry;
With Tears, with restless Tears, I pray;
Yet, unregarded, die.

With faithful Praise adored:

Thy He^p their Souls restored.

Yet no Disgrace received:
Thy Hand procured their Liberty,
And all their Wants relieved.

Of Man in vain have born;
By Men exposed to common Shame,
And all the Vulgar's Scorn.

With Scoffs disdainful move.

If God his Cause approve.
God was his Hope, in God his Trust,
On God the Wretch rey'd:
God, if He Will have him, strongly must
Espouse his Darling's Side.

Thou wast my God, my Guide:

My Infant Cries supplied.

O never cast me by;
For daily Woes my Life attend,
And no Assistant's nigh.
Part 2.

And impious Arms prevail;

And open Mouths, assail.

My Bones, disjointed, start:
As Wax before the Sun's hot Beams,
So melts my careful Heart.

Cleaves to my parching Jaws;
And I shall soon to Earth belong
By Death's determined Laws.

And all the Godless Crew:
They pierce my bleeding Hands and Feet,
And Wounds on Wounds renew.

While here I racked appear;
And gaze in Scorn, while deathful Groans
My wasted Vitals tear.

And carefully divide;
And for their Shares, their doubtful Pleas,
Impartial Lots decide.

O fly to resoue me!

And bloody Dogs set free!

O save, and hear my Prayer!

Thy Name, thy Praise declare.
Part 3.

His happy Smiles implore!
Ye faithful Seed, his Glories raise,
His sacred Name adore!

The Poor's afflicted Case;
Nor hid his Face; but when I cried,
Bestowed his wonted Grace.

In Vast Assemblies sing;
My humblest Vows on holy Days,
With just Devotion bring.

Thy Saints thy Praises found;
Their joyful Hearts with Heavenly Cheer,
And Life Eternal crowned.

The World thy Grace proclaim:
All Nations Thee their God shall know,
And bear thy sacred Name.

And over the World presides:
His Word their quiet State maintains,
And Truth to all divides.

And just Obedience pay.
The Poor to him shall gladly bow,
And his Commands obey.
Nay, those whose drooping Souls draw near
The dark devouring Grave,
Shall at his Name revived appear,
And his Protection crave.

And in his Family
Their happy States and Names preserve,
And all his Goodness see

Succeeding Ages show,
That those to come on God nay call,
And all his Wonders know.
Another Meter: As the 124th.
WHY, o my God; o why, my God, do Thou
Desert a Soul oppressed with mighty Woe!
Thou, whose uhbounded Mercies largely flow;
And ready Help, and kind Supports allow
To others, who beneath their Sufferings bow!

My flowing Tears, consume the cheerful Light;
My restless Groans disturb the silent Night:
Yet still my absent God his Smiles denies;
For Tears or Groans has neither Ears nor Eyes.

Thy Nature change? or to thy Servants make
Thy Promise fail? Can God himself forsake?
O, no! He Is holy still: His wondrous Grace
The faithful World with Praise and Thanks embrace.

Their Faith in him, in him their Hopes were sure;
Their Considence in him from Shame secure.

Their ancient Freedom, and their State retrieved.

A trampled Worm, a Wretch, forgot, forlorn;
Exposed to all the insulting Vulgar's Scorn.
My heavy Woes their scossing Wits inflame,
And think I merit greater Pains and Shame

Shoot out their Tongues with pointed Flouts and Jeers,
(Unkind returns, for all my sanguine tears!)
With cruel Joys the Rout my Life pursue,
And my unutterable Torments view.

God was his Strength, his Friend, his Father too:
Let Us see what that Almighty Friend can do:
Let Us see his God; through the dividing Sky,
On rapid Wings, to his Assistance fly!
womb
Wast thou my God, and I was only thine;
My Birth, Conception, Nature, all Divine.

Thy Image in my Infant-Soul had Room.
And can I doubt my God's immortal Love?
Can Seas or Earth again, or can the Sky,
Dissolved in one unshap'd Confusion, lie?
Can groundless Hate pursue the spotless Dove?
Or can unkind Oblivion reign above?

My dropping Soul for sure Assistance flies;
On Thee, for Help, my drooping Soul relies.
My Griefs are nearer now, and stronger grown;
My Foes unnumber'd, my Assistants none.

Curled Bulls of lofty Basan's surly Breed;

Against the daring Hunters Spears engage,
Than against me this blind malicious Age.

My mangled Body, and my wounded Mind;
No sinewy Strength my loos'ning Joints can find.
Woes swell my throbbing Heart, and deadly Care,
And horrid Pangs approaching Death declare.

To cool Men's Rage, or ease my Torments, use?
My Tongue its Cries, their Tears my Eyes refuse.
And that thou, Lord, may cast thy Thunders by,
I groan, I sweat, I bleed, and faint, and die.

My Hands, my bleeding Feet, are rudely torn;
My dying Groans suppressed by noisy Scorn.
So greedy Dogs about the Carcass meet,
And Passengers with surly Snarlings greet.

Their Eyes, still dry, the stupid Vulgar raise,
And, hard as Rocks, on all my Sorrows gaze.

And with impartial Lots, their Claims decide.

Fly on thy own Salvation's Balmy Wings:
From that alone my Strength and Safety springs,
To give me Life, let thy Assistance be
Swift as my own Obedience was to Thee!

My wretched Soul, deserted, Friendless, mourn.
And all their Swords against my Bosom turn,
Be thou but mine, their swords and teeth shall have
A Check, and all their Malice find a Grave.

Mytrembling heart, tho they would withforce control
With rabid Force distract my peaceful Soul;
Be thou but mine, I Will live more free from Fear
Than Mariners when Halcyon Calms appear.

Thy gracious Actions, and thy glorious Name
And in thy House thy wondrous Love proclaim.

Now to his Court with grateful Songs repair!
Ye who of Israel's Privilege partake,
By Faith united to the chosen Seed,
To his blessed Courts with grateful Songs proceed

Nor to the Oppressed himself a Stranger make.

And there, in public, pay my Vows to Thee:
There all thy Saints my Gratitude shall see:
My Sacrifice their fainting Hope shall raise,
And turn their Mourning to their Feasting-Day!

Their Hearts with no uncertain Tumors swell,
But in Eternal Joys and Pleasures dwell:
Where, changed their happy Hymns of Praise shall be,
To Angels Tunes, and Heavenly Harmony.

Earth's utmost Borders, dearest Lord, be thine:
To Thee the farthest Pagan Tribes incline
To Thee shall all the enlightened Nations flow,
And holy Reverence and Devotion show.


His Government the naked Poor allow.
Their God to them his Kindness still retains,
And gives then Life, and then their Lives maintains.

To God devoted, and from God be named;
For sacred Rites and holy. Virtues famed:

And his great Acts to future Heirs extend.
To God the Father, and to God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost, Almighty Three,
One only God, one Glorious Trinity!
As shall be, is, and was, ever: Time begun;
Be lasting Glories paid, and Homage done.
PSALM. xxiij. As the 100th.
AMidst a Thousand Wants and Woes,
My Soul on God for He^p relies:
My Griefs his pitying Wisdom knows;
My Wants his pitying Love supplies.

My Soul through Truths delightful Ways:
My Foot sure by his Condust treads,
And never from Paths of Wisdom strays.

New Health on sickly Flocks bestow,
So in thy Favors quickening Beams
I sweetly live, and kindly grow.

By Thee, dear God, secured from Harms;
Thy very Rod demonstrates Love,
Thy Staff supports my wearied Arms.

On all my chief Delights? from Thee
Sweet Wine and Oil my Bowl shall crown,
And boundless Plenty compass me.

On, Thee my Hopes, my Joys depend.
Then in thy House I Will fix my Rest,
My Life in lasting Praises spend.
Another Meter, as Mr. Sandys's 10th.

Those Soul his Cares in safety keep.
Through flowery Meads,
He gently leads
Me on where I securely sleep:
Or by His guidance go,
Where silent Waters flow.

The Errors of my wandering Mind:
For this Name's sake,
He brought me back,
When I from Virtue's paths declined.
And to his righteous Ways,
Consines my fleeting Days.

Though through Death's gloomy, shades I go;
Since there with me,
My God will be.
From Thee alone my Comforts flow,
Which to me, ever Lord,
Thy Rod, thy Staff afford.

A Table nobly stored dispose,
Oils largely shed,
Around my Head.
And till the purple Juice o're-flows,
Thy endless Bounty will,
My Bowl divinely sill.

A Portion all my Life for me:
And then my Rest,
Supremely blessed,
Within thy sacred House shall be;
Where, to my God and King,
I Will endless Praises sing.
PSALM. xxjv

To God above belong,

The Waters built it strong.

His own Immortarl Name:
But o what Man can find such grace,
Dear Lord, to reach the same?
What happy Man divinely blessed
Attend thy Altars there,
Or of a Seat secure possessed
Before thy Face appear?

From all Corruptions free,
Whose honest Heart, sincerely good,
Abliors Hypocrisy.
Who never in Thoughtst, or Actions yain,
His active Soul employed,
Nor falsely swore, nor lived in pain
To make his Promise void.

Unfading Blessings give,
Reward him well, and let him still,
On his Salvation live.

Seek God's Immortal Name,
And Israelites by Faith commence,
And Israe^'s portion claim*

Your glorious Arches raise,
Then shall the King of Majesty,
Come in with lofty praise*

It Is God, the mighty Lord,
And wondrous Wars record.

Your, glorious Arches raise,
Then shall the king of Majesty,
Come in with, lofty praise.

It Is God, the mighty Lord
Of Hosts; whose Praise his Subjects sing,
Whose Honors all record.
Another Meter: As Da Pacem Domine.

Earth, and all of Earth possessed:

On the Floods secured its Rest.

Can, Lord, pursue
Paths to reach thy sacrecd Hill?
Or see thy Face
In that blessed Place,
There, unmoved, abiding still?

He who purifies his Heart;
Whose Soul is neither proud, nor vain,
Nor can from his Oaths depart.

From God shall see,
And his Savior's Righteousness:

Who every Way
After Jacob's Maker press.

Doors Eternal, open wide!
Then shall the King of glorious State
Through your Ports triumphant ride.

Whose Majesty
Your Angelick Anthems sing?
The Lord of Might
Supreme in Fight;
He Is our Great, our Glorious King.

Doors Eternal, open wide;
Then shall the King of glorious State
Through your Ports triumphant ride,

Whose Majesty
Your Angelick Anthems sing?
The Lord, whose Sway
All Hosts obey:
He Is our Great, our Glorious king.
PSALM. xxv.


O save me from insulting Foes,
And Shame, and Infamy!

But keep thy Servants free:

Reveal thy Paths to me!

To me Salvation give;
To me, dear Lord, who all my Days
In scred Longings live!

Thy Bowels, Lord, re-call!

Forgive, forget them all!
O, for thy tender Mercy's sake,
With Favor think on me!

His righteous Paths to see.

The Humble kindly draws:

To those who keep his Laws.
Part 2.

With weighty Guilt oppressed:

Thy Paths with Safety bles'd!

His Race the Land shall hold:

Will God his Grace uhfold.

From subtle Snares retrieve:

With Love my Woes relieve.

O kindly rescue it!

And all my Sins remit!

Who hate me wrongfullie.

Because I trust: in Thee.

And on thy Favors wait:

From its afflicted State!
PSALM. xxvj.

Have trod the perfect Way:
trust in Thee; no Dangers nigh
Can make my Hopes decay.
Prove me, my God; examine well
My Reins, and search my Heart:

From Truth I Will never depart.

My Soul hates Hypocrites:

In impious Ways delights.

And grateful Offerings bring:

And all thy Wonders sing.

In them thy Glories dwell:

Nor bloody Murth'rers fell!

Who love large Bribes to see:

O save, o pity me!

My ready Steps consine;
And stand where thy great Name, to bless
Assembling Saints, combine.
PSALM. XXVij.

Poor changing Mortals fear?
His Smiles my Life and Strength supply;
And can I saint appear?

To eat me up designed,
They trip'd, and fell, but never rose,
With Ma'ice deadly blind.

My Heart no Fear can know:
Though War's Alarms about me found,
My Faith shall stronger grow.

From God I long to hear;
To see his sacred Beauties shine,
And serve his Altars there.

Within his secret Place;
A Rest, a Rock for me provide;

Above my Foes, which press me round;
While mighty Offerings I
Shall bring with Joys triumphant sound,
And praise my God most High.
Part 2.

And hear, and pity me!

I Will seek, dear Lord, to Thee.

In Anger, Lord, from me:
My Help of old, o let thy Grace
My Guard, my Safety be!

My God will own me still.

To me thy righteous Will;

To barbarous Enemies!
Who Snares for me by Falsehood lay,
And hunt my Soul with Lies.

My sainting Soul revived,
Of thy refreshing Love secure
While here on Earth I lived.

And he will exalt thy State:
Thy Heart, with Strength renewed, uphold;
On him o humbly wait!
PSALM. xxviij.

Thy Answer, Lord, I crave,
Left, by thy Silence ruined, I
Too soon approach the Grave.

Thy lowly Servant prays;
When toward thy Seat of Mercy he
His Hands shall humbly raise.

With wicked Workers, who
Speak friendliest to their Neighbors when
They plot their Overthrow.

Their black Designs return:
And let them all, beneath the Blast
Of self-sown Mischief, mourn.

And what his Hands have wrought,
Let Ruin all their Works surprise,
To swift Destruction brought!

His praying Servant's Voice;

In whom my Thoughts rejoice!
To Him, whose Help my Faith requites,
I Will joyful Praises sing;

For his Anointed King.

Thy old Inheritance;
And their Salvation, by thy Word,
From Age to Age advance!
PSALM. xxix.

A grateful Sacrifice:
In his unbounded Strength delight,
And to his Glories rise!

His sacred Name alone:
Bow, bow to Him, his Praise proclaim
Before his Awful Throne!

Hark how his Thunder rolls!
The Lord from over the Water speaks,
And all the Deep controls.

Which on his Voice attend:

The lofty Cedars rend.

Like Heifers over the Field;
Old Libanus and Hermon skip
When Clouds their Thunder yield.


The barren Sands, and distant Shoars,
Before his Thunder quake.

Their Young unperfect cast;
And Forests bare and stripped appear,
As with a Winter's Blast.

Reigns an Eternal King;
And all his glorious Majesty
In Heavens bright Temples sing.

Will guard his Churches round:
His Blessings on their Heads shall light,
With Peace and Plenty crowned
Another Meter: As the 112th.

Of fattest Rams from Bashan bring:
To Him let mighty Princes rise,

Just Honors to their Lord allow,
And in his sacred Temple bow.

In Cracks of dreadful Thunder speaks!

His Voice with dismal Glory breaks:

With its tempestuous Force o'er-born.

The rooted Hills before him shake;
Before his Voice the Mountains cleave,
And Libanus and Hermon shake:
And Earth as sudden Motion yields,
As Heifers tripping over the Fields.


Its Force the trembling Wild proclaims,

The Forest-Herds, and trembling Deer,
Cast out their Young, unformed, for Fear.
His Lightnings strip the Forests round;

All in his House his Praises sound,
And He a King Eternal reigns.

And all the Sweets of Peace pursues.
PSALM. xxx.

I Will Praises sing to Thee,
Who have not made my Foes rejoice,
But have exalted me.

And Health thy Mercy gave.

And from the loathsome Grave.

His sacred Name adore:

His Favors Life restore.
One Night may pass in Griefs and Tears,
One melancholy Night;
But Joy, with Golden Wings, appears
Before the dawning Light.

I never should fall, nor move:

By thy surrounding Love.
Thy Face withdrawn, a Thousand Cares
Disturbed my tortured Breast:

And servent Cries, addressed.

My Death what Trophies raise?
Can mouldering Dust thy Glories see,
Thy Truth or Goodness praise?

To my Assistance fly!

My sable Weeds to Joy.

My Tongue shall praise thy Name:
My Harp on every tuneful String,
Thy Deathless Praise proclaim.
PSALM. xxxj.

From all Confusion free!
With Justice all my Foes control,
And still deliver me!

And to my Rescue fly!
Be thou my Guard, with Strength Divine;
My Rock, and Fortress high!

O, for thy Mercy's sake,
For thy great Name, direct me now
The safest Ways to take!

O Thou, my Strength esteemed!

Lord, by thy Truth redeemed!

God's Mercy sure rejoice,

And heard my mournful Voice.

But set my Feet at large.

My present Woes discharge!
Part 2.
My Eyes, my Mind, my Bowels all,
Beneath thy Anger waste,

My Years in Sighs are past.
My strength with Sins huge weight oppressed,
My putrid Bones decay.

With my Disasters play.
To them a Laughing Stock, a Scorn,
A Bug bear I appear,
And those who meet a Wretch forlorn,
Draw back-their Heads for fear.

Or threw like Potsherds by,

And barbarous Emnity.
Fear sinks my Soul, while mighty Men
Against my Life combine;

Thou still, dear Lord, art mine.

From persceuting Foes,

Thy saving Smiles disclose!

And thy Assistance crave!
But let confounded Sinners fall
Down to the silent Grave!

Whose proud Contempt and Scorn,
That good Men might be thoroughly crushed,
Could lying Lips suborn.
Part 3.

Who fear, thy sacred Name!
What Good for them thy Loves dispose,
Thy mighty Works proclaim.

Within thy secret Place;
And in thy House and Rest provide,
From brawling Tongues Disgrace.

Such wondrous Things for me!
Who from a well senc'd City brought
Me out, and set me free!

Before my God appear;
Yet, Lord, thou heard'st my Prayer; my Cry
Obtained thy gracious Ear.

His faithful Servants keeps:
But off at once the Proud, abhorred,
His equal Vengeance sweeps.

More Courage still shall send,
Whose Hearts are to his Service true,
And on his Truth depend.
PSALM. xxxij.

Whose Errors Mercies hide;

Whose Soul's sincere, and tried.

My aching Bones decayed;
And through long Night, and tedious Day,
One dismal Roaring made.

All Day, all Night chastis'd;
My fainting Spirits were at a stand,
Like Brooks by Drought surpised.
At last I all my Crimes displayed,
My wretched Sins confessed:
To God I Will own my Guilt, I said;
And God my Guilt released.

shall in their Prayers complain;
And though Woes deluge all around,
Themselves untouched remain.

From pressing Ills secured;
And all my cheerful Music flows
From Liberty assured.

And I Will your Souls instruct;
And in the blissful Ways of Rest
With careful Eyes conduct.

Whose Brutish Furies will,
Unreign'd, uncurb'd, unruly prove,
And balk their Riders Skill.

The Just with Mercy's crowned.

Whose Hearts are right and sound.
PSALM. xxxiij. As the 100th.

From you how comely Praise appears?

O reach the Great Jehovah's Ears!

His Praise with Art and Courage sing:

His Faith approved in every thing.

Over Earth his wondrous Mercies slow;

His Active Word and Spirit show.

And sinks unfathomed Deeps below.

On Earth, their mighty Maker know!

Broke from vast Nothing's fruitful Womb;
And did, at his commanding Call,
Shape, Order, Beauty, Strength assume.

And breaks the Nations fond Designs:

And pass all Time's extended Lines.
Part 2.

Where God has Fixed his glorious Name!
Where He affumes the chief Command,
And lays his own peculiar Claim.

And Man's weak Race and Actions viewed;

Surveyed the careless Multitude.

And all their various Actions weighs.

Or mighty Hosts, or empty Praise.

He on his foaming Steed relies:

With Help and Mercy both supplies.

In Famine He their Wants relieves.

To us his Shield's Assistance gives.

By which We all our Hopes excite.

On us, Lord, let thy Mercy light!
Another Meter: As Mr. Sandys's 34th.

Its sweet when with a cheerful Voice
The Just his Praises sing.

But with Voice, and Harp, and Lute,
Praise our Immortal King!

With loudest Joys his Glory raise;
Let all your Songs be new!

Performance is his whole Delight,
And all his Works are true.

With spreading Wings his Mercy moves
Over all the spacious Earth.

And bade their numerous Armies rise;
That Word was all their Birth.

Which now the rolling Seas compose;
And Heaps on Heaps were thrown:
Unfathomed Whirl-pools, dangerous Deeps
His Subterraneous Treasure keeps
In hollow Vaults, unknown.

With Awe let all the World appear
Before its Maker's Face!

He gave the Word, it fixed and stayed
In its appointed Place.

The subtle Plots, and crafty Mines,
Which Heathens closely frame.

His Thoughts and all his Ways endure;
From Age to Age the same.
part 2.

Which God will to himself secure,
His own Inheritance.

From thence over all Mankind his Eyes,
His piercing Eyes advance.


His Thoughts severely try.

The Men who mighty Strength pretend,
On Strength in vain rely.

And, by his Make, for War designed,
His Rider cannot secure.

And all his Mercy's kind Supplies
Are to the Faithful sure.

In Famine, what their Hunger craves,
His careful Hands provide.

He, as a Shield, secures our State;
And is our Help and Guide.

His holy Name's our happy Choice,
On which our Hopes may rest.

So let thy faithful Servants be
With thy Compassion blessed!
PSALM. xxxiv.

My Mouth shall sound his Praise

His Love in Anthems raise.
The meek and humble Souls shall hear
Of my exalted State:
Thy Loves, which so immense appear,
Shall all their Joys create.

My Savior magnify!
Let Us to exalt his Name agree,
And raise his Glories high

And all my Fears redressed:

With Love and Life were blessed.

And God received my Prayer;
And free from all Afflictions made,
And all perplexing Care.

And threatening Ills divert.

With Bliss the faithful Heart!

For such no Wants surprise.

And, spent with fasting, dies.
But those who, seek the Lord, with all
That Is good or sweet are stored:

And learn to fear the Lord!
Part 2.

Would see delightful Days?

Thy Tongue from guileful Ways.

What Is good and virtuous do;
And Love and Peace with Flames Divine,
And constant Care, pursue!

His Ears their Prayers attend:

Their Lives from Earth to rend.

And sets them safe from Harms;

Whose Souls Repentance warms.

But God their Force dispels;

And all their Bruises heals.

And those who hate the Just;

Who on his Mercy trust.
PSALM, XXXV.

With such as strive with me!

My mighty Guardian be!

My Persecutors Rage!
To me thy Saving Health disclose,
And for my Soul engage!

Their own Confusion see;

Who Mischief brew for me:

Disporse their angry Crew!
Their slippery Ways be dark, their Course
Angelick Arms pursue!

For me they laid their Snare:
O let such Woes their Hearts invade,
As unsuspected are;

Their own Destruction prove!
While flowing Joys my raptured Mind
With kind Salvation move.
Part 2.

Who gives the Poor distressed,

And bloody Tyrants, Rest!

And unknown Crimes object;

And on my Soul reflect.

I fasted, mourned and prayed;
Their Pains with kind Concernment owned,
To Heart their Sorrows laid.

My dearer Self, had died,
No farther could my Griefs extend,
My Love no more be tried.

With barbarous Joy surveyed;
The Rabble grew my saucy Foes,
And used the flouting Trade.

The witty scornful Crew:
And at my Life, with Hate resin'd,
And gnashing Fury, flew.

O save my helpless Soul!
My Darling from their Jaws to free,
Their Lion-Force control.

I Will celebrate thy Name;
And where the valiant Bands repair,
Thy lofty Praise proclaim.
Part 3.

My Causeless Haters smile;

Whose studied Words beguile.

Our Eyes his Downfall see.

O stay not long from me!

My God, my Lord, descend!

And from Reproach desend!

We have our Heart's Delight:
Nor let them proudly boast, Aha!
We have 'devour'd him quite.

Who at my Harms rejoice;
And Horror and Disgrace subdue
The proud insulting Voice.

With cheerful Spirits sing:
God loves his Servants Peace; o praise,
O praise our mighty King!

Thy righteous Acts proclaim;
Thy Justice every Day declare,
And praise thy glorious Name.
PSALM. xxxvj.

My sober Censures try
My Heart concludes by Reason's Rules,
Such Brutes a God deny,

But Sin's their who'e De'ight;
Till all their dark Intendments found,
A general Hate excite.

And off their Virtue's thrown:

In viler Actions shown.

Thy Truth surmounts the Skies:

Thy Judgments dark and wise
Like some unfathomable Deeps,
Unbounded Wealth enclose:
And Man and Beast thy Favor keeps,
And Health on all bestows.

Beneath thy sacred Wings
How safe the Sons of Men remain
At Lov's immortal Springs!

And drink delightful Streams,
From those Eternal Springs distilled;
And feel thy gracious Beams.

Thy Light affords us Light:

To those whose Hearts are right!

My tottering State restore!

Sink, fall, and rise no more!
PSALM. xxxvij.

Thy self of Peace deprive:
Nor swell with secret Envy when
The wicked Workers thrive,

And painted Flowers decay!
More swift the Sinner's Glory flies,
And sooner fades than they.

And Faith and Truth defend:

And all thy Prayers attend.
5 Walk upright, on his Grace recline,
For his Performance stay:

Bright as the Cloudless Day.

But never for Sinners grieve;
Nor wicked Men, in all their State,
Secure, or fixed believe:

Lest Sin on thee prevail;

But Sinners sink and fail.

Destroyed, no more shall be:
Yea, thou shall search to find his Place,
And not his Dwelling see.

For their Inheritance;
There live, and with delightful Mirth,
Abundant Peace advance.

Against the Just combine:

He sees their Days decline.

Their Bows and Swords they try:

Their Bows in Splinters fly.
Part 2.

More true Content bestows,
Than Sinners find when all their State,
With Pride and Plenty flows.

And strongly guards his own;
While broke the Sinner's Force remains,
His cruel Hopes overthrown.

His Heritage endure:

In Famine feeds them sure.

Of Lambs, in Fumes, away;

They never design to pay.

And all their Race is blessed;
And when the dinners fall, they live
Of all the World possessed.

Their Ways their Maker please:

And holds them up with Ease,

But never yet could see
The righteous Man to Ruin sold,
Or his Posterity.
I never God's holy Saints have known,
Deserted quite, complain;
Nor off their wretched Chi dren thrown,
Nor beg their Eread in vain.
Part 3.

And all their Seed are blessed:

To Good, and live at Rest.

God's sacred Arms embrace,
And such in Safety keep, but he
Cuts off the Sinner's Race.

Where many Years they live:

A righteous Sentence give.

Their Steps are firm and sure;

Or would their Deaths procure.

His faithful Friends forsake;
Nor Goodness, like a Judge severe,
His Anger's Object make.

And so, exa'ted high,
On Earth thou't see delightful Days,
And impious Wretches die.

His Boughs, like Laurels, round;

Nor could his Place be found.

How down in Peace he lies;

Of weighty Curses, dies.

And Might in Danger sends,

Sets free, assists, defends.
PSALM. xxxviij.


On me thy Terror lies:

Sins make my Bones to waste;

And over my Head are passed.

With foul-Corruption slow;

And I all mourning go.

My Carcass mortified;

My roaring Cries divide.

To Thee my Sighs are known.

My Sight and Eyes are gone.

My Wounds at distance view;
My Kindred all my Doom pronounce,
And cruel Strangeness show.
Part 2.

Their subtle Snare have set;
Their Tongues are all to Mischief free,
Their Studies, all Deceit:

Their cruel Words deny;
15 But hoped my God, my Savior would
On my Behalf reply.

My Foes insulting Pride
Who Pleasure in my Stumbling took,
And all my Hopes defied

My Woes before my Face;

My wretched guilty case.
But now my Sins, and guilty Fears,
I Will in thy Presence lay,
Till Sorrows and repenting Tears,
Shall wash my Guilt away.

And in their Multitude:

Because. I Good pursued.

Nor stay too long from me:

And my Salvation be.
PSALM. xxxix.

I Would watch my sinful Ways;
For often my Words at random fly,
My Tongue, unguarded, strays.

And curbed my hasty Tongue:
Nay, I forbore to ta k of Good,
Till Sorrow grew too strong.

Sad Thoughts inslam'd my Breast;
At last my Words in Torrents flowed,
And thus my Thoughts expressed

How far my Days extend,
That I may all my Time bestow
To weigh my latest End.

A Point, compared with Thee:
And all the wretched Race of Man
Is empty Vanity.

And spends himself in vain;
In vain that useless Wealth improves,
Which unknown Heirs may gain.
Part 2.

My Hopes are all in Thee:

No Scorn to Fools may be!

I humbly silent bear:

And ease my wasting Fear!

Our broken Beauties lie
Like Cloth which fretting Moths affect,
And prove we are Vanity.

My Supplications hear;
For like a Stranger here am I,
As all my Fathers were.

My failing Faith restore,
Ever Death my fainting Spirits seize.
And I appear no more!
To Father, Holy Ghost, and Son,
One sacred Trinity,
Who framed this Universe, alone,
Eternal Glories be.
PSALM. xl.

For God's Compassion stayed;
Who bowed his Ear, and heard my Cry,
When I submissly prayed:

And from the miry Clay;
And on a Rock secured my Feet,
And then prepared my Way.

New Songs of sacred Praise:
This all shall see, and fear, and have
Just Grounds their Faith to raise.

Whose Trust on God relies;
Who scorns the Sinner's haughty Frown,
And Men inured to Lies.

Thy wondrous Acts to show,
Thy Thoughts for us, thy Acts transcend
Whatever I think or know.

A Body fit for me:
By Thee were no Burnt-Off'rings claimed,
To purge Iniquity.

My Name and Work describes:

My Flesh from Jacob's Tribes.
Thy Laws, which I in Heart embrace,
Flow from my grateful Tongue.

To all the listening Throng.
Part 2.

And thy Salvation shows;
My Heart thy Mercy never conceals,
My Lips thy Truth disclose.

Thy Pity, Lord, exclude:
To save me let thy Goodness come,
And all thy Truth be showed!

My wretched Heart surround:
My Trespasses, too weighty grown,
My failing Sight confound.
More than my Hairs my Sins appear,
And break my fainting Heart:

Thy winged Aid impart.

Who hunt my Life with Hate:
Let dark Confusion seize them all,
Who for my Ruins wait.

On their own Heads return,
Who laugh, and proudly flout, to see
Thy wretched Servant mourn.

With lively Briskness raised,
Sing all to thee; and all proclaim,
The Lord, the Lord be praised!

On me some Thoughts bestow:
Nor let thy Help to me be crossed,
Nor thy Assistance slow!
PSALM. xlj.

The needy Poor supplies;
The Lord will to his Help repair,
When greatest Dangers rise.

And prosper'd here below;
And the malicious Hate survive
Of his designing Foe.

The Lord will raise his Head;
In sharpest Pains, some Means devise
To ease his restless Bed.

Too long in Sins employed!

My very Name destroyed.

Their whole Discourse is Lies;
Their public Talk's Iniquity,
Which there their Hearts devise.

My spiteful Foes contrive:

He cannot his Plague survive.

Who was my daily Guest,
Could all his subtle Counsels bend
Against his Master's Breast.

And I Will their Deeds requite.

My Foes triumphant Spite.

Thy Strength my Heart supports;
And all my Happiness shall be
To tread thy sacred Courts.
Israel's God! his Praise
Through lasting Ages sing:
With loud Amens the G ories raise
Of Jacob's mighty King!
PSALM. xlij.

Pant for the cooling Streams,
So pants my Breast, dear God, till blessed
With thy reviving Beams.

The living God be near:
O when shall I, Lord, happily,
Before thy Face appear!

By Day my Cheeks o'erflow'd;
On Tears I fed, while Scorners said,
Where Is now his boasted God?

My serious Thought re-calls,
In my sad Breast, my Soul, oppressed,
Beneath its Burden falls.
Then I, with mighty Numbers proud,
To God's blessed Temple went;
And all the Crowd, with Songs aloud,
To Him their Praises sent

Those blissful Minutes gone;
Yet where so fast, With Sorrow's Blast;
Is all my Courage flown!
Why droops my Soul so much? O why
Do thou disturb my Breast?
My Faith on High to God shall fly,
And on his Bosom rest.
Part 2.
Hermon's Caves, and Jordan's Flows,
While I thus banished live,
Against my Woes tormenting Throws,
Dear Lord, I vainly strive.

Thy treasured Tempests blow;
And in their Course, with mighty Force,
The mighty Waters flow;

Thy Mercies still by Day;
To praise my Mind by Night's inclined,
Or I devoutly pray.

Am I rejected so?
O why must I thus groaning lie,
Beneath my angry Foe?

And with Reproaches fly,
And Scoffs anew, my Soul pursue;
And, Where Is his God? they cry.

In my despairing Breast?
What weighty Blow, what dreadful Woe
Thus breaks thy ancient Rest?
Hope yet in God, in Patience wait
On Him, my Health, my God;
I yet his State shall celebrate,
And spread his Works abroad.
PSALM. xliij.
BY Men of Blood beset, distressed
By all the treach' rous Crew,
My Prayers to pitying Heaven addressed,
For Life and Safety sue:
O Thou, just God, assert my Cause,
My sinking Cause maintain;
And, tried by thy impartial Laws,
Let me thy Smiles re-gain.

Why, from thy Presence thrown,
Must I, despairing all the Day,
Beneath Oppression groan?

My wandering Steps to guide,
Till I thy holy Mount ascend,
And near thy House reside.

And cheerful Anthems sing:
Thy Praise, blessed God, my Harp shall show
On every tuneful String.

Within my wounded Breast?
Why should Despair thy Thoughts control?
Or break thy ancient Rest?
Trust yet in God! I shall my Part
Still in his Love obtain:
And God within my grateful Heart,
Enthroned in Joys, shall reign.
Another Meter. As the old 130th.

On those who Mercy hate!
From deceitful, cruel Jaws
O save my sinking State!

Why then must I, unblessed,
Thus a constant Mourner be,
By barbarous Foes oppressed?

And let them guide me still;
To thy House conduct me right,
And to thy holy Hill!

the God of all my Joy;
And his Praises there to show,
My tuneful Harp employ.

Why thus disturbed within?
On that God securely rest,
Who often thy Help has been.
Fear not, droop not; I shall yet
His Health with Praises see:
He Is my God, and can'd forget
My kind Defense to be.
Another Meter, as Mr. Sandys's 22th.

On cruel Hands, and faithless Hearts.
Save me from him who from the Laws
Of Truth, and sober Virtues, starts,
Who boldly acts the falsest Parts,
With strange Success, and vast Applause!

My Strength, and Help, and Hopes descend:
Why then must I rejected be?
Why thus beneath Oppressions bend?
On thee so long in vain attend,
From bloody Foes to set me free?

To be my constant, faithful Guides;
To lead me to that sacred Height,
Where thy illustrious Name resides,
Where thy Illustrious House abides,
With thy immortal Glories bright.

That God who all my Joy creates,
To whom I all my Pleasures owe,
On whom my Soul, reviving, waits.
My Lord, my God, in whose blessed Gates
His Praise my tuneful Harp shall show.

Thus vexed in my uneasy Breast?
To God for Help and Safety fly,
On his Divine Assistance rest,
For with my God's Salvation blessed,
I yet shall sound his Praises high.

Thy wondrous Works of Old;

And we their Countries hold.

Nor Native Valor save:
Thy Arm, thy Love, thy Countenance
Their Lands and Safety gave.

For Jacob's Seed command

Thy kind assisting Hand.
Their Heads, in thy Almighty Name,
We'll quickly trample over;

And trust my Sword no more.

And break'st their Hearts with Shame:

And ever praise thy Name.

A strange Disgrace endure:
Thy Aids no more our Armies see,
Nor can thy Help procure.

And we are spoiled with Ease:

Wherever the Gentiles please.

Yet not advanced thy Gain:

And treat with proud Disdain.
Part 2.

At us each shakes his Head:

A Thousand Blushes spread.

And black Reproaches, grows,
The Barbarous Acts, and shameless Lies
Of our revengeful Foes.

We cannot our God forget;
But in thy Covenant we rest,
Thy Truth before us set.

But to thy Judgments true,

And Death our Steps pursue.

Or Idol-Gods adored,

Our secret Thoughts explored?

To Slaughter deemed for Thee.

No distant Stranger be!

Why hid thy lightsom Face?

The Earth, forlorn, embrace.

Our sinking State retrieve!
Our Souls, to Sorrow Captives made,
With Mercy, Lord, relieve!
PSALM. xlv.

I Will sing a lofty Song;
The Streins, my busy Thoughts indite,
To our blessed King belong.
And though the Pen-man's nimble Hand
Flies swiftly over his Scrowl,
More swiftly, and with more Command,
My Tongue attends my Soul.

Thou, Lord, art fairer found:
Thy Lips distill Celestial Grace,
With God's due Blessings crowned.

Gird on thy dreadful Sword,
With Majesty, and glorious Light,
And Truth's All-conqu'ring Word.

Thee with assured Success:
Thy dreadful Arms all Fame transcend,
And all thy Foes depress.

Thy Foes shall spread the Field;
And at thy Footsteps wounded fall,
And to their Conqu'ror yield.
Part 2.

And Right thy Scepter crowns;
Bright Justice fil^s thy righteous Hands,
Sin dies beneath thy Frowns.
Moved with thy Gifts, and Acts Divine,
Thy God anoints thy Head;
Thy Joys thy Fellows Joys out-shines,
On Thee in plenty shed.

From all thy Garments flow;
And round thy Ivory Palace meet,
And all thy Motions show.

Among thy Maidens stand:
The Queen, with Golden Crowns oppressed,
Waits at her Sov'reign's Hand.

With humbly prudent Care:
Thy Fondness of thy Fathers leave,
And of thy Country's Air.

To thy bright Charms allow;
For He Is the Lord, He reigns above;
To Him o humbly bow.
Part 3
Tyrian Dames resort
With Gifts, fair Queen, to thee:
The wealthy Men shall make their Court
To awful Majesty.

But richer far her Mind;
An inward Heavenly Treasure bears,
By Love and Grace refined.

With all the Embroid'rer's Art;
Her Train's by Royal Virgins born,
Who share her Joys and Heart.

Their Eyes soft Loves create,
When, to attend their Monarch, they
On their great Mistress wait.

A gallant, sprightly Train:
Brave Youths, to Crowns and Sceptres born,
And over the Nations reign.

I Will ever thus proclaim;
And all the joyful World shall sing
Thy Godlike Acts, and Name.
Another Meter: As the 113th.

My Heart, my Head, my Tongue combine
To bless the World's Incarnate King.
No nimble Pen-man's flying Hand
More swiftly can his Quill command,
Than I my Savior's Glory sing.

Dear Lord, thy Godlike Beauties are!
Thy Lips Eternal Sweets distill.
Hence, by thy mighty Father blessed,
Thy humble, but capacious Breast,
All Heaven's immense Endowments fill.

Gird on thy dreadful, glittering Sword;
And with Majestic Honors crowned,

Truth, Meekness, Justice guard thy Side.
Thy Arm with Terrors braced around,

By the Right Hand, to Conquest used,
Shall pierce thy stubborn-hearted Foes:
And all the trembling World shall meet,
To cast themselves beneath thy Feet,
O'er-aw'd by thy resistless Blows.

A righteous Scepter fills thy Hands:
To Thee the suppliant Nations bow.

Thy Frown the wicked World restrains,
And Sinners fly thy threathing Brow.
Hence God, thy God, with Joys around,
Above thy Mates, thy Heart has crowned;
His Balmy Joys thy Passions warm.

Which from thy lofty palace blow;
And Sweets thy pleased Attendants charm.
Part 2.

Fair Virgins, all of Royal State,
Like bigger Stars in the Galaxy.
And at thy Hand enthroned is seen
Thy charmingly victorious Queen;
Her Crown pure Gold, but purer she.

Thy native Land's and Father's Seat;
And for thy King, thy Kindred quit:

And thou his Deity adore,
And to his Heavenly Will submit.

Thy Service in Oblivion die;
But through the farthest Regions famed:
To thee shall Tyrian Dames resort;
And wealthy Princes make their Court
To thee, by thy Renown inflamed.

Thy Soul; a Thousand Beauties there
Thy Diamonds and Rubies stain,

Thy Majesty to meet thy King,
Attended with thy Virgin-Train.

Blessed by thy King's exalted Love,
Thou Wilt in his Starry Palace reign.

Of Princely Youths thy Marriage grace,
And Royal Crowns and Empires gain.

Thy Majesty, and glorious State,
I Will sing in never-dying Verse.
The World shall thy bright Throne adore,
The Suppliant World thy Grace implore;
Thy Spousals bless, and praise rehearse.
PSALM. Xlvj.

When greatest Danger's near:

On Earth, we scorn to fear.
Though Mountains, torn from every Shore,
Into the Seas be hurled;

Assault the trembling World.

Which round his City go,
Refreshing Springs, with gentler Falls,
And easy Windings, flow.

No Strength his Walls can move:
God guards it; Malice cannot divorce
It from his earliest Love.

The frighted Nations heard;
The Kingdoms felt the fatal Stroke,
And Earth dissolved appeared.

To us his Care extends:
With us the God of Jacob reigns,
And all our Coast defends.

Through all the World has wrought;
What wondrous Desolations He
On every Land has brought!

And breaks the Spears and Bows;
And to the Flames, to keep the Peace,
The rattling Chariot throws.

I Am God, and only I:
To me the Nations round shall bow,
And raise my Glories high.

His Care to us extends:
With us the God of Jacob reigns,
And us from Ills defends.
PSALM. xlvij.

All People, praise the Lord:
With Triumph's Voice, in him rejoice,
His wondrous Name record!

With dreadful Majesty,
A Monarch reigns, and Earth restrains
With his commanding Eye.

Beneath our Empire fall:
The Nations meet, to kiss our Feet,
And us their Masters call.

His Heritage might be:
His Favors grace the faithful Race,
Whose Wealth He loves to see.

With Trumpets toward the Sky.

With Songs and Praises vye!

Earth's mighty Monarch's Praise,

Whose Will the World obeys.

With neighboring Princes bow,
While He, though high, continually,
Defends our Earth below.
PSALM. xlviij.

In Sion's sacred Hill:
On which immortal Buildings raised,
That glorious Mountain fill.

It gives to distant Lands;
And on its Northern Quarters placed,
God's holy Temple stands.

A certain Refuge known;

Are off as swiftly gone.
They saw, admired, and terrified;
From thence distracted flew:
Fear seized 'em all; and over their Pride,
Pangs, as of Childbirth, drew.
Though mighty Navies, close combined,
For our Destruction meet,
He breaks them with his stormy VVind,
And scatters all the Fleet.
Often have we heard, and often have seen,
In thy blessed Residence,
How Thou, great God of Hosts, have been
Thy City's strong Defense.
Secured by Thee, it never decays;
And in thy Temple we
Thy Everlasting Mercies praise,
And sing, dear Lord, to Thee.
Great is thy Name, thy Praises great
Through all the World resound:
Thy Name with Righteousness complete,
Thy Hand with Justice crowned.
Sion's Mount rejoice and sing,
And Judah's Daughters dance;
Such Blessings, Lord, thy Judgments bring,
So much their Peace advance.
Sion round; quite round her go,
Her Bulwark's Numbers find;
Her Battlements and Ramparts know,
Her stately Buildings mind.
Then let unborn Posterity
Your wondrous Records have;
For God's our God for ever, He
Our Souls from Death shall save.
Another Meter: As the 112th.

From Salem's Walls, and Sion's Hills;

Our happy Land with Glory fills;
That Temple guilds her Northern sides,
Where God, the King of Kings, resides.

A strong Defense, and Refuge sure.

Nor could the glorious Sight endure:

But off, on Terrour's Wings, retired.

As Women in their Childbirth feel:
By Land they met God's angry Blows,

By furious Eastern Tempests tossed,
Till all their Strength and Pride are lost.

Have seen what often we'd heard of old:
The Lord of Hosts her Strength will be,
His Hand her lasting Walls uphold.

We in thy holy House record.
Thy Name Earth's utmost Borders know:
As far, great God, thy Praises fly,
Thy Hands Eternal Justice show:
Let Sion's Mount then cheerfully,
Let Judah's Virgin-Daughters sing
The Judgments of their glorious King.
Sion's Rounds her Towers describe;
Observe how strong her Bulwarks are:
The Palaces of Judah's Tribe,
Let those to come with theirs compare;
They Will read God here: and only He
So good, so sure a Guide could be.
PSALM. xlix.

The World your Tribes extend;

My sacred Songs, attend:

Of Knowledge meditate:

And Things of ancient weight.

By sinful Men distressed,

And mighty Treasures rest?

Cannot one lost Soul redeem:
Nor God, to bate their sinful Score,
Their largest Gifts esteem.

The Grave's expected Prey,
Such Price a Soul's Redemption bears,
As they can never repay.

And all that Wealth descend
To unknown Heirs, which foolish'y
They thought no Time could spend.
Part 2.

From Time's consuming Hands;
Their Names and Memories endure
On all their purchased Lands.

But, like the Beast, must fa^l:

Their Ways are foolish all.

Shall soon their Force subdue:
Their Graves, soon filled with crumbling Dust,
Their fading Natures show.

His Hand will mine support.

Nor Sin exalted court.

Their Wealth and Glories too;

As common Mortals do.

A mighty Name may gain;
But quickly to the Dead they go,
And Light no more obtain.

The Ways of Wisdom slight,
Involved like Thoughtless Beasts must be
In everlasting Night.
PSALM. l.

To new Alarms your careless Ears:
The Lord, the Great Jehovah, now
To plead Religions Cause appears.
From East to West, from Shore to Shore,
The dreadful Summons swiftly rolls:
His Voice, in Thunder's dismal Roar,
At once the frighted World controls.

With Majesty and Terrors crowned:

His Steps impetuous Storms surround.

The Heavens above, and Earth below;
That where his righteous Sentence falls,
The World, all satisfied, may know.

Who in my Laws delight, and over
Their Sacrifice my Covenant chose,
And there to me devoutly swore.

As Judge, the great Tribunal holds:
Bright Angels make his Justice known,
While He Eternal Truth unfolds.
Part 2.
Israel, hear!
With thee the Case I Will calmly plead:
Lo! I, the Lord of Hosts, appear;
Thy mighty God, thy Sovereign Head!

Or of thy sparing Hand complain?
Or bid that constant Steams should rise
From bleeding Bullocks, duly slain?

Thy Bullocks, and thy Goats; I scorn:

Which on a Thousand Hills are born.

And all the Droves which graze the Fields:

To me the World its Plenty yields.

Or Goats? or drink their streaming Gore?

My Grace, with Vows performed, implore.

To Me, to me thy Griefs display;
And thou, when I to save thee fly,
Just Honors to my Name shall pay.
Part 3.

Dare thou to preach my Laws presume?
With what strange Impudence can thou
My Covenant in thy Lips assume?

Behind thy Back my Words are thrown:

And make the Adult'rers Lot thy own.

Thy Tongue deceitful Lies contrives:

Thy Mother's Sons of Fame deprives.
Thus have thou done, while silent I
Thy senseless Crimes with Patience viewed:
And thou, with wondrous Policy,
Could me just like thy self conclude.
But now before thy mournful Eyes
I Will set thy Sins, thy Crimes dispose
My Wisdom shall thy Soul surprise,
And all thy foolish Arts disclose.
Consider this, o ye who dare
Forget your mighty God, lest He
Your Souls with utmost Fury tear,
And none your fainting Souls can free.
That Man who offers Praise, alone
Due Glory to my Name can raise:
And I Will my Saving Health make known
To him who wisely guides his Ways.
Another Meter, to the old proper Tune.
WAke drowzy World! no more let Sleep surprise
The heavy Lids of thy Lethargick Eyes.
Hark, thy Creator calls! awake! awake!
He comes! See how the Dead their Graves forsake!
Before his Face the fatal Trumpet sounding,
And all his Angel-Guards his Throne surrounding.
from East to West the dreadful Summons roll,
and shake the Southern and the Northern Pole.
Nature in cold faint Sweats dissolving lies;
A sudden Heat melts down the folding Skies;
And Seasand Earth, torn from their old Foundation,
Are all o'erturn'd in one great Desolation.
Sion's Glory reigned,
Whose Presence long her happy State maintained,

His Menaces in dismal Flames are rolled:
Black Clouds from every piercing Eye defend him;
And dreadful Storms, with Thunder's Roar, attend him.

Before his Frowns, in empty Vapors fly:
The new-cloath'd Bones for their old Mates enquire,
And fluttering Souls to their own Homes retire.
Then God his Silence breaks, his Angels hearing,
With Adorations at his Bar appearing.

Whose Follies durst my just Commands oppose;
But gently home those holy Souls convey,
Who would my Laws, with upright Thoughts, obey
Who in blessed Covenants, for their Salvation,
Depend on me by solemn Dedication.

Blessed Guards, my Judgments and my Justice view*
I Will no unrighteous Judges Part assume;
My Lips on none shall pass a private Doom:
My very Foes this Honor sha'n't deny me;
And even Souls condemned shall justisie me.
Israel's faithful Race;
His Sons by Nature, and his Sons by Grace!
I am thy God, o Israel, only thine;
And all, thy self, thy Strength, and Hopes, are mine
I Will plead my Cause with thee: o, speak sincerely!
If ever I dealt wish thee, or thine, severely!

Or bid thee greater Gifts, or more, provide?
Did I complain when Incense rarely fumed,
And scarce one Lamb my holy Day consumed?
Did ever I for Sacrifice reprove thee?
Or to external costly Wors'hip move thee?

Of Goats or Kids I Will never rob thy Fold.

Hills, Forests Woods, to me their Stores must yield.

And all the Cattle on a Thousand Mountains.

Can thou believe I Would beg the Creature's Aid?
Bashan's Bulls would eat?
Or Goats rank Blood would make a Heavenly Treat?
Can He who owns the World, and all its Plenty,
Or He who fills this All, himself be empty?

Let humble Praise, with holy Incense rise.


And I Will soon change thy melancholic Story,
And thy Deliverance shall advance my Glory.

And thus at him his jealous Fury burns:

In whom my Word no Reverence creates:
Know thou, my Laws are Life to thofe who choose them:
But, o, how dare thy wretched Lips abuse them?
PSALM. lj
How dare thou the Office of a Priest assume?
Or in my Covenant read thy dismal Doom?
No Thieves commended, in my Laws appear;
Nor can thou find Adult'rers pardoned there:
Yet with Adulterers and Thieves thy Sentence,
Thy Words, thy Life, agree, without Repentance.

Lies are their Product, Falsehood all their Fruit.
Thy Talk, thy Neighbor and thy Friend blasphemes;

Its thy whole Study, thy affected Fashion,
To spread vile Scandals with Deliberation.

Never broke thy Rest, and never crossed thy Will:
So my Existence was at last denied;
Or mine, at least, by thy vile Nature tried;
Like some mean Idol, to the World presented:
And against: me, all bold Affrents invented.
But now my Anger's roused, thy Actions all,
Before my Sight, in horrid Order fall.
See how they stand before thy trembling Eyes;
And in thy Face thy guilty Conscience flies.
No Sleep, no Rest, nor Quiet now befriend thee;
But Hellish never-ceasing Woes attend thee.

Lest you become my uncheck'd Fury's Prey!

Be your Words holy, and your Actions wise:
So may your Bliss obtain a long Duration,
And all be crowned with my Divine Salvation.

Extend thy Mercy's Store!
Let me thy pard'ning Mercy see,
To clear my sinful Score.

And purge me, Lord, from Sin;

It racks my Breast within.
I see, I see my Crimes when Sleeps
Should seal my wearied Eyes:
Me sill awake my Conscience keeps,
Or frightful Dreams surprise.
If I with noisie Pleasures try
To ease my tortured Soul,
Black Lust and Blood are ever by,
And all my Joys control.

And trespassed in thy Sight;
That justified thy Words might be,
And all thy Dealings right.

In Sin at first conceived;
To that I Have since a Gaptive been,
By Hellish Arts deceived.

Thy secret Wisdom show:

More white than Northern Snow.

Of Joy and Gladness hear;
And let these broken Bones rejoice,
Which now thy Vengeance bear!
Part 2.

O turn thy angry Face!

A Mind renewed by Grace!

Thy sacred Gifts from me:

My Spirit large and free!

To tread thy perfect Way.;
Conversion and Repentance preach
To such as loosely stray.

Thy kind Salvation bring,
And then my Tongue, from Fetters free,
Thy righteous Acts shall sing.

Shall celebrate thy Praise;
Thy Praise shall be my constant Song,
As in my fairer Days.

Nor ask for Sacrifice;
Else should a Thousand Oxen fall,
And Incense daily rise.

The Heart's his Sacrifice:
A wounded Soul, a bleeding Heart,
His Mercy cannot despise.

To thy, selected Place:
Thy Church, now despicably low,
With lofty Walls embrace!

With thee Acceptance gain:
And humble Hearts and lifted Eyes
Thy Altars Flames maintain.
Another Meter, to the old proper Tune.

With guilty Pangs of Conscience torn,
I prostrate here, without one Beam
Of Comfort, lie, a Wretch forlorn.
Mercy to me, o Mercy show;
A Wretch thy Mercy, Lord, implores:
On me o let thy Mercies flow,
And wash out all my guilty Scores!
O wash o cleanse my, Conscience, Lord,
From Falsehood, Lust and, Cruelty;

And only, dismal Objects see.
Lord, how it racks, my Soul! how strong
Guilt's terrible Convulsion moves!
What Chains of Woes it drags along!
How bitter Sin's Remembrance proves!

And boldly trespassed in thy sight;
That I thy righteous Truth might find,
Thy Judgment pure, thy Sentence right.

At first in Sin and Guilt conceived;
I was originally cursed,
My Soul of Innocence bereaved.
Hence sprung the fatal Fruit and Hell
With Ease my native Proneness won,
My careless Pride, unguarded, fell,
With shameless actual Guilt undone.

O let my Heart thy Wisdom know.

More white, more pure than Northern Snow.

Thy Loves shall fill my pardoned Soul.
My Bones, long justly racked with Pain,
With Balmy Joys be sound and, whole.
To Father, Holy Ghost, and Son,
One blessed one glorious Trinity,
On whom our Hopes Hepend alone,
Eternal Praise and Glory bt.
Part 2.

No more my cancelled Errors view.
O change my Heart, and, by thy Grace,
My Mind with Heavenly Thoughts renew

Thy sacred Influence remove;

In Good my forward Soul improve.

Transgressors shall thy Laws esteem.

My Soul from Crimson Guilt redeem!

My Tongue, thy sacred Name shall raise;
Thy Love, my slowing Songs reveal!
My Mouth thy righteous Judgments praise.

No Fumes from steaming Altars raised,
Prevail; else, numerous Herds, for me,
Had on a Thousand Altars blazed.

Is, Lord; thy noblest Sacrifice:
A broken Heart, a contrite Breast,
Thy tender Mercies never despise.

Its ruined Hopes, and Walls repair;

With righteous and accepted Prayer.
To Father, Holy Ghost; and Son,
One blessed, one glorious Trinity,
On whom our Hopes depend alone,
Eternal Praise and Glory be.
PSALM. lij.

Prevailing Malice boast?
Think thou God's Mercies ever can die?
His boundless love be lost?

Out-cuts with sharpest Lies:
We know thy Heart, Hell's certain Pledge,
Can only Frauds devise.

But honest Actions hates:
Thy Tongue no Truth or Justice loves,
But Lies on Lies creates.
Thy Tongue, base Wretch, such Language speaks,
As may the Just devour:

By his resistless Power.
He Will tear thee out, and from thy place
Root out thy hated Name

And thus expose thy Shame:
"Lo! here is the Man, who, lofty grown,
"His God regarded not;
"But Could his favoring Hand disown,
"And God himself forgot.
"5 But of his mighty Wealth he would boast,
"With vast Possessions blessed:
"In impious Arts he trusted most,
"In Malice fixed his Rest.
"See where he lies, forgot, forlorn,
"By all the World despised:
"His Name, his shattered Fortunes torn,
"His Life by Hell surpised.

In God's blessed House shall stand;
And on the Mercies sure rely
Of his unchanging Hand.

And I Will adore thy Name;
And with, thy Saints thy Mercies show,
Thy gracious Acts proclaim.
PSALM. liij.

Such Fools the wretched World are grown
Corrupt, desil'd, 7s;educ'd with Lies;
Not one for sober Practice known.

The World, and all their Actions viewed
To see if any duly prayed,
Or Wisdom's Lectures understood.

Corrupt at once, and filthy grown;
Not one would on his Maker call,
Not one to practice Good was known.

That they, like Bread, my Saints devour?
In all their Talk, God never comes in;
They never invoke, nor own his Power

Their Strength God's weighty Anger breaks.
With Shame thy fierce Besiegers die;
God's angry Scorn their Downfall speaks.
Israel's Safety spring!
If God his banished Tribes restore,
Then Israel shall triumphant sing,
And Jacob's Race despond no more.
Another Meter: As the Complaint of a Sinner

Thus in his Heart has said;
God's but an awful Tool
By crafty Preachers Made.
Thus all corrupted are,
And all in Sins delight:
But none for Truth declare,
None ever practice Right.

Looked down on Earth below,
To see what Man would try
His God to seek or know.

They Are vile and filthy all:
None good on Earth appear,
Nor on their Maker call.

Their Apprehensions quite,
Against my Saints to boast,
And with their God to fight?
Dare they my Israel's Seed,
Like common Bread, devour?
And on my People feed,
And scorn my saving Power?

A senseless, groundless Fear:
And all thy Enemies,
Who durst in Arms appear,
Shall crushed and scattered lie
By God's revenging Hand;
And all, confounded, die,
Despised by God's Command.
Israel's Wealth
From Sion's Mount proceed!
When shall their Savior's Health
Redeem, his Captive Seed!
When that blessed Time appears,
Poor Israel shall rejoice;
And Jacob, freed from Fears,
Exalt his cheerful Voice.
PSALM. live.

By thy great Name relieve!

My flowing Words receive!

Against me fiercely rise;
They hunt my Life, who have no Fear
Of God before their Eyes.

Among my Friends appears!

The End of all my Fears.

I Will then devoutly pray:
Thy Name shall in my Praises be;
It Is good thy Praise to pay.

From all my Griefs and Woes:
Through him my longing Eyes have seen
My Wish on all my Foes.
PSALM. lv.

From him Who prays to Thee!

O hear! o answer me!

Who would oppress me quite;
Who me with impious Lies oppose,
And prosecute with Spite.

Death's Terrors round me fall;

My Thoughts and Actions all.

Swift as the Doves, to me?
Then would I fly away, and live
Where I some Rest might see.

Some lonesom Desert find,

From every stormy Wind!

Their Tongues and Hearts divide;
for Strife within the City reigns,
And cruel Thieves reside.
Part 2.
Such, Day and Night, their Walls surround;
Within are Sins and Woes:

And Fraud and Falsehood grows.

I then had Patience held:
Had Enemies despised my Name,
I h'd soon my self concealed.

My Bosom's Partner made,
In closest Bonds of Friendship tied,
My private Thoughts betrayed.

Each other's Souls we read:
Often to the Temple jointly went,
By like Devotions led.
O let the treacherous Brute, alive,
To Hell's dark Womb descend!
Who could with Hellish Art contrive
To kill his kindest Friend!

My God shall rescue me:

His suppliant Slave will be.
Part 3.

From Wars, on me designed:
For though too strong my Foes might seem,
My God was always kind.

And humble all their Pride
Who never were shocked on Earth with Fear
And therefore God defied.

And all Agreements broke:
And Spite through all their Counsels ran,
However they softly spoke.

Than their deceitful Words;
Yet Villains never more Malice showed,
Nor fought with sharper Swords.

His Hand shall set thee free:
He'^l always hold the Righteous fast,
No Time their Change shall see.

Untimely sink, and die,
And in the Pit's Destruction fall:
But I Will on God rely.
PSALM. lvj.

For Men wou^d me devour;
Against me all their Forces bend,
And press me every Hour.

Designed to swallow me;
And Armies which my Soul oppose,
Would my Destruction see.


Nor will I fear what Hurt to me
Poor mortal Man can raise.

My Fall their Thoughts are bent:

Against my Life intent.

In Wrath destroy them all!

My Tears, which daily fall:
O let them ever in thy Sight,
In Books recorded, lie.

When I to God shall cry.
I know it for God's my Patron dear,


Which mortal Men can do.

To Thee my Praise I Will pay,

When I in Danger lay.
And still I hope, through God, my Feet
Shall ever firmly stand:
My Steps thy saving Favors meet,
And I possess the Land.
PSALM. lvij.

My Soul depends on Thee:
Thy Wings, till off this Danger blow,
Shall my Protection be

Who all my Wishes sends:

From barbarous Men defends.

To save my drooping Soul,
Which now with raging Lions lies,
Who would devour it whole.
I ly with fiery Men, whose Words
Like Spears and Darts appear,
Whose piercing Tongues than sharpest Swords,
A greater sharpness bear.

Above the lofty Skies,
And over this Earths enlightened Frame,
Lord, lift thy glorious Eyes.

At fatal Nets prepared.
But now my Foes in Pit-falls made
For me, themselves are snared.

Is fixed, thy Praise to sing.

To praise thy gracious King.

And I Will prevent the Day:
To God's great Name new Anthems make,
And to his Glory play.

Among the Nations praise,

His Truth and Mercy raise.

Above the lofty Skies,
And over this Earth's enlightened Frame,
O lift thy glorious Eyes!
PASL. lviij.
Psalm Iviij. As the 100, or, as Mr. Sandys's 14.

Are all your Consultations just?
May others your Decisions trust?
Their Lives to your pure Hands submit?

Iniquities alone pursue,
Earth groans so long oppressed by you,
Your bloody Hands, and faithless Arts.

All Liars from the Breasts and Womb.
Lies in then Infant-Souls have room,
In Lies their Elder years are grown.

Black poisonous Toads, and Serpents are,
Nor can the deafest Asp compare,
With their hard-hearted Policies.

And all his Magic Cant defy,
These will not admit the Sufferer's cry,
No Tears can move their stubborn Hearts.
Part 2.

Who, with a brutish Force enraged,
Against weak Innocence engaged,
Confound the Poor and Righteous Cause.

So let their Malice quickly die:
And when they let their Arrows fly,
Let neither Bows nor Shafts prevail.

Or like untimely Births decay,

As Thorns before a fiery blast.

But God's all-righteous Vengeanee view,
And all the Paths of Joy pursue,
And wash their Feet in impious gore.

" The Just are Well rewarded now,
" A God at last we must allow,
" A God the lower World to sway.
Or thus,


Are all your Counsels just?
May Men to you their lives commit,
Or your Decisions trust?

Iniquity pursue,
Your bloody Hands, and faithless Arts,
Make Earth her Groans renew.

How from the Womb they ly'd,
Their Infant Years, to Falsehood prone,
Their Elder Age supplied.

Black poisonous Serpents are,
With their hard-hearted Policies,
Deaf Adders cannot compare.

And all his Cant defy:
And these with unrelenting Hearts,
Throw off the Sufferer's cry.

With brutish force enraged,
Against the Poor's afflicted Cause,
And Innocence engaged.

So let their Malice die,
Nor Jet their shivered Bows prevail,
Or broken Arrow fly.

Or hasty Births decay,

To thy fierce Wrath give way.

But God's just Vengeance view,
And wash their Feet in impious Gore,
And joyful ways pursue.

The Just are well repaid.
A God to Rule the World must be,
And his Commands obeyed.
Another Meter: As the old 126. proper Tune.

And far removed from fearching Eyes,
No cheerful Light
Could break th'impenetrable gloom,
No starry Spark
Could there the dark Cabal surprise,
But sullen Night
At once possessed the dismal room,
These sat Sam's Council, there their Plots they said
Their Souls more black than Nights prevailing shade.
Vile Men, could you
There in a righteous Balance weigh
The Sufferer's Cause,
And neither Love, nor Pride, nor Hate,
Nor Malice show?
Did all impartial Justice sway
Your equal Laws?
No Bribes an unknown Right create?
Did you in that obscure retreat conclude,
God's piercing Eye your Thoughts and Actions viewed.

To look for facred Justice where
Triumphant Sin,
With all its cursed Attendance reigned,
Where Hopes of Gain
Could barbarous Violence endear,
And all had been
By secret Wickedness maintained.
Yet such you all, great Counselors, have been,
The Slaves of Tyrants, and the Tools of Sin.

To entertain the World you ly'd,
And Fraud and Lies
Your Thoughts, and Words, and Actious filled
With Poisons nursed,
Your Looks the Basilisk out-vy'd,
Your baleful Eyes
The Serpent at a distance killed.

Then you^'d support the poor Afflicted Heart.

What Judgments on the Miscreants call?
Whose Lion rage
Would all the trembling World devour?
Thy Wrath display,
Great God, and make their Furies fall,
At once assuage
Their Spite and desolating Power.
Let all their Strength, like hasty Torrents, fly,
Which now overflow, now sink in Sands, and d^e

Consumed in their own unctuous slime,
When Mid-day's Sun
On them shoots down his pointed Heat.
Those Births decay
Which Women loose before their Time,
Shapes just begun
And not by Nature's Hand complete.

Their broken Bows and Shafts their Hands deceive
Rise mighty God,
Let thy impetuous Fury break
On their cursed Heads
While yet they firmly stand and thrive!
O let thy Rod
Thy Wrath with dreadful Lashes speak!
As Ruins spread
When fiery Tempests fiercely drive,
And thorny Woods with crackling Flames embraced
Are laid at once, in one short Moment, waste.

The Sons of Heaven shall droop no more,
But every Mind
With Joys surprising Raptures swell,
Their Feet be washed
In flowing Streams of sinful gore.

To powerful Truth, with Praise shall tell,
"God doubtless reigns, his care his Servants guard
"And all their Faith with endless Love rewards
PSALM. lix.

Who fierce against me stand;

My Safety, Lord, command!

The mighty Men combine;
And all agree to murder me
For no Deserts of mine.

Their Bands my Life pursue;
For me thy Might then, Lord, excite,
And all my Dangers view.

For Israel's Land declare;
The Gentiles round in Wrath confound,
No Sins of Malice spare!

And round the City go;
And for the Prey they missed by Day
Their snarling Temper show.

For, who can hear? They cry,

With Smiles their Rage defy.

And God is kind and just,
My Confidence in his Defense,
Shall ever firmly trust.

With them prevent my Woes,
And o let me thy Vengeance see,
On my insulting Foes!
Part 2

My People sin the more
But, o disperse, with Anger fierce,
Their Substance, and their Store!

And what their Tongues have told;
Let all their Pride be mortified,
Their perjured Minds controlled.

Consume, consume them so,
That they thy Grace to Israel's Race,
And all the World, may know.

And round the City prowl:

But murmur loud, and howl.

Thy Mercies early praise:
For in my Grief, their kind Relief
My drooping Fancies raise.

Thy Mercies store disclose;
Till all have known from whence alone
My kind Assistance flows.
PSALM. lx.

From Israel's chosen Line
When in a sad destructive War
So mighty Kings combine.
See how our trembling Armies move,
When not revived by Thee:
O let us now thy ancient Love,
Thy former Mercies see!

Nor could its Fears conceal.
Oh, with thy kind restoring Look
Its dismal Breaches heal!

To deadly Fears betrayed:

Are for the Truth displayed.

From Chains and Bondage free,
Let thy Right Hand Salvation give,
And hear and answer me.

My Heart with Joys supplied:
And now I Will Sichem's Lands possess,
And Succoth's Plains divide.
is mine, Manasseh's mine,
My Head on Ephraim rests:
But Judah's Tribe, by Right Divine
The Royal Crown invests.
my meanest Slave shall be,
And Edom kiss my Feet;
And Palestine, subdued, shall me
With humblest Tributes meet.

And Edom's Barriers, lead?

Our marching Armies head?

Then, Lord, thy Aids dispose.

Shall crush our angry Foes.
Another Meter. As Psalm. 121. proper Tune,

Thus off in Anger thrown,
And wretched Dastards grown?
O turn, and with a gentler Eye
All our late Disasters view,
And thy ancient Loves renew!

And made its Pillars bow:
O heal its Breaches now!

Has a Thousand Hardships brought,
And imposed a deadly Draught.

Thy sacred Banner stands;
Thy Truth has armed their Bands,
And all their pressing Fears are past

O support and-answer me!

My Heart with Joy supp'y'd:
I Will Sichem soon divide,
And Succoth's fertile Plains possess.
Manasseh too,
And what Ephraim's Strength can do.
Judah the Royal Crown must wear.

Shall Moab's Offspring be:
And Edom's Youth my Shoes shall bear.
Palestine, my conquering Feet,
With triumphant Garlandls meet.
Edom's Head,
Our trembling Bands will guide,
Or in our Camps preside?

Though of old we off were thrown,
Now our Cause and Armies own!
In all our Streights, assist us, Lord;
For Man's poor Helps are vain.

God's Strength to us shall Strength afford,
And his unresisted Blows
Batter down our angry Foes.
PSALM. lxj.


On Thee, though languishing, depend;
To Thee, for Comfort, fly.

Against fierce Enemies!
Fix me on that high Rock at length,
Which all their Force defies!

Beneath thy Wings shall be:

Were kindly heard by Thee.
To those who fear thy Name, thy Grace
Shall large Possessions give

A Thousand Ages live.

From every threatening Storm,

And daily Vows perform.
PSALM. lxij.

With humble Silence wait:

And then confirms my State.

My Life? Your selves shall fall;
And like old tottering Fences fail,
Or like some battered Wall.

And old in Lies they grow:
Their Language Oily Blessings crown,
Their Hearts with Curies flow.

With humblest Silence wait:

And then secures my State.

My Strength, my Hope, my Trust.

On Him, ye suffering Just!
Our God's a Guard, who never can fail:

Nay, that against'em turns the Scale,
They Are all an empty Lie.
Those Men by Providence depressed,
And those exalted high;
The Rich, the Poor; the Worst, the Best,
Are all an empty Lie.

Nor swe'ling Thoughts disclose;
Nor on your Treasures multiplied
Your care'ess Hearts repose.

His Declaration heard,
That Might belongs to God, and He
Will for his Might be feared.

And thy impartial Hand
Will, as Men's various Works incline,
Their due Rewards command.
PSALM. lxiij. us the rooth,

To Thee, dear God, I lift my Eyes;
For thou alone my God shall be.
To Thee my thirsty Soul aspires;
Thy Smiles my longing Flesh desires,
Where I no Springs of Comfort see.

I met of old thy quickening Grace,
I Would now thy Strength and Glory view.

And I with cheerful Lips would show
Thy Works, thy ancient Praise renew.

Whi'e Life shall last; and in thy Name
My Hands and Heart devoutly raise.

But more in Thee my Soul delights;
And Thee my joyful Lips shall praise.

Thy Loves I through the Night record,
And on thy Goodness meditate.

And, shadowed by thy glorious Wings,
I Will all thy Works with Joy relate.

Thy Hand my strong Support appears.

Shall sink in Death's Eternal Shade:

And Wolves, and savage Beasts, a Prey.

Exalted high; the World shall see
His flowing Joys: and all who swear
To him, shall in their Oaths be blessed;
And Lying Lips, with Shame suppressed,
No more to blast his Crown appear.
PSALM. lxiv.

My Life From angry Foes!

And wicked Workers Blows!

Their Tongues are sharper far;
And out they shoot their bitter Words,
Like Shafts prepared for War,

To wound the perfect Heart;
And, fearlese, there, with bo'd Surprise,
He throws his deadly Dart.

Encouragements apply;
And talk of spreading Snares, and say
Who can our Snares descry?

And all their Thoughts profound;
And all a Search for Mischief keep,
And practice Mischief found.

Their wounded Hearts shall reach:

Themselves, themselves impeach.

And all around, with Fear,
Acknowledge God's revenging Hand,
And all his Acts revere.

Their Faith more strongly raise;
And each good Man exalt his Voice,
To sing his Maker's Praise.
PSALM. lxv. as the rooth.
PRaise, Lord, in Sion waits for Thee;
To Thee our holy Vows we pay.
Thou hear'st us; whence, in Misery,


But Thou shall all my Sins forgive.

Thy House, and in thy Presence live:
When him Devotion kindly warms,
His inward purer Joys abound;
His Soul with blessed Re igion's Charms,
Is in thy sacred Temple crowned.

To us? our sure Salvation springs
From Thee: thy Flock for Shelter flies
To thy protecting Mercy's Wings.
For us thy dreadful Judgments move,
And scatter all our Fears and Woes.
Whence all in Thee their Trust improve,
Where Earth extends, or Water flows.

And Power thy wondrous Throne surrounds;
And at thy Voice, the Seas, amazed,
Laid down their Billows roaring Sounds.

And all the murmuring Nations quell;
When ruffling Storms disturb the Main,
And stubborn Hearts with Madness swell.
Part 2.

And thy prodigious Signs appear,
At them the trembling Nations gaze,
And them at utmost distance fear.
The blushing Dawn, the Morning-Skies,
Through all the World thy Praise proclaim;
And when Night's gloomy Shadows rise,
They celebrate thy glorious Name.

Thy Hand their various Need supplies;
Thy Dews and Rains prepare the Way
For Grass, and Herbs, and Plants to rise.
What mighty Treasures Lord, have Thou
Within thy watery Chambers laid?
Whence all our vast Provisions now,
Our Corn, and Wine, and Oil's conveyed.

Their wealthy Crops and Fatness yield:
The lower Lands thy Smiles partake;
Thy Blessing warms the springing Field.

Owes all its Plenty, Lord, to Thee:
Thy Clouds with fat'ning Drops abound,
And we their large Production see.

Those coo^ing Drops in Season bless:
The dancing Hillocks join their Hands,
And Mirth and Gratitude express.

Huge Crops the burdened Valleys bring;
Joys echo through the cheerful Field,
And all their Maker's Praises sing.
Another Meter, to the old 104th proper Tune.
Siou's blessed Gares,
Lord, Praise waits for Thee:
To Thee holy Vows
Shall justly be paid.

All our Confidence: we
By It moved in thy House,
Our Petitions have made.

Against me prevails;
O purge, O remove
Our Follies away!

Whom thy Mercy never fails!
Thy Choice can approve,
And thy Service can stay!
That Man in thy Sight
And Temple may dwell;
Thy Altars draw near,
Thy Favors enjoy;
And in Thee delight,
And be satisfied well
With Goodness: and there
All his Service employ.

In Righteousness shown,
Thou 'It answer our Cares,
Our Savior to be.
Our Confidence springs
From thy Goodness alone:
Whence Strangers make Prayers,
And rough Sailers, to Thee.

Fixed strongly by Thee;
Thy powerful Arm
Has girt'em secure.

For thy Fury, we see,
Mad People can charm,
And their Quiet procure.

All Nations afright,
Where Comets ever blaze,
Or Earthquakes can tear,
The Morning, which shine,
And the dark gloomy Night,
Rejoice in thy Praise,
And thy Glories declare.

Its Waters abound;
Vast Rivers, with Wealth,
The Countries overflow:
Thence Corn has its Birth;
And the Fie'ds, With it crowned,
New Vigor and Health
On the Nations bestow.

Thy Water partakes;
The Furrows, Jaid low,
Are drenched with the same:
The Clods quickly yield,
Earth its Hardness forsakes;
The Crops, which they show,
Then God's Blessing proclaim.

With Goodness is crowned;
And all thy blessed Ways
Pure Fatness distill:

All the Deserts around;
All ecchoing Praise
From each neighboring Hill.

The Pastures are clad;
The Valleys with Corn
Are covered quite o'r:
Hence Nature may keep
Now its Revels; and glad,
With Praises adorn
Both her Lord, and her Store.
PSALM. lxvj. as the 113th.


Advance his Name, his Glories sing.

Thy Terrors make thy Foes, with Fear,
To Thee their forced Submissions bring.

Thy Name shall in their Songs ascend
Above the Clouds, above the Skies.

How when his dreadful Works appear,
Their Terrors Humane Hearts surprise.
Egyption Bondage He
His Israel's happy Race set free,
God through the Seas contrived a Road;
Where, fenced by Watery Walls, they went
Safe over a spacious Continent,
And all their Hearts with Joys o'erslow'd.

His Look the Rebel-World restrains,
And beats their swelling Humors down.

That God, whose Name our Tongues confess:
His Name, with losty Praises crown.

He never slumbers, never sleeps;
He never permits our Feet to slide:

When for the noblest Works designed,
Our Sou s as often his Hands have tried.

Our Strength funk down with weighty Cares;
Our Heads we bowed to conquering Foes.

Through Floods of Tears, thy Mercies great
Conveyed us to a sweet Repose.
Part 2.


My Vows in Times of Danger signed.

My guiltless Hands, shall Favor there,
More than a Thousand Oxen, find.

O hear, while I, with Praise, record
What for my Soul his Hands have wrought:


His Smiles, alas! had vainly sought.
God reads the inward Parts, and views
What Ways the righteous Soul pursues,
And hears his earnest Prayers and Cries:
But Hypocrites, whose various Arts
Divide their glosing Tongues and Hearts,
Are odious to his piercing Eyes.

With Favor gently answered me;
His Ears to my Petitions bowed.

His suppliant Servant's prayers would hear,
And Mercy to his Prayers allowed!
PSALM. lxvij.

Lord, show thy glorious Face:
O let thy happy Servants see
Thy Blessing, and thy Grace!

Salvation's certain Way,
Thy Truth to all the Nations show,
Thy saving Health display.

Exalt thy glorious Name:
O let the Nations all abroad
Thy wondrous Praise proclaim!

The governed World shall sing,
When Thou shall all, by equal Laws,
To righteous Judgment bring.

Exa't thy glorious Name:
O let the Nations all abroad
Thy wondrous Praise proclaim!

Its ancient Burden show;
And on our selves, from God's free Hand,
Shall endless Blssings flow.

And at his awful Feet,
With Fear the farthest Tribes shall fall,
And to his Laws submit.
PSALM. lxviij. As the 100th.

Will quickly turn themselves to Flight:
Their Malice cannot his Wrath oppose,
Nor bear the Terrors of his Sight.

As Wax dissolves before the Fire,
So Impious Men their Weakness find,
And, by his Frowns consumed, expire.

Before their God shall Praises sing.
Sing then, ye Saints; sing all your Parts;
Exalt the great Celestial King.

His Name with boundless Glory shines.
In Him each raptured Soul confides,
And gladly in his Praise combines.

God, like a Judge and Father, cares;
Starves Rebels, makes the Captives rise,
And fills the lonesom House with Heirs.

The barren Wilds, and Defart-Lands,
Earth's Bosom strong Convulsions tore,
And Heaven, dissolved at thy Commands.

Nay; Sinai too, supreamly blessed,
Great Israel's God with Terrors filled,
With Light's immoderate Beams Oppressed.

On thy exhausted Canaan flowed;

Thy Goodness on thy, Flock bestowed.
Part 2.
God gave the Word, and out in haste
All Nature's ready Armies flew,
And spoke God's Will; and as they passed,
Did all opposing Force subdue.
God's Household then, with Spoils, grew fair,
Of routed Hosts, and flying Kings;
As Doves, which feem to cut the Air
With Silver Plumes, and Golden Wings.

Among the Brick-Kilns newly laid;
Sal'men's Whiteness bore,
When in his Snowy Robes arrayed.
Sion, Bashan's Pride our-vies;
And God in Sion's Hill delights.

What God's own Residence invites?

By fiery Angels, round Him wait;
As once in S^nai's Mount appeared,
When there, enthroned, his Glory fare.

Both Death and Hell were Captives led:
Thy Gifts made stubborn Hearts comply,
And Rebels own their sacred Head.

Who us with bounteous Goodness loads:

Our Guide from Death's obscure Abodes!

God in their Heads, their Vitals, wounds.

Whom Bashan, or the Sea, surrounds.
My Friends shall live at large, and free;
Ill used, restrained, oppressed no more.

Where Dogs shall lick the streaming Gore.
Part 3.

Are often with awful Wonder viewed,
When in thy House, on Holy Days,
Thou meet'st, the suppliant Multitude.

Then those who touch the tuneful Strings;
The Damsels next their Fingers prove,
And loud the merry Timbrel rings.

Your God, o all of Israel's Race!
Benjamin his Anthems raise,
Whom first the Regal Ensigns grace.
Judah's Head combine,
And all the Tribes their Leaders bring,
Till Mid-land Tribes and Coasters join
And All then Maker's Glories sing.

O let our Graces stronger be!
While Strength from Salem's Temple flows,
Great Kings shall offer Gifts to Thee.
Egyptians Force! confound
The Brutes, in Idol-worship strong:
Those who in Pride and Wealth abound,
And who for Wars and Tumults long.

From Egypt, and Arabian Lands;
And cast their Crowns and Sceptres by,
And raise to him their suppliant Hands.

His Name ye Earthly Kings adore.

And speaks in Thunders dreadful roar.

Who over his Israel's Lot presides,
Whose Power, and whose Majestic light,
Above the highest Orb resides.

Israel's Eternal God surround!
The Saints his Might and Courage grace,
His Name be still with Praises crowned.
PSALM. lxix.

The Floods my Strength control.

And sink my fainting Soul.

My Throat grows hoarse and dry,
My very Ey. strings Crack, while I
On Thee for Help rely.

And they whose causeless Hate,
Pursue my Soul, and break my Peace,
Are strong, and Fortunate.
To lay their Spite, I paid with Care,
What never was due from me.

My Faults concealed from Thee.

Who on thy Love depend,
None blush through me who seek thy Face,
Or for thy Grace attend:

To all Reproach confined,

To me are grown unkind.
Part 2.

My Soul consumes, and dies,
And those who dare affront thy Name,
My Heart with grief surprise.

But I Am reproached for all.

Among their Proverbs fall.

I Am made their constant Theme,
Each Drunkard tries his brutish Wit,
My Glories to blaspheme:

Receive my Soul's address,
With Mercy by thy faithful Word,
My cruel Foes repress.

From mighty Waters save,

And from the gaping Grave.
Let not the Floods devour me quite,
Nor Whirlpools swallow me;

And hear my Prayers to Tnee!
Part 3.
With Pity view my mournful Case,
And ease my dismal Woes.

When Sorrows round me close.

Who, in my Fall delight.

Are ever in thy sight.

For Comfort looks in vain,
No Friends my mournful State condole,
Nor feel my dreadful Pain,

Sharp Vinegar to drink,

Their spiteful Pleasures sink.
O let thy Curse a deadly snare,
Of all their Plenty make,
And when their Souls for Mirth prepare,
All Mirth their Souls forsake.

With strange Diseases shake.

And they of both partake.
Part 4.

Their Tents deserted ly,

And Wounds to Wounds apply.

Them Righteousness behold!

Nor with the Just enrolled

Thy Health, dear God, shall raise.

And ever sing thy Praise.

Than Firstling Bul'ocks, please.

Shall see it, and live at Ease.
Joys shall their happy Hearts possess
At this triumphant Sight:
Their Souls shall wondrous Mirth express;
Their Lives, supreme Delight.

And sends Deliverance:

Their Hosts, his Praise advance.

Within their Countries rest:

Who love their Maker best.
PSALM. lxx.

And set thy Servant free!

Who seek to ruin me!
With Shame confound them all,
Who would my Life destroy;

Express unmanly Joy.

Let constant Joys reside:
Let those who love thy saying Grace,
Say, God be magnified.

O haste to help me, Lord;
And, as thou often have done before,
Thy speedy Aids afford!
PSALM. lxxj.

From Shame o keep me free!

Hear, help and rescue me!

I, when oppressed, may fly.
Thou art my Rock, my Fort; in Fear
I on thy Word rely.

From Fraud and Violence,

My Lord, my Youth's Defense!

By Thee was brought to light;
And by thy Providence was nursed,
And in thy Praise delight.

In Thee my Hopes are strong.

Thy Praise, my daily Song!

When Age comes creeping on:
O leave me not when Strength decays,
And youthful Years are gone!

Where they in private meet,

And leaves his Favorite!
Up! let us seize him now; pursue
Wherever the Dastard flies:
He has, alas! no Help in view;
None to his Aid will rife.
Part 2.

No more thy Helps delay!

Their Spite, with Shame repay.

And praise Thee more and more;

And thy Salvation's Store.
These all Accounts so far transcend,
That none their Numbers know.

Thy Justice only show.

Thy wondrous Works have showns:

When weak and ancient grown!
Lord, leave me not when hoary Hairs
Invest my aged Head:
Till to this Age, and future Heirs,
I Have all thy Wonders read.

And great thy Judgments are.
What Being, Lord, though cali'd Divine,
Can ever with Thee compare?

Yet shall thy Smiles revive;
And from Earth's hollow Deeps below,
Present my Soul alive.

Thy Comforts guard my round:

And Harp's melodious Sound.
O Israel's holy God, to Thee
My Lips will gladly sing;
My Soul, redeemed from Misery,
Its Tribute Praises bring.

And daily talk of thee,
Since they are crushed with dark Disgrace,
Who sought to ruin me.
Psalm. 72. As the 100th. or Mr. Sundays's 1^

Thy Justice on his Son bestow,

The Humble, by his Justice live.

Shall all for public Peace declare:
The meanest Officers, with Care,
Their Princes Goodness imitate.

And break the bold Oppressor's Force.

His Fear shall every Heart enslave.

Which on the new-mown Grass descend.
Shall to the Moon's last Age extend,
And Peace, abundant Peace, diff'use,
The Righteous, in his happy Reign,
Shall thrive; his mighty Empire stretch
As far as Lands or Waters reach,
Or farthest Springs their Streams maintain.
To Him the Arabian Troops shall bow;
His Enemies the Dust embrace.
And Saba's Kings, to court his Grace,
Their noblest Gifts and Offerings vow.
The Isles, the Continent, shall send
Their Kings, to kiss his sacred Feet.
All kings shall in his Worship meet,
And Nations to his Service bend.
For He Will the praying Poor discharge;
The Oppressed, who no Assistance find.
He Will to the needy Soul be kind;
And He Will the humble Heart enlarge.
From Violence He Will set them free;
From shameless Fraud, and base Deceit.
And in his Sight jn Value great
The Blood of all his Saints shall be.
Long shall He live; pure Gold as long
To Him the Arabian Bands shall pay:
To Him the obedient World shall pray,
And Him with daily Blessings throng.
And though his Truth at first may seem
Of meanest Worth, and smallest Force,
'T will soon, with a resistless Course,
Command the wiser World's Esteem.
Its Fruit to nobler Heighths shall grow
Than Lebanon's immortal Heads:
More thick than Grass the Valleys spreads,
Vast Crowds shall to his Doctrine flow.

God's Son, before reflecting Streams,
Threw back the Sun's first Infant-Beams;
And in Him every Nation's blessed.

O blessed be God, the mighty Lord,
Whose Name old Jacob's Tribes record,
Whose Name his wondrous Works proclaim!

Till Time's run out; and every Day
His Glories through the World display;
And loud Amens, Amens resound!
Another Meter, as Mr. Sandys's 5th

Enrich the Prince's Royal Mind,
Fer Crowns and Governments designed.

And safe in his Prerogative
Shall all the Poor, Afflicted, live.

The mighty Men shall Peace maintain,
And Justice all the Vulgar gain.

And all their Race from Harms secure:
But Tyrants must his Wrath endure.

As long as Mid-day's Suns appear,
Or Moons the gloomy Midnight cheer.

As gentle Dews which cool the Plain,
Or Showers which Grass and Herbs maintain!

Abundant Peace her Head shall raise,
While Moons shall shine, or Stars shall blaze.

As far as Seas Can feel the Tide,
Or Rivers flow, or Winds can ride.
Arabians wild shall trust:
His Foes, beneath his Footstool thrust
Shall sall, and humbly lick the Dust.

To Him Black AEthiopians pray,
And Offerings on his Altars lay.

His Servants, and his Slaves; and He
All Nations at his Feet shall see.

The Suff'rers and Afflicted cheer,
When neither Help nor Friends appear.

The humble and submissive Mind
Shall always his Assistance find.

He Will all their fainting Souls redeem,
And dear their precious Lives esteem.

To Him their Golden Tributes pay,
And daily praise, and daily pray!

May mighty Crops adorn the Ground;
Like Libanus, with Cedars crowned.
Their Towns, before with Widows filled,
A new and numerous Offspring yield,
Thick as the Grass which shades the Field.

His Name, with endless Blessings graced,
Beyond the Sun, Eternal last.

Whose wondrous Works we daily, see,
Praised by his grateful Churches be!

May all the World advance his Fame!
While we Amen, Amen proclaim!
PSALM. lxxiij.
Israel's kind,
To those whose Hearts are pure:

My Faith was scarce secure.

An Empire in my Breast,
To see how impious Madmen reigned,
With Peace and Plenty blessed.

Their Strength no Sickness broke:

Nor felt God's angry Stroke.

And robbed with Violence:

Beyond their utmost Sense.

And in Oppressions boast;
And with their thundering lofty Talk
O'er-awe the neighb' ring Coast.

And trembling Earth subdue:

Allure the hungry Crew.

"Our secret Practice know?
"Can God our gallant Acts reprove,
"Or greater Wisdom show?

Can, with a prosperous Gale,
And still increasing Riches, through
The World's rough Ocean fail.
Part 2.

"I Have cleans'd my Hands in vain;
"In vain my Heart I purified,
"And Innocence maintain,

"I Have daily mortified;
"And grovel'd in Affliction's Dust,
"By sharp Temptations tried.

"Should I such Thoughts embrase,
"I must God's Providence upbraid,
"And damn chosen Race.

The dark, perplexing Maze:
In vain by Reason's, Methods tried
Thy Wisdom's secret Ways;

With humble Thoughts, ascend;
And there their wretched Fortunes trace,
And read their dismal End.

How quickly ruined all!

With Terrors wasted, fall!

When Sleep the Man forsakes,
So Thou their Image shall despise
When once thy Fury wakes.

Though long perplexed before;
Though Grief did then my Heart divide.
And Pains my Bosom tore.
Part 3.

My untaught Soul betrayed:
And I, beneath the Rank of Men,
With senseless Beasts was laid.

Thy Hand my Life supports:

To thy All-glorious Courts.

Can my Affections be?
And none on Earth my Soul can love;
O none, compared with Thee!

Thy Strength my Heart supplies.
Thou art my God, my Part Divine,
When Time; expiring dies.

From Thee, shall sink, and die:
Those Fools who dote, with wanton Love,
On cursed Idolatry.

His flowing Mercies are!
On Him I Have fixed my Trust, that I
Might all his Works declare.
PSALM. lxxiv.

No more thy Smiles obtain?
Shall thy poor Flock eternally
Thy Fury's Weight sustain?

Those Lands, by Thee possessed:
With Pity Sion's Mount behold,
Which once thy Presence blessed!

Our Desolations, haste;
For cruel Foes thy Temple seize,
Thy sacred Dwellings waste.

Where thy Assemblies met!
And their triumphant Banners over
Thy mournful Altars set!

The curious Carver raised
Rare Figures on the yielding Wood,
For Ant and Softness praised

By barbarous Axes spoiled:

With ruined Heaps defiled.

Let Us all at once destroy!
And on each place of Worship they
Devouring Flames employ.

No Prophets speak thy Will,
And none our Term of Woes explore,
By Wisdom's sacred Skill.
Part 2.

From thy insulting Foes?
How long shall horrid Blasphemies
Thy glorious Name expose?

Stretch out thy dreadful Hand!
Their bloody Insolence alarm!
And their Designs withstand!

The World's Salvation flows:
To Thee its ancient Liberty
Poor jacob's Portion owes.

With sudden Haste recoiled
And Israel, marching through, with Ease
The ransacked Ocean spoiled.

In mighty Waters, died:
Nor would the rolling Waves retreat
From Pharaoh's haughty Pride.
The King, his Lords, his Troops were thrown
Around the Purp'e Shore;
A Prey to Wolves and Vultures grown,
But to be feared no more.

The Rocks their Waters yield:
And through old Jordan's Bosom laid
A spacious, Sandy Field.

And draw'st the gloomy Night;
And make the Sun adorn the Skies,
The Moon advance her Light.

With winding Seas embraced:
And Heat, and Cold, in Yearly Rounds,
Thy wondrous Wisdom placed.

O now revive the same!
Since Foes in Scorn thy Wisdom hold,
And Fools blaspheme thy Name.
Part 3.

To cruel Hands resign;
Nor pass the poor Afflicted over,
As if they never were thine.

With our blessed Fathers made;
For Rapine now our Quarters all,
And barbarous Force invade.

Dear Lord, remove their Shame;
And, though in Woes and Poverty,
They Will still exalt thy Name.

Think how the scoffing Crew,
How Fools each Day, with deep Disdain,
Thy glorious Name pursue.

Of thy triumphant Foes!
Who Thee, with fierce advancing Noise,
And growing Spice, oppose.
To Eathen, Holy Ghost, and son,
One God, in Persons Three,
Be Glory paid, and Homage done,
Through all Eternity.
PSALM. lxxv.

We offer Thanks and Praise
Thy Gpodness We so near us fee,
In all thy wondrous Ways.

The Royal Crown shall wear
Through all the Land my righteous Hand
With Justice shall appear.

The Tribes, and all the Lands!
And when they shake, I only make
Its Pillars firmly stand.

O cast your Follies by!
I Sinners told, O be n't so bold,
Nor set your Horns on high!

With such a softy State;
Nor stubbornly your God defy;
Nor so perversely prate:

Not Chance, but God bestows:

Who Justice only knows.

He holds the deadly Bowl!
The dreadful Sight may well affright
The wretched guilty Soul.
What horrid Drugs compound
The Crimson baleful Draught!
The Nations round, as guilty found,
To the very Dregs are brought.

To Jacob's God I Will sing:
And my sharp Sword; over those abhorred
For wicked Actions, bring.

While a'l the Just around,
Through God, their Friend, shall high ascend,
With Mirth and Glory crowned
Psalm. lxxvj. as the 148th. or as Mr. Sandys's 47t^
Judah's known,
It Is great in Israel:
Salem's shown;
His Smiles on Sion dwell;

Swords, Bows and Shields,
For Martial Fields,
And Arrows broke.

Than theirs, whose numerous Bands
In Violence delight,
And spoil their Neighbors Lands;
Who proudly boast,
No Force can stay
Their conquering Way,
Or guard our Coast.

Their daring Hearts attends;
And on each drowsy Brow
An heavy Sleep descends.
The Men of Might
Grope but in vain,
Their Swords to gain,
In that dark Night.

And Horse and Chariot lie,
Profoundly buried all,
In one deep Lethargy.

Deserve our Fear:
For, who can bear
Thy angry Brow?

With Terrors from the Sky,
The World, to what it feared,
Submitted si ently.

To fave and seek
The patient Meek,
And crush their Foes.

Great God of Hosts, shall praise:
And though the raging Flame,
With spreading Fury, blaze;
Yet fuddenly
Their Rage, restrained
By thy just Hand,
Shall sink, and die.

Your Vows before him lay;
And what was vowed before,
With grateful Gladness; pay.
To that great King,
Whose angry Brow
Aws all below,
Your Offering bring.

With unresisted Force,
Fierce, Monarchs shall disarm,
And stop their headstrong Course
His Awful Frown
Strange Terror brings
On Earthly Kings,
And casts them down.
Another Meter, applied to our own Cases in this Nation.
British Isles is known,
And is in England great:
England is his happy Throne,
His highly favored Seat.

The Bow, the Sword, the Shield:
His Word alone, without a Stroke,
Secured the Martial-Field.
Though mighty Tyrants mighty Edme
With Scandal mixed, may gain,
Yet, Lord, thy more illustrious Name
No base Reproach can stain.

Those daring Hearts pursue;
And Sleep on every drowsy Brow
Distills its weighty Dew.
In vain, alas! the Man of Might
Dreams over his former Broils:
In vain in the Dark he strives to fight,
And for a Conquest toils.

And Horse and Chariots lie
Confounded quite, and buried All
In one deep Lethargy.

Thy Fury, who can stand?

It hushed the trembling Land.

With Rising Judgment reigned,

And He their Wrath restrained.
Britain's Lord adore,
Your Vows before him lay!
And what your just Engagements bore,
With grateful Gladness pay

Resistless Terror brings;
Bold Princes daunts, and batters down
The proudest Earthly Kings.
PSALM. lxxvij.

And He received my Prayer.
The Lord, when by Afflictions tried,
I sought with earnest Care.

With mighty Woes oppressed;
And Sorrows, unresisted, reigned
In my afflicted Breast.

But was perplexed the more:
My Soul, to sad Complaints resigned,
Its Burden hardly bore.

And banish needful Sleeps.
My wretched Soul Grief's strange Surprise
In heavy silence keeps.

Those happy Days of old:
Those Songs, in better Seasons made,
Which God's great Name extolled.
Distractions still, by Nights, by Days,
Confused my wearied Mind:
I mused, and sought the secret Ways
Of Providence to find,

"Is God for ever gone?
"8 Will God his Presence always hide,
"His former Loves disown?
"9 What! Are his Days of Mercy past?
"His sacred Promise void?
"His Smiles with angry Clouds o'er-cast?
"His Goodness all destroyed?

"These faithless Thoughts create,
"But God can yet my Hopes recall,
"And change my mournful State,
Part 2.

Thy Miracles of old.

Thy wise Designs unfold.

Are holy, Lord, and pure.
What God with Thee in Greatness vyes,
Or can thy Frowns endure,

Thy Might the Nations know.

On Jacob's Race bestow.

Thy Face, ami parting fled. The Deeps with one prodigious flaw
Displayed their sandy Bed.

At thy commanding Voice,
The pointed Lightnings went abroad,
With Thunders roaring noise.

And streaks of dismal Light
Shot through the Air; the trembling ground
Quaked With the dreadful fright.

Through mighty Waters made,
Thy secret Paths could none survey,
Or where thy steps were laid.
Moses and Aaron through the Deep,
And trackles Deserts lead
Thy Tribes, and them, like tender sheep,
Securely kept and fed.
PSALM. lxxviij.
MY People mark my Precepts well,
Your Ears to my Discourses bow,

And Truths obscure and ancient show.

From what our hoary Fathers told.

Might God's miraculous Acts unfold.
Jacob's race,
And bade our Fathers teach their Seed,

His Will, and his Injunctions heed.

Unmixed from Age to Age descend.

His Works declare, his Laws attend.

Whose Hearts perversely false rebelled,
Let God's prodigious Wonders die,
And neither Faith nor Conscience held.
Ephraim's Archers? what
So turned their coward Backs in fight?

And from his Laws began their flight.

And all his mighty Wonders shown;
AEgpt's Ruins still declare,
And Zoan's sields have dearly known.
Part 2

While all the crouding Waters gazed,

By Night bright Flames before them blazed

Sweet Waters as from Fountains drew,

Which soon to spacious Rivers grew.

And in a Desert hungry Land,

Yet questioned God's Almighty Hand.

Thus, with a taunting boldness, said,
"Can God his Wonders here renew?
"Full Tables in a Desert spread?

"And out the wholesome Waters broke:
"But can his Magic Rod proceed,
"Will Bread and Flesh attend the stroke?

And at them soon his Fury smok'd,
Israel's feed so false appeared,
And faithless Fools their God provoked.
Part 3.

From their unbounded Treasures rain,

And tastful Manna fills the Plain.

To glut their hungry Appetite.

And Southern fruitsul Gales excites.


Less Sand around the Ocean lies,
Then Fowls about their Tents remained.

On them their utmost wish bestowed:

Nor feel their Lusts confounding load,

God with a dismal blast surpised,
Their noblest Youth, and Princes died,
All to his Anger sacrificed.

They Would still his wondrous Works oppose,

In sading Joys, and Jasting VVoes,

For God they would seek, to God they would fly,

Their great Redeemer, God most high.

With lying lips to Him they prayed,

Their Hearts their faithless Works betrayed.

Their Tribes, and laid his Anger by;

Would quickly change, and quickly die.
Part 4.

And urged, and vexed his Heavenly mind!

And Israel's Holy God confined!

VVinch them from slavish Bonds redeemed,
Zoan's Field, and AEgypt's Land
With dreadful Signs and Wonders teemed.

To nauseous Blood, and mystic Gore,

And Frogs their Royal Chambers bore.

And Locusts all their Toils enjoyed,



With fiercer flames his Fury glowed;
And as his burning Fury fwell'd,
The Coals malignant Angels blowed.
Thick through the solid Dark they flew,
With horrid shrieks, and dismal Cries,
And laid Hell's end ess Pains in view,
Before their Intellectual Eyes.
No Torch, no Star, no Middays Beams,
No peaceful Thought, no comforts Light,
But Ghosts with frightful Howls and Screams,
Could pierce the unfathomable Night.
No sleep could feal their laboring Eyes,
But dreadful Dreams of following Woes,
And roaring Storms, and rattling Skies,
And trembling Earths convulsive throws.
Part 5.

Lost Egypt lay; God's dreadful Hand,
Heavy with ripening Vengeance grown,
Does newer Wounds and Plagues command.
Now a thick pestilential Air,
Is raised from late corrupted Gore,
And sullen Stars malignant glare,
And Locusts rotting round the shore.
From Fens and Bogs, and poisonous Lakes,
And what rank venomous Weeds produce,
From Scorpions, Basilisks and Snakes,
And Toads and Hemlocks baleful Juice.
All these in One, with deadly skill,
Infernal Spirits temper sure;
That every Atoms force may kill,
And neither Art, nor Nature, cure.
Out straight commanded Michael flies,
A thousand Spirits round him wait,
And on his Spear the mixture tries,
And loads it with resistless Fate.

Where Men reposed, or Beasts were laid,
But Death at once attacked 'em all,
And one continued Slaughter made.
The firstborn Prince, the firstborn Slave,
Of Flocks and Herds the Firstlings died,
Each Floor assigned its Heir a Grave,
Each Roof entombed its Owner's pride.
With dying Shrieks, and Groans, and Cries,
The frighted Hills and Walls resound,
All Egypt now in mourning lies,
In Sorrows boundless Ocean drowned.
Part 6.

Thus ravaged all the sinful Land,
God of his Israel took the Charge,
And led them with a gentler Hand.

His Flock, his own Peculiars they,
His Care their growing Wants supplied,
And led them safely all the Day.
Those Foes, who, with a furious Will
Pursued, beneath the Seas He drowned;

With his protecting Presence crowned.

And gave their Lands to Jacob's Race;
Who, then their Towns fecurely held,
And in their Cities took their place.

To Anger moved their mighty Lord,
Nor would their holy Vows fulfill,
But his Commands, and Laws, abhorred.

And like an ill-set Bow they broke.

Which might his jealous Rage provoke.
Each lofty Hill, each shady Grove,
They with their gaudy Idols filled,
Against their Maker boldly strove,
And there their Sacrifices killed.

And off the ungrateful Nation threw,
Shilo's Holy Place disclaimed,
That Ark which once his Glories knew,
Part 7.

Resigned to their insulting Foes.

And filled his Heritage with Woes.

Their mateless Virgins, Virgins died.

Their own sad Widow's Tears denied.

On Golden Wings bright Mercy rose;
And God, his hotter Fury past,
Made Love her ancient Smiles disclose.
Like some fierce Giant, roused from Sleep,
Or high with sprightly Wines inflamed;

And their Eternal Shame proclaimed.
Joseph's Fields,
And, Ephrain's Tribe, though fruitful, scorns:
Judah yields;
His House loved Sion's Mount adorns.

And all the Town beneath command:
And deep the vast Foundaticm lies;
As Rocks, the solid Buildings stand.

David takes;
And him his Israel's King declares,
His holy Nation's Pastor makes.

He watches, feeds, and safely folds;
And with an upright, prudent Heart,
Our happy Church and State upholds.
PSALM. lxxix. As the 130th.

Thy blessed lnheritance;
And thy holy House desil'd,
And still their Arms advance.
Salem's Walls on Heaps are laid:

Preys to Wolves and Vultures made,
Beneath the open Sky.

By dying Martyrs shed:
Salem's Streets, with flowing Blood,
And mangled Corpses spread.
Jacob's Tribes, alas! are grown
Their nearest Neighbor's Scorn;
Out to vile Derision thrown,
By cruel Scoffs over born.

Shall thy fierce Fury burn!

Thy weighty Vengeance turn!
Let the Gentile-Nations all,
Who never acknowledge Thee,
Underneath thy Judgments fall,
And just Severitie.

Poor Jacob's wretched Race;
And Destruction's Tempest pour
On Israel's Dewlling Place.

And speedy Mercy show;
For by Thee alone we live,
Though now reduced so low.
Part 2.

From Thee our Safety springs:
Honor to thy Name, Most High,
Such Saving Mercy, brings.

"Now where is their mighty God?
Let them now the Lashes try
Of thy revenging Rod!
Grant that, Lord, our longing Eyes
Thy just Revenge may see!
While the Blood of Martyrs cries
So loud, great God, to Thee!

Before thy Majesty
And with mighty Power defend
The Souls, condemned to die.

Their base, reproachful Spite;
Such who in the Scorners Way,
And Blasphemies, delight.

For ever praise thy Name;
And, through endless Ages keep
Thy everlasting Fame.
Or thus,

Thy blessed Inheritance;
And have thy holy House defiled,
And still their Arms advance.
Poor Salem's Walls in Heaps are laid:
Thy murdered Servants lie,
As Preys to Wolves and Vultures made,
Beneath the open Sky.

By dying Martyrs shed;
And Salem's Street's, with flowing Blood,
And mangled Corpses spread.
Jacob's Tribes, alas! are grown
Their barbarous Neighbors Scorn;
And to Derision vilely thrown,
By cruel Scoffs o'er-born.

Shall thy fierce Furies burn!

Thy weighty Vengeance turn!
O let the Gentile Nations all,
Who never acknowledge Thee,
Beneath thy heavy Judgments fall,
And just Severity!

Poor Jacob's wretched Race;
And total Desolation pour
On Israel's Dewlling Place.

And speedy Mercy show;
For by thy Mercy, Lord, we live,
Though now reduced so low.
Part 2.

From Thee our Safety springs:
For G'ory to thy Name, Most High,
Such saving Mercy brings.

"Now where is their boasted God?
Let them too all the Scourges try
Of thy revenging Rod!
Permit, blessed Lord, our longing Eyes
Thy just Revenge to see!
While yet the Blood oiF Martyrs cries
So loud, great God, to Thee!

Before thy Majesty!
And with Almighty Power defend
The Souls condemned to die.

Their base reproachful Spite,
To such as in the Scorners Way,
And Blasphemies delight.

For ever praise thy Name;
And through Eternal Ages keep
Alive thy glorious Fame.
PSALM. lxxx.

Like Flocks, thy Israel guides!
Shine forth, O Thou, whose Strength above
The Cherubs Wings resides!

Great God, thy wondrous Might;
And with thy saving Strength espouse
Thy ancient People's Right!

And let thy Beams Divine,
Our Health and Safety to create,
With doubled Luster shine.

Thy Fury's Heat sustain?
How long thy People, Lord, to Thee
Address their Prayers in vain?


Our Neighbors quarrel; and our Fears
Malicious Foes deride.

And let thy Beams Divine,
Our Health and Safety to create,
With doubled Luster shine!
Part 2.
Egypt's fruitful Soil,
Thy Hands a Vine removed;
And made the Ganaanites recoil;
And here the Plant improved.

Through all the Country spread:
And with the weighty Purple Fruit,
It bowed its noble Head.

Its Arms, like Cedars stood:

And reached Euphrates Flood.

Her Fruits by all destroyed?

And savage Beasts annoyed?

And, from thy lofty Skies,
On thy poor Vineyard, void, and waste,
O cast thy gentler Eyes!

In Canaan planted first;
And made its Branches strongly stand,
By Peace and Favor nursed.

By cruel Hands cut down:
Thy People's Hopes and Vigor sunk
Beneath thy angry Frown.

On him that is raised by Thee,
With Strength to ease our Miseries,
And set the Bondmen free!

Nor thy Commands transgress:
Our Hopes, our Lives, shall all be thine;
Thy Name we'll daily bless.

And let thy Beams Divine,
Our Health and Safety to create,
With doubled Luster shine.
Psalm.1xxxj. As the 100th, or Mr. Sandys's 8th.

Aloud the God of Jacob praise!

The pleasant Harp, or charming Lute.

Let Us feast on these appointed Days;
And with the shriller Trumpet's Voice,
In God, our Strength, our King, rejoice.

A Statute firm in Jacob stands;
A Monument of Love, since He
From Egypt's Bondage set them free.
There we, when God, our Help, appeared,
An unknown, awful Language heard.
said God, thy Burden ceased;
"And I thy Hands from Pots released.

"And I, in Mercy, answered thee
"From the dark Closets of the Sky,
"Where Thunder's secret Treasures lie.
"At Meribah thy native Pride
"I with-prodigious Waters tried.

"Which I, for thy Direction, draw.
Part 2.

"To such thou never shall bend the Knee;
"To such no guilty Worship pay,
"Nor Off rings on their Altars lay.

"First led thee out from Egypt's Land.
"Let me thy largest Wishes know,
"My Gifts shall still as largely flow.

"And Israel no Submissions paid:
"Their Hearts no kindest Acts could gain;
"No Love, their wandering Steps restrain.

"To Ways to which their Hearts inclined,
"Such Ways as they would themselves invent;
"At once their Crime, and Punishment.

"My Laws, and my Commands obeyed,

"Who durst their thriving State oppose.

"Had been, as Liars, all abhorred
"Consumed, destroyed, and buried quite
"In dark Oblivion's gloomy Night.
"But Israel, of my Love possessed,
"Had been to endless Ages blessed.

"And Honey from the Rocks distilled.
To Father, Spirit, Son, bless'd' Three,
One only God, one Trinity,
As is, as was ever Time begun,
Be Praise, and endless Homage done. Amen.
Another Meter: Proper Tune.

With cheerful Voices sing!
To Jacob's God, through all the Crowd,
Let hearty Praises ring!

And let the Timbrels sound!
While pleasant Harps their Sweets disclose,
And Lutes maintain the Round!

With Infant-Beauty dressed!
Your solemn Joys with Trumpets raise,
At that appointed Feast.

To Israel's faithfol Race:
And we must still the Laws, enrolled
By Jacob's God, embrace.

His Pledge of endless Love,
When they an unknown Language heard
From rending Clouds above.
said God, released,
"And made from Labors free:
"Through me thy wearied Fingers ceased
"From Bricks and Slavery.

"And ready Aids applied:
"And thee, through gloomy Thunders heard,
"At Massab's Waters trv'd.

"To thee I Will testify:
"If Israel's Race my Words can bear,
"And with my Laws comply.
"Thy Seed no other God shall own;
"No Sacrifice allow
"To Gods by other Nations known,
"Nor to their Idols bow.
I only live; thy Lord, thy God,
"Who thee from Egypt freed:
"And I Will my largest Stores afford,
"To serve thy utmost Need.

"My just Commands refused:
"My Israel from their Vows could fall,
"And all my Loves abused.

"And let the Fools pursue
"Their foolish Ways; and as they strayed,
"Returnrd their Wages due.

"my kind Advice obeyed;
"Nor, by their own false Hearts misled,
"From Ways of Wisdom strayed!

"And turned my dreadful Hand
"Against the wretched Heads of those
Who durst against them stand!

"By Lies themselves had framed:
"But Mine had been a Nation made,
"Through endless Ages famed.

"With Wheat's pure Fatness filled;
"And them with Honey satisfied,
"From flowing Rocks distilled.
PSALM. lxxxij.
the Judge, where mighty Kings
Their secret Counsels hold:

And wicked Laws uphold?

The afflicted Soul relieve:

From Wicked Hands retrieve.

Who on in Darkness reel;
Through whom Earth's strong Foundations break,
Apd strange Convulsions feel.

"The Sons of God, most High;

"Like common Mortals die.

And over the World advance!
For all the scattered Nations are
Thy just Inheritance.
PSALM. lxxxiij.

Nor wrapped in Silence lie:

And bear their Heads on high.

Their secret Counsels take;
And those who thy Protection find,
Their hated Objects make.
they cry; let Israel bear
"No more a Nation's Name!
"Let Us from Time's largest Records tear
"Their long-detested Claim!

And horrid Plots design;
Leagued in a strong Conspiracy,
Against thy self, and thine.

Where Edom takes his Place;
What Bands fierce Moab's Countries yield,
And Agar's slavish Race!
Gebal and Amnon's Companies
Cursed Amalek commands;
And Palestine's Battalion lies,
With Tyre's assisting Bands.
Assur's Forces join,
And Ammon's Side embrace;
And Desolations all design
On Abraham's faithful Race.
Part 2.

And let thy daring Foes
The Lot of ruined Midian bear,
Who durst the Saints oppose;
As Sisera's and Jabin's Hosts,
Near Kishon's Torrents died,
Endor slain; and all the Coasts
With Blood, for Dung, supplied.

With Zeeb and O reb, dwell
Where Zeba's and Zalmunna's Train,
With all their Princes, fell,

"Come, let us at once go seize
"The Tents their God inhabited,
"His sacred Palaces!

The rapid Whirlwind flies:

Or Mountain-Shrubs surprise;

With Tempests terrify!

And to thy Service fly!

Crushed with Eternal Shame;
And know God only rules on high,
By Great Jehovah's Name.
PSALM. lxxxiv.

Great Lord of Hosts admires!
Ah, how thy Courts, thy glorious Face,
My longing Soul desires!

My Flesh, my Heart rejoice
To see thy sacred Earthly Throne,
And hear thy Heavenly Voice.

The Swallows build their Nests;
Where, with their yet unfeather'd Kind,
The Dam in Safety rests.
But, ah, thine Altars! wretched I
Near them no more can sing,
While, banished from thy House, I sly,
Dear Lord, my God, my King!

Can live, and praise thy Name!

Whose Hearts thy Ways can frame!

Their Eyes with Sorrows drowned;
Yet Blessings on their Teachers slow,
With Fruit their Pains are crowned.

The improving Learners go;
Till them the God of Gods embrace,
And Rest on them bestow.
Part 2.

And kind Affistance bring:

Thy once anointed King!

More blessed, more swoet to me,
Than could a Thousand Thousand Years,
At any Distance, be.
I Would rather keep thy Temple's Door,
And fiod thy Presence there;
Than in a Palace reign secure,
Where Sins uncheck'd appear.

Will Grace and Glory give,
Who with his Laws sincerely close,
And on Obedience live.

Great Lord of Hosts, must be,
Who, through all Worldly Changes, can
Unmov'dly trust in Thee!
To Father, Holy Ghost, and Son,
Ono God, in persons Three,
Be Glory paid, and Homage done,
Through all Eternity.
PSALM. lxxxv.

To Israel's Captives been;

And covered all their Sin.

Thy Jealous Furies eased:
And He who pleads for us above,
Has all thy Wrath appeased.

From Anger kindly turn!
Some Limits to thy Wrath allow,
Which, else, would always burn.

To us new Vigor give;

And in thy Favor live.

And thy Salvation show!

Who will his Peace bestow
On all his own: His Saints shall find
The Sweets of Heavenly Peace,
When they, from Sin's foul Dross refined,
From careless Follies cease.
God's kind Salvation's always nigh
The Wise, who fear his Name;
That Glory over our Land may fly,
And raise our ancient Fame.
Kind Peace and Righteousness embrace,
And Truth and Mercy close:
Truth springs from Earth; from Heaven, her Face
Impartial Justice shows.
All Good on us shall God bestow,
Our Land shall fruitful prove:
And Justice, with a wondrous Flow,
Before his Face shall move:
While we, who erred so often before,
Blessed with so sure a Guide,
From God shall never wander more,
But in his Paths abide.
Another Meter: As the old 125th, proper Tune.
Blessed Lord, thy kinder Thoughts at last
Did Jacob's Captive-Tribes restore:
And, all the People's Follies past.
Their Sins with Mercies covered over;
Thy Jealous Furies eased,
And all thy Wrath appeased.
To us, o God, our Savior, now,
From thy tempestuous Anger, turn!
Shall thy fierce Wrath no Bounders know,
But through Eternal Ages burn?
Us, Lord, again revive,
And in thy Joys we live!
To us thy Mercy, Lord, extend!
To us thy blessed Salvation show!
To God's kind Answer I Will attend;
For Peace he will on his Saints bestow.
His Servants shall have Peace
When they from Follies cease.

That Glory may possess the Land.

And Peace and Justice, Hand in Hand.

Fair Justice casts her Eye.

Our happy Land shall fruitful prove;

Before his glorious Presence move.
And we, with such a Guide,
Shall in his Paths abide.
PSALM. lxxxvj.

For I Am distressed, and poor!

Blessed God, my Soul secure!

Who hopes thy Grace to see:
Mercy, thy Mercy, Lord, I crave;
And daily cry to Thee.

O make my Soul rejoice!

Thou hearst my humble Voice.



The Gods of Vanity.
All Nations, whom thy Hands have made,
Shall fall before thy Face;
And, with pure Worship, duly paid,
Thy glorious Name embrace.
For Thou art God, thy Works are great;
Thy self art God alone!
To me, blessed God, thy Ways repeat,
And make thy Doctrines known!
I Will walk in Truth; then, Lord, unite
My Heart to fear thy Name!
My Heart shall then thy Praise recite,
And all thy Praise proclaim.
Thy Mercy's great to me; from Hell
Thou brought my sinking Soul;
Though Tyrants at me proudly swell,
And would my Life control.
No Sense of Thee the Rebels show:
But Pity, Lord, we see,
Grace, Patience, Mercy, Truth, we know,
In plenty dwells with Thee.
To me, dear God, with Mercy turn!
Thy Strength on me bestow!
To him who is of thy Handmaid born,
Thy kind Salvation show.
With me some Mark of Favor leave,
And shame my spiteful Foes,
When they thy Aid to me perceive,
And all thy Love disclose.
PSALM. lxxxvij. as the 113 th.
WHen God, in his All-searching Mind,
To fix his Church on Earth designed,
Deep he her strong Foundations laid.
Sions Mount, that sacred Place.
(Though well He loved all Jacob's Race)
He his peculiar Darling made.

Shall thy Immortal Glories fly.
Blessed City of the Eternal King!
Egypt, Assure Palestine,
And all the Arabia's shall be thine,
And Vows to thy Protector bring!
Envy in Them no more shall reign,
But Saints to fill thy blissful Train,
Shall come from each converted Land.
Sion yet those Sons of Peace,
Shall more than other Lands increase,
And in her God securely stand.

The Gentiles Tribes shall fill the Scroul,
From Thee, blessed God! our Joy shall spirit

Shall tune their cheerful Strings to Thee,
And thy Eternal Praises sing.
PSALM. lxxxviij.

Call Day and Night to Thee,

And kindly answer me!

The Grave attends my Fate.

Just in a dying state.

In The Grave from Sorrows free,
Where Men thrust out from Memory,
Are cut from Earth by Thee,

Thou throw'st my trembling Soul,

And all thy Tempests roll.

And less than Strangers kind,
Nor can I Liberty obtain.
By Chains of Hate confind.

Through deep afflictions shed.
To thee I send my daily Cries,
My Hands submissely spread.
Part 2.

Where Death triumphant Reigns?
The Dead to make thy Wonders known,
Shake off their Icy Chains?

Advance thy Mercies Fame?
Or shall Destructions utmost Doom,
Thy Faithfulness proclaim?

Where all thick Darkness hides?
Thy Righteousness be published where
Forgetfulness presides?

My morning Prayers are made.

Thy Beams no more displaid?

With constant weakness pressed,
Have born thy Terrors constantly,
In my Distracted Breast,

Thy Terrors bear me down.

My baffled Comforts drown.

To mighty Distance fly,
And those I intimately knew,
In unknown Darkness ly.
PSALM., lxxxix, Meter first; as the 113th.

Thy Truth from Age to Age record,
My Lips shall praise thy glorious Name,

Thy Truths with Heaven it self compare,
Thy Faithful Promise I Will proclaim.

"And to my Servant David said,
"(My chosen King,) and firmly swore.

"Thy Royal Sceptered Heirs command,
"Till Sea and Earth and Times no more.

Thy Holy Congregation raise,
Thy Faithful Works above the Skys.

What God-like Man thy Mate can be?
What Lord to equal Glories rise?

Where his Assembling Saints appear.
And his attending Angels aws.

Whose Truth so breaks with Beams divine:
Received by every Worlds applause.
Part 2.

And make its angry Waves obey,
Thy Word its stormy Tempest quells.
Egyptians wounded died,
Thy dreadful Arm the gathering Pride,
Of all thy fiercest Foes dispells.

Thy Hands this Earth's Foundations laid,
And all the World with Plenty stored:

Tabor and Hermon both declare,
Thy Name, and Thee, their mighty Lord.

Thy Hand resistless vigor shows,
Thy glorious Hand's exalted high.

Thy truth, and ancient mercy Known,
Thy Steps to all the World desory.

By holy Trumpets sounds alarmed,
And live enlightened, Lord, by Thee!

With solemn Musicks moving voice,
Thy Righteousness their strength shall be.

And with a settled strength Command,
But God is still their Strength and Pride,
Thy Goodness, and thy boundless Love,
Has raised our happy Strength above,
Since thou have owned out sinking side.

That Holy One can shelter yield,
Who Is Israel's God, and Israel's King.

A smiling Vision, raised of old,
Did thus of thy Anointed sing.
Part 3 Meter 2. As the 100th.

"A Man above the Vulgar placed;
"My King my Servant David made,
"His Head with holy Unction graced.

"My Arm his strong support shall be:

"No Sinner, his Destruction see.

"And batter those who hate him down:

"And in my Name exalt his Crown.

"Shall his unbounded Reign confine:

"His Saving Health, his Rock Divine.

"Above Earth's Kings, exalted high:

"Nor my immortal Covenant die.

"Outshine, out-wear the Rolling Skies,

"Or ever against my Judgments rise;

"My Precepts or Injunctions slight,

"Their Sins, with Strokes deserved, requite.

"Nor break my faithful Word of old;

"Nor change what Prophets once foretold.

"And cannot my David's Hopes deceive;

"No Time shall of their Rights bereave.

"Those faithful Signs, to Mortals known,
"May cease to set, and cease to rise;
"But nothing shock his glorious Throne.
Part 4. Meter 3.

But, at a distance, now
Terrors thy dear Anointed hold
From thy contracted Brow.

Defiled his trampled Crown;

And trod his Fences down.

His neighboring Foes despise:

And high their Forces rise.

He flies, the Martial Field:

Their former Luster yield.

And he is o'erw helm'd with Shame.

And seel thy Fury's Flame?

Have but a While to live.

What Art can Lives retrieve?

By Oath to David due?

What Scorns thy Friends pursue!

On thy Anointed King;

Amens devoutly sing.
PSALM. xc.

Our certain Resting Place,

On Earth's extended Face:
Before this Earth to Shape was grown,
Before the World was framed,
Thee, Lord, the mighty God alone,
Eternity proclaimed.

With thriving Beauty shines,
His proudest Shows thy Frowns abate,
And he to Dust declines.
When groveling in the Dust he lies,
Thy Smiles his Fortunes raise.
"Weak Man, say Thou, return, and rise!
Weak Man thy Word obeys.
A Thousand Years no longer last
In thy unbounded Sight,
Than Yesterday, so lately past,
Or its succeeding Night.
So Floods, with rapid Swiftness, slide;
So Dreams, in Slumbers, fly;
So Meadow-Greens, with cheerful Pride,
Salute the Morning-Sky.
They slourish with the Morning's Tears,
And shoot their Branches high;
But ever the shady Night appears,
Are mow'n, and scorched, and die.
When thy impetuous Anger burns,
Our Lives are soon consumed;
And by thy Wrath's severe Returns,
To deep Afflictions doomed.
Thou view'st our wretched Actions over;
And thy All-searching Eyes
Examine all that secret Score
Which now in Darkness lies:
Far off our flying Days are blown,
Before thy Fury's Blast:
Our Years, like empty Tales, are gone
Which scarce one Moment last.
Part 2.

May hold their constant Course;
And if to Eighty one arrives,
By Nature's rarer Force,
Yet his declining, battered Strength
Mere Pains and Sorrow brings,
And fails, and swiftly flies at length
On Time's impatient Wings.

Thy Anger's utmost Might!
Which, as thy Fear, through all must go,
With an unbounded Flight.

And so our Hearts apply,
That we, through Wisdom's peaceful Ways,
May reach Eternity.

To all thy Servants Woes!

To holy Joys dispose!

Thy gentler Smiles obtain;
Proportioned to our long Despair,
And Years of constant Pain!

And all thy faithful Race,
Thy Works, thy wondrous Glories show;
And send thy quickening Grace!

On all our Labors rest,
Till all our Handy-works appear
By thy Protection blessed!
PSALM. xcj.

Who to his Maker slies;
And on his kind, protecting Arms,
For Help and Health relies.

To God I Will freely say,
"My strong Defense; on Thee it is just
"My Hope should firmly stay.

From Death's surprising Share;
And keep thee from the Infection free
Of Pestilential Air.

His Feathers over thee spread,'
While his unfailing Promise brings
A Shield to guard thy Head.

Death's Shafts obscure the Day?
He Will guild them both with wholesome Light,
To keep thy Fears away.

With wild Destruction reign?

Ten Thousand Morsels gain?
Though Death the Day and Night command,
And gasping Corpses lie,
Heaps upon Heaps, on either Hand,
And almost Mountain-high?

How God's revenging Stroke
Distinguishes, where carelessly
Vile Men their God provoke.
Part 2.

Thy sacred Refuge made;
And has it self, for Shelter, thrown
Beneath his saving Shade;

Nor Mischief-boding Chance;
No cruel Plague, to give thee Fear,
Shall near thy Tents advance.

Where God and Nature lead,
Thy Feet, through all thy mortal Days,
With Care exactly tread.
He Will give his Angel-Armies Charge
About thy Paths to wait;
To lay their watchful Guards at large,
And to secure thy State.

The Rocks of Sin below,
Where strong Temptation's fatal Store
And daily Scandals grow.

With all the Infernal Crew;
And Men, in Hell's vile Work engaged,
Their poisonous Arts pursue.
His Feet shall quickly tread them down,
Whose Heart my Loves inflame;
And Freedom shall with Honor crown
The Man who knows my Name,

His Cries I Will kindly hear;
Be with him, and exalt him high,
And rid his Life from Fear.

I Will on my Friend bestow;
And to him, by a Thousand Ways,
My kind Salvation show.
PSALM. cxij.

On all thy Holy Days,
Great God, when all thy Churches ring
With thy exalted Praise!

Unsolds the Morning-Light;
Thy Truth, ever Clouds have first begun
To form the gloomy Night.

Its cheerful Notes can raise;
And Organs can with Shalms rejoice,
To found thy lofty Praise

My Soul's triumphant Joys.

Her shrillest Notes employs.

This wondrous Happiness
Nor can the Blessing's Balmy Flow
The foolish Heart possess.

And watch the Sinner's Race,
How they like Summer-Plants improve,
Their Branches thrive apace:
Yet think not how, when pleasant Blooms
Have spread the Wicked over,
They sink beneath their weighty Dooms,
And live on Earth no more.

Thy wretched Foes, shall die:
And those who wicked Actions love,
Dispersed, confounded, lie.
Part 2.

With Strength exalt it high;
On me fresh Oil of Gladness shed,
And fill my Heart with Joy.

On all my angry Foes:
My Ears shall hear their Doom, who me
With envious Spite oppose.

Like Palms, their Heads shall raise:
Their Seed, like Cedars, multiplied,
Which Libanon displays.

His House has p'anted round,
Shall in his Courts securely stand,
With constant Verdure crowned.

Shall spring with lively Shoots;
Their thrifty Leaves long Life presage
To their extended Roots;

His Righteous Works declare;
And make the wiser Nations know
How just his Actions are.
PSALM. xciij.
Jehovah, reigns,
With Majesty and Glory crowned;
The Lord Almighty Strength retains
With that, like Garments girt around.
His Hand the World's vast Frame secures;
He stays it with his Awful Nod.

Thy Self an everlasting God!

At Thee, like mighty Waters, roar;
And dash, like breaking Waves, aloud,
Which threaten all the neighboring Shore.

Their Hearts, their swelling Furies high;
Their utmost maddest Rage obeys
That God who rules above the Sky.

And all thy Testimonies sure:
Thy Flocks pure Holiness pursue,
And ever, like thy Self, endure.
Another Meter: As the 111th, proper Tune.

The great Jehovah reigns,
With Awful Glories crowned:
As with a Robe of Light,
The Lord with wondrous Might
And Strength is girt around.
By his Divine Commands
The World securely stands,
From Alterations free.

Thy Deity extolled
From all Eternity.

Against thy Kingdom, loud,
Like mighty Waters, roar;
And with a surly Spite,
As breaking Billows, fight,
And shock the neighboring Shore.

Their furious Hearts engage;
And Heaven it self defy;
His stern Command alone
Can beat their Madness down,
Who ever rules on high.

Thy Promises renew;
Both faithful, both secure.
Thy Saints, with Holiness,
Shall toward thine A'tars press,
And ever blessed endure.
PSALM. xciv.

Great God of Vengeance, rise,

With just Rewards surprise.

Uncheck'd, triumphant reign?

With haughty Boasts maintain?

Afflict thine Heritage?

Nor spare their Orphans Age?

"Can God our Actions see?
"We Jacob's unknown God defy:
"From his Observance free.

Think well, ye senseless Crew!

Who Ears bestowed on you?
What, cannot he see, whose Hands the Eyes,
Those Orbs of Wonders, made?

From Your Correction stayed?
Cannot He who Sense on Man bestows,
Their secret Thoughts descry?

And knows their Vanity.

Has all thy Laws obeyed!

The Pit for Sinners made.
Part 2.

Nor his Inheritance:

And upright Souls advance.

Or my Assistant be?

Had quickly silenced me.

Thy Mercy's He'p ensur'd:

My Soul's Delight procured.

Who settle Sin by Law?

And Blood of Martyrs draw.

My God will raise my State:
My solid Rock, my Refuge He;
Whose Loves my Faith create.

Their Malice He Will repay:
With sudden Strokes their Pride repress,
And cut their Hopes away.
PSALM. XCV.

To our Eternal King!
The Lord, our strong Salvation praise,
His Goodness loudly sing!

And pleasant Anthems sing.

Over all the Gods, a King.

His powerful Hand commands.

He laid the rising Lands.

And at his Footstool low,
Our humbly bending Knees before,
Our great Creator show!

And in his Pastures feed,
Those wandering sheep which kindly He,
From Death and Darkness freed.
To day, o hear his Voice, to day!

No more your own false Thoughts obey,
My Wrath no more provoke!
"No more with hardened Hearts refuse,
"My necessary Grace;
"Nor, as in former times, abuse
"My Word, or Holy Place!

"Who all my Wonders saw,
"And many Years perversely bold,
"Despised my righteous Law.

"With just Displeasure moved,
"This wretched Nation sin the more,
"The more by Goodness proved.
"They neither know my self, nor know
"Those Rules to them addressed,
"Nor will I e're their Souls bestow,
"In my, Eternal Rest.
Another Meter: As Mr. Sandys's 15th.

To our Lord, and to our King!
Let us make a joyful Noise,
To that God whose Love employs,
All his saving Health, and Grace,
To protect his faithful Race.

Come before his Glorious Face,
And our Psalms, and cheerful Airs,
Join with Vows and humble Prayers!

Lofty his Eternal Seat.
Every God to Him submits,
He a King above them sits.

Solid Rocks and Mountains steep,
All their strength's by Him possessed,
And by his Protection blessed.

By his mighty Hands prepared,
Earth to Him, submissly bows,
And his forming Power avows.

And his Footstool kneel before!
Let us kneel, and prostrate all,
To our Lord, and Maker, fall!

We are all his People known;
Us His Hands securely keep,
He Is the Shepherd, we the Sheep,
Hear, o hear, his voice to Day,
And that sacred Voice obey!

Let no Hardness center there,
As of o'd your Father's pride,
All my kindest Cares defied,
When their wandering Armies past,
Though the Deserts sandy waste.

Often to Believe denied me.
Though my Wonders all they saw,
Knew my Power, and heard my Law.

Forty tedious rolling Years,
I with wondrous patience bore,
But at last in Fury swore.
" 11 These a wretched People are,
" All involved in Error's snare,
" Soon they have my Laws forgot,
" Seen my Works, but know them not;
" By my Self, my Self alone,
" (That Is the greatest Oath that is known)
" These shall never, never blessed,
" Enter my Eternal Rest.
PSALM. xcvj.

Sing all the Earths around!
Your Blessings to his Altars bring,
His saving Health resound!

To spread his glorious Name!

His wondrous Acts proclaim!

More to be feared then those.

On Vainer Fools impose.
Our God stretched out the lofty Syes;
How glorious Majesty,
How strength with lovely Beauty vyes,
We in his Temple see.

Give strength and Glorys due!

To him with Offering's fue!

Let all devoutly bow,
And Fear before his Face express;
And to his service vow!

The great Jehovah reigns!
Through Him the World's established frame,
Unmoved and Firm remains.
He Will Judge the People righteously;

Let Earth be glad, the Ocean high,
Exalt its roaring Voice!

Express in various ways;
And Forests with a murmuring Noise,
Their great Creator praise!

To make the World confess,
All Justice in His Bosom lies,
And Truth and Righteosness.
PSALM, xcvij. As the 100th.
Messiah, reigns;
No more to Jewish Bounds confined.
Since all the World the Blessing gains,
Let all express a grateful Mind!
O let that spacious Continent
Which Adam's numerous Heirs possess,
And all the Isles, with sweet Consent,
Their Savior's wondrous Love consess!

The God from Faithless, curious Eyes.
On Judgment too, by Justice tried,
His Throne's Eternal Pillars rise.

And melt the Hearts of angry Foes.

And trembling Earch its Master knows.

Like Wax, before his Flames appear:
And those whose Thoughts their God defied,
The mighty God of Nature fear.

Aloud, with wondrous Signs declare:
His glorious Works before the Eyes
Of all the astonished Nations are.

Adore, and in their Idols boast!
Our God with humblest Worship please;
Bow to Him, all ye Heavenly Host!
Ziou's and Judah's Daughters true
With Joys thy Judgment, Lord, embraced:

With more than Angel-Glorys graced.

All Sin for Him, in each Degree!
He Will Safety for his Saints create;
And from the Wicked set them free.

And Joys for upright Hearts prepared.
In Him o let our Joys be shown;
His Holiness, with Thanks, declared!
Another Meter.
Jehovah, reigns;
Let all the Earth rejoice!
Let all those Isles the Sea contains
Exalt a cheerful Voice!

Our God from Humane Eyes:
On Righteousness, by Justice tried,
His Throne's Supporters rise.

Consume his angry Foes.

The Earth, with trembling, shows.

Like Wax; dissolving, flow:

And All, his Glory know.

And in their Idols boast.
But for your God our Savior take,
Ye bright, Angelick Host!
Zion's and Judah's Daughters heard
Thy Judgments, Lord, with Joy:

Over Earth, exalted high.

All wicked Works pursue!
For He Will secure his Servants State
From all the sinful Crew.

Are sown: Ye Righteous, all
Rejoice; and God's All-sacred Might,
With grateful Thoughts, re-call.
Another Meter; to the Notes of the 114 th, as translated by Mr. Cowley.

Let all the Earth around,
The Isles with Joys resound!
God alone a King remains!

Justice severe, and Judgment, waiting by.
His glorious Throne prepare.

With dreadful Flashes, rake the Air;
And all his Foes malignant Race,
With all their impious Works, one burning Pile embrace.

With what a dismal Glare
They fill the glowing Air,
Soaring towered the frighted Pole!
Shocked with the Vision, trembling Nature quakes;
The shattered Earth a strong Convulsion shakes

Like Wax before the Fires:
Whatever his scorching Fury felt,
Before the World's great Lord retires;
And by his awful Frown dissolved, at once expires.

And all the People see
His glorious Majesty,
How it fills the Purpled Air.

Those Fools, whose Thoughts their empty Idols
Fools, who absurdly boast
In Gods themselves can frame! please!
But, o ye bright, Angelick Hosts,
Adore our Great jehovah's Name;
And on your bended Knees, the God of Gods proclaim!
Sion heard,
And judah's Daughters too;
And at the wondrous Show,
Extasy'd with Joys, appeared:
Thy Goodness then before the Nations shone;
Thy sacred Judgments through the World were known.

Thy glorious Godhead still
Makes all the World submisly bow;
Blessed Angels thy Commands fulfill:
And All Subjection yield to thy Immortal Will.
Jehovah love,
With God-like Hatred due,
All wicked Works pursue:
Fix your happy Souls above!
He, like a Father, guards his faithful Souls;
And all their Foes, and all their Force, controls.

The Just and Good shall shine:

In your Jehovah's Praise combine;
And all his holy Acts record in Songs Divine!
PSALM. xcviij.

With Anthems new proclaim!
His Hand, his holy Arm, has brought
Himself the Conqu'ror's Name.

To give the Nations Light:
His Righteousness the Lord has shown,
In all the People's Sight.

His Truth to Israel's Race:
And all those Bounds which Earth consigned,
His Saving Health embrace.

Sing cheerful Notes around!
The Lord, among the grateful Crowd,
The Lord's just Praise resound.

And Trumpets Martial Sound:
With ecchoing Cornets let the Praise
Of God, the King, be crowned!

The World, and all its Host!

And lofty Mountain boast!

And Earth its Doom shall know:
His Righteousness the World shall hear,
His Truth and Justice show.
Another Metres as Mr. Sandys's 13th.

His wondrous Works record!
Sing, sing an Anthem new.
Return his Praises due,
Whose Hand, whose holy Arm
Dissolved Hell's fatal Charm:
Whom we triumphant see,
And crowned with Victory!

Is now more clearly known:
His Truth and Justice He
Makes all the Nations see.
Israel
His Mercies ever dwell:
And though a while a Cloud
His Truth and Mercy shroud
From their expecting Eyes,
Off soon the Shadow flies,
And both, with Beams Divine
More bright and strongly shine.
So all the Nations round
Have our Salvation found;
How God about us waits,
And all our Health creates.

Their Maker's Praises sound:
O let the Earth rejoice,
And raise its cheerful Voice;
And all the World combine
In Thanks, and Songs Divine.

To our Eternal King!
To well-tuned Harps o raise
Your Notes of Heavenly Praise!

Let Cornets Notes rebound,
And with them loudly sing
To our Eternal King!

Its Joys from Shore to Shore:
Let Angels, blessed on high,
With Earth in Praises vye!

The ecchoing Hills rebound;
And with a cheerful Noise,
Express their boundless Joys!

Before the Lord express!
For, lo! He comes with Haste,
And Awful Glories graced:
His dreadful Summons all
To his Tribunal call:
His Judgment then shall bless
The World with Righteousness:
Truth from his Lips shall flow;
And all the World shall know
Their glorious Judge, and see
His Love and Equity.
PSALM. xcix.

Beneath his Empire quake!
He sits above the Cherubs, crowned:
Let Earth's Foundations shake!
Sion's great, and high;
Above the People raised.

His holy Name, be praised!

And Equity prepares:
And Judgment with his Justice moves
In Jacob's blessed Affairs.

Before his Footstool bow;
And spread his wondrous Works abroad,
His holy Nature show!
Moses once, and Aaron so
Among his Priests appeared;
And Samue' with his Prophets, who
The God of Jacob feared.
These at his Footstool bowed, and there
To him devoutly prayed;
And always found his Answers near,
And all their Faith repaid.

His Statute-Laws obeyed;
And He to Them from Clouds obscure
His gentle Answers made.

Their Follies would pursue,
Yet often their Cries He Would kindly hear,
His Mercies often renew.

Before his A'tars bow!
Our God, our holy Lord proclaim,
With Praise his Glory show!
PSALM. c.

To God your Voices raise;

And Sing your Savior's Praise!

Not We our selves have made;
Our Shepherd, He; his People, we;
And in his Pastures laid.

With Thanks, and hearty Praise:
For Praise on his Assembly waits
On all his holy Days.

And all his Mercies sure:
His Truth from Age to Age has stood,
And shall unchanged endure.
Another Meter, As the old 100th.

Before our mighty Lord appear!
To Him your cheerful Voices raise;
Adore his Name with humblest Fear.

But He, to us our Substance gave:
He Is ours, we His, those Sheep which He
Di'd, by his own pure Blood to save.

And in his Courts his Glories sing:
On all his own appointed Days,
Your Sacrisice of Praises sing

His Favor great, his Mercy sure;
His Truth has ever firmly stood.
And shall from Age to Age endure.
PSALM. cj.

And sing my God to Thee.

O come, dear Lord, to Me!
Then with an undissembling Heart
I'^l ever justly move;
And in my Court, in every part
Thy sacred Rules improve.

With Satisfaction, see.
And those who things perverse devise,
Shall never be great With Me.

I Will none that is wicked own:

Against their Neighbor's shown.

I Will never at Court endure,
Eut through the Land my searching Eye
Shall faithful Friends procure.
That Man who treads a perfect Path
My Favorite shall be;

Shall never dwell with Me,
I Will bear no Liar in my fight,
The wicked I Will destroy,
Salem freed from Sinners quite,
Shall perfect Peace enjoy.
PSALM. cij.
A Soul with mighty Woes oppressed,
May thus complaining pray:
And in deep Sorrows Language dressed,
His weighty Griefs display.

To Me thy Face disclose!

O heart O ease my Woes!

My Bones, like Hearths, with heat.

And I forget my Meat.

Through my unceasing Groans:

Wild Desents vent their moans.

Aboat their Nestlings mourn;

With bloody Oaths are sworn.

While I endured thy frown.

Thy Wrath now hurts me down.

So sinks; like Grass it wains;
thou ant, thy glorious Name,
From Age to Age remains.
Sions help return;
In time her Woes relieve!

And for her Ashes grieve.

All Kings thy Glory see:
Sions Walls new built appear,
And Glory springs from thee.
Part 2.

O write his Goodness down!

Their mighty God's renown,

Turned down on Earth below,

And let the Prisoners go.
Sions Walls might show
His Praise, his Name record,

To serve their Mighty Lord,

Then, "spare me Lord! I prayed.

"Thy Years can never fade.

And stretched the lofty Skies.

And Time it self defies.
They like a worn-out Garment fail,
And shall be changed for new.

Nor time thy Steps pursue.

With thy obedient Race,
And their well-settled Heirs abide
Secure before thy Face.
PSALM. ciij. As the 100th.

My Tongue my Soul his Praises sing!

His Loves to kind Remembrance bring!

Thy Weakness heals, thy Plagues removes,

And crowns thee with his tenderest Loves.

Thy Age with vigorous Youth renews.

His just Revenge their Foes pursues.
Isreal's Race of old,
By Moses made his Precepts known:
He, by our Jesus, still unfolds
His Will and Goodness toward his own,

His Vengance, not his Mercy slow.

Nor let his Anger always glow.

Though foul, with Rods he gently lasht,
His pitying Eyes a thousand times,
Our still repeated Follies past.

As Skies enclose our humb'er Earth.

Then Sun-set's from the Mornings Birth.
Part 2.

Then Fathers to their Darling Heirs.

Our mouldring Dust as gently spares.

Or Grass which shades the cheerful Plains:

And neither House nor Name remains.

The Just, and all their faithful Seed:

And all his righteous Precepts heed.

And thence his boundless Empire guides;
And over the Subject World, alone,
His Arbitrary Will presides.

Does in complete Obedience shine!

Blessed Ministers of Love Divine!

Praise through his spacious Empire sing!
While I with grateful Anthems raise
New Honors to my Glorious King.
PSALM. civ. As the 100th.

How great, blessed God, how wondrous great.
What Majesty, what Glories roll
About thy Everlasting Seat!

Thy Curtains are the expanded Skies.

On humble Clouds thy Chariot flies.
God walks on groaning Winds in State,

And Scrvant-Flames around him wait,
And fly to bear his great Commands.

A well-pois'd never moving Load.

Which over the highest Mountains flowed.

When his commanding Thunders roared.

Sweet Plains appeared, and Mountains soard.

Earth fears no more the encroaching Deep:

And round the Mountains softly creep.

And kindly cool their thirsty Flame.

And there their curious Buildings frame.
Part 2.

And make our Earth with Fruits abound.

And Herbs for Men are useful found.
Through Him rich Corn o're-spreads the Fields,

Fat shining Juice his Olive yields;
His Bread a Vital Strength imparts.



Through Rocks the Coney breaks her Ways,

And when to rise, and when to fall;

And out the Forrest-Rangers crawl.

And loud the hungry Lions roar.
God for their Diet finds a way,
And feeds them with his secret Store.

And to their unknown Dens repare;

Till Night again o're-clouds the Air.

Great God, thy Works of, Wonder are!
Thy Riches are through Earth proiclaim'd;

Part 3.
There Fishes, great and small, in strange
Unnumber'd Numbers cut their Way.

And Whales in boundless Oceans Play.

Of Thee they beg their timely Food:

And All are filled with needful Good.

Sink down to Dust, and Dust remain:

And rise and fill the World again*

His Works; his Looks, his dreadful Stroke.

And make the trembling Mountains smoke.

While Health, or Life, or Breath remains:

I Will praise his Name in lofty Strains.

And impious plotting Fools control,
And all their Stock on Earth deface.
O bless, O praise the Lord, my Soul!
PSALM. CV. as the 100th. or Mr. Sandys's 8th.

His Acts through every Tribe proclaim!

Through all the World his Wonders praise!

His Smiles, with cheerful Hearts, implore;

And ever seek his glorious Face,
Abr'ham's faithful Seed,
O ye of Jacob's chosen Breed,

And on his Judgments meditate!

His Judgments through the World are known:

Shall through a Thousand Ages hold.
Abraham spoke before,
What He to Isaac firmly swore,
Israel laid,
And thus his lasting Covenant made.
Canaan's Land I Will give,
"Where you its lawfal Heirs, shall live;

Add despicable Strangers all.

And round the neighboring Countries strayed

And Ill-designing Kings restrained.

"Let no malicious Injury
"My Prophets or my Friends approach,
"Or on my chosen Sons encroach!
Part 2.
Canaan's Land annoyed
And God the Staff of Bread destroyed;
And jacob's House, among the rest.
The long-continu'd Want oppres'd.
Joseph, sold a Slave, he sent
Before, who might their Fates prevent.

The pinching Fetters reached his Soul,

God's Word his faithful Wisdom tried:

Who ruled the People, set him free.

To him his weighty Cares referred,

His God-like Sense, and wiser grow.
Egypt Israel went,
And there his Hoary Age was spent;

With Strength, above their Enemies blessed

And they his People's Fate contrived,

God Moses sent, and Aaron chose*

In Signs and dreadful Wonders spoke:

Imprisoned all the groaning Land.

The poisoned Fish o'er-spread the Shore.

And round their Royal Chambers croak'd.
Part 3.

And Lice in all their quarters swarmed.

And burning slashes raked the Plains.

Of his prodigious Thunders broke,

And unknown Insects swept the Ground.

The Land of all its Fruits was cleared.

Their early strength and Glory broke.

With Jewels, Gold and Silver sped,
Egypt joy'd to see,
Themselves from Plagues and Terrors free

By Night Flames pointed out their Way.

And let them Bread of Angels eat.

And streams on parching Lands bestowed,

To Abraham his unchanging Word.

From Bonds, with joys triumphant, free,

The Neighboring Towns, and Heathten Lands.

That, sensible of what they owed,
Their Seed, his Statures might record,
And keep his Laws: O praise the Lord!
Psalm. cvj. As the looth. cr Mr. Sandys's 14th.

For sure his Boundless Mercy stands,

His Honor, who can justly blaze?

And always righteous Laws pursue:

By thy Salvation guarded, sleep!

That good thy chosen Friends; partake,
That Mirth thy happy People make,
Those Joys thy dear. Possessions know.

Their, Crimes, their impious Crimes renewed,
Egytian Wonders viewed,
But to Forgetfulness resigned;
Forgot his Mercies stores, and near
The Sea, so lately passed rebel'd:

To make his Name and Power appear.

While they through Deeps, as Deserts, passed;

Redeemed from Perseuting Hands.

Not one his wretched Life retrieved;
Then they his Word a while believed,
And Gratitude with Praises showed.

Nor his Divine Adviee improved;

And made it in the Desert Hot.

Their Stomachs easeless Hunger tore;
Moses then their Envy bore
And Aaron, God's Anointed Prist.
Dathan's and Abivam's Crew,
Earths hollow gaping Womb devoured:

And Flames the Godless Rebels flew.
Part 2

And to the senseless Idol bowed;

They both their God and Guide proclaimed.

Nor Egypt's Slayish suffriiigs, thought;

And on the Ocean's Purple shore.

But in his chosen Moses came,
He stayed the approaching dreadful Flame,
And sacred Wrath, impetuous speed.

His Word with them no Credence found;

And off they threw their Lords command.

That they in Desert Wilds might die;

And perish all in barbarous Lands.

Their Souls to peor's God bet raid.
And eating Sacrisices made,
To him; an Idol's Servants grew.

And out the Plague among them broke;
phineas, with a righteous stroke,
The Plagues infectious Rage repelled.

When God's just Wrath his Zeal atton'd;
His God the Righteous Action owned,
And blessed him with a Deathless Name.

At Massah's springs they mischies made:
that meekest Soul betrays,
Till Passion in him rashly spoke.
Part 3.

By God's Command, they fondly spared;

Their Sins, and all their Plagues, assumed.

While to their graven Gods they bowed:

To Devils, they sacrisic'd to Hell.

Poor Inncent, to Idols flowed:
Canaan a dismal shambles showed,
And Infant Gore the Country drowned.

Them to polluting Whoredoms drew,

And could his own Possessions loath.

Them to their domineering Foes;

Their Pride and losty Thoughts declined.

His Vengeance prostcute their Crimes:

He saw and heard them while they prayed.

And Sympathiz'd with all their Woes;

Grew gentle, pitiful, and kind.

From Heathen Chains and Lands recall,
That we may sing thy Praise, and fall
With Thanks before thy Glorious Face,
Israel's Name record.
His Piaise from Age to Age refound;
And let the joyful Tribes around
Sing out Amen: o praise Lord!
PSALM. cvij. Part 1. Meter 1.

His Goodness celebrate!
Let Age to Age resound his Fame,
His bounteous Acts relate!

His peaceful Arm redeemed:
O be his Praise in grateful Streins,
His glorious Works esteemed.

His lsrael's scattered Race;

They found no Resting Place,

Their wasting Spirits failed;
Yet with their pitying God at first
Their humble Cries prevailed.

Was their unfailing Guide,

In well built Towns reside.

His wondrous Mercies praise!
Through all the World his Acts proclaim!
His boundless Glories raise!
Part 2. Meter 2.

Relieve the thirsty Soul;
The hungry Wretch revives, when He
Bestows his plenteous Dole!

his gracious Laws abused,
Despised their Maker's gentlest Call,
And Love's soft Voice refused.

In weighty Fetters chained;
Death's Chains around the Rebels flew,
And Woes their Souls restrained.

Beneath the dismal Weight;
And when, in vain, they begged aloud
For Men to ease their State.

And at his-Footstool laid
Their pressing Griefs, and mortified,
The softhing Rebe's prayed.

And every Slave unchain'd,
And with warm Beams of gentlest Love
The Sufferers entertained.

His bounteous Acts declare!
Let all Mankind with Thanks proclaim
How great his Mercies are!
Part 3. Meter 3. As the 100th.

Of massive Brass their Leaves unfold;
No Bars of Steel, nor sturdy Grates
Against his powerful Words can hold.

And with their Sins their Judge provoked,

Nor cased their Hungers stickly Stroke.
Their Stomachs loathed blessed Angels Food,
Sweet Manna dropping from the Skies;
And Quails disturbed their curdling Blood,
Till Nature sunk without Supplies.

He heard, and heard them when they cried;
God's Word their dying Swoons allayed,
And Appetites and Food supplied.

Where fading Nature's Force declined;
To them his healthful Favors showed,
And their distempered Blood refined.

Above the Skies exalt his Name!

And Trophies to his Goodness raise!
Part 4. Meter 4. as the 148th

The restless Ocean flies.
And fail from Shore to Shore,
For wealthy Merchandise

How wondrous there
God's Works appear,
How powerful He.

The swelling Tempest roars;
And foaming Billows break,
And lash the bounding Shores.
While Wind and Tide
On rolling Seas,
Wherever they please,
Triumphant ride.

On Watery Mountains rise,
As if the Clouds they would meet,
Or brave the threatening Skies.
Now down they come,
Steep tumbling all,
With dreadful Fall,
To meet their Doom.

Reels here, and staggers there,
While horrid Storms prevail,
And Courage yields to fear.
All Hopes are lost,
And in Black Night,
Ships guideless quite,
At random tossed.

He hears their mournful Cries,

And Light remounts the Skies:
Rough Billows slake,
And gentle Gales
Swell all their Sails
Their Port to make.

The wearied Sailers rest:
New Life and Safety gained
Warms every fainting Breast.
Joys sweeter taste,
And the dear Shore
Is va'u'd more
For Dangers past.

His Bounteous Actions praise!
Let all the World record
His Mercy's wondrous Ways.

Where Princes are,
His Loves declare
With grateful Songs.
Part 4. Meter 4 As the 113th.

Fair Streams desert the hirsty Lands,
And Springs no more their Waters yield.

Their blooming Hopes and ripening Joys,
And sows with barren Salt the Field.

He turns vast Lands to standing Lakes,
And makes the Sands with Waters flow.

And through the new-raised Fields divides,
And makes new Towns and Cities grow.

Rich Wines the grateful Vineyard yields;
Their Crops are full, profound their Peace;

Their crowding Offspring throng their Gates,
And all their pregnant Flocks increase.

His Counsels, his Commands refused,
A sudden Change o'returns their State.
Down falls their haughty Pride, their Race
Incessant Wars And Plagues desace,
Exposed to every Neighbor's Hare.

Confounds them in their proud Conceits,
And lets their Hopes bewildred fall.

Transfers his favoring Mercies store,
And feeds, and multiplies them all.

(While silent impious Atheists ly)
Admire his Providential Ways!

To meditare on Works Divine,
And sing their great Protector's praise!
PSALM. cviij. As the 110th

Is fixed, thy losty Praise to sing,
I Am ready with my noblest part,
To praise my everlasting King,

While I prevent the Morning's light.

In all the wondering Nations fight.

Above our Thoughts and Measures far:
But higher, Lord, thy Mercies rise,
More swift thy Truths vast Conguests are

Let all the Earth thy Glories see.

I Will rescue those beloved by Theo.

And by his Oath my Joy maintains,
I Will quick Shichcm's Fields possess,
And measure Succoth's fruitful Plains.
Gileads mine, Manasses too,
My Head on Ephraim's strength relies,
The Scepter's Royal Indah's due,
My Kingdom He with Laws supplies.
Moab, my meanest Slave shall be,
And Edom prostrate at my Feet,
And conquere'd Palestina me
With humble Tribute gladly meet.

Or Edom's rocky Frontiers lead?

At last our fainting Armies head.

For Humane Helps are only shows,

We Will trample over our vanquished Foes.
PSALM. cix.

No longer silent go!

And Traitors bolder grow.
Against me-they their Rage excite,
Their Tongues with Falsehood whet.

And causeless Hate beset.

But I in silence pray.

And Love with Hate repay.

Let Satan bind his hands!

When He in judgment stands!


That Office fix another in,
Which to himself was due!
No Father let his Children see,
His widowed Wife go mourn!

Exposed to Want and Scorn!
Their Bread from cruel Hands entreaty,

Seize all his Wea'th, and every Cheat,
His Pains and Gains invade!

Nor all his Orphan race,

Their very Names deface!
Part 2.

Their Father's Crimes remain!
No length of Time, or Years, forget
Their Mother's viler stain!

Their Memory to destroy.

Not Love his Thoughts employ.
But the dear Man, to Sorrows born,
With humblest Thoughts inclu'd;
The broken Heart with Anguish torn,
His bloody Hate pursued

His Lot may Curses be!
His Heart no Blessings ever approved,
Let him no Blessing see!

And with their poisonous draught
His Bowels washed, like Oil diffused,
Quite through his Bones they wrought.

But Curses closely bound;
And Curses for a Girdle bear
To gird him duly round!

From God's revenging Hand;
Whose spiteful Words my Life oppose,
And who against me stand.

My Party kindly own!
Thy Mercy's Goo'd; o let it here
To vescue Me be shown!
Part 3.

With inward Wounds decay,

Or Locusts hurld away.

And all my Leanness see,

And shake their Heads at me.

Thy farmer Mercies now!

Thy Helps dear Lord allow!

Thy Blessings Lord bestow!
Let Them, their own Confusion see,
But me thy gladness know!

Let Shame be round them roul'd!

Thy Praise at large unfold:

With sure assistance stands:
His Soul with saving Wings to hide,
From partial Judges Hands.
PSALM. CX.

Thus to my Lord, has said
Till thou shall see thy Foes abhorred,
Beneath thy Footstool laid;
Sions Hill thy regal claim,
Thy Scepter first shall rise,
Thence Reign and with thy awful Name,
Command thy Enemies,

Thy ready Armies move;
And Preach those happy gladsome years,
The Reign of boundless Love:
Though at a mighty distance now,
The careless People stand,
To Thee they'I then as swiftly flow,
And own thy ruling Hand.
Washed from their Crimes and snowy white.
Their Tempers undefild,
And clothed with Innocence and Light,
And like their Matter mild.
These Conquests first belonged to Thee,
E're dewy Mornings rose,
Or Time could through Eternity,
Thy sacred Birth disclose.

And shook his awful Throne,
And when swift Time shall be no more,
He'el that Engagement own.
"You Are an Eternal Priest, to Thee
"There Is no succeeding Heir.
"And like Melchisedes shall be,
"And Crown, and Miter wear.

Rebellious Kings destroy.

And fill his own with Joy.
But where bo'd Opposition reigns,
The slughter'd Corpses round,
And dying Kings shall spread the Plains,
And stain the purple Ground.

The Rage of Thirst shall know,
With Sorrow's streams be entertained,
And drink of deadly Woe;
Till, all those Difficulties past,
His Glory's largely spread,
And all shall see the Crown at last,
On his victorious Head.
PSALM. cxj.
O Praise the Lord! my Heart, prepare
To praise the mighty Lord!
Wherever his blessed Assemblies me
Will I his Name record.

By Men of Wisdom sought:

And comely Beauty wrought:
His Righteousness eternally
Shall, with his Works, endure

And his Compassions sure.

The Lord at large provides:
His ancient Covenant the same
Still in his Thoughts abides.

He to his People shows;
And Portions, from the Gentiles brought,
On them at large bestows.

His Precepts just and sure;

Through every Age endure.

And gave them lasting Laws;
And still his holy Name, esteemed,
Our Veneration draws.

An Understanding pure
Will in Obedience best appear,
And its just: Praise endure.
PSALM. cxij.
O Praise the Lord! All Blessings wait
On him who fears his Name;
In whom his just Commands create
Pure Love's immortal Flame.

His Generation blessed:

In Wealth and Plenty rest,

Through gloomy Darkness, shines.
Mercy's the righteous Man's Delight:
To Love his Soul inclines.

And lends to those in Need:
In Judgment, from his milder Breast
No cruel Words proceed.

Shall ever sweetly last:

His Heart in God be fast.

Can on his God repose,
Till of the Downfall he is assured
Of all his angry Foes.

The needy Poor supp'ies:
His Righteousness shall ever stand;
His Strength, with Honor rise.

With envious Eyes shall view;
And gnash, and pine; and deep Distress
Their blasted Hopes pursue.
PSALM. cxiij. Proper Tune.

Ye Servants of the Eternal King!


Till Night her sable Wings display,
His Name's immortal Praise proclaim!

The Lord's illustrious Glory stains
The brightest Star, the clearest Sky.

With Him, whose lofty Dwellings are,
Above all Heavens, exalted high?

Survey the never-resting Skies,
And all our humble World below.

And from the Dunghill lifts the Poor;
His Goodness, and his Strength to show.

To Majesty, and Princely State;
And bids'em Crowns and Sceptres claim.

O'er-joy'd a youthful Race to leave.
O praise! o ever praise his Name.
Another Meter.

Ye Saints, with one Accord!
His hoIy Name, with Praise, proclaim;
His holy Acts record!

Till Time it self shall end!

Till Night's dark Shades descend.

His Glories pass the Sky.

Or with his Height can vye?

Through Heaven and Earth can see,

In Want and Misery.

Those who the Dust embrace;
With Kings to vye in Majesty,
And rule his chosen Race.

The barren Womb's restored,
With Joy to embrace a lively Race.
Praise then, o praise the Lord!
PSALM., cxiv.
Israel's Tribes, when Jacob's Race
From barbarous Egypt went,
Judab was his holy Place,
Israel his Government.
Jordan saw their God,
Advancing in their Head:
The Seas, amaz'dly parting, stood,
And Jordan backward fled.

Leaped up like frighted Rams:
The Hills, with the surprising Fright,
Skip'd like the trembling Lambs.

That they divided stood?
What Fears could Jordan's Currents seize,
Or turn his hasty Flood?

So like the frighted Rams?
The little Hills on crowded Heaps
To run, like trembling Lambs?
Jacob's God
Appears, with Glories crowned,
His dreadful Looks, his awful Nod,
The trembling World confound.

He turns the Rocks to Springs:
And from dry Flints, by wondrous Ways,
Unceasing Fountains brings.
Another Meter: As the 113th.

His Empire, and his Name's Repose;
And, more than all the Nations loved:
And with his own Almighty Hand,
From cruel Egyst's barbarous Land,
Their happy Tribes in Peace removed.

The Sea a while, as doubtful, stood;
But soon, with wild Amazement, fled.
Old Jordan's Streams, with headlong Haste,
Astonished Merom's Waves re-pass'd,
And backward flew, to find their Head.

Their Heads above the Clouds before,
Like Rems, from their Foundations leaped
The lesser Hills, as frighted Lambs
Run trembling to their helpless Dams,
Beneath their Parent-Mountains crept.

What made old Jordan's Waters try,
With backward Streams, to find their Spring?

The lesser Hills, like trembling Lambs,
Close to their Parent Mountains cling?

At him the World amazed appeared
The World before its Maker quakes:
His look who now in Jacob reigns,
And there his holy House maintains,
The settled frame of Nature shakes.

Let Jordan's Banks be filled no more,
Let barren Sands around us ly,
Our God can change with wondrous ease
The Flints to Springs, the Rocks to Seas,
And all his Peoples Wants supply.
PSALM. cxv.

But to thy Name is due;
For Mercy lays thy gracious Ways,
And all thy Words are true,

Where Is He whom God they call?

And acts his Pleasure all.

Fine Silver, weighty Gold:
And Men With care such Gods prepare,
And then their Gods uphold.

Though made with Mouths and Eyes,

Who can their Ears surprise.
The strongest Stench, the noblest Sweet
Their Nostrils cannot invade;

Were never for walking made.
With all abusive Scorns appear
Before their Deities,
Yet shall not you there one Murmur hear,
So still their Anger lies.

Who first advanced the Trade,
And such are those whose Souls repose
On what their Hands have made.
Part 2.
Jacob's wiser Seed,
On God securely trust!
He Will help with speed in times of need,
And ever shield the just.
Aaron's sacred Breed,
On God securely trust!
He Will help with speed in times of need,
And ever shield the Just.

In him securely trust;
He Will he'p with speed in times of need,
And still defend the Just.

His Priests shall all be blessed.
Our Tribes shall find his Blessings kind
On all their Dwellings rest.

The Rich, Poor, Young and old;

Shall you and yours uphold.

Who bade theWorld to rise

Lives high above the Skies.

For mortal Men designed,
Man freely reigns, and God maintains
The Gift to them resigned.

Who sink to silence down;

And endless Blessings crown.
PSALM. cxvi.

My Lord my Love shall be;

Who bowed his Ear to me.

Me hellish Pains surpised,
And Troubles often, and Anguish found,
And Sorrows exercised.

To God I humbly prayed,
Thy Help, thy Favor, Lord, I claim,
My soul, dear Savior, aid!

And Mercy freely shows,

To save my soul from Woes.

The Lord was kind to thee,

My Eyes from Tears are free.
He Keeps my Feet from Falls and I
My Woes, by him, survive,

As in his Presence, live.
Part 2.

But sore afflicted I

Men sure are sold to lie.

For all thy Loves to me?

And duly call on Thee.

Abroad in open Light;

In their Redeemer's Sight.

My self thy Servant own,
Thy Handmaid's Son, from Slavery
By Thee discharged alone.

My Sacrifice shall be;
And in the Lords great Name I Will raise
My suppliant Hands to Thee.

In all the People Sight,
In Salem, in thy holy House;
O praise the Lord of Might!
PSALM. cxvij.

Ye Nations all around!
His Goodness through the World record,
His glorious Acts resound!

His Mercy largely flows,
His Truth no Time can e're deface,
Nor Force his Power oppose.
Or thus.

Ye Nations all around!
His Goodness through the W'or'd record,
His wondrous Acts resound!

His Mercy largely flows,
His Truth no Time can e're deface,
Nor Force his Arm oppose.
PSALM. cxviij.
Jehovah praise,
He Is good in all his Ways:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
His Goodness never decays,
Jacob's long protected Race
Adore his wondrous Grace,
His Mercies sure unchanged endure;
When Time resigns his Place.
Aaron's sacred Helts proclaim
The Lords exalted Name:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
His Goodness still the same.

With grateful Praises say,
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
His Mercies never decay.

From Streights soon set me free

What Man can do to me.

His own Assistance sends.
My longing Eye shall soon descry
My Foes expected Ends.

To trust: our Hopes and Care,
Then to repose our Hopes in those,
Who wretched Mortals are.

To fix our Hopes and Care,
Then to repose our Trust in those
Who mighty Princes are.
Part 2.

In God their Strength defied;

I so their Force out-vy'd.

Like blazing Thorns they died:
In Gods great Name I quenched their Flame;
And all their Strength defied.

To work my overthrow;
But through Gods-Aid, though often afraid,
I still in Safety go.

My God's my daily Song;
Salvation He ordained for me,
Who to himself belong.

Where righteous Men reside;
Gods Hand is grown renowned alone,
For Deeds of Valour-try'd.

His Hand on high proclaimed,
His Hand is grown renowned alone;
For valiant Actions famed.

How great his Actions are.

My Life would kindly spare.

Now grant me free access;
I Will gladly there with Thanks appear,
And God my Savior bless.
Part 3.

The Righteous enter there:

Who would his Suppliant hear.

Off by the Builders thrown;
Now all the Coins securely joins,
And makes the Building One.

Amazed the Wonder see.

And Mirth triumphant be.

Our favored Actions take,
Our Business bless with kind Success,
Lord, for thy Mercy's sake!

In Gods Almighty Name!
You who before his House adore,
To you we wish same.

O bind the Sacrifice!
With Cords it nigh his Altars tie,
Till there it bleeds and dies.

I Will Praises sing to Thee.
By me thy Name, thy glorious Fame
Shall still exalted be.
Jehovah praise!
He Is good in all his Ways;
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
His Mercy never decays.
PSALM. cxix. Aleph, 1. Beth, 2.

Gods purer Laws confine,

To Him in Heart incline.

As by his Orders move.

Thy Rules should keep and love.

Could by thy Statutes tread!

When thy Commands I read.

When I thy Judgments know.

To me no Stranger grow!

If he thy Word obey.

O never let me stray!

From Sin to guard my Heart.

And all thy Laws impart!

My ready Lips declare;

Then noblest Treasures are.

Thy Laws before me set;

Thy Words I never forget.
Gimel, 3. Daleth, 4.

So I thy Words shall keep.

To view thy Wonders deep!

Thy Testimonies hide!

My longing Soul divide.

Who from thy Precepts stray.

For I thy Words obey!

But I thy Statutes chose.

My Counsels all compose.

In Dust which prostrate lies.

O teach, and make me wise.

I Will spread thy Works the more.

Lord, by thy Word restore!

To me thy Laws impart.

Thy Judgments fill my Heart.

From Shame my Life discharge!

If thou my Heart enlarge.
He, 5. Vau, 6.

And I Will observe it still.

Thy Laws my Heart shall fill.

For them I dearly love.

While by thy Rules I move!

And make me live to Thee!

And fears, make good to me!

But, Lord, thy Judgments give!

Me by thy Justice live!

As promised, Lord, bestow!

And yet more faithful grow.

Thy Word and Truth from me!

My constant Guides shall be.

In thy Commands secure.

Yet I no shame endure

For them my Hands I Will raise.

And thy Commandments praise.
Zain, 7. Cheth, 8.

In which thou made me trust.


Yet I thy Laws pursue.

And all my Joys renew.

Who from thy Precepts strayed;

My daily Music made.

And keep thy Righteous Laws:

A just Obedience draws.

I Would keep thy sacred Word:

Thy Grace, Dear Lord, afford!

My careful Footstop traced:

I flew with winged haste,

I cannot forget thy Ways

Thy righteous Judgments praise.

Thy Name, and keep thy Word.

Thy Statutes teach me, Lord!
Teth, 9. Jod, 10.

For all thy Words are true.

Good Sense and Knowledge too!

Thy sacred Words to know.

To me thy Statutes show!

But I sincerely move.

Thy Laws entirely love.

To keep thy Laws with Care.

Of Gold and Silver are.

Thy Judgments make me know!

While in thy Paths I go.

Thy Love afflicted me.

Alone descend from Thee.

I Will in the Laws delight.

But I Will thy Laws recite.

With me as Friends appear!

I no Disgrace can fear.
Caph, 11. Lamed, 12.

And on thy Promise waits.

My Sight with Woes abates.

Yet I thy Laws retain.

O now my Foes restrain!

Against thy righeous Law.

And Faithful Precepts draw!

Never from thy Precepts went.

To keep thy Testament.


The Earth, formed by thy mighty Hands,
Stands by thy Patronage.

To Thee their Service pay:

But that I kept thy Way.

Since often by them revived.

Has on thy Precepts lived.

But I thy Statutes read;

But those all Bounds exceed.
Mem, 13, Nun, 14.

My serious Studies move;

In Wisdom's Rules improve.

Than all my Teachers know.

My reverend Elders grow.

To keep thy sacred Word.

With Heavenly Wisdom stored

With which thy Words are blessed:

All lying Ways detest.

And fill my Paths with Light:

I Will keep thy Judgments right.

My fainting Soul revive!

To me thy Judgments give!

I cannot forget thy Law.

From that my Soul withdraw.

For my rejoicing Heart,

From Them can never depart.
Samech, 15. Gnain, 16.

All vain Opinions hate.

And on thy Word I wait,

At pure Obedience aim.

And guard my Hope from shame!

Shall all thy Laws respect.

Who Cheats and Lies project.

Of Sinners purged away.

With awful Fear survey.

Me from Oppressions Force!

To stop the Tyrants Course:

And promised Righteousness,

And with Me Statutes bless!

Thy Testimonies know!

Thy Law should overthrow.

Then heaps of purest Gold;

The Paths which Lies uphold.
Pe, 17. Tsadi, 18.

My Soul to keep them tries,

And make the Simplest wise.

To fainting Spirits are.

O let thy Servant share!

No Sin shall conquer me.

Then mine, thy Laws shall be.

Thy Servants Soul convert!

Vain Men thy Laws desert,

Thy Judgments all are rights.

To Righteousness excite.

Thy sacred Word forget.

On it my Heart is set.

My Soul thy Law retains.

From Age to Age remains.

With Woes, thy Statutes give.

O make me Wise to Live!
Koph, 19. Resch 20.

I Will keep thy Statutes sure

Thy Testimonies pure.

While for thy Word I Wait.

On them to meditate,

Thy Judgments Lord renew!

And Mischiefs ways pursue.

And thy Commands are True.

Were strong and lasting too.

Who don't forget thy Laws!

O save and plead my Cause!

Thy Statutes never pursue.

My strength, just God, renew!

I don't thy Laws decline.

Against thy Word combine.

In Love revive my Soul!

Shall Times last Force control.
Schin, 21. Than, 22.

Yet more thy Words I feared.

Then Spoils in Battle cleared.

But Love thy Laws to trust.

For all thy Judgments Just.

No Cares disturb their Rest.

With thy Commandments blessed.

And loves exceedingly.

My ways before Thee lie.

Thy Statutes make me Wise!

My Promised Rescue rise!

When all thy Statutes taught;

And Orders justly wrought.

For I thy Precepts chose.

My Joy thy Laws compose.

Thy Judgments help my Cause!

Who never forget thy Laws!
PSALM. cxx.

Who bows his Ear to me.

And Tongues deceitful free!

Thou false deceitful Tongue?

And Arrows from the strong.

In Foreign Tents abide!
Wo's me who banished thus among:
Men used to Blood reside!

Who hate the Thoughts of Peace,

Their Quarrels most increase.
Another Meter, Proper Tune.

And deep Distresses cry,
And He receives my Prayer.
2 Lord, save my Soul from those;
Whose Lips with Falslhood close;
Whose Tongues deceitful are.

Or what thy Portion be
Thou while deceitful Tongue?

Shall thou from Justice bear,
And Arrows of the strong,

Must through necessity,
In dismal Tents abide!
Woe's me! who must so long
In Banishment, among
Blood-thirsty Brutes reside!

With those who live by wrong,
But hate the Thoughts of Peace.

That Peace I dearly love.
Their Feuds and Jarrs increase.
PSALM. cxxj.

From whence my Aids descend?

Will sure assistance send.

Thy Watchman can surprise.
Israel safely keeps,
Never shuts his wakeful Eyes.

And he defends thy Head
Thy Maker will his shade secure
Over all thy Dwellings spread.

Shall never make thee i^l.
On thee the Moons unwholesome Gleams
No hurtful Dews distill.

Thy Soul from Harms secure:

His Loves unchanged endure.
Another Meter: Proper Tune.

And thence assured expect,
That God should me protect.

From that God whose Word gave Birth
To the Skies, and humbler Earth.

Thy Guardian never sleeps,

Can never shut his wakeful Eyes;

Thou beneath his Shade shall rest,

Unhurt thy Head shall bear,
And no Distemper fear:
Nor shall the Moon's malignant Gleams,
Poisonous Vapors, used to kill
With her Midnight Dews distill.

And all those I is control,
Which might affect thy Soul.

And with Goodness thee secures,
Which from Age to Age endures.
PSALM. cxxij.

Gods House is all our Quest.

In Salem's Entrance rest.

So Salem's Buildingss grow;

And to his Presence flow.
There Isreal's Testimony stands,
And Gods great Name they praise.

And David's Offspring sways.
Salem's Peace! may those
Who love thee prosper still!

Thy Houses Plenty fill!

O may thy Joys increase!
And where my God his Dwelling makes,
I Will seek thy Wealth and Peace.
Another Meter. Proper Tune.

The Captives cheerful Cries,
Gods holy House is all our Quest.
Our often wandering Feet
In one Design shall meet,
And in the Gates of Salem rest.

With curious Arts increase;
So Salem's happy Buildings rise,

And Israel's God attend,
And Thanks and Praises sacrifice.

There David once was great,
And still its to his Offspring due.
Salem's Peace!
O may thy Friend's increase!
And good Success their Loves pursue!

Thy Walls and Houses round,
And for my fairhful Brethrens sakes,
Thy Cause I Will countenance,
Thy Good and Peace advance
Where God his glorious Dwelling makes.
PSALM. cxxiij.

Almighty Lord to Thee
We raise our sad despairing Eyes,
Consumed with Misery.

His Master's angry Hands,
Or some corrected Maid dispatch
Her Mistresses Commands.
Yet view each Look, each turning Glance,
To find if Pity there
Would in their smoother Brows advance,
Or in their Eyes appear.
So justly we, chastis'd for Sins,
In patient Silence wait,
Till God, once more appeased, begins
To raise our mournful State.

O hear our earnest Cries!
And let thy Vengeance silence those
Who our sad State despise

The scoffing World's Abuse,
And all that Insolence and Scorn,
Which Pride and Wealth produce.
PSALM. cxxiv.

Sing now, and show a grateful Mind.

When Men of Blood our Fall designed.

All swallowed by the barbarous Foe;

At once the Neighboring Meads overflow.

Our Hopes, our Joys, our Souls Destroyed.
Our Foes yet scarce appeased at last,
Or their inhuman Entrails cloyed.

Whose careful Love our Souls redeemed!
And us from cruel Hands set free,
His Name be praised, his Works esteemed.

When just beneath the Fowler's Hand.
Our God disclosed the Fatal Trap,
And we, through Him, in Safety stand.

And Malice private Plots devise,
Our Help's at hand, our Hope divine
On God, who made the World, relies.
Another Meter. Proper Tune.

Had not the mighty God our Cause maintained

When cruel Men with barbarous Oaths combined
And to destroy our hated Land designed.

Their bloody Throats wide as Hell's dreadful Gate
Had gorged our Church, and swallowed down the State

A Flood quite over our Souls at once had brought


And broke the Snares, and our Escape decreed!

Who made the worlds, and whom the worlds obey.
PSALM. cxxv.
Sion's Mount, endure,
Who in their Maker trust:
salem's Walls secure,
So God secures the Just.

Or in their Quarters rest,
Lest they beneath Temptations fail,
Above their Strength oppressed.

Who Peace and Goodness love!
To such thy gentle Smiles disclose,
Whose Hearts are fixed above!

Gods just Revenge shall find:
Who Will Peace among his own disperse,
And to his Saints be kind.
Another Meter. Proper Tune.

Unmoved, like Sion's Mount, endure:
Salem's Walls secure,
So God Himself secures the Just,
His Mercies endless store
Shall last when Time's no more.

When they his holy Saints assail,
They may, but never long, prevail:
Lest Faith crushed by unequal Force,
Should faintly quit the Field,
And to the Tempter yield.

To Men of upright Hearts be kind!
While those the Sinners Portion find,
Who stubborn and perversely move;
But on God's Israel
Shall Peace eternal dwell.
PSALM. cxxvj.

At first it seemed a Dream;

And Praise our glorious Theme.
The very Gentile Nations round.
Cried out at once, amazed:
See how God's Favors there abound;
How soon his Friends are raised!

Our Joys are truly great;

O let thy Hands complete!
So Judah's long deserted Lands
Shall more Refreshment know,
Then where soft Streams through Southern Sands,
With constant Coolness flow

To reap their Fields in Joy.
Their precious Seed may give them Scope
For Faith's Divine Employ.

Their, Seed was vainly sown;
Yet home their Sheaves triumphant bring,
At last a Burden grown.
Another Meter. Proper Tune.

Returned his happy Captives home,
We all appeared
Like those who in their Slumbers dream.

Praise from our cheerful Tongues would come.
Mirth daily was
Our Food, and Praise our daily Theme.
The very Heathens round us wondering, cried,
See how God's Love to them is magnified!

Indeed is highly magnified.
Our present Joys
Are more than former Sorrows great.

Ful^ Streams for Southern Lands provide.
O let our Restitution be at last complete!
Judah's Lands shall more Refreshment know,
Than Sands through which thy cooling Rivers flow.
Thus, though swelled Grief
Rou's in with an impetuous Tide,
Yet sliding off,
It soon its Place to Joy resigns.

And through a fond
Mistake to cold Despair inclines:
Comes home at last with Joys triumphant Sound,
With weighty Sheves his fruitful Harvest crowned.
PSALM. cxxvij.

The Workmen build in vain;
And Towns, without Gods wakeful Eyes,
A needless Watch maintain.

Your daily Works renew,
And till the Stars remount the Skies,
Your daily Works pursue.
Fare never so hard, it is all in vain,
If yet by God unblest;
Do all, and but his Smiles obtain,
You Will safely, sweetly rest.

By Gods blessed Influence grow,

Shot from some Gyant's Bow.

With such bright Shafts resound!
He Will never to Force, nor Malice yield,
While these his Foes confound.
Another Meter. Proper Tune.

The Workmen build, but build in vain,
And Cities useless Guards maintain,
If God withdraws his watchful Eyes.
Gods Help out-does the Builders Art,
And He performs the Watchman's Part.

Your daily painful Works renew,
Your daily painful Works pursue,
Till Night again obscures the Skies,
Support your selves with meanest Fare,
The Drink of Tears, the Bread of Care.
In vain you toil, and build in vain,
If God still at a Distance stands,
And neither bless your Heads nor Hands.
But if his Love you once obtain,
Then rise, or watch, or fast, or weep,
You Will safely live, and sweetly sleep.

By God's immediate Blessing grow,

They seem in all their youthful Bloom;
They too can hurl their deadly Darts
With steady Hands, and daring Hearts.

With such important Shafts as these!
The Man his Foes undaunted sees.
No Fear his Head or Heart confounds,
Nor will he quit the Martial Field,
While these Support and Comfort yield.
PSALM. cxxviij.

Who in his own best way,
Do to thy Great Creator bow,
And his Commands obey!

And on thy Labors rest,
Thy meaner, but contented State,
With Peace and Safety blessed.

With purple Grapes o're-born;
So thy kind Mates chaste Beauties shine,
Her Fruits thy Walls adorn.
The lovely Mother she
With hopeful Issue crowned,
Her Sons, like Olive Plants, shall be
Thy Tables planted round.

On thee his Friend bestow,
Sion's sacred Place,
A thousand Favors show.
Blessed with a firm old Age,
Thy happy Eyes shall see
Thy lively fruitful Heirs presage
A long Posterity

The Churches blessed increase,
Secured by long Felicity,
And universal Peace.
PSALM. cxxix.
Israel say,
My Foes have often oppressed

Distur'd my Peaceful Rest.

And long their furrows drew,
And would of short successes proud,
Their spiteful ways pursue.

Their Cords in Pieces tore.

Who hate to Sion bore!

Which Springs but quickly dies,

And Reapers, all despise.

To such as labored there,
Gods Blessing on Your Labors fall,
His Name your Harvest cheer!
PSALM. cxxx.

From gloomy Deeps I cried

No more to me denied!

Who Lord thy Wrath could bear?

The Spring of Godly Fear.

And on thy Word depends.
E're I the dawning Morning see,
My Soul the Lord attends
To him o raise your Humble Eles,
Poor Isreal's scattered Race!
With him kind Mercy treasured lies
And never failing Grace.
From Him Redemption freely flows,
And He Will redeem Thee too.
From all thy Sins and all those Woes,
Which justly Sin pursue.
PSALM. cxxxj.
NO Prides aspiring Rage,
No swelling Thoughts engage.
Dear God my Heart to beat a part
With this corrupted Age.
I never at Empire aimed,
Nor Crowns, nor Scepters claimed,
Nor soared above with wanton Love,
Of Mysteries enflamed.
But as some Babe at Rest,
Weaned from its Mothers Breast;
Close Silence keeps with gentle sleeps,
Or Smiling Slumbers blessed,
So Lord my Soul set free
From careful Vanity
From Earths delights and unknown Flights,
In Silence waits on Thee.
O Ye of Isreal's race,
O seek his glorious Face!
On Him besure your Faith secure,
And his Commands embrace!
PSALM. cxij.
David's Troubles Lord,
How in Affliction He,

O Jacobs God to Thee!

With Cedar nobly ciel'd.
And Beds with Golden Canopyes,
Would downy Slumbers yield.

Nor stretch my self at ease:
No sleep shall on my Brows encroach
My Lids no Slumbers please.

By Heavenly Favor blessed;
Where Jacobs God on Holy ground,
Will fix his glorious Rest.
It Is done! and as our Meaner Race
Of old their Maker chose.
So rough and mean's that wondrous Place
Where he will at last repose,
Fields and Shilohs Plains,
Are all alas! destroyed!
And Sions Mount unsmooth'd remains,
And rough, obscure, and void;
Yet there his Arc is fixed, and there
His sacred Altars stand;
Till there his Temples roofs appear,
And all the Mount command.

His holy Altars bow,
And at his glorious Feet adore,
And due Submission show!
Part 2.

Assume thy chosen Seat!
And on thy flock which humbly prays,
Thy Blessings Lord repeat!

Thy Saints for Joy shall sing,
David's sake his Offspring blessed,
To Crowns and Scepters bring!
David swear of old,
His Oath in Truth was made,
Thy Seed shall still the Kingdom hold,
From Heirs to Heirs conveyed.

My Covenant observe.
And from those Rules my Laws declare,
Shall never vainly swerve.
I too will them as Kings support,
And thy continued Line:
On Salems Throne in Judae's Court
From Age to Age shall shine.
is Gods Election, where
He Will hold his Residence.

"My longed for Rest Commence.

"Their Poor with plenty cloy.

"And fill their Saints with Joy.
David's Branches ever strong,
"Shall fill the Regal Line,
The Lamp of my Anointed long
"With settled Luster shine.

But his i^lustrous Head
With starry Beams of Glory crowned,
Fresh Honors round him shed.
PSALM. cxxxiij.

Where prudent, Christians move
In peaceful Ways, and all delight
To wear the Chains of Love?
Then Kindness fills their tender Hearts,
And shoots through all their Eyes.
Each Tongue a Love unfeigned imparts,
And Love's their Exercise.

The Head of Aaron crowned,
And down his Head the Ba some rolled,
And drenched his Garments round.
From him the pleasant Odours through
The Tabernacle flowed,
And on the sacrificing Crew,
A thousand Sweets bestowed.

On Sion's Mount distill,
And Clouds their Silver Drops diffuse
On H^mo^'s fruitful Hill.
So God, where Men his Peace maintain,
His Blessing largely sends,
And Love to all that heavenly Train,
From Age to Age extends.
Another Meter, as the 148.
SWeet Peace, blessed Charity,
How soft thy heavenly Charms,
When that uniting Tie
The Souls of Brethren arms;
And soars above
Rough Nature's Jars,
And sinful Wars,
On Wings of Love!
More sweet than Balsams shed,
By Gods divine Command,
On Aaron's sacred Head,
Which all his Garments stained:
And thence distilled,
Gods holy Place,
With heavenly Grace,
And Odours filled.

Which ancient Hermon crowned,
Or Drops which Clouds diffuse
Gods holy Mount around.
And all below
Kind warmth prevails,
And pleasant Dales
With Plenty flow.

The God of Peace descends;
The Church and State maintains,
And every Tribe defends,
His Blessings fall,
And Life and Ease,
And lasting Peace
Extends to all.
PSALM. cxxxiv.

In nightly turns adore
With Praise his wondrous Acts record,
His gracious Smiles implore.

Your Hands devoutly raise,
And all those happy Hours embrace,
To sing his glorious Praise.

The World from Nothing rose,
Great Blessings with a liberal Hand,
On all his Church bestows.
PSALM. cxxxv.

With grateful Anthems raise,

And fill his Courts with Praise!

For it is a pleasant Thing;
When Men with Thanks his Name record,
With Thanks his Praises sing.

His own peculiar Care;

With him in vain compare.

God acts his pleasure all.

And he commands their Fall.
Fierce Lighthings on his pouring Rains,
At his Commands attend:
Rough Winds he from his Treasures dreins,
Which thence in Storms ascend.
God, the Firstborn, from Man to Beast,
Through trembling Egypt slew,
Him, by his dreadful Plagues oppressed,
Distracted Egypt knew.
Pharaoh and all his Armies died
Beneath his weighty Hand

And many a fruitful Land;
and Og, and all who reigned
Of Canaan's Rea^ms possessed,
Israel's Race their Kingdoms gained,
And there secured their Rest.
Part 2.

From Age to Age endures.

While that their Peace procures;
For God for all their Sufferings grieved,
And their afflicted Case,
Will them, from cruel Foes relieved,
With tend' rest Loves embrace.

Of Gold and Silver use,
Whose Mouths were never for Speech designed,
Whose Eyes the Light refuse.

No Breath their Lives declare;

And such their Makers are.
Israel's Race,
O Aaron's House proclaim!

O Praise his sacred Name!

His Name and Acts record;
Whose Glories all his Churches fill,
Praise ye, o praise the Lord!
PSALM. cxxxvj.


His Mercies sure unchanged endure
A never-failing Store.


His Mercies sure unchanged endure
To end^ess Ages known.

Stretched out the lofty Skies:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
When all expiring lies.

The mighty Waters rise:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure.
When Time and Nature dies.

Set up the glorious Light:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
As that immensely bright.


His Mercies sure unchanged endure
In all the Nations sight.

Through Egypt's Land destroyed:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
Over all his Works employed.

Israel's Race:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
When Time resigns his Place.
Part 2.

Made mighty Seas divide:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
Through endless Ages tried.

All Israel's Armies lead:
His Mercies sure Unchanged endure,
In all his Actions read.
Pharaoh's Host
Returning Waves prevailed:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure
On all his own Entailed.

His People marched secure:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
And as his Nature pure.


His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
To all his Servants true.
Amorite,
Bashan's Giant Lord:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
As his Eternal Word.

Israel's Race bestowed:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
To all his Creatures showed.


His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
By all his Saints esteemed.

O praise this heavenly King:
His Mercies sure unchanged endure,
Let all his Creatures sing!
Another Meter, as the 148th.




For certainly
His Mercies sure
Unchanged endure
Eternally.

Stretched out the lofty Skies,

Above the Waters rise.
For certainly, etc.

Drew out the glorious Light,


For certainly, etc.

Through Egypt's mournful Land,
Israel drew

For certainly, etc.

The Seas divided fled,

His Jacob's Army led.
For certainly, etc.
Pharaoh's Host,

Canaan's ancient Coast

For certainly, etc.
Amorite,
Bashan's Monster King


For certainly, etc.



And reigns above the Skies.
For certainly, etc.
PSALM. 137. Proper Tune.
ON Babel's Rivers Banks we sat,
O're-whelm'd with Miseries,
And Tears for Sion's ruined State,
O're-flow'd our mournful Eyes.

As our disordered Minds,
On Willows unregarded hung,
Exposed to wanton Winds.

Disturbed our silent Woes,
And bad us change our mournful Cheen,
Our Thoughts to Songs compose.
"Let Us hear, they cried, that wondrous Song,
"Which once your God could charm,
"Our Ears for Sion's Music long,
"Our heavy Hearts to warm.

To please our haughty Foes?
Shall we, what to our God belongs,
In Heathen Lands expose?
Salem's Woes pass over,
Her Desolations slight,
O may our skilful Hands no more
The curious Ear delight.

If we her Walls forget;
Or don't, above our chief Delight,
Poor Salem's Sorrows set!
Esau's barbarous Race,
How at our Fall they cried,
Down, down, their mighty Walls deface!
O're-turn their ancient Pride!
Babel e're avoid
Our God's revenging Hand,
Since He by whom thy Pride's destroyed,
Shall, blessed, in safety stand.

Who breaks the tender Bones
Of Babes torn from the Mother's Breast,
On unrelenting stones.
Another Meter: As the 51th. Proper Tune.
Euphrates Banks we lay,
Poor slaves oppressed with Cares and Fears;
And thought on Salem's fatal Day,
Our Sighs burst out at last in Tears,
We saw proud Babel firmly walled,
Her Buildings fair, serene her state,
The sight poor Salem's Doom recalled,
Augmenting Sorrows dismal weight.

To calm our Thoughts, and ease our Woes,
Such Ease, alas! in vain we sought,
Our Wounds no Musick's Balm could close.
Careless, at last, we hung them by,
On mournful Willows planted round,
Where the sad Strings by sympathy,
Sighed, broke, and gave a doleful sound.

Our Country waste, our selves in Chains,
A sport of all our Sorrows made,
And called for Musick's pleasing streins.
"Come take your lazy Harps, they cry,
"Tune well, tune every sounding string,
"Let Us have, some godly melody,
"Some cheerful Hallelujah sing!

Our holiest Things to Dogs, or Swine?
Should we God's sacred Name pollute,
Or treat his Foes with songs Divine?
Sion's ancient Fame!
Ah Salem's ruined Walls! shall we
Forget Dear Sion's darling Name,
Or Widdowed Salem's Misery?
No; rather may our Fingers loose
Their Relish on the tuneful Lyre;
Our Hands their sweetest Strokes refuse
Their softest Touch, and noblest Fire,

Our Throats! our Tongues be always dry!
No more our charming Anthems please,
If Salem's sad remembrance dye.
Nay, should Joys sudden Ecstasies.
To Heaven our drooping Tempers raise;
O may we never approach the Skies,
If Sion crowns not all our Praise!
Esan's Sons whose Spite
Unnaturally urged our Fate:
Down, Down with Salem; Raze it quite;
Down with that Birthright-stealing State!
Our deathful Cries not one kind Look
Could from obdurate Brethren gain;
Our Griefs they for Diversion took;
Laughed at our Cries, and mocked our Pain.
Babel, stay;
Thy Sword was cruel too; thy Rage
Could brutish Edom's Curse obey,
And against Tears and Cries engage.
See where God's dreadful Judgments wait,
To strike the dead revenging Blow!
And blessed be He whose mortal hate
Shall make thee taste of Salem's woe!

From Mother's Breasts thy Infant Race;
Nor for their tender Outcries spare,
But dash their Brains in every place.
PSALM. cxxxviij.

Before the Gods will sing,

My grateful Offerings bring:
Before thy Holy Place I Will bow,
Thy Truth, thy Mercies praise;
For over thy Name entirely now
Thy Word it self displays.

To strength my Soul appeared.

When they his Words have heard.

Shall tread thy sacred Ways:
When they thy Just Commands obey,
They Will all thy Glories praise.

The World's vast Empire sways,
On humble Souls He casts his Eye,
And scorns the Prides haughty ways.

As sunk and lost appear,
Thy Hand shall break my angry Foes,
And save my Soul from fear.

O don't my Hopes defeat;
But all thy Works, for me, with care,
Thy Handy works complete!
PSALM cxxxix.

And thoroughly canvass'd me!

Is known long since to Thee.

My private Path displays;
By Thee my very Sleeps are scanned,
And all my various Ways.

Before the Words are framed,
Before my Tongue can find its use,
Is in thy Ears proclaimed.

Behind, Before, survey;
I know thy Hand, thy ski full Care,
Thus built my humble Clay.

This Forming Wisdom know;

And I, alas! too low.
Whither, O whither then should I
Go from thy piercing sight?
O whither from thy Spirit's Eye
Direct my secret flight?

Thy Throne of Glory's there:
If in Hell's gloomy Deeps I lie,
In Hell thy Powers appear.

Outstrip, the fleeting Day,
And toward the Ocean's Western Springs
Find out an unknown way,

Would lead me out at last;
And thy Right Hand my Steps command,
And ever hold me fast.

Shall sure my Steps conceal,
Around me soon a glorious Light
Would all my Walks reveal.

One dismal Gloom to frame,
That Gloom, with more than Mid-days Beams,
Would Night it self inflame.
Part 2.

Thy Hand my Reins possessed;
And, in a wondrous Covering rolled,
Did all my Limbs invest.

Thy dreadful Wonders shine;
My Thoughts shall all my Works recall
And in thy Praise combine.

My curious Texture grew;
Thy Wisdom all that Darkness traced,
And all my Substance knew.

And in His Book enrolled;
And as each Day with Shape endu'd,
My growing Members told.

How vast their Numbers are!
The Sands we round the Ocean see,
Cannot with their Sums compare:

And in my Nightly Dreams,
They through my Soul themselves diffuse,
And are my waking Themes.

Begone, Blood-thirsty Crew,

His Name with Lies pursue!

Who hate my maker, fly;

With deadly hate defy.

Which way my Thoughts incline!

Conduct in Paths divine!
PSALM. cxl.

O save! O rescue me!

And quarrel constantly.

Of angry Serpents are;
Their Lips more Venom far disclose,
Than fretted Asps prepare.

Me, Lord, in peace bestow!
Whose spite against my ways is bent,
And would my Steps o'erthrow.

With unsuspected Arts;
And when they quite surround my Way,
They please their scornful Hearts.

Then to the Lord I said,
The Prayers, the Supplications own,
By me thy Servant made!

My safety, Lord, descends:
When furious Battles compass me,
Thy Hand my Head defends.

Nor gain their base Design!
Lest they their Hearts; if thou connive,
To haughty Pride resign.

Who now my Path surround,
Let the malicious Lies they brew,
Themselves at last confound!

Hot Flames, about them fly,
And they, O never raised again,
In dismal Darkness lie!

On Earth continue long;
Let mischief hurt the Griping Fool,
Who still delights in Wrong.

The Lord will still maintain:

And in thy Sight remain.
PSALM. cxli.

And let my Voice, my Cries

As Evening Sacrifice!

My Lips with Wisdom close!

And wicked Works oppose.
Lest I associate with those
Who only Sin pursue,
And feast where luscious Plenty flows
Amongst the scornful Crew.

The Good my Sins reprove;
Their Wounds are kinder far than they
Who feign deceitful Love.
Let those, Lord, heal my Head, as Oil
Which heals and molliflies:
And though my Foes attempt my spoil,
For them my Prayers shall rise:

Be trampled under so,
That they my prudent Words may praise
And Wisdom's sweetness know!

Or Ploughs tear up the Ground;
So, Lord, our Bones unbury'd lie
Our emptied Graves around.

O don't my Soul reject!
But from those Snares my Foes devise,
My Innocence protect!

Dear Lord, entangle me!

His own Confusion be!
PSALM. clxij.

I prayed, I cried to Thee,

I laid my Misery.

But, Lord thou know it my Way,
And how, my Foes with active spite,
Their Snares about it lay.

I stand, alas! unknown,
Where e're my Soul for Refuge flies,
It Is left forlorn alone.

And said, "My Hope's in Three,
"Thou Lord, while I on Earth abide,
"Shall all my Portion be.

"My lost Condition view,
"Save me from those too mighty Foes,
"Who now my Life pursue!

"Thy holy Name to praise!
"The Just with Songs shall compass me,
"When Thou my Head shall raise.
Another Meter.

To him I cried aloud

And all my Sufferings showed

Thou knewst my certain way,
How Snares by cruel Arts improved,
About my Footsteps lay.

But was, alas! unknown,
My wretched Soul no shelter found,
And was esteemed by none.

In Thee my Hope's secure,
Thou art, since I my Life possessed,
My Lot, my Portion sure.

My groaning weakness see!
Save me from Persecutor's rage,
Too strong alas! for me.

To praise thy sacred Name,,
And when the Righteous compass me,
Thy Bounties I Will proclaim.
PSALM. clxiij.

In Truth and Righteousness!

Thy Servant's Soul oppress!
For when thy searching Eyes begin,
To try our fading Years,
Lord, in thy sight overwhelmed with Sin,
The purest; Saint appears!

My Life quite overthrown,
I ly in Darkness lost, like, those
Who to their Graves are gone.

My Heart deserted mourns,

My happier Age returns.
On all thy Acts, I daily muse,
Thy Works run daily over,

So Thee my Hands implore.

Thy smiles, dear Lord, I crave;
Least I, like dying Men, appear,
Who just approach the Grave.

For, Lord, I trust in Thee,
To Thee I lift my Soul, make plain
The way of Life to me!

To Thee for shelter fly.

My Lord, my God, most High!
O let thy Spirit lead me to
The Land of Righteosness,

And for thy Glory bless!
Just Lord, from Troubles set me free,
And all my Foes destroy,
Thy Mercy, and thy Help, let me,
Thy Servant, Lord, enjoy!
PSALM. clxjv.

And whose victorious Might,
Instructs my ready Hands for War,
My Fingers for the Fight,

My Savior, and my Shield.
In Him I trust; through Him to Me,
My willing People yield.

Owned by the favoring Ey?

Like Shadows swiftly fly;

The Hills, the Hills shall smoke!

With one confounding stroke!

And save and rescue Me,
From Headstrong Crowds, my Crown defend,
And Foreign Tyranny;

In Deed and Word agree.

On Lute and Harp to Thee.
Part 2

On Royal Head bestows,
And from his Servant David wards,
The plotting. Traitors blows.

From Foreign Enemies!
Whose Words Actions all agree,
In Treachery And Lies.

In Watered Gardens show.
And with a kindly vigor thrive,
And daily stronger grow:
Our Daughters like fair Marble Coins
Smoothed by some Currious hand;
On which the building sweetly joins,
The Roofs securely stand.

And run our Garners over;
Till none by Numbers force can know,
Our never ending store.
Our Flocks their Young by thousands, near,
Our very Gates shall lay,
Ten thousands in the rolling Year
About out Pastures play.

We no Invasions fear,
No Captives know, no Cries among
Our peaceful Dwellings hear.

On whom such Favor flows!
But o more happy those on whom,
Their God himself bestows!
PSALM. cxlv.

Above the lofty Skies,

And Psalms of thanks devise.

No Bounds his Greatness knows.

His wondrous Works disclose.

To search thy wondrous ways.

While I thy Greatness praise.

To mind thy Goodness brings,
And all thy Loves unfailing Stores,
In grateful Anthems Sings.

To vengeance only slow,

Over all his Mercies flow.

And celebrate thy Name;
Thy Saints as gladly all their Days,
Thy glorious Might proclaim.
Part 2.

Thy Servants Talk shall show,

Thy awful Glories know,

Thy Government endures;

Their timely Ease procures.

From Thee they beg their Food,

And satisfies with Good.

Thy Ways and Works appear!

To those who seek Thee near!

Thou see thy Servants Tears.
Thy Hand relieves their Various Cares,
And Ends their Doubts and Fears.

Thy Judgments dreadful weight.
To thy revenging Wrath resigned,
And unrelenting Hate.

Above the lofty Skies;
And all to Thee shall pay their Praise,
Till Times last Moment dies.
PSALM. cxlvj.

Thy Maker's Glories raise!

I Will sing thy lofty Praise.

For safety never rely,

And all whose Counsels die.

On God his Lord depends;

Whose Promise never ends.

When pressed by Violence.
Does Prisoners free, and Food to those
Of Hungry Souls dispense.

And with his healing Art
Sets up the sinking Soul; supplies
With Love the faithful Heart.

The Lord himself maintains,
But over the Stubborn Sinner draws,
Destructions fatal Chains.
Sion reigns;
His Actions all record,
His Throne from Age to Age remains,
Praise ye, o Praise the Lord!
PSALM. cxlvij.

Our Mighty Maker's praise,
Its pleasant, and a comely thing,
His Glorious Acts to blaze.
Salem's Walls repairs,
Her wretched Dust removes,
And home her wandering Outcasts bears
Fenced with his tenderest Loves,

What Man from Man conceals.
And gently binds the bleeding Heart,
Its wounds as gently Heals.

And all their Number Counts,

All numbering Art surmounts.

But casts the Sinner down,

Your Harps with Praises Crown!

Which Rains as duly bring,
And makes the buried Plants to rise.
The Sun burnt Hills to spring.

For Birds of Prey provides.

Of mighty Men derides.

And for his Mercies wait
Sion, Salem, o proclaim,
Thy God's Majestic State!
Part 2.

And blesses all thy Seeds,

On Wheats pure fatness feed.

With wondrous swiftness flies,

Which all in Fleeces lies.
His heavy Frosts, like Ashes you
Spread over the Fields behold.

Can stand his pierceing Cold?

His Ice, his Frosts and Snow!
Before his Warmer gusts abate,
And all in Waters flow.
Jacobs chosen Race
His Sacred Writings gave;
His Laws, his Judgments, by his Grace,
His Israel only have.

Nor of his sacred Word,
Nor of his Righteous Judgments heard,
Praise ye, o praise the Lord!
PSALM. cxlviij.

On High his Glories raise!

His Name with Joyful Praise!

To praise his glorious Name;

Of Waters praise the same!

Made by his great Command,

Unmoved, unchanged to stand.

And each unfathomed Deep.

Yet still his Orders keep!

And every Fruitful Tree!

And Insects each Degree.

Who rule the World below,

And Heads adorned with Snow.

Whose Name excells alone,
Whose Name is over the Worlds vast frame,
On Winds of Glory blown,

His Saints his Praise record,
His Israel, his near Friends repeat,
Praise ye o praise the Lord!
Another Meter. Proper Tune.

The Skies his Praises sing!
Let Heaven the Seat of Love,
With Heavenly Praises ring
Of his great Name,
Ye Angel Host
With Reverence boast;
His Praise proclaim;
Bright Sun, whose Golden Rays,
Fill all the World with Light;
Pale Moon, bright Stars which blaze,
Through the dark Fields of Night,
Heavens outmost Frame;
Vast Deeps which lie
Above the Sky,
His Praise proclaim!
Let these their Maker Praise,
By whose Command Divine,
The Sky its Wealth displays,
And all those Beautys shine.
Fixed by his Will,
They all stand fast,
And Orders past,
With Joy fulfill.
Ye Dragons Earth-born Race;
And all ye Deeps profound.
With every Natural Grace,
Your Masters Praises sound.
In Praise agree,
Fire, Clouds, Hail, Snow,
And Storms which blow,
At His Decree.
Let Soaring Mountains now,
And smaller Hills descend,
Fruit Trees before Him bow,
And stately Cedars bend.

Birds airy wings,
And creeping Things,
His Praise proclaim!

And Subject Nations show.
Great Men of Princely Birth,
And such as Judgment know.

Each Virgin Throng,
With Old and Young,
His Praise describe!

Exalt their Maker's Name,
And various Ways invent,
To spread his glorious Fame.
His Name shall rise,
With Beams divine,
Through Earth to Shine,
And reach the Skies.
Israel great,
And Praise is comely, where
Before his Mercy Seat,
His grateful Tribes appear.
O all accord,
Who Worship near,
His Presence there,
To praise the Lord!
PSALM. cxlix.

The great Jehoviah praise!
His Praise in his Assemblys show,
On all his Holy Days!
Israel's Faithful Race,
Their Maker's Power adore,
And Sion's Heirs with humble Grace,
Their Monarchs Smiles implore!

Let all his Praises sing!
To the Meek, in whom the Lord Delights,
Beauty and Safety spring.

With lightsom Glories blessed;
And Praise their God, whose happy choice
Secured their Downy Rest

A Ground for all their Joys;
Then They a two edged Sword shall wield,
Whose very weight destroys:

To all the Nations round,
Whose glittering brandished Edge, with Fears
Will all their Hearts confound.

With Ease in Slavish Chains!
And till their Noblest Youth confined,
Strong Fetters weight restrains.

Which Holy Books record,
Such Honor all his Saints assume,
Praise ye, o praise the Lord!
PSALM. cl.

His Holiness proclaim!
His wondrous Acts record.
And praise his awful Name,
His dreadful might,
O celebrate!
His Power and State,
In Songs recite!

With sweet Tuned Harp and Lute!
Sing all the Chorus round,
To cheerful Pipe and Flute!

The King of Kings
With sounding Strings,
And Organs praise!

Till with a Shriller sound,
Wide as the vaulted Sky,
Your cheerful Notes rebound.

Each living thing,
His Glories sing,
And Praise his Name!
Another Meter.

His strength, his Holiness adore,

His Majesty with praise implore!

With Lute and Harp his praise advance!

And Viols, and a cheerful Dance!

His Name to loudest Cymbals Sing.
And all whom Vital Spirits inflame,
O praise the World's Eternal King!
To Father, Holy Ghost and Son,
One blessed one glorious Trinity,
As is, as was e're Time begun,
So endless praise, and Glory be!
The End of the PSALMS.
DOXOLOGIES.
For the 1st. Meter of the 1st. Psalm, etc.
TO Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
Immense, Eternal, Three in One,
By Us, and all the Heavenly Host,
Be Glory paid, and Homage done!
For the 2d. Meter, and all of 8 and 6 Syllables.
To Father, Spirit, Son, Blessed Three,
In whom we move and Live,
One undivided Trinity,
Unceasing Glories give!
For the 2d. Meter, of the 8th. Psalm. and all of Ten Syllables.
To God the Father, and to God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost, blessed Trinity,
As is, as was, before the World begun,
Eternal praise, Eternal Glory be!
For the 2d. Meter of the 11th. Psalm.
To Father Holy Ghost and Son,
One God, as was e're Time begun,
As now We see,
So ever be
All Humblest Homage done!
For the 2d. Meter of the 15th, Psalm.
To Father, Holy Ghost and Son,
Blessed Three in One!
Eternal Praise and Glory pay,
His Word obey,
As was of Old; as still we see,
And shall, when Times extinguished, be.
For the 17th Psalm, and all Two Sixes, and Eight and Six.
To Father, Spirit, Son,
One God in Persons three,
Be Glory paid and Homage done,
Through all Eternity
For the 20th. and 122d. Psalm, 1st. Meter and proper Tune.
To that great Lord above,
The God of Peace and Love,
In Essence One, in Persons Three,
To Father, Spirit, Son,
Each God immense alone,
One Undivided Trinity.
To him your Anthems raise,
And Holy Songs of Praise,
And Glories pay, and Reverence show,
So God of old was blessed
Of these he is still possessed,
And these will when Time's done be due.
For the 22d. and 124th. Psalm. 2d. Meter.
To God the Father, and to God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost, Almighty Three,
One only God, one Glorious Trinity,
As shall be, is, and was e're Time begun,
Be lasting Glories paid and Homage done.
For the 23d. Psalm, 2d. Meter.
To Father, Holy Ghost, and Son,
Eternal glorious Three and One,
Be Glory paid.
His Word obeyed.
As was before Times Birth begun,
As is, and still shall be,
Through all Eternity.
For the 24th. Psalm, 2d. Meter.
To one great God, one mighty Lord,
One Eternal Trinity,
The Father, the Eternal Word,
And the Spirits Majesty,
We Will gladly raise,
Unceasing praise,
And his endless Glories sound.
So Saints of old,
His Name extold.
So we'll keep the Eternal round.
For the 29th. Psalm, or 127th. 2d. Meter, or 48th. 2d. Meter.
To Father, Holy Ghost, and Son,
One blessed, one glorious Trinity,
Who framed this Universe alone,
All Honor, Praise, and Glories be,
So 'twas of Old, at Present too,
And shall when Time's run out be due.
For the 33d. Psalm. 2 Meter.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
By us, and all the Heavenly Host,
Be equal Glories paid!
Great Three in One! thus blessed of old,
They still their ancient Honors hold,
And must be still obeyed.
For the 43d. Psalm. 2d. Meter.
To the Father, Spirit, Son,
One glorious Trinity,
Persons Three, in Essence One,
Eternal Glory be!
Thus e're Time begun its race,
The Godhead was obeyed,
This when Time resigns its place,
Must to our Lord be paid.
For the 3d. Meter os the same Psalm.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One blessed Eternal Trinity,
By us and all the Heavenly Host,
Be Praise ascribed and Majesty,
So 'twas at first, and still shall be,
When Time expires, and Nature's lost.
For Psalm. 45th. Meter 3d. etc.
To that great Lord who rules above,
The God of Might, of Peace, and Love,
In Essence One, in Persons Three!
To Father, Holy Ghost and Son,
Each God Himself, immense alone,
One undivided Trinity.
To Him with Hearts exalted raise,
Your Holy Hyms and Songs of Praise,
And Glories pay, and Reverence show.
So He before Time's Birth was blessed,
Of these He Is now by Right possessed,
And they will, when Time's no more, be due.
For the 50th. Psalm. 2d. Meter.
To God the Father, and to God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost, coaequal Three;
Three Holy Persons, but adored in One!
All equal Honors, equal Glories be,
His Glory shone e're Time's first Springs could move it,
And vast Eternity shall more improve it.
For the 51st. Psalm. and 137th. Psalm. 2d. Meter.
All Glory to that Mighty Lord,
Who made the World, and all its Host!
The Father, the Begotten Word,
And the proceeding Holy Ghost.
As was e're Time's first Race begun,
As was when Time commenced his Score.
As is, and ever shall be done,
When Nature sinks, and Time's no more.
For the 53d. Rsal. 2d. Meter.
To one Almighty Lord,
One glorious Trinity,
The Father, Spirit Word,
Eternal Glories be,
So happy Angels Sung,
Before the World begun,
So ever Lord among,
Thy Servants shall be done.
For the 58th. Psalm. 3d. Meter.
To God alone,
The Mighty Father, Mighty Son,
And Holy Ghost,
Blessed Trinity, great Three in One,
Be Homage done.
As was before the World begun,
When the Angel Host!
Over Rebel Mates the Conquest won,
So we at present Sing his glorious Praise,
So All shall Sing when Time it self decays.
For Psalm 60, and 121st. Meter 2d.
To Father, Holy Ghost and Son,
One God, in Persons Three,
All Praise and Glory be!
As was before Time's race begun;
As is now, and shall be paid,
When swift Time its self is laid.
For Psalm. 69, 2d. Meter.
To Father and Son,
And Pure Holy Ghost,
One blessed Trinity,
All Glory be paid,
As e're Ttime begun,
By the Heavenly Host,
And by All must be,
When Time's motions are laid.
for Plal. 72, 2d. Meter.
To Father, Holy Ghost and Son,
Blessed Trinity, Great Three in One,
Be Glory paid and Homage done,
So 'twas before this All was made,
Nor shall God's Honors ever fade,
But shall when All Is consumed be paid.
For Psalm 76, or 148th. Proper Tune.
To Father, Spirit, Son,
The glorious Trinity,
In Sacred Essence One!
All Praise and Glory be,
As now We see,
As was Time past,
And shall outlast Eternity.
For Psalm 85, 2d. Meter. Proper Tune.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
One blessed one glorious Trinity,
From all the World's Created Host!
Eternal Praise and Glories be,
So 'twas e're Time begun,
And ever shall be done.
For Psalm 93, 2d. Meter.
To Father, Spirit, Son,
Eternal Three in One!
All praise and Glory be,
As 'twas in Times of old,
And we shall still behold,
And through Eternity.
For the 95th. Psalm. 2d. Meter.
To the Father, Spirit, Son,
God Eternal Three in One,
Be all Praise and Glory paid,
When the World in Dust is laid.
For Psalm. 97. 2d. Meter.
To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Spirit, Three,
A glorious Trinity,
In Eternal Essence One.
By all the bright Angelic Host above,
By us the Sons of Grace, and Heirs of Love,
Be Praise and Glory paid,
As was in days of old,
As is where God's Command's obeyed,
And shall as long as Nature Hold,
And when the World's consumed and all its ruins cold
For the 98. 2d. Meter.
To Father, Spirit, Son,
Eternal Three in One,
One glorious Trinity,
Unceasing Glory be,
As was e're time begun,
And ever shall be done.
For the 119th. Psalm. Proper Tune.
To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Holy Ghost,
Be Glory paid, and Homage done,
By all the Heavenly Host:
By us, and all Mankind, as was,
Before Time'e Course begun,
As is, and undecay'd shall pass,
When Time's last Moment's run.
For Psalm. 127, Meter 2d.
To Father, Holy Ghost, and Son,
One glorious God, in persons Three,
One Undivided Trinity,
Be glory paid, and Homage done,
'Twas so e're Time's first race begun,
And shall be when his last is run.
Si male quid Cecini me Culpa redarguet Ipsum,
FINIS.

