THE CANTICLES, OR SONG OF SOLOMON, Reduced into a Decasyllable: Together, with
the Song of MOSES In Meeter.

By R. K.

Printed in the year 1662.

To the Right Honorable, and my ever most Honored Lady, the Lady DIANA
Countess of HOLLAND.
AS Providence, Right Honorable, made you Inheretrix of so Princelike a
Mansion, as few of your Sex have ever been superior therein; so are you hardly
to be paralleled in those more estimable possessions treasured up in your mind,
being as well familiar with other Tougues, as the owning Orator of that
harmonious Lutetian Language, in the voluble, and elegant pronuntiation whereof
so to be admired, and in all other gifts and endowments both of body and mind
so transcendent, as if Urania seemed only in your person and presence to erect
a second Parnassus for her learned sisters. But amongst your Honors matchless
virtues, that of your Modesty, together with my own insufficiency, would
disallow the expatiating in a Panegyricall address; I shall therefore decline
further praises, which not to seem flatteries where you are not known, would
doubtless be thought detractions where you are. An obligation (most Honored
Madam) under which a great and undeserved favor from your honor, having
brought me long since, (not only after my septennian travels, and return into
the Land of my nativity) in then admitting me a servant in your most Noble
Family and House of Kinsington, but also commending me afterward as Secretary
to King James (of Famous Memory) his Ambassador. And therefore being ignorant
how I might give testimony of my bounden duty, I took upon me the boldness to
devote these few lines, only to manifest I had a desire (though unable) to
make expressions of a due engagement, and so be delivered of that most pregnant
conception of my devoted service; not doubting but as the Persian Monarch
kindly accepted the poor man's handful of water, so your Honor will likewise
admit this mite into the treasury of your Noble acceptance. As it has pleased
our Gracious God to give you patience (that precious and powerful Panoplie) in
all troubles, not only in the most injurious deprivation of goods and lands,
but also in the Martyrdom of the nearest relation: so that there may be, as
with holy Job, a double restitution; as also that all the blessings on mount
Gerizim in this life, and in the next all the blessings that Christ preached on
the Mount, may be multiplied in your Honorable Person and Posterity, shall be
the daily prayers of

Your Honors most humbly devoted servant R. K.

To the Reader.
IF any wonder at my presumption in publishing these lines, especially at such
a time wherein so many learned productio^s are set forth, and so little
regarded: I wish them to understand that I was induced hereunto by some, not of
the meanest Quality, either for Virtue or Learning: and though for many late
years we have heard the voice as of Haddarimmon in the vallye of Megiddo,
nothing but Lamentation and mourning in our Streets, we now (blessed be God)
have cause to celebrate our deliverance in Songs of thanksgiving. Wherefore I
have reduced into this Form of a Decasyllable, the Song of Solomon: The Subject
as it proceeds from Royal (rather Divine) Authority, so it is no less
Musical, and therefore were it overmuch Boldness in me to deviate from the
text: Wherefore so near as I could, I confind my self to the words themselves,
as by a Comparative Perusal will appear. Else happily the Verse (as more
delightful to Curiosity) might have been invested in some Richer habit, and so
Marched out in a more Poetical Posture then now it seems to do. How any
shall value the ensuing Lines I am Ignorant, though my Conscience bears me
witness in these weak Endeavors, my only Aim was at Gods Glory, for that not
seldom a verse moves such Delight and Attention as otherwise were not so
easily obtained in the opinion of

R. K.

The Song of SOLOMON.
Argument. Chap. 1.
The Church to Christ makes most sincere expression
Of her true love: and by her own confession
She is deformed, yet prays she may be sent
Amongst the flocks unto the shepherds tent;
He condescends (O gracious declaration)
And so there is made a joint congratulation.
Verse:
AN holy Cantick paralelled by none,
A Song of Songs, the Song of Solomon;
The sacred Kisses of his mouth kiss mine,
Thy love does much exceed the sweetest wine.
There Is hope of concord (Diapason sweet)
When spouse her Husband does so kindly greet.
The fragant savor of thine Ointments prove thee
Effus'd, and therefore do the Virgins love thee.
O draw me (sure thy hests we will not shun)
We will make have and after thee will run.
A Gracious King most lovingly has sought me,
Who has into his royal chambers brought me.
We will be glad and all rejoice in thee,
Thy love's more precious then the Wine to me.
From thee the upright never will depart,
But most entirely love thee in their heart.
I do indeed confess that black I am
(O all you daughters of Jerusalem)
Like tents of Kedar though a comely one,
Or like the Curtains of King Solomon.
O look not one me, for if black I be,
The Sun has blemish't, and defaced me:
There Is none but will with me condole my woes,
To think that brethren should become my foes,
They only made me keeper of the Vine,
But careless and remiss I kept not mine.
Thou whom my soul does love, O let me taste,
And know where thou art pleased to take repast:
Conceal it not, I pray, to me disclose
Where all thy tender Flocks at noon repose:
For why should I be one that turns aside,
Or goes astray? Come, come, be thou my guide.
O thou of women fairest, would thou know?
Then trace my flocks, and by their footsteps go;
And let thy tender Kids take nutriment
With near approaches to the shepherds tent.
I did thee often, O my love, compare
To horses that in Pharaohs chariots are.
Rich jewels set in rows thy cheeks do grace:
Chains of the purest gold thy neck embrace.
To the Rich Golden Borders for content
Weel make with Silver Studs for Ornament.
While that my royal King receives refection
I feast one sense with Spicknards sweet confection.
A bundle of sweet Myrrh my well-beloved
Is unto me, and so of me approved.
O may it be well pleasing in his sight
Between my Breasts to lodge and lie at night.
He as a Cypress cluster is to me
Among the fertile vines of Engedie.
Behold, behold how fair thou art my Love,
Thine eyes are like the eyes of the comely Dove.
Behold, Beloved thou art pleasing fair,
Our bed is also green, my Dove, my Dear.
The Beams are Cedar which our house support,
Our Rafters Firr: so do they well consort.
Argument. Chap. 2.
The mutual love of Christ, and Church we hear,
The hope and her vocation does appear;
Christ's tender care of her, and her profession,
The Church her hope, and of her faiths Confession.
I am the Rose of Sharons fertile field,
The fairest Lilly that the valleys yield.
Even as the Lilly that with thorns does grow
Amongst the daughters, so my Love ye know.
Amongst the Brambles, as the Apple Tree,
Amongst the sons so is my Dear to me.
'Twas my delight and best my Joys did fit,
When underneath his shadow I did sit:
There to repose I made no little have:
His fruit was sweet and pleasing to my taste.
He brought me to the wine, and for mine honor
Did over me display his loving Banner.
Stay me with flaggons, apples comfort me;
For I am sick, sick of loves malady.
Under my head he does his left hand place,
And with his right he kindly does embrace.
I do adjure you of Jerusalem
Even by the Roes and Hindes, and all of them
You do not stir, nor once my love dis-ease,
Nor yet presume t'awake him till he please.
O leap for Joy, and cheerfully rejoice,
For surely it is my well-Beloved's voice.
Behold, he comes leaping upon the mountains
Skipping the hills, above the liquid fountains.
If my Beloved I can directly know
He Is like the Heart, or like the nimble Roe:
Behold, behind our wall he takes his Station,
And through the window makes his Speculation:
O how these sacred Glympes my Soul do nourish,
When through the Lattess I behold him flourish.
My Dear-Beloved spoke, and thus did say,
Rise up my Love, my Fair One, come away.
For lo the thunder clapping storms at last flowers,
Do cease, the Rain is over, Winter past.
The Earth's adorned with sweet and fragrant
The Birds make Music in their wooden Towers:
Rejoice and sing your comfort's now at hand,
The Turtles Voice is heard within our Land.
The Fig Tree shows her fruit though it be green,
The Vines sweet smelling tender grapes are seen;
(His joyful sacred Voice brooks no delay)
Arise my love, my fair one, come away.
My Dove! that art within the secret place
Of Rocks, and Stairs, let me behold thy face:
Thy sweet melodious voice O let me hear,
Voice sweet, and countenance comely both appear.
The great and little Foxes see you take,
For in our Vines and Grapes they havoc make.
My well-Belov'd is mine, mine wholly is,
I in like manner totally am his.
Amongst the fairest Lillies feeds he,
Till Sun dispell the Clouds, till Shadows flee.
Return beloved, like some young Heart or Roe,
Which do upon the Mount of Bether go.
Argument: Chap 3.
The Church her fight and Conquest in temptation;
Her Glory and Triumphant Ostentation.
In bed I sought him by obscurest night
Whom my Soul counts most precious in her sight*
No place so secret which I had forgot,
Wherein to seek him, yet I found him not.
No Street, nor place in City, but i will prove,
And search and seek him whom my Soul does love,
The Watch men which about the City went,
Even they had found me out incontinent:
To whom I said, o can you learn or prove
Where I may find him whom my Soul does love.
From whom, when I had past a little space,
I found my Soul's sweet Love, and only Grace:
Fast hold on him I took, (I long had sought him)
I left him not, but to my mother brought him;
Nor yet content until I did him see
Within her Chamber that conceived me.
I do adjure you of Jerusalem
Even by the Roes, 2 Chap. 7
the Hindes, and all of them,
You do not stir, nor once my Love disease,
Nor yet presume to awake him till he please.
Who is She now that comes (I pray confess)
Like smoking Pillars from the Wilderness,
Perfumed with Odours, Mirth, and incense brave,
And with all Spices which the Merchants have?
Behold the Princely bed of Solomon,
A rich one sure, for like it there is none;
There Is round about it (if you view it well)
Sixty brave valiant men of Israel.
They brandish all the Sword: they fear no Skars,
Courageous all, all expert in the wars
All have their Swords upon their Thighs for fear
Least any Danger should by Night appear.
A Palace was there made by Solomon
Of the strong stately Trees of Lebanon:
The Pillars Silver, and the Pavement Gold,
The Covering Richest purple that is sold:
The midst thereof with love was paved for them,
(I mean) the Daughters of Jerusalem.
Go forth ye Daughters of Mount Zion, see
The King now crowned in Glorious Majesty:
(O chiefest Joy, o sacred Consolation
To hear of such a matchless Coronation.)
Argument. Chap. 4
The Graces of the Church he makes appear,
With that true Love which he to her does bear;
She likewise prays he would vouchafe her fit
In his most Gracious presence for to sit.
Lo thou art fair, yea fair thou art my Love,
Thine eyes are like, the eyes of the comely Dove:
Those comely hairs which grow among thy locks,
In my esteem are like unto the Flocks
Of Goats, (the increase whereof makes th'owners glad,
Such as look down from great Mount Gilead.
Thy teeth like flocks of Sheep in order grow,
Which purely washed do from the washing go;
Each one brings twins (so fruitful is the Stock)
There is not one prov's barren in the flock.
Thy Lips like Scarlet are (thy teeth to fence)
Thy talk's most comely, sweet, thy conference;
And as a piece of a Pomegranat rare
Within thy Locks, even so thy Temples are.
Thy neck is strong, it is of great force and power,
Made for Defense like David's only Tower
A Thousand Shields do hang within the same,
And all the Targets of great men of fame.
Thy Breasts like two young Roes (being twins) appear
Which do themselves among the Lillies cheer.
Till the day break, and shaddows pass away,
The Mount of Myrrh, and Incense i will survey.
Thou art all fair my Love; in thee's no blot,
Nor is there blemish or deformed spot.
O come with me my Spouse, come let us be gone,
Make have, come quickly from Mount Lebanon:
From Amana see that thou cast thine eye:
From Shenir top, and from Mount Hermon high,
From Dens of Lions, and the Mountains fell,
Where none but cruel spotted Leopards dwell.
My Spouse, my Sister, thou have ravished
Mine Heart, and have with Love me captive led;
Both with thine Eye, and Chain (my Love my Dear)
Which thou about thy comely neck do wear.
How fair's thy Love (my Spouse and Sister mine,
And how much better is thy Love then Wine!
And all thine Ointments in their fragrant smell,
The richest Spices of the world excel.
Thy Lips like th'hony comb drop constantly,
Under thy Tongue does milk and honey lie:
The Garments which thou daily put'st upon
Do smell as sweet as Mount Lebanon.
My Spouse a spring shut up, or fountain sealed
Does seem, or like a Garden fast impaled.
Thy plants, an Orchard of Pomegranates are,
With Spicknard, Camphire, and what else is rare:
Spicknard, and Saffron, Calamus, and Myrrh,
Aloes, chief Spices, with the juice of Firr.
O Gardens fountain, Well of waters living,
With streams from Lebanon true comfort giving.
Arise O North, and come O South, and blow
On this My Garden, that the spice may flow;
Let my Beloved to his Garden have,
And of the fruits best pleasing let him taste.
Argument: Chap. 5.
Christ here awakes his Church and her he calls,
She tast's his Love, and then Lovesick she falls,
Not fully able yet she interlaces
A brief de scription of him by his Graces.
Lo in my Garden Sister now am I,
My Myrrh I gather with my Spicery,
On th'hony comb, and honey is my will
To feed; on Wine and Milk to drink my fill:
Be merry friends, it is comfort you may think,
When you may feast, and may so freely drink.
Indeed I now do sleep and slumber take,
And yet methinks my troubled soul does wake,
It Is my Beloved's voice that sems to knock,
And says, come quickly, quick to me unlock,
My Sister, Love, my Dove, immaculate,
Make have, dispateh, wide open set the gate,
My head is full of dew, which does distill
The humid Drops by night, my locks do fill.
I am now naked, for my Coat is gone,
Alas what means is there to put it on?
I now am washed, and now my feet be clean,
Must I pollute, and them defile again?
My Love his hand put up into the door,
My Bowels for him all were moved sore.
I did arise when as my Love did knock,
With Myrrh perfumed were Fingurs, and the Lock.
I then did open, but my Love was one
Withdrew himself, and quickly got him gone.
(O Admiration,) when to me he spoke,
How sense and motion did my Soul forsake?
I sought him truly, him I could not find,
No answer had I: (Justly I repind.)
The watchmen which in City walk the round,
They sought me out, to me they gave the wound;
Wall Keepers struck me, and they did assail
To take from me mine Honor, and my veil.
I charge you Daughters of Jerusalem,
Tell my Beloved, of Love that sick I am.
O Thou fairest of Women, (tell me if thou can)
Is thy Love fairer then another man?
In thy Beloved is this thy trust so large
Him to prefer, and us so deeply charge?
O! my Beloved is ruddy, pure, and white,
In whom before ten thousand I delight.
His head is like pure gold, and gold that is fine,
His bushy Locks like raven sable shine.
His Eyes are like Doves Eyes, by Rivers wet
With Milk, and washed, composed, and fitly set.
His Cheeks like Beds of Spices in our Bowers,
Adorned, and graced with sweet perfuming Flowers.
His Lips like fragrant Lillies dropping sweet,
Which with strong smelling Mirrh do kindly meet.
His hands like Ringes of Gold with Berill suited
(Hands pure, such hands as never were polluted)
Like Ivory, such is his belly bright,
With Saphyrs purest in our humane sight.
Like Marble Pillars, such his legs I hold,
Set on the Sockets of the purest Gold.
Like Lebanon his countenance permanent,
And like the Cedars, so most excellent.
His Mouth is sweet, yea loving sure is he,
He only, he is best pleasing unto me.
It Is my Beloved, my friend, and his I am,
(O all you Daughters of Jerusalem)
Argument. Chap. 6.
The Church in humble manner makes profession,
And of her Faith in Christ, atrue confession,
He shows the the Graces of his Church (his Dove)
And likewise does assure her of his Love.
Of Women thou the fairest, where is that one
I mean, how far is thy Beloved gone,
And whither's thy Beloved now turned aside,
That we may seek him, and with him abide.
To Beds of Spices my Beloved does go,
To gather Lillies which in Gardens grow.
He feeds amongst them, and without repine:
His Love I am, and my Beloved is mine.
As beautiful as Tirza art thou love,
So comely as Jerusalem thou'l prove:
Fierce like a Foe with brave undaunted braggs,
And like an Army with displayed Flaggs.
O turn, O turn thy piercing eyes from me,
For now they seem to get the victory.
Thy Hair, and comely Locks which thou do wear,
Like Flocks of Goats in Gilead do appear.
Thy teeth like flocks of sheep in order grow
Which purely washed, chapter 4. 2.
do from the washing go:
Each one bring twins (so fertile is the stock)
That there is not one proves barren in the flock.
And as a piece of a Pomegranat rare
Within thy Locks even so thy Temples are.
Queens Sixty, Eighty Concubines there stand,
Virgins in number, which exceed the Sand.
My Dove she is one that is pure and unpolluted,
Sole Daughter of her Mother she is reputed:
The Daughters yield her blessed Salutations,
The Queens, and Concubines high Commendations.
Who is she, and what countenance in my sight
Is that which seems like to the morning bright?
Fair as the Moon, so radiant and so clear,
As is that glorious Sol in his careere:
And Like an Army (cruel in their manners)
Most dreadful in their practice under Banners.
Down to the Garden of the nuts went I,
Fruits in the valley that I might espy,
If Vine did flourish, if the Grapes were good,
Or if Pomegranat yet put forth a Budd.
My Soul for flight before I was aware
In Chariots of my Nobles did prepare.
Return, O Shulamite, procrastination
Renounce, on thee let us fix our contemplation,
In this, our Shulamite, what can you see?
Even as a furious armed company.
Argument. Chap. 7.
Her Graces here are Further manifested,
Faith and Desire are likewise here protested.
How splendent is the appearence unto me
Of thy shod feet, O Princely Progeny?
Joints of thy Thighs like precious Jewels are,
No work of Artists may with them compare.
Thy Navell's some round goblett without crack
And such an one as does no Liquor lack:
An heap of Wheat so white as whitest Lilly,
Even such an one is my Beloved's Belly.
Thy Breasts like to young Roes being twins appear;
Which do themselves among the Lillies cheer.
Thy Neck is like some Turret mounted high, 4. chapter 5.

Or Tower of the purest Ivorie;
Thine Eyes are full of Glory and of State,
Like Heshbons Pool near to Bathrabbims Gate:
Like Lebanons fair Tower is thy Nose,
Which on Damascus does a look dispose.
Thine head like Carmel, purple is thine hair:
The Kings bound in thy rafters (O my Dear.)
How fair, how pleasant art thou for delight,
My Love? (I am unable to recite.)
Thy stature's like the palm, those breasts of thine
Are like the clusters of the sweetest vine,
Up to the Palm tree I much speed will make,
And on the boughs thereof fast hold will take:
Like clusters of the Grape thy breasts shall be,
Smell of thy nose like apples unto me.
The pallat of thy mouth like sweetest wine,
Prepared and fit for this beloved of mine.
Such wine as forces by pure influence,
Those fast asleep to show their eloquence.
My well beloved is mine, mine wholly is;
I in like manner totally am his.
Into the fields, beloved, let us have amain,
And in the villages let us remain.
Let Us early rise and to the Vine-yards hie,
There to behold the Vines plosperity:
Whether the root its tender vine does nourish,
Or Vines yield Grapes, or if Pomegranat flourish:
And there, even there thou shall most certain prove,
That I will freely give to thee my love.
The Mandrakes, O beloved, I send forth a smell,
Within our Gates are all things that excel;
All fruits both new and old, and best approved
I have laid up for thee my best beloved.
Argument. Chap: 8.
The Church her love, and fervent inflammation
To Christ: and of the Gentiles true vocation:
The Church here longs, nor can she brook delays,
She daily for Christ's sacred coming prays.
O would thou were like my native brother,
Who sucked the breasts of my most loving mother.
When I without should find thee would I meet thee,
And would most kindly with my kisses greet thee:
With kindest greeting that might be devised,
I would salute, and yet not be despised.
Then would I bring, and forthwith would conduct thee
Into my mothers house who would instruct me,
Where thou should drink wine (of such influence)
Of my pomegranats, spiced Quintescence.
Under my head his left hand should he place,
And with his right should kindly me embrace.
I charge you daughters of Jerusalem, 3. chapter 5

Even by the Roes, the Hinds, and all of them,
You do not stir, nor once my love dis-ease,
Nor yet presume t'awake him till he please.
Who is this now comes leaning (pray confess)
On her beloved from the wilderness?
By mine endeavors I have raised thee
From underneath the fruitful apple tree;
There that dear mother that conceived thee
Did bring thee forth: (a blessed progeny.)
O thou my love, see thou do not forget me
In heart, on arm there like a signet set me:
For love is strong as death, and jealousy
Is to the grave most like for cruelty:
They Are coals of fire, which issue from the same,
which do afford an hot and vehement flame.
Much water cannot quench lov's inflammation,
Nor can floods drown it with their inundation:
Though man would give his whole estate for love,
It would naught but contempt and hatred move.
We have a sister, but those springs be dry,
Which fed young babes, and still them when they cry;
What shall we for our little sister do,
When for her shall be suit and seeking to.
If that she be a wall without defect,
On her a silver palace we will erect:
If that a door she be we thus dispose her,
Only with boards of Cedar to enclose her.
I was a wall with breasts like towers bright,
Then was I one found favor in his sight.
At Baal-hamon was a vineyard large,
Which Solomon to keepers gave in charge;
Each did a thousand silver pieces bring
For fruit thereof unto the royal King.
It Is near at hand the vineyard which is mine:
(O Solomon) a thousand must be thine:
For such as keep the fruit we will prepare
(A portion fit) two hundred for their share.
All the companions to thy voice give ear:
O thou that in the gardens do appear,
And dwell: O therefore let my soul rejoice,
Cause me likewise to hear that blessed voice:
Make have beloved, like some young heart or Roe,
Which do upon the spiced mountains go.
The Song of MOSES. Deuteronomy. 32.
And they sung the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb. Revel. 15. 3.
GIve ear a while you heavens high
To that I have in hand,
Thou earth below thy self apply
My words to understand.
As bigger rain from clouds does fall
My speech power out I will,
And as the drops of dew so small,
So shall my words distill.
As gentle rain, that glads the flowers
which pleasant Garden yields;
And as the stronger streams of showers,
Which wash the Grass, in Fields;
The matter which I shall record,
Is great Jehovah's name,
Give Glory therefore, to the Lord
By listening to the same.
The most strong God has perfected
His works, which show his might,
And all his ways are ordered
By Judgment, and by Right:
In word so faithful him account,
As works do show him strong,
As he in Judgment does surmount,
So far is he from wrong:
Its of themselves that they be bad
Who spilt themselves with Sin,
A Bastard brood, and Nation mad,
Not sons, nor ought of kinn.
Is this the thanks, O folk unwise,
You for your God prepared,
Ye foolish men, is this your guise,
Your Lord thus to reward:
What, is he not thy Father dear,
Who thee most dearly bought,
Who made thee of his mercy mere,
And faishion'd thee of naught?
The day's forepast remember well,
Time's gone to mind recall;
Ask Grand-syres old, and they will tell,
And aged Fathers all.
The highest God when he of old
Gave Nations each their share,
Alotting Adam's Sons to hold
Their Portions as they are:
The Borders of the People he
Appointed out to lie,
As numbered now the issues be
Of Jacobs Progeny.
Jehovahs portion is his stock
That chose he for his own,
His Lot is fell in Jacobs Flocks
His Heritage alone.
In midst of wastfull Wilderness,
He there forlorn him found,
In place of doleful barrenness,
A roaring fruitless ground:
He led him like a skilful guide,
And taught him carefully,
And from all peril did him hide,
As apple of his Eye.
As Eagle moves her birds to fly,
By fluttering ore her nest,
Shoots out her wing, lifts up on high
Her brood she bears to rest;
Even so the Lord, and none beside
Jehovah he alone
Led him about, and other guide
Or God with him was none.
He bare him to the highest hills
To eat the fruits in field,
And suck the honey which distills
From stone, and Oil Rocks yield.
To feed on butter of the Kine,
And Milk of fruitful Sheep:
Fat Lambs, and Rams, and Kids which clime
on Bashan hill, so steep:
The grains of purest Wheat for bread,
He him alow'd to have:
The Grape's sweet blood, and liquor red
For drink to him he gave.
But he full fed, began to kick
With heel, and spurn full hard,
So gross thou art, and brawnd so thick,
And laded so with lard:
Eft soon therefore did he forsake
The God which life him gave.
And of the Lord no count did make
Who him from death did save.
They him provoked to jelousie
With gods of Nations strange;
And did through their idolatry
His love to hatred change,
They served such gods they never knew,
Not gods but fiends they were,
A sort of start up gods and new,
Whom Fathers did not fear.
The mighty Lord thou have forgot,
Who thee of love begat,
And thou thy god remembrest not,
Whose hand did thee create.
The Lord was angry for to see
His children to offend:
From them my face I will (said he)
Turn back, and see their end:
For sure a froward nation,
And overthwart they are,
A Faithless generation
From truth removed far.
With that which is not God, they me
Provoke to Jealousy,
Me to displease in love they be
With every vanity.
To Jealousy I will them move
By men not great nor gay,
I mean their patience for to prove
By some as mad as they.
For fire is kindled in my fume,
Which burns to hel's deep pit,
The earths increase for to consume
And mountain roots with it.
My plagues on them I will bestow,
Mine arrows I will spend.
My wrath by hunger some shall know,
By heat, shall others end*
A bitter plague appoint I shall
With teeth of beast to tear:
The serpents which in dust do crawle
For them their stings shall bear.
The sword without shall overtwrow
In chambers fear shall slay
Young men, young maids, babes, him also,
Whose head for age is gray.
I said I sure would havoc make,
And scatter them abroad,
So that their names should quite forsake
The place of their abode.
But that I fear their foes fell band,
Would boast and brag it out,
And say it was our mighty hand,
That brought this work about.
A nation senseless sure are they,
No whit for to amend.
For were they wise, then would they weigh,
And mark their latter end.
How should one man a thousand chase,
And two ten thousand foil,
Except their God drew back his Grace,
And sold them to the spoule.
For with our God, their Gods no whit*
Are once to be compared:
No though our deadliest foes should sit
The Judgment to award.
Their grapes, are grapes of bitter gall,
Their (...) cruel death;
Their wine, they Dragons venom call,
And Aspes most deadly breath.
And is not this reposed in store,
And treasured up with me:
Yea sealed sure with many more,
So sure as sure can be.
Revenge, and recompense mine are,
Their foot in time shall slide,
Their day of ruin is not far,
Their Judgment stays no bide.
Yet God shall for his folk repent,
And Judge their cause alone
When as their strength, and power is spent,
And all their hope is gone.
When once he may begin to say,
Where now is all their boast,
Where are those Gods which were their stay
On whom they trusted most.
Which ate their sacrificed fall
And drank their offered wine*
Let them rise up, and help; for that
They need no help of mine.
No God besides me, can be found,
Behold I, I am he,
I kill, I save, I heal, I wound,
None, none can hide from me.
Mine hand to Heaven up I stretch,
And swear, I live for ay.
My glittering sword (...)
And whet, I home (...)
If once on Judgment I (...)
My wrath on foes shall (...)
Mine haters then shall understand,
I can regard them all.
My shafts I shall make drunk in blood,
My sword shall flesh devour.
On slain and spared when I think good
My wrath on them to power.
Ye Nations with his Church him praise,
For you it will be good:
For sure it is he will always
Avenge his servants blood.
His enemies shall feel his hand
In vengeance more and more,
But for his people, and his land
He mercy has in store.
FINIS.

