A PARAPHRASE UPON THE SONG OF SOLOMON.

BY G. S.

Cum Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt. 1641.

To the King.
SIR,
I Presume to invite you to these sacred Nuptials: the Epithalamium sung by a
crowned Muse. Never was there Pair of so divine a Beauty, nor united in such
harmonious Affections: and infinitely he deserved her love; redeemed at so dear
a Price, and inricht with so invaluable a Dowry.

SIR, Let me find your Pardon for thus long continuing to make my Allay
current by the impression of your Name. Directed by your propitious Aspect,
have I safely steered between so many Rocks; and now, arrived at my last
Harbor, have broken up my ruinous Vessel.

The humblest of your Majesty's Servants George Sandys.

Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes.
March 31. 1641.
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE SONG OF SOLOMON.
Cant. I.
SPONSA. IOyn thy life breathing lips to mine;
Thy love excels the joy of Wine:
Thy Odors, o how redolent!
Attract me with their pleasing sent;
These sweetly flowing from thy Name,
Our Virgins with desire inflame.
O draw me, my Beloved, and we
With winged feet will follow thee.
Thy longing Spouse at length, great King,
To thy prepared Chamber bring:
Then shall our Souls, intranst with joy,
In thy due praise their Zeal employ;
Thy celebrated loves recite,
Which more then crowned cups delight.
Who Truth and sacred Justice prise,
To thee their hearts shall Sacrifice.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
You Branches of that holy Stem,
Though black, in favor I excel:
Black as the Tents of Ismael;
Yet graceful, as the burnisht Throne,
And Ornaments of Solomon.
Despise not my discolored look:
This Tawney from the Sun I took.
My Mothers Sons envied my worth,
And swollen with malice, thrust me forth
To Keep their Vines in heat of Day,
While, ah, my own neglected lay.
More loved then all of humane Seed,
O tell me where thy Sheep do feed;
Where rest they, in what grateful shade,
When scorching Beams the fields invade!
Why should I stray, and turn to those
Who are but thy disguised Foes?

SPONSVS. O thou the fairest of thy kind!
I will inform thy troubled Mind.
Follow the way my Flock had led,
And in their steps securely tread;
Thy Kids feed on the fruitful plains,
Besides the Sheep-coates of our Swains.
Thou love art like those generous Steeds
Which Pharo for his Chariot breeds,
Trickt in their rich Caparisons.
How shine thy Cheeks with sparkling Stones,
Which loosely dangle from thine ears!
Thy Neck the Oceans Treasure wears.
I will a golden Zone impart,
Enameled with curious Art.

SPONSA. WHile he the Prince of Bounty feasts,
And entertains his happy Guests;
My Spiknard shall perfume his hair,
Whose Odor fills the ambient air.
All Night his sacred Head shall rest
Between the Pillows of my Breast.
Not Myrrh, new bleeding from the tree,
So acceptable is to me:
Nor Camphire Clusters when they blow,
Which in Engedies Vineyard grow.

SPONSUS. Thy Beauty, Love, allures my sight,
And Sheds a Firmament of Light.
In either Eye there sits a Dove;
So mild, so full of Artlesse Love!

SPONSA. Thou, my Beloved art fairer far;
Thou as the Sun, I but a Star.
Come, my Delight, our pregnant Bed
Is with green buds and violets spread:
Our Cedar Roofs are richly gilt,
Our Galleryes of Cyprus built.

Cant. II.
SPONSUS. I Am the Lilly of the Vale,
The Rose of Sharons fragrant Dale:
Lo, as th'unsullyed Lilly shows
Which in a Brake of Brambles grows;
My Love so darkens all that are
By erring men admired for fair.

SPONSA. Lo, as the Tree which Citrons bears
Amidst the barren shrubs appears:
So my Beloved excells the Race
Of Man in every winning Grace.
In his desired Shade I rest,
And with his Fruits my Palate feast:
He brought me to his Magazines,
Replenisht with refreshing wines:
And over me, a tender Maid,
The Ensigns of his love displayed.
With Flagons o receive my Powers,
And strew my Bed with Fruits and Flowers,
Whose taste and smell may cordial prove,
For, ah, my Soul is sick with Love:
Beneath my head thy left Arm place,
And gently with thy Right embrace.

SPONSUS. You Daughters of Jerusalem,
You Branches of that Holy Stem,
I, by the mountain Roes, and by
The Hearts which through the Forest fly,
Adjure you that you silence keep,
Nor, till she call, disturb her sleep.

SPONSA. Is it a Dream! or do I hear,
The Voice that so delights mine Ear!
Lo, he over Hills his steps extends,
And bounding from the Cliffs descends;
Now like a Roe, out-strips the wind,
And leaves the breathed Heart behind.
Behold! without my Dearest stays,
And through the lattice darts his Rays.
Thus, as his looks, his words invite:
O thou the Crown of my Delight,
Arise my Love, my Fair One, rise,
O Come, delay our Joy envyes.
Lo, the sharp Winter now is gone,
The threatening Tempests over-blown;
Hark, how the Aires Musicians sing,
And carrol to the floury Spring,
Chaste Turtles, housed in shady Groves,
Now murmur to their faithful Loves:
Green Figs on sprouting trees appear,
And Vines sweet smelling Blosomes bear.
Arise my Love, my Fair one Rise,
O Come! delay our Joy envies.
O thou my Dove, whom Terror locks
Within the Cranies of the Rocks;
Come forth, now like thy self appear,
And with thy Voice delight mine Ear:
Thy Voice in Music, and thy Face
All conquers with resistlesse Grace.
My loved Companions, for my sake,
These Foxes, these young Foxes take:
Who thus our tender Grapes destroy,
And in their prosperous Rapine joy.
I am my Loves, and He is mine;
So mutually our Souls combine!
He, whose affection words exceeds,
His Flock among the Lillies feeds.
Return to me my only Dear;
Stay till the Morning Star appear;
Stay till Nights duskie shadows fly
Before the Days illustrious Eye.
Run like a Roe, or Heart, upon
The lofty Hills of Bitheron.

Cant. III.
SPONSA. Stretched on my Restless Bed, all night
I vainly sought my Souls Delight;
Then rose, the City searched: No Street,
No Angle my unwearyed Feet
Vntraced left: Yet could not find
The Only solace of my Mind.
When Lo, the Watch who walk the Round,
Me in my Souls distemper found:
Of whom, with passion, I inquired;
Saw you the Man so much desired?
Nor many steps had farther past,
But found my Love, and held him fast:
Fast held, till I the so long sought
Had to my Mothers Mansion brought.
In that adorned Chamber laid,
Of her, who gave me life, I said:
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
You Branches of that holy Stem,
I, by the Mountain Roes, and by
The Hinds, which through the Forest fly;
Adjure you that you silence keep,
Nor, till he call, disturb his sleep.

CHORUS. What Beauty from the Desert comes,
Like Spires of Smoke raised from sweet gums!
With Aromaticke Powders fraught,
By Merchants from Sabaea brought.

SPONSA. Behold the Bed he rests upon,
The Royal Bed of Solomon:
Twice thirty Soldiers, who excel
In Valor, Sons of Israel,
So dreadful to their Enemies,
Their bright Swords mounted on their thighs,
His Person guard from the affright,
And Treasons of concealing Night.
King Solomon a Chariot made,
Of Trees from Lebanon convay'd:
The Pillars Silver, and the Throne
With Gold of Indian Ophir shone:
With Tyrian Purple ceil'd above,
For Sions Daughters paved with Love.
Come Holy Virgins, O come forth,
Behold a Spectacle of worth!
Behold the Royal Solomon,
High mounted on his Fathers Throne,
Crowned with the Crown his mother placed
On his smooth Brows, with Iems enchac'd,
At that solemnized Nuptial Feast,
When Joy his ravished Soul possessed.

Cant. IV.
SPONSUS. HOw fair art thou, how wondrous fair!
Thy Dove like Eyes in shades of Hair;
Whose dangling Curles appear like flocks
Of Climing Goats from Gileads Rocks:
Thy Teeth like Sheep in their return
From Chison, washed, and smoothly shorn,
None marked for barren, none of all
But equal Twins at once let fall.
Thy Lips like threads of scarlet show,
Whence graceful accents sweetly flow:
Thy Cheeks like Punicke Apples are,
Which blush beneath thy flowing hair:
Thy Neck like David's Armory,
With Polisht Marble raised on high;
Whose walls a thousand Shields adorn,
By Worthies often in Battle born:
Thy Breasts are Twins, Twins of the Roe;
There grazing where the Lillies grow.
I to the Mountains will retire,
Where bleeding Trees perfumes expire:
Until the Morning fleck the sky,
And Nights repulsed Shadows fly.
How beautiful thy looks appear!
In every part from blemish clear!
My Spouse, at length let us be gone;
Leave we the fragrant Lebanon:
Look down from Amana, Look down
From Sheners top and Hermons Crown:
From Hills where dreadful Lions rave,
And from the Mountain Leopards Cave.
Thou who my Spouse and Sister art;
How have thou ravished my heart!
Struck with one glance of thy bright Eyes!
One Hair of thine in Fetters ties!
Thy Beauty, Sister, is divine,
Thy love, my Spouse, more strong then wine.
Thy Odors, far more redolent
Then Spices from Panchaia sent:
Thy Lips drop Honey, from below
Thy Palate Milk and Honey flow.
Thy Robes a sweeter Odor cast,
Then Lebanon with Cedars graced.
My Love, by mutual vows assured,
A Garden is with strength immured:
A Crystal Fountain, a clear Spring,
Shut up and sealed with my Ring:
An Orchard stored with pleasant Fruits;
Pomgranet Trees, there spread their roots,
Where sweetly smelling Camphire blows,
And never dying Spiknard grows;
Sweet Spiknard, Crocus newly blown,
Sweet Calamus and Cinnamon:
Those Trees which sacred Incense shed,
The Tears of Myrrh, and Aloes bled
From bitter wounds; with all the rare
Productions which perfume the Air.

SPONSA. Those living Springs from thee proceed,
Whose Drils our plants with moisture feed:
Like Crystal Streams which issue from
The Fountain-fruitfull Lebanon.
You cooler Winds breath from the North,
You dropping Southern Gales break forth;
On this our Garden gently blow,
And through the Land rich Odors throw.
Come Love, Come with a Lovers have,
Our riper fruits and spices taste.

Cant. V.
SPONSUS. MY Spouse, my Sister, thou who art
The Joy and Treasure of my heart:
I to my Garden have retired,
Reapt spices which perfumes expired;
Sweet Gums from trees profusely shed,
On dropping Combs of Honey fed;
Drunk Morning Milk, with new pressed Wine:
O Friends, whom like desires combine;
Eat, drink, drink freely: nor remove
Till you be all inflamed with Love.

SPONSA. Although I sleep my Passions wake,
For he who knocked, thus sadly spoke:
My Love, my Sister, thou more mild
Then gallesse Doves, my undefiled,
O let me enter! Night has shed
Her Dew on my uncovered Head;
Which from my drenched Locks distills,
And with a frozen numnesse chils.
Can I assent to thy request,
Disrobed and newly laid to rest?
Shall I now cloth my self again?
And feet so lately washed, distain?
But when I had his hand discerned,
Drawn from the latch, my bowels yern'd.
I rose, no longer could defer
To unlock the Door; when liquid Myrrh,
Thence dropping, on my finger fell,
And breathed an odoriferous smell.
But ah, when opened he was gone:
His grief fetched from my heart a groan.
In vain I sought my Souls Beloved;
I called him, o too far removed!
The Watch and those who walk the Round,
In this pursuit the Afflicted found:
Smot, wounded, and profanely tore
The Sable Veil my Sorrow wore.
You Virgins of fair Solyma,
I charge you, if you meet him, say,
That I his Spouse am sick for Love,
And with your tears soft pity move.

CHORUS. O thou of all our Sex most fair,
Can none with thy beloved compare!
Does he so much our Loves transcend
That we alone should him intend!

SPONSA. Lo! in his face the blushing Rose,
Joined with the Virgin Lilly, grows:
Among a Myriad he appears
The Chief, and Beauties Ensign bears.
His head adorned with burnisht gold,
Which Curls of shining hair infold,
Black as the newly pruned Crow:
His Eyes like Doves by Fountains show,
Late bathed in a Rivolet
Of Milk, alike exactly set:
His Cheeks, sweet Spice, and flowers confer,
His Lips, like Roses dropping Myrrh.
His Hand, the wondering Eye invites,
Like Rings that blaze with Chrysolites:
His Belly, pollisht Ivory,
Where Saphires in blew branches lie:
His Legs, like Marble pillars, placed
On Bases with pure gold inchac'd:
His Looks, like Cedars planted on
The Brows of lofty Lebanon:
His Tongue, the Ear with Music feeds:
And he in every part exceeds.
You Daughters of Jerusalem,
Such is my Friend, my praises Theme.

Cant. VI.
CHORUS. Fair Virgin, paralel'd by none,
O whither's thy Beloved gone!
Direct our forward Zeal, that we
May join in this pursuit with thee.

SPONSA. Behold, the more then life desired
Down to his Garden is retired:
There gathers Flowers, Feasts in the Shade,
On Beds of bruised Spices laid.
Our mutual flame all flames exceeds:
My Dear among the Lillies feeds.

SPONSUS. Not Regal Terza, Isreal's
Delight, thy Beauty, Love, excels:
Not thou, Divine Jerusalem,
That art of all the World the Iem:
Nor Armies with their Ensigns spread,
So threaten with amazing Dread.
O turn from me thy wounding Eyes!
In every glance an Arrow flies!
Thy dangling Hair appears like flocks
Of climing Goats from Gileads Rocks:
Thy Teeth, like Sheep in their Return
From Chison, washed and smoothly shorn;
None marked for barren, none of all
But equal Twins at once let fall:
Thy Cheeks like Punick Apples are,
Which blush beneath thy flowing Hair.
They boast of many Queens, great store
Of Concubines, and Virgins more
Then can be told: my Vndefill'd
Is all in one; the only Child
Of her fair Mother: and brought forth
To show the World an unknown Worth.
Queens, Virgins, Concubines, beheld,
Admired, and blessed the Vnparalel'd.

CHORUS. Who Is this, who like the Morning shows,
When she her Paths with Roses strews!
More fair then the replenisht Moon,
More Radiant then the Sun at Noon:
Not Armies with their Ensigns spread,
So threaten with amazing dread.

SPONSUS. I to my pleasant Gardens went,
Where Nutmegs breath a fragrant sent,
To see the generous fruits which graced
The pregnant vale, with springs inchac'd:
To see the Vines disclose their Iems,
And Granets blooming on their Stems.
Then unaware, and half amazed,
Me thought my ravished Soul was raised
Up to a Chariot, swift as winds,
Drawn by my Peoples willing Minds.

CHORUS. Return fair Shulamite, return
To us, who for thy absence mourn.
What see you in the Shulamite!
Two Armies prevalent in fight.

Cant. VII.
SPONSUS. O Princess, thou then life more dear,
How beautiful thy feet appear;
When they, with purple ribands bound,
In golden Sandals print the ground!
Thy Joints, like Jewels, which impart
To wondering Eyes the Workmans Art:
Thy Navell, like a Mazer, filled
With Juice from rarest fruits distilled:
Thy Belly, like a heap of wheat,
With never fading Lillies set:
Thy Breasts two Roes, new weaned, show,
Which fell at once from one fair Do:
Thy Neck, an Ivory Tower displayes:
Thine Eyes, which shine with equal Rays,
Like Heshbons Pooles by Bathrabim,
Where silver-scaled fishes swim:
Thy Nose, presents that Tower upon
The face of flowery Lebanon;
Which all the pleasant plain survays,
Where Abana her streams displays:
Thy Head, like Carmel, clothed with shade;
Whose Tresses Tyrian fillets brai'd.
The King, from Cypress Galleryes,
This Chain of strong Affection ties.
How pleasant! O how exquisite!
Thy Beauty framed for sweet delight!
Thy Stature, like an upright Palm:
Thy Breasts, like Clusters dropping Balm.
I will ascend the Palms high Crown,
Whose Boughs Victorious Hands renown,
And from the spreading Branches Root,
Will gather her delitious fruit.
Thy Breasts shall like ripe Clusters swell,
Thy Breath like new pulled Citrons smell:
Choice wines shall from thy Palate spring,
Most acceptable to the King:
Which sweetly shall descend, and make
The Dumb to speak, the Dead to wake.

SPONSA. I, my Beloved, am only thine,
And thou by just exchange art mine;
Come, let us tread the pleasant fields,
Taste we what fruit the Country yields,
And in the Villages repose
When shades of Night all Forms enclose.
Then with the early Morn repair
To our new Vineyard; see if there
The tender Vines thrust forth their Gems,
And Granets blossom on their Stems.
There, where no frosts our Spring destroy,
Shall thou alone my Love enjoy*
How sweet a smell our Mandrakes yield!
Our Gates with various fruits are filled:
Fruits that are old, fruits from the tree
New gathered, all preserved for thee.

Cant. VIII.
SPONSA. O Had we from one Mother sprung!
Both at her Breasts together hung!
Then should I meet thee in the Street,
With unreproved kisses greet:
And to my Mothers house conduct,
Where thou thy Sister should instruct:
There would I spiced Wines produce,
And my Pomegranets purple Juice;
Thy left Arm for my Pillow placed,
And stricktly with thy right embraced.
You Virgins, born in Sions Towers,
I charge you by the chief of Powers,
That you a constant silence keep,
Nor till he call, disturb his sleep.

CHORUS. Who Is this, whose feet the Hills ascend
From Deserts, leaning on her Friend!

SPONSA. I, my Beloved first raised thee
From under the Pomecitron tree:
Thy careful Mother, in that Shade,
With anguish, her fair Belly laid.
Be I, o thou my better Part,
A Seal impressed upon thy Heart:
May I thy Fingers Signet prove,
For Death is not more strong then Love:
The Grave not so insatiate,
As Iealousies inflame debate.
Should falling Clouds with Floods conspire,
Their waters could not quench Loves fire:
Nor all in Natures Treasury,
The Freedom of Affection buy.
We have a Sister immature,
That has no Breasts, as yet obscure,
What Ornaments shall we bestow,
When Mortals her Endowments know?

SPONSUS. On her, if strongly built to bear,
We will a Silver Palace rear;
Or, if a Door, to deck the same,
Will Leaves of carved Cedar frame.

SPONSA. I am a firm Foundation
For my Beloved to build upon;
My Breasts are Towers: I, his Delight,
His object and sole Favorite.

SPONSUS. Late in Baal-Hamon Solomon
Let forth his Vineyard: every one
For Fruits and Wines there yearly made,
A Thousand silver Sheckles paid.

SPONSA. This Vineyard, this which I possess,
With diligence I daily dress.
Thou Solomon shall have thy due:
Two hundred more remain for you,
(Out of the surplus of our gains)
Who in our Vineyard took such pains.

SPONSUS. O thou that in the Gardens liv'st,
And life infusing counsel giv'st*
To those that in thy Songs rejoice,
To me address thy cheerful Voice.

SPONSA^ Come my Beloved, o come away!
Love is impatient of Delay:
Run, like a youthful Heart, or Roe,
On Hills where precious Spices grow.

FINIS.

