THE PROVERBS OF SOLOMON PARAPHRASED: With the ARGUMENTS OF Each CHAPTER Which
supply the place of a COMMENTARY.

By SIMON PATRICK, D.D. Dean of PETERBURGH, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, MDCLXXXIII.

TO HER GRACE The Duchess of MONMOUTH.
MADAM,
THere were anciently so many Noble Women, as well as Men, who, even then made
the study of the Scripture their delight, when Christian piety began to decay;
that a great part of S. Hierom's pains was bestowed in opening the meaning of
them to Blesilla, Marcella, Melania, Paula and her Daughter Eustochium, with
several other eminent Roman Ladies: whose Songs (as he writes to Asella) were
nothing but Psalms; whose discourse was the Gospel; whose pleasure was
continence; and whose life was fasting and abstinence.

More particularly he addressed his services of this kind, to the last of those
Ladies, Eustochium; to whom he gives an Epithet, importing her prodigious
industry, with the most fervent desire, in the study of heavenly knowledge: and
therefore inscribed to her the most elaborate of all his Commentaries upon the
Prophet Isaiah (as he did afterward those upon Ezekiel) which were sent her by
parts in XVIII. Books; before every one of which there is a solemn Preface to
her.

By whose example, and to heighten that esteem and love of Divine Wisdom,
wherewith, in an age of folly and vanity, God has already inspired your
excellent mind, I have presumed to dedicate to your GRACE this small Work of
mine; wherein, with no small labor, I have expounded the most useful Book of
the PROVERBS.

Which commends it self to your Grace's acceptance, both by the excellence of
the matter; containing (as the words are VIII. 6. XXII. 20.) most noble and
princely things; choice Maxims, built upon the oldest Observations, and that
will stand firm and be found true, as long as the world endures: and from the
dignity and splendor of the Author; whose illustrious name and pedigree, is
set down on purpose (as S. Basil thinks) in the entrance of the Book, to give
the greater Authority to his words.

It is SOLOMON, to whom the Lord himself said, 1 Kings III. 12. Behold, I have
given thee a wise, and an understanding heart, so that there was none like thee
before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee: And again, it
is recorded of him there, IV. 29, that God gave Solomon wisdom and
understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the Sand that is
on the Sea shore. For as the Sand of the Sea incompasses all the Coasts of this
World wherein we inhabit; so did his Mind comprehend all things as well Humane
as Divine.

This is that Admirable person, to the study of whose rare Wisdom I invite
your Grace: which that it may be had in greater Veneration, the name also of
his Mighty Ancestour, says the same S. Basil, is added in the title unto his
own: to put us in mind that he was the Wise Son of a Wise Father and Prophet,
who from his infancy had instructed him in the holy Writings, and made him fit
to succeed him in his Throne.

That likewise contributes not a little to the weight of these Instructions,
that the Author of them was a KING; and a King in the holy City of God, whose
Authority he had; which being a name of regular and legal power (as the same
Father still observes) it is manifest that the Precepts delivered by such a
person, and one who was truly worthy of that high title of a King, are of the
greatest worth and moment: because they have respect to nothing but merely the
common benefit, and public good; and cannot be suspected to have been framed
and composed with any aim at private interest. For that is the difference,
says he, between a Tyrant and a King: that the former has regard only to
himself in all that he does and designs; but the other consults the profit and
welfare of those whom he governs.

So that, in short, this is the Work of him, who was truly invested with that
threefold glory, which the Ancients ascribe to Trismegistus; the power of a
King, the illumination of a Priest, and the learning of a Philosopher.

But the excellence of this Book will be best understood by the serious perusal
of it; which will discover it to be a Magazine of all sorts of Wisdom: so full
of golden Sentences (as King James gives its character in his Instructions to
his Son) and moral Precepts, in all things that concern our conversation in
this world, as among all the profane Philosophers and Poets, there is not to
be found so rich a Storehouse of Natural Wisdom, agreeing with the Will and
Divine Wisdom of God.

And therefore it is most worthy the constant study of all persons, who would
accomplish themselves with the most useful knowledge: but of none more, than
of those that are Great, whom Solomon instructs how to be Greater, and to make
their Greatness also lasting and durable: and especially of such whose
Understandings are Great and Capacious; able to penetrate into the depths even
of the Civil Precepts and Advertisements contained in this Book; springing (as
our great Advancer of Learning speaks) out of the most profound secrets of
Wisdom, and flowing over into a large field of variety.

In which I am confident your Grace will delight to walk: whose exquisite
Judgment cannot but find the highest entertainment, in weighing the Wisdom, as
well as the Truth, and Usefulness of these Parables: and whose Virtue and
Prudence disposes the hours of your life with such order, as not to let you
want time, both to ponder them your self, and to instill them also into the
Mind of your Children.

Whose future happiness depends, upon their being early seasoned with such
Principles as these: which will be the most effectual Preservatives against the
infectious air wherein we breathe: and a Treasure of such inestimable price, as
will keep their Minds from being corrupted, by all the briberies of Fortune (as
we call it) or from being dejected at any cross turn of it; which, in this
world, must be sometimes expected.

For such is the inconstancy of all humane things, such is the frailty even of
our own bodies, as your Grace has been lately taught by a tedious Sickness
(from which I most heartily congratulate your Grace's happy recovery) that we
love not our selves, if we seek not after a better Good, which is firm and
permanent: a good that can withstand corruption; and defend it self against the
force of time, and all the accidents of this World.

In the prosecution of which supreme Good, I commend your Grace to the blessing
of the Almighty; who always favors the least desires of being good, and
therefore will never desert your sincere endeavors of it: which are not
unknown to Him, while you prefer the Closet to the Theater, and look more to
the inside of Virtue, than to its outward appearances.

But I forget my self; and stand in need of a pardon for this long Address:
which I shall the more easily obtain, if your Grace please to believe nothing
emboldned me to it, but the opinion I have that your Goodness is as unlimited
as my desires to approve my self, what I stand bound by many obligations to be,

May it please your Grace, Your Grace's most humble and obedient Servant S.
Patrick.

THE PREFACE.
I. NExt to the Psalms of David, which are an admirable Collection of Devotion,
follow the Proverbs of Solomon, which contain most excellent Rules of life.
They are commonly called his Ethics; correcting men's errors, and teaching
them how to conduct themselves in all relations: but may as well be called his
Politics also, comprehending under that word, Rules for the Government of
Families, Cities and Kingdoms as well as of particular Persons. For, as S.
Basil speaks, this Book is (...), an universal instruction and direction for
all men, and for the whole life: containing frequent documents, of what is to
be done on all occasions.

II. And there being two ways of teaching; one by brief Sentences, and
Aphorisms, which are delivered also promiscuously without any great care about
the order of them; the other by methodical Discourse, according to the Rules of
Logic, proceeding orderly from one thing to another, till all that belongs to
the matter in hand, be reduced to one body, and make as it were an entire
building: Solomon has chosen the first way, which was the most ancient; as it
would be very easy to show, were there any necessity of it; and were not the
great Antiquity of this sententious way of speaking, apparent enough from that
passage of David's 1 Samuel XXIV. 13. As says the Proverb of the Ancients;
wickedness proceeds from the wicked: which is much like that Greek Adage
(...). For it was very usual with the Wise men of old (as the Lord Bacon
observes in his Eighth Book of the Advancement of Learning) when their
observation light upon any thing, that might prove beneficial unto common life,
to reduce it immediately and contract it, either into some short sentence or
parable; or else into a Fable. As for Fables they were only the substitutes,
and supplements of Examples; to serve instead of them, while they were wanting,
and no longer: when the world abounded with Histories, they became unnecessary,
because the shadows of things are useful only where the substance cannot be
had; and because the aim is more exact, and more pleasant, when the mark is
alive. Then those Fables were to give place to this Sententious way of
Instruction, comprising wise observations in a few words: which could be
illustrated and enforced by a multitude of examples.

III. And therefore in the fabulous times, we find those even among the Poets,
who forsook Fables and betook themselves to this more profitable way of
Instruction: particularly Phocylides and Theognis, whom Julian the Apostate is
bold not only to compare with Solomon, but to prefer before him. To whom S.
Cyril of Alexandria very judiciously answers (Lib. VII. adv. Jul.) that as
Solomon's Work is of far greater Antiquity; he being contemporary with Homer
himself, and they living a long time after, with Solon and Thales in the reign
of Croesus: so it is infinitely more weighty than theirs. Who said indeed some
pretty, spruce things, but so weak and shallow in comparison with the manly and
deep sense of Solomon's Proverbs; that they were fit only for the use of
Nurses to prattle to their Babes; or at the most for Paedagogues to teach
little Boys. There is not, for instance, such a wise instruction to be found in
all their Books, as the very first of all in Solomon's, which he lays as the
ground of all wisdom (but they alas! did not think of) that the Fear of the
Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. This as S. Basil observes, is that (...)
(which their Philosophers so much talked of, but did not understand) the only
thing that can purge the soul, and prepare it to be capable of Instruction:
which it is as improper, says he, to give to a man of impure affections, as it
is to pour a precious ointment into a sordid, filthy Vessel.

The like I might say of another most admirable Precept in this Book, to
dispose the soul for wisdom, viz. trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and
lean not to thine own understanding. There is no such word in all their
Writings; nor in Isocrates neither (whom that Apostate Prince vainly magnified
likewise above Solomon) who may be praised for some profitable lessons he gave
to youth, but must stoop, as S. Cyrill speaks, to this great person; who as he
wrote long before him, so far outwent him in all sort of wisdom, for the
instruction both of young and old. Nor does he only give precepts of manners,
but many excellent admonitions about rewards and punishments: together with
lively descriptions of the events of humane actions; which serve much for our
information. Many things also he discovers of men's most secret affections; of
the causes and grounds of the greatest changes in humane affairs; of the
principal things, that are of greatest moment in Government; of the way to
avoid all manner of dangers, and to preserve our selves, our fame, our estates:
with so many other things of like nature, that the Son of Syrack justly said of
him XLVII. Ecclus. 14, 15. He was as a flood filled with understanding. His
Soul covered the whole earth, and he filled it with dark Parables.

IV. By that name some call these short Sentences, which we call Proverbs:
though the word Parable properly signifies only a comparison or similitude.
The original of which name is this (as Grotius has observed in his Prolegomena
to Stobaeus) that the most ancient Authors delivered their precepts about
manners, or about government, by comparisons: either full and at length (which
the Rhetoricians properly call (...), parable) or curtailed, as we speak, and
shortened. And these taken either from things plainly fabulous (as that of the
Fruit Trees and the Bramble in IX. Judges, and that of the Thistle and the
Cedar, 2 Chronicles. XXV. 18. of the Hawk and Nightingale in Hesiod; the Wolfs, Dogs
and Sheep in Demosthenes; and the famous parable of Menenius about the Members
of our Body) or else from things likely and probable, as that of Nathan to
David, and most of our blessed Savior's.

V. But Solomon's Sentences in this Book are not of this Nature, and therefore
the LXX. use another word, signifying a saying as trite and common as the high
way; worn, as we say, thredbare (to use S. Basil's phrase) by every bodies
constant use. And so does the Latin and our English word Proverb, denote some
ancient common Saying, which every body has in his mouth. But the word in the
Hebrew, denotes only any acute and excellent Saying; which is as worthy to be
known by all, and to be in every ones mouth, as common Proverbs are. And thus
it is used in the most ancient Book of Holy Scripture, for an eloquent speech,
much exceeding those that had been made before; in the beginning of the XXVII.
and XXIX. of Job. And so the Doctors of the Church explain it. A Proverb,
says S. Basil, is a profitable Saying, delivered with a moderate concealment
of the sense, etc. or a pithy Sentence; in a few words expressing much sense.

This is the first signification of the word: though in aftertimes, every
Saying that was never so little out of the way of vulgar speech, began by the
Hebrews to be called Mashall; as may be seen in XX. Ezekiel. 49. And whether it
was figurative, or simple and plain, if it did contain any profitable
Instruction, it was called by the same Name; as we learn from the Sentences in
this Book.

VI. Which consists of a Preface, and of the Book it self. The Preface is in
the nine first Chapters: seven of which seem to be an Admonition what is to be
done, and what to be avoided, to make a man capable of Wisdom: which in the
eighth and ninth Chapters sets forth her own praises.

Then begins, as you find in the front of the tenth Chapter, the Proverbs of
Solomon: which consist of three Parts, or Books. The first Part from the
beginning of the Xth Chapter, to the 17th verse of the XXII. where a new form
of speech, any body may discern, begins (as I have there noted) and continues
to the XXVth Chapter: which may be called the second Part. And then from the
XXVth to the XXXth (which is the last Part) follow such Sentences as were
collected afterward out of his Writings, or the Writings of those who had
recorded them; by some persons whom Hezekiah employed to search the ancient
Records. For we are told in 1 King. IV. that he spoke in all three thousand
Proverbs: which Josephus seems to think were so many Books that perished in the
Captivity; but S. Hierom takes for so many Sentences contained in this Book:
that is, some of them, for there are in all but 800 verses. And some of them
are not Solomon's; for in the end of the Book are added certain Sayings of Agur
to his Scholars, and the Instructions of a pious Mother to her Son Lemuel: of
all which I have given an account in their proper places.

VII. And therefore must entreat all those that would profit by this Book to
read the Argument of each Chapter, before they proceed to the Paraphrase: or
at least to consult the References which I have made to such passages in it, as
will help to make the sense clearer, or to explain difficult places: which
sometimes are capable of more senses than one; and therefore if I have not
represented them all in the Paraphrase, I do it in the Argument: designing all
along this alone, to give the fullest and properest explication of every
phrase; upon which as I have not dilated, so I have expressed the meaning in
the plainest words, I could find. For as Saint Hierom speaks concerning his own
Commentaries upon Ezekiel (in the Preface to the Vth Book) my business was not
to study the Art of Rhetoric, nor of exact composition, and graceful
language; but to use a careful diligence to hit the sense: resting content
with this praise alone, if the Wise-man's words be understood by my means. And
indeed it ought to be the design of every good man, in such Works as these,
that the Holy Books (as he speaks in another place) may be made more
intelligible and acceptable by his endeavors; and not that his own Writings
may be commended, by occasion of those Books.

VIII. And in his time nothing was commended, he says, but only that which
men fancied to be Eloquence. In this the Latins were then altogether delighted;
but nauseated the understanding of the Holy Scriptures. Which provoked God, in
his just judgments, to deliver them into the hands of those rough Nations, who,
in his days, broke in like a flood upon them; and turned their vain affectation
of neatness and elegance of speech, into rudeness and Barbarism: which ought to
be a caution unto us, not to give up our selves, to the admiration only of the
language and of the wit of the Stage; lest our minds thereby be so depraved,
that we have no relish of the most serious, no not of the sacred Writings, but
reject them as insipid things: with which disease if any be infected, they
might, by God's Grace, be cured; if they would be pleased to apply their mind,
with due attention to the study of this one Holy Book: which wants nothing to
entertain the minds of all men, though of the widest capacity, with the
greatest variety of pleasure; if they have not perfectly lost their taste, of
that which will do them good, and make them truly happy.

IX. It is recorded by Suetonius of Caesar Augustus, that in his reading all
sort of Greek, as well as Latin Authors, he chiefly observed, and transscribed
such wholesome precepts or examples, as might serve him either for public or
private use: which upon occasion he produced, for the Instruction of his own
domestics, or of the Commanders of his Armies, or the Governors of Provinces,
or the Magistrates in his several Cities; according as he thought every one had
need of Admonition: whom if any man have the heart to imitate, Solomon has
saved him the labor, which that great Person underwent. He need not turn over
many Volumes, to search for all manner of wise instructions; but be furnished
here (and that at an easy rate) out of the vast treasure of Learning, he has
left us in this small Book, with the best Advices that can be given, either to
Princes, Counselors, Judges, and other public Ministers; or to all sorts of
Subjects in their several relations, and in every condition: to make them both
pious and politic: to direct them in the choice of their Consorts; in the
education of their Children; in the management of domestic affairs, and in
their transactions with other men; in contracting or conducting their
Friendships; in giving or taking good counsel and reproof; in making or
preserving peace; in judging of men, and of the event of their designs; and in
short (for it would be a new Book to mention every thing particularly) to
instruct every one in all sorts of virtue; especially in the Government of the
Tongue: wherein men offend, and whereby they suffer so much, that there is no
part of prudence more necessary than that, and therefore none more insisted on
in this Book.

X. Which contains the Wisdom of that excellent Prince, who could readily
resolve all Questions and doubts; penetrate into the nature of all things; and
had his own Family and Kingdom, in such admirable order, that it astonished her
who came from the ends of the earth, to discourse with him. And it was
composed, if we may rely upon the judgment of the Jewish Writers, in his best
and most judicious years; when his Kingdom also was in perfect peace, and there
was no disturbance in his affairs.

For the Book of Canticles, say they, was wrote in his youth; the Proverbs,
when he was of riper years; the Ecclesiastes when he was old, and repented of
the sins he had been drawn into by the snares of Women: who had made this
Admirable person, as great an example of folly, as he had been before of
wisdom: whence that common saying of theirs; men compose Songs, when they are
young, Parables, when they are grown to be perfect men; and Discourses of the
vanity of things when they are old.

XI. But the time of his writing these Books is not so material as the design:
which is excellently expressed by S. Basil, in a discourse of his upon the
Beginning of this Book. (Tom. I. Hom. XII.) "The Book of Proverbs, says he, is
an Instruction of manners, and a Correction of the passions; and an entire
direction of the whole life, containing abundance of precepts about well-doing.
The Ecclesiastes touches upon the Nature of things; and evidently shows the
vanity of every thing in this world: that so we may not think it worth our
pains, to be so solicitous as we are about things that swiftly pass away from
us; nor waste the thoughts and cares of our mind about empty and vanishing
enjoyments. The Song of Songs shows the manner of perfecting Souls. For it
contains the happy concord of the Bridegroom and the Spouse: that is, the
familiarity of the Soul, with God the WORD."

XII. I conclude this Preface, as that Great man does that discourse. "He is
wise, not only who has arrived at a complete habit of Wisdom but, who has
made some progress toward it; nay who does as yet but love it, or desire it,
and listen to it. Such as these, by the reading of this Book, shall be made
wiser; for they shall be instructed in much Divine, and in no less Humane
learning: it expelling Vice diverse ways; and, with as great variety,
introducing all manner of Virtues. It bridles the injurious tongue; corrects
the wanton eye; and ties the unjust hands in chains. It persecutes sloth;
chastises all absurd desires; teaches Prudence; raises men's Courage; and
represents Temperance and Chastity after such a fashion, that one cannot but
have them in veneration."

Let a man but consent to one thing, which this Book desires, to make these
Precepts familiar to his mind, saying unto wisdom (as you find the words VII.
4.) thou art my sister, and calling understanding his kinswoman: and he will
not fail to be happy. For this is the sum of all, in a few words, Love her, and
she shall preserve thee.

ERRATA.
PAge 116. line 4. add [ a] 159. 27. r. inculcated. 172. 2. kindly affected.
198. 26. he who has. 247. 13. The best way to. 275. 2. all company. 293. 29.
d. his. 297. 11. (...). 372. 3. considered with. 400. 10. deliver them, etc.
442. pen. house of correction. 444. 22. Margema. 464. 20. look like a reproach.
476. penult. d. he before cannot. 477. 28. for natural r. mutual.

A PARAPHRASE ON THE PROVERBS.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT.
The Title of this Book is joined to it, as a part of the work, and contained
in the six first verses. Where the Author uses several words to express the
matter he intends to treat of, viz. Wisdom, Instruction, Understanding,
Knowledge, etc. the difference of which I have expressed as well as I could in
the Paraphrase, and shall not here criticize upon them. But observe rather that
the learning they teach is the most necessary of all other; and therefore so
contrived, as he tells us, that the most Ignorant as well as the most Wise may
receive great benefit by it.

In order to which, the first principle of it must be carefully observed; which
is this: [a] that a due sense of God is a most necessary qualification to
profit by these Instructions; which will signify nothing to Epicures, and such
like profane persons. This is the very first word of the Book v. 7. teaching
us, that our first care must be to possess our minds with a lively sense, that
there is a God; and that the highest Wisdom in the World is to study to please
Him, and to know what will please Him; and to be fearful to offend Him, by any
neglect of Him, or by doing any thing contrary to his Will. Which fear of
offending God is commonly founded in a dread of his punishments; which perhaps
gives the first rise to this fear: however Nazianzen well observes (Orat.
XXXIX. p. 628.) that we must not, if we would be wise, first begin in
Contemplation, and so end in Fear; (for an unbridled Contemplation is very
dangerous) but being thoroughly seasoned and purged, and as one may say
attenuated, and humbled by Fear, so to be carried aloft in Contemplation.

This is the first step to Wisdom, and the second is; [b] next to God, to bear
a great reverence to Parents, both natural and spiritual: to God's Ministers,
that is, and to all Teachers and Instructors; to whom if Children be not bred
to give a great regard, they seldom prove virtuous. v. 8. Where it is very
observable how much Humane Laws differ from Divine: the former generally only
providing that due regard be given by Children to their Fathers, but taking no
notice of Mothers; as may be seen in the Persian Laws mentioned by Aristotle,
the Roman described in the Digests and Constitutions, and several passages of
the Greek Philosophers, which we find in Epictetus and Simplicius, who (as
Grotius notes upon the Fifth Commandment) consult only the honor of the
Father: but God in his Law takes care to preserve a just reverence both to
Father and Mother equally; as the persons whose ministry He uses to bring us
into the World. And accordingly not only Solomon in this place and many other,
but the Son of Sirach also (who was bred under that Divine Institution) presses
the duty oweing to both very largely; in the first sixteen verses of the III.
of Ecclesiasticus.

Now one of the first things Parents should take care of, is to teach their
Children [c] to avoid evil Company (as it follows here v. 10.) and then to
represent Vice in its true colors, as Solomon here does one sort of
wickedness, v. 11, 12, etc. the root of which he shows is love of money: which
therefore should be looked upon as most odious; and indeed the root of all evil,
v. 18, 19.

Their stupid blindness also is to be represented, who will take no warning:
but though destruction be plainly before their eyes in the way wherein they
are; yet will go on to complete their ruin, v. 17.

And they are to be admonished also to hearken to the voice of Wisdom
presently, wheresoever they meet with it: which is every where, v. 20, etc.
Which is pressed here ( v. 24, etc.) from this consideration, that there will
be a time when they shall stand in need of God's help; but not find it, if they
have slighted his importunities to obedience. For He is not only good but just
also: and not so easy, as to be moved merely by Prayers and Entreaties (and
that when we are in distress) which have more of self-love in them, than love
to Him. Whose wise Providence requites men in their kind; and destroys them by
that which they most desire.

"In short, in this Chapter he introduces Wisdom speaking to his Son, or to
her Children in general; inviting them to love her, and by no means to tread in
the way of Sinners: but to keep close to her directions; threatening destruction
to those who contemned this Counsel."

There seem to be three Proverbial Sayings in it. One v. 17. which may be four
or five ways interpreted: two of which I have comprised in the Paraphrase,
being the most common and natural. Another v. 31. like to that in Terence, Tute
hoc intrivisti, omne hoc vorandum est tibi. And the other in the next v. 32.
Where those words, the prosperity of Fools shall destroy them, teach us that it
is a great part of Wisdom, to be able to bear a great fortune, as we call it.
Of which among the Jews Jason was an example in after times, who was undone by
his Successes, 2 Maccab. v. 6, 7, etc.

1. THE proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel;


1. THIS Book contains some notable and very useful Sayings of that wise
Prince, King Solomon, the Son of that devout Prince, King David: by whose
special appointment he succeeded him in the government of God's peculiar People
Israel; for which (according to David's Prayer LXXII. Psalm, and his own 1
Kings III. 9.) God endued him with an extraordinary degree of understanding.

2. To know wisdom and instruction, to perceive the words of understanding;


2. The scope of them, is to make a Man know what it is to be truly wise; and
instruct him how to avoid those errors which Men are apt to fall into, or to
correct them if he has been misled and run into them; and to make him
understand when good advice is given him, nay, to be able to give it unto
others.

3. To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and equity;


3. For they will furnish him with the most excellent notions, and make him
capable to understand things of highest concernment: both how to be just and
good in all private transactions; and in public trusts and offices to judge
and act according to right and equity; and every other way, to be upright and
exactly virtuous.

4. To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.


4. The most unskilful and incautious persons, may here learn to be
circumspect and wary; and they who are childish and inconsiderate get so much
knowledge, as to behave themselves with prudence and discretion.

5. A wise man will hear, and will increase learning: and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels:


5. As for him that is wise already, he will not lose his labor in reading
this Book; which will make him still wiser. And indeed it is principally
designed for the improvement of him that is so wise, as to be willing to learn
more: who shall both gain a clearer knowledge of what he understands; and also
make such additions, that he shall be fit to be a counselor to Kings, and
govern the affairs of State in the greatest Kingdoms.

6. To understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and
their dark sayings.


6. He shall comprehend the most useful Maxims; and be able to express them
also with the greatest elegance: the weightiest sayings of wise men shall be
easy to him; and their abstrusest notions shall not be hidden from him.

7. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise
wisdom and instruction.


7. In the first place then, let all both simple and wise, look upon an awful
sense of God, a devout affection to Him, and fear to offend Him as the chiefest
point, and the very foundation of all Wisdom: Without which men are but Fools;
and, having no regard to their Creator, will despise the wisest Instructions
that I can give them. See Arg. [a]

8. My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy
mother:


8. And next to God let me advise thee, my Son (or whoever thou art that come
to learn of me in this Book) to reverence thy Parents. And not only to hearken
unto thy Father, when he teaches thee to fear God, or tells thee that thou do
amiss; but to let thy Mother's commands be a Law to thee; especially when she
bids thee observe the Directions of thy Tutors and public Instructors, unto
whom she commits thee: from which be sure never to depart. See Arg. [b]

9. For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy
neck.


9. But value their counsels more than the fairest ornaments thy Parents can
put upon thy head; or the most precious chains wherewith they can adorn thy
neck: for they shall add a far greater grace unto thee; and make thee more
acceptable both with God, and with all worthy men.

10. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.


10. There will be those who will make it their business to seduce thee from
their obedience; but remember, my Son, that none can love thee so well as they:
and therefore if lewd persons (who have no respect to God, or to their pious
Parents and Instructors,) persuade thee to bear them company, by no means yield
to their greatest importunities; but flee their society. See Arg. [c]

11. If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily
for the innocent without cause.


11. They may represent perhaps what advantage it will be to thee, to join with
them in the breach of the very next Commandment to that, of honoring thy
Father and thy Mother: saying, come along with us to our lurking places, where
no body can see us; and from thence set upon a wealthy Traveller, who is to go
that way, and take away his life: what though he be innocent, we shall the more
easily dispatch him, when he suspects no danger and has given us no
provocation.

12. Let us swallow them up alive, as the grave, and whole, as those who go
down into the pit:


12. And though he should have many Servants or Companions with him to defend
him, let not that affright thee; for we are enough of us to kill them all with
ease and in a moment, or to strangle them and bury them alive: so that none
shall escape to tell any tales; nor shall they make any noise; nay, it shall
not be known what is become of them.

13. We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil:


13. The booty shall be great; for we are sure to find vast treasures, and all
manner of precious things: enough to enrich us all, and furnish our Houses
bravely; that we may live splendidly all our days.

14. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse:


14. Come in for a share of it; and thou shall have as much of it as we, who
have been longer at the trade: for we live like Friends, among whom all things
are common; there is but one purse among us all, in which every one has an
equal interest.

15. My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their
path.


15. But, My Son (or whoever thou art that wilt learn of me) let them not
prevail with thee, to go along with them; or to betake thy self to such a
course of life: but if thou find an inclination to it, stop it presently;
and stir not one step in their company, or after their example.

16. For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.


16. For it is not one single murder (or robbery) in which they will engage
thee (though the guilt of that is too horrid to venture upon) but they will be
always hurrying thee to some new mischief or other: and as soon as one mischief
is over, they will be ready for, and make haste to commit another.

17. Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.


17. Flee from their society therefore, now that I have given thee this
warning: and be not so foolish and incautious as the silly Birds; who use to
run into the snare or the net, which they see the Fowler lay before their eyes.
(VII. 23.)

18. And they lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for their own
lives.


18. For as he does not lay his net in vain, but they are caught therein, so
assure thy self these men are setting a trap for themselves, when they lie in
wait to take away the lives of others: for they shall not always escape the
hand of Justice; but at last be taken and suffer, either by a special vengeance
of God, or by his Ministers, what they have deserved.

19. So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain: which takes away the
life of the owners thereof.


19. Such is the fate of him that greedily endeavors to enrich himself by such
wicked means. As the Bird enticed by a little chaff falls into a snare, which
it does not perceive; so he on a sudden loses his life, to satisfy a vain
desire of worldly pelf, which then he cannot enjoy.

20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets.


20. Let me advise you therefore rather to hearken to the manifold instructions
of Wisdom; whose most excellent counsels you cannot but be as well acquainted
withal, as you are with that which is proclaimed in the open streets: For you
hear them in the plain dictates of your own Consciences, in the Laws of God, in
the Mouth of his Prophets and Ministers, in the Admonitions and Examples of
good Men, and in the Course of his Providence and wise Government; which call
upon you more earnestly and loudly, than these lewd Seducers, to follow and
obey them.

21. She cries in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of the gates:
in the city she utters her words, saying,


21. There is no place where this Cry of Virtue and Piety is not heard; which
is not ashamed of it self, nor lurks in darkness, like those impious Seducers,
but appears openly in the midst of the greatest crowds; where no noise can
drown its voice, no business, either public or private, can thrust by its
reproofs; but still it interposes it self, and every body, even those wicked
Men that flee from it, hear it calling to them;

22. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners
delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?


22. And representing their unaccountable folly and stupidity, in such
unanswerable Questions as these. Is it not apparent by many examples, that such
men as you are deceived and abused with vain hopes? Why then do you continue
the cheat? Have you not played the fool long enough, but you will still act
against your reason and against your interest? Where lies the pleasure of
scoffing at Religion and Virtue, that you will never give it over? Is any man
so wise, that he needs no Monitor? Or is Ignorance so laudable, that a man
should hate those who would inform him?

23. Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will
make known my words unto you.


23. Do not turn away from such checks as these; but repent in time, and
resolve to learn your duty. It is not too late, for if you will listen to the
secret rebukes of your own Consciences, and to the open reproofs of my
Prophets, and follow their directions, I will plentifully communicate my mind,
and infuse the very sense of it into you; It is not hard to find, nor will I
conceal any thing of it, but plainly show you all that I require of you.

24. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded;


24. Which offer if you refuse, nay, go on obstinately to despise instruction,
then hear the doom which God, whose voice Wisdom is, passes upon you. Because
I have pressed you often to amend, and ye would not yield to me; nay, I have
been very urgent and earnest with you (offering you my assistance, heaping upon
you many benefits, and when they would do no good, laying on corrections, as
well as showing you the way to happiness) and none of you would so much as
attend unto me:

25. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof:


25. But, quite contrary, set at naught all the good advices I gave you, as if
they had been but vain and idle words; and slighted all my reproofs and
threatenings, as if they had been ridiculous, or of no moment:

26. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes;


26. Therefore I will repay you in your kind; and as little regard what becomes
of you, in the day of your calamity (which like a dismal Cloud I will bring
upon you unavoidably) I will be utterly unconcerned, when you know not which
way to turn your selves; but are become the scorn of those, who shall see you
quake and tremble at that, which before you would not fear at all.

27. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you.


27. Though it prove such a dreadful calamity, as will lay all waste, it shall
not move me to relieve you; but I will let it sweep you and all you have away
like a whirlwind: and when you fall into the most pinching outward distresses,
and into the sorest anguish of mind; you shall evidently see, it was my
pleasure to reduce you to those inextricable straits and pressures.

28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me:


28. For then (hearken all you that have not yet sinned to this degree of
obstinacy) it will be very hard for these men not to think of me, whom before
they would not regard: nay, they shall cry to me for help, but I will send them
none; they shall seek my favor importunately, but without the least success.

29. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD.


29. Because, when time was, they hated that knowledge, of which now they are
forced to be desirous: and when they were earnestly solicited to have some
regard to God and to Religion, they would not consent unto it:

30. They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof:


30. But (as was said before) rejected my good Advice with such disdain, as if
it had been a grievance to them; and slighted, nay contemned all those
Reproofs, whereby I would have reclaimed them from their Impiety.

31. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devices.


31. Therefore, as it is just that men should reap what they sow, and eat such
Fruit as they plant, so these men shall suffer the punishments, which their
wicked doings naturally produce: nay, be glutted and surfetted with the
miserable effects of their own counsels and contrivances.

32. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of
fools shall destroy them.


32. For let them alone and they need no body but themselves to destroy them:
their escaping dangers, only making them more audacious to run into them; and
their receiving daily additions of riches and honors, supplying their folly
with means to hasten their undoing.

33. But whosoever hearkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from
fear of evil.


33. Such a vast difference there is between wicked and virtuous Men. For whosoever
follows my Counsels, and takes the courses to which I direct him, shall even
then be safe, and possess what he has in peace, when he sees these Fools come
to ruin: Nay, he shall not be so much as disturbed with the fear of any
mischief; but rest secure of a watchful Providence over him.

CHAP. II.
ARGUMENT.
The attention of those that read this Book being bespoke in the foregoing
Chapter, He persuades them not only to read but to receive and obey these
good Counsels; by representing the benefits of being wise, that is, good and
virtuous; and the mischiefs a man shall thereby avoid. The chief is, that he is
sure to be under the guidance and blessing of God; who will impart more and
more of himself to those that study Wisdom; which is the scope of the former
part of this Chapter: and as on the contrary, if he do not order his ways by
the rules of Wisdom he is sure to wander most dangerously, so if he keep close
to them they will preserve him from utter ruin; which is the design of the
latter part of it. Where under the figure of an Adulterous Woman, v. 16. some
think he persuades us to shun all those [a] Doctrines which draw away the mind
from God; such as those of the Epicuraeans and Idolaters. But I take this to be
intimated before v. 12. and therefore understand him literally: and then he
seems to give a caution, against the breach of the next Commandment to that
mentioned in the first Chapter, v. 10, 11. where he charges his Son by no means
to consent to join with Murthethers; and here to shun Fornication and Adultery,
which alienate the mind quite from Wisdom, v. 16, 17, etc.

This therefore is one of the first things Wisdom directs us unto, and a
principal benefit we receive by it; to preserve our Understandings from being
corrupted, by keeping our Bodies pure and undefiled. For too many, giving up
themselves to fleshly Lusts, are thereby wholly perverted, and never recover
themselves: but live and die like Fools.

And one of the next points of Wisdom is, [b] to be taught by the dear bought
experience of others; who have been ruined Body and Soul, by those lewd Courses
to which we are enticed. And here the wise Man leads us back as far as the Old
World: which was wholly destroyed by such vilanies as men's brutish Lusts and
Passions carry them to commit. This seems to be implied in the word Rephaim, v.
18. (concerning which see Mr. Mede, p. 42.) who being abominably debauched
themselves, had corrupted the rest of the World: so that there was no way left
to purge it, but by extirpating the whole race of Mankind; except the Family of
Noah.

In short, here are both Promises and Threatenings to excite us to the study of
Wisdom; together with good Directions to make our Proceedings successful:
which are principally these. First, our own diligence; secondly, dependence
upon God for help and assistance; thirdly, a due value of that which we seek;
fourthly, avoiding such things as will plainly seduce us; and lastly, putting
in practice what we know, that we may know more: for want of which many learned
Men have proved worse than the most ignorant. Most of these are the sense of
the beginning of the Chapter; and the last of them is the sense of v. 10, 11.

[c] There are those who look upon v. 4. as a Proverbial Saying, borrowed from
those that dig in Mines: the former part of it expressing eager desire and
great diligence; and the latter invincible resolution and constant
perseverance, notwithstanding those difficulties that occur to discourage our
labor. Both which I have taken notice of in the Paraphrase; though I see
nothing Proverbial in it, more than in many other similitudes.

[d] I do not know whether I need observe (it is so easy) that the phrase we
meet withal v. 19. go unto her, is a modest expression; used frequently in the
holy Books: as may be seen very often in one Chapter XXXVIII. Genesis 2, 8, 9, 16,
18.

1. MY Son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee;


1. AND now, My Son, whose happiness I most heartily desire, let me tell thee
for thy further encouragement; that if thou do entertain these Exhortations,
which I have now given thee; and keep these Precepts in remembrance, for the
same end that Corn is sown and covered in the ground.

2. So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thy heart to
understanding:


2. Lissening with diligent attention, not to the inticements of such evil Men
as I have described but, to the counsels and instructions of Wisdom; with
sincere affection applying thy mind to understand thy duty:

3. Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding:


3. And moreover, if thou expressest such a desire of it, as men do of that
which they most need; and without which they are in danger to perish: praying
those that are able to inform thee; and beseeching God likewise with ardent
devotion, that He would bring thee acquainted with it:

4. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her, as for hid treasures:


4. If thou do value this Wisdom above the greatest Treasures, and show thy
esteem of it by studious seeking for it, as covetous Men do for money: laying
hold upon all occasions of profiting in knowledge, and pursuing thy advantages
(as they do) when thou meetest with them; not giving over thy labor presently,
if thou find not what thou desire; but enquiring still, and sparing no
pains to know what the will of the Lord is: See Arg. [c]

5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the LORD; and find the knowledge of
God.


5. Then thou shall not fail to understand what it is to be truly religious;
and that there is no Wisdom comparable to it: and shall find also what reason
there is to reverence, worship and solicitously obey Him, who is the Almighty
Creator, Governor, and Judge of all the World.

6. For the LORD gives wisdom: out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding.


6. For as Wisdom, no less than all other good things is the gift of the Lord
(without whom all our pains and study about it will be ineffectual) so there is
no doubt He will bestow it on those who esteem it above all worldly goods;
especially this most necessary part of it: which He has already imparted to us
by his Prophets and Men inspired; who have given us a true knowledge and
understanding of Him.

7. He lays up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that
walk uprightly.


7. And have assured us, that he has solid and durable Blessings (transcending
all the transitory things of this life) reserved in store for upright Men: and
will protect all those by his Almighty Providence, whose care it is to perform
and complete obedience to Him in all things.

8. He keeps the paths of judgment, and preserves the way of his saints.


8. That so he may preserve them in their integrity; and encourage them neither
to swerve from the rules of Justice, nor to cease to exercise Mercy and
Kindness: For he has a great favor to such pious Persons; and will be their
keeper and defender in such proceedings.

9. Then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea,
every good path.


9. By which thou shall understand that Justice and Mercy in thy private
dealings, and faithful discharge of thy trust in all public Offices, and
uprightness in every other Virtue; are all of them the best, the most plain,
easy, and natural way a man can take to be happy.

10. When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy
soul;


10. And when Wisdom has thus taken possession of thy very heart and
affections; and thou find an inward pleasure and satisfaction, by observing
the rules of Piety and all manner of Virtue.

11. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee:


11. This alone will be a sufficient security to thee, and make thee unwilling
to depart from them. For thy own experience will teach thee that it is the
greatest cunning to go in those plain and open ways; and that no men understand
their own interest so well, as they that cannot be persuaded by any means to
forsake them.

12. To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks
froward things.


12. Though otherwise thou might be seduced into a wrong course, yet this
will deliver thee from that danger; and not suffer thee to be perverted by the
mouth of him, that would subtly insinuate his lewd Principles into thee.

13. Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness:


13. Though thou should be assaulted by many of them, thou shall easily
discover their folly; in leaving the straight, plain and even paths of Virtue,
to walk blindly they know not whither in the perplexed ways of Vice and
Wickedness:

14. Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked.


14. Being so mad as to rejoice when they have done any mischief; and having no
higher pleasure than to pervert others, and make them as bad as themselves:

15. Whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths.


15. That is, to draw them aside, and entangle them in intricate ways, directly
cross to their own interest, safety, and pleasure; for the whole course of
their life is nothing else, but a shameful contradiction to their soberest
Reason and best Understanding.

16. To deliver thee from the strange woman even from the stranger which
flattereth with her words:


16. But such is that sweet satisfaction which (as I said v. 10, 11.) thou will
find in the affectionate love of true Wisdom, that it will deliver thee, not
only from the Snares of wicked Men; but, which is more dangerous, of a naughty
Woman: whose company (though so pernicious that God would have thee perfectly
estranged from her, as if she were not of the Commonwealth of Israel, yet) has
powerful charms in it, to flatter thee into her embraces. See Argument [a]

17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her
God.


17. Above all other, from that filthy Adulteress, who is so lewd as to leave
her Husband (though a worthy and perhaps noble Person) to whom she was joined
in her youth, when love is in its greatest warmth, and took him for her Guide
and Governor: but has wickedly broken the Laws of God, and violated the
solemn vow of fidelity to him, which she made when they were married.

18. For her house inclines unto death, and her paths unto the dead.


18. The least degree of of that discretion which Wisdom infuses, will teach
thee to avoid her Society, who loves no body, now that she has forsaken him
that had her first affection; but seeks the ruin of all that go to her House:
where, by one means or other, they are in danger to meet with their Grave, and
be sent to keep company with those old Giants; who corrupted Mankind with such
filthiness and violence, that they brought a deluge upon the Earth. (VI. Genesis
4, 5, 11.) See Arg. [b]

19. None that go unto her, return again, neither take they hold of the paths
of life.


19. And this is very remarkable, that it is rarely seen that any body who is
drawn into her impure embraces, ever gets out again: but she holds them all so
fast by her enchantments, and they are so blinded and bewildred by her arts;
that, like Men who have quite lost their way in a strange Country, they seldom
or never can hit into it, and recover themselves, to a virtuous way of living.
See Argument [d]

20. That thou may walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the
righteous.


20. In which the sincere love of Wisdom ( v. 11, 12, etc.) will so secure
thee; that escaping her snares, as well as those of wicked Men, thou may
imitate those excellent Persons the Patriarchs and Prophets; and be preserved
in the paths of those righteous Men, who followed after them.

21. For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in
it.


21. Which is as much as to say, that thou may be perfectly happy: for men of
integrity (according to God's promise XI. Deuteronomy. 8, 9, 21.) shall peaceably
enjoy this good Land which God has given us; and they that study sincerely to
please Him in all things, shall leave it in possession to their Posterity after
them.

22. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors
shall be rooted out of it.


22. But such impious Men, as I spoke of (according to what God himself has
also denounced XI. Deuteronomy. 17. and other places) shall be cut down from the
Earth; where they may flourish, like a Tree, for a time: nay, they that give
themselves up to do wickedly, and keep no faith with God nor Man, shall be
plucked up, like a Tree, by the very roots, and leave none to preserve their
memory behind them.

CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter he continues to press obedience to the precepts of Wisdom;
from the consideration of the Benefits that are to be reaped thereby. Which he
began to speak of in the foregoing Chapter (touching also there upon the
mischiefs on the contrary side) but here handles more largely; and explains it
not only in general but in several particular Precepts: for instance,
liberality to God's Ministers, v. 9, 10. patience in adversity, v. 11, 12. the
foundation of which is an entire trust in God and his Fidelity, who will honor
those that honor Him, in his Ministers; and never desert those in their
trouble, who do good when they are in their prosperity, v. 5, 6.

After these things he returns to the general Exhortation, v. 13, etc. advising
every one to learn the Doctrine delivered by God, and to be obedient; and not
to be so foolish, as to prefer their own wisdom or craft before it. To which
he adds Promises, and Comminations; together with several Advices; which I need
not note particularly, because they lie plainly before their eyes who will
read the Chapter.

I shall only observe that he represents Wisdom [a] ( v. 16, 17, etc.) that
is, Religion and Virtue, as other Authors have done (particularly Cebes in his
Tables) in the shape of a beautiful Woman, or rather Queen; with her Arms
extended, in the posture not only of directing, but also of rewarding her
Lovers and Followers. For she holds forth in her Right hand the great blessings
of Health, and length of days, unto all those that will walk in the way to
which she points. And it was but just to place this in her Right hand, that is,
to give it the precedence; because it was the chief promise of the Law; and
indeed the most desirable of all earthly Blessings, without which nothing can
be enjoyed; no not our selves.

And then, after this, follows Wealth and Reputation; things that Mankind
mightily covet; which he places in her Left hand; as inferior Blessings, but
that come also from her gift.

And as for cheerfulness in all conditions, there are no Pleasures he affirms
like those, which wait upon her, and attend her motions. Safe and secure
Pleasures; which do not merely gratify us for the present, and then expose us
to danger and leave us sad afterward: but give us a peaceable possession of
perpetual joy; which never dies nor decays, but, like the Tree of Life, remains
fresh for ever. This he proves v. 19, 20. and amplifies in the rest of the
Chapter.

[b] In which some observe three Proverbial Sayings: One v. 8. which seems to
be but a metaphorical representation of that firmness, that vigorous health,
and cheerfulness of mind, which Virtue imparts: the other in v. 12. [c] whom
the Lord loves he corrects; which Theodoret upon XII. Hebr. 6. calls indeed
(...), a Proverbial Admonition, belonging to such Parents, Guardians and
Masters, as are careful of those committed to their charge: but he names it
so, I suppose, only because he found it in the Book of the Proverbs. The last
in v. 18. [d] Tree of Life: which seems to be a Proverbial Speech (used
afterward more than once in this Book) for that which prolongs Life; and makes
it very delightful and pleasant, as well as firm and durable: If we understand
it of Christ, the wisdom of God, (as Origin, Saint Ambrose, Saint Austin and
others do) or of his Doctrine, which is the same: it is literally true that He
gives immortality, as the Tree of Life in Paradise would have done.

1. MY son, forget not my Law; but let thine heart keep my commandments.


1. LET me then again entreat thee, whoever thou art that come to learn of me
(who loves thee with a Fatherly affection) not to be careless and negligent in
the observance of these Instructions: but remember them, and love them, and set
thy self heartily to do whatsoever I command thee.

2. For length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to thee.


2. For this is the surest way to that which all men naturally desire, and seek
to attain: a long Life, in firm health, vigor and strength; with all manner of
happiness and prosperity, XXX. Deuteronomy. 18, 20.

3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck, write them
upon the table of thine heart.


3. Of this thou can not miss, if thou will be steadfastly good and just; for
the infinite bounty of God, and his faithfulness to his Promises will secure
these Blessings to thee: therefore let my Commandments be ever before thine
eyes; fix them in thy Memory, and in thy Affections, as if they were engraven
upon thy Heart; and look upon it as the greatest ornament to be obedient to
them.

4. So shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and
man.


4. Which is as much, as if I had bidden thee acquire favor with God; and
understand, on all occasions, what is good for thy self: ordering all thy
Affairs with such judgment and prudence, as to be in high esteem with Him and
with Men.

5. Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto thy own
understanding.


5. And assure thy self there is no rule of prudence like to this, to confide
in God entirely; and to depend wholly on his Providence, for good success in
well doing: not imagining that by thy own wit and policy, thou can contrive
such events as thou desire, and bring about what thou designest.

6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.


6. No, in all thy undertakings both private and public, be sensible of his
overruling Power; observe his Laws; and implore his favor and blessing: and He
shall guide thee in thy proceedings; and bring them to an happy issue, as He in
his Wisdom sees best for thee.

7. Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the LORD, and depart from evil.


7. Never be guilty of such folly, as to conceit thine own wit to be so great,
that thou can manage things thereby in thine own way (neglecting the Rules
that He has prescribed thee) to thy satisfaction: but have a religious regard
to Him, who can either disappoint or prosper thee, as he pleases; and, fearing
to offend his Majesty, avoid most cautiously those practices that He has
forbidden thee.

8. It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.


8. This is the way to preserve a good habit both of Soul and Body: and in all
conditions to remain undejected; nay, cheerful and fully satisfied, whatsoever
happens. See Arg. [b]

9. Honor the LORD with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase.


9. As for example, there are those who think it prudence to save all they can;
though it be by robbing God Himself: But, if thou will be truly wise and happy,
honor Him in his Ministers, by paying them their tithes duly; and bringing
oblations to his house at the three solemn Feasts; (XXIII. Exodus 14, 15.)
together with the first fruits of all that thy Estate produces (XXII. Exodus 29,
30.) in token of thy gratitude to Him, and that all thou have is his, and
cannot thrive without his Blessing.

10. So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out
with new wine.


10. Which He will power upon thee abundantly; and convince thee, by lading the
Earth with Fruit, and sending a seasonable as well as plentiful Harvest and
Vintage, that this is the way, not to diminish but, to increase the Estate
which God has given thee. XXVIII. Deuteronomy. 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. XXXI. 10.

11. My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD: neither be weary of his
correction.


11. And suppose it be his pleasure that any affliction should befall thee; My
Son, ( v. 1.) let not that dissatisfy thee; nor make thee, either doubt of his
gracious Providence over thee, or out of impatience take any unlawful course
to remove it from thee.

12. For whom the LORD loves he corrects, even as a father the son, in whom
he delights.


12. But rather submit unto it, as a part of his Fatherly Discipline, which
cannot hurt thee; but only correct something that is amiss in thee: For we are
sure He loves those that keep his Commandments; and therefore nothing that
proceeds from his love ought to be despised; or received with an abject mind;
but duly esteemed by them, and raise their expectation of some good from the
affliction: which should no more make Him suspected of any unkindness, than a
tender Parent is, when he whips the Child in whom he delights; and to whom he
wishes so well, that he will not let him be unchastised. See Arg. [c]

13. Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding.


13. Happy, more happy than can be expressed, is that man, who attains to this
degree of wisdom; and acquires (though it cost him the greatest pains and
labor) such an understanding of God and belief of his Providence, as,
notwithstanding any troubles that befall him, still to adhere unto Him in
faithful obedience. ( v. 7.)

14. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and
the gain thereof than fine gold.


14. If it were to be bought for money, one would purchase it at any rate: for
the profit of it is infinitely to be preferred, before all the advantages that
can be made by silver and gold.

15. She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou can desire,
are not to be compared unto her.


15. The most precious Pearls are not so valuable: nor can our boundless Fancy
present any thing to our Wishes, that is worthy to come in competition with it.

16. Length of days is in her right hand: and in her left hand riches and
honor.


16. For true Wisdom presents us, as we say, with both hands: teaching us in
the first place such prudence and moderation, as by the Divine Blessing prolong
our days (which none of those things can do for us) and in the next place,
adds both riches and honor; which men foolishly and vainly seek to get and to
keep by other means. See Arg. [a]

17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.


17. And besides all this, there is a singular pleasure, nay the highest
delight, in all the acts of Virtue to which Wisdom directs her Followers: who
are always, either in perfect sasety by well-doing; or, if any trouble come
upon them, have that inward tranquillity and satisfaction, which nothing else
could give them.

18. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is every
one that retains her.


18. In short, Wisdom leads into a Paradise; and supplies the place of that
Tree of Life, from whence our first Parents were banished: that is, gives not
only a present, but an immortal satisfaction, to all those that strongly
apprehend and retain her Precepts; and therefore I again pronounce him happy (
v. 13.) above all other men, and above all expression, who constantly and
firmly adheres unto them. See Argument [d]

19. The LORD by wisdom has founded the earth; by understanding has he
established the heavens.


19. For they are a participation of that wonderful Wisdom and Understanding,
whereby the Lord settled the Earth, in that place where it remains fixed; and
disposed the heavenly Bodies in that admirable and unchangeable order, which He
would have us imitate.

20. By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the
dew.


20. In works of mercy and goodness especially: whereby we plainly communicate
with Him in that knowledge, by which the Lord made fountains of water gush out
of the Earth, for the use of all living Creatures; and the Clouds drop down
plentifully their refreshing dews, for the cherishing of Plants and Grass,
which in hot Countries many times have no other moisture.

21. My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and
discretion.


21. My Son (to whom my affection is so great that I cannot but again repeat
it, v. 1. 11.) let me prevail with thee to fix these good instructions in thy
mind: look upon them as the most solid Wisdom, and the greatest cunning and
policy; and accordingly observe them.

22. So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.


22. For they will revive and cheer thee, when other things fail thee: and
enable thee also with acceptable words to comfort those, whom the fame of thy
Wisdom shall invite to learn of thee.

23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall nor stumble.


23. When thou go abroad about thy business thou shall dispatch it the more
cheerfully; because thou art sure of God's Providence over thee: and wisdom
will direct thee to avoid those stumbling blocks, by which others fall into sin
and danger.

24. When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid: yea, thou shall lie down,
and thy sleep shall be sweet.


24. And when thou come home to rest from thy labors, thou shall not be
troubled with fear of what may happen, whilst thou art asleep; but (having
nothing within to discompose thee) shall lie down securely, and, by a sound and
sweet repose, be refreshed to return to thy employments.

25. Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked when
it comes.


25. In which, if thou should be interrupted by any rumors and reports of
unexpected and approaching danger, let not that disturb thee: no, though thou
should see the Wicked ready to lay all waste, or the Divine Vengeance
bringing utter desolation upon them for their wickedness.

26. For the LORD shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being
taken.


26. For a firm hope in the Lord shall be thy support, even when thou art in a
tottering condition: nay, when thy skill quite sails thee, and thou know not
what to do for thy safety; He shall so direct and guide thee, that thou shall
be preserved from falling into the hands of those that lie in wait to destroy
thee.

27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of
thine hand to do it.


27. And, as it will give thee great security of mind and confidence in God at
such a time, not to be conscious to thy self of any wrong done to thy
Neighbor, by denying to pay thy just debts, when thou art able; so the
remembrance of having done good to others will be a far greater: and therefore
let me advise thee to take a special care, not to withhold relief from those,
whose needs in-title them unto it; when thou can not pretend disability, but
have wherewithal to do it.

28. Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give;
when thou have it by thee.


28. And, as thou would not have God to defer his help, in such distresses as
I spoke of ( v. 25, 26.) so do not thou put off thy Neighbor, when he begs a
kindness of thee, saying; I cannot now; come another time; to morrow thou shall
see what I will do for thee: when if thou had a heart to it, thou could
supply him now, as well as then; and who can tell what shall be to morrow.

29. Devise not evil against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely by thee.


29. And let not the quietness of any Man's temper, much less the confidence he
has of thy honesty and goodness, tempt thee to contrive any mischief to him:
for the more securely he relies on thy virtue, and the less mistrust he has of
any harm from thee, the greater wickedness it will be, so much as to have it in
thy thoughts to do him any injury.

30. Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.


30. For instance, do not bring false Actions against any Neighbor, nor vex
him with causless or unnecessary Suits at Law: no, nor so much as pretend a
cause for quarrelling and falling out with him, when he has done nothing to
deserve it of thee.

31. Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.


31. And what though thou should see men thrive by oppression and violence,
let not that provoke thee to emulate them; that is, to wish thy self in their
condition, by imitating them in any of their injurious proceedings.

32. For the froward is abomination to the LORD: but his secret is with the
righteous.


32. For he that perversely departs from all the rules of truth and justice, is
above all expression abominable to the Lord; even in his highest prosperity:
but the Lord is a Friend to men of sincere integrity; who know the secret of
his Providence in raising those wicked Oppressors so high, that they may have
the more dreadful fall.

33. The curse of the LORD is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the
habitation of the just.


33. The evil doer is under the curse of the Lord, though he live in the most
stately Palace: but just and good men ought to look upon themselves as under
his care and blessing; and therefore very happy in the meanest Cottage.

34. Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he gives grace to the lowly.


34. Those proud Oppressors and Scoffers at good Men, he will undoubtedly, not
only confound but, expose to scorn, and make them ridiculous in the eyes of
the World: but cause the humble, modest and meek (who bare even their insolent
scoffs patiently) to be had in honor and highly esteemed.

35. The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of fools.


35. They may be despised and debased for a time, but in the issue they shall
be accounted the only wise Men; and leave an excellent never-dying fame behind
them: when those impious Men shall be famous for nothing, but the shame and
disgrace that shall fall upon them.

CHAP. IV.
ARGUMENT.
The dullness, sluggishness and forgetfulness of Mankind in their principal
concernments, are so notorious, that we need not wonder the Wise Man repeats
the very same things, and quickens our attention to them, in the beginning of
this Chapter. Which he thought necessary to excite again ( v. 10.) and again (
v. 20.) because all his pains, he knew, would be lost without serious
consideration of what he said: and the very first step to Wisdom, is to have a
mind to be wise.

And to make his Exhortations the more acceptable, he acquaints the Reader with
the Lessons which his own Father and Mother were wont to teach him ( v. 3, 4,
etc.) and the great benefit he had received by them. Which gave him the greater
confidence to press every one to follow his example of obsequiousness to good
counsels, as the surest way to be happy: and by no means to imitate the
examples of the wicked, from which he disswades by many arguments ( v. 14, 15,
etc.) and beseeches they may be so duly pondered ( v. 20, 21, etc.) that they
produce in every one a watchfulness over his heart, his mouth, his eyes, his
feet; as may be seen in the conclusion of the Chapter.

The whole Chapter from v. 4. may be conceived to be the words of David, as
well as Solomon's. But I have extended David's advice no further than unto v.
10. and there make Solomon to resume his exhortation; and urge upon his Son
what his Father had taught him.

There is one Proverbial speech in v. 27. which needs no explication. Some
would have another, v. 16. but I can see no reason for it.

The Principal Instructions in this Chapter are these. The care that Parents
ought to take, to instruct their Children diligently: and the greater they are
(suppose Princes) the more accurate ought their Education to be, as Solomon's
was, v. 3, 4, etc. And above all things the excellence of Wisdom and Virtue is
to be inculcated: for this excites a desire of it; and that is the very
beginning of it, as some expound those words, v. 7. In which sense they are
admirably explained in the Book of Wisdom, VI. 12, 13, 14, 17. Next to this
they are to be cautioned against evil Company, as the bane of Youth: and the
wretchedness of their life that live wickedly is to be represented; and the
happiness, comfort and satisfaction of theirs that live virtuously; which
increases as their days and their virtues do, v. 18. Next they are to be taught
how necessary it is to be constant in reading pious Books, especially the holy
Scriptures, v. 21. And to have an upright heart, sincerely disposed to follow
such directions; upon which all depends, both their well or ill doing, and
their well or ill being. Watchfulness also over the Senses is commended, as of
great use to preserve the Affections from being corrupted.

1. HEar, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding.


1. LIsten then all ye, that are desirous to learn, unto the Instructions
which, out of a paternal affection, I bring from God unto you: hearken to them,
though they correct your present manners; and let your mind be so attentive,
that you may know what it is to have a right understanding in all things.

2. For I give you good doctrine, forsake you not my law.


2. They are no frivolous or indifferent matters which I teach you; but the
most excellent things, and absolutely necessary to your happiness: therefore do
not merely attend to them, but strictly observe my Precepts, as the Law and
Rule of your life.

3. For I was my father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my
mother.


3. Do as I my self did, who remember, that, when I was a Child, the Son of a
most wise and pious Father, and under the careful eye of an affectionate
Mother; who loved me most dearly above all her Children, and while I was soft
and flexible, and apt to receive good impressions, looked to my education with
great circumspection;

4. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep
my commandments and live.


4. My Father was wont to tutor and instruct me (1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 8. XXIX. 2.)
saying; mind my words, and faithfully retain them, not only in thy memory, but
in thy affections: observe my Commandments, and thou shall enjoy long happiness.

5. Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not, neither decline from the
words of my mouth.


5. And this is the thing I require of thee, not so much to seek after Riches,
as to treasure up Wisdom; and endeavor to understand how to behave thy self
upon all occasions; and when thou art well informed in thy duty, do not forget
it, nor turn aside from the way, into which I will direct thee.

6. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep
thee.


6. Quit all things in this World rather than forsake the Precepts of Wisdom;
stick to them, and they will preserve thee from innumerable mischiefs; love
them sincerely, and they will be a stronger guard than money can procure thee.

7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom: and with all thy
getting get understanding.


7. And as there is nothing comparable to Wisdom, so the first step to it is
to know as much, and to prize it accordingly. Begin therefore to be wise, by
looking upon the fear of God as above all earthly Possessions, and by being
willing, if it were needful, to give all thou art worth to know what is
pleasing to him.

8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honor when
thou do embrace her.


8. Thou can not speak nor think too highly of this Wisdom, as thou shall
find by happy experience. For if thou magnify it, above all things, it will
raise thy esteem and make thee great in the World; yea, when thou entertainest
it with ardent love, thou shall become most illustrious in the sight of God and
Men.

9. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall
she deliver to thee.


9. Whatsoever else thou have to commend thee and gain thee honor, this shall
add unto it, and make it far more amiable: the fairest ornaments or the most
beautiful Crown that can be set upon thy head, shall receive luster from
hence; and be settled there the more securely.

10. Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings: and the years of thy life shall be
many.


10. Thus my Father was wont to discourse to me, as I do to thee, My Son; whom
I earnestly again entreat ( v. 1.) to consider what I say; and to believe it:
and then I promise thee, what he did me ( v. 4.) that thou shall lead a long
and happy life.

11. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom: I have led thee in right paths.


11. I have already taught thee, and will still inform thee in the wisest
course unto it; not in those crooked ways of fraud and falseness, etc. which
many take; but in the directest paths of integrity and truth, in which I
intend, as I have done hitherto, to lead thee.

12. When thou go, thy steps shall not be straightened, and when thou runnest,
thou shall not stumble.


12. And if thy actions and designs have no other rule, thou shall be at ease,
and free from those straits and difficulties which others meet withal: and in
case thy business shall require haste, this will be the safest, as well as the
most inoffensive (if not the shortest) way to accomplish thy ends.

13. Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go; keep her, for she is thy
life.


13. Resolve to try it, and, though it should be contrary to thy present sense
yet, do not refuse this Instruction which I give thee; but take such fast hold
of it, as never for want of care and pains, to let it slip out of thy mind:
keep it as a most precious treasure, for all thy happiness depends upon it.

14. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men.


14. And if thou really intendest to be guided by me, remember the advice I
gave thee in the beginning ( chapter 1.10.) not so much as to enter upon their
wicked course of life, or to keep them company, who regard not God and are
injurious to Men: or if thou have been seduced into it, be not persuaded by
their seeming prosperity and thriving condition to continue in it.

15. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.


15. Avoid it therefore with a just abhorrence; come not near it, but get as
far as thou can from their Society: and decline all occasions that might
invite thee into it, as dangerous temptations.

16. For they sleep not except they have done mischief: and their sleep is
taken away, unless they cause some to fall.


16. For as mischief is their business, so they pursue it with a restless
diligence: there being those among them, for instance, that cannot be quiet,
nor have any satisfaction, till they have executed their villainous intentions;
but perpetually disturb themselves, that they may ruin others.

17. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.


17. For they live by robbery and spoil; having no other meat and drink, but
what is the fruit of rapine and violence, and not of their honest labors.

18. But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and
more unto the perfect day.


18. Which makes a wide difference between them and righteous Men; whose pure
and innocent life is full of honor as well as joy: which increases continually
together with their virtue; proceeding (like the splendor of the Sun, which
nothing can extinguish, nor hinder in its course) till it come to the highest
pitch of joy and glory.

19. The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they stumble.


19. Whereas those wicked People live most uncomfortably, as well as basely and
vilely; going on blindly to their own destruction (of which they are in
constant danger, and grows more and more upon them) and yet they know not (no
more than men in thick darkness) what mischief it is that suddenly may befall
them.

20. My son, attend to my words, incline thine ear unto my sayings.


20. Therefore I do not without reason once more repeat my request unto thee (
v. 1, 10.) that thou will give diligent heed to my advice; and seriously
consider those exhortations, which proceed from a sincere affection to thy
welfare.

21. Let them not depart from thine eyes: keep them in the midst of thine heart.


21. Read them over and over again, and keep them perpetually in mind; or
rather preserve them studiously, and lay them up, as a most precious treasure,
in the closest affections of thy heart.

22. For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh.


22. For they will make all those exceeding happy, both in body and soul, that
come thoroughly acquainted with them: and, how various soever their temper and
condition be, will prove an universal remedy for all their griess and troubles.

23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.


23. And charge thy self with this, above all other cares, to set such a strict
guard upon the inward thoughts, motions and affections of thy soul (which are
besieged with many enemies) that thy consent be never obtained to any thing,
which thou oughtst to refuse: for thy living well or ill depends on this; and
such as thy caution and watchfulness is in this, such will the actions of thy
life be, which flow from thence.

24. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.


24. And as they that defend a City against an Enemy, set a strong guard at the
Gates and Posterns, so do thou upon thy Ears and upon thy mouth: never speaking
things contrary to Truth, Honesty, and Religion thy self; nor listening unto
those that do, but banishing both, as far as is possible, from thy familiarity.

25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before
thee.


25. The Eyes also are dangerous inlets into the heart; and therefore watch
them well that they do not gaze about, and fasten on every object that invites
them: but be fixed upon one scope, as thy thoughts ought to be, from which let
nothing divert them.

26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.


26. And before thou fixest and resolvest upon any action, examine and weigh it
thoroughly, whether it be agreeable to the rule of life, and the end thou
aimest at: and so thou shall be constant to thy self, and confirmed in a
steadfast course of well doing.

27. Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.


27. From which do not suffer thy self to be drawn aside, either to
superstition on the one hand, or to contempt or neglect of Religion on the
other: let neither love of Friends nor hatred of Enemies, neither hope of
pleasure and gain, nor fear of pain and damage, neither prosperous nor cross
events, ever move thee to turn into either extremes from the rule of virtue:
but, whatsoever inclination thou find that way, do not proceed to commit the
least sin against God or against thy Neighbor.

CHAP. V.
ARGUMENT.
There being nothing to which Youth is so prone, as to give up themselves to
satisfy their fleshly desires, and nothing proving so pernicious to them, if
they do it with Harlots; the Wise Man gives a new caution against those impure
Lusts, which he had taken notice of before ( chapter II. 16, 17, etc.) as great
obstructions to Wisdom: and with repeated entreaties begs attention to so
weighty an argument, which here he prosecutes more largely, and presses not
only with singular elegance, but with powerful reasons. Which in the heat of
youth men are not forward to consider; but if they would be so sober, Solomon
has said enough to deter them from whoredom.

Whose miserable effects he describes by several apt resemblances ( v. 4, 5,)
which show how, by this vice, men lose their honor, their time, their health,
and estates; and at last (as he shows afterward) lie down in sorrow, and end
their days in an unprofitable repentance. And therefore, for the prevention of
this, he commends the use of marriage, and a passionate love for a man's own
Wife; which he describes allegorically: first, [a] under the comparison of a
domestic fountain; where a man may quench his natural thirst, and from whence
streams ( i. e. Children) may be derived abroad to serve the public good, etc.
and secondly, under the comparison of a young Hind and a young wild Goat; which
are taken notice of by Authors that write of Animals (particularly Oppianus)
to be loving Creatures: and which in ancient times were playfellows (as one may
call them) for the greatest persons, who kept them in their palaces, and
diverted themselves with them, as a lovely sort of Creature, whom they
delighted to adorn with Chains and Garlands and such like things. About which
Bochartus among others may be consulted: who has demonstrated that the Jaalah
(which we translate a Roe) is a Creature that lived in mountainous places, and
could climb up the steepest Rocks. Unto which, as well as to a young Hind,
Solomon compares a good Wife, because of the simplicity, softness, good nature
of this kind of Creature; and other qualities mentioned by ancient Authors.
Who abundantly satisfy us, what reason the Wise Man had to make choice of these
comparisons, to represent the pleasures of ardent love between Man and Wife;
when it is natural, without constraint; sincere, simple, gentle, without
moroseness, suspicions or pride: which good qualities are not to be found in
Harlots; but may be met withal in a Wife. From whence he shows the
unreasonableness, nay unaccountable folly of preferring fornication and vagrant
lusts, before the innocent joys of a married life ( v. 20.) to which a man, who
considers his own good, would choose to be tied that he may avoid the
inconveniences or rather miseries to which the lusts of uncleanness reduce
him: but especially the heavy judgment of God; who having ordained marriage for
the comfort of Mankind and the preserving society ( v. 21, etc.) will not
therefore let the contempt of it go unpunished.

The principal things to be learnt in this Chapter are; not to believe every
thing to be good for us, that pleases the flesh for the present, v. 3, etc. but
in the beginning of any pleasure, to look to the end of it; to avoid the
company of Harlots: to use due care in the choice of a Wife: to love her too
much, rather than too little; to restrain our selves from inordinate affection,
by the consideration of God's omnipresence, etc.

The Proverbial Sayings are obvious enough, in v. 3, 4, 15. I shall only give
an account of my translating (...) v. 14. [b] the Assembly of Judges: for in
many other places, besides those quoted there in the Paraphrase, it signifies
the LXX. Elders or Senators who judged the People: as in the XX. Josh. 6. and
XXVII. Numb. 21. where R. Solomon thus expounds (...) all the Congregation. And
so truly it seems plainly to be used XV. Numb. 24, etc. where the Sacrifice is
different from that prescribed in IV. Levit. 13, etc. and therefore the sin was
different and the Congregation for whom this was offered, were the
Representatives of the whole Congregation; or, as they now speak, the great
Sanhedrin.

1. MY son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my understanding.


1. I Cannot too often awaken thine attention, (whoever thou art that putest
thy self under my Instruction. See chap. II. 1. III. 1, 21, etc.) especially in
things of such moment as I am going to treat of: and therefore again I beseech
thee, both to mind diligently, and to consider what I take to be true Wisdom,
and more than ordinary Prudence.

2. That thou may regard discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge.


2. Which if thou observest, it will make thee so skillful and discreetly
cautious, that thou shall not only be able to preserve thy self from the most
subtle and dangerous deceits; but upon occasion to advise others, and keep them
from being cheated.

3. For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is
smoother than oil.


3. As too many are by the arts of an Harlot, from whom thou ought to
estrange thy self as much as if she were not of the commonwealth of Israel: for
she pretending the greatest love, allures inexperienced youth by her flattering
speeches, and sweet voice perhaps and songs, wherewith she inchants them; and
making them believe they shall taste nothing but the most delitious pleasures,
her soft and smooth inticements slip down glibly into their unwary hearts,
which are taken with her.

4. But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.


4. But the beginning of this love is not so sweet, as the conclusion is
bitter; and therefore think of both together, and believe what I now tell thee
without making a trial: that after a short pleasure follows long pain, by the
impairing Men's health, strength, estates, and credit; which they cannot reflect
upon without trouble and vexation, and (if she do not quite destroy their
reason) be filled with remorse of conscience and anguish of spirit: for, like a
sword that cuts on both sides, she wounds both Soul and Body.

5. Her feet go down to death: her steps take hold on hell.


5. In short, leads those that follow her to an untimely, shameful, and
miserable end: to have never so little to do with her, is to approach to
certain and inevitable destruction; not only here, but in another World.

6. Lest thou should ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, that
thou can not know them.


6. For though thou may think to make a retreat in time, thou will be
deceived: she having more ways than thou can ever know (winding and turning
her self into a thousand shapes) to keep thee from so much as deliberating
about thy return to a virtuous course of life.

7. Hear me now, therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words of my
mouth.


7. All which considered should incline those that read these things, to be
obedient to me: who do not desire to restrain them from any thing that will
make them happy; but in tender affection advise them, not to be enticed by her
flatteries to depart from those fatherly counsels, which out of mere kindness I
give unto them.

8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house:


8. If all will not be governed by them, yet do thou, whose mind is awakned to
attend unto me, wholly shun all familiarity with her; nay, so much as the least
aspect toward her: avoid her as thou would the Plague; and be so far from
going into her Chamber, as not to come near the door of her House.

9. Lest thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel.


9. Lest thou forfeit all the reputation, which perhaps thou have got by worthy
actions, and grow contemptible among thy Friends and Acquaintance; who see thee
prefer the company of Harlots, and their base Attendants, before that of the
most virtuous Persons: and thereby thou lose, not only thy fame, but sacrifice
the flower of thine age, and thy precious time, to one that does not love thee
a jot; but could see thee perish without any pity.

10. Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house
of a stranger.


10. And that will be the issue of thy impurity; which wastes first the strength
and vigor of thy Body, and then thy Money and Estate, upon a strange Family,
perhaps of another Country: whose filthy Lusts are satiated at the expense of
thy Spirits; and whose House and Table are furnished with the fruit of thy care
and labors.

11. And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed.


11. And when things are come to this pass, that thy credit, thy friends, thy
precious time, thy health, thy Estate, and the pleasure too are all gone, and
nothing left but an heavy heart, and skin and bone; then thou begin
unprofitably to groan and lament; nay, perhaps to roar out thy grief in a most
deplorable manner:

12. And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof?


12. Saying, How stupidly foolish have I been, in not considering all this
sooner? how senslessly bent upon my own ruin? I am amazed to think how I hated
the cautions that were given me to avoid her company? and inwardly despised
(how civily soever in outward show I received them) the just reproofs I had
afterward for going to her.

13. And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to
them that instructed me?


13. I wanted no good Instructions, my Parents, Tutours, Friends, and God's
Ministers; who informed me of the danger, and taught me how to escape it: but,
alas! I was so sottish, as not to obey them; so contumacious, that I did not so
much as consider what they said unto me.

14. I was almost in all evil, in the midst of the congregation and assembly.


14. But gave up my self to follow my lusts, which in a short time engaged me
in almost all kind of wickedness; from which the reverence of no persons could
restrain me: but openly, in the face of the most public and solemn Assemblies
of God's people; even before the Magistrates and Judges (XXV. Numb. 7. XXXV.
12.) I boldly committed them. See Arg. [b]

15. Drink waters out of thine own cistern; and running waters out of thine own
well.


15. Such are the fruitless moans of a man, that has quite exhausted himself
in those lewd courses; which show how much better it is to follow the advice,
which I now give thee: Marry; and in a Wife of thine own enjoy the pleasures
thou desire, and be content with them alone; innocent, chaste, and pure
pleasures; as much different from the other, as the clear waters of a wholesome
fountain, are from those of a dirty lake or puddle.

16. Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the streets.


16. Of whom thou may have a lawful Issue, which thou need not be ashamed
to own; but openly produce, and send them abroad, like streams from a Spring,
to serve the public good: nay, a numerous progeny may be derived from your
happy society, and match into diverse other honest families.

17. Let them be only thine own, and not strangers with thee.


17. Children that acknowledge no other Father, because they spring from one
whom thou enjoyest (like a fountain in thy own ground) to thy self alone: being
taught by thy confining thy self to her, never to admit any stranger to thy
bed; but to keep it solely unto thee.

18. Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.


18. Happy shall thou every way be in such a Wife; whom I advice thee to take
in thy youth, and avoiding those filthy cruel Harlots ( v. 9.) to solace thy
self in her innocent and delightful company: whereby thou will long preserve
thy youth, which they speedily deflowr, v. 10.

19. Let her be as the loving hind, and pleasant roe, let her breasts satisfy
thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love.


19. Love her and cherish her, with a most tender affection; and let her always
seem amiable in thy eyes: if thou would recreate and disport thy self (as
some are wont to do with young fawns, and other beautiful creatures of like
kind) let it be with her, as the sweetest companion; in whose embraces take
such satisfaction, as to forget all other, and to be excessively transported
with her as long as you live. See Arg. [a]

20. And why will thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace
the bosom of a stranger?


20. Consider, My Son, ( v. 1.) what I say, and deny if thou can, that it is
an unaccountable folly to seek that in a vile Harlot (to whom thou ought to
be as great a stranger, as to her Religion) which thou may more fully, more
pleasantly, securely, and constantly, as well as more innocently, enjoy in a
pious Wife of thine own Nation.

21. For the ways of man are before the eyes of the LORD, and he pondereth all
his goings.


21. And, which is most considerable, enjoy with the approbation and favor of
the Lord: from whom no man can hide his most private actions, but He plainly
sees and weighs all he does, wheresoever he be; and will exactly proportion
rewards and punishments, according as he behaves himself.

22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his sins.


22. If he be a wicked Fornicator or Adulterer, for instance, let him not think
to escape, because he is so cunning that no body observes him, or so powerful
that none can call him to account: for his own manifold iniquities shall arrest
and apprehend him; and he shall need no other chains to bind and hold him fast,
to answer for them to God.

23. He shall dye without instruction, and in the greatness of his folly he
shall go astray.


23. Whose sentence upon such a person is this; that he shall inevitably
perish, ( v. 5.) because he refused to follow these Instructions; and not only
miss of his aim of being happy, but, like men that wander from the right way,
precipitate himself into unexpected ruin ( v. 9, 10, 11.) because he was such
an egregious fool, as to take no warning by all that could be said to him; but
still to commit innumerable sins ( v. 13, 14.) though he was told the many
inconveniences, nay mischiefs they would bring upon him.

CHAP. VI.
ARGUMENT.
For the securing of the peace and happiness of a married life (which the Wise
Man had commended in the foregoing Chapter) he here adds two cautions; one
against suretiship, the other against sloth: which make great discontents in a
Family, by bringing it to poverty. He illustrates both by elegant similitudes;
especially the latter, by the example of the Ant: Who borrows of none, and yet
is not in danger to starve; laying up in store, by a notable industry,
sufficient provision in due season against a time of need. Which the great Lord
[a] Bacon ingeniously applies (in the beginning of his Sixth Book of the
Advancement of Learning) to the improvement of Arts and Sciences, by every ones
bringing his grain. And in this business he defines the slothful to be; whose
only care it is to live upon the main stock; but not to improve it by sowing
the ground of Sciences over again, and reaping a new harvest. This is the sum
of the eleven first verses.

And upon this occasion he annexes the description of a deceitful knave ( v.
12, etc.) who cares not by what wicked arts he lives, when he is reduced to
poverty. Whose character he gives from his mouth, his eyes, feet, singers,
heart and tongue. And after a septenary of vices ( v. 16, etc.) which he
represents as most odious to God, he returns to his former Argument; to give
cautions against uncleanness, especially Adultery ( verse 20, 24, etc.) which
as it is many times the effect of Idleness, so he shows is the way to bring one
to poverty; nay, to endanger ones life, or to bring inevitably upon him some
other mischief: not only infamy, but the hatred and revenge of that person who
is wronged by the Adulterer; who hereby puts himself into a worse condition,
than that of a Thief. [b] They that would see the terrible effects of this
jealousy fully and lively described, let them read Saint Chrysostom, (...),
chap. 52. Where he observes, among other things, that (...), etc. this Disease
is wont to breed and bring forth not only an intolerable heaviness of mind,
but an insupportable rage; and that, such is the madness of this distemper,
that it is not cured, no not by the revenge it takes upon him that is the cause
of it.

The principal points of Wisdom to be learnt in this Chapter are these; care
of our Family; caution in engaging for others; diligence in some honest
employment; hatred of idleness as contrary to nature; not to contemn the
meanest Instructor, but to learn something even of the smallest Creature; and
to improve the present time; to dread the mischievous effects of poverty,
especially that which comes by idleness: (the effect of which is too often the
loss of all conscience, v. 12, 13, etc.) to give good heed to the Admonitions
of our Parents and Instructours, when they teach the will of God: and above all
things to fortify our selves against the sins of uncleanness. About which the
Wise Man gives the more frequent cautions, because youth is not more prone to
them, than they are pernicious to youth. Who ought therefore not only to weigh
diligently the miserable consequences of them, especially of Adultery (which he
represents in the conclusion of the Chapter) but carefully to avoid the
occasions of such sins; and faithfully to suppress the first motions toward
them, v. 25, etc. [c] Where he gives a particular charge to watch over our eyes
(which are the inlets of love) and uses a remarkable phrase to express the
danger of gazing upon an evil Woman; lest he be taken or caught with her
eyelids: which he seems to compare to nets as other Authors do. Particularly
Philostratus in his Epistles; where he often speaks of the (...), nets of the
eyes; and has in these elegant words expressed the power of love which resides
in the eyelids, here mentioned. (...). etc. Epist. (...).

It would be too long to note the Proverbial Speeches in this Chapter. I shall
only give a brief account of one of them, and of one phrase in this Chapter
that needs a little explication.

[d] As for the Proverbial Speech it is v. 11. upon which the Lord Bacon has
made a very ingenious observation; distinguishing in this manner, between the
poverty that comes as a Traveller, and the want that comes as an armed Man:
that the shipwreck of fortune falls upon Prodigals or such as are careless of
their Estates, by insensible degrees at the first; with soft silent paces, like
a Traveller, and is hardly perceived: but soon after Necessity invades him,
like an armed Man: that is, presses upon him so hard, that he feels it plainly,
and perceives there is no resistance to be made. And thereupon he gives this
prudent advice, to prevent the Traveller, and to be well provided against the
armed Man. But it is sufficient to have noted this here, (out of his Eighth
Book of the Advancement of Learning, chapter 2. parab. 5.) which they that please
may make use of upon occasion. In my Paraphrase I have waved this exact
curiosity: because I observe the Wise Man generally repeats the same thing in
other words, without any such distinction.

[e] As for the phrase I spoke of it is v. 31. where it is said a Thief shall
restore sevenfold (as we translate the word) when the Law of Moses enjoins no
such restitution, but much less (XXII. Exodus 1, 4.) and there is no reason to
think the Law was altered in aftertimes. Therefore I have followed another use
of the word Schivatajim, which signifies not any determinate number; but only
such as is perfect and complete in its kind; as may be seen IV. Genesis 15, 24.
XII. Psalm. 7. XXX. Isa. 26.

1. MY son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand
with a stranger,


1. AND now, My Son, ( see chapter II. 1. III. 1. 17.) that no difference may arise
between thy Wife and Thee; be advised by me, not to pass thy word rashly for
the money which thy Neighbor or Friend borrows of another: much less stand
bound for a Stranger, whose honesty or ability is unknown to thee.

2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words
of thy mouth.


2. Young men indeed think this no great matter: but if thou have been so
incautious, as to be drawn into such engagements, look upon thy self as no
longer a free man; but hampered and inslaved in dangerous obligations.

3. Do this now, my son, and deliver thy self, when thou art come into the
hand of thy friend: go, humble thy self, and make sure thy friend.


3. And therefore, in that case, immediately follow the counsel which I now
give thee, My Son; do thy utmost endeavor to be discharged, by pressing thy
Friend forthwith to satisfy the debt, or to give thee security against the
Creditor: Make no delay, and stick not, if need be, to cast down thy self
before him on the ground, and beseech him as readily to grant thy request, as
thou wast forward to comply with his: be not modest at all; nor cease to urge
and importune him by thy self and by thy Friends, till thou have prevailed with
him.

4. Give not sleep to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy eyelids.


4. Be not quiet till this be accomplished; nor take so much as a wink of sleep
till thou art eased of this care: which, if thou understandest thy self, may
well disturb thy rest.

5. Deliver thy self as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from
the hand of the fowler.


5. For thou art in the same condition with a young Roe, or silly Bird; that is
taken in the toil of the Hunter or the snare of the Fowler: and therefore
struggle, like them, with all thy might, to get loose (if it be possible) and
to be released from the bond wherein thou art entangled.

6. Go to the ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise:


6. Nor is industry and diligence requisite in this alone, but in all thy
affairs: to which therefore, if thou art slothful, I must excite thee by the
example of the Ants; whose orderly and unanimous diligence, in collecting and
preserving food for themselves, if thou will mark and observe, thou may be
ashamed to be an idle spectator of their labors; and learn hereafter to
imitate their provident care. See Arg. [a]

7. Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,


7. Which is the more remarkable, because they have none to lead and direct
them (as Mankind have) no overseer to exact their labors; no supreme Governor
to call them to an account for any negligence.

8. Provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.


8. And yet they never omit the opportunity they have in Harvest, to make
provision against the Winter; but toil perpetually in gathering, and carrying
food into the cells, they have dug for it in the Earth; where they lay it up
and secure it with admirable art; that it may neither be injured by the
weather, nor stolen from them by other Creatures.

9. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep?


9. O the strange idleness of Mankind! who have many Monitours and Governors,
that call upon them again and again, and stir them up in vain to labor. What
rechlesness is this, which makes thee, O sluggard, indulge thy self in laziness
and sloth? as if thou wast made for nothing else, but to sleep and take thine
ease?

10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep.


10. Rolling thy self in thy Bed, and ridiculously desiring thy pains may be
spared, and thou may be suffered still, without any disturbance, to enjoy a
little more sleep; when thou have loytered too long, and put off the care of
thy affairs from time to time, till thou have none left to do it in:

11. So shall thy poverty come as one that traveleth, and thy want as an armed
man.


11. But poverty comes apace upon thee, and before thou art aware leaves thee
as naked, as if thou wast stripped by a Highway-man: nay, extreme want seizes on
thee unavoidably, like an armed Man, which thou can find no means to resist.
See Arg. [d]

12. Anaughty person, a wicked man walks with a froward mouth.


12. By which means thou may be tempted to become the worst of men, a perfect
shark, void of all faith and honesty: whose mouth never speaks a word of truth;
but makes it his business by lies, or flatteries, or slanders, or perjuries, to
maintain himself in his idle courses.

13. He winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with his
fingers.


13. His very Eyes are Instruments of deceit, or mischief; for he makes signs
with them to his Companions, when they are to play their pranks: or if that be
too broad, he secretly treads upon their Toes; or signifies his mind by the
motion of his Fingers; for every part of him is employed to make his wicked
meaning understood.

14. Frowardness is in his heart, de devises mischief continually, he sows
discord.


14. How should it be otherways, when his Heart is a Shop, furnished with
nothing but all manner of perverse inclinations; which are perpetually at work
to contrive some mischief or other: and (if they can do nothing else) by
casting suspicions into men's minds one of another, to stir up hatred,
dissension, strife, brawlings, law suits, and all manner of discord; which is
the destruction of Families and Kingdoms.

15. Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; suddenly shall he be broken
without remedy.


15. And shall prove his own utter ruin; which, for this very cause, shall
sooner than he thinks of in a terrible manner come upon him: when he fancies he
has carried his matters so cunningly, that no body discerns his villainy, he
shall on a sudden be looked upon as the pest of Mankind; and, like a Vessel
broken into little bits, be incurably undone.

16. These six things does the LORD hate; yea, seven are an abomination unto
him:


16. For, among offenses of this kind, nothing is more odious to the Lord (who
is the dispenser of rewards and punishments) nothing more opposite to the
Divine Nature, and which He more severely punishes, than these six or seven
things; which are commonly found in such loose Companions, as I have now
described.

17. A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood.


17. First, pride and haughtiness of spirit; which swelling a man with a vain
opinion of himself, makes him contemn all others, and overlook them as below
his notice. Secondly, falsehood, or treachery; which stick not at any lies, or
flatteries, or calumnies. And thirdly, a violent, cruel disposition; which
makes a man rather embrue his hands in the blood even of an innocent person,
than not have him removed, who stands in the way of his designs.

18. An heart that devises wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running
to mischief,


18. To which add the fountain of all these, and of those that follow, a mind
that studies nothing but how by fraud or force (though never so injurious to
others) to satisfy some desire of pleasure, covetousness, or revenge: which
produces three other abominable Vices. First, forwardness to execute such
mischievous intentions and desires cheerfully, without any check or delay.

19. A false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among
brethren.


19. Secondly, An Atheistical impudence, which makes a man in open court (when
he is upon his oath) testify any falsehood against his Neighbor; and lastly,
such malicious envy, as loves to make the dearest Friends fall out; and takes
pleasure to see those at variance, who ought to be most closely united in
brotherly affection.

20. My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of thy
mother.


20. And here, My Son, I must remember thee of what I said in the beginning (I.
8.) about a reverend regard unto thy Parents; especially when they warn thee
against such wickednesses as these: do not make light of their admonitions; but
observe the precepts of thy Father, and let thy Mother's commands be a law to
thee. See I. 8.

21. Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.


21. Fix them in thy mind, and link thy affections so fast to them, that they
may not only be continually before thine eyes; but seem the greatest ornament
to all thy words and actions, when they are ordered by their directions.

22. When thou go, it shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it shall keep
thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.


22. Thou will find the benefit, of giving early entertainment to such good
counsel from thy Parents, in every passage of thy whole life: for when thou
go about any business, it will guide thee to do it honestly and
successsully; when thou lie down to sleep, it will make thee rest secure of
the guardianship of the Divine Providence over thee; and, when thou awakest in
the morning, suggest to thy thoughts how thou ought to behave thy self at
home and abroad.

23. For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of
instruction are the way of life:


23. In the darkest times and the most dubious cases, it will both direct and
comfort thee: for every particular Commandment of God (which they teach thee)
is like a Candle; and the whole Law is like the light of the Sun; to show thee
thy way, and to exhilarate thy Spirits, while thou walk in it: nay, the
severest reproofs, which correct thy errors and reduce thee to obedience, are
the way to the greatest happiness.

24. To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a
strange woman.


24. As those instructions and reproofs, for instance, ought to be accounted,
which preserve thee from being deluded by the flattering speeches, and
inticements of a lewd Woman: from whom thou ought perfectly to estrange thy
self, as from a sink of all wickedness.

25. Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with
her eyelids.


25. Let me advise thee again (though I have done it often II. 16. V. 3, 4, etc.)
not to gaze upon her beauty, or upon her fine attire; but suppress the very
first desire, which a glance of her may have kindled in thy heart: do not
consent to pursue it in the least; much less suffer thy self to be caught in
the nets of her wanton Eyes, and thereby drawn into her dangerous embraces. See
Argument [ c]

26. For by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread: and
the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.


26. For such is the cunning of a Harlot, that having got a silly Youth into
her toils, she will hardly let him go, till she have reduced him to the
extremest beggary: and if she be another Man's Wife, a train is laid for that
which is more precious by far than all the treasures he has spent, viz. his
dearest life; which he foolishly loses for the short pleasure of a sinful Lust.

27. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt?


27. He may think perhaps to enjoy his pleasure so privately, that none shall
know it; but that is as unlikely, as that a man should take fire secretly into
his Bosom, and so conceal it that it shall not break out and burn his Clothes.

28. Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt?


28. Who ever heard that fire will do no hurt, because it is closely lodged?
or that any body ever walked barefoot upon red-hot Coals, and his Feet escaped
from being burnt?

29. So he that goes in to his neighbor's wife: whosoever touches her, shall
not be innocent.


29. Even so is it sottish folly to imagine that a man shall suffer nothing,
who lies with his Neighbor's Wife: let him be who he will that commits that
crime, he shall not escape unpunished.

30. Men do not despise a Thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is
hungry:


30. For he is not a common Thief, who only steals a man's goods, and that
perhaps out of extreme necessity, merely to satisfy his hungry Appetite, which
he knows not otherways how to fill: such an one we are apt to pity, and do not
expose him to shame, by whipping him, and laying stripes upon his back;

31. But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold, he shall give all the
substance of his house.


31. But when he is found out, he shall only make as complete a restitution
(LXXIX. Psalm. 12.) as the Law requires (XXII. Exodus 1, etc.) though that
perhaps may be no less than all that he is worth. See Argument [e]

32. But whosoever commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding: he that
does it, destroys his own soul.


32. But the Adulterer robs a Man of his Wife, without any such necessity,
there being other and honest ways to satisfy his desires: and therefore has no
excuse, but must be looked upon as a stupid Fool void of common understanding;
and when he is found out be punished not merely in his estate, but with the
loss of his life. XX. Levit. 10.

33. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped
away.


33. And besides the quarrels and other troubles wherein this sin may engage
him, his Reputation shall receive a deadly wound; and it will make him
infamous, as long as he lives and when he is dead: for while his Name lasts it
shall not be mentioned without reproach; but have a brand of disgrace set upon
it, which shall never be blotted out.

34. For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day
of vengeance.


34. For no Restitution can be made, or Satisfaction given in this case, as
there may be in the other; no Prayers neither, or Submissions shall prevail
with the injured. Husband: whose justly provoked indignation rises up to a
furious rage; which will not pity or spare the Adulterer (though the public
Justice should be asleep) when he finds an opportunity to be revenged. See Arg.
[b]

35. He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou
give many gifts.


35. Though he may be willing to expiate his crime, and redeem his life at any
rate, it will not be accepted; the largest gifts will be refused; and though
greater and greater be still offered, they will not appease his wrath: which
pursues the Adulterer implacably, and never rests contented, but in his utter
ruin.

CHAP. VII.
ARGUMENT.
Chastity is a virtue of that consequence, and Impurity such a pernicious bane
of Youth; that the Wise Man thought he could not too often make mention of the
danger of the one, to move men carefully to preserve the other. And therefore
is not contented with what he had already said about this matter, in the latter
end of the second Chapter, and in the whole fifth Chapter, and now in the
latter part of the sixth: but again repeats it with renewed importunities;
desiring to be heard attentively, especially in the cautions he gives against
Adultery; the avoiding of which he represents as a high point of Wisdom, v. 1,
2, 3, 4.

And the better to secure those that desire to be happy from this snare, he
represents, together with the silliness of young Men, the cunning and crafty
devices of an impudent Adulteress. Which is admirably set forth from v. 6. to
v. 21. Where he begins to show the effects of her courtship, and its lamentable
conclusion. And thereupon v. 24. renews his entreaties to beware of such Women;
who have undone many and great persons; and to stop at the very first motion or
inclination toward her.

The sum of all is, that it is a singular benefit a man has by true Wisdom,
to be preserved from such sins and such miseries: And therefore we should study
Wisdom; which alone can secure us from being deceived by such flatteries, as
bewitch silly and incautious Souls to their ruin. And herein the vigilance of
Magistrates is required to watch and observe (as Solomon did v. 6. 7.) the
manners of their Subjects; that they may the better obviate and correct their
vices: but especially every man's diligent consideration is necessary, of such
things as Solomon here sets before him to divert him from such wicked courses.
Particularly the character of these lewd women is to be studied; who are then
most abominable, when they put on the mask of piety and devotion. As this
strumpet does ( v. 14.) in her speech which she makes to the young Man. Where
there are two things in my Paraphrase, of which I owe some account to the
Reader.

[a] The one is in the beginning of it, v. 14. Where I have taken Schelamin
peace offerings, of which there were three sorts (VII. Lev. 11, 12. 16.) for
the last of them, offerings of thanksgiving for blessings already obtained; not
of prayer for the impetration of blessings from God (as Grotius and others
understand the word) not yet received. My reason is, because she was so
solicitous to have company at her feast upon this Sacrifice, that very day.
Every body knows that such Sacrifices were to be of the best, either of
Bullocks, or Sheep or Goats (III. Lev. 1, 6, 12.) and that the greatest part of
them fell to the share of the person who offered them, that he might feast with
God: that is, all except the fat upon the kidneys, and rump of the Sheep, and
the breast and right shoulder; which was sufficient to make a liberal
entertainment for his Friends. But this is not so commonly observed, that
though they might keep this flesh two days, before it was all spent, because
there was such plenty of it, yet that is to be understood only of the two
first sorts of Peace Offerings, for obtaining blessings; not of the
eucharistical, or Thank-offerings: which as Philo observes, were to be eaten
the very same day they were offered; that they who had readily received favors
from God, might as readily, and without delay, communicate to others. Which is
the account Abarbinel also gives of this matter: and it is observable, that all
sorts of bread were to be joined with this Sacrifice, that every thing might be
ready for the Feast.

[b] The other thing is at the latter end of her speech, v. 20. where by the
word Haccese I understand the Full Moon, as the Vulgar Latin does. With which
Translation Interpreters find fault, because it looks like a contradiction,
they say, to call that day by a name, which signifies the Moon to be covered:
and therefore they translate it rather the New Moon, as we do in the margin of
our Bibles. But they that can consult Lud. de Dieu upon LXXXI. Psalm. 3. will
find good reason to take it quite otherwise; for the Full Moon: which giving
light then all the night, made it a fit time for a journey, either in Winter
(as by the darkness of the night, v. 9. I suppose it might now be) when the
days are short; or in Summer when the heat made them unfit for travel.

The Proverbial Sayings in this Chapter, some make three, others four: all
contained in two verses 22, and 23. With which I shall not trouble the Reader;
because I have made them plain enough in the Paraphrase; and intend not to fill
this Book, with like sayings out of other Authors.

[c] I should only add that Rabbim in the last verse, but one, signifying
great men as well as many, I have expressed both: and Solomon himself as well
as Sampson became an example of the mighty men there mentioned who were undone
by lewd Women.

1. MY son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.


1. THere is great reason then, My Son, (II. Prove. 1.) to repeat the caution I
have often given thee, against this and other vices: and to beseech thee, to
observe my Instructions, and to lay up my Commandments in such faithful
remembrance; that they may not fail to produce the fruit of obedience.

2. Keep my commandments, and live: and my law as the apple of thine eye.


2. For if thou will be ruled by them, assure thy self (as I have said before
IV. 4.) thou shall enjoy long happiness: therefore observe them carefully with
a tender affection to them; and, looking upon them as thy safest guide and
directour, consent as soon to wound the apple of thine Eye, as in the least to
violate any of My Laws.

3. Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart.


3. Do not merely read what I write, imagining thou can have continual
recourse to them here in this Book; but be so well acquainted with them, as to
have them (as we speak) at thy fingers ends: or rather, let them be transcribed
from hence, into thy very heart.

4. Say unto Wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call understanding thy Kinswoman:


4. There embrace them with ardent love; and set such an high esteem on
Wisdom, that thou may invite it more and more unto thee: till it be as
familiar with thee as an only Sister, born at the same time with thee; and
thou understand and delight in all her Precepts, as so near a kin to thee, that
thou find them to be the very reason and sense of thy own mind.

5. That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which
flattereth with her words.


5. Which will be a powerful preservative to thee from the snares of the
naughty Woman: who, though her company be so pernicious that God would have
thee perfectly estranged from her, as if she were not of the Commonwealth of
Israel, yet has powerful charms about her, to flatter those into her
embraces, who are not heartily in love with Wisdom.

6. For at the window of my house I looked through my casement,


6. Of which a memorable instance comes now into my mind; for looking one day
from my Chamber, through the lattices of the Window of my Palace;

7. And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man
void of understanding,


7. I observed, among the undisciplined and unexperienced Striplings of the
City, one that was as childish and void of consideration, as he was youthful
and eager in his desires:

8. Passing through the street near her corner, and he went the way to her
house,


8. Who, as if he had a mind to be undone, passed idly through the Street,
till he came to a Corner, where naughty Women use to haunt: walking in as
stately a manner, as he could devise, directly toward one of their Houses.

9. In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night:


9. It was in the twilight, while he might see his way and yet hope to be
concealed: in the close of the day; which was followed by a night as dark as
pitch, and fit for such works of darkness.

10. And behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtle
of heart.


10. There, on a sudden, I was surprised with the sight of a Woman starting
forth; who did not stay till he came up to her, but went to meet him, in a
gaudy lascivious dress, apt to allure a weak young Man: who thought presently
she was in love with him; when her heart, as full of subtilty as his was of
folly, is reserved only to her self.

11. (She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house.


11. This is her character: She is full of talk, and of bold unseemly
courtship; unruly and not to be controuled or broke of her will; idle also and
always gadding abroad, as if she had no business (but with her foolish Lovers)
at home.

12. Now is she without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner)


12. Sometime she stands before her door; and, if that will not do, she goes
further into the streets and places of greatest concourse: and, more
especially, waits at every corner (where she may look into two streets at once)
to ensnare such as are apt, like silly birds, to be taken by her.

13. So she caught him and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him,


13. At one of those corners (as I said) she met this young fool; and, contrary
to all the rules of modesty, caught him hard about the neck and kissed him: and
after these amorous caresses put on still a bolder face, and, without any
blushing, made this following speech to him;

14. I have peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows.


14. I am a happy Woman, in many blessings that God has bestowed upon me, for
which I have given Him solemn thanks this very day: and, as Religion and Custom
binds me, I have provided as good a Feast as those Sacrifices would afford,
which I formerly vowed and now have paid; having no want of any thing but of
some good company at home to rejoice with me. See Arg. [a]

15. Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I
have found thee.


15. Which made me go abroad to try if I could meet with thee (who art the very
person whom I came to seek) that I might invite and earnestly beseech thee to
be so kind as to bear me company: And, to my great joy, this is added to all my
other happiness, that I have found thee speedily and most opportunely.

16. I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with
fine linen of Egypt.


16. There shall no other pleasures be wanting when our Feast is done; but from
the Table we will remove to my Bed: which I have richly adorned with every
thing that may please the eye; and made it as soft also as heart can wish.

17. I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.


17. Where thou shall be entertained likewise with the sweetest perfumes, that
ours or the neighboring countries could furnish me withal; such as Myrrh,
Aloes, and Cinnamon: wherewith I have sprinkled my Bed, to render it more
grateful to all thy senses,

18. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning, let us solace our
selves with loves.


18. Why do we waste our time then here in the street? Come along with me, and
let us go thither; and there satisfy our desires to the full with love: we
will solace our selves with the sweetest pleasures; which shall not end till
the morning light.

19. For the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey;


19. For there is no fear they should be interrupted or disturbed; the Man
(whom they call my Husband) being from home, and not likely to return in haste:
For he is gone to a place a great way off;

20. He has taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day
appointed.


20. Where he has much business to dispatch; which will detein him so long,
that I am sure it will be full moon (and now the new does scarce yet appear, v.
9.) before he can be at home again. See Arg. [b]

21. With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her
lips she forced him.


21. In the representing of these, and many other like specious pretenses (of
great affection to him, of all sorts of pleasure, of secrecy, and safety in
their enjoyments) she showed her self such a mistress of her art, that she
bowed the heart of the young Man to become her disciple: and, having wrought
upon his inclinations, she pursued her advantage with so much cunning; that she
rather compelled than attracted him, by her charming voice, and her soft
alluring language.

22. He goes after her straitway, as an ox goes to the slaughter, or as a
fool to the correction of the stocks:


22. For he made not the least Objection, but away he went immediately, and
followed her like a great Calf (as we speak in our language) or a stupid Ox;
that fancies he is led to the pasture, when he is going to be killed: or like a
fool, who takes it for an ornament, when the stocks are brought for his
correction, to be clapped upon his legs.

23. Till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and
knows not that it is for his life.


23. Just so he hastily threw himself into her embraces, and dreamed of nothing
but pleasure; till, like a rash Soldier that falls unexpectedly into an
ambush, he received a mortal wound by that, which he fancied would be his
highest satisfaction; or like a silly bird that greedy of the food which is
laid to entice it, never minds the snare that is laid together with it: So he
eagerly longing to taste of her Feast and the following delights, had not so
much as a thought, that this was a design upon his life; and would not end, but
in miseries infinitely greater than all his joys.

24. Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of
my mouth.


24. This is a true representation, my dear children (whom I love unfeignedly,
not deceitfully like those harlots) of the folly and danger of these lewd
courses, in which youth is prone to be engaged: and therefore do not look upon
it as an idle speculation; but give diligent heed unto it, and be ruled by my
Advice.

25. Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.


25. Let not one of you so much as entertain a thought of going to such a
woman; much less of consenting to her enticements: or if any of you have been
so unhappy as to be engaged in her company, let him think it is too much that
he has adventured to turn aside out of the right way, and not wander till he
has utterly lost himself in those strange paths, and cannot find his way back
again.

26. For she has cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have been slain
by her.


26. Do not presume of being safe in such courses, and of making a good retreat
at last: For many have been the examples of no mean persons, who have fallen in
their reputation, their estates, their healths, their comforts of life, and in
truth have utterly perished by her: innumerable are the mighty men, both for
valor and for wisdom, whom she has brought to ruin. See Arg. [c]

27. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.


27. In short, to follow her unto her house, as this young man did, is the
direct way to hell: every step that is taken to her Bed (unto which she invited
him to ascend) is in truth a going down to the dismal chambers of death, and
to the most horrid miseries.

CHAP. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
The folly and danger of yielding to those brutish lusts and affections whereby
so many are misled, having been plainly discovered and lively described in the
foregoing Chapter; the Wise man proceeds in his design, by appealing to all
that read these things, whether they be not sufficiently cautioned against
those courses which ruin them; and abundant care be not taken to make them
really wise and happy. For he knew none could answer those questions
negatively, which he asks in the beginning of the Chapter ( v. 1, 2, etc.) but
all must confess they have been informed in the doctrine of Wisdom. Whom he
represents as present every where, and commending it self to all sorts of
persons with a sincere affection ( v. 6, etc.) as infinitely better than all
the treasures which they greedily seek ( v. 10.) and to be desired and valued
upon so many accounts, that it is not easy to number them. Particularly, for
that Prudence and that Authority, which it gives to those who are endued with
it ( v. 12, 14, 15, etc.) and more than this because it makes them approach
near unto God, the fountain of Wisdom and Goodness, and the original pattern of
them, v. 21, 22, etc.

This is expressed in such magnificent language, that, though Solomon I suppose
thought of nothing, but the wise directions God had given them in his Word,
revealed to them by his Servant Moses and the Prophets; yet the ancient
Christians thought his words might better be applied to the Wisdom revealed
unto us in the Gospel by the Son of God: nay, to the Son of God himself, the
Eternal Word, and Wisdom of the Father.

[a] Whom the Arians, by a false interpretation of a passage in this Chapter v.
22. endeavored to prove a Creature: but according to the Hebrew verity, if
this Text belong to that matter, appears to have been, as S. John speaks, with
the Father in the beginning, being his only begotten before all worlds. And so
the word (...) which we translate possess sometimes signifies in Scripture; and
as it is thus rendered by the LXX. in the XIII. Zach. 5. so ought be translated
in IV. Genesis 1. (not I have gotten or possessed but) I have brought forth a man
from the Lord: as Bochartus discourses in his Phaleg, p. 784.

But I said, if it belong to that matter, because the Fathers themselves are
not resolved, whether these words, v. 22. may not rather be applied to our
blessed Savior, according to his humane Nature. For so the great Athanasius
himself sometimes expounds them (though at other times he goes the other way)
allowing the Arian sense of (...), he created me; this is not to be understood,
says he (in his Expositio Fidei, p. 242. Tom. 1.) of the Divinity of Christ;
"but (...), is written of Jesus bodily, as he was born of the Virgin Mary. For
of this (...) (as he speaks) whom he sent for our Salvation, it may be said
truly that he was the beginning of God's ways: we have access by him to God the
Father, as he himself says, I am the way, which leads to the Father." And
afterward in his Epistle about the Decrees of the Nicene Council, p. 262. he
glosses upon these words in this manner; "the person who here speaks is indeed
our Savior, who is to be conceived to say this when He took a body, the Lord
created me the beginning of his ways. For as with respect to his being the Son
of God, it is most agreeable to say, He was always, and in the bosom of the
Father: So, being made a man, this saying was very becoming, the Lord created
me." And, to name no more places, he interprets it thus several times in his
third Oration against the Arians, p. 415, 417, etc. where he has these words,
It is as if he had said, My Father made me a body, and created me to be among
men for their Salvation.

But this not being the sense of the words which Solomon first intended, I
shall not build my Paraphrase upon it; but take Wisdom here, as it signifies
in other places of this Book and has been hitherto described. Whom Solomon now
celebrates for her most venerable Antiquity, as Aristobulus observes to Ptolomy
(in Eusebius his Praepar. Evang. L. XIII. p. 667.) and introduces like a most
beautiful person, no less than a Queen; or rather some Divine Being
(infinitely to be preferred before that base Strumpet spoken of in the
foregoing Chapter.) Who having finished her own praises, which, the truth is,
better agree to that heavenly Doctrine afterward delivered by our Lord Jesus
Christ (who was the Wisdom of the Father, both as the Eternal LOGOS subsisting
with him before all worlds, and as He was anointed by the Holy Ghost to declare
to us all the Counsel of God) concludes with an earnest invitation unto all to
become acquainted with her instructions; if they meant to be happy and would
avoid the greatest miseries, v. 32, 33, etc.

There are so many notable lessons to be learnt out of this Chapter, that it
would make this Preface too long, if I should mention them all. I shall
therefore name only one Doctrinal point, that if this Chapter be at all to be
understood of the Divinity of the Son of God (which the Arians believed) then
both his Eternity is most plainly here asserted, and also his distinct
Subsistence and personality, as we speak, v. 22, 30. And these two Practical.
First, that it is a vain pretense we make to Wisdom, if the fear of God and
true Virtue be wanting, v. 13, 20. and Secondly, the whole Chapter supposes,
what the last verse more particularly expresses, that every man's death and
destruction is from himself; who wrongs his own Soul; and that against the
desire and earnest frequent importunities of the Wisdom of God: unto which he
will not hearken; but perversely rejects the seasonable reproofs and the
wholesome advices, which, on many occasions, he meets withal to prevent his
ruin.

They that follow the vulgar Latin fancy they find a Proverbial saying, v. 13.
where that which we translate a froward mouth, they translate a mouth with two
tongues: But I have followed the Hebrew, which speaks of a worse sort of
perverse language than that phrase alone signifies.

1. DOES not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?


1. CAN you then hereafter pretend ignorance, and say you never had any caution
given you against these snares? Or rather, have I not the greatest reason to
chide you for your stupidity in hearkening unto those secret allurements to the
deeds of darkness, when their shamefulness is so apparent? and you have had so
many open and loud admonitions given you to be wiser? and such serious and
earnest endeavors have been used, by repeated instructions and reproofs to
reclaim you from your folly?

2. She stands in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the
paths.


2. There is no public Crier better heard and understood by all, when from an
high place he makes proclamation to the people, than the rules of Wisdom and
Virtue are: which do not lie concealed, nor can be altered at our pleasure; but
present themselves continually to men's thoughts wheresoever they go, being as
plain as the highway, and remaining unmovable and fixed, notwithstanding all
the attempts that have been made to subvert them.

3. She cries at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the
doors.


3. Let their business be what it will, whether in the Courts of Judgment, or
among those that traffic in the City, or in their own private habitation,
still they know what their duty is: which their own Conscience, as well as
God's Ministers, rings so continually in their ears; that they cannot avoid
such informations.

4. Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of man.


4. Which they hear as plainly and distinctly, as if Wisdom it self should
call to them from above, saying; hearken, O men, of whatsoever rank and
condition you be: whether high or low, rich or poor; for my instructions are
common to you all.

5. O ye simple, understand wisdom; and ye fools, be ye of an understanding
heart.


5. Your fault is, that you are inconsiderate and easily cheated (VII. 21, 22.)
or, which is worse, stupidly bent to follow your sensual appetite; as if you
had no better inclinations: But if you will attend, I will make you more
circumspect and wary; and dispose you to be led by prudent counsels.

6. Hear, for I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my lips
shall be right things.


6. Do not turn away your ears, but lissen to my words; for I will teach you
things most worthy of your notice and choice: which will conduct you safely in
all the passages of your life; and lay before you such a plain, direct and
easy path, that if you walk in it you shall not miss of being happy.

7. For my mouth shall speak truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.


7. For I will utter nothing rashly, or contrary to the truth; all falsehood,
deceit and whatsoever may do hurt, being so detestable to me, and so far from
my thoughts, that the correction of such wickedness is the aim of my discourse:

8. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing froward or
perverse in them.


8. Every word of which is exactly conformable to the rule of Righteousness:
There is nothing I injoin or forbid merely to hamper and perplex you, or to
abridge you of your just liberty; much less to misguide and pervert you, in the
pursuit of what is good for you.

9. They are all plain to him that understands, and right to them that find
knowledge.


9. But, whatsoever they may seem to inconsiderate and prejudiced minds, they
will all manifestly appear equal and just unto him that uses his reason; and
approve themselves, as I said, exactly conformable to the strictest rules of
Righteousness, unto well-disposed minds; who will be at the pains to know the
difference between right and wrong, or between that which is good and that
which is evil for them.

10. Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice
gold.


10. They will not think me unreasonable, when I commend the very rebukes which
I give them (though administered by some sharp affliction, III. 14.) and set
such a high price upon them, as to advise every one to accept them rather than
silver; and to value the knowledge of God, and of themselves and of all things
else (which these corrections teach them) above the choicest gold.

11. For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired,
are not to be compared to it.


11. For true Wisdom is such an inestimable Jewel, that the most precious
Pearls are trash to it: nor can our boundless fancies present any thing to our
wishes, that is worthy to come in competition with it.

12. I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions.


12. For what is there comparable to a prudent Mind, which is not crafty to
deceive, but so cautious as not to be deceived? And this I may boast is solely
in my power to endow men withal; who ever give the safest, nay infallible
Advice, and direct men to discreeter Resolutions in the most difficult cases,
than the subtilest head in the world, that consults not with me, can invent for
his Clients.

13. The fear of the LORD is to hate evil; pride, and arrogance, and the evil
way, and the froward mouth do I hate.


13. And my Rules are as short, as they are sure: For I teach men in the first
place religiously to worship and stand in awe of the Divine Majesty: which is
but a vain pretense, I further instruct them, if it do not make them abominate
all manner of evil, though but in design: more particularly, I hate that vain
opinion men have of their own abilities to compass their designs, which makes
them forget God, and despise the wholesome advice of honest men; as I likewise
do the use of all unlawful means, though the end be good; especially, lying,
calumny, detraction, breach of faith, which every one must renounce who will
have my Friendship:

14. Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding, I have strength.


14. Who am the ablest Counselor in all deliberations; and give men the most
certain, solid and never failing advice, for the effecting their desires, or
being contented with disappointments: For I comprehend whatsoever is fit to be
done or omitted in all undertakings; and inspire men also with courage to
persist in good resolutions, which are neither rashly taken nor wrongfully
pursued.

15. By me kings reign, and Princes decree justice.


15. Kings themselves fit not fast on their Thrones, though placed there by God
himself, unless they be ruled by me: the wisest Senators cannot support
themselves and them, but by persuading them to enact and execute just and
merciful Laws, for the government of their people.

16. By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.


16. In vain do their great Captains, or other Ministers endeavor to defend
them, but under the conduct and protection of my virtuous discipline: Nobles,
and all the Judges of the land lose their Authority, if they do not faithfully
observe the Rules that I prescribe them.

17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me.


17. Which are no less amiable than they are easily known; there needing no
more to come acquainted with me, but only to love me: For they that love me
are beloved of me; and as they will not fail to seek what they love, so they
shall certainly find what they studiously seek.

18. Riches and honor are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness.


18. And together with me, they shall find such riches and honor, as shall add
to the greatness, and splendor, and stability of their Kingdoms and dignities:
For not merely riches and honor are in my donation, but durable possessions;
which will last the longer, because they are not gotten either by oppression,
or by niggardice: for I teach men both to do justly and to love mercy also
(IV. Dan. 24.)

19. My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than
choice silver.


19. Whereby I bring them in greater Treasures than Gold, though never so
massy, never so refined; a Revenue of higher value, than the purest and
choicest Silver in the World.

20. I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment:


20. For I set their minds and hearts aright; and enrich them with excellent
thoughts: which teach them how to use those earthly goods, and govern
themselves with such exactness in all their private transactions or public
administrations; as never to swerve from the steady rules of justice and equity.

21. That I may cause those that love me, to inherit substance; and I will fill
their treasures.


21. In order to their happy settlement in a state of eternal peace and
substantial satisfaction; which I conser on all those that sincerely love me
and adhere unto me: whose Souls I will fill as full, with abundance of
inestimable riches, as their Treasuries are with Silver, and Gold, and all
other stores.

22. The LORD possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.


22. For the LORD himself has no greater riches than me, who lead men to a
participation of Him and communion with Him (III. 19, 20.) with whom I was ever
present (as well as always most dear unto Him) not only when he began to
create this World; but before he made any of his Works: when as yet there was
Nothing but himself.

23. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.


23. My Sovereignty and Dominion is from everlasting; and has no superior to
it: All Antiquity comes infinitely short of mine; who was before the Earth it
self, the common mother of all mankind (I. Genesis 1.)

24. When there were no depths, I was brought forth: when there were no
fountains abounding with water.


24. When as yet there were no depths (I. Genesis 2.) I was conceived in the mind
of God, long before the sources and springs: whose excellent waters, which are
of greater value than any other, owe their rise unto me, the inexhausted
fountain of all things.

25. Before the mountains were settled; before the hills was I brought forth:


25. Who had a being before the Mountains, from whence those waters run, were
settled; or there was so much as a hillock to be seen in the earth.

26. While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest
part of the dust of the world.


26. For as yet the Lord had not made the earth it self (as I said before, v.
23.) much less adorned it, and put it into this form of lofty mountains and
spacious plains: no, there was not so much as the first atome of this globe
whereon you tread.

27. When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon the
face of the depth:


27. But why do I speak of the earth alone? I was present when He disposed the
heavens into this wonderful order, wherein we behold them; as well as when he
moved upon that confused Abyss which they enclosed, and fashioned the earth
into a regular shape.

28. When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains
of the deep:


28. When he made the watery clouds also, with admirable Wisdom, so firm in the
air, that they shall not fall down all together, but by drops upon the earth:
and provided strong Cisterns for the waters pent up there; from whence they
gush out forcibly, and yet wear not away the passages He has opened for them.

29. When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his
commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth:


29. When he prescribed also to the Sea its limits, that the waters thereof
(though they swell and toss up and down) shall not pass over the shores wherein
He has confined them: and when he settled the Earth so steadfastly, like a
building upon sure foundations, that it remains unmovable in the place he
appointed for it.

30. Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him:


30. Then was I with Him, nay, very near unto Him; contriving all these things:
nor had He any higher pleasure than me, who day by day, during the Creation of
the World, produced some lovely work or other; in which He rejoiced, to see how
good and agreeable they were, I. Genesis 4, 10, 12, 18, 21, 25, 31.

31. Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with
the sons of men.


31. More particularly, I displayed my skill in the vast variety of Creatures,
wherewith I have beautified this Earth, wherein you dwell; which afford a most
delightful spectacle unto me, and unto all wise Observers: who may see, that,
above all the rest, my principal thoughts were fixed upon the children of men
(I. Genesis 26.) in whom I delighted exceedingly (as the Lord does in me, v. 30.)
beholding them made in the Image of God, and after his Likeness; capable to
converse with me.

32. Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for blessed are they that
keep my ways.


32. Who may therefore justly expect (all these things considered) that you
should cheerfully embrace my repeated Counsels; and, as dutiful children, take
the greatest pleasure in being obedient to them: For blessed, you cannot but
see, blessed, beyond all expression, are they who observe (as all other
creatures do) the Laws that I have prescribed them.

33. Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not.


33. Hearken, I beseech you, and yield to the voice of your own reason, and of
God's holy Word and Spirit: which checks the irregular motions which you find
at any time in you: and be so wise and considerate, as not to slight and reject
it.

34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at
the posts of my doors.


34. But rather invite such Instructions, by giving them thankful
entertainment, and going thither where you may meet with them: For happy, more
happy than can be expressed, is that man, who not only hearkens obediently
when he is told his duty, but makes it his business to be rightly informed;
neglecting no opportunity, but constantly and diligently attending there, where
he may be taught how he ought to live; most earnestly desiring to become my
disciple, and to be governed by me.

35. For whosoever finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the LORD.


35. In which, whatsoever pains he bestows, he shall not lose his labor: For
as he shall not fail to find what he seeks, so he shall find withal, that I
will make his life a perpetual pleasure to him; for I have demonstrated that he
must needs be beloved of the Lord, to whom I am most nearly allied, and from
him he shall obtain his heart's desire.

36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul; all they that hate
me love death.


36. From whence it is manifest, that he who violates my Laws, does the
greatest injury unto his own Soul: and whosoever they be that hate to be
reproved for it, and can neither endure to be told of their faults, nor receive
any good advice, they love to be miserable, and wilfully bring upon themselves
utter destruction.

CHAP. IX.
ARGUMENT.
In this Chapter the Wise man seems to me to illustrate more fully, what he had
delivered in the conclusion of the foregoing ( v. 32, 34, 35.) concerning the
satisfaction and happiness they might expect to find, who would attend at the
gates, and submit themselves to the government of that heavenly Wisdom; which
he had described to be acquainted with all the secrets of the Almighty. And
which he here again represents as a glorious Queen, the daughter of heaven,
adorued with all perfections (and [a] therefore uses a word of the plural
number ( v. 1.) whereby to express her excellencies) living in a stately
Palace; unto which she invites all misguided Souls, and promises them, if they
will forsake their follies, the most delicious entertainment.

[b] Which is set forth under the notion of a Feast, whereby the holy Writers
are wont to express (as the aptest resemblance of it that can be found) the
high satisfaction, joy and pleasure, which the principles of Wisdom and Virtue
fill our hearts withal; when we have such a true relish of them, that we
embrace them and digest them, and are inlivened by them to a pious life.

This is the substance of the Parable; every part of which is not to be
minutely scand: nor shall I go about to say what is particularly meant [c] by
the seven pillars of Wisedom's house (though taking her house for the World,
the seven pillars may well be thought the seven planets) what by her meat, what
by her drink, etc. but look upon them only as a description of the ability of
Wisdom to impart complete satisfaction unto those that entertain her precepts.
Which were principally taught in the Schools of the Prophets; whose business it
was to instruct the people (as the Scribes did afterward) in the Law of God:
and being dispersed in several places of the Country, I have conjectured their
Schools might be the House here spoken of, where Wisdom had her habitation. I
cannot say certainly how many of them there were, much less that there were
just seven principal Schools, which might be looked upon as the main supporters
of Religion and Virtue: but there were more than one it is evident from the
sacred History, where in one City, 1 Samuel IX. 13, 14. we find Samuel seated (in
whose times these Schools began to flourish) who no doubt had there a College
of Prophets with him, as he had afterward, we find at Ramah XIX. 20. and in
another place called the Hill of God, where the Philistines had a Garrison, we
meet with another company of Prophets, 1 Samuel X. 5, 10. And in after times
there were Sons of the Prophets both at Bethel (where they seem to have been
more anciently, 1 Samuel X. 3.) and at Jericho, 2 King. II. 3. 5. and at Gilgal,
IV. 38.

These Schools also were seated in high places it appears from 1 Samuel IX. 2. X.
5, 10. [d] 2 King. I. 9. (and might be one reason of their sacrificing in such
places) which agrees exactly with what is said here of Wisedom's crying upon
the highest places of the city, v. 3. to call all those who had an appetite, to
come and partake of her Instructions. Which there was some hope all those might
do, who were merely inconsiderate and deluded ( v. 4.) though scorners (as he
observes, v. 7, 8. who perhaps called the Prophets Mad men) are so incapable of
correction that nothing will move them to become better; and therefore she
passes them by, and leaves them to their beastly folly: which inclines them
rather to lissen to the inticements of such filthy Strumpets as he had
described, Chap. VII.

Against whom there cannot be too much caution, the Strumpets house being, as
S. Chrysostom (Hom. 2. upon S. Matthew.) calls it, the very shop of the Devil:
and therefore the Wise man again gives her Character in this Chapter, ( v. 13,
14, etc.) and represents the danger of being drawn in by her; that, if it was
possible, he might make men sensible, there is nothing more inconsistent with
wisdom than to give up themselves to those impure lusts, which have been the
ruin of all those that have been led by them.

That is one of the profitable lessons to be learnt from this Chapter: in which
the Wise man concludes his Preface to the Book of Proverbs. And therefore again
repeats once more ( v. 10.) that first Principle upon which all Religion is
built, wherewith he began this preface (I. 7.) The fear of the LORD is the
beginning of wisdom. Which they that want, will be apt to make a laughter of
all good instructions; and it is well if they be not angry at those, who are so
kind as to reprove them. If they be, it is best to let them alone, and not cast
pearls before swine; as our Savior teaches, [e] agreeable to the Doctrine of
the Wise man, v. 7, 8, 9. of this Chapter.

Where the Lord Bacon (L. VIII. Advanc. of Learning, C. 2. Parab. 9.) is very
curious and distinguishes between a scorner and a wicked man (mentioned v. 7.)
and between shame or reproach, and a blot; and consequently between reproof
given to the one and rebuke to the other. "For a scorner, says he, only makes
us lose our labor; but the other repays us with a stain and dishonor. When a
man instructs a scorner his time indeed which he thus imploys is thrown away,
and others deride his pains, as a labor ill placed; and the scorner himself
also despises the knowledge which he is taught. Thus a man is put to shame.
But the matter is transacted with greater danger in the reprehension of the
other, because a wicked nature, not only gives no ear to advice, but turns
head against his Reprehender, now made odious to him: whom he either wounds
presently with contumelies before his face, or traduces afterward to others
behind his back."

But I have not been thus nice in my Paraphrase, because it is the manner, I
observe, of the Wise man to repeat the same thing, in the same Verse, in other
words, throughout all this Book: and a scorner signifies the worst of men.

[f] In the ninth Verse also the same great person, following the Vulgar and
reading the words thus, give occasion to a wise man, and his wisdom will be
increased, makes this witty observation (in the same Chap. Parab. XXXII.) that
" occasion when it is offered, shows the difference between Wisdom that is
ripened into habit, and that which swims only in the brain and conceit, or is
boasted in speech, but has not taken deep root. For the former upon occasion
presented, whereby it may be exercised, is instantly quickened, addresses it
self to the business, and is so enlarged and dilated, that it seems greater
than it self: But the other which, before occasion, was brisk and busy, now
occasion is given becomes amazed and confused; So that even he who presumed
himself possessed of it, begins to be in doubt, whether his preconceptions of
such wisdom, were not mere dreams, and empty speculations."

But there being no such word as occasion in the Original, and the word give
seeming to me rather to refer to what the Wise man is speaking of, viz. reproof
or instruction, I have waved this observation: which will do well alone, but
not be connected with the Discourse; which is my design to represent. And here
note this as a mark of a hopeful person, that is likely to become wise, if he
be not galled with reproof; at which fools are wont to kick. This is a Truth to
be considered most seriously, by which every man may take a measure of himself,
whether he be likely to come to good or no. If he cannot endure to be told of
his faults, it is a shrewd sign he is in the way to be undone; and has not as
yet so much as approached to the gates of Wisdom.

Which admonishes us here of another great fault of mankind, [g] who are most
eager after that, which is prohibited to them. An observation which is as true
of their fondness and readiness to embrace heretical Doctrines (to which the
Fathers apply v. 17.) if they be preached in a corner, and made a great secret;
as of their appetite after those pleasures, from which they are restrained, and
cannot have with public approbation.

1. Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars.


1. DO not imagine that I commend unto you some meaner piece of knowledge or
skill, but the most absolute and accomplished Wisdom; whose worth and dignity
is inexpressible: For as this great world I told you (VIII. 26, 27, etc.) was
built by wisdom in most excellent order and perfect beauty; so from every part
of it we may learn what regard we ought to have, to her holy precepts: which
are taught every where, but especially in the Schools of the Prophets. See Arg.
[a] [b] [c]

2. She has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine; she has also
furnished her table.


2. There, above all other places, a most plentiful provision is made for all
hungry and thirsty souls (that are desirous to know what is good for
themselves) who shall find no less life, and vigor, and strength, and joy
communicated to them from her sacred Instructions, than the body does when it
partakes of a liberal and most delicious Feast.

3. She has sent forth her maidens, she cries upon the highest places of the
city.


3. For nothing is wanting there, but only Guests to accept of her
entertainment; unto which her attendants and Ministers (persons of uncorrupted
purity and sincerity) are sent to invite you, with a loud voice and earnest
entreaties: which cannot but be heard by whole cities and countries; unto whom
the dwelling places of wisdom, and the food of souls lie openly exposed. See
Arg. [d]

4. Whose is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wants
understanding, she says to him,


4. There is no man so silly but he may be welcome to it; or rather all such
persons are desired to bethink themselves, how inconsiderately they have been
seduced, and to forbear the prosecution of their foolish desires so long, as to
take advice of her. Let a man be never so much besotted with vice and
wickedness, she does not reject him, nor despair of him; if he will but
hearken, when she makes this gracious motion to the whole knot of them;

5. Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.


5. Draw near, consider, and lay to heart, the wholesome Instructions which I
propound to you: credit me so far as to rely upon the promise which I make you
of the highest comfort, pleasure, and satisfaction, in embracing and obeying my
precepts.

6. Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding.


6. Do but make a trial, by forsaking all ill company, and those childish
desires, and senseless courses, of which you can give no account to your
selves; and immediately you shall have a taste of happiness, which will invite
you to perfect it, by following hereafter the deliberate dictates of sober
reason, and the grave counsels of prudent persons, who have discerning minds,
and practice themselves what they commend to others.

7. He that reproves a scorner, gets to himself shame: and he that rebukes
a wicked man, gets himself a blot.


7. As for those that deride Religion and scoff at all good admonitions, it is
in vain to meddle with them; for reproofs are fittest for such persons, and he
who performs that charitable office, not only loses his labor, but is like to
be requited with reproaches: whosoever he be that rebukes one of those impious
wretches, has commonly all the dirt thrown upon him, that their malice can
rake together. See Arg. [d] [e]

8. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee.


8. Therefore men of that wicked temper Wisdom does not invite to her
instructions, nor require her Ministers to call upon them; but rather to pass
them by, when they find by experience that they can do no good to such
persons, but only draw their hatred upon themselves: from such it is wisdom
to turn away, and bestow reproofs upon those who have so much understanding, as
to see God's Ministers intend their good, and accordingly thank them for it,
and give them opportunity to do them further service.

9. Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man,
and he will increase in learning.


9. For this is an undoubted Maxim, that a man disposed to learn will grow
wiser even by Reprehension; and the Instructions given to a man inclined to
goodness, will make him better, and much improve him, not only in knowledge
but in the practice of virtue, (whereas a scorner grows worse by endeavors to
reform him, and is only made more incapable of good advice, by being
exasperated and enraged at it.) See Arg. [f]

10. The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge of the
holy is understanding.


10. And the very first, and indeed the principal thing that is to be instilled
into all men's minds, without which they will learn nothing else, is a Religious
sense of the Divine Majesty, and an awful regard toward him (as I have
observed already more than once, I. 7. II. 5. VIII. 13. but it cannot be too
often repeated) And next to this, that no knowledge deserves the Name of
Understanding, but that which is delivered by the Holy men of God, and disposes
us to devote our selves unto Him in holy obedience.

11. For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be
increased.


11. Other knowledge may make thee subtle and cunning in thy worldly affairs,
but this alone can make thee happy: And will certainly both prolong thy life
(as I have frequently said, III. 2, 16. IV. 10, 13, etc.) and lengthen it in
health, peace, prosperity and pleasure.

12. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self: but if thou scornest,
thou alone shall bear it.


12. This is the true reason I invite thee so earnestly to imbibe my Doctrine,
( v. 5.) not for my own sake, but for thine: who alone wilt either reap the
profit of being truly virtuous; or suffer all the harm and mischief (which will
not in the least redound to me) of thy profane scoffs and jeers at Religion
and Goodness.

13. A foolish woman is clamorous; she is simple, and knows nothing.


13. Unto which profaneness as there wants not temptations, so there is none
more dangerous, I think, which makes me mention it so often (II. 16. V. 3. VI.
24. VII. 10, 11, etc.) than the lewd and impious Adulteress; who is no less
bold and importunate, than she is bewitching and powerful to besot the minds
of her stupid lovers; but perfectly ignorant of God and Religion, and a
stranger to all the principles of virtue.

14. For she sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of
the city,


14. Which she openly opposes, for (as if she would put a manifest affront upon
them) in that very place where the Ministers of Wisdom call men to learn the
fear of the Lord ( v. 3, 10.) she sits in state, at the door of her house, to
divert their minds from all such thoughts, and drown them in sensual pleasures.

15. To call passengers who go right on their ways.


15. That Is the very business of her life, to defeat all good designs; by
drawing even those aside into her chambers of impurity, who were going straight
forward to the schools of wisdom and goodness.

16. Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him that wants
understanding, she says to him,


16. Whose words ( v. 4.) she no less impudently than profanely returns, and
tells them, it is not she but wisdom and virtue that makes men fools; by
confining their desires, and denying them the liberties which she invites to
come and enjoy in her embraces: where their dullness shall learn this unknown
secret,

17. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.


17. That there are no pleasures comparable to those, which a man gets by
stealth from them to whom they properly belong: no morsel so sweet, as that
which is forbidden; but, having been long desired, he finds at last a private
opportunity, to taste of without danger. See Arg. [g]

18. But he knows not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the
depths of hell.


18. But the poor deluded wretch considers not all this while (which I have
often already represented, II. 18. V. 5. VII. 27. and is all that I shall
oppose to those sinful inticements) that she invites him to his utter ruin
both of soul and body ( See II. 18.) and sinks all those down, who accept of
her invitation, to the very bottom of that pit, where the old Giants are, who
corrupted mankind with such filthiness and violence, that they brought a deluge
upon the earth, VI. Genesis 4, 5, 11.

CHAP. X. The Proverbs of Solomon.
ARGUMENT.
Here now properly begins the Book of the Proverbs (as the Title of this
Chapter tells us) what has been delivered hitherto, being rather a Preface; to
awaken attention; and from sundry arguments to commend the wise Instructions,
which now follow, to every ones practice; and to caution those, who would
receive benefit by these Instructions, from such things as may hinder their
edification in the School of Wisdom.

Whose Lessons, in this first part of the Book, (which reaches to the 17th
Verse of the XXII. Chapter) are delivered in short Sentences; every Verse being
a Lesson by it self, which commonly has no connection with that which goes
before and follows after: or if there be any, it is not so clear as to be
easily made out. And these Lessons are for the most part delivered, either by
way of Antithesis, i. e. comparing opposites one with another; the wise, for
instance, and the foolish, the diligent and the sluggish, the rich and the
poor, and, in general virtue and vice, assigning to each their proper rewards
and punishments: or they are mere Parables, that is, similitudes; in which one
thing is compared to another that resembles it.

And he intending to instruct all sorts of men in their several kinds of life,
these Lessons are very various; and do not merely inform them about their
manners, but about the events also, which are wont (either frequently or
sometimes) to accompany or follow such and such estates, offices, and actions
of humane life. And some are directions for single persons; others for the
ordering of household affairs; and others for the government of kingdoms. In
short, some are divine Precepts; others civil Advertisements for the management
of our selves in several passages of humane life: to the observance of which he
excites the Reader sometimes by promises, sometimes by threatenings.

It is not to be expected that in a Paraphrase, I should preserve the smartness
that is in many of these Sentences: And it will be hard to abridge, as I have
done hitherto, the Contents of each Chapter. Yet, I shall attempt something in
it: And though I cannot say there is an order observed in them all (they being
only a Collection of wise Observations and Aphorisms, in which, Method is wont
to be neglected by other Authors) yet the first Sentence of this Chapter,
seems not to have been casually, [a] but designedly set in the front of the
rest. Because nothing contributes so much every way to the happiness of
mankind, as a Religious care about the Education of Children. Which Parents are
here admonished to attend, if they desire their Children should not prove a
grief and shame to them: and Children are put in mind of the Obedience they owe
to their Instructions, that they may be a joy to their Parents.

The Lord Bacon (in his Advancement of Learning, L. VIII. C. 2. Parab. VII.)
thinks that the gladness and heaviness, which are in Fathers and Mothers,
according as their Children prove good or bad, are here so accurately
distinguished by Solomon; "that he would represent a wise and well governed
Son, to be chiefly a comfort to the Father, who knows the value of wisdom and
virtue better than the Mother (which account the Hebrews also give of this
matter) and therefore rejoices more at the towardliness of his Son: which he
not only better understands, but has taken perhaps so much more care about
his Education, that the good fruits of it give him a greater joy than they can
do to the Mother. Who on the other side is more grieved and discomforted at the
calamity of a Son; both because the affection of a Mother is more soft and
tender, and perchance is conscious to her self that by too much indulgence she
has tainted and corrupted his tender years." She is more at home also (it may
be added) and therefore, having her Son's folly more in her eye, has a greater
share in the grief that it causes.

But this is not to be too much pressed, I think, for both of them have such a
share either in the joy or in the sorrow, that it is as hard to distinguish
between them constantly, as it is to make a difference between the joy and
grief for the well or ill doing of a Son, and the well or ill doing of a
Daughter: which may be, and often times are, equal. And therefore I have but just
touched upon this in my Paraphrase of the first verse. Concerning which I shall
note this further, that whether these Instructions were written with a peculiar
respect to the education of Solomon's own Son, or indifferently for all, it was
most judiciously done to begin with such as this first part chiefly consists
of: there being so great a necessity (as the forenamed Writer observes in his
VIIth Book Chap. 3.) "that men drink deeply all pious and moral knowledge
before they taste of politic, that they who are bred up in the Courts of
Princes, and in affairs of State from tender years, rarely attain to inward and
sincere probity of manners. For not being seasoned with Religion and the
Doctrine of manners and offices of life, their judgments are corrupted and made
to think, that there are no true and solid moral differences of things, but all
things are to be measured by utility and success." And in this false opinion
they are the more immovably settled if to ill education, there be added the
fuel of bad Books: which all those will reject with disdain, who shall be so
happy as to make this Book their early study.

In which there follow here immediately (and very properly) some Instructions
about getting riches, and about the keeping and using them aright ( v. 2, 3,
etc.) that a curse may not be intailed upon them, and descend with them unto
our children. And then v. 7. a memorable observation is annexed, [b] (which
Plato, as Eusebius observes, translated into his VIIth Book of Laws) concerning
the fame of good and bad men, after they are dead. About which the same great
man before named (the Lord Bacon) has this Note in the same VIIIth Book,
Parab. 8. That the Name of good men after Envy is extinguished (which cropped the
blossom of their Fame, while they were alive) presently shoots up and
flourishes; and their Praises daily increase in strength and vigor: But for
wicked men (though their fame through the partial favor of Friends, and of men
of their own faction, may last for a little time) a detestation of their name
springs up not long after; and at last those vanishing praises end in infamy,
and like bodies that putrify, expire in a filthy and noisome odor. And thus
the LXX. in this place instead of the memory of the just is blessed, or is with
blessing or benediction, have these words, the memory of the just is with
encomiums or praises: which is the true explication of the phrase. And
accordingly the Church commemorates the Saints of God, recounting their worthy
deeds, and praising Him for them. Of which see Mr. Mede Discourse XXII.

The rest of the Chapter consists of mixed observations, concerning the
difference between wise men and fools, idle persons and diligent, ill-natured
people and those who are candid and kind ( v. 12.) and especially between the
vices and virtues of the tongue, and their rewards and punishments, v. 13, 14,
etc. And one remarkable observation is inserted, v. 22. which belongs to [c]
that head of diligence and laboriousness: upon which, he remembers us, no man
is so to depend, as to imagine to obtain what he would have by that alone; but
to look up to God as the donour of all good things, and giving success to our
industry. Which was a thing little thought of by heathens, who were too prone
to imagine all things requisite unto happiness, to be placed in themselves. But
the Scriptures every where inculcate this, that it is God who gives wisdom to
the wise, and victory to the valiant, and riches to the diligent, and good
success to the prudent and potent, etc.

[d] Unto which add that observation also, v. 24. which may be further improved
than is expressed in the Paraphrase, to this sense; that wicked men many times
draw upon themselves that which they feared, by those very means whereby they
study to avoid them. An Example of which (as Bochartus observes in his Phaleg,
L. I. c. 16. Part. 1.) we have in those that built the Tower of Babel: who for
fear of dispersion designed to build a City and a Tower, saying, Go to, let us
build, etc. lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth, XI.
Genesis 4. But God so ordered it that this very attempt was the occasion of their
dispersion, and brought what they feared sooner upon them, atque ipsum mali
remedium, illis cessit in periculum: the very remedy of the evil they would
have avoided, leading them directly into it.

R. Levi has an observation that the precepts of Wisdom from the beginning of
this Chapter to the 10th verse of the XVIIIth are in a manner all concerning
the danger of several sorts of vice and wickedness: and afterward they are all
concerning other subjects. Which, how true it is, I shall there consider.

1. THE proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes a glad father; but a foolish son
is the heaviness of his mother.


1. LET the Father's care in educating his Children (especially his Son the
Heir of his Family) be equal to the joy he will have in their well doing: and
let the Mother beware that her indulgence do not spoil them; for she will have
the greatest share in the heaviness, which their untowardness will give them.
See Arg. [a]

2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivers from
death.


2. This is more necessary than the care of heaping up riches for them (which
many times tempt men to fraud and oppression) for though great treasures be
gotten by such means, they will be so far from availing the owners in time of
distress, that they will rather expose them to be a prey; when justice and
mercy with a little wealth, will procure safety and deliverance from the
greatest dangers.

3. The LORD will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he
casts away the substance of the wicked.


3. The reason is, the Lord has Treasures in store, for the just, especially
for the merciful man; and will send him such supplies in his straits, that he
shall not starve, but rather have enough: But He will drive the wicked out of
their ill-gotten possessions, whereby they think to secure themselves from want.

4. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand: but the hand of the
diligent makes rich.


4. And next unto Virtue let Children be bred up to Industry; without which
indeed they cannot be virtuous: for both poverty and fraud are commonly the
fruit of negligence and sloth; when an active diligence is wont to enrich men,
without the help of deceit.

5. He that gathers in summer is a wise son: but he that sleeps in harvest
is a son that causes shame.


5. Especially if prudence be added to diligence and opportunity be not
neglected: For as he that makes Hay (as we speak) while the Sun shines is
commended for his provident care; so he that by taking his ease, when he should
gather the fruits of the earth, loses all the benefit of his former labors, is
a shame to himself, and unto those that bred him.

6. Blessings are upon the head of the just: but violence covers the mouth of
the wicked.


The blessings of heaven shall visibly descend in great plenty, upon the just
and merciful man: but their own iniquity shall violently overwhelm those, to
their utter confusion, who wickedly defraud and oppress their neighbors.

7. The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot.


7. And though Envy may sometime cloud a good man for the present, yet after
death an honorable mention shall be made of him; and he shall be commemorated
with praises: when the memory of the wicked, who now perhaps are extolled,
shall either perish or stink and be abominated. See Arg. [b]

8. The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool shall fall.


8. He that is truly wise will thankfully receive such good advices as these,
and avoid the dangers of which he is admonished: But he whose wisdom lies
only in his tongue (which moves upon all occasions, and will not let him learn
of others) ruins himself, even by his own imprudent prating.

9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely: but he that perverteth his ways,
shall be known.


9. He that deals sincerely in all his actions is both safe and secure: but he
that relies upon fraud and tricks of deceiving shall find his cunning fail him
at the last; and besides can never be secure that he shall not be detected and
made a public reproach.

10. He that winketh with the eye, causes sorrow: but a prating fool shall
fall.


10. But he especially, that under pretense of kindness betrays his neighbor,
and gives the sign to others, when he would have them circumvent him, is a
common grievance; and shall himself, in the end, feel the miserable effects of
his falseness: for he is worse than a man, who openly professing his malice
rails perpetually, and thereby, sooner hurts himself than others.

11. The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: but violence covers the
mouth of the wicked.


The discourse of a good man (like a perpetual spring of wholesome water) always
tends to the profit, comfort, and refreshment of those that receive it: but a
wicked man, how fair soever his language be, does but conceal the mischief,
which (like pestilent waters out of a deep pit) he designs to produce when
opportunity serves.

12. Hatred stirs up strifes: but love covers all sins.


12. Such is the difference between hatred and love, that where all things are
in quiet hatred raises up disturbance, and makes men quarrel about trifles;
when love pacifies the minds of those that it finds provoked by real offenses,
and composes all those contentions, for which there was too much occasion.

13. In the lips of him that has understanding, wisdom is found: but a rod is
for the back of him that is void of understanding.


13. He that would be wise must seek the acquaintance of some intelligent
person: but the most knowing person in the world cannot make him wise that is
void of consideration; who will never learn, unless perhaps by some great
affliction.

14. Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near
destruction.


14. Wise men treasure up knowledge, and reserve it till a fitting opportunity
to make use of it: but a fool is always talking, and seldom opens his mouth but
it proves a present mischief to himself or others.

15. The rich man's wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the poor is
their poverty.


15. Riches are a powerful defense to their owners against a great many evils,
to which we are subject in this life; and naturally raise men's minds and make
them confident: whereas poverty exposes men to injuries and abuses; and is apt
to depress and deject their spirits.

16. The labor of the righteous tends to life; the fruit of the wicked to
sin.


16. Which is a great motive to an honest diligence; but then remember this,
that the end of a virtuous man's labors after riches is only that he may
provide himself the necessaries of life, and that he may do good with them:
but the great revenues, which perhaps are left to a wicked man by his
ancestors without any pains of his own, are employed to satisfy his sinful
lusts and passions.

17. He is in the way of life that keeps instruction: but he that refuses
reproof, erreth.


17. He that carefully observes, and puts men in mind of these wholesome
admonitions, which may teach them to correct and amend their lives, is in the
way to make himself and others happy: but he that leaves off to give reproof
incourages men in their errors; from which he, who shuns those that are wont
to reprehend him, is never like to be reclaimed.

18. He that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters slander, is a
fool.


18. He that dissembleth his hatred, by great professions of Friendship before
ones face, and then goes and vents it in slanders behind his back, may seem a
cunning man; but is really an impious fool.

19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin: but he that refraineth
his lips, is wise.


19. Nor are calumny and flattery the only vices of the tongue; but much
speaking is rarely innocent: therefore he that is sparing of his words, and
considers well both when, and where, and what he speaks, is a truly prudent
person.

20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of the wicked is
little worth.


20. The words of such a man are exceeding valuable; because they are both
solid and sincere: but let wicked men devise and study what they please, it
will be good for little, or rather very mischievous.

21. The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want of wisdom.


21. Many are preserved from perishing by the discourses of a good man: But a
fool, for want of consideration, receives no benefit by them, and does not so
much as take care to save himself.

22. The blessing of the LORD, it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it.


22. It is not merely men's industry and provident care, to which they owe their
riches; but the blessing of God prospering their endeavors: which when He
favors, wealth flows in apace upon them; and is enjoyed also without anxious
thoughts and labors. See Arg. [c]

23. It is as a sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of understanding
has wisdom.


23. A senseless sinner makes a jest of the most horrid impieties that can be
committed by himself, or others: but a man that weighs things wisely considers
that this is no laughing matter; and takes that pleasure in doing well, which
fools take in mischievous wickedness.

24. The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire of the
righteous shall be granted.


24. Yet there is none so wicked but he is sometime afraid; and, since this
will not amend him, he shall feel what he fears: but this is the comfort of
righteous men, who have reason to hope, that they shall at length obtain their
desires. See Arg. [d]

25. As the whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is
an everlasting foundation.


25. Though the wicked, like a whirlwind, may bluster terribly, and overthrow
all that stands in his way, yet he quickly vanishes, and destroys himself by
his own violence: but the righteous, as he is fixed and settled in his virtue,
which is peaceable and quiet and makes no disturbance; so he enjoys the solid
fruits of it, in a durable, and immovable felicity.

26. As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to
them that send him.


26. Vinegar is not more offensive to the teeth, nor smoke more vexatious to
the eyes, than a remiss and negligent minister is to him that imploys him, and
relies upon him in a weighty business.

27. The fear of the LORD prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shall be
shortened.


27. The best way to prolong life is religiously to observe the Laws of God:
but wickedness generally (both by its own nature and by God's righteous
judgment) brings men to an untimely end.

28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation of the
wicked shall perish.


28. And what a lamentable case is a wicked man in, when he finds himself
unexpectedly undone? for this is another difference between a good man and a
bad; that the hope of the former concludes in a joyful possession of what he
waits for: but the other, failing of his expectation, ends his days in sadness
and sorrow.

29. The way of the LORD is strength to the upright: but destruction shall be
to the workers of iniquity.


29. Whence it follows also that a faithful observance of the rules of Virtue,
which the Lord has prescribed us, inspires the upright man with great courage
and undaunted resolution, when any evil threatens him: but the workers of
iniquity, being weak and feeble spirited, are terribly shaken, nay broken, with
the fear of that destruction which is coming on them.

30. The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not inhabit the
earth.


30. There is no way like Piety, Justice, and Mercy, to establish a family in
perpetual prosperity: But the wicked (how successful soever they may be for a
time) shall not be able to settle themselves and their posterity, in the good
land, which God has given us.

31. The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom: but the froward tongue shall
be cut out.


31. The very discourse of a righteous man is so profitable to instruct others
in Wisdom, and Goodness, that it shall be a means to perpetuate him, like a
fruitful tree, in a flourishing condition: but he that uses his tongue
perversely, to abuse, cosen, or raise dissensions among his neighbors, shall be
cut down, like a tree that combers the ground.

32. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable; but the mouth of the
wicked speaks frowardness.


32. The righteous knows very well, how to speak those things (and accustoms
his mouth unto them) which are grateful to men, and yet not displeasing to
Almighty God: But the wicked are odious to both; because they are skilled
altogether in lying and flattery, fraud and calumny, and such like subtle, but
detestable, arts of doing mischief.

CHAP. XI.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter consists of many promiscuous observations, concerning such things
as will make men happy or miserable. It begins with an Admonition concerning
Justice in our dealings one with another: without which Society (which God
designs and takes a special care to uphold) cannot be preserved. And mankind
being very apt to be regardless what they do, toward God or toward man, when
they grow rich and great; he next gives a caution against Pride and Insolence,
as a certain forerunner of ruin. For it consisting in forgetfulness of God,
confidence in men's selves, despising others, slighting good counsels, and
attempting things out of the bounds of men's place and calling (all which
proceed from stupid folly) naturally leads men headlong into destruction.

Then he commends sincerity and charity ( v. 3, 4.) and represents the vast
difference between Virtue and Wickedness, in order to men's private safety ( v.
5, 6, etc.) and to the public security ( v. 10, 11.) After which follow a
great many prudent observations and advices, for men's private, and for the
common good: with such remarks upon sundry virtues and vices, as are sufficient
to invite to the one, and deter from the other.

[a] Among the rest there is one, v. 21. (translated thus by us, though hand
join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished) upon which there are as many
glosses almost, as there are Interpreters. But I have only put together those
two senses of the former part of the verse, which are most agreeable to the
latter; and do not think fit to trouble the Reader with the other, any further
than merely to inform him of this one thing. That most Interpreters by hand in
hand understand the hands of diverse persons: but some few take it, for the
hands of one and the same person, who puts one hand into the other. And these
last named, make the sense one of these two ways: either that though a sinner
endeavor to hide his sin (as a man does a thing which he holds in one hand and
covers with the other) he shall notwithstanding be found out and suffer for it;
or that, though wicked men do nothing, but like an idle person have their
hands folded one in the other, yet they are not free from sin; which they are
devising in their mind, and will draw a just vengeance upon them.

[b] In the next verse I have followed Bochartus ( de Animal. S. Part I. L. II.
C. 57.) in his translation of those two words (...) which he renders her mind
departs, viz. from the love of her husband: but I have not neglected the
other sense of which I think those words are capable.

[c] In the 29th verse I have adhered to the opinion of the Lord Bacon (Book
VIII. of the Advanc. of Learning, Chapter 2. Parab. 9.) "who takes it for a
profitable admonition touching discords in families and domestic breaches (but
may as well be applied to whole kingdoms, which are larger families) which
whosoever cherishes among his children or servants (or people) as a means to
have his affairs better administered, when they have an evil eye upon, and hate
one another; commonly finds his hopes turn into wind. For those alterations and
changes, for the most part succeed ill: and those disturbers of their own
families oftentimes meet with vexations and ingratitudes from those very
persons, whom (passing by others) they adopt as the objects of their special
favor: Nay by this means, they draw upon themselves ill reports and doubtful
rumors: for it is not ill observed by Cicero, That all reports, both good and
bad fame, come from domestics. Which two evils (he thinks) Solomon expresses
by inheriting the wind:" for the frustrating of expectations and raising of
rumors are rightly compared unto winds. I have added in the Paraphrase two
other things belonging to wind; which makes a great noise, and leaves nothing
behind it: for all make it an emblem of emptiness.

[d] The last verse is a wise consideration suggested to good men, when they
are under the oppressions of the wicked: that if the just be afflicted (as
Melancthon glosses) who seriously endeavor amendment of life, God will take a
time to reckon with those lewd men, who contumaciously and furiously persist in
their wickedness. So the wise man (says he) admonishes us of two things. First
that the Church is subject to the Cross, which the cruelty of Tyrants may lay
upon it: but secondly those Tyrants must one day answer for their cruelty by
sharp punishments upon themselves; Nay, though they flourish for some time, at
last, says he, they are shaken out of their empires. Hither he applies those
known words of the Poet, Ad generum Cereris sine caede, etc.

1. A False balance is abomination to the LORD: but a just weight is his
delight.


1. IT is not so small a sin as men imagine, to cheat their neighbors (though
it be only in a little matter) but extremely hateful and detestable to the
great Lord and Governor of the world: as on the other side, exactly just and
equal dealing in all our commerce one with another, is highly pleasing to him.

2. When pride comes, then comes shame: but with the lowly is wisdom.


2. Do not entertain an haughty conceit of thy self, nor insult over others;
for the folly of this appears, in drawing along with it that contempt and
disgrace, which above all things such men would avoid: therefore be humble and
modest; the wisdom of which is manifest, from the universal respect which it
gains every where.

3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them.


3. The integrity of those that uprightly observe the rules of virtue, is their
highest prudence, and safest guide, through all manner of difficulties and
dangers: but the crafty wiliness of perfidious men, who will be tied unto no
Laws, is mere folly; and shall be so far from preserving them, that it shall
prove their certain destruction.

4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivers from
death.


4. Heaps of wealth, amassed by extortion or covetousness, shall as little
avail, as subtilty and cunning, when God in his righteous displeasure shall
punish the world by a common calamity: But Justice, accompanied with Mercy (as
has been observed already, X. 2.) will befriend him that has constantly
practiced them, and rescue him even when there is no hope of safety [ See XXIX.
Ecclus. 11, 12, 13. and XL. 24.]

5. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked shall
fall by his own wickedness.


5. Remember this (and be not nauseated at the repetition of it, for it is a
weighty Truth) that there is no surer Guide to direct men in the plain way to
safety, or any other good, than a sincere and impartial observance of all God's
Laws: but that the wicked shall perish, by those very impious courses (of lies,
suppose, breach of promises, perjuries, and oppression) whereby they think to
greaten or to secure themselves.

6. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors
shall be taken in their own naughtiness.


6. Remember it I say (for it cannot be too often culcated) that the virtue of
unfeignedly and entirely upright men, shall be their preservative when they are
in danger: but they that are governed wholly by their own depraved desires and
interests, shall be entangled and inevitably perish in their own naughty
contrivances.

7. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish: and the hope of
unjust men perishes.


7. Do not imagine therefore that they have the advantage of others, who are
loose from all Laws. They may seem so to have for the present; but, beside what
I have now said, it must be considered that Death (and how suddenly does that
sometime overtake them) utterly destroys all their projects and hopes:
whatsoever they expected to accomplish by their riches, or their power, or
their friends, it perishes together with them.

8. The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead.


8. Nay, before that it is frequently seen, that a just man is unexpectedly
drawn out of those straits and difficulties wherein he was perplexed, and the
wicked (who perhaps brought him into them) takes the place which he has left;
falling into those very distresses, from which the just is happily freed.

9. An hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor: but through knowledge
shall the just be delivered.


9. And more than this, a good man has this advantage by his wisdom, that it
sometimes instructs many how to evade those snares, which the profane
Hypocrite, with counterfeit professions of friendship, lays to destroy his
neighbors.

10. When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices: and when the
wicked perish, there is shouting.


10. We see also in this how amiable virtue and how hateful vice is, that the
Inhabitants of a City generally leap for joy when good men prosper and are
advanced unto power: but are so far from pitying the downfall of the wicked,
that they shout when they behold them tumbling from the high places to which
they were raised.

11. By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is overthrown
by the mouth of the wicked.


11. Men of unbiassed virtue make a City flourish, by the blessings they
procure for it from heaven, by their prayers, by their prudent advice, their
pious admonitions, and their constant study of the public good: but the
wicked, by their blasphemies, their evil counsels, their pestilent maxims,
their impious doctrines, whereby they corrupt men's manners, utterly subvert the
good estate thereof.

12. He that is void of wisdom, despises his neighbor: but a man of
understanding holds his peace.


12. It is a great weakness to speak contemptuously of any man, or to render
him ridiculous (for no man is so mean but he is sensible of despisal, and may
find ways to show his resentment) therefore a thoroughly prudent person,
whatsoever he thinks of others, says nothing to their reproach.

13. A talebearer reveals secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit
concealeth the matter.


13. A man whose trade it is to ingratiate himself by defaming others, will not
stick most treacherously to discover the secrets wherewith they have entrusted
him: But a man whose mind is steadfastly fixed to be true and faithful to his
neighbors, will study (though they have not desired him) to hide those things,
which, being known, may prove injurious to them.

14. Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of counselors
there is safety.


14. Where prudent Counselors are wanting a Nation goes to wrack, as
certainly as a Ship does without a Pilot: nor is one sufficient; but then a
Country is safe, when there are many wise men to govern affairs: that if one
fail, there may inow still remain; or what one or two sees not, others may be
able to discern.

15. He that is surety for a stranger, shall smart for it: and he that hates
suretiship is sure.


15. He is in great danger to be undone, who stands bound to pay the debts of
another man, especially of a stranger (VI. 1.) whose ability and honesty is
unknown to him: And the way to be secure from that fear, is not only to avoid
such engagements ones self, but to abhor to see other men enter into them.

16. A gracious woman retains honor: and strong men retain riches.


16. Beauty and virtue in a woman advances her to Honor; as formidable
strength and power in men advances them to Riches: and as their principal care
is to keep their Treasures, so hers should be to preserve her Reputation.

17. The merciful man does good to his own soul: but he that is cruel,
troubles his own flesh.


17. He that has a heart to be kind and bountiful unto his neighbors, will
have this advantage by it, among many others, that he will not deny what is fit
and convenient to himself: whereas the covetous and hard-hearted, as he has no
regard to his nearest relations, so he pinches his own flesh, by his sordid way
of living.

18. The wicked works a deceitful work: but to him that sows righteousness
shall be a sure reward.


18. He thinks perhaps hereby to raise himself, or his posterity to greatness,
but, like all other wicked men, will be deceived in his expectation; for the
event of his actions never answers the design: but virtuous men shall
infallibly reap the fruit of their pious, just and charitable labors.

19. As righteousness tends to life: so he that pursues evil, pursues it to
his own death.


19. Thus God orders it in his Providence, and thus it is in the nature of
things, that virtue tends to make men happy: but the more eagerly any man
pursues an evil thing, the more he is bent upon his own destruction.

20. They that are of a froward heart, are abomination to the LORD: but such as
are upright in their way, are his delight.


20. Of all other men they are most odious to the Lord, who pretend to justice,
kindness and truth; but study and devise how to compass their ends, though it
be by the wickedest means: as on the contrary, they whose exact observance of
the rules of righteousness in the whole course of their lives, testify the
integrity of their hearts, are highly in his favor and love.

21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished: but the seed
of the righteous shall be delivered.


21. Though the wicked endeavor to strengthen himself and his family by
powerful leagues and confederacies, and his successors also have mighty
associates to maintain his acquisitions, they shall not be able to defend
themselves from the punishment their iniquity deserves: but the posterity of
the righteous need not be at such pains; but, though deserted by men, escape
the danger into which the other fall, by the help of God alone. See Arg. [a]

22. As a jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is a fair woman which is without
discretion.


22. As a golden ring is ill placed in the snout of a swine, which is always
routing in the mire: so is beauty ill bestowed on the body of a woman, whose
mind having lost all savor and relish of virtue, carries her from her husband,
to wallow in filthy lusts, and adulterous pleasures. See Arg. [b]

23. The desire of the righteous is only good: but the expectation of the
wicked is wrath.


23. The righteous desire nothing but that it may be well with all men; but the
wicked wish for trouble and disturbance, especially that they may execute their
malice and wrath upon those whom they hate: And accordingly God will deal with
them; good things shall be the portion of the righteous, but his just
indignation shall frustrate the expectation of the wicked.

24. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty.


24. You may see by this how miserably they are mistaken, who imagine none so
wise as the penurious; that you shall find here and there a man who
communicates readily and liberally to the necessities of others, and yet his
estate is so far from being impaired thereby, that it increases: when others,
who are so saving that they will part with nothing, no not upon the most just
occasions, do not thrive at all, but by one means or other become beggars.

25. The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that waters, shall be watered
also himself.


25. Let not him therefore that bestows benefits, imagine thereby he shall be
impoverished, for it is the certain way to enrich himself: and the larger his
charity is, and the more diffused for the refreshment of others, the greater
abundance shall be poured on him, and the abler still shall he grow to do more
good.

26. He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing shall
be upon the head of him that sells it.


26. He that hoardeth up corn in a time of scarcity, on purpose to raise the
price, shall fall into the popular hatred; and be loaded with many a curse: but
he who then opens his granaries and sells at a moderate rate, shall not only
have the peoples good word, but the blessing of God.

27. He that diligently seeks good, procures favor: but he that seeks
mischief, it shall come unto him.


27. He that from the time he rises, studies nothing but how to do good to
others, shall obtain favor both with God and man: but he whose business it is
to do mischief, shall draw upon himself the evil he designs against others.

28. He that trusts in his riches, shall fall: but the righteous shall
flourish as a branch.


28. He whose confidence in riches as the surest support and defense, makes him
covetous, unjust and unmercifull, shall fall to decay like a withered leaf: but
they whose pious dependence upon God, makes them just and charitable, like a
flourishing tree, shall thrive and prosper.

29. He that troubles his own house, shall inherit the wind: and the fool
shall be servant to the wise of heart.


29. He that makes or cherishes dissentions and factions in his own family (or
kingdom) may, by making a great bustle and stir, seem to be a notable man; but
will not only be deceived in his expectations, but defame his government, and
bring his estate to nothing: nay, it is oftentimes seen that he who is thus
foolish, loses all his authority, and becomes a servant to him, who administers
his affairs with a more prudent care. See Arg. [c]

30. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that wins souls,
is wise.


30. The benefit the world receives from a just and charitable man is so great
that it may be compared to the fruit of the tree of life; which keeps mankind
from being miserable: but he is the greatest Benefactour of all, who
communicates wisdom so charitably and seasonably, that he draws souls to the
love of virtue.

31. Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more the
wicked and the sinner.


31. But who is there so good as to do or to suffer no evil? And if God do not
let the just and charitable men (mark what I say) they who are so useful and
beneficial to the world go without correction; who can think that the wicked,
who is good for nothing, but obstinately contemns and breaks all the Laws of
God and man shall escape the just punishment of his many crimes? See 1 Pet. IV.
18. and Argument [d]

CHAP. XII.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter begins with an Admonition, often inculcated in this Book,
concerning the affection wherewith a man, that would be wise and good, ought to
receive charitable reproofs. And there are several things also repeated,
concerning the Providence of Almighty God; in punishing men according to their
wickedness, and delivering good men from those who seek their destruction:
which is notably expressed in three verses one after another, v. 5, 6, 7. where
he observes how the wicked laboring to compass their ends, by cosenage, or by
violence, even by blood (especially if they can privately make a man away) not
only miscarry in their designs, but are unexpectedly overturned, and subverted
out of their places, wherein they behaved themselves with such injustice and
cruelty.

There are diverse Instructions also here repeated about several virtues and
vices; especially, those of the tongue. Among which Melancthon commends this to
the remembrance of the Reader, v. 22, [a] lying lips are an abomination to the
Lord; who recommends to us, says he, the love and care of Truth; both in
doctrines concerning Himself, and in Arts, and in all honest Covenants, and
Contracts. For Truth being among the chiefest and most conspicuous virtues,
therefore the contrary vice is condemned, by a terrible word, and called
Abomination, i. e. such an evil as God detests with a singular indignation (for
Idols are called (...), abominations, or abominable things) which is
principally true of such lies, as are on purpose invented to destroy men's fame;
and much more of such as are devised for the taking away their lives and the
ruin of their families: such as those which David often complains were
contrived against him.

The Lord Bacon has made notable remarks also upon another passage in this
Chapter, v. 10. where he observes concerning the former [b] part of the verse,
"that there is implanted in man's nature a noble and excellent affection of
pity and compassion, called here Mercy: which extends it self even unto brute
creatures, that are by divine ordination subject to his command. And therefore
this compassion has some analogy with that of a Prince toward his subjects.
Nay further, it is most certain, that the worthier any soul is, the larger is
its compassion. For contracted and degenerate minds, imagine these things
appertain not to them: but the mind that looks upon it self as a nobler portion
of the Universe, is kndly affected toward inferior creatures, out of the
communion there is between them: wherefore we see that there were under the old
Law many precepts concerning this, which were not so much merely ceremonial, as
institutions of Mercy." "As that of not eating flesh with the blood in it, and
such like." I suppose he means those mentioned, XXIII. Exodus 5. 19. V. Deuteronomy. 4.
XXII. 6, 7. XXV. 4. For, as Grotius has excellently observed, it is very
laudable to exercise kindness toward brute creatures, that we may keep our
selves the more remote, from all manner of cruelty toward men. Which the
Angel, the Jews think, reproved in Balaam when he chid him for striking his Ass
three times. For thus they bring in the Angel speaking to him, in the great
Commentary upon Numbers, If I am required to demand satisfaction for the injury
done thy Ass, concerning whom there is no Law of justice, nor Covenant of our
Fathers, how much more for this, that thou go about utterly to root out a
whole Nation?

I omit what the same Lord Bacon there says (Book VIII. of the Advanc. of
Learn. C. 2. Parab. 14.) concerning the ancient Essens, and Pythagoreans, and
concerning some people now in the Mogul's Country, and the present Turks (who
are full of affection to brute creatures;) and only observe that he looks upon
the latter part of the same verse, as a kind of caution added by the wise man;
lest we should think he patronizes all sort of mercy and compassion. "No, the
mercy which spares wicked persons from being cut off by the hand of justice, is
not mercy, but more cruel than cruelty it self. For cruelty is exercised upon
single persons only: but this kind of mercy, by the grant of impunity, arms
the whole band of impious men against the innocent." So by the Mercies of the
wicked, he understands, mercy shown to the wicked: Which is an unusual form of
speech, and disagreeing to the opposition which the wise man, in this
proverbial saying, makes between the righteous and the wicked. And therefore it
is not to be embraced, nor to be looked upon as a true exposition: in which
though I believe he followed Drusius, yet he has very little company besides.
And the sense rather lies as I have expressed it in the Paraphrase: in which if
I have added more than Interpreters do, I am confident it will appear to him,
that considers, not to be without reason. For these words, the tender mercies
of the wicked are cruel, seem to me to have the same sense with that proverbial
speech among the Greeks, (...).

In the twelfth verse I have expressed both senses of which the word mezod is
capable: which signifies both a net and a fortress. And so I have done in the
next ( v. 13.) which may be rendered two ways. Either, that by prevaricating
with his lips, a wicked man lays snares, or [c] that he is himself ensnared by
his prevarications. In the same manner I have comprehended more senses than
one, in several other verses; which if I should particularly mention, it would
enlarge this Preface beyond its just length. Else I should have made some
remarks upon v. 15. where the danger of self-love and self-conceit is
represented: which has ever this effect, that it makes men slight, if not
reject good counsel; out of a vain opinion, that none can advise them better
than themselves: which is to follow the direction of a fool. For it is a
certain note of folly to rely wholly upon a man's own judgment, as it is of
prudence to hearken to the advice of others.

1. Whosoever loves instruction, loves knowledge: but he that hates reproof is
brutish.


1. IT is an excellent sign that a man will be wise and good, who not only
patiently bears with those that tell him of his faults, but loves and is
thankful for reproof: which he who not only declines but hates, and is
thereby enraged, gives way to such brutish passions passions and desires, that
there is little hope he should ever be a man.

2. A good man obtains favor of the LORD: but a man of wicked devices will
he condemn.


2. He that studies how to do good to others attracts the good will and
blessing of the Lord upon himself: but he who contrives mischievous designs,
under a specious show of Religion and the public good, shall be judged by Him,
who knows the heart, to suffer what he deserves.

3. A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the righteous
shall not be moved.


3. For no man, though never so subtle or powerful, shall be able to establish
himself and his family, who lays the foundation of his greatness in wickedness:
But the righteous, like a tree that has taken a deep root in the earth, though
shaken with storms and tempests, shall remain unmovable in a flourishing estate.

4. A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that makes ashamed, is
as rottenness in his bones.


4. A wife that strenuously imploys her self in her domestic affairs, and can
prudently command her own passions and desires, is a singular ornament and
honor to her husband; who may well glory in his happiness: but she whose
laziness, or lasciviousness, or other infamous quality, makes him down his head
for shame, is an incurable grief, and vexation, consuming him and all that he
has.

5. The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the counsels of the wicked are
deceit.


5. The designs of good men are managed with exact justice and truth: but the
contrivances of the wicked are carried on with fraud, dissimulation, and all
manner of deceit.

6. The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the
upright shall deliver them.


6. Nay (such is the height of their wickedness) they consult one with another,
and lay plots to take away secretly the life of those who stand in the way of
their designs: but men sincerely good give the best advice they can to deliver
such innocent persons from their bloody snares.

7. The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but the house of the righteous
shall stand.


7. And God befriends them also; who not only defeats those wicked projectours
in their designs, but so totally overthrows them and their families that no
footstep of them remains: whereas He not only continues, but settles the just
man's family in a durable succession (as I have often said, v. 3. and X. 25,
30. XI. 35.) when they that assaulted them are quite extinct.

8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but he that is of a
perverse heart shall be despised.


8. True prudence, directing a man to effect his ends by fair and honest means,
will procure him the greatest esteem, and the most lasting praise: but he who
contrives by fraud, and such like crooked ways, to attain his aim, shall fall
into utter contempt, and be scorned by all as a foolish knave.

9. He that is despised, and has a servant, is better than he that honors
himself, and lacks bread.


9. He is far happier who makes no show in the world, but has a competent
estate; than he who appears in great splendor and pomp abroad, but wants bread
to eat when he is at home.

10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast: but the tender mercies of
the wicked are cruel.


10. A good man takes care that his beast be well used, and have food and rest
convenient for it; which is more than men bent upon wickedness will do for
their neighbors: For their very kindnesses, being treacherous, are a cruel
cheat; nay the highest expressions which they make of tenderness and compassion
(whereby they induce others to repose a trust in them) are intended merely as a
cover, for the mischief they mean more securely to do them. See Arg. [b]

11. He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that
follows vain persons, is void of understanding.


11. He that takes pains in an honest employment, suppose in tilling his land,
shall find it requite him with sufficient, if not plentiful, provision for
himself and his family: but he that is idle, falling into the company of loose
and wicked persons, will find at last (by the desperate courses into which they
will lead him) that he wants not only bread, but understanding.

12. The wicked desires the net of evil men: but the root of the righteous
yields fruit.


12. The wicked desires two things, first to do as much mischief as he can by
his wiles and arts of deceiving; and then to be secure in his wickedness: but
the righteous make every body the better for them; and thereby enjoy that
safety, which the other have only in their wishes and desires.

13. The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips: but the just shall
come out of trouble.


13. The wicked insnares himself by that deceitful talk, wherewith he designed
to have ensnared others: but the righteous escapes the danger; nay, by his
prudent discourse avoids very great difficulties, wherein otherways he might
have been entangled. See Arg. [c]

14. Aman shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, and the
recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.


14. There is no man gives good counsel and advice (especially in public
affairs) but he shall reap the fruit of it abundantly himself: and there is no
good work he does for the benefit of others, but God will requite it, and make
it turn to his own good account.

15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto
counsel, is wise.


15. A fool is so conceited that he consults no body but himself; for
whatsoever he does, in his own opinion he is always in the right: but a wise
man will not rely upon his own judgment alone; but, suspecting himself, makes
use of the sound advice of other men.

16. A fools wrath is presently known: but a prudent man covers shame.


16. A fool (like a beast) is no sooner provoked but he grows angry; and, which
is worse, it appears immediately in his countenance, words and actions: whereas
a prudent man is not unseemlily transported by his passion; but stifles his
resentments, even of the most reproachful injuries that are done him.

17. He that speaks truth, shows forth righteousness; but a false witness,
deceit.


17. He that freely and boldly speaks the truth and all the truth, and nothing
but the truth, demonstrates himself an honest man and does justice unto others:
but he that conceals the truth or forges falsehoods, and testifies unto lies,
declares himself both a deceitful and mischievous person.

18. There is that speaks like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of
the wise is health.


18. A cutthroat is not more pernicious than he; and they are not much better,
whose business it is by secret calumnies to wound the reputation of their
neighbors, or to make discords and divisions among them: which a good man uses
all his skill to cure; persuading them to love, unity and peace.

19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue is but
for a moment.


19. He that speaks the truth (being always conformable to himself) has this
advantage, that he can never be disproved, nor consequently discredited: but a
liar, though he may at present be believed, is soon confuted; for he is apt to
contradict himself and blast his own reputation for ever.

20. Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counselors
of peace is joy.


20. They do but deceive themselves, who look for any satisfaction from
dissentions and disturbances; which they cannot contrive without much fear and
anxiety of mind: but, as they are always cheerful who consult nothing but
peace, concord, and happy settlement so, they will have great joy, whatsoever
the issue be, of such good designs.

21. There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked shall be filled
with mischief.


21. For the divine Providence takes a peculiar care of good men, to avert the
harm that the iniquity of the wicked intends them: which shall fall upon
themselves in such abundance as to overwhelm them.

22. Lying lips are abomination to the LORD: but they that deal truly are his
delight.


22. It is thought no great matter, if a man break his word, or any way deceive
his neighbor; but know, that this is a thing exceeding hateful to the Divine
Majesty: and on the contrary they that faithfully perform their promises, and
in all things deal truly with their neighbors, are no less acceptable to Him.
See Arg. [a]

23. A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools proclaims
foolishness.


23. A prudent man conceals his knowledge, and will not make a show of being so
wise as really he is: but a fool publishes his ignorance, as if he was
ambitious that every one should know he is a fool.

24. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the slothful shall be under
tribute.


24. He that takes pains in an honest employment, shall take his ease at last;
nay raise himself to dominion and power: but he whose sloth makes him live by
shirking and deceit, shall bring that toil upon himself which he would avoid;
when his poverty and villainy have reduced him to be a slave.

25. Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoup: but a good word makes it
glad.


25. Anxious cares and solicitude how to live depress the spirit of a man,
otherwise magnanimous: but the kind and encouraging discourses of a Friend
(much more the gracious promises of God) erect it, nay make it glad.

26. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor: but the way of the
wicked seduceth them.


26. As in other things, so in this a righteous man is more excellent than his
neighbor, that he does not delude himself with vain hopes; nor miss his end,
as the wicked does in all his designs.

27. The slothful man rosteth not that which he took in hunting: but the
substance of a diligent man is precious.


27. There is nothing more vile than a lazy fellow that lives by cheating; who,
if he catch, shall not be able to keep his prey: But he is a valuable man, who
by honest diligence gets wealth; which shall durably remain with him.

28. In the way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof there is
no death.


28. True goodness leads unto endless prosperity and happiness: nor is there
any one action of virtue that tends to make a man miserable; as all manner of
wickedness does.

CHAP. XIII.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter begins, as the foregoing did, with and Admonition about receiving
instruction and reproof with due regard to them; especially from Parents, who
cannot be thought to intend any thing, but the good of their Children.

And as he did there so, here again the Wise man gives fresh advice about the
government of the tongue, about diligence and industry: and has several
observations, not much different from what he made before, of the advantage
which the Righteous have of the Wicked, in a great many instances, which are
easy to observe in the Paraphrase.

And in the eighth verse he seems to me to teach [a] contentedness of mind; by
showing that the poor have a great advantage of the rich in an evil time. Some
indeed take the sentence quite otherways, as if the Wise man intended to
represent the great advantage rich men have of the poor, in this sense; a rich
man, when he fears any evil from his enemies, can divert it by a sum of money:
but a poor man when he is threatened; dare not stay, but runs away. And others
there are who go a middle way, and think he intends to show, that each of them
have their advantages of several kinds. But considering the opposition that is
usual in this Book, between one part of the verse and the other; this seems not
to be the meaning: yet I have mentioned it, that they who do not take the
opposition to lie as I have expressed it in the Paraphrase; may have their
choice, and follow which sense they like best. As for that of Clemens
Alexandrinus L. III. Paedagog. Cap. 7. who thus glosses upon the former part of
the verse, (...), if a man be rich, he shall be saved by giving away to those
in want; it does not answer to the opposite part of the verse; unless we should
interpret it thus: as for the poor, they shall have no rebuke for not giving,
because they have nothing to give. But I look upon this as not genuine; though
his Admonition upon this occasion be excellent, which is this: He that
earnestly presses to go up to heaven must (...), carry about with him that good
staff of beneficence, and by relieving those that are afflicted, partake
himself of true rest and refreshment.

Which it is impossible to find any way but in [b] virtuous courses, as the
fifteenth verse suggests to us; the sense of which according to the plain
import of the Hebrew words, I have expressed in the Paraphrase. But as the last
part of it sounds in our language it will not be incongruous, to take the
meaning of the whole thus: If a man have understanding enough to be thoroughly
good, he will find things favorable to his honest desires; but they that take
evil courses meet with great difficulties, and are forced to go backward and
forward, and wind and turn every way, to bring about their ends, or save
themselves perhaps from ruin.

[c] There are several other notable sentences in this Chapter; upon which if I
should enlarge it would be to write a Book. The only two which Melancthon
singled out for the observation of his Scholars, are the one of them in v. 10.
concerning pride. Upon which he remembers them of the Greek Proverb, (...), A
mountain cannot mix with a mountain, i. e. two high men will never agree
together: and of another excellent saying among the Latins, Creed mihi, sapere,
est non multum sapere, Believe me, to be wise, is not to be over wise. For they
whose minds are infected with a vain opinion of themselves, either cannot see
the truth, if it be against their thoughts; or if they do, they will not
acknowledge it, for fear they should yield and confess themselves overcome.

[d] The other is v. 23. the latter part of which he renders differently from
all that I have read; there is much food in the furrows of the poor, and alii
sine modo cumulant; and others heap up without any measure, that is, to no
purpose, when a little will suffice. Which is a wise saying, but not agreeable
to the Hebrew Text.

I shall only add that as the Chapter begins with an Admonition to hearken to
reproof (especially from Parents) which is repeated again in the middle, v. 13,
18. so it concludes, [e] in the last verse but one, with an advice to Parents;
not to spare the rod, if reproof will not do: which is but necessary in very
young Children; because there is no other means perhaps to make them understand
the difference between good and evil, decent and unseemly; but only to make
them smart for the one, and to give them some sensible pleasure for the other.
Some Children, that is, are so disposed, that they must be thus treated: and it
seems a wonderful piece of wisdom in the old Lacedaemonians (as Plutarch
relates in his Laconical Institutes) that, out of an universe love and care for
each others good, made it lawful for any man to correct the Child of another
person, if he saw him do amiss. And if the Child complained of it to his
Father; it was looked upon as a fault in the Father, if he did not correct him
again for making that complaint. Such was their confidence in each other, that
every man being as much concerned for another man's Children as for his own,
would never do them any injury, nor unreasonably check them without cause. For
this is the Character Plutarch gives of them; that they did not as in other
Cities, look every man only after his own children, servants and cattle; but
every man looked upon what was his neighbor's, as his own, (...), that there
might be, as much as was possible, a communion among them, and they might take
care of what belonged to others, as if they were their own proper goods.

1. A Wise son hears his fathers instruction: but a scorner hears not
rebuke.


A Good Child will reverendly receive and obey, both the instruction and the
reprehension of his Father: but there is no hope of him, that laughs and
scoffs, when he is admonished or chidden for his faults.

2. A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the
transgressors shall eat violence.


2. He that speaks well of others, or gives them faithful counsel, shall reap
the benefit thereof himself: and so shall they that perfidiously calumniate or
deceive them, suffer themselves that injury which they desired to do their
neighbors.

3. He that keeps his mouth keeps his life: but he that opens wide his
lips, shall have destruction.


3. It is worth a man's pains to watch over his tongue; for he that carefully
observes every word he speaks, preserves himself from much trouble and danger:
but he that blurts out every thing that comes into his head, not minding what
he says, is in the ready way to ruin.

4. The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing: but the soul of the
diligent shall be made fat.


4. There is nothing gotten by sloth, neither riches, nor learning; which he in
vain desires that will not labor for them: but the diligent and industrious
shall never want satisfaction, but enjoy perhaps a great deal more than he
desired.

5. A righteous man hates lying: but a wicked man is lothsom, and comes to
shame.


5. A good man not only avoids but hates all manner of falsehood, both in word
and deed: but the wicked delights to abuse others with such abominable lies and
frauds, as make him no less loathsome than a stinking carcass; and so
contemptible, that he dare not show his face for shame.

6. Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way: but wickedness
overthrows the sinner.


6. The justice of all honest and upright designs, will be a sufficient
security to them: but all wicked contrivances are overthrown by their own
iniquity.

7. There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing: there is that makes
himself poor, yet has great riches.


7. You will be deceived, if you judge of men by the outward appearance; for
there are those, who have the vanity to make a great show in the world, when
they are not worth a farthing: and others, who are so cunning as to dissemble
their vast estates under the garb of poverty.

8. The ransom of a man's life are his riches: but the poor hears not rebuke.


8. Rich men are not always so happy as they are imagined; for their wealth
sometimes only serves to make them accused of high crimes, and then to bring
them off with a huge sum of money, which they pay to save their lives: but no
body is apt to find fault with the poor, or to bring any charge against them.
See Arg. [a]

9. The light of the righteous rejoices: but the lamp of the wicked shall be
put out.


9. The happiness of the just is great and illustrious, like the light of the
sun; and increases still to their endless joy: but the happiness of the wicked,
is weak and dim, like the light of a candle; and will at last be utterly
extinguished.

10. Only by pride comes contention: but with the well-advised is wisdom.


10. They that have an high conceit of themselves and will yield to none,
declare their folly; in that they can do nothing without strife and
contention: but they that are so humble as to be advised by others, do all
things prudently, in quietness and peace. See Arg. [c]

11. Wealth gotten by vanity, shall be diminished: but he that gathers by
labor, shall increase.


11. Wealth ill gotten (by lying, gaming, cheating, etc.) soon wastes away: but
what is gotten by honest labor swells to a greater heap, which moulders not
but still increases.

12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick: but when the desire comes, it is a
tree of life.


12. The delay of that which a man eagerly expects is such an affliction, that
it differs little from a lingering disease: but when he enjoys what he has
long looked for, it restores him presently to his former vigor and liveliness.

13. Whose despises the word, shall be destroyed: but he that fears the
commandment, shall be rewarded.


13. He that despises the good admonitions or counsels that are given him, is
his own enemy, and destroys himself: but he that reverendly submits to the
divine commandment makes God his Friend, who will reward him for it.

14. The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of
death.


14. The Instructions of a good man ought to be as a Law to him that receives
them; for, like the water of a perpetual spring, they are most beneficial:
especially to preserve him from those pernicious and destructive principles
whereby too many are ensnared.

15. Good understanding gives favor: but the way of transgressors is hard.


15. A prudent, pious and regular behavior, is most amiable and acceptable to
all men: but the conversation of such as live by no law but their own lusts,
like rough way, is grievously uneasy. See Arg. [b]

16. Every prudent man deals with knowledge: but a fool lays open his folly.


16. All prudent persons are so cautious not to discredit themselves, that they
undertake nothing but with due deliberation, and what they understand: but a
fool discovers his weakness to be greater than was thought, by rash meddling
with matters out of his reach.

17. A wicked messenger falls into mischief: but a faithful ambassador is
health.


17. A Messenger, or a Minister, that wickedly betrays his trust, is so
injurious to (his Prince or) him that employs him, that he shall not escape a
just punishment: but he that faithfully discharges this Office (healing
suppose, or preventing differences and breaches) procures safety to himself, as
well as to the person that used his service.

18. Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction: but he that
regards reproof, shall be honored.


18. He that proudly rejects instruction, and disdains to be checked in his lewd
courses, is likely to be a beggar, and exposed to the public scorn: but he
that is so humble as to give a due regard to reproof, and to correct his
errors, not only gains a just esteem, but is likely to rise unto dignity and
honor.

19. The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is abomination to
fools to depart from evil.


19. It is an high satisfaction to enjoy what we earnestly desire: but fools
herein defeat themselves; being so wedded to their wickedness, that they will
not quit it, if that must be the condition of their being so happy.

20. He that walks with wise men, shall be wise: but a companion of fools
shall be destroyed.


20. He that keeps company with wise and good men is likely to be so himself;
that is, to be happy: but he who associates himself with the wicked, shall be
as certainly ruined, as he will be unavoidably infected with their wickedness.

21. Evil pursues sinners: but to the righteous, good shall be repayed.


21. The wickedness of sinners pursues them to their unavoidable destruction:
and the good which righteous men do, will infallibly return into their own
bosom, and reward them with many blessings.

22. A good man leaves an inheritance to his childrens children: and the
wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.


22. A man that does good with his estate, takes the surest course to settle
it upon his posterity for many generations: but the wealth of him, who regards
nothing but his own sinful lusts and pleasures, shall be transferred from his
Family unto one that is truly virtuous.

23. Much food is in the tillage of the poor: but there is that is destroyed
for want of judgment.


23. A poor man, many times, makes a plentiful provision for himself and his
Family, out of a few acres of Land; which he manages judiciously and honestly:
but there is a sort of men, whose larger estates are wasted; either for want of
skill to improve their ground, or because they do not pay the hireling his
wages. See Arg. [d]

24. He that spares his rod, hates his son: but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betimes.


24. Fond affection, which makes a Parent forbear to chastise his Child for the
faults that cannot otherways be amended, is no better than hatred; for it helps
to undo him: therefore he that truly loves his child must not be so indulgent;
but as soon as ill inclinations begin to appear, while he is tender and
flexible, give him early correction as well as admonition, before he have
accustomed himself to the doing evil. See Arg. [e]

25. The righteous eats to the satisfying of his soul: but the belly of the
wicked shall want.


25. A righteous man never wants satisfaction, because his desires are
moderate, and he lives in a temperate use of God's blessings: but wicked men,
some of them bring themselves to extreme poverty, by their luxury and riot; and
others of them are indigent even in the midst of the greatest abundance;
because their desires are insatiable, and they never think they have enough.

CHAP. XIV.
ARGUMENT.
[a] As the foregoing Chapter began with a description of a towardly child, so
this with the Character of a good Mother of a family: who by her prudent care
makes it flourish; when a lewd woman throws the house (as we say) out of the
windows: For so the wise man observes, She pulls down the house with her own
hands, that is, ruins the family without any other help. There needs no more
than a bad wife, to undo a family.

[b] A little after this ( v. 4.) there follows an Admonition for the man
without doors, as here for the woman within; that he do not neglect his
husbandry. Of which Oxen, every one knows, were the principal instruments:
being not only employed in that Country (as they are here) in plowing the
ground, and carrying home the crop; but also in treading out the corn. The
strength also of the Ox (which is here mentioned) is celebrated in all
Authors: and thence Bulls are called Abbarim, i. e. robust among the Hebrews;
who were very careful about the breeding of these most profitable creatures.
It is not my business to inquire after the difference between Alaphim and Sor
(which we render here, in this Verse, by the same English word) but certain it
is, they are used promiscuously for either sex; and the latter without any
respect to age: though most commonly it signifies one grown to maturity, which
we call an Ox.

[c] Upon the next Verse but one ( v. 6.) the Lord Bacon (in his VII Book of
the Adv. of Learning, Chap. 2.) has made this useful gloss, He that comes to
seek after knowledge, with a mind to scorn and censure, shall be sure to find
matter enough for his humor, but none for his instruction. One reason of which
is, that this humor of deriding all things, springs from a great pride and
conceit of their own wit, which disposes them to seek for Wisdom not from
others, but wholly from themselves: and so (as the Wise man observes) they are
not likely to find it, where it is not to be had. When he that attributes less
to himself, and has the humility to listen to instruction, in a short time
attains great wisdom. I cannot wholly omit the opinion of Jansenius; who
thinks the Wise man means that he has accustomed himself to laugh at all
wholesome counsel, and in some strait or other begins to think what is best to
do, commonly finds himself at such a loss, that he cannot see his way out of
it. And it may be applied to those also, who having mocked at Religion all their
days, at last desire to understand it; but cannot, through their own inveterate
indisposition to it.

[d] In the next Verse I have joined those two senses together, which it may
have according to the different acception of the word Minneged signifying
either before, or from before.

[e] The next ( v. 8.) I take to be that, which the Lord Bacon, minding the
sense rather than the words, thus translates ( Advancement of Learn. B. VIII.
C. 2. Parab. 30.) Prudens advertit ad gressus suos, stultus divertit ad dolos.
Which his English Translatour (who refers this to XXVII. Prove. 12. which is
quite to another purpose) reads thus, A wise man is wary of his way, a cunning
fool seeks evasions. Upon which that Lord thus descants: "There be two sorts of
Wisdom, the one true and sound, the other counterfeit and false: which last
Solomon doubts not to call folly. He that applies himself to the former, takes
heed to his own ways and footings, foreseeing dangers, studying remedies, using
the assistance of good men, and fortifying himself against the wicked: wary how
he enters upon a business; and not unprepared for a retreat, and how he may
come off handsomely: attent upon advantages, courageous against impediments,
with innumerable other things, that relate to the government of his own ways
and actions. But that other kind of Wisdom is made up altogether of fallacies,
and cunning devices; and relies wholly upon hopes of circumventing others, and
framing them as he list himself. This Wisdom the Parable rejects not only as
wicked, but as foolish. For, first, it is not in the number of things, which
are in our own power, nor is it directed by any constant rule; but new
stratagems must be every day devised, the old failing and growing useless. And,
secondly, as soon as ever a man has got the name, and the opinion of a cunning
crafty companion, he has deprived himself utterly of the principal Instrument
for the management of his affairs, which is Trust: And so he will find by
experience all things to go cross to his desires. For, lastly, these arts and
shifts, how ever they promise fair, and much please such as practice them, yet
they are commonly frustrated, and which is worse end sadly." Which Tacitus has
well observed in these remarkable words, Consilia calida and audacia,
expectatione laeta, tractatu dura, eventu tristia, "Crafty and audacious
counsels, are joyful in the expectation, difficult in the management, and sad
in the event."

[f] There is the same difficulty in the 9 th verse that was in the seventh:
For the word Jaliz is translated by some mock, by others excuse: and so
(besides what I have comprehended in my Paraphrase) there may be this sense of
the words; Fools endeavor to make handsome apologies for their faults, and to
find out colorable excuses; but upright men freely confess them, and easily
grant a pardon for them, and make up the differences which they raise in a
friendly manner. Or if we retain the acception of mocking, this may be the
sense of the verse; Fools laugh and jeer at those who have committed a sin: but
good men pity them, and by kind reproofs seek their amendment. I know not how
otherways to make out the opposition, which is usual between one part of the
Verse and the other, unless we choose to take it thus; That when fools offend
God in the highest manner, they make nothing of it: but if good men in the
least offend, they presently beg his pardon and seek his grace and favor. The
former part of the sentence also may be inverted, and make this plain obvious
sense; which is as natural as any: Sin will expose those to scorn, who are so
foolish as to commit it: And then the latter part is as plain; But the upright
will have favor both with God and man. A good Admonition to them that make a
mock of sin; which will in time make a mock of them, and expose them as
ridiculous fools.

[g] Some take the next ( verse 10.) to be an Admonition to a prudent man, that
he should conceal both his grief and his joy; and keep them to himself. But it
is rather an advice to every one, not to censure too heavily the passions of
grief or of joy in others; because the causes of them may be unknown to us. Or
we may look upon the former part of the Verse, as an admonition to those that
are at ease; not to censure too severely the complaints of those that are in
pain or trouble: and the latter part as an admonition to such as are delivered
from trouble, to be more thankful than any one can exhort them to be, because
they best know what reason they have for it.

[h] The next Verse but one ( v. 12.) is the only sentence which Melancthon
points out to his Scholars, as most remarkable in this Chapter. Which he takes
to be an Admonition of the weakness and blindness of men's judgment, and all
humane counsels: which mistake lamentably, and lead men frequently into ruin.
According to that saying of Simonides (...), shows and seeming appearances do
violence to Truth, Or truth is forced to give way to the mere show of it: and
that other, (...) shadows too often cheat us of the reality Against which there
is no remedy, but the word of God, and invoking his direction: according to
such sayings as these, Thy word is a light to my feet, etc. Commit thy way unto
the Lord, and trust in him, and he will bring it to pass. This shall be your
wisdom, to walk in my precepts, Deuteronomy. IV.

[i] And as some are deceived by their own counsels, so others by the counsel
of flatterers; if they be so simple as to believe every one that pretends to
kindness, v. 15. Where Bochartus notes very appositely, that as prudence
without simplicity degenerates into craft: so simplicity without prudence, is
no better than mere fatuity.

[k] In like manner the wise man observes, v. 23. that talking without doing is
vain; and to no purpose; but only to be a cover perhaps for Idleness. As the
Lord Bacon ( Advancement of Learning, B. VIII. C. 11. Paral. 28.) glosses upon
that Verse in these words: " Solomon here separates the fruit of the labor of
the tongue, and of the labor of the hands, as if want was the revenue of the
one, and wealth the revenue of the other. For it commonly comes to pass, that
they who talk liberally, boast much, and promise mighty matters, are beggars;
and receive no benefit by their brags or by any thing they discourse of. Nay,
rather for the most part such men are not industrious and diligent in their
employment; but only feed and fill themselves with words, as with wind.
Certainly as the Poet says, Qui silet, est firmus, He that is conscious to
himself of proficiency in his endeavors, contents himself with inward applause
in his own breast, and holds his peace: but he who knows within himself that he
only hunts after vain glory, and has nothing else to live upon, talks
abundantly, and reports wonders unto others."

There are several other remarkable things in the rest of the Chapter; but this
Preface is already so long, that I shall only touch upon one, verse 34.

[l] Where they seem to me to have translated the Hebrew most exactly, who take
the word Chesed in the ordinary sense of it, for mercy or clemency; not for
reproach, which it never signifies unless, perhaps, once, Lev. XX. 17. of which
there may be a just doubt made. As for the word Chattaah, no body doubts but it
signifies a sin-offering, as well as sin; yet, with respect to our translation,
I have endeavored to express both senses of those two words in my Paraphrase.

1. EVery wise woman builds her house; but the foolish plucketh it down with
her hands.


1. HE has a great Treasure, whosoever he be, that has a wise and virtuous
wife; for she alone by her diligence and prudent administration, is able to
raise her family, and increase its riches and reputation: But she that is
foolish, and void of goodness, by her negligence, ill management, and luxury,
without any other assistance, will lay it low, and waste all that has been
gotten by her predecessors care. See Arg. [a]

2. He that walks in his uprightness, fears the LORD: but he that is
perverse in his ways, despises him.


2. He that sincerely discharges his duty in all the actions of his life, has
a due regard and reverence to the Lord; from which all virtue flows: but he
that cares not what he does, so he do but satisfy his own lusts and passions,
lives in a profane contempt of his Majesty; which is the very fountain of all
wickedness.

3. In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: but the lips of the wise
shall preserve them.


3. A fool is so insolent that he boldly calumniates and wounds the reputation
of others, though it come home at last, with a terrible back-blow, upon
himself: but wise men are careful of their words, not to offend, much less
abuse, the meanest person; and thereby they remain in safety.

4. Where no Oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increase is by the strength
of the Ox.


4. If the fields lie fallow and be neglected, a famine must needs follow: but
good husbandry bestowed upon them, makes great plenty. See Arg. [b]

5. A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter lies.


5. A person of integrity will not be prevailed withal, either for fear or
favor, to justify the least untruth: but a man of no conscience, who has
accustomed himself to lying, cares not how many falsehoods he testifies; which
he utters without any difficulty.

6. A scorner seeks wisdom, and finds it not: but knowledge is easy unto
him that understands.


6. He that scoffs and jeers at every thing he reads or hears, would be
thought wise; but loses all his pains, which perhaps he takes, to be so: When a
serious person, who does not think himself too wise to learn, easily and
quickly attains the knowledge of things necessary, and useful for him. See
Arg. [c]

7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the
lips of knowledge.


7. Observe a fool (and a wicked man is no better) as diligently as thou
please, and thou shall never learn any good from him: and therefore it is
best to flee the company of such persons, whose discourse thou perceivest tends
to nothing but vice and mischief. See Arg. [d]

8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the folly of fools
is deceit.


8. The greatest cunning and subtilty that a truly wise and good man studies,
is to understand what he ought to do, and what to avoid, upon all occasions:
but all the skill of wicked men, such is their folly, lies in cheating tricks,
and in devising arts of circumvention and deceit. See Arg. [e]

9. Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous there is favor.


9. Lewd men, as if it were but a sport, care not what injury they do their
neighbors, and, when they have done, laugh at those that talk to them of
making satisfaction: but among men exactly virtuous there is nothing but good
will, which makes them live without offense, or presently reconcile themselves
to those they have offended. See Arg. [f]

10. The heart knows his own bitterness; and a stranger does not intermeddle
with his joy.


10. No body can know what another suffers, so well as he himself: and he alone
is privy to the greatness of that joy, which springs from the happy conclusion
of his sufferings. See Arg. [g]

11. The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the
upright shall flourish.


11. Men of sincere integrity are happier in a mean cottage, than the wicked
are in their palaces: For, when the great and potent families of those wicked
men are over-turned, the despicable family of the sincerely pious shall
flourish and grow illustrious.

12. There is a way which seems right unto a man: but the end thereof are the
ways of death.


12. Examine every thing strictly and impartially, and be not led merely by thy
appetite: for that makes many actions seem innocent, which in the issue prove
deadly destructive. See Arg. [h]

13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is
heaviness.


13. Do not think that every one that laughs is merry, or that profuse and
immoderate joy is true pleasure; for it leaves the heart more heavy and sad
after-wards, especially when the mind reflects upon it: Nay, such is the vanity
of this present life, there is no joy with out a mixture of sorrow; which
oft-times treads so close upon its heels, that it immediately follows.

14. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a good man
shall be satisfied from himself.


14. He that, to avoid a danger, revolts from those virtuous courses, unto
which he knows he ought to have adhered, shall bring upon himself misery
enough, by his own devices: But a truly good man is, even in this, far
superior to him, that, though he should suffer, his own integrity and the
clearness and quietness of his conscience, gives him abundant satisfaction.

15. The simple believes every word: but the prudent man looks well to his
going.


15. It is a mark of great silliness to be credulous; that is, to take all
those for friends who make profession of it, and easily to follow every ones
advice: for a prudent man is suspicious, and proceeds cautiously; examining,
before he trust; and considering well, before he do as he is advised. See Arg.
[i]

16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil: but the fool rages, and is
confident.


16. A wise man being admonished of his error, and of his danger, is afraid of
incurring the divine displeasure; and instantly starts back from that evil way,
into which he was entering, or wherein he was engaged: but a fool storms at
those that would stop him in his course, and proceeds boldly and securely to
his own ruin.

17. He that is soon angry, deals foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is
hated.


17. He whose anger is presently kindled, and breaks out when he is offended,
may do such things, when the fit is upon him, as none but a fool would be
guilty of; but he is nothing so bad as him, who, suppressing his wrath, lets it
boil in his breast, and deliberately contrives how to take a cruel revenge: for
most men are inclined to pity the weakness of him that is hasty, but this man's
wickedness is odious, and execrable unto all.

18. The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.


18. Inconsiderate men will never leave their folly, till they feel the woeful
effects of it: but they who are cautious and advised will heartily embrace all
the means of Instruction, and endeavor to arrive at the perfection of
knowledge; which will prove a singular ornament and glory to them.

19. The evil bow before the good: and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.


19. Evil doers had best not be insolent in their prosperity; for they may not
only be brought low, but have been seen to humble themselves before the face
of those good men, whom they had oppressed: the most impious of them, that
stuck at nothing which would support them in their wickedness, have been forced
to wait as humble supplicants at the gate of that just man (whom they despised
and abused) and implore his favor, and relief.

20. The poor is hated even of his own neighbor: but the rich has many
friends.


20. There is little sincere kindness left in the world; for if a man fall into
poverty, his near neighbor, nay, even he that professed friendship to him
before, not only forsakes him, but hates his company: but if a man grow very
rich (let it be by what means it will) there are many that before took no
notice of him, who will pretend to love him; nay the greatest persons offer him
their favor.

21. He that despises his neighbor, sins: but he that has mercy on the
poor, happy is he.


21. But let such men know that it is a greater sin than they imagine, and
shall be severely punished, to overlook their poor neighbor, and deny him
their charitable relief: which whosoever compassionately affords him, not only
does a good deed, but shall be amply rewarded for it.

22. Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth shall be to them
that devise good.


22. Need I tell you (when it is so known a truth) that they miss their end,
and do but contrive their own ruin, who carry on mischievous designs against
the innocent? But they that take the same pains to study how to do men good,
shall never fail of that bountiful reward, which is secured to them by the
faithful promise of God.

23. In all labor there is profit: but the talk of the lips tends only to
penury.


23. If a man take pains in any honest employment, though never so mean, it
will bring him in some profit: but to spend ones time in talking only, and
perhaps boasting what he can do, tends to nothing, but to make a man a beggar.
See Arg. [k].

24. The crown of the wise is their riches: but the foolishness of fools is
folly.


24. Riches are a singular advantage and ornament to a wise and virtuous man,
who knows how to use them: but such is the folly of wicked men, that their
Wealth makes them the more vile, and only gives them the greater means to show
what senseless fools they are.

25. A true witness delivers souls: but a deceitful witness speaks lies.


25. An upright man will not fear to endanger himself in justifying the truth,
to save the lives of those that are falsely accused: but false and deceitful
men boldly pour out lies and calumnies, though thereby they destroy the
innocent.

26. In the fear of the LORD is strong confidence: and his children shall have
a place of refuge.


26. A religious care to please the Lord in all things, gives a man the firmest
resolution, and the strongest confidence of security and protection in all
dangers: And his children after him may flee to God for safety; and hope to
fare the better for their pious father's sake.

27. The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of
death.


27. There is nothing makes a man live so comfortably and happily, as this
Religious care to avoid every thing offensive to his Majesty: which, like a
perpetual Spring, gives endless satisfaction; and diverts a man from those
dangerous ways, wherein others are entangled to their utter destruction.

28. In the multitude of people is the kings honor: but in the want of people
is the destruction of the prince.


28. The honor and splendor of a King depends upon the multitude, wealth and
strength of his Subjects; whom therefore he ought to cherish: for if they be
wasted by unnecessary Wars, or forced, into other Countries by oppression and
unjust ex actions, it proves the ruin of his Kingdom.

29. He that is slow to wrath, is of great understanding: but he that is hasty
of spirit, exalts folly.


29. He declares himself to be a great man, and to abound with prudence, who is
not soon provoked to anger, by reproaches or ill usage: by which if a man be
hastily inflamed, he exposes his folly, and makes it apparent to every body.

30. A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envy, the rottenness of the
bones.


30. There is nothing conduces more to health and happiness, than a quiet,
gentle and contented mind: but envy, and such like fretfull passions, is as
miserable a torment and consuming disease, as rottenness in the bones.

31. He that oppresses the poor, reproacheth his Maker: but he that honors
him, has mercy on the poor.


31. He that defrauds or oppresses the poor, forgets God, who can reduce him to
the same condition; nay, affronts his Majesty, who has promised to be the
Defender of such helpless people: therefore whosoever has any respect to God,
will be so far from injuring, that he will show mercy and do good to him that
is needy.

32. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous has hope
in his death.


32. When a wicked man falls into calamity, his heart sails him, and he is
driven away from all his confidences, like the chaff before the wind, by the
conscience of his own wickedness: but a righteous man is not dismayed in the
greatest dangers; but remains steady and confident, even in death it self.

33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding: but that
which is in the midst of fools, is made known.


33. A prudent person makes no unseasonable demonstration of his Wisdom; but
lets it lie quiet in his own mind, till there be a fitting opportunity to do
good with it: whereas fools cannot contain themselves, but presently vent
whatsoever they know, tho never so small, in every company whereinto they come.

34. Righteousness exalts a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people.


34. Justice and Piety raise a Nation to the highest degree of prosperity and
glory, especially when mercy, humanity and kindness, even unto strangers and
enemies, is joined with them: which pacifies the divine anger, and turns away
many calamities; which the contrary sins bring down upon a people, till they
make them vile and miserable. See Arg. [l].

35. The kings favor is toward a wise servant: but his wrath is against him
that causes shame.


35. A prudent and dextrous Minister of State, who understands his business,
and is faithful in it, must needs be very acceptable to his Prince: whose
anger nothing more provokes, than one who regards not his Master's honor, but,
by his ill management, disgraces his Government, and brings all things into
confusion.

CHAP. XV.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter begins with that Aphorism, which [a] the Lord Bacon ( Adv. of
Learning. B. VIII. Chapter 2.) has set in the front of all those, which he has
culled out of this Book; for an example of that sort of wisdom which is to be
exercised in business, upon various occasions. And he applies it particularly
to a man's behavior toward a Prince or other great Person, when he is angry
with him. " Two things, says he, Solomon advises in this case: the one is that
an Answer be made; the other, that it be soft. The first of which contains
three precepts. First that you beware of a sad and sullen silence; which either
charges the fault wholly upon your selves; or impeaches your Master of
injustice, as if his ears were not open to a just defense. Secondly that you
beware of delaying the Answer, and of craving longer time for your defense:
because that plainly betrays you are devising some cunning and counterfeit
Apology, having no present Answer. Thirdly that by all means an Answer be made:
an Answer I say, not a mere confession or submission; but with some sprinklings
of an excuse let fall here and there. For it is not safe to bear your self
otherways, unless you have to deal with very generous and noble dispositions,
which are rare. But then, this Answer (which is the second and principal thing
here advised) must be very soft and temperate, not harsh and peremptory: for
that will make the business worse than if it had never been meddled with at
all; and increase that wrath which you should study to appease."

Melancthon also, I find, in his short Lectures upon this Book, commends this
Lesson very much to his Scholars: but looks upon it as a general precept for
the preservation of peace, and avoiding unnecessary contentions; which arise
out of pride, ambition, morosity of nature, emulation, wrath, superstition;
which move men either to give ill words, or to return worse to those that are
given them; endeavoring to overcome by sharpness and bitterness, not by lenity
and moderation. And the truth is, the Hebrew word we translate answer,
signifies as well what is first said, as the reply to it. So that Solomon here
gives this caution, that we should not think it enough, not to begin strife and
contention; but if others begin it, we should not continue it by rough answers:
but endeavor to make an end presently, by mollifying the matter; and yield
much for the common tranquility's sake. And he thinks it is a precept of the
same nature, with that of Pythagoras, Stir not up fire with a sword: and
commends those excellent verses of Euripides, (...)
(...)


And next to this precept he commends to his Scholars [b] that in v. 8. which
is all that he glosses upon in this Chapter: And thinks it is a caution against
resting in ceremonious worship, without moral virtue. Concerning which he says
so many things, useful for these present times, that I cannot but here give
the sum of them.

There are three sorts of works, says he, mentioned by the Prophets,
concerning ceremonies, and concerning moral virtue, and concerning faith. For
the first of these, ceremonies or external signs; God instituted some for two
causes. First, that they should be signs of the promises. Secondly, that they
should be the nerves of the public Congregation: because God would not have
his Church be hid in obscurity, but be conspicuous and discerned from other
nations, voce and ceremoniis. But here we must prudently consider, how
ceremonies are to be used; because men are prone to false worship, and
especially to the abuse of ceremonies: which they take for righteousness, and
think thereby to merit remission of sin: which persuasion spread it self
largely among mankind, in the heathen world, among the Pharisaical Jews, and in
the Roman Church. Yet the wiser heathen themselves corrected this error, of
trusting to ceremonies, without moral good works. Plato, for instance, says
that, God loves Worshippers, (...), not that can artificially complement him
with gestures and outward shows; but that in truth honor virtue. But the
Scripture goes a great deal further; and teaches us also to add faith in God
and in our Lord Jesus Christ. Moral good works will please God, when done for
this end; not that we may merit thereby remission of sin: but that we may be
obedient to God, and teach others to know him, and to celebrate him. And then
also ceremonies, instituted by God, are pleasing to him, when they are done for
this end; not to merit remission: but because they are signs admonishing us of
the promises, to stir up our faith; and likewise because they are signa
confessionis, signs of what Religion we profess; and lastly, quia sunt nervi
congregationis, because they are the nerves whereby the Congregation of
Christian people are joined together, and preserved in unity. These true ends,
says he, ought to be understood by the Church, and impious opinions to be
removed. And for such good ends, one would think none should question, much
less quarrel with those few Ceremonies, which our Church has appointed in
God's service.

That this was his opinion also, appears in his Commentaries upon the Fiftieth
Psalm: where he says, that even humane Ceremonies are, in some sort, the
nerves of discipline; and condemns only those that make them effectual for the
remission of sin. But his mind is delivered most fully, in a discourse which I
find in the Second Volume of his Works, concerning the method of preaching:
where he directs Preachers to tell the people in general, that all Ceremonies
are not to be abolished; as appears by this, that then we must take away
Baptism and the Eucharist. And if any one ask, what must be done with
Ceremonies instituted by man, he answers; some of them are necessary, and
therefore must be retained; as certain days, in which the word of God is
taught; and certain rites in the Church, such as that of singing Psalms; and
certain forms of communicating, etc.

But there are others not so necessary, what must be done with them? must they
be tolerated? He answers, yes; if they be not impious, and if they be useful:
either because they commend Religion to the Vulgar, or they are instructive to
Children, for whose sake they were chiefly instituted. N.B.
For we see in some Churches, where there are no Ceremonies left but only the
Sacraments; that Religion was never so contemptible as it is now. For there is
need of external show, which may commend Religion to the Vulgar, and make it
appear more venerable; because they cannot of themselves see its magnitude and
dignity.

It is impious also, he resolves, to think that all Ceremonies were instituted
by wicked Popes. No, there were some prudent and holy men, who perceived how
supine and dull the minds of the vulgar were; that they would never be sensible
of the dignity and amplitude of Religion, unless their minds were both awakned
and detained by some reverend solemn Ceremonies; which might help to lift them
up, and teach them to admire it.

These are his Reasons why all Ceremonies ought not to be abolished; because
some are commanded; others necessary; and others, that are not, have no impiety
in them, and are very profitable for weaker minds. Which I thought good here to
insert; because the opinion of so great and wise a Reformer, may weigh much
with some persons, who have little regard to us.

I have been so long in this, that I must but briefly mention two verses more:
upon which the before named Lord Bacon has given some touches.

[c] The first is v. 15. where by a merry heart he understands a good
Conscience ( Adv. of Learn. B. VII. Chapter 1.) and thus glosses. A mind conscious
of good intentions, though success be wanting, affords truer and purer joy, and
to nature more agreeable, than all that this world can furnish a man withal,
either for the enjoyment of his desires, or the repose of his mind. The words
indeed of Solomon seem to be larger, and to extend unto all that are void of
care, anxiety and sorrow: but this is a pious sense, and may well be
comprehended in them.

[d] The other place is v. 19. the beginning of it: where he has enlarged the
sense further, than I have done in my Paraphrase (and the words will bear it)
to this purpose, that sloth, in the conclusion, proves laborious. "For
diligence and sedulous preparation levels the way we are to go in any business;
and removes impediments in our passage. But he that is slothful, and put's off
all to the last point of execution, must needs perpetually, at every step, pass
as it were through briars and thorns; which ever and anon entangle, detain and
hinder him in his proceedings. The same observation may be made concerning the
Government of a Family, wherein if there be due care and providence used, all
goes on cheerfully; and as it were of its own accord, without noise or tumult:
but if those be wanting, when some greater occasion falls out, all matters
throng in to be dispatched at once; the Servants are in an uproar, the whole
house rings, and there is nothing well done in that confusion."

[e] The two verses before this some have connected; but there is no necessity
of it: though it be a great truth, that passionate men are apt to make
disturbance even at feasts; which men of temperate spirits endeavor to
appease, though affronts be offered them. According to that excellent advice of
Seneca, Let dissension begin from others, but reconciliation from thee. It is
there observed by Bochartus (L. II. de Animalibus Sacris, Cap. 32. Part 1.)
that herbs, or as some translate it, green pottage, was the poorest; and an Ox
put up into a stall and there fatted (or as the Talmudists understand the
phrase a crammed Ox) the noblest entertainment in those Countries. For it is
reckoned among the provision made for the tables of Solomon and Nehemiah; and
in the New Testament, the Marriage provision which the King made at his Son's
Wedding were oxen and fatlings, XXI. Matthew. 4. and the fatted calf was brought
forth to entertain the returning Prodigal. And thus it was in other Countries,
as he observes out of Dioscorides; who notes that Homer never sets any other
cheer before his Heroes but this; no not at Marriages or any other meetings:
though he introduce Agamennon often treating the Princes of Greece.

1. A Soft answer turns away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.


1. A Mild, submissive and yielding answer, to him who severely chides,
pacifies wrath; and prevents the further progress of it: but sharp,
contemptuous and saucy language incenses it more, or raises a passion, where
there was none before. See Arg. [a]

2. The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools
pours out foolishness.


2. A wise man gives profitable instructions; and understands also how to speak
so seasonably and prudently, that it shall make the knowledge he imparts, both
acceptable and useful: whereas fools have nothing but silly stuff to utter; or
pour out their thoughts so indiscreetly and confusedly, that they only serve
abundantly to declare their folly.

3. The eyes of the LORD are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.


3. There is nothing either in heaven or earth that can escape the knowledge of
God: who is everywhere; and observes the most secret motions and actions of
men, both good and bad.

4. A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but perverseness therein is a breach in
the spirit.


4. He that skilfully employs his tongue to give wholesome instructions,
especially to heal differences and make peace, is an incomparable blessing to
the place where he lives, and makes it a paradise: But he that abuses his
tongue, to poison men with ill principles, to lie, to calumniate, to make
bates, does most miserably disturb mankind, and (like a biting wind) blasts all
the comforts of their life.

5. A fool despises his fathers instruction: but he that regards reproof, is
prudent.


5. He that regards not, or rejects the instruction of his Father, or Tutour,
or other Superior, whose love is equal to his authority, will always be a
fool: But he that is willing to receive even rebukes, from whomsoever they
come, and carefully observe them, has already attained a great degree of
wisdom; and prudently consults his own welfare and happiness.

6. In the house of the righteous is much treasure: but in the revenues of the
wicked is trouble.


6. A truly just and merciful man is very rich, whether he has little or
much; because he is well contented, and what he has is likely to continue in
his family: But there is much disquiet and trouble in the greatest revenues of
the wicked; which can neither stay long with him, nor give him satisfaction
while he enjoys them.

7. The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish does
not so.


7. Wise and good men are neither envious nor sparing of their pains to
disperse their knowledge; which they freely communicate, and diligently
propagate unto others: but evil men are such fools, that either they have
nothing to impart, or no heart to do any good with what they have.

8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD: but the prayer
of the upright is his delight.


8. It is impious to think to please God, with mere gifts and sacrifices; which
when they are presented from wicked men, who have no thought of amending their
lives, are abominable to the Divine Majesty: but the very prayers of upright
men, though they are not able to bring Him any costly offerings, are exceeding
acceptable, and prevail for great blessings from Him. See Arg. [b]

9. The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the LORD: but he loves him
that follows after righteousness.


9. For the whole way of a wicked man, his designs, contrivances and course of
life, are all odious and abominable to the Lord; which make even his sacrifices
no better: but He loves him, whose thoughts, affections and endeavors, are
earnestly bent to an unwearied pursuit of piety and virtue.

10. Correction is grievous to him that forsakes the way: and he that hates
reproof shall die.


10. Sharp and grievous punishments shall be inflicted on him that forsakes the
virtuous path, in which he began to tread: for he is not easily reclaimed;
because it is unpleasing to him to hear of his faults; and in time he hates
reproof, and then must certainly perish.

11. Hell and destruction are before the LORD: how much more then the hearts of
the children of men?


11. The Lord is perfectly acquainted with things most hidden and secret to us;
with the grave, the infernal places, and things perished and quite consumed:
how much more therefore with the souls of all men living upon earth, if they
have but so much as an intention, or inclination to depart from Him?

12. A scorner loves not one that reproves him: neither will he go unto the
wise.


12. A profane man, who makes a mock of God and of Religion, loves not to
argue with himself about such matters, and hates those that reprove him: which
makes him avoid the acquaintance and society of wise and virtuous men, for fear
he should meet with their reprehension.

13. A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the heart
the spirit is broken.


13. When the mind of a man is inwardly satisfied and full of joy, it does good
to his body too; as appears in his cheerful countenance: But when grief and
sorrow seises on the heart, it dejects, infeebles and breaks the most
courageous spirit.

14. The heart of him that has understanding seeks knowledge: but the mouth
of fools feeds on foolishness.


14. An intelligent man, who is heartily in love with wisdom, greedily seeks
for solid knowledge: but men void of understanding gape after, and relish
nothing but frivolous, vain and unprofitable things; which are like meat and
drink unto them.

15. All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry heart
has a continual feast.


15. All the days of a poor man are full of anxiety and trouble; especially if,
when any affliction befalls him, he be discontented with his condition, and
cannot bear with disappointments: but a good heart, and cheerful spirit is a
cure for this; especially, a mind conscious to it self of designing well,
whatsoever the success prove, is a perpetual comfort, and a higher
satisfaction, than the most delicious banquet of the rich and prosperous. See
Arg. [c]

16. Better is little with the fear of the LORD, than great treasure, and
trouble therewith.


16. A small estate, with a fear of offending the Divine Majesty by discontent
or any other sin, is much better than vast Treasures with disquiet and
confusion of thoughts; which (without a religious sense of God) are wont to
attend upon abundance of wealth.

17. Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox, and hatred
therewith.


17. The meanest fare, with the love of him that invites, and with agreement
among the guests, is much better than the most sumptuous entertainment of him
that hates us; or among those that quarrel and contend, even then when all
differences should be forgotten. See Arg. [e]

18. A wrathful man stirs up strife: but he that is slow to anger appeaseth
strife.


18. A man prone to wrath will easily disturb the most peaceable company, being
apt to quarrel for very trifles: but a meek and patient person is so far from
raising strife, that he will endeavor to compose it, when he finds it is begun
by others.

19. The way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns: but the way of the
righteous is made plain.


19. A slothful man, when he has any thing to do, feigns to himself most
grievous difficulties, which he fancies, or pretends are impossible to be
overcome: but those very things seem easy to the industry of honest hearted
men; who go on smoothly in their business, and conquer all impediments. See
Arg. [d]

20. Awise son makes a glad father: but a foolish man despises his mother.


20. A pious Son (as has been said before X. 1. and cannot be repeated too
often) is a great joy to his Parents; especially to his Father, who hopes he
will support his Name and Family: but a wicked man is as great a grief unto
them; especially to his Mother (whose indulgence perhaps makes him more
irreverend toward her) when he bears no regard to her; nay despises her
commands and admonitions, and makes her contemptible unto others.

21. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man of
understanding walks uprightly.


21. It is a pleasure (as was also said before X. 23.) to a man void of
consideration, to do the most absurd and wicked things: but he that
understands himself, not only directs his thoughts, and takes the greatest
care, to live orderly and regularly; but feels it to be his highest
satisfaction.

22. Without counsel, purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of
counselors they are established.


22. The necessity likewise of prudent Counselors is fit again to be repeated
(XI. 14.) for if they be wanting, the best designs are likely to miscarry: but
where there are a multitude of wise and virtuous men consulting for the public
good, they will easily compass any thing; by foreseeing all difficulties, and
providing against them.

23. A man has joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due
season, how good is it?


23. And it is a great pleasure to a man to give wholesome counsel; and a
greater to see the good success of it: but the greatest of all (an
inexpressible pleasure) both to himself and others, to have given it so
seasonably, that a business was easily effected by it, which had not been done
without it.

24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.


24. The way to be perfectly happy, a truly wise man sees, is to raise his
thoughts, desires and hopes above this earth, and to have respect to God in all
his actions: which will make him truly noble and great; and preserve him both
from all mean and base practices, and from the most horrid dangers here, and
utter destruction hereafter.

25. The LORD will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish the
border of the widow.


25. Trust not in riches and power, but in the great Lord of the world, who
possesses and disposes all things; for He will overturn the Family of haughty
men (who forgetting Him, trample upon their inferiors) though never so
strongly supported: but will preserve the poor Widow, who has no helper, in
her right; when such insolent persons invade it.

26. The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the LORD: but the words
of the pure are pleasant words.


26. For the Lord abhorrs all wicked designs, and mischievous contrivances: but
the kind consultations and discourses of such, as seek the welfare and comfort
of others, are no less pleasing to Him than they are pure.

27. He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own house; but he that hates
gifts shall live.


27. He that is so greedy of money, that he cares not how he gets it, instead
of raising his Family, confounds it: but he that hates bribes, and all
unlawful ways of gain, shall prosper, and continue it.

28. The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked
pours out evil things.


28. A good man thinks it is soon enough to speak, when he is asked about a
business; and deliberates within himself to speak nothing that is not to the
purpose: but bad men are rash and forward to utter their mind; and generally
do more hurt than good.

29. The LORD is far from the wicked: but he hears the prayer of the
righteous.


29. The Lord is far from giving any regard to the wicked, whose business it is
to do evil, though they implore his favor: but sends good men help, when they
pray unto him, as readily as they were wont to send relief to others.

30. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart: and a good report makes the
bones fat.


30. It is a wonderful pleasure to behold all the beautiful works of God,
which present themselves to our eyes: But nothing gives such intimate
satisfaction, and makes a man so cheerful in well-doing, as to hear a fair
report of his own honest actions; or to receive the good news of the well-doing
of other virtuous men.

31. The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise.


31. He that lends an attentive ear to wholesome reproof, and is obedient to it,
is to be numbered among the wise; and shall at last be able to give good
instructions unto others.

32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul: but he that hears
reproof, gets understanding.


32. And whosoever he be that refuses, much more that contemns, such
instructions and reproofs, he sets his own Soul at naught; and despises the
means of his safety: but he that diligently hearkens to it, knows what is good
for himself; and keeps his Soul from being lost for want of understanding.

33. The fear of the LORD is the instruction of wisdom; and before honor is
humility.


33. A brief Institution of Wisdom and Virtue is this, to have an awful sense
of God; with a devout affection to Him, and fear to offend Him: And as this is
the best disposition for Wisdom; so humility, and patient submission, in a low
condition, is the best preparation for honor and preferment.

CHAP. XVI.
ARGUMENT.
[a] This Chapter begins with a most necessary observation, which a good man
ought always to have in his mind (for which cause it is repeated, with little
difference, twice more in this very Chapter, v. 9, 33. and again Chap. XIX.
21.) the sense of which our Translation seems to have missed. For it ascribes
both the Preparation of the heart, and the Answer of the tongue, unto the Lord
(which is true in this regard, that without Him we can do nothing), whereas
the Hebrew words run plainly thus, Man has the disposing of the heart, he may,
with God's leave and common assistance, intend, propound, resolve within
himself, what he will say and do: but that he shall be able to utter things in
that order he has premeditated; or, if he be able, shall attain the end of his
deliberation, and eloquent speech, is more than he can undertake; for that is
as the Lord pleases. This seems to me to be better opened by Melancthon than
any one I have read. Who truly observes, that such sayings as these do not
take away the liberty of man's will or choice; but only show, that even the
best men sometimes err in their choice; and that the success does not always
answer. For we must diligently distinguish, says he, between our election and
the success: and remember that we need a double help of God, for the making a
happy choice. One of judging aright; and the other afterward, of governing
events. For unless our judgment be ruled right, many errors happen; as we see
in Josiah, Zedekiah, Demosthenes, Pompey, Cicero; who all erred in eligendo
bello in their resolves about war; and direful events followed. And sometime
also when the mind does not err in its judgment; yet God is not pleased to
assist the action, for other causes. As in the War against the Benjamites,
which miscarried a great while, because the Israelites trusted in their own
strength. We must always therefore be sensible, that happy events do not depend
merely on humane forecast, diligence and Power; as Jeremiah speaks, I know, O
Lord, that the way of man is not in himself. i. e. he cannot have what success
he will; but must be beholden to God for his happiness. This our weakness God
would have us to acknowledge, and to fear and depend on Him; as it follows
here, v. 3. Commit thy work unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established. To this use we ought to accommodate such sayings, as these, not to
a Stoical opinion of necessity. Thus he.

[b] And he no less worthily glosses, upon the common Interpretation of v. 4.
the latter part of which has exercised many Pens to little purpose: when the
sense is clear, though no expositor, that I have seen, has hit upon it. viz.
that God makes some use of wicked men, as well as of all things else; which
they shall serve whether they will or no. For He disposes (so the word we
translate has made is to be understood; not of his creating things) all things
correspondent to his own will and pleasure, which they all obey. So lammaanthu
seems to be best translated, not for himself, but according to his will.
However, I have included the other interpretation also in my Paraphrase; but
applied the day of evil not to the punishment which He inflicts upon the wicked
for their sins; but which He orders them to inflict upon others, when their
iniquities are ripe for his vengeance. For it is the Method of his Providence,
to direct the ambition, wrath, hatred, revenge, etc. which he sees in some
wicked men's hearts, to vent themselves there, where it will do service to Him.
Who wisely and justly makes some wicked men do execution upon others like
themselves. This seems to me the most easy and natural sense of the words:
which were remarkably fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman
Soldiers; whom our Savior used to punish his crucifiers. Not that they
undertook that War, out of any design or desire to do our blessed Savior
right; but out of an ambition to inslave the World: (...), yet God made use of
them for another design, as public executioners, by whom he punished the
ungodly, as Theodoret speaks upon LXXIV Psalm. 3.

[c] I must omit Melancthon's glosses upon this Verse, and the two next; that I
may have room for his pertinent observation upon v. 10. A divine sentence is in
the lips of the King, etc. "These words, says he, affirm the whole political
order, Magistrates, Laws, Distinction of Dominions, Contracts, Judgments,
Punishments, to be things ordained by the Wisdom of God among men. And since
we know Political order to be the work of God, we ought to love it; and study
to defend it; and modestly, for God's sake, obey it; and give thanks to God who
preserves it; and look upon those horrible furies of the devil and men, who
disturb this order, to be displeasing to God: as this whole Doctrine is
explained Romans XIII. But what is this divine Sentence which is in the King's
lips? It is the Laws, says he; and judgments according to the Laws: and
besides, God has armed Kings with a power to make Laws of their own, not
repugnant to his Laws; but built upon them, either by demonstrations, or
probable reasons. God sometimes moves the mind of Kings also, and gives them
singular motions (as other excellent Artificers have) because He will by that
means save mankind, etc. Thus it was a singular motion in Solomon's reasoning
about the true Mother of the Child. And in the judgment of Gonzaga in the last
age, upon the Spanish Governor of Milan under him. Who having held a Noble
person Captive a long time, would not deliver him to his Wife (when she
petitioned and offered a large sum of money for his redemption) unless he might
lie with her: and after he had obtained his desire, then caused her husband to
be killed, and delivered him dead to her. Which when Gonzaga heard, and had
examined, he compelled him to marry this woman; and as soon as he had done
that, he condemned him to be immediately beheaded, and gave her all his estate."

But we are not from such places as this to infer, that Kings cannot give a
wrong judgment: though this be as good a conclusion as from those words, the
Priest's lips shall preserve knowledge, to conclude the Pope cannot err. Kings
from this place of Solomon may as well pretend to Infallibility, as Priests
from that place of Malachi. Nay, if we respect either the form of this precept,
or the plenitude of God's promise for ability to perform it, we must confess,
this place is more plain and peremptory for Kings; than any can be brought for
the High-Priest's Infallibility, in giving definitive sentence. And yet all the
places (as a famous Divine of our own speaks, Dr. Jackson, B. III. upon the
Creed, Chap. 12.) that can be brought either for the King's or the Priest's
Authority, rather show what manner of men they should be, both in life and
judgment; than assure them of any infallibility of judgment, if they be
dissolute in life, and regard not the Laws of God. This was a thing never
dreamt of by any, till the notoriously infamous lives of Popes discredited the
titles of Sanctity and Infallibility (which from the conceit of their
predecessors integrity they had usurped) and enforced their flatterers to frame
a distinction of Sanctity in Doctrine, separated from Sanctity of Life.

I thought it not amiss to say thus much upon this subject, because I find even
Maldonate himself in his Notes upon this place, has the confidence to conclude
the Pope must needs have this privilege, which is promised to Kings: when, it
is apparent, Kings are not infallible; and consequently, by his own reasoning,
Popes cannot be so.

There are other notable sentences which would deserve a larger gloss than I
have given in the Paraphrase; which I must pass by: because this Preface is
already prolonged to a great length.

[d] I shall only therefore mention two. One v. 21. where Wisdom and
Eloquence are compared together. The former of which, no doubt, is of greatest
value, as we see in those words of God to Moses, when he disabled himself for
the service imposed upon him, for want of the other faculty; There is Aaron,
says the text, he shall be thy speaker, and thou shall be to him as God. Yet
in profit, and popular esteem Wisdom gives place to Eloquence; according to
the vulgar Translation of this verse, Sapiens cord appellatur prudens, sed
dulcis Eloquia majora reperiet. Signifying, says the Lord Bacon ( Adv. of
Learning, Book VI. Chapter 3.) not obscurely, that profoundness of wisdom may help
men to fame and admiration; but it is Eloquence which prevails in business and
active life.

[e] The other is v. 26. where I have put two senses together; according to the
different acceptions of the Hebrew word Amal: which signifies either to take
pains ones self, or to molest others. But I can see no reason why Maldonate
should favor the LXX Translation; who, against the stream of all other
Interpreters, apply these words to an ungodly man's digging up evil to himself,
as if the meaning were, he digs a pit for himself, and the words he speaks are
the cause of his punishment, as if he were burnt: unless it proceeded from his
fondness for the Spanish Inquisition, which he was desirous to introduce every
where. The very best of them, it appears by him (who was one of the most
learned and judicious Interpreters in the Romish Church) are most devoutly bent
to our destruction: For he cannot forbear here to allege that Inquisition as a
proof of Solomon's words, Id exemplo Inquisitionis Hispanicae perspicuum est,
etc. This is apparent by the example of the Spanish Inquisition; whereby he
that speaks any thing rashly against the faith, is deservedly delivered to the
fire; which I WISH WERE DONE EVERY WHERE. Thus in the most literal sense, this
Jesuits lips are as a burning fire; in which he would have us not only singed,
but devoured: in pursuance of this Maxim of Solomon. Which others honestly
interpret of those calumnies, discords, seditions, which evil men raise, by
their tongues, to the destruction of their neighbors. For so it follows v. 28.
A froward man sows strife, etc.

1. THE preparation of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from
the LORD.


1. MEN may deliberate, and contrive, and order in their mind, what, and in
what manner and method they will speak: but whether they shall persuade, and
prevail or no for such an Answer as they expect, nay, be able to deliver
themselves with such elocution as they imagine, cannot be resolved by them; but
depends upon the pleasure of the Lord. See Arg. [a].

2. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes: but the LORD weighs the
spirits.


2. Such is the blindness of self-love, that men can find no fault in
themselves; but imagine all that they contrive and do, to be free from blame:
which, when the Lord examines, who searches into the very intentions of men's
hearts, is found to be very defective, if not vicious.

3. Commit thy works unto the LORD, and thy thoughts shall be established.


3. When thou undertakest any thing, implore the Divine blessing; and
committing the success of it to God's Providence, leave it to Him to give what
issue to it He pleases: which is the surest way to have thy honest designs
accomplished.

4. The LORD has made all things for himself: yea, even the wicked for the day
of evil.


4. The Lord disposes all things throughout the world, to serve such ends, as
He thinks fit to design; which they cannot refuse to comply withal: For if any
men be so wicked as to oppose his Will, he will not lose their service; but
when He brings a public calamity upon a Country, employ them to be the
executioners of his wrath. See Arg. [b].

5. Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the LORD: though
hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.


5. There is no man so great, but if his mind grow lofty and arrogant,
forgetting God, and insolently oppressing his neighbor, he is hateful beyond
all expression unto the Lord: who will take vengeance on him and pull him down,
though he make never such strong confederacies to support himself; for if he
avoid one punishment, another shall overtake him; nay, his wickedness shall
pursue him from generation to generation, (XI. 21.)

6. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the LORD, men
depart from evil.


6. The most effectual means to appease men's anger for private offenses, or to
divert the anger of God in public calamities, is to exercise mercy and loving
kindness, with justice and faithful performance of promises: especially when
they proceed from an awful regard to God, and Religious dread of his
displeasure; which will make a man careful to decline every thing that is
evil, and thereby escape the punishment that attends upon it.

7. When a man's ways please the LORD, he makes even his enemies to be at
peace with him.


7. The best to have our enemies reconciled unto us, is for us first to be
reconciled unto God: for such is the reverence men bear to Virtue, and such is
the love which the Lord has to virtuous persons, that when all their designs
and actions are such as He approves: He inclines even those that were their
foes, to become their friends.

8. Better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without right.


8. A small estate honestly gotten, and charitably enjoyed, is much to be
preferred before vast incomes heaped up by oppression, and kept without
hospitality.

9. A man's heart devises his way: but the LORD directs his steps.


9. The mind of man designs an end, and contrives what means to use, and
reckons perhaps what success they will have: but the Lord determines what the
event shall be, and orders his motions perhaps to such an issue, as never came
into his thoughts.

10. A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his mouth transgresses not
in judgment.


10. God is present in a singular manner unto a pious King, inspiring his mind
to divine sagatiously in dubious and obscure things; that his resolutions and
decrees may be received like Oracles; and all causes be decided by him so
justly and exactly, that no man be wronged in the judgment which he passes. See
Arg. [c].

11. A just weight and balance are the LORDS: all the weights of the bag are
his work.


11. And it is worthy of his care, that there be no corruption in private, no
more than in public justice; for it also is of divine Institution; the great
Lord of all requiring just and equal dealings in all our commerce one with
another; which He has ordained should be managed with scrupulous integrity, in
the smallest, as well as in the greatest matters.

12. It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for the throne is
established by righteousness.


It is not enough to good Kings that they do no injury; but they abominate,
with the highest detestation, all oppression, cruelty, extortion, etc. not
only in themselves, but in others: for they know that Justice, Mercy, and true
Religion, support their authority, and make their Kingdoms durable.

13. Righteous lips are the delight of kings: and they love him that speaks
right.


13. And calumniators or flatterers find no acceptance with such Princes; but
they delight in those that will not deceive them by false, unjust and malicious
informations; and make him their favorite, who deals sincerely and tells them
the truth, though it may seem ungrateful to them.

14. The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise man will pacify
it.


14. The wrath of a King strikes such terror into him, with whom he is
offended, as if the sentence of death were pronounced against him: but, as ill
men and fools exasperate it more, so, a virtuous and prudent Courtier appeases
his anger, and makes a reconciliation.

15. In the light of the kings countenance is life, and his favor is as a
cloud of the latter rain.


15. And when a King will be pleased to look graciously upon a man, especially
after he has been incensed against him, it not only revives, but gives him
the greatest joy: for from his favor he promises himself all manner of
happiness; as a plentiful harvest follows the showers of rain, which, in the
spring, refresh the Corn.

16. How much better is it to get wisdom, then gold? and to get understanding,
rather to be chosen them silver?


16. But after all is done, to get so much wisdom as to know the difference
between good and evil, and to understand how to behave a man's self upon all
occasions; is, beyond all expression, better and more to be chosen, than the
greatest treasures of gold and silver, which either the favor of Princes can
give, or his own industry acquire.

17. The high way of the upright is to depart from evil: he that keeps his
way, preserves his soul.


17. This is the constant aim and endeavor of upright men, the beaten path, as
we may call it, in which they travel, to decline every thing that is evil: and
he who makes this his care, looking well to all his actions, that he do
nothing amiss, looks well to himself, and preserves his soul and body from
destruction.

18. Pride goes before destruction: and an haughty spirit before a fall.


18. Insolent behavior is the forerunner of utter destruction: and when men
lift up themselves in their own thoughts, and overlook all others with
contempt, they are in the greatest danger to stumble; and not to see that,
which will give them such a grievous downfall, as will break them all to
shivers.

19. Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, then to divide the
spoil with the proud.


19. Therefore it is much better to submit to the meanest condition, nay,
patiently to bear injuries, with afflicted, but meek and lowly persons; than to
lift up ones self to the prejudice of others, and, by trampling upon them to
partake with the proud in their rapine and spoil.

20. He that handles a matter wisely, shall find good: and who so trusts in
the LORD, happy is he.


20. He that understands his business thoroughly, and manages it prudently and
discreetly, is likely to have good success: but none so happy, none so sure of
prospering in his design, as he that confides more in the Lord, than in his own
skill and industry.

21. The wise in heart shall be called prudent; and the sweetness of the lips
increases learning.


21. He whose mind is well furnished with wisdom, cannot but win a great
reputation; and be highly esteemed, for his prudent counsels and resolutions:
but if he have the powerful charms of Eloquence also, to convey his mind
delightfully unto others, it will add a greater value to his Wisdom; and make
it more diffusive and instructive unto the world. See Arg. [d].

22. Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that has it: but the
instruction of fools is folly.


22. A clear understanding and right judgment of things, like an inexhaustible
spring, gives perpetual comfort and satisfaction to him in whom it is; and
makes him very useful unto others: but the learning of fools is frivolous and
vain; and therefore, if they undertake to instruct others, they only make them
like themselves.

23. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips.


23. The Mind of a wise man instructs him to speak judiciously and pertinently:
and makes him not only communicate his thoughts to others, but with such
weight of reason as increases their learning.

24. Pleasant words are as an honey comb, sweet to the soul, and health to the
bones.


24. Especially when he can deliver his mind in pleasing and delightful words,
flowing from him with a natural Eloquence, as honey drops from the comb: which
ravish the affections, and touch a man's heart to the very quick; when he needs
either comfort or cure for any inward disease wherewith he labors.

25. There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the
ways of death.


25. But there is never more need of caution, than when we hear a moving
Orator, therefore this instruction may be here necessary to be repeated ( XIV.
12.) examine every thing strictly and impartially; and be not led away merely
by thy fancy, and thy appetite: for they make many things seem innocent, which
in themselves, and in the issue, are deadly and destructive.

26. He that labors, labors for himself; for his mouth craveth it of him.


26. It is a powerful motive to a man to take pains in an honest employment,
that all his labor is for his own preservation; his mouth begging this favor
of him, that he may not starve: and on the contrary, he that spends his time in
giving trouble and vexation unto others, will find it fall upon himself; for he
cannot speak so much as an evil word, but it will return upon him and fly back
in his own face. See Arg. [e].

27. An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a burning fire.


27. And it is not a little pains that an ungodly lawless man takes, to plot
and devise mischief; wherein he labors, as if he was digging for a treasure;
and one way is, to brand his neighbor with false reports and slanders; and
thereby utterly destroy his reputation.

28. A froward man sows strife; and a whisperer separateth chief friends.


28. Others of them have such a perverseness in their spirit, that it is their
business to disturb the world, and raise dissentions among those that would
live in peace; by backbiting, detracting, and whispering false stories: making
a breach even between Princes and people, husband and wife, nay, the dearest
friends and familiars, if they hearken to their tales.

29. A violent man inticeth his neighbor, and leads him into the way that is
not good.


29. Another sort live by rapine and open violence; who are not content to do
wrong themselves, but persuade others to enter into their society; and then
lead them into the most pernicious courses.

30. He shuts his eyes to devise froward things; moving his lips, he
brings evil to pass.


30. Which they do not fall into by chance; but with profound study contrive
the ruin of others; and the sign being given, they furiously execute the
mischief they have designed.

31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.


31. Old age is very venerable, when a man's past life has been truly virtuous
and useful: which is the best way also to prolong ones days; and bring one to
that great honor, which is due to those, who have long done much good to
Mankind.

32. He that is slow to anger, is better then the mighty: and he that rules
his spirit, then he that takes a city.


32. He that can suppress the vehement motions of anger, deserves more praise
than those mighty men who quell the enemies that oppose them; and he that has
power to govern all his own inclinations, affections and passions by reason,
has a nobler Empire than he that subdues Cities and Countries by force of Arms.

33. The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposing thereof is of the
LORD.


33. Acknowledge the Divine Providence in all things, even in those which seem
most casual: For though men cast the lots into the lap of a garment, or into a
hollow vessel, and thence draw them out again; yet it is the Lord who directs
entirely in what order they shall come forth, and so determines the matter in
doubt, according to his pleasure.

CHAP. XVII.
ARGUMENT.
In the first verse of this Chapter the Wise man observes how happy that Family
is, which lives in peace, and perfect agreement one with another; though they
have but a mean estate. And next to this how happy a thing it is, if there be
but one wise and virtuous man in a Family (suppose he be but a Servant) when
any dissentions and differences arise in it. For so the Lord Bacon ( Advanc. of
Learning, Book VIII. Chap. 2. Parab. 2.) expounds the [a] second verse: whose
words I will set down, because, if they hit not the sense completely yet, they
very pithily express a part of it, and carry in them a very important truth.
"In all troubled and disagreeing Families, says he, there is commonly some
Servant or gentle Friend, who being powerful with both sides, may moderate and
compose the differences that are among them. To whom, in that respect, the
whole house, and the Master himself are much engaged and beholden. This
Servant, if he aim only at his own ends, cherishes and aggravates the
divisions of the Family: but if he be sincerely faithful and upright,
certainly he deserves much; so as to be reckoned as one of the Brethren; or at
least to receive a fiduciary administration of the inheritance."

[b] And after some other documents there follows a notable rule for the making
peace, and ending all differences; whether between particular persons in
Families, or between Kingdoms, v. 9. upon which, the same great person thus
glosses ( ib. Parab. 27.) "There are two ways of proceeding, to arbitrate
differences and reconcile affections. The one begins with an act of oblivion of
what is past; the other begins with a repetition of wrongs, subjoyning
apologies and excuses. Now some think this last to be the only way; insomuch
that I have heard a prudent person and great Statesman lay down this Maxim, He
that treats of peace, without a recapitulation of the terms of difference,
rather deceives men's minds with the sweet name of agreement, than composes them
by equity and moderation of right. But Solomon, a wiser man than he, is of a
contrary opinion: approving an act of oblivion, and forbidding repetition. For
in repetition or renewing the memory of the causes of difference, there are
these inconveniences: not only that it is, as we say unguis in ulcere, raking
in the ulcer, which very much exasperates, but also indangers the breeding of
new quarrels while they are debating the old (for the parties at difference
will never accord about the terms of their falling out) and lastly, in the
issue it brings the matter to apologies: whereas both the one and the other
party would seem rather to have remitted the offense, than to have admitted
excuses for it."

Melancthon thinks this and the three next verses 10, 11, 12. to be Sentences
near of kin; all belonging to the right method in judging, which is
comprehended in that saying of Christ's, If thy Brother sin against thee, tell
him of it between thy self and him: And interprets this ninth verse thus
(taking Aluph for a Prince, which we translate chief Friends) He that orderly
admonishes him that erreth, cures him and makes no public disturbance; saves
the man, and preserves public concord: but this order being neglected, thence
arises out of brawlings, discords of Princes, wars and devastations.

[c] Now an evil man only seeks scoldings or contentions (as it follows v.
11.) i. e. says he, he does not seek truth, nor the good of the Church; but
troubles without end. Thus Cleon and Alcibiades in the State, scattered seeds
of war at Athens: the Cynicks and Academicks contradicted every body among the
Philosophers: and lately Valla, Cornelius Agrippa, Carolostadius, etc. had the
like scolding natures. These seek not truth; but contradict things rightly
spoken, or wantonly move unnecessary disputes, and will not yield when they are
admonished, but with greater rage defend their errors. Of such Solomon here
says in the next verse, it is better to meet a bear robbed of her whelps, than
a fool in his folly. An example of which we meet withal, when we meet with a
bewitched Papist, who defends the most manifest errors. Thus he.

But that which the Vulgar translates semper jurgia quaerit malus, and we
translate, an evil man seeks only rebellion, the most and the best
Interpreters, take the other way, as the words lie more naturally in the
Hebrew, a man very rebellious, seeks nothing but mischief: which sense I have
expressed in the Paraphrase, together with the other.

[d] The truth of the next verse ( v. 12.) is admirably opened by Bochartus (L.
III. de Animal. Sacris, Cap. 9. Part. 1.) who observes four things concerning
the Bear, out of good Authors. The first every one knows, that a Bear is an
exceeding fierce Creature: the second is, that the Female is more fierce than
the Male: the third, that she is more fierce than ordinary, when she has
Whelps: and lastly, that when she is robbed of them she is fiercest of all,
immanem in modum, even unto rage and madness. Which the Scripture takes notice
of in two other places beside this, 2. Sam. XVII. 8. XIII. Hosea 8. where S.
Hierome observes that the writers of natural History say, among all wild
Beasts, none more fierce and cruel than the Bear, in two cases especially, when
she wants food, and when she is robbed of her Whelps. The reason of this last
is there given by Kimchi; which well enough agrees with the comparison, which
the Wise man here makes: for a Bear cannot be more in love with her Whelps,
than a fool is with his absurd opinions and resolutions: and as a Bear falls
upon the next person she meets withal, taking him for the robber; so does a
fool upon every one that stands in his way, though he be never so much obliged
to them. He spares none in the heat of his passions, but furiously abuses
them, etc.

[e] Unto what is expressed in the Paraphrase upon v. 17. concerning a Brother
being born for Adversity (which I have referred, as the best Interpreters do,
unto a Friend) this may be added; as the plainest translation of the Hebrew
words. A true Friend (spoken of before) is born (that is, becomes) a Brother in
Adversity. He was a Friend before; this makes him a Brother: and so he is to be
esteemed.

[f] There is a phrase in the nineteenth verse, exalts his gate, which is
variously taken by Interpreters. I have expounded it literally; not for the
mouth, but for the gate of an house or other place: and have put two senses
together.

[g] Various glosses also have been made upon the beginning of v. 22. a merry
heart does good like a medicine: where, because the particle like is wanting in
the Hebrew, other constructions have been made of the words: some, for
instance, having taken them thus, a merry heart makes a medicine work better,
or do more good. But he that can consult Bochartus (in his second Book of
Sacred Animals, Chap. 16. Part 2.) may find so many examples of the defect of
that which they call (...) caph ^militudinis; that he will not think it
unreasonable to supply it, (as our Translatours have done) in this place of the
Proverbs.

In the twenty fourth verse I have put two senses, in which the words may be
taken, into one. And that none may wonder at the repetition of the [h] same
thing in the twenty fifth verse, which was said just before in the twenty
first; I shall here observe: That there is no doubt but Solomon, having
frequent occasions to speak of the same matter, varied the words sometimes, but
not the sense; and so the Collectours of his sayings put down both. And he
might speak the oftener of this matter, having an example before his eyes of the
great weakness of his own Son: who, it is not unlikely, was a perpetual grief
to him. There is also something observable in this verse, which was not in the
other, viz. that the untowardness of Children have many times different effects
upon the Parents: provoking the Fathers to anger and exasperation; and the
Mothers to grief and sorrow, to which their tenderness more inclines them than
to the other passion.

There are several ways also of expounding the latter end of the next verse, v.
26. I have expressed the sense of our Translation; and had respect, in the next
verse to that ( v. 27.) to both readings of the word which we render excellent.

BEtter is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than a house full of
sacrifices with strife.


1. THere is more satisfaction in a bit of dry bread (without butter or oil,
etc.) in the open field, and love and concord therewith; than in a house full
of the best cheer in the world, attended with brawling, contention and strife.

2. A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causes shame: and shall
have part of the inheritance among the brethren.


2. Probity and prudence, are so much better than mere riches and noble birth;
that a wise and faithful Servant sometimes arrives at the honor, of being
appointed the Governor of a Son, whose folly and wickedness make him a
discredit to his Family: nay, he is left not only Executor of the Father's
Will, or Trustee for the Children; but his merits perhaps are rewarded with a
portion of the Estate, which is to be distributed among them. See Arg. [a]

3. The fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the LORD tries
the hearts.


3. The art of man has found out means to prove whether gold and silver be
pure or no; but none can search into the secret thoughts, designs and
inclinations of men's Souls, but the Lord: who (as those metals are tried by
fire) many times proves and discovers what they are by sharp afflictions and
troubles.

4. A wicked doer gives heed to false lips: and a liar gives ear to a naughty
tongue.


4. A man that designs evil unto others, hearkens greedily to him, that will
tell false and mischievous stories; and there never wants such a man, of the
very same mind with himself: for he who gives his mind to lying and falsehood,
lissens to him that speaks the most pestilent things.

5. Whosoever mocketh the poor, reproacheth his maker: and he that is glad at
calamities, shall not be unpunished.


5. He that derides a man because he is poor, forgets God, who can bring him
down to as low a condition; nay, affronts his Majesty, who has promised to
take a peculiar care of such friendless persons: nor is he much better, who
rejoices at the calamity of others; which will bring unavoidable punishments
upon himself.

6. Childrens children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are
their fathers.


6. The honor and comfort of Parents lies in a numerous progeny; which does
not degenerate from their ancestors Virtue: And that which makes Children
illustrious, is their being descended from worthy Parents; whose wisdom and
virtue reflects an honor upon their posterity.

7. Excellent speech becomes not a fool: much less do lying lips a prince.


7. It does not become a fool to discourse of grave and weighty matters; which
as they are above him, so are not regarded out of his mouth, though he should
speak excellent things: but it is much less seemly for a Prince to lie and
deceive; which as it is below him, who represents the God of truth, so makes
him despicable and destroys his Authority, when his Subjects cannot rely upon
his word.

8. A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that has it: whither
soever it turns, it prospers.


8. A gift is so tempting that it can no more be refused, than a lovely Jewel
by him to whom it is presented: and such is its power, it commonly prevails
over all men, dispatches all business, carries all causes; and, in a word,
effects whatsoever a man desires.

9. He that covers a transgression, seeks love; but he that repeateth a
matter, separateth very friends.


9. He that passes by and buries in oblivion, a transgression that has been
committed against him, takes the best course to preserve friendship, and to
make himself universally beloved: but he who rakes up that fault again, and
objects it a fresh when it was forgotten, breaks the strictest bands of amity,
and makes an irreconcilable separation. See Arg. [b]

10. A reproof enters more into a wise man, than an hundred stripes into a
fool.


10. One reproof penetrates deeper into the mind of an ingenuous man, and works
a greater alteration there; than an hundred stripes will do for the amendment
of an obstinate sool:

11. An evil man seeks only rebellion: therefore a cruel messenger shall be
sent against him.


11. Who seeking nothing but to have his own will; and being so refractory that
he has shaken off all reverence to God, or to his Governors, is wholly bent
upon mischief and cannot be reclaimed; it remains therefore only, that a
severe execution be done upon him; to cut him off in his folly, without mercy.
See Arg. [c]

12. Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his
folly.


12. There is less danger in meeting a Bear in the height of her rage, than a
furious fool in the pursuit of his unruly passions and desires: for it is
possible to defend a man's self against the one; but there is no way to hinder
the brutish motions of the other. See Arg. [d]

13. Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.


13. It is so unnatural for a man to return evil to him, from whom he has
received nothing but good; that the punishment of his ingratitude shall not
rest in his own person, but descend upon his posterity to all generations.

14. The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water: therefore leave
off contention before it be meddled with.


14. When men begin a quarrel or a difference they know not where it will end:
For the very first breach is like cutting the banks of a river; which presently
overflows the neighboring grounds, but cannot easily be reduced into its
bounds again. It is best therefore to make peace immediately, before both
parties be involved in such troubles, as, like a deluge of water, lay all
desolate.

15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they
both are abomination to the LORD.


15. It is hard to say, which is most detestable to the Lord, he that pleads
for a wicked man, and, more than that, acquits him; or he that pleads against
the righteous, nay plainly condemns him. Certain it is, they are both most
highly obnoxious to his displeasure, who is the fountain of justice; and as he
would have it exactly administered, so hates those who endeavor to confound the
nature of good and evil among men.

16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he
has no heart to it?


16. What good does a great estate in the possession of a fool? Can he
therewith purchase wisdom, how to use it? alas! he wants understanding to
desire it, and to procure good Instructours; in which his riches (if his mind
were good) might be serviceable to him.

17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.


17. Time makes proof of a Friend; who, if he be sincere, loves not merely for
a fit, nor alters with the change of one's condition: but continues steadfast in
adversity, as well as in prosperity; nay, in straits and distresses, shows
himself more like a Brother than a Friend. See Arg. [e]

18. A man void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes surety in the
presence of his friend.


18. He is very inconsiderate, whose kindness makes him forward to pass his
word for the payment of another man's debts (VI. 1. XI. 15.) and especially to
enter into bonds in the presence of his neighbor for whom he engages: which
may make him more careless about the payment; than he would have been, if,
unknown to him, he had been security for him.

19. He loves transgression that loves strife: and he that exalts his gate,
seeks destruction.


19. He vainly pretends to the love of piety, who accustoms himself to brawling
and contention: which as necessarily draws along with it abundance of sins, as
lifting up a man's self above his estate, in raising sumptuous buildings,
brings him to ruin; or as breach of the public peace opens wide the
floud-gates to all iniquity. See Arg. [f]

20. He that has a froward heart, finds no good: and he that has a perverse
tongue, falls into mischief.


20. A man of wicked designs, which he resolves to accomplish by any sort of
means, shall find himself deceived in his expectation: and he who employs his
tongue to deceit and fraud, pretending fair to men before their face, but
slandering them behind their back, shall, by that very means, bring mischief
upon himself.

21. He that begets a fool, does it to his sorrow: and the father of a fool
has no joy.


21. Great is the care which ought to be taken, in the contract of Marriage,
and in the education of Children: For if a Son prove vicious and lewd, it will
be such an inexpressible grief to his Father, that he will take no comfort at
all, in any thing he injoys, v. 25.

22. A merry heart does good like a medicine: but a broken spirit dries the
bones.


22. And consequently it will shorten his days: For as nothing conduces more to
health than a cheerful spirit, which serves instead of physic; so nothing
destroys it more than sadness and grief, which consumes the vital juyces, and
dryes up the body to skin and bone. See Arg. [g]

23. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of
judgment.


23. No man would willingly be known to be so wicked as to be bribed to do
injustice: but there are too many that will suffer themselves to be secretly
corrupted by presents; to give counsel or judgment contrary to the course of
Law and Equity.

24. Wisdom is before him that has understanding; but the eyes of a fool are
in the ends of the earth.


24. As a wise man's understanding appears in his very countenance; and a fool
is known by his garish and wandering eyes: so the one has his wisdom always
present and ready at hand to guide and govern him; when the other knows not
what to follow, but his thoughts are roving up and down to no purpose, though
he ramble to the very ends of the earth.

25. A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare
him.


25. A foolish dissolute Son, who regards not the counsel of his Parents,
wasting their Estate and disgracing their Family, is such a vexation to his
Father that he provokes his indignation; and such a grief to his mother, that
it makes her life bitter and irksome to her. See Arg. [h]

26. Also to punish the just is not good; nor to strike princes for equity.


26. There may be specious pretenses for it, but it is against all honesty and
piety; to punish innocent persons together with delinquents: especially to
scourge Judges and Governors, for doing equal justice upon all offenders.

27. He that has knowledge, spares his words: and a man of understanding is
of an excellent spirit.


27. The more any man knows, the less he is apt to talk: for his wisdom gives
him such an excellent composure of spirit, that it represses his heat, his
forwardness and haste; and makes him cooly deliberate what, and when it is fit
to speak.

28. Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise: and he that
shuts his lips, is esteemed a man of understanding.


28. Such a virtue it is to be silent, that he who understands nothing is
deemed wise, as long as he holds his peace: and he whose mind has such power
over his mouth, as to keep it shut, that nothing may suddenly and impetuously
go out, is wise indeed.

CHAP. XVIII.
ARGUMENT.
[a] There is so much difficulty in the two first Verses, which has produced
so many various interpretations, that I scarce know which to follow. Some take
that word which we translate separateth himself, in a good sense; others in a
bad: I have chosen the latter, because it seems most agreeable to the rest of
the words. But the Chaldee Interpreter, gives a quite different sense both of
that word, and of some other in these verses: and de Dieu has shown there is
such reason for it, that I think I am obliged here to take notice of it, and to
Paraphrase upon it.

By niphrad, which we render separateth himself, he understands a man divided,
uncertain in his own mind, who can stick to nothing; but wanders about in his
own thoughts. And the last word in the first verse, jith galla, which we
translate intermedleth, he translates is left desolate. And then in the next
verse, taking behith galloth for wandering up and down; not for discovering, or
revealing, as we do, the Paraphrase will run thus.

V. 1. An unconstant man desires many things, and seeks satisfaction: but
whatsoever he seeks, he never meets with it, but is defeated, and disappointed
in all his designs.

2. And this is a certain character of a fool, that he never fixes in any
thing: but chooses rather to gad up and down, and rove from one inquiry to
another; than give his mind to true wisdom and prudence, in which he has no
pleasure.

The Lord Bacon aims at this, I suppose, when he briefly expresses the sense of
Solomon, thus, Pro desiderio quaerit cerebrosus, omnibus immiscet se, "A
hare-brain'd man seeks to satisfy his fancy, and intermixeth himself with all
things." According to that of Seneca, Vita sine proposito, languida est and
vaga, "A life that proposes no end to pursue, is faint, sickly and vagrant."

If we take the word niphrad in a good sense, then the Paraphrase must run thus:

1. He that lives retired, and sequesters himself from ill company, and
business, out of a true affection to wisdom; endeavors to have a sound
knowledge and understanding of things.

2. But a vain man addicts himself to his Studies, for no other end; but only
to vapor with a show of wisdom, which he does not love.

[b] As for the vulgar Translation, it is so remote from the Hebrew, that I
shall only observe an handsome application which the Lord Bacon has made of
the second verse; to a quite different purpose from all Interpreters that I am
acquainted with. The words there run thus, Non recipit stultus verba prudentum,
nisi ea dixeris quae versantur in cord ejus. Which is commonly understood, of
accommodating ones self to the humor of a fool, who otherwise will not regard
what is said to him: but that great Man applies to the way of dealing with men,
of corrupt minds and depraved judgments. "Who pre-suppose that honesty grows
out of weakness of wit, and want of experience; or only out of a silly belief
given to Preachers and Schoolmasters, to Books and Popular opinions. And
therefore unless you can make them plainly perceive that you know what is in
their very heart, when you exhort and admonish them; and are as well acquainted
with their depraved principles and crooked rules, and have as fully discovered,
and deeply sounded them as themselves; they will despise all manner of virtue
and the most excellent counsels; according to that admirable Oracle of Solomon,
A fool will not receive the words of the wise; unless thou speak the very
things that are in his heart, i. e. an honest man can do no good upon the
wicked; unless he know all the coverts and depths of wickedness. In which
Matchiavel himself has done some service; by discovering plainly what men use
to do, not what they ought to do." Advanc. of Learning, B. VII. Chap. 2.

[c] The next verse may have a connection with these two, and intend to describe
the worst of wicked men; who seek for glory by being so bold as to scorn
Religion, and all the Teachers of it. Such men are the greatest of Solomon's
fools: by whom an excellent person (whom the Hebrews call Ish in opposition to
Adam) should not be discouraged, from pouring out good instructions; as he
shows in the following words, verse 4.

[d] Then after a caution to Judges ( v. 5.) to search into the merits of a
cause; and not merely to look to the quality of the person that appears before
them; he observes in several verses, the mischief done by the tongue, v. 6, 7,
8. In the last of which the word Mithlahamim being of uncertain signification,
(because it is but once more used, and in this Book, to the same purpose) I
have taken in two or three of the senses, of which it is capable: as he that
pleases to examine, will be satisfied.

[e] Rabbi Levi observes that in the tenth verse there begins another sort of
precepts, of a different kind from those that have been hitherto delivered from
the beginning of the Tenth Chapter, to this place. All which have been in a
manner, concerning the danger of such vices, as sloth, hatred, anger, deceit,
brawling, strife, impiety; and other parts of that folly, against which he has
given many General cautions. But now he proceeds, as that Jewish Doctor thinks,
to an Argument of another nature, directing men in the management of affairs of
State, or in domestic business, etc. Which is true in part, but not an exact
Observation. For there are precepts, of the former kind, interspersed in the
following Chapters, as any one may see that will read them: and so there are
several political maxims, and others belonging to different matters, in the
Chapters foregoing. Even that observation which here immediately follows ( v.
11.) concerning a rich man's confidence in his Wealth, rather than in the
Divine Providence and protection, was delivered in part before X. 13. And the
very next concerning pride and humility ( v. 12.) in Chapt. XV. 33. and XVI.
18. And that also ( v. 16.) about gifts was touched in XVII. 8.

[f] The thirteenth verse is referred by some to Judges, who were anciently
called Cognitores. And in good Authors cognoscere is as much as to do the
office of a Judge; who ought to take the greatest care to know the truth,
before he give a sentence. For if it be a shame to a private person, in
ordinary discourse, to answer a matter before he hears it; much more will it
be to a Magistrate, if in matters of justice and judgment, he come to a
resolution, before he has taken full cognizance of them.

[g] Some would connect the seventeenth verse with the foregoing, but I have
taken it separately. And there being several ways of interpreting it, either
politically, with relation to causes brought before a Judge; or spiritually,
with relation to what is transacted in a man's own Soul; I have followed our
Translation, which seems to me, nearest to the Hebrew. In which a just man is
not the person of whom Solomon speaks; but the mark of the Nominative Case (as
Grammarians call it) is set before the word first. So that it has the same
meaning with our vulgar saying; One tale is good, till another be told: though
I think there is more in it; and the Lord Bacon has made this excellent
discourse upon it; which I have not neglected in my Paraphrase.

"The first Information, says he, ( Adv. of Learning, Book VIII. Chapter 2. Parab.
17.) in any cause, if it a little fix it self in the mind of the Judge, takes
deep root, and wholly seasons and prepossesses it: so as it can hardly be taken
out, unless some manifest falsehood be found in the matter of the Information;
or some cunning dealing, in exhibiting, and laying open the same. For a bare
and simple defense, though it be just and more weighty, can hardly compensate
the prejudice of the first Information, nor is of force in it self, to reduce
the scales of Justice, once swayed down, to an equal balance. Wherefore it is
the safest course for a Judge, that nothing touching the proofs and merit of
the cause, be intimated before hand; until both Parties be heard together: And
it is best for the defendant, if he perceive the Judge to be preoccupated, to
labor principally in this (so far as the quality of the cause will admit) to
discover some cunning shifts, and fraudulent dealing, practiced by the adverse
party, to the abuse of the Judge."

They that expound this verse (as the Ancients generally do) concerning private
judgment, within a man's own soul, follow the LXX. and the vulgar Latin: and
commonly make this the meaning. A good man, before he mind another man's
faults, will first narrowly look to his own: and call himself to an account,
before he inquire after their miscarriages. This is an excellent sense (if the
words would bear it) which some of the Lutherans follow: even Melancthon
himself, who thus translates it, Justus initio est accusator sui, postea
inquirit in alium: and runs into a long discourse concerning self-love, and
men's blindness to their own faults, and quick-sightedness in spying other men's;
citeing the known sayings of Catullus, Horace and Persius to this purpose. But,
though he take the just man here to be opposed to the hypocrite our Savior
speaks of, who minds the more in his Brother's eye, and neglects the beam in
his own yet, he acknowledges that the Greek word in the LXX belongs to the Law,
and the civil Courts, viz. (...), which is the allegations of the accuser,
before the other party be heard: and has this remark out of Demosthenes, It is
hard to pull out of men's minds, the opinion they have first conceived.

Which Verres among the Romans understood so well, that it was his common
trick, to accuse those whom he had injured: for men are apt to favor the
Plaintiff; supposing he cannot have the impudence to complain without a cause.

Nay, there are those in the Roman Church that apply the vulgar Translation
this way; to this sense. A just man is so prudent (as well as honest) as to
relate all that concerns his cause sincerely, without concealing any thing;
even accusing himself if he be guilty: whereby he procures greater favor, and
prevents what his Adversary would have said; who, besure, would have laid it
open to his disgrace, if he had craftily omitted any thing, etc.

But I will not trouble the Reader with any other of their Interpretations;
which are devised merely to make good that Translation. The truth of ours may
be further justified from the next, v. 18. which belongs to the matter of civil
controversies: which if the Judges could not determine, were referred to God's
decision by lots.

[h] But I have said enough, if not too much of this: and therefore shall only
observe a few reflections which Melancthon makes upon the Twenty-second verse.
"Where he notes first how acceptable the state of Marriage is to Almighty God,
as well as unto us. And next, what care he takes of pious persons in that
state; for so he understands those words, as they run in the Vulg. Lat. Hauriet
voluptatem a Deo. As if he should say, there are great dangers in humane life,
and many common miseries; but God will be the keeper of such married persons,
as in happy concord and agreement, invoke his protection. Such were Zachary and
Elizabeth, and other pious persons: whom God wonderfully preserved, when the
armies of wicked men ravaged all Judea. When Lamyrus slew 30000 Jews, and
caused the captives to eat the carkases of their Brethren; then he protected.
Zachary and Elizabeth, and the blessed Virgin and her parents; as he saved the
three Children in the fiery furnace. By which examples we may conceive, what it
is to draw pleasure from the Lord."

"Those words also show, what comfort and delight there is in an agreeable
marriage; and therefore we ought to flee fornication: and keep in mind those
severe threatenings, Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, etc. and the
punishments God inflicted upon the inhabitants of Canaan for their confused
lusts. Nec est dubium, magnam partem calamitatum, etc. Nor is there any doubt,
that a great part of the calamities, among all mankind, are the punishments of
filthy lusts. Let us therefore be more ardent in begging chastity of God; for
the more he is displeased with impurity, the more carefully we ought to
preserve chastity: and let us observe that rule, To shun sins, is to shun the
occasions of sins."

1. THrough desire, a man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth
with all wisdom.


1. HE that affects singularity, inquires into all manner of things; according
as his vainglorious humor leads him: which makes him also bend himself, with
all the wit he has, to overthrow the solid reasons of wiser men. See Arg. [a]

2. A fool has no delight in understanding, but that his heart may discover it
self.


2. For a fool will never take any pleasure in true understanding; but all the
design of his studies is, to make a vain ostentation of wisdom unto others:
This is his chiefest pleasure, to hear himself discourse; that is, discover the
folly that is in his heart. See Arg. [b]

3. When the wicked comes, then comes also contempt, and with ignominy,
reproach.


3. Into whatsoever company or society (suppose into the Schools of Wisdom) a
profane person comes, he brings along with him, contempt of God, and Religion,
and good men: and (as one wickedness grows out of another) that contempt
improves into affronts, and reproachful language of them. See Arg. [c]

4. The words of a man's mouth, are as deep waters, and the wellspring of
wisdom, as a flowing brook.


4. A man of great understanding is never exhausted, nor wants matter of
useful instruction: his mind being like a fountain, out of which wise thoughts
spring perpetually; and flow in abundance, with a torrent of Eloquence, for the
common good and benefit.

5. It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the
righteous in judgment.


5. Apologies may be made for it, but it can never be made consistent with
honesty and goodness, to have respect to the person, not to the cause; which is
brought before one in judgment: for by that means the wicked is favored,
because he is rich, or because he is a friend, etc. and the just man loses his
right, and is oppressed, because he is poor, or none of the Judge's
acquaintance.

6. A fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for strokes.


6. If a fool find others scolding or contending, he will thrust himself into
the quarrel: but is so unskilful, that instead of making them friends, he
increases the difference, till from words they come to blows; in which he
escapes not without some share of them to him self.

7. A fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul.


7. For in all other cases, a fool uses his tongue so imprudently, that he
ruins himself by his own discourse: and if he go about to defend what he says;
he is but the more entangled, to the certain hazard of his life.

8. The word of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the
innermost parts of the belly.


8. A whisperer of false stories makes a great show of harmlesness, if not of
love and kindness, when he backbites others; nay seems perhaps to do it very
unwillingly, with great grief of heart, and not without excuses for the
persons, from whom he detracts: but his words give them the most deadly wound;
and sink deep into the mind of those that hear them. See Arg. [d]

9. He also that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great
waster.


9. There is so little difference between a slothful man and a prodigal, that
they may be called Brethren: for he that looks not after his business, must
needs come to poverty, as well as he that is a spend-thrift.

10. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs into it, and
is safe.


10. The Almighty power and goodness of the great Lord of the World, is the
securest defense in all manner of dangers: unto which a virtuous man may have
the confidence cheerfully to resort, and hope to find protection; nay, to be
there as safe, as if he was in an impregnable fortress. See Arg. [e]

11. The rich man's wealth is his strong city: and as an high wall in his own
conceit.


11. The worldly-minded man indeed thinks otherwise, and places his security in
heaps of wealth; which he fancies has a power to do any thing, and is able to
defend him (like a high bulwark, which none can scale) from all assaults: but,
alas! this is only his own vain opinion; he is safe merely in imagination.

12. Before destruction the heart of man is haughty. and before honor is
humility.


12. When a man's spirit grows lofty by prosperity, forgetting God, and
despising his brethren, it is a certain forerunner of his utter destruction: as
on the other side, humility, meekness and patience, in a low condition, is the
best preparation for honor and preferment.

13. He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame
unto him.


13. He that is so forward as to answer to a business before he has heard the
state of it (that is before he understand it) thinks perhaps to show the
quickness of his apprehension: but, by his impertinent discourse, declares his
egregious folly, and makes himself ridiculous. See Arg. [f]

14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit, who
can bear?


14. There is a vast difference between outward and inward evils; for a manly
spirit will support us under bodily sicknesses and outward afflictions: but if
the mind it self have lost its courage, and become abject, cast down and
oppressed with grief and sadness; it is not in the power of man to raise and
lift it up.

15. The heart of the prudent gets knowledge; and the ear of the wise
seeks knowledge.


15. He (therefore) that has so much understanding, as to consider what is
good for himself, will take the greatest care, to possess his mind with the
true knowledge of God, and of his duty to him: and be so wise as to lissen to
those that can give him right information, for it is this alone, that can
preserve the mind from being dejected and broken).

16. A man's gift makes room for him, and brings him before great men.


16. There is no man so mean but he may make his way, whithersoever he desires,
by gifts and presents: which will procure his enlargement, if he be in prison;
and more than that, bring him into favor with great men; nay, purchase him the
honor to wait upon Princes.

17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just: but his neighbor comes
and searches him.


17. A man may seem to have a good cause, who has got the start of his
neighbor; till he come also to examine his information, and open the whole
matter before the Judge: nay more than this, he has a great advantage who
first possesses the Judge's mind, with the justice of his cause; for it will
not be easy for his adversary to find out his tricks and to confute him,
without a diligent search and curious inquiry into what he has alleged. See
Arg. [g]

18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and parts between the mighty.


18. But in some cases it is very hard to make an end of suits; where the
reasons are strong on both sides, or the parties contending both very powerful
to maintain their pretensions: and then the casting of lots is an equal way to
determine the controversy; and put each of them in quiet possession of that
which falls to his share.

19. A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city: and their
contentions are like the bars of a castle.


19. But there are no contentions so sharp and obstinate, as those among
Brethren: who grow so refractory when they have transgressed against each
other, that it is easier to take a strong City, or to break the bars of a
Castle; than it is to compose their differences, and remove all the
obstructions that lie in the way to their hearty reconciliation.

20. A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; and with the
increase of his lips shall he be filled.


20. The Tongue is so hard to govern, and so much depends upon it, that (it
cannot be too often repeated XII. 14. XIII. 2.) we ought to take as great care
about the words we speak, as we do about the fruit of our Trees, or the
increase of the earth, which we are to eat: for according as they are wholesome
and good, or unsavory and bad; so will the pleasure or the pain be, wherewith
we shall be filled.

21. Death and life are in the power of the tongue; and they that love it,
shall eat the fruit thereof.


21. The good or the harm that the Tongue can do, both to a man's self and
unto others, is more than can be expressed; for many have cut their own throats
by incautious words, when others have remained safe by silence, or brought
themselves off from danger by prudent answers: in like manner by false
accusations it destroys other men, or saves them by testifying the truth; and
this may be laid down for a general Rule, that they who love to talk much shall
suffer by it.

22. Whosoever finds a wife, finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the
LORD.


22. He who has married a wife, that is truly a help meet for him, has met
with a most excellent blessing: and ought thankfully to acknowledge the
singular favor of God, in guiding his mind to make so happy a choice. See Arg.
[h]

23. The poor uses entreaties, but the rich answers roughly.


23. Boldness does not become a Beggar, but modest entreaties and doleful
supplications; which is the proper language of the poor and miserable: and if
they meet with a stern or harsh answer from the rich, it is no wonder; and they
must still humbly deprecate their displeasure.

24. A man that has friends, must show himself friendly: and there is a friend
that sticks closer than a brother.


24. A friendly person is prone to do all neighbourly offices; which is the
very end of friendship, and the way to preserve it: and such a friend is
sometimes found, who loves so heartily; that he sticks closer to his Friend in
any strait, and assists him more faithfully, than a Brother.

CHAP. XIX.
ARGUMENT.
[a] This Chapter begins with a comparison between the Rich and the Poor; whom,
in another regard, he had compared together in the last verse but one of the
foregoing Chapter. The sense is plain enough; and it is, (...), one of those
Proverbs, which contains much wisdom in it, as Greg. Nazianzen speaks ( Orat.
XXVI. p. 458, 459.) who applies it unto "Christians of mean understanding, and
simple speech; that understand not (...); neither the instances of Pyrrho, nor
the Syllogisms of Chrysippus; nor the depraved cunning of Aristotle's Arts, nor
the witchery of Plato's Eloquence: which like the Egyptian plagues had infested
the Church. There is no need, says he, of any of these: but a poor man that
walks in his simplicity ((...), as he paraphraseth it, poor in discourse, and
reasoning and knowledge) and relies upon plain simple words, is much better
(and will in this way be saved, as in a small Cogboat) than a Fool (for he is
no better) that knows how to wind and turn every way in his discourse; and most
unlearnedly trusts to his demonstrations," etc. But this must be acknowledged
not to be the literal sense of the words, but only an accommodation of them to
his purpose: which was to represent how commendable simplicity is in Religion,
and inquiries of Faith; as well as in all things else. Not that a man should
content himself to be ignorant, but only, that he should not be too curious
and subtle in his disquisitions.

[b] For Solomon, in the next verse, observes two great springs of all our
miscarriages; want of understanding, and want of deliberation. To make too much
haste in a business, is the way not to speed (according to the known Proverb)
and to run blindly upon any thing, is no less prejudicial to us in our
undertakings. That Is the meaning of the first word, which we translate also:
both he that affects things without knowledge, and he that pursues what he
understands, without deliberation: run into many mistakes, and commit many
sins. So some render the word Nephes (Soul) the desire of the Soul, the
appetite, which must be always governed by prudence; or else it will run a man
upon rocks, and precipitate him into ruin. For which miscarriage, he shows in
the next verse ( v. 3.) he must blame none but himself; and never in the least
reflect upon his God, as if He were negligent of us, or hard to us: which men
are prone to think, when they have foolishly undone themselves.

[c] Then follows an observation, which he had made before, XIV. 20. but here
repeats, in different words, over and over again, v. 4, 6, 7. For it is a
lamentable thing to see how little true Friendship there is in the world; most
men altering and changing together with the fortune (as we call it) of those
whom they pretend to love. If they be rich, they are courted by every body; but
poverty shows how insincerely. The Books of all ancient Authors are full of
such Sentences; which I shall not so much as mention. [d] But note that in the
midst of these, he inserts ( v. 5.) an observation (which he had formerly made)
of a greater wickedness in humane nature; which moves them either publicly to
accuse others falsely, or secretly to backbite them: neither of which shall
escape unpunished. For there is no word so secret that shall go for naught, and
the mouth that belieth, slays the soul; as the Wisdom of Solomon excellently
speaks I. 11. This is repeated also again in this very Chapter, v. 9. with the
alteration only of one word. The reason of which is, that Solomon (as I have
noted before) using often the same axioms, sometimes varied the phrase, though
not the sense: and the Collectours of his sayings, thought good to set down his
different forms of speech, for the same thing. In both verses, the LXX. plainly
understand him to speak of such lies as are pernicious and burtfull to others:
and in the latter of them, they take the destruction which the Wise man
threatens unto such liars, to arise from their own wicked words. And so I have
expressed it in my Paraphrase. There are those, who think that this Sentence is
repeated in the ninth verse, as an admonition to the rich men spoken of in the
verses foregoing: who break their promises with those that depend upon them;
and give good words, when there is no need of them; but will do no good, when
men call for their assistance. These shall suffer for their falseness. But this
seems to be strained; and not agreeable to the meaning of the Hebrew Text.

[e] That which follows ( v. 10.) is a notable admonition of the confused and
disordered state of things, here in this present world: wherein we too often
see men void of wit or goodness, wallowing in pleasure; that is, abounding in
all things that can gratify their senses, which they please most absurdly: and
mean men getting into power, and lording it over their betters, etc. These
things are very unseemly, says Solomon; and the latter of these more unseemly
than the former: but so it will be, unless men become wise and good; for most
are made worse by prosperity, which they know not how to use. Therefore it is a
true Rule of the Son of Sirach XXXIII. Ecclus. 24. Fodder, a wand and burdens
for an Ass: and bread, correction and work for a Slave. Every one is best in
the condition that is proper for him: and therefore a Slave should be kept
under; and a brutish Sot be restrained from taking all his pleasure. For no man
is fit to govern another, that cannot govern himself, as the next verse
intimates: And the more power any man has, the harder it is for him to command
his passions: which may be suggested in the twelfth [f] verse; for the young
Lion, to whom a King is compared, as he is the strongest, so is the fiercest of
all other.

From hence the Wise man passes to some domestic observations v. 13, 14, 15,
18, 19. Upon which if I should make any remarks, it would extend this Preface
beyond its just bounds. The skillful Reader will see where I have put two
senses together: which I could not do in the twenty third verse; and therefore
shall here give a short account of it.

[g] All Interpreters, except one, understand it as our Translation has
rendered it; by supplying a word before, abides satisfied. Only Lud. de Dieu
thinks the parts of this verse are opposite; as the rest use to be: and by that
word which we translate satisfied (which signifies full in the Hebrew Language)
understands proud and haughty people (as they who are rich are too prone to be)
who are here opposed to him that fears God; as they are in Luke I. 50, 51, 53.
And the Paraphrase will run thus; He that is possessed with such a religious
sense of God, that he fears to offend Him, is a most happy man: but he that is
swollen with pride and forgets God, when worldly goods flow in upon him, shall
lie down at last in sorrow; and never want something or other to afflict him.
And something of this sense the LXX. seem to have had in their mind; who make
the members of this verse opposite, as he does; understanding by (...) full, he
that has no fear of God. For so their Translation runs; the fear of the Lord
is to a man's life, (...), etc. but he that is without fear ( viz. of God)
shall abide in places, where there is no knowledge to govern him, i. e. run
blindly into all manner of mischief.

[h] The next verse is a most elegant, but hyperbolical, description of a man
that has given up himself to sloth: who refuses to do things, as easy as to
pull his hand out of his bosom; and as necessary as to eat and drink. This
being the plain sense, I have not varied from the common translation of the
word zallachath; which every where signifies a pot, or dish, or something like
it; and can only by a metaphor be applied to the bosom, or arm-holes. But we
must either so understand it, or else take the first word taman, hide, in a
very improper sense: for there can be no cause for hiding the hand in a pot.
Therefore we must either translate it as we do; or else understand by hide,
putting, or thrusting the hand into the pot or dish; and thus translate the
whole verse: A sluggard puts his hand into the dish; but will not so much as
move it from thence unto his mouth.

[i] The next verse, as Melancthon well notes, is an observation, concerning
the way of amending the world. Some are so bad, they must be handled with great
sharpness: especially such profane men, as with an Epicurean contempt deride
admonition, and grow thereby more furious. But there are those who grow better,
even by the examples of severity against notorious Offenders: As the
Gibeonites, came and sought peace, when they saw their neighbors destroyed;
and the punishment of Sisamnes made Otanes more cautious, when he was placed in
the Seat covered with his Predecessour's skin; as Herodotus relates in his
Terpsichore. But then there are a third sort, who need not so much; but being
admonished, are obedient to those that tell them of their faults. To such a
reproof, at the most, is sufficient.

[k] In the two next verses, I have had respect to both constructions, of which
they are capable. But in v. 28. I have omitted the sense, which some great
Hebricians give of the words; as if an ungodly witness sought only by false
colors to deceive the Judge, and thereby pervert judgment. For a witness of
Belial, seems to me rather to signify such an impudent Varlet, as sticks not
boldly to testify to the grossest lies.

1. BEtter is the poor that walks in his integrity, than he that is perverse
in his lips, and is a fool.


1. A poor man who acts sincerely, and has no guile in his mouth, is far
happier and more to be commended, than him that gathers great riches by fraud
and circumvention: which he takes to be cunning, but will prove folly in the
end. See Arg. [a]

2. Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good; and he that
hastes with his feet, sins.


2. Ignorance and inconsideration, are equally mischievous; for a mind that
knows not what it ought to choose, and what to avoid can never do well: and if
a man hastily and unadvisedly pursue an end (which he reasonably propounds to
himself) and will not take time to deliberate, he must needs commit many
errors. See Arg. [b]

3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against
the LORD.


3. Yet he is unwilling to take the blame upon himself, but commits this grand
error after all the rest; that when his own folly, and perhaps wickedness,
has led him to many misfortunes, he imagines God is unkind to him: and is
vexed, not at himself, but at the Divine Providence; against which he
perpetually murmurs.

4. Wealth makes many friends; but the poor is separated from his neighbor.


4. Together with Riches, a man gets many (and perhaps great and powerful)
Friends, though he had none before: but he that has most need of them is so
far from getting any, that, if he had one, he loses even him, when he grows
poor. See Arg. [c].

5. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies, shall
not escape.


5. A false Witness, who fears not in open Court to accuse the innocent, shall
meet at last with a just punishment: nor shall he escape, who privately
calumniates, and vents his malice in lies to the prejudice of his neighbor.
See Arg. [d]

6. Many will entreat the favor of the prince; and every man is a friend to
him that gives gifts.


6. A Prince never wants suitors for his favor, which the greatest persons
seek with the humblest submissions: and every one loves, or pretends to love
him; whose liberality is so well known every where, that it has procured him
the name of a bountiful giver.

7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his friends go
far from him? he pursues them with words, yet they are wanting to him.


7. All the kindred of a poor man not only forsake him (as was observed before
v. 4. and XIV. 20.) but hate his company, as a disgrace or a trouble to them;
and therefore no wonder if his companions and familiars grow strange to him: He
urges them with their former protestations or promises of kindness, but finds
they signified nothing; and if he earnestly implore their pity it is to no
purpose.

8. He that gets wisdom, loves his own soul: he that keeps
understanding, shall find good.


8. He that is so considerate, as to value Wisdom above Riches, and
accordingly to store his mind with virtuous principles, is the truest lover of
himself: and if he strictly observe them, and conduct his life by those rules,
he shall find the profit of it.

9. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies, shall
perish.


9. He that testifies to a lie, to the perverting of justice, if the Judge do
not find him out, shall be punished by God: and he who privately whispers
slanders against his neighbors, and kindles strife and contention among them,
shall perish by those wicked practices.

10. Delight is not seemly for a fool: much less for a servant to have rule
over princes.


10. Pleasure does not become a man void of understanding; who is never more
ridiculous than when he can do what he list: and yet Empire less becomes a
vile Slave; who is most intolerably insolent, when he can wantonly domineer
over the greatest persons. See Arg. [e]

11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass
over a transgression.


11. The world thinks him stupid, who is patient; and without sense of honor,
who passes by injuries: but the more understanding any man has, the slower he
is to anger; and the greater his spirit is, the greater his glory and praise,
not to revenge a wrong, when he has opportunity.

12. The kings wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his favor is as dew upon
the grass.


12. But none find it more difficult than a King, especially in the heat of his
youth, to bridle his wrath; the signification of which is as dreadful to his
Subjects, as the roaring of the young Lion to the rest of the Beasts: and on
the other side, any token of his favor and kindness is so comfortable, that as
the dew restores those herbs, which were parched by the hot beams of the Sun;
so it revives those who were almost struck dead, with the terror of his rage.
See Arg. [f]

13. A foolish son is the calamity of his father; and the contentions of a wife
are a continual dropping.


13. Two things make a man exceeding unhappy; a dissolute Son and a scolding
Wife: for the former breaks the heart of his Father, to see him like to prove
the utter destruction of his Family: and the other drives a man to undo his
Family himself, when he is no more able to live at home with her, than to dwell
in a rotten and ruinous house, through the roof of which the rain drops
perpetually.

14. House and riches are the inheritance of fathers; and a prudent wife is
from the LORD.


14. The singular Providence of God therefore is to be acknowledged, in a
virtuous Wife; which is not so easy to get as an estate. For an house, with
all its furniture, and land belonging to it may descend upon us, without our
thought, from our progenitors: but great care and prudence is required in the
choice of a Wife, that knows how to manage a Family aright; who is not found
neither, without the peculiar direction and blessing of the Lord.

15. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall suffer
hunger.


15. As labor makes men vigorous and rich, so sloth and idleness has these
two miserable effects: that it insensibly sinks the mind into a dull stupidity
and unconcernedness about the most necessary things; and thereby reduces them
unto extreme beggary and want: To which may be added a third; that it tempts
men to shirk, and use dishonest arts for a livelihood.

16. He that keeps the commandment, keeps his own soul; but he that
despises his ways, shall die.


16. He that carefully observes the commandments of God, as the rule of his
life, has a due care of himself, and consults his Soul's safety: but he that
minds not what he does. despising all order and rules of life, is regardless of
his own good, and will be very miserable.

17. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the LORD; and that which he
has given, will he pay him again.


17. He that takes compassion on the poor and relieves his necessities, does
not impoverish but enrich himself. For the Lord looks upon what is given to the
poor as lent unto Him: and He will not fail to make him a full compensation; or
rather return the benefit he has done to others, with large interest and
increase of blessings, upon him and his posterity.

18. Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his
crying.


18. Give due and timely correction to thy Son for his faults, before he have
gotten an habit of them, and there be little hope of his amendment: but neither
proceed to such cruel usage of him, as to make him weary of life, and not to
care what becomes of him; nor yet be moved merely by his roaring to abate of
thy necessary severity toward him.

19. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet
thou must do it again.


19. For he whose wrath exceeds all bounds, and makes him severe beyond
measure, undoes his Child, and consequently himself (nay all men that are
immoderately angry bring great mischiefs upon themselves, and if you help them
out of one danger, it does not make them cautious, but they run into a new
trouble) and yet if he do not punish him at all, he tempts him to go on in his
sin; and the same case, whether he shall punish him or no, will return again.

20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in thy
latter end.


20. Lissen unto good advice, and be not impatient of reproof; no nor of
correction for thy faults: but receive all thankfully; and learn thereby that
wisdom which will do thee service, when all things else will fail thee.

21. There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the counsel of the
LORD, that shall stand.


21. There are many designs and contrivances in the minds of men, which they
think are so well laid that they cannot miscarry: but are all defeated by the
overruling counsel of the Lord; which alone can inevitably bring to pass
whatsoever it pleases.

22. The desire of a man is his kindness: and a poor man is better than a liar.


22. There is nothing more desirable to a man, than to have wherewithal to be
kind to others, and oblige his Friends and neighbors; for nothing makes him
more beloved: but it is better to want this power, than to have it, and have no
will to do good; no not to those to whom we have made great professions and
promises of love and kindness.

23. The fear of the LORD tends to life, and he that has it shall abide
satisfied: he shall not be visited with evil.


23. Nothing makes a man lead so happy a life as a religious care to please the
Lord in all things; which is attended with abundance of blessings, but
especially with inward satisfaction of mind: which makes a man sleep quietly
and securely; without fear of any evil that can invade him. See Arg. [g]

24. A slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as
bring it to his mouth again.


24. All things seem so difficult to a lazy wretch, who indulges himself in
sloth and loves his ease; that he would not willingly pull his hands from under
his arms; no, not to put his meat into his mouth. See Arg. [h]

25. Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware; and reprove one that has
understanding, and he will understand knowledge.


25. Punish a derider of Religion severely; and though it do him no good, yet
those incautious persons whom he has deluded, will be awakened by it to
greater circumspection: but it is sufficient only to chide a welldisposed
person for his faults; of which he himself will receive the benefit, and learn
to amend them. See Arg. [i]

26. He that wastes his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that
causes shame, and brings reproach.


26. A Son that leads a debauched life, too often wastes all his Father's
estate; and either turns his Mother out of doors, or makes her weary of the
house: which is so disgraceful, that it makes them ashamed to show their
heads; and will bring him to greater confusion at the last.

27. Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words
of knowledge.


27. My Son, beware of their discourse, who, under the show of greater
learning, seduce thee from the plain doctrines of Virtue; or if thou have been
unhappily engaged in such company, quit it presently, and stick to those that
honestly instruct thee: for remember this; to leave off hearing the instruction
of good men, is the first step toward a departure from all Religion.

28. An ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked
devoureth iniquity.


28. A wicked witness, who has perfectly discharged all sense of good and
evil, mocks if you tell him of Law and Justice, or of the judgment of God upon
perjured persons: for there is no iniquity so great, but there are men as
leudly impious; who will not so much as boggle at it, but swallow it down as
glibly, as drunkards do their liquour. See Arg. [k]

29. Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.


29. But they shall not mock always; for terrible punishments shall certainly
be inflicted upon those that scoff at Conscience and Religion: nor shall other
wicked men escape, who are such fools as to flight these good instructions; but
feel at last to their smart, the doleful effects of their sin, in indelible
marks of the divine displeasure.

CHAP. XX.
ARGUMENT.
[a] The first precept in this Chapter is against Drunkenness, as an enemy to
Wisdom, even in common things; much more in those of everlasting consequence:
For that it commonly expells out of men's minds all reverence both to God, and
to others, inclining them to take the license to say or do any thing without
restraint or discretion; and what unruly passions it excites when the brain is
disturbed with it; is known to all, and need not be here recited. The word
Homeh which Solomon here uses, and which we render raging or outrageous,
includes them all: signifying that discomposed, unquiet and restless state of
mind; which expresses it self in some wild motion or other, according as men
are naturally inclined. But nothing worse can be said of it, than this that it
makes men either stupid sots, or profane scoffers at Religion and all sobriety.

[b] Next to this he advises every man to take heed, how he suffers himself to
be drunk with anger. For nothing else but an intoxication therewith, can make a
man so distracted, as to fly in the face of Majesty. For so that word hithabber
properly signifies, not to provoke the King (though most Interpreters, even
Bochartus himself, so render it) but to be angry at him: which is a kind of
madness: For thereby he is provoked to such fury, as is in young Lions, who are
the fiercest of all others. I have therefore expressed both senses of the word.

[c] In the next verse I take ish to signify a more than ordinary man; one of
the highest rank; and that in Wisdom: For it is opposed to a fool; and
therefore so I have expounded it.

[d] As I have also understood it in v. 5. where Solomon observes that there
are no men so cunning, but there are others as subtle to find them out.
Concerning which Art of finding out men, the Great Lord Bacon has given many
notable rules (in his second Chapter of the VIII Book of the Advancement of
Learning) for though the knowledge it self falls not under precepts, because it
is of Individuals; yet instructions for the deducing of it may be given. And he
observes six ways whereby the knowledge of men may be drawn out and disclosed.
By their faces and countenances; by words; by deeds; by their nature; by their
ends; and by the relations of others. What he says upon these heads, the Reader
may there find. I shall only mention this single observation of his; That the
weakest and simplest sort of men, are best interpreted by their Natures
(according to which they commonly act) but the wisest and most reserved, are
best expounded by their ends and aims.

[e] The next verse is very variously expounded; but our Translation seems to
come nearest to the sense of the Hebrew words: Which may admit also of this
construction; which approaches nearer than any other, beside that which we
follow. It is the common inclination of mankind, when they are in need or
danger, to call for relief or help from him, whom they have obliged: but there
are very few, that in such a condition will approve themselves to be faithful
friends.

[f] The eleventh verse also may be expounded quite contrary ways. Because the
word ithnakker signifies both to make ones self known, and to make ones self a
stranger, unto others. All the ancient Interpreters follow, as ours does, the
first sense; which seems most genuine: for Nature commonly betrays its
inclinations in children so plainly, and they are so strong and violent, that
they cannot dissemble them. Yet that (which is the other) is no absurd sense;
which some give of these words, Even children are so cunning, as to hide their
inclinations: and therefore it is not easy to guess in their childhood, what
they will prove when they come to man's estate. But this is not so common as
the other.

[g] The next verse some good Interpreters expound wholly, concerning the
happiness a people is in, when the Subjects are so humble, that they are
inclined meekly to obey their Superiors; and their Superiors so wise, that
they solicitously provide for their safety and good Government. Thus Melancthon
observes, that in Government these two things must concur; Good Counsel in the
Governors, and Obedience in the People: both of which Solomon acknowledges to
be the gift of God. Nay, both these, says he, must concur in a King; who must
not only have good Counselors, but be inclined also to hearken to them; or
else he will not be happy. Jeremiah was an excellent Monitor, but Zedekiah
would not be ruled by him; and so Jerusalem was destroyed: as on the other
side, Hezekiah in former times, hearkened to Isaiah, and then it was preserved.
Haec est principalis sententia, hujus dulcissimi dicti. But I rather look upon
this to be, that which they call a tropical sense, not the literal; and
therefore I only note it here, together with this wholesome Admonition of that
Author which follows: That Kingdoms cannot be well governed only by humane
Wisdom; but the Assistance of God must be implored, both in giving of counsel,
and in bowing the wills of men to Obedience, and in governing events.

[h] The fourteenth verse is alleged by the Lord Bacon, as an Instance of one
of the mere colors of good and evil: teaching us that all is not good which
men praise; nor all bad which they discommend. For as faud, the wise man here
observes, makes them dispraise that, to which they have a mind: so in other
cases, out of ignorance, or out of partiality, or faction, nay sometimes from
natural disposition, men both disparage that which is praiseworthy, and
commend that which is good for little.

But there are other Authors, who give a quite different sense of these words;
particularly Luther and Melancthon: who by koneh do not understand a buyer; but
an owner or possessor. And imagine the meaning of this Proverb to be, that men
are not wont to like that which they enjoy; but after God has taken it away
from them, then they commend the happiness they have lost. The last named
Writer, heaps up abundance of excellent sentences out of the Ancients, like
this of Thucydides, (...), the present is always grievous. Which arises out of
sickleness and inconstancy; or because they are cloyed with what they have long
enjoyed; or are impatient of some inconveniences in their present state; but
chiefly out of inconsideration, that all conditions will have something
troublesome in them; and out of great unthankfulness to God, and insensibleness
of his Providence, which disposes things better than we can do our selves. But
the word jithhallel, which we translate boast, scarce admits of this sense; and
therefore I have not taken notice of it in the Paraphrase.

[i] Whether peninim in the next verse, signify Rubies, or Pearls, or any
other sort of precious stone, or none in particular, is not very material: but
Bochart I think has demonstrated that it signifies Pearls (Part II. L. V. C.
6. de Sacr. An.) and therefore I have so translated it. And it is not an
impertinent argument, which he alleges for this (cap. 8.) that Wisdom in the
Scripture is frequently compared to Pearls, or preferred before them; as it is
here in this place.

[k] In the seventeenth verse, under the name of bread of deceit, may be
comprehended all things got wrongfully: which though they may please a man in
the beginning, will bring sorrow and pain in the conclusion: and therefore so I
have expressed it in the Paraphrase.

[l] There is little difficulty in the verses that follow till we come to the
25 verse. Where the vulgar Latin has been so extremely corrupted, that various
interpretations have thence arisen of a very plain sentence, as the words run
in the Hebrew. Which are directed against Sacrilege, as Protestant Writers
universally acknowledge. A corruption (says Mr. Cartwright himself) which
never more infested the World than in this age: in which most men, not only
give nothing; but do all they can to take away from that which their Ancestors
have given to the service of God, and the support of his Ministers, of Schools,
or of the Poor. By which they are guilty not only of their own destruction;
but of the loss of the souls of others. The only difference between them
herein is, that some take the words to be a censure of the hypocritical
wickedness of such, as after they have committed sacrilege, and such like sins,
think to make God an amends by Vows, and Sacrifices, and Prayers.

Thus Luther and Melancthon, and among the Reformed (as they are called) de
Dieu, who adds this new conjecture, that the first word Mokesch may be
interpreted by a snare, i. e. fraudulently and craftily; and then the sense is
this: A sacrilegious man finds devices to rob God, of things that are
consecrated to Him: and then makes vows, in hope by them to expiate his
sacrilege. The whole sentence he also observes may be otherways disposed: but
it seems to be so forced and unusual that I shall not mention it.

[m] The like variety of interpretations, the mistake of the Vulgar Latin has
produced in the next verse. Which seems to intend no more than this, That a
Good King separates the bad from the good, by a due execution of his Laws:
which is like the winnowing of the corn, after the chaff is separated from it,
by drawing the wheel over it. For as the flail is the Instrument among us of
beating the corn out of the husk; so in those hot Countries, they made this
separation by a wheel drawn by Oxen over it: which both pressed out the corn,
and broke the straw; as may be seen in XXVIII Isa. 27. 28. and many other
places, which our learned Countryman N. Fuller has explained in his
Miscellanies (L. VI. Cap. 12.) and Dr. Hammond has applied to that place of
the Psalmist LXXVIII. Psalm. 13. though it seemed to me there, to have another
meaning.

Others by the wheel understand here such a sore punishment as that mentioned 2 Samuel VIII. 2. XII. 31. and then the meaning is, He will use the utmost rigor
to extirpate the wicked, and fright men from their wickedness.

[n] The plainest sense also of v. 27. seems to be that in our Translation: the
latter part of which the Lord Bacon (with some others) refer to the inquisitive
search of man's mind into all manner of things. "For though the Wise man says
(in the III Ecclesiastes) that it is impossible for man to find out all the
Works of God; yet this does not derogate from the capacity of man's mind, but
may be referred to the impediments of knowledge (such as the shortness of life,
janglings among learned men, and refusing to join their Studies and Labors,
unfaithful and depraved tradition of Sciences, with many other inconveniences,
wherein this present state is entangled) for that no parcel of the world is
denied to man's enquiry, or invention he declares in another place; where he
says, the Spirit of man is as the lamp of God; wherewith he searches into the
inwards of all secrets." Thus he, in the beginning of his Advancement of
Learning. Which, if it be not the full import of the words, is nearer than that
sense which others give of them; who by the candle of the Lord, understand
either the knowledge of God himself, which penetrates into the secrets of all
men's thoughts; or else his divine favor and love, the sense of which
marvellously recreates and refreshes the soul; and is as it were the life of
man, penetrating through his whole body.

[o] Upon the next verse Kab-venaki has this note; that by chesed, the mercy,
which Solomon here commends unto a King we are to understand, an exceeding
great excess of goodness, and kindness; even toward those who are not worthy
of it: and by Emeth truth, his keeping his word exactly, and loving and
sincerely practicing this virtue. Which two will keep him from all harm; but it
is that excessive degree of goodness alone; which establishes and settles him
in the throne of his Kingdom. A Proverb directly contrary to the wicked Maxims
of Matchiavel, as Schickard observes in his Mischpat Hammelech, Cap. IV.

[p] The last verse some take to be a description of the depraved condition of
humane Nature; which makes men as loath to be cured of their sins, by sharp and
severe rebukes, etc. as to be beaten till lumps be raised in the flesh, etc. So
they make Tamrick bera, the cleansing or scouring of an evil man, to be the
subject of which he speaks. And then the Paraphrase should run thus, To rub up
a wicked man, and chide him soundly for his sins; is as grievous to him as to
beat him till he be bruised; and so sore, that he complains his very bowels are
hurt and in anguish by it. This I have not wholly neglected; but yet followed
the common Exposition: which is, that the severest corporal punishments, are
necessary for the cure of some offenders.

1. WIne is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived
thereby, is not wise.


1. LET him whose design it is to be wise and good, take heed of accustoming
himself to excess of Wine, and suchlike liquors; which is inconsistent with
it: For drunkenness not only disposes a man to be abusive and scurrilous, in
deriding even things most serious and sacred; but to be so furious, tumultuous
and quarrelsome, as declares him both to be a fool, and incapable of being
otherwise. See Arg. [a]

2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion: whosoever provokes him to
anger, sins against his own soul.


2. The displeasure of a King strikes terror into men and makes them tremble,
as they are wont to do at the roaring of a young Lion, which comes with open
jaws to devour them: It is best therefore to submit to him; for whosoever
provokes him, especially by angry and exasperating language, brings his own
life (as well as his soul) into very great danger. See Arg. [b]

3. It is an honor for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will be
meddling.


3. It is below a wise man, or one that is truly great, to scold and brawl; or
if a quarrel be begun, it is no disparagement to him (but the noblest thing he
can do) to withdraw himself from it, and let it rest: but all fools and lewd
persons love to thrust themselves into contention; and fancy, when they are
engaged in strife, they are bound in honor to maintain it. See Arg. [c]

4. The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefore shall he beg in
harvest, and have nothing.


4. The smallest difficulty frights a lazy person from the most necessary
undertaking; for instance, he will not rise to plough his ground in Autumn,
when the morning air grows sharp, for fear of catching cold: by which means he
exposes himself to far greater hardships; for in the harvest time, when plenty
crowns the labors of other men, he turns beggar, and no body pitties him, or
will relieve him.

5. Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water: but a man of understanding
will draw it out.


5. There is nothing but may be compassed by Wisdom. For though the designs
and intentions of another man, especially that has a deep wit, are as hard to
be sounded as Waters that lie in the secret Caverns of the Earth: yet there are
persons of such penetrating understandings, and of so great a reach, that they
will find means to discover them and draw them out. See Arg. [d]

6. Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who
can find?


6. It is such an honor to be kind and to do good to others, that a great
part of mankind value themselves very much upon the mere pretense of it; every
one of them boasting what he has done, or will do upon occasion: though,
alas! in a time of trial, it is very hard to find so much as one of them, that
will be as good as his word. See Arg. [e]

7. The just man walks in his integrity: his children are blessed after him.


7. But whosoever he be, that is endued with this rare virtue of being just to
his word; and so sincerely charitable, that he persevereth in his virtue to the
end of his days; he shall not only fare the better for it, and enjoy great
satisfaction in himself, while he lives; but his children after him shall reap
the happy fruits, of his unfeigned love to God and man.

8. A king that sits in the throne of judgment, scatters away all evil
with his eyes.


8. A Prince attentive to his peoples good, who does not give up himself to
pleasure, nor abandon all the care of his affairs to his Ministers, but sits
constantly himself to do justice to his people; prevents a world of mischief
by his very presence in the courts of judgment: and by his strict observance
how things are carried, and careful search into men's causes, keeps both Judges
and Pleaders, and all men else within the bounds of their duty; and applies
fitting and seasonable remedies to all the public grieveances.

9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?


9. There is no man so perfect, that he has nothing left to do; for who can
say, and say truly, that he has not the least evil affection remaining in him,
no unruly passion stirring in his soul? Or that he is so free from every sin,
that he needs no further purifying?

10. Diverse weights, and diverse measures, both of them are alike abomination to
the LORD.


10. It is not so small a sin as men imagine to cheat and cosen their
neighbors; for instance, to buy by a weight or a measure too heavy and big,
and to sell by those that are too light and scanty: for these are alike
displeasing to the Lord; nay such injustice is detestable to Him beyond
expression.

11. Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether
it be right.


11. It is not hard to give a shrewd conjecture, what a child is like to prove
when he is a man: For not only youths, but little children, make early
discoveries, by their behavior, by their contrivances, by their dealings one
with another; nay, by their very sports and pasttimes, and such things wherein
they delight, whether their future life will probably be modest and honest;
free, that is, from lasciviousness, impurity and suchlike vices; and void also
of fraud, and guile, and malignity of spirit. See Arg. [f]

12. The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the LORD has made even both of them.


12. As the Lord is to be acknowledged the fountain of all good; particularly
of those excellent and useful senses whereby the knowledge of all things is
conveyed to us: So the towardly disposition which we observe to be in any
child, to lissen to instruction, and a clear understanding to discern, with a
sound judgment to resolve aright, are likewise, above all things, to be
peculiarly ascribed to the divine Grace. See Arg. [g]

13. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty: open thine eyes, and thou shall
be satisfied with bread.


13. But our Industry must be joined with God's blessing, in the faithful
improvement of those faculties, or good inclinations He has given us. And
therefore let not idleness make thee indulge thy self in too much sleep; which
is the way to beggary: but get up betime, and apply thy self, with attentive
care, to some honest labor; and then thy desire of all things necessary shall
not want satisfaction.

14. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer: but when he is gone his way,
then he boasts.


14. The buyer sometimes is as unjust and deceitful as the seller ( v. 10.)
for when he cheapens a commodity, he disparages it to such a degree, as if he
thought it nothing worth: but having purchased it, upon his own terms, he goes
away and brags how subtle he was; and laughs at the simplicity of him that sold
it, at so vile a rate. See Arg. [h]

15. There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge are a
precious jewel.


15. Some think themselves rich, and powerful, and happy, because they have
treasures of Gold, or perhaps heaps of Pearls, or other precious Stones: but
among all the Jewels, or ornaments, or furniture that are most esteemed, there
is none comparable unto true Wisdom; especially joined with Eloquence; which
can do more than them all. See Arg. [i]

16. Take his garment that is surety for a stranger: and take a pledge of him
for a strange woman.


16. It is rank folly to trust him, who is so rash as to be bound for one,
whose ability and fidelity is utterly unknown to him; especially for a woman
whose loose way of life, makes her credit justly suspected: therefore have
nothing to do with such an inconsiderate person, without the utmost security
that he can give thee, for the payment of what he owes thee.

17. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but afterward his mouth shall be
filled with gravel.


17. Do not satisfy thy appetite of wealth, by fraud, lying or bribery; nor
thy desires of pleasure by adultery or fornication: For though this may be
sweet for the present, it is but like the pleasure of greety bread, which may
relish well to an hungry man, when it is first tasted; but being chawed, hurts
the palate, cuts the gums, or breaks the teeth, with the sharp and rough
gravel that is in it. See Arg. [k]

18. Every purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice make war.


18. Rashness spoils the best designs; which must be carried on prudently and
with good advice, if we would have them prove successful: and above all other,
warlike expeditions are not to be undertaken without great deliberation; nor
can be well managed without exact conduct, and subtle contrivance: unto which
the Victory is commonly more to be ascribed, than unto force.

19. He that goes about as a tale-hearer, reveals secrets: therefore meddle
not with him that flattereth with his lips.


19. He whose trade it is to ingratiate himself by defaming others, will not
stick most treacherously to discover the secrets wherewith they have entrusted
him (XI. 13.) Therefore suspect a fawning fellow, and have no familiarity with
him; for his drift is, to entice thee to talk, what he intends to carry about
to others.

20. Whosoever curses his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in
obscure darkness.


20. He that not only slights and despises, but reproaches, and wishes
mischief to his Father or Mother, shall bring the heaviest punishments on
himself, and on his posterity: who, the happier they were before, shall be the
more miserable, by falling from a flourishing, into the most dismal condition.

21. An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning: but the end thereof
shall not be blessed.


21. Make not too much haste to be rich; for though with a great deal of bustle
and stir, an estate may in a short time be heaped up; yet the foundation of it
being laid in rapine, extortion, or fraud; it moulders away many times as
suddenly as it was gotten; and it is certain will not prosper unto many
generations.

22. Say not thou, I will recompense evil: but wait on the LORD, and he shall
save thee.


22. Be patient, and do not so much as resolve to take revenge for any injury
thou have received (of which thou art not the proper Judge, nor like to do
exact justice in it) but leave thy cause to the Lord, and expect his righteous
sentence: believing steadfastly He will not only do thee right; but defend
thee from farther injuries; which thou fanciest, perhaps, thou shall invite by
thy forgiving those that are past.

23. Diverse weights are an abomination unto the LORD: and a false balance is
not good.


23. To buy by one weight and to sell by another, is extremely odious not only
to all honest men, but much more to the Lord: which was said before ( v. 10.)
but is a sin so heinous, and yet so commonly practiced, that this is fit to be
repeated again; that it is a most wicked thing to cheat another, though it be
but in a little matter ( v. XI. 1.)

24. Man's goings are of the LORD, how can a man then understand his own way?


24. There is no man great or small, that can take one step toward any thing
he designs, without the permission and direction also of the Lord: who
overrules their motions unto ends so far distant from men's thoughts, that it
is impossible for them to know what the event shall be, of any thing they
undertake.

25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy: and after vows
to make enquiry.


25. There are two pieces of profaneness, which entangle him that is guilty of
them, in great troubles; nay bring ruin upon him. First when he makes no
distinction between things holy and common; but converts that which was
consecrated to God (the first fruits, suppose, or suchlike sacred things) to
his own proper use: And secondly, when he vows in his distress, to give
something unto God; but having obtained his desires, studies how he may be
loosed from his obligations. See Arg. [l]

26. A wise king scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them.


26. Such impious persons can no more stand before a Religious Prince, than the
chaff before the wind: but he disperses them all, and thrashes them (as we
speak) so severely, that the Country is clean purged, and freed from such
wicked wretches. See Arg. [m]

27. The spirit of man is the candle of the LORD, searching all the inward
parts of the belly.


27. That active spirit, which the Lord has breathed into man, is like a torch
lighted at the divine understanding, to guide and direct him in all his
motions; and to make reflections upon them afterward: nay, to penetrate also
into the most secret designs of other men, that he may not be deceived by them.
See Arg. [n]

28. Mercy and truth preserve the King: and his throne is upholden by mercy.


28. The best and strongest Guards for the preservation of a Prince's Person,
and for the security of his Government; are bounty and clemency, joined with
justice and faithfulness to his Word: and if either of the two be of greater
force than the other, for their support and maintenance, it is an high degree
of bounty and benignity; which settles him fast in all men's affections, and
intails the kingdom upon his posterity. See Arg. [o]

29. The glory of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old men is the
gray head.


29. That which makes young men honored is their strength, and vigor, and
courage; whereby they are capable to serve for the defense of their Country:
but that which makes old men venerable is their aged gravity and experience,
which qualifies them to advise and consult for its safety.

30. The blewness of a wound cleanses away evil: so do stripes the inward
parts of the belly.


30. It is impossible to mend some persons without blows; and those not gentle
neither, but severe: And therefore though it be a very sharp and grievous
remedy, which they by all means avoid, it must not be forborne; but they are
rather to be beaten black and blew, and scourged till their very hearts ache,
than not be cleansed from their impurity. See Arg. [p]

CHAP. XXI.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter begins with a Sentence, which Themistius, a Pagan Philosopher and
Orator, seems to take notice of, and mention as very memorable in the Assyrian
(as he is supposed to call the Hebrew) Writings: and commends to the thoughts
of the Emperor Valens, in a speech he made to him Orat. IX. But if he had
respect to this Proverb of Solomon's, he did not fully comprehend the sense of
it; for he takes notice only of a Prince's mind being in the custody, and
under the guard of God. For thus he translates it, (...), the mind of the King
is kept in safe custody in the hand of God. From whence he draws this
Inference, that a King ought to be very sensible what danger he is in, if he go
about any thing contrary to the mind of God; because he then is in peril to
fall out of the hand, which preserves and keeps him. Nay, thou oughtst, O King
(says he) not only to design nothing thy self, but what is holy; but they
that are about thee ought to speak to thee nothing that is not so: For every
word that comes to thy ears, is written in his uncorrupted hand. But though
this be a most excellent Admonition, worthy to be written in the hearts of all
Princes, that it is very unbecoming to have any evil thing, any thing impure,
or in the least blemished with cruelty or inhumanity, in that heart, which
those most holy and most gracious and benign hands of God, carry in their
keeping; yet there is a great deal more than these Assyrian Letters or
Pictures, which he speaks of, express. For Solomon would have them, and us,
sensible that they cannot manage things by their power, as they think good; but
depend upon an higher cause, who orders all their motions, good and bad, to
such ends as He proposes to himself; quite contrary to their intentions and
inclinations. Which is an Instruction sufficient to correct the pride of the
most absolute Monarch, and the impatience of the most oppressed Subject.

[b] Next to which follows ( v. 2.) a caution against thinking too well of our
selves: which had been delivered before (XVI. 2.) but for the weightiness, I
suppose, of the matter, and the proneness of men to flatter themselves, and not
to judge sincerely of their own actions, is here again repeated.

And then there is a caution added ( v. 3.) against Hypocrisy; which thinks to
please God with ceremonies, without moral honesty.

[c] In the fourth verse the meaning is something uncertain, from the different
acceptions of the word ner or nir: which the Greek, the Latin and other
Interpreters, translate not ploughing, or ploughed fields; but the light, the
splendor of the wicked. I have had respect to both senses; understanding by
ploughing, the study, contrivance and business of wicked men. And the Sentence
may be inverted, in this manner: sin is the pride, the ambition, the glory and
joy (or the business) of wicked men. That, upon which they value themselves,
and for which they think themselves brave fellows, etc. is, that they dare do
wickedly: or we may make two Sentences of this verse, to this purpose; men that
have proud and lofty thoughts, have very ambitious desires and an unsatiable
appetite; which put them upon much wickedness: nay, the very business and
employment of all wicked men (as well as their pleasure) is nothing but sin.
And this word ner signifying a yoke, among the Chaldaeans, Syrians and
Arabians, Lud. de Dieu thinks this no improper sense: superciliousness, and
swelling of the heart (or mind) is a yoke intolerable; and proper to the
wicked. Castalio alone understands by sin, the effects of sin; to this sense:
pride, and haughtiness of mind are deadly enemies to that happiness, and
pleasure, which the wicked pursue: for instead of making them greater, as they
fancy, they lay them low in all men's opinions, and expose them to their hatred,
etc. I omit other Interpretations.

[d] In the seventh verse there are different opinions about the force of the
word jegorem: most of which I have endeavored to express in the Paraphrase.
And there is no little obscurity in the next verse: but besides that sense
which I have represented, the words are capable of another, which is as plain;
viz. as the man is, so are his works; a man of tricks will act strangely (quite
different from all the rules whereby we ought to govern our selves) but an
honest man, you may know where to have; for he acts conformable to the Laws of
righteousness.

[e] In the eleventh verse, de Dieu thinks both parts of it, ought to be
referred to one and the same subject, viz. peti, the simple: who, says Solomon
(according to this construction of the words) may be instructed two ways. One
is, by the punishments which are inflicted upon a Scorner; which works upon his
fear: the other is, when he attends to the wise, and observes God's great
goodness to him; which works upon his love. Wherein he seems to have respect
also to another signification of the word bemaschil, besides that of attending
to information and instruction: for it sometimes imports that happiness and
prosperity, wherewith God blesses the wise and prudent. But that sense which I
have followed in the Paraphrase, seems nearest to the Hebrew: and agrees best
with what was said before, XIX. 25. And it being usual, in this Book, to repeat
the same Sentence, in diverse places, in different words; I have therefore kept
to that sense. But if any like the other (which the Vulgar Lat. also follows,
making both parts of the Sentence to respect the simple) the plainest
interpretation of the latter part of it, seems to me to be this: when
Instruction is given to the wise, the simple also learn something; by observing
how diligently even the wise hearken to it. And in this sense the word Maschil,
with lamed after it, is used in the next verse; the just considers the house of
the wicked.

[f] Which, though it seem very plain, yet there are great varieties in the
interpretation of it: because of the following part of the verse. In which many
put in the word Jehovah, or God, to supply the sense (as we do) but without any
necessity; there being a clear and obvious sense, (which I have expressed in
the Paraphrase) without any such supplement; if we do but take the just man for
a just Magistrate, and not for a private person.

[g] There is little difficulty after this, till we come to the 24 th verse:
where he either gives this character of a Scorner, that he is proud and
arrogant, and does all things in the wrath of his pride (as the words are in
the Hebrew) or describes the proud and arrogant man to be a Scorner also, and
full of haughty wrath. It is not of much concern, which way we take it; for the
sense will, in a manner, be the same. I have expressed the Hebrew, as near as I
could, in my Paraphrase; taking the construction thus: A proud and haughty
person, who may well be called a scorner, proceeds furiously, and unsufferably
in all that he does.

[h] In the last verse Solomon mentions the Horse instead of all warlike
preparations: because it was the chief; and all nations placed much of their
confidence in the number and strength of their Horses. But that the Israelites
might not do so too, there was a special provision made in their Law against
it, XVII. Deuteronomy. 16. Notwithstanding which, they were so prone to this vain
confidence, that Joshua in his Wars against the Canaanites houghed all the
Horses he took, after a great Victory: that is, cut their hamstrings, and
thereby made them unserviceable: which he did by an express command from God,
XI. Josh. 6, 9. and the reason of it was, (as Kimchi well observes) to prevent
a false conceit, which might have risen in the peoples mind; that they owed
their good success to them, had they made use of those Horses in future
Battles. Which Solomon also here endeavors to prevent: For, though he had a
great number of Horses, to increase that splendor which was peculiar to him,
above all Kings; yet he would have them know he did not trust in them; nor
would have the people imagine they were a whit the more secure, because they
were so well appointed for War, if they did not carefully obey the Laws of God;
and from him look for deliverance.

1. THe kings heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers of water: he
turns it whither soever he will.


1. IT is not in the power of Kings (much less of other men) either to do, or
to design, what they please: but their very wills are subject to the great Lord
of all; who diverts them as easily from what they intend, or inclines them to
that which they resolve against; as the Gardener draws the streams of water,
through the trenches he cuts, unto what part of the ground he thinks good. See
Arg. [a]

2. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the LORD pondereth the
hearts.


2. There is nothing that a man does or designs (especially if he be great and
potent) but (such is the fond affection he has for himself) he fancies it to
be exactly good: when in the account of the Lord, who searches into the secrets
of men's Souls, and knows the just value of every thing, they are very
defective, if not grossly wicked. See Arg. [b]

3. To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice.


3. Men imagine, for example, that their devotion toward God, will satisfy for
their breach of faith, their uncharitableness and injurious actions toward
men: when He prefers the practice of Truth, of Mercy and Justice before the
richest Sacrifices that can be offered to Him.

4. An high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked, is sin.


4. The pride, the insolence, the ambition and vast desires; nay, all the
designs and contrivances of wicked men, with all the prosperous successes they
have in them, lead them into abundance of sins; and in the issue into no less
miseries. See Arg. [c]

5. The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness: but of every one
that is hasty, only to want.


5. He that to prudent counsels and contrivances, adds an honest diligence, is
likely to grow rich: but he that acts inconsiderately in his business; or
greedily catches at every advantage, whether by right or wrong; or undertakes
more than he can manage, out of an eager desire to grow rich presently; is most
likely to be a beggar.

6. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro
of them that seek death.


6. There are men that make it their business, with much labor, to heap up
wealth, though it be by lying, or flattery, or calumny, or perjury: but as such
treasures are no more durable than heaps of chaff, or clouds of smoke, which
are soon dissipated by the wind; so they expose the owners of them to many
dangers, and at last bring them, by their own diligence, to a woeful end.

7. The Robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse to do
judgment.


7. For the rapine of such wicked men, whereby they have destroyed other
Families and made them desolate, shall fall in most grievous and dreadful
punishments upon themselves; which they shall not be able to shake off, till
they be utterly destroyed: because they knowingly injured their neighbors, and
obstinately denied to make them satisfaction.

8. The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his work is
right.


8. For a man whose life is nothing but wiliness and craft, imposture and
deceit, is so alienated from God; that he is very odious to Him, and to all
good men: but he that is sincere and free from all fraud and guile, approves
himself in all his actions, and is most acceptable and dear to both. See Arg.
[d]

9. It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a brawling
woman in a wide house.


9. It is much more desirable to live poorly and solitarily in the open air,
exposed to all the injuries of the weather; nay to be thrust into a little
corner, on the top of the house; than to have a spacious habitation and
numerous family, governed by a contentious wife: whose perpetual scolding and
brawling, within doors, upon the least occasion; is more intolerable than the
thunder, and the lightning, and blustering winds, which may molest him without.

10. The soul of the wicked desires evil: his neighbor finds no favor in
his eyes.


10. An impious man is so set upon mischief, that he is not satisfied till he
has effected his desire: nor will he spare either Friend, or Foe, to serve his
ambition, his covetousness, or whatsoever evil affection it is, that reigns in
him.

11. When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when the when
the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge.


11. Lay a heavy fine or other punishment, upon a derider of Religion; and
though it do him no good, yet such simple persons, as were only incautiously
deluded by him, will make some wise reflections on it, and be the better for it:
as for him that is wise already, it is sufficient only to give him good
admonitions; of which he himself will receive the profit, and amend what is
amiss in him. See Arg. [e]

12. The righteous man wisely considers the house of the wicked: but God
overthrows the wicked for their wickedness.


12. A just Judge makes a prudent, but strict scrutiny, into all the actions of
a wicked man's family; that he may so punish them for their rapine, violence
and extortion; as to deprive them of all power to do any further mischief. See
Arg. [f]

13. Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself,
but shall not be heard.


13. He who is so far from relieving the poor, though they lie under most
grievous calamities, that he plainly declares their petitions are very
troublesome to him; shall fall into the like straits and pressures himself:
and, which is worse, be denied when they force him to cry for help.

14. A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom, strong wrath.


14. Men do not love to be thought so weak, as to do any thing for money; but
such is its power, if it be secretly conveyed, that they will resign their
strongest resentments to it: their anger, for instance will yield to a gift;
nay, a rich present, prudently placed, will extinguish that wrath, which was
thought implacable.

15. It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be to the
workers of iniquity.


15. The execution of justice is a joy to him, that has observed the Laws; but
a terror to those that have violated them, by their wicked deeds: who look
upon themselves as in danger to be undone thereby.

16. The man that wandeth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
congregation of the dead.


16. He that will not live by those wise Laws, which God has prescribed him,
but follows the conduct of his own foolish lusts and passions, shall after all
his extravagances be sent down to hell; and there confined to the company of
the old Giants: who giving themselves over to debauched courses, were swept
away with a deluge ( See II. 18. IX. 18.)

17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loves wine and oil
shall not be rich.


17. Nay, before he goes thither he may suffer very much; for it is too
frequently seen, that voluptuous men destroy their own pleasures, by wasting
their estates, and bringing themselves to extreme beggary: at the best, he can
never thrive, who loves to feast, and to live delicately.

18. The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous; and the transgressour for
the upright.


18. Nay, such is the distinction which Divine Providence makes between the
good and the bad, that righteous men are not only strangely delivered from
those dangers which others fall into; but preserved from mischief, by its
seizing on the wicked: and men sincerely virtuous, escape in a common calamity;
when they that prevaricate with God and with Religion, by that very means
(which they thought was best for their safety) are overwhelmed in it.

19. It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an
angry woman.


19. It is more eligible (as was said before v. 9.) to dwell quietly, in the
most rufull place upon earth; than to live in a palace with a contentious wife:
whom nothing can please; but is uneasy and angry at every thing, and always
gives provoking language.

20. There is a treasure to be desired, and oil in the dwelling of the wise:
but a foolish man spends it up.


20. Wisdom furnishes a man not only with the necessaries, but with all the
conveniences and pleasures of life, that he can reasonably desire; which it
teaches him also to enjoy with great satisfaction, though but in a small
habitation: but such is the folly of a wicked man, that he lavishly spends all
those treasures; which he knows not how to get, nor how to live without.

21. He that follows after righteousness and mercy, finds life,
righteousness and honor.


21. He that makes it his business to be good; not contenting himself merely
with doing no harm, but greedily laying hold on all occasions to exercise
justice and mercy, shall lead a most happy life: for, besides the satisfaction
and pleasure he has in doing good, he shall preserve himself from being
injured; and oblige all to be kind to him; and be highly esteemed, honored and
praised every where.

22. A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casts down the strength
of the confidence thereof.


22. The virtue of the mind is of greater force, and more prevalent, than
strength of body; For a whole City of mighty men, are not able to resist a wise
and pious Commander, that besieges them: but they are either taken by his
cunning stratagems; or they yield themselves to his eminent goodness; unto
which they trust more than to their fortifications,

23. Whose keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles.


23. He that is wary and cautious in his talk, thinking seriously before he
open his mouth, and taking care to offend neither God nor man by what he
speaks, preserves his mind from a great deal of trouble, and himself from
dangerous distresses.

24. Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath.


24. He that is puffed up with a great conceit of himself, whose ambition makes
him insatiable in his desires, as he regards neither God nor man; so he cannot
endure the least opposition, nor do any thing with moderation: but, being
easily enraged, with insolent fierceness and cruelty, proceeds against those
that cross his designs. See Arg. [g]

25. The desire of the slothful kills him: for his hands refuse to labor.


25. A sluggard has desires as well as other men; which must needs be a
perpetual torment to him, because he will not be at the pains to give them
satisfaction: nay, they bring him sometime to a miserable end; because his
sloth moves him to make provision for them by robbery, or other unlawful ways,
rather than by following some honest, but laborious calling.

26. He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous gives and
spares not.


26. Nor is there any measure in his desires; but as they are endless, so they
are exceeding eager and restless, to his own and others great disturbance: but
he that is diligent and honest, is so far from desiring, much less stealing,
his neighbor's goods, that he freely gives away his own; and has not the less
thereby, but still enough to spare.

27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more when he brings
it with a wicked mind?


27. God is so far from being pleased merely with Sacrifices (XV. 8.) that when
they are offered by impious men, who never think of amending their lives, he
detests them; though presented with never so specious a show of piety:
especially, when at that very time, they have some wicked design in their
heads, which they think to sancifie by their Sacrifices.

28. A false witness shall perish: but the man that hears, speaks
constantly.


28. He that for money, or love, or hatred, shall testify any thing of which
he has no knowledge, shall soon lose his credit; and at last come to a
miserable end (XIX. 9.) but he, that in obedience to God, testifies nothing but
what he has attentively heard or seen; as he never varies from what he
deposes, so he shall always be believed, and continue in good esteem as long as
he lives.

29. A wicked man hardens his face: but as for the upright, he directs his
way.


29. All the endeavors of a man resolvedly wicked, is to grow so impudent that
he may not blush at what he does; nor be moved, in the least, by any man's
admonitions or reproofs: but a man sincerely virtuous is so different from him,
that he himself examins, and censures his own actions if they be amiss; and
makes it all his care so to live, that he may not be ashamed of what he does.

30. There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the LORD.


30. It is folly to design any thing which is not approved by the Lord: for let
it be managed with all the skill that natural sagacity, long study and
experience can furnish men withal; with the most prudent foresight also of all
contingencies; and with mature and deliberate advice about the most effectual
means, and with due application of them to the end; they all signify nothing,
when they oppose the counsels and decrees of Heaven.

31. The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety is of the LORD.


31. Nor is power and force, though never so great, more significant than
counsel and advice: For after an army of Horses, and Chariots, and valiant
Soldiers, are set in battle array, they can give no security of Victory,
without the divine favor and help; from whom alone therefore both safety and
prosperous success is to be expected. See Arg. [h]

CHAP. XXII.
ARGUMENT.
[a] After an Admonition not to set too great a price upon Riches; ( v. 1.)
there follows another ( v. 2.) unto rich men; not to set too great a value upon
themselves: but with an instruction also to the poor, not to be discontented
with their condition; the rich having as much need of them, as they have of the
rich. Greg. Nazianzen. indeed (Orat. XVI. p. 263.) is of opinion that Solomon
does not say, that God has made one man poor and another rich, (...), for it
is not apparent that such a distinction is from God: but his meaning is only
this, that (...), they are both alike the workmanship of God, though in
external regards they be unequal. Which ought to shame rich men into sympathy,
and brotherly kindness toward them; that when they are apt to be lifted up
because of those things wherein they are unequal, they may be taken down again
and become more moderate; when they consider how in the greatest things they
are both alike.

But I have had a respect to the other thing also in my Paraphrase: because, if
God did not intend, in the beginning, so great a disparity as we now see (which
this is not a place to dispute) yet some disparity, it may be easily proved, he
did design; the mean condition, that is (though not beggary) of some, in
comparison with others. Which serves many wise ends of his Providence: nay,
beggary may be very useful, to give the greater occasion of liberality on the
one hand, and of patience, humility, and honest diligence on the other. And to
be commended for these virtues, is much better than to be rich, as he observes,
in the first verse. Where Melancthon, has a large discourse to show that it is
lawful, nay necessary, to endeavor after a good fame: according to that
saying, I have need of a good conscience, with respect to God, and of a good
name for the sake of my neighbors. And he alleges some ancient sentences to
the same purpose with this of Solomon; as that of Publius, Honestus rumor
alterum patrimonium est: and that of Plautus, Honestam famam si servasso, sat
ero dives.

[b] There are more observations about riches, in v. 7, 8, 9. which seem to me
to have a dependence one upon the other; and so I have considered them in the
Paraphrase. And in the next verse but one ( v. 11.) I have followed the
judgment of Lud. de Dieu, who thinks Solomon observes two fruits of pureness of
heart; one, that the word of such a man may be relied on; and the other, that
the King (who loves not to be deceived) will be his Friend, upon that account.
This seems nearest to the Hebrew; unless we will take it thus: Two things
recommend a man to the affection of a Prince, his Integrity, and his Eloquence:
which make him very capable to do his Prince service. And then the Paraphrase
must run thus: He that loves sincerity above all things, and is able to deliver
his mind in acceptable language, is fit to be Privy Counselor to a King.

[c] And to this, I conceive, he has some respect in the next verse; where by
Daath Knowledge, in the first part of it, we are to understand (the other part
of the verse shows) men truly knowing, and who speak according to their
knowledge.

[d] In the 13 verse, there is an admirable description of the disposition of
slothful persons, who raise difficulties in their own fancies, where there are
none; or, pretending them greater than they are, will not so much as attempt
any thing, because it is possible they may meet with insuperable hindrances.
Which some have, not unfitly, applied, to cowardly Magistrates, who dare not
punish great and powerful offenders; but excuse themselves, saying, He is a
mighty man, there is no dealing with him, etc. Whereas a Worthy Magistrate (as
an excellent Prelate of our own, Bishop Sanderson speaks) would meet with such
a Lion to choose; that he might make God's Ordinance to be reverenced, and clear
the way for others, by tearing such a beast in pieces: and would no more fear
to make a Worshipful Thief, or a Right Worshipful Murderer (if such a one
should come in his circuit) an example of Justice; than to twitch up a poor
sheep-stealer.

But the Lord Bacon applies it, no less wittily, to the laziness of Mankind, in
the Advancement of Learning (L. 1. C. ult.) the knowledge of some things being
so abstruse, that it is impossible to be compassed by humane industry. Whereas
all those things are to be held possible and performable, which may be
accomplished by some persons, though not by every one; and which may be done by
the united labors of many, though not by any one apart; and which may be
effected in a succession of Ages, though not in the same age; and in brief,
which may be finished by the public care and charge, though not by the
abilities and industry of particular persons. But there is no excuse for those,
who will not set themselves to any enquiries; because some things cannot be
known. Which is perfectly the temper of the sluggard, Solomon here mentions;
who because a Lion sometimes comes into the street, would not stir out of his
doors. It was not ordinary, you must know, for Lions to come into Towns; no,
nor to rove in the daytime (the night being their season, CIV Psalm. 20.) But
sometimes by the divine vengeance they were stirred up to leave the deserts,
and go into inhabited places (V Jer. 6. 2 King. XVII. 25, 26.) and likewise (if
we may believe the great Philosopher in his History of Animals) when they grow
old, (...), etc. they haunt Cities more than other places; because then they
are not so able to prey upon beasts, and therefore lie in wait for men. The
same is affirmed by Pliny, as Bochartus observes, L. III. C. 2. Part 1.

[e] In the Sixteenth verse I have followed our Translation, and expressed the
sense to as much advantage as I could. But I think the Vulgar Latin which
Luther and some others follow, comes nearer to the Hebrew, which runs thus: He
that squeezes the poor to increase his own estate, gives to the rich (not to
secure what he has gotten but) only to impoverish it: That is, He shall be
squeezed by some mightier person than himself. And so the Paraphrase, in more
words, should be this:

Such is the just Providence of Almighty God, that he, who to enlarge his own
estate or power, oppresses the poor by violence or deceit, shall meet with the
like extortion, from others more powerful than himself: and thereby be reduced
to as poor a condition, as those whom he oppressed.

The End of the First Part of the Book of PROVERBS.
THE SECOND PART Of the BOOK of PROVERBS.
Now from this verse, there is scare any Inter preter but has observed,
another form of speech, much different from the former, begins, and continues
unto the XXV Chapter: And therefore it may not unfitly be called, The Second
Part of the Book of Proverbs.

From the beginning of the Tenth Chapter to this place, the Instructions of
Wisdom are delivered in short sentences, and Proverbs properly so called;
which have seldom any connection one with another, or not easily discerned:
showing what is good or bad, true or false, etc. But now follows Exhortations,
and Precepts, in the Imperative Mode of speech, and those comprehended in two
or three, or more verses, before he finish what he intends. In which
alteration, some think the weakness of the Reader is consulted: who being weary
of the sententious way of Instruction, may be refreshed and awakened unto new
attention, by varying the form of writing. And thus the son of Syrack after his
gnomae or sentences, adds an earnest exhortation to the study of Wisdom and
Virtue, like this of Solomon, in the following Section, which I call his Second
Part. Which may have respect both to that which went before; and to that which
follows: as if he had said, let not all that has been said be lost, or
superficially regarded; but take a serious Review of the foregoing Counsels;
and give ear also to what I have further to deliver, etc.

[f] And to more the greater attention, he recommends them ( v. 20.) under the
name of Schalischim, words fit for a Prince to speak, and the best men in the
world to hear: which we truly therefore render excellent things. There is
another notion of the word, I know; which I have not altogether neglected: but
it always signifying in the Bible, either great Captains, and Commanders, and
Nobles, or the best sort of Musical Instruments (as it does in one place) I
look upon this as the most proper Interpretation of it.

[g] And among those Principal Rules of life, he first commends this v. 22. not
to be injurious to poor people: especially by oppressing them in a form of
Justice. Which all know was administered by the Elders in the gate of their
City; as may be seen in many more places, besides that, which I have noted in
the Paraphrase XXI Deuteronomy. 19. XXII. 9. XXV. 7. IV Ruth 1, 2, etc. Which being so
common a notion, it is strange that the Greek Interpreters should here
understand this verse of poor people begging at their doors: whom the Wise man
admonishes them not to abuse. This seems to be their sense: but the word
Tedakkee signifies more than (...), dishonor or abuse, (which is the word
whereby the LXX express it) for it denotes as much, as to crush, and that into
bits, i. e. to undo people utterly; which no body is inclined to do, unto
poor wretches begging at their doors: who are undone already.

[h] Then follows a most necessary advice about the choice of a Friend, v. 24,
25. upon which the Lord Bacon has passed this judicious remark; ( Advanc. of
Learning, B. VIII. Chapter II. Par. 26.) "By how much the more devoutly the Laws of
Friendship among good men are to be observed; by so much the more it stands us
upon to use all caution, even at the very first, in the prudent Election of
Friends. And let the disposition and humors of our Friends be what they will,
so far as concerns our selves only, they are by all means to be born withal:
but when they impose a necessity upon us, to behave our selves just as they
would have us toward other men, it is a very hard, and unreasonable condition
of Friendship. Wherefore it highly concerns us, as Solomon here admonishes, for
the preserving of the peace and safety of our life, that we intermingle not our
matters with men of a choleric nature: and such as easily provoke, or
undertake Quarrels, and Debates. For such kind of Friends will perpetually
engage us in contentions and factions: so that we shall be constrained either
to break off Friendship, or to be wanting to our own personal safety."

[i] In the two next verses ( v. 26, 27.) he seems to warn men against such
Friendships, as will engage them to be bound for the debts of others. There are
several Admonitions before, against being surety for a stranger, VI. 1. XI. 15.
and in one place (XVII. 18.) he seems to caution against rash engagements,
though for a neighbor or friend: but especially, he here adds, when a man is
conscious to himself that he has no estate, and does but deceive him to whom
he stands bound for another man's debt: And so, by pretending to be more able
than he is, deprives himself of the benefit of that Law mentioned XXII Exodus
26, 27. and repeated XXIV Deuteronomy. 6.

[k] What is said in the 28 verse against the removing of the Boundaries
whereby one man's possessions are distinguished from another; and that by
ancient consent; is applied, by all sorts of Writers, as a caution against
innovations. And it is a great mistake to imagine, that only Popish Authors
make that use of it: for the best of the Protestants, have thought fit to
accommodate it to the same purpose. And among the rest Melancthon has very
judiciously explained it, in this manner. "This Precept is not obscure, if it
be cited allegorically for not changing the Laws, which Antiquity by Grave
Authority has delivered; unless there be an evident necessity. For this is
often repeated among the precepts of political life, not rashly to change the
ancient Laws. And here he quotes a long passage out of Demosthenes against
Timocrates, concerning the people of Locri; who ordained that he who proposed a
new Law to them, should do it with an halter about his neck, etc. And if there
were such severity now, says Melancthon, we should not have so many new
Dogmatists and Lycurgus's, about Wax-candles, and Bells, and suchlike things;
of whose change, as there is no necessity at all, so it would bring no utility.
And wise men require us to pardon and indulge some small inconveniences to
custom; lest by motion, as it is in sick bodies, the Commonwealth should suffer
a greater evil. It is necessary indeed here to add this caution, when any
Doctrine is impious, and the Law establishes impious opinions and Idols, then
we ought to prefer Rules before them, and to obey God rather than man. But when
such amendment is necessary, the boundaries and limits of our Fathers are not
taken away, but restored: because we only return to the Doctrine delivered by
God to our first Father, according to that of Tertullian, Primum quodque
verissimum est. All our care therefore herein is to enquire diligently, what is
the true Antiquity: for that is a great confirmation of our Faith, when we
understand the true state of the Church in all Ages, to follow the testimony of
those who retain the Foundation."

[l] In the last verse, Solomon does not merely commend Industry and Diligence,
as some understand it (taking this to be the same with the Greek Proverb,
(...)) but something more; which the Hebrew word Mahir plainly imports, viz.
speed, swiftness, readiness, and cheerfulness, in the dispatch of business. To
which is required a quickness of apprehension in discerning the fittest means,
and a dexterity in the application of them: so that the business is not only
done, but done speedily, and without much noise and bustle. On such a person,
if he can be found, Solomon here makes this remark, that he is likely to come
to great preferment. "For there are no qualities (as is observed by the Lord
Bacon B. VIII. Chapter II. Parab. XIX.) which Princes more respect and require in
the choice of a Minister, or Servant, than celerity and alacrity in the
dispatch of business: which is above all the rest, as he shows, by this
induction. Men of profound Wisdom, are many times suspected by Kings as too
prying; and able by the strength of their wit (as with an Engine) to turn and
wind about their Masters, insensibly, whether they will or no. Then popular
persons are hated, as those that stand in the light of Kings, and draw the eyes
of the people too much unto themselves. Men of courage, are commonly taken for
turbulent spirits, and more daring than is meet. Honest men, who are valuable
for their integrity, are thought too stiff; not so pliable as their Masters
desire, to their will and pleasure in every thing. To conclude, says he, there
is not any other good quality, which presents not some shadow, wherewith the
mind of Kings may be offended: only quickness of dispatch, in the execution of
commands, has nothing in it, that does not please. The motions also of the
minds of Kings are swift, and not very patient of delays. For they imagine they
can do any thing: this only being wanting, that it be done out of hand. Upon
which account, above all other qualities, celerity is to them most acceptable."

1. A Good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favor
rather than silver and gold.


1. RIches are not so great a good as men imagine; for a wise man will prefer
the fame of using them well (or any other virtue) much before them: and choose
much rather to be esteemed and beloved of good men, than to be possessed of
abundance of silver and gold. See Arg. [a]

2. The rich and poor meet together: the LORD is the maker of them all.


2. The World does not consist all of rich, nor all of poor; but they are mixed
together, and have need one of another: and will agree well enough, and not
clash one against another, if they both consider; that there is one Lord who is
the Creator of both; and has by his Providence ordered this inequality, for
their mutual good. See Arg. [a]

3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself: but the s^ple pass
on, and (...) punished.


3. He whose long experience and observation of things has made him cautious
and circumspect, foresees a calamity before it come; and withdraws himself from
the danger, into a place of safety; but an incautious and credulous person is
easily abused by crafty men, to overlook the mischief which, even they intend
against him; and so he goes on securely in his accustomed track, till it
overtake him.

4. By humility, and the fear of the LORD, are riches, and honor, and life.


4. A modest sense of a man's self, and humble submission to the meanest
condition, arising from a Religious regard to the divine Majesty, is the way to
be promoted, both to wealth and to honor; and to enjoy them both also, a long
time, in joy and pleasure.

5. Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that does keep his
soul, shall be far from them.


5. The life of a man that winds and turns any way, to bring about his ends, is
very scandalous to others; and will entangle him at last in most grievous
troubles: he therefore that has a care of his soul, will have no society with
such persons; and thereby avoid the danger of being undone by them.

6. Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not
depart from it.


6. Instruct a child, as soon as ever he is capable, and season his mind with
the principles of virtue, before he receive other impressions: and it is most
likely they will grow up with him; so that when he is older, he will not
forsake them, but retain them as long as he lives.

7. The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.


7. Riches draw dominion along with them over the meaner sort; nay, though a
man be not absolutely poor, yet if he be forced to borrow, he loses his
liberty, and depends upon the will and pleasure of the lender.

8. He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity: and the rod of his anger shall
fail.


8. But let not such abuse their power, for no man can reap better than he
sows; but if he do injury to others, it shall produce his own trouble: and the
Authority which he employs vexatiously and spitefully shall fail him; and not
be able to bear him out in his inhumanity.

9. He that has a bountiful eye, shall be blessed: for he gives of his bread
to the poor.


9. On the other side, he that beholding the miserable condition of others,
takes compassion upon them, and friendly relieves them, shall be blessed by
God, and commended by men: because he does not put them off to be supplied by
others, but imparts of his own goods to him, that cannot requite him again.

10. Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out: yea, strife and
reproach shall cease.


10. Throw the scoffer, who derides all things, out of a society, and
contention, which he is wont to raise, will go out together with him: there
will be no quarrels, no suits, no reproachful words, wherewith contending
persons are apt to bespatter one another, when such insolent, and turbulent men
are excluded.

11. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the king
shall be his friend.


11. He whose heart is so free from guile, that he places his pleasure in the
integrity of his mind, and the purity of his conscience, will never gloss, nor
flatter, nor study to put false colors upon things; but speak ingeniously,
according to the sincere sense of his Soul: upon both which accounts a Wise
Prince will value him; and advise with him as a Friend. See Arg. [b]

12. The eyes of the LORD preserve knowledge, and he overthrows the words of
the transgressour.


12. There is a special Providence of God, which watches over honest men (who
speak as they think) and which prospers the advice they give, and the affairs
they manage: but He subverts such as are treacherous and perfidious; and blasts
all their counsels and designs. See Arg. [c]

13. The slothful man says, There is a lion without, I shall be slain in the
streets.


13. A slothful man never wants pretenses to excuse himself from labor; for
he can feign to himself imaginary difficulties, and make a dreadful
representation of them: affrighting himself with dangers where there are none;
or which happen very rarely. See Arg. [d]

14. The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the LORD,
shall fall therein.


14. When thou art enticed by the beauty and blandishments of those lewd women,
from whom thou ought to estrange thy self as far, as they are estranged from
God ( see II. 16.) remember that they allure thee into such a gulf of utter
destruction; that to fall into their familiarity, is a mark of the highest
displeasure of Almighty God against thee, for some other crimes.

15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child: but the rod of correction
shall drive it far from him.


15. False opinions and bad inclinations stick so close sometime to the mind
and will of a child, and are so twisted with them; that no admonitions, no
reproofs, nor the wisest discourses; but only prudent and seasonable
chastisement, and that not without some severity, will remove such obstinate
folly.

16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and he that gives to
the rich, shall surely come to want.


16. There are some men have such a mixture of ill qualities; that at the same
time they will take from the poor to enrich themselves, though it be by
violence or fraud; and give to the rich and powerful to wink at their
oppressions: But all in vain, for such practices shall certainly bring them to
beggary. See Arg. [e]

The End of the First Part of the Book of PROVERBS.
THE SECOND PART Of the BOOK of PROVERBS.
17. Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart
unto my knowledge.


17. And now let me exhort thee again (IV. 20. V. 1.) whosoever thou art, that
read these things, to attend diligently; and consider seriously all the
counsels and precepts which wise and good men have delivered: and in
particular, let me prevail for an affectionate application of thy mind, to the
knowledge which I impart unto thee.

18. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall
withal be fitted in thy lips.


18. For it will give thee most high satisfaction, if thou do so heartily
entertain them, and thoroughly digest them, and faithfully preserve them in
mind: that thou art able withal to produce any of them, as there is occasion,
and aptly communicate them for other men's Instruction.

19. That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have made known to thee this day,
even to thee.


19. For what greater satisfaction can there be, than to have a good hope in
God, and to be well assured of his gracious Providence over thee; which is the
very end, for which I now declare these things to thee: that if thou have been
negligent before, yet now at length, thou, even thou may know, the way to
happiness; and show it unto others.

20. Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge:


20. Think of it seriously, and deny if thou can, that I have taken more ways
than one for thy information: and have set down most excellent Rules, and those
well consider with great exactness and care, for thy conduct both in public,
and in a private state of life. See Arg. [f]

21. That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth, that thou
might answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee?


21. That thou might, not only have a certain, firm, and solid knowledge,
of all those truths that are necessary for thee, but be able also to give sound
advice to those that send to consult thee: and be fit to manage the most
difficult affairs, to the satisfaction of them that employ thee in an Embassy.

22. Rob not the poor because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted in the
gate.


22. And besides those Instructions already given, remember these that follow.
Never abuse thy power to the spoiling of him, that is in a mean condition,
because he is unable to resist thee: but especially do not undo him there,
where he hopes for relief, by denying him justice; much less by false
accusations, when he comes into the public courts of judgment (2 Samuel XV. 2.)
See Arg. [g]

23. For the LORD will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that
spoiled them.


23. For all causes shall be heard over again, by a higher Judge; even the Lord
himself, who will do them right: and force their spoilers to pay dearly for
the wrong they have done them; for which nothing less than their life shall
make satisfaction.

24. Make no friendship with an angry man: and with a furious man thou shall
not go:


24. And as there is nothing more necessary than a Friend, so a principal point
of Wisdom consists in the choice of him; concerning which, observe this Rule
among others: not to enter into any familiarity with a man prone to anger; and
the more furious he is, be so much the more cautious, of being drawn along with
him, into any company. See Arg. [h]

25. Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul.


25. For it will be a very hard matter to preserve thy self, in good temper,
when he is out of humor; but thy very kindness to him, will make thee feel the
same commotion: nay, bring thy very life into great danger, by being engaged in
all his quarrels.

26. Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties
for debts.


26. And do not keep company with those, who are forward to pass their word,
and give security for the payment of other men's debts; lest they draw thee into
such dangerous engagements (VI. 1. XI. 15.) especially when thou have no estate
to answer the debt for which thou art bound. See Arg. [i]

27. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under
thee?


27. For it will highly incense the Creditor when he falls upon thee, to find
thou art not so able a man, as thou made a show of to him: and so provoke him
to pull away thy very bed from under thee, when thou art in it; and leave thee
shamefully and wretchedly on the ground: For why should any man have so little
care of his own good, as thus to expose himself to such miserable straits, for
the sake of another.

28. Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.


28. Be content with thy own estate, and do not seek to enlarge it by invading
other men's possessions: especially those to which they have an unquestionable
right, having enjoyed them by long prescription, and by the consent of thy
forefathers, whose constitutions ought to be had in great veneration. See Arg.
[k]

29. See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings, he
shall not stand before mean men.


29. Mark a man that is not rash, but yet quick and dextrous in the dispatch of
any business he is charged withal: and thou may foretell that he shall not
long continue obscure, in some private and mean family; but be taken notice of,
and preferred to the service of his Prince, in some public Ministry.

CHAP. XXIII.
ARGUMENT.
[a] As the foregoing Chapter concludes with an observation, concerning the
quality of a person, who is most likely to come to preferment; so this begins
with a caution to him, when he is promoted to it. For the first verse is (as
Melancthon calls it) Aulica Admonitio, an Admonition to a Courtier; remembering
him, that there is danger, even in the favor, especially in the familiarity of
Princes and great men. Whose kindness must be used, with much modesty and
circumspection: especially if they be so extraordinary kind, as to admit an
inferior to eat with them: when if a man use not great moderation, he loses
the guard he ought to have upon himself. For his head growing hot, his tongue
may run, as we say, before his wit; his behavior may be indecent, or too
negligent, etc. and therefore Solomon advises such a person to be very
considerate at that time, above all others; and with earnest attention to mind
both who and what is before him: (for the Hebrew wards may refer to both, as I
have explained it in the Paraphrase) there being great danger of his ruin, if
he give any offense, at such a time; when the passions of the Prince or Ruler,
are apt to be as disordered, as his own. And therefore had need be watched,
that he may know how to appease them presently; and so govern himself, as to
receive no prejudice thereby.

[b] But especially he must be sure to have a command over his tongue (which
Melancthon takes to be the meaning of putting a knife to his throat, v. 2.)
that it take not too much liberty, and that he speak nothing rashly: which may
undo him, as it did Clitus; whom Alexander slew at a Feast, for contradicting
him too freely. He cites many Admonitions out of the Poets, concerning this
danger; concluding with that counsel which Aesop gave Solon, when he was going
to Croesus; speak to a King, (...), either as little, or as sweet, as is
possible.

But this is too narrow a sense of that phrase, put a knife to thy throat;
though it be a part of it. For it expresses the exceeding great caution, a man
should use at a Feast lest he exceed his bounds in eating and drinking: wherein
he should be as careful, as he is of cutting his throat; which many have in
effect done by intemperance: whereby some have utterly destroyed their healths
at last; and others fallen into such a liberty of speech, as has on a sudden
cost them their lives. Be as afraid therefore, says the Wise man, of running
into excess (of which thou art in great danger at a great Table, if thou have a
great stomach) as if the knife wherewith thou cuttest thy meat, would certainly
cut thy throat, if thou eatest too much. In short, he advises a man to affright
himself from Intemperance; where is a great temptation to it.

There are those indeed that take the first particle ve, in the beginning of
the verse, to signify as much as otherwise; and the meaning to be, if thou
do not curb thy appetite, but let loose its reins to eat and drink, as much
as it desires, it will expose thee to as certain danger, as if a knife were at
thy throat: which though it be not so easy a construction, I have not
altogether neglected.

[c] After this follows an Admonition against Covetousness, v. 4. where he
neither forbids all labor, nor a provident care (which in other places he
commends) but only represents how vain it is, to be over-solicitous; and to
leave no thoughts, nor strength for any thing else: for so the first word is,
do not weary thy self to be rich. And in the next part of the Sentence, he
only bids us desist from our own understanding; meaning thereby, either we
should not wholly trust to that, though in the use of honest means; or that we
should not follow our own inventions, contrary to the divine direction. Some
would have the meaning of the whole to be this; do not prefer the getting of
riches, before the getting of wisdom: taking the verse as if it ran thus,
labor not for riches so as to cease from the prosecution of wisdom: let not
thy worldly cares hinder better things, and then there is no danger: which is
an excellent sense, if the words would bear it.

[d] The reason which Solomon adds v. 5. has little or no difficulty in it;
which is from the uncertainty, either of getting or of keeping Riches. Whose
inconstancy he sets forth by the flight of an Eagle: which of all other birds
is observed to fly swiftest, and highest into heaven (as Solomon here speaks)
or into the clouds (as other Authors) that is, quite out of sight. Whence it
is that God saying, he carried the Israelites out of Egypt upon Eagles wings,
XIX. Exodus 4. R. Solomon (upon XII. Exodus 37.) took a conceit that they went an
hundred and twenty miles in one hour; for so far it was from Ramases to
Succoth. Which though it be but an idle fancy, yet there was this foundation
for it; that the Scripture expresses the swiftest motion by that of Eagles. So
Saul and Jonathan, who were strong and excellent Racers, pursuing their Enemies
with great speed, are said to have been swifter than Eagles, 2 Samuel I. 23. And
such were they who pursued Zedekiah and the people of Judah, when they fled out
of Jerusalem in hope to make an escape, IV. Lam. 19. I. Habakk. 8. compared
with 2 King. XXV. 4, 5. And thus other Nations represent it, as Bochartus
observes out of Cicero, who tells us out of Chrysippus; that when a Racer
dreamt he was turned into an Eagle, an Interpreter told him; Vicisti, ista enim
ave volat nulla velocius.

[e] Next to Covetousness he condemns Envy, as Melancthon and others
understand, v. 6, etc. or rather such covetousness, as makes men sordid: whence
arises indeed that part of envy, which disposes a man to grutch every thing to
his neighbor, though he would be thought liberal: which I pass by only with
this note, of that good man; that a singular diligence ought to be used, in
observing and finding out, the dispositions and inclinations of others; that we
may know whom to avoid, and whom to consort withal. And (according as he
understands the beginning of the next verse, v. 7.) there is none worse than
the man now mentioned, who has a Spectre or Satyr in his Soul; so he renders
it, mistaking Schaar for Saar: which are widely different. And this word
Schaar, being used only here in this place, has raised a great deal of
difficulty, whence to derive it: which I shall not trouble the Reader withal;
the sense being well enough expressed in our Translation, and in short is this,
He is not as he seems: His thoughts differ much from his words; and therefore
do not believe what he says, but mark the discovery he makes of his inward
thoughts. Which are so sordid, that he is detestable, as some render the
phrase, or stinkingly base.

[f] Of envy at the prosperous estate of wicked men, which makes others wish
themselves in their condition, though it be by imitating their wickedness, he
speaks afterward, v. 17. From whence to the XXV. Chapter, most of the precepts
are admonitions, proper for Parents to give their Children; that they may know
what to eschew: particularly Drunkenness and Whoredom (of which he speaks in
this Chapter) and such company, as may entice them to be so lewdly wicked. And
in order hereunto to implant in their minds a due esteem of Wisdom, as
infinitely to be preferred before all earthly treasures. This he inserts in the
middle, between the cautions against Drunkenness and Whoredom [g] v. 23. upon
which the Lord Bacon has passed this remark, that the Wise man judged it
reasonable, that Riches should be employed to get Learning, and not Learning be
applied to gather up Riches.

[h] "S. Chrysostom's observation concerning an Harlot (Hom. XIV. ad pop.
Antioch.) most excellently explains v. 27, 28. that (...), a Whore understands
nothing of love or friendship but only of the art of inveigling. Her heart is
never sensible of true affection; but is made up of wiles to deceive and entrap
men unto their undoing. And if the danger do not appear she is the more to be
avoided (...), etc. because she covers the destruction, and hides the death;
and takes care it shall not presently come into the sight of him, whom she
insnares into it."

[i] In the conclusion of the Chapter he reassumes his discourse about
drunkenness; and represents at large the dismal effects of it, in so lively a
manner, as may well deter any man that reads it seriously, from being too busy
with Wine. Which he says, in conclusion, bites like a Serpent, and stings like
a Basilisk: (So Bochartus has proved we ought to translate the word Tziphoni,
which we render Adder) whence it was, that Tatianus, the Encratites and
Manichees, called Wine, the gall of the Dragon, and the venom of the old
Serpent: and would not taste a drop of it, no not in the holy Communion. Not
considering, what lies open and obvious to every bodies eyes, that there is not
hurt in the thing it self (which is a singular divine benefit) but in our
excess. Whereby innumerable diseases are bred in the body, the reason for the
present suffocated, and the most absurd affections stirred up: which change men
for the time into beasts. Some into Lions as Bochartus glosses (L. III. C. X.
P. 2.) witness Alexander, who killed his dearest Friend in his cups, and Herod,
who after a Feast condemned the great Servant of God John Baptist (whom he
himself highly reverenced) to be beheaded: others into Dogs, as Nabal, who most
rudely and churlishly barkt at David, to whom he had great obligations, when he
was in drink: Others into Hogs, wallowing in filthy pleasures; as Lot who
defiled himself with incest, when he was not himself: nay, it throws men down
below the beasts, who drink no more than needs, and never excite their thirst
by art, but only follow the direction of Nature. All which if any man
consider, he will easily allow of what Solomon says, that it bites like a
Serpent, etc. that is, does more mischief than can be repaired. For the wound
which the Basilisk gives, is said by Avicenna to be incurable; and the Writers
of his Nation say, it does hurt even by its looks and by its hissing, as that
Author before named relates Cap. IX. And so Solomon immediately represents the
effects of drunkenness to be such, that they make a man senseless, and perfectly
stupid; and consequently incorrigible, though he suffer never so sadly by it,
v. 34, 35. As if this poison, made a mortification in the whole man; for which
there is no remedy.

1. WHEN thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is before
thee.


1. WHen a Prince or a very great person, does thee the honor to admit thee to
his table; be not transported with such vain joy, as to remit the seriousness
of thy mind: but remember thou art in danger, if thou have not thy wits about
thee to direct thy behavior; lest thou touch any thing, which perhaps was
reserved only for the Prince's own eating, or demean thy self undecently
toward him, or toward any of the Guests, or Waiters at the Table. See Arg. [a]

2. And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.


2. Especially lest thou speak too freely, which may hazard thy undoing: for
the prevention of which keep thy mind as sharp set as thine appetite; and
affright thy self from intemperance in language, as well as in eating: of which
there is the greater danger, if thou have a greedy desire of meat and drink.
See Arg. [b]

3. Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat.


3. Most especially when exquisite delicacies are set before thee; which are so
tempting, that it is a piece of wisdom not to be too forward to accept of such
invitation; or being there to content thy self with the plainest dish: for it
was not kindness, but design perhaps which called thee thither; or thou may
be easily enticed by such dainties, to overeat thy self.

4. Labor not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom.


4. Do not trouble thy self with restless and tiresome labors to get a great
estate: be not too thoughtfull, nor let thy cares be endless, about such
matters; much less use any ill contrivances, which they may suggest to thee:
no, nor depend so much upon thy own prudent management for the success of thy
honest undertakings, as upon God's blessing. See Arg. [c]

5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they flee away as an eagle toward heaven.


5. Consider, for the cure of this, how ridiculous it is, that thou should
let thy mind be so intent upon Riches, and pursue them with such haste and
earnestness; which perhaps thou can never catch; or if thou do may be gone
as fast as they came; and by all thy care and pains never be recovered. See
Arg. [d]

6. Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither desire thou
his dainty meats.


6. Receive no obligations from a sordid man: but though he invite thee to a
Feast (which he may make perhaps sometime for ostentation sake) let not the
good cheer tempt thee, to accept his invitation. See Argument [e]

7. For as he thinks in his heart, so is he: Eat and drink, says he to thee,
but his heart is not with thee.


7. For even then, when he would be thought most free and generous, he is not
able to dissemble the baseness of his mind: which expresses it self in his very
looks; whereby he shows that when he prays thee to feed heartily, he had rather
thou would let it alone, and thinks thou eatest and drinkest a great deal too
much.

8. The morsel which thou have eaten, shall thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet
words.


8. Which will make thee so nauseate all his dainties, as to be ready to bring
up again every bit thou have eaten: and to repent of the commendations thou
have bestowed on his entertainment; or the thanks thou have returned to him for
it; or the wholesome discourse, thou have interspersed at the Table: for it is
all perfectly lost upon him.

9. Speak not in the ears of a fool; for he will despise the wisdom of thy
words.


9. And indeed it is good advice, not to speak of any serious thing to such
stupid fools: for be thy discourse never so ingenious, prudent, or instructive,
they will not only reap no profit by it; but despise and perhaps laugh at it.

10. Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the
fatherless.


10. What was said before (XXII. 28.) of not removing the ancient boundaries,
understand with a peculiar respect to Fatherless Children: whose possessions be
not tempted to invade, because they are in their Infancy, and do not understand
the wrong that is done them; or are utterly unable to defend or to right
themselves.

11. For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee.


11. For, if their Guardians and Friends be careless of their concerns, or
afraid to oppose thy proceedings, they have a Protector who neither wants
power nor courage to recover their right: and will undoubtedly assert it, and
condemn thee to make them ample satisfaction. XXII. 23.

12. Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of
knowledge.


12. And do not think these to be slight admonitions, which need not much to be
regarded: but apply thy mind with sincere affection to such instructions, and
lissen diligently to those persons whose discourses tend to make thee
understand thy duty.

13. Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the
rod, he shall not die.


13. Unto which Children sometimes will not attend, and therefore remember what
has been often said (XIII. 24. XIX. 18. XXII. 15.) and do not forbear to give
correction to a Child, that is so ill disposed: let not foolish pity make thee
spare him; for it will do him no hurt if he be soundly beaten; but rather be a
means to save him from sorer punishment, even from death it self.

14. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell.


14. Do not turn over this business to another, but do it thy self; which may
save the public Officers the labor: nay, by making his body smart for his
faults, both body and soul may be delivered from utter destruction.

15. My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.


15. But mix the kindest exhortations and entreaties with this discipline,
saying; My dear Child, if thou have any love for me, who was the Instrument of
bringing thee into the world, be serious, and heartily in love with wisdom and
goodness: which will give me, me I say (not to mention now thy own happiness) a
joy incomparably greater than all other.

16. Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things.


16. A joy that may be better felt than expressed; diffusing it self all over
me; and making my mind triumph, when I hear no ill words come out of thy mouth;
but only discourses of the right way to be happy.

17. Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the LORD all
the day long.


17. In which that thou may always tread, be not offended at the prosperity
of the wicked; much less vex and fret thy self into an imitation of them: but
maintain perpetually an awful sense of God in thy mind; which is the best
preservative against envy and all other sins, if thou perseverest constantly in
it. See Arg. [f]

18. For surely there is an end, and thine expectation shall not be out off.


18. Which there is great reason thou should; for be assured, though thou art
afflicted for the present, the time will come when thou shall not only be
delivered, but rewarded for thy patience: expect it confidently, if the fear of
the Lord make thee persist in faithful obedience to him: for it shall not be
in the power of man to disappoint thee of thy hope; but thou shall certainly
flourish, when those wicked men shall hang down their heads and perish.

19. Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way.


19. And more particularly, my dear Child, be advised by me to study this piece
of wisdom; and to follow closely and heartily this direction which I commend
to thee.

20. Be not amongst wine-bibbers; amongst riotous eaters of flesh.


20. I know how greedy youth is of pleasure; and in what danger to be corrupted
by it: therefore avoid the society of drunkards and gluttons; and take heed of
all excess in eating and drinking.

21. For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags.


21. For besides that it is an enemy to wisdom, it brings men to poverty;
which is the common effect of revelling, feasting and riotous living: for that
is wont to be attended also with laziness, carelessness and neglect of all
business; which necessarily reduces men to extreme beggary.

22. Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when
she is old.


22. Be obedient to this counsel; which is given thee by thy Father, who loves
thee, and has had longer experience of the world than thou, and by bringing
thee into it has power to command thee: and do not slight (as the manner is)
what thy Mother says, because she is a woman, much less because she is grown
old; which ought to make her advice the more regarded by thee.

23. Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and
understanding.


23. Spare no cost nor pains to acquire the knowledge of what is true and
false, good and bad; and do not think there is any thing of equal price unto
it: and therefore neglect not the study of it, though it were to get never so
much money, or the highest honors; but prefer wisdom and virtue, and the
means that instruct thee how to attain it, and to make thee able to do good to
others, infinitely before them all. See Arg. [g]

24. The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begets a
wise child, shall have joy of him.


24. For there is no greater joy, a Parent can have, than to see his Son take
virtuous courses: which as it is the only wisdom, so gives both Parents and
Children, the highest pleasure and satisfaction.

25. Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall
rejoice.


25. Let not thy Father and Mother then, want this singular pleasure; but by
thy well-doing fill the heart of her that bare thee with joy and triumph: who
for all the pains and care she has had in thy birth and about thy education,
desires no other requital but only this.

26. My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.


26. And more especially, my dear Child, let me prevail with thee also, to
apply thy mind affectionately to this following instruction: and let thy
thoughts be very intent and fixed upon it; that thou may preserve they self in
the practice of those virtues to which I have directed thee.

27. For an whore is a deep ditch; and a strange woman is a narrow pit.


27. Estrange thy self from harlots, as much as they are estranged from God;
for (as I have told thee before, XXII. 14.) thou art utterly undone, if thou
fallest in league with a whore; who will never be satisfied with all the money
thou can give her: and yet, such are her arts, notwithstanding all the
straits and hardships thou shall suffer by her, it will be a hard matter, when
thou art once engaged, to get quit of her.

28. She also lies in wait as for a prey, and increases the transgressors
among men.


28. She is not what she appears; but, whatsoever love she may pretend to thee,
is no better than a highway robber; who will watch all opportunities to make a
prey of thee: and is of no other use in the world, which already is too bad,
but to make it worse; by increasing the number of lewd, disloyal and faithless
men. See Arg. [h]

29. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who
has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes?


29. And if thou intendest to avoid such women, then (as I said before v. 20.)
avoid intemperance; the lamentable effects of which are so many, that it is a
hard matter to enumerate them: For if thou considerest, who they are that run
themselves into all manner of mischiefs, that are never out of danger, but are
engaged, for instance, in quarrels, disturbing the neighborhood, by their
noise and tumult, and fighting; and are wounded, not for the safety of their
Country, but for frivolous causes; look deformedly, and spoil their very
countenances;

30. They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine.


30. Thou will find they are such as are so in love with wine, that they
neither willingly stir from it; nor content themselves with the ordinary sort:
but make a diligent search for the richest and most generous liquours.

31. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in
the cup, when it moves it self aright.


31. Therefore do not believe thy senses merely, but consider the power and
effects of wine: and when thou see how bright it looks, and how it sparkles
in the glass; when it tastes most gratefully, and goes down smoothly; let it
not entice thee to excess.

32. At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.


32. But remember, that the pleasure will be attended at last with intolerable
pains; when it works like so much poison in thy veins; and casts thee into
diseases as hard to cure, as the biting of a Serpent, or the stinging of a
Basilisk. See Arg. [i]

33. Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter
perverse things.


33. Thy thoughts will not only grow confused, and all things appear to thee
otherways than they are; but lustful, nay adulterous desires will be stirred
up, which thou can not rule: and thy mouth, being without a bridle, will
break forth into unseemly, nay filthy, scurrilous, or perhaps blasphemous
language; without respect to God or man.

34. Yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he
that lies upon the top of a mast.


34. And, which is worst of all, thou will grow so perfectly senseless, that thy
most important business will not only lie neglected; but thou will sottishly
run thy self into the extremest hazards, without any apprehension of danger:
being no more able to direct thy course, than a Pilot who snorts when a Ship is
tossed in the midst of the Sea; or to take notice of the peril thou art in,
than he that falls asleep on the top of the Mast, where he was set to keep the
watch.

35. They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have
beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.


35. And to complete thy misery, should thou be not only, mocked and abused,
but beaten also, thou thy self wilt confess afterward, that it made no
impression on thee: nay, should thou be most lamentably battered and bruised,
thou will neither know who did it, nor at all regard it; but, as if no harm had
befal'n thee, no sooner open thy eyes, but stupidly seek an occasion to be
drunk, and beaten again.

CHAP. XXIV.
ARGUMENT.
[a] The proneness of good men, especially while they are weak, and only in
the beginnings of Goodness, to be dejected at the prosperity of the ungodly,
and so to be tempted to imitate them, is the reason, that the admonition we
meet withal in the first verse is so often repeated. Which we find before III.
31. XXIII. 17. and comes again v. 18. of this Chapter.

[b] And, in like manner, for the encouragement of well-disposed persons, to
depend on God's blessing, in the exercise of a virtuous prudence; for the
getting, increasing, and preserving of an estate ( v. 3, 4, 5.) he repeats
another observation ( v. 6, 7.) of the advantage which Wisdom has over mere
strength: which we had several times before, XI. 14. XV. 22. XX. 18.

[c] And then having shown that it is not Wisdom to invent new ways of doing
hurt ( v. 8, 9,) he advises to diligence in the acquiring of true Wisdom,
while we are in a good condition: For else we shall not be able to support our
selves when Adversity comes. So some understand v. 10. which we translate
otherways, and so do most Interpreters: and therefore I have expressed, the
sense of our translation first; and only annexed the other to it. There is a
third, which I have taken no notice of in my Paraphrase, because it does not
seem to me to be genuine; which is this, If adversity deject thee, and break
thy spirit; thou will be so much the more unable to get out of it. But it is an
excellent observation, and therefore I thought good here to mention it: though
the simplest sense seems to be that which we follow, and in brief is this; Thou
art not a man of courage, if thou can not bear adversity with an equal mind.

[d] And there is a courage to be exercised in our charitable succouring of
others, as well as in our own distresses; which he commends in the following
words, v. 11, 12. Where he presses with a great deal of warmth (as will appear
to those that understand the Hebrew language, and read the last words with an
interrogation) the necessity of giving our assistance for the rescuing of
innocent persons (when their lives are in danger) either by counselling them,
or petitioning others on their behalf, or purchasing their release with money,
or using our authority, or power (if we have any and can do it lawfully) for
their deliverance. For this chiefly belongs to Magistrates, and those that are
in public Office; who ought not to be overawed by great men, from undertaking
the protection and relief of those who are unjustly oppressed. This I think
Melancthon has expressed, as well, or better than any I have met withal, in
this manner: "God commands both the Magistrate and private men, not to murder
the innocent, and likewise not to assist unjust cruelty. But quite contrary the
Magistrate ought to be the Guardian of innocent men's lives; and private persons
in their places ought to oppose, without sedition, unjust severity, as much as
they are able. There are many examples of this in the Scripture. Jonathan
opposed his Father, and helped to preserve David; not only by the good
testimony he gave of him, but by other good offices. Obadiah fed the Prophets,
whom Jezabel designed to have killed. The Eunuch pulled up Jeremiah out of the
dungeon; and the Egyptian Midwifes saved the Israelites children, as Rahab
afterward did the spies. In the time of Dioclesian, a noble person in the city
of Nicomedia in Bithynia, publicly tore down the Edict of the Emperor, for
putting Christians to death; that he might show he detested that unjust
cruelty. Examples to the contrary, are such as that of Doeg, who in compliance
with Readiness fury slew the innocent Priests: and many now, either openly or by
their silence confirm the unjust severity, which is exercised against our
Churches. Let such think of these words of Solomon, If thou forbear to deliver
them."

[e] Who shows with what pleasure such Instructions should be received, and how
profitable, nay necessary, they are, by the example of Honey ( v. 13, 14.)
which was not only reckoned the sweetest thing in those Countries (as appears
by many places of Scripture) but one of those, which was most necessary, for
humane life; as appears by the words of the Son of Sirach XXXIX. 41. For it was
useful for food, for drink, for medicine, for preserving of dead bodies; and
was so natural to them, that it seems to have been the food of Infants, VII.
Isa. 15. Whence the ancient Christians, were wont to give a little milk and
honey to those who were baptized; as persons newly regenerate and born again:
because Honey as well as Milk, was the nutriment of little children in those
days and countries. How refreshing it was, appears by the story of Jonathan, 1 Samuel XIV. 17. and in what common use, by the example of our Savior after his
Resurrection, XXIV. Luke 41, 42. Which may all be applied to Wisdom; from
whence the mind derives the greatest satisfaction: and therefore ought to be,
as it were, our daily diet (without which we cannot subsist) from the beginning
of our days, unto the end of them.

[f] For many gracious promises are made to it, which must not be so
understood, he shows, as if no evil thing should befall good men: but as
Wisdom teaches them to be content with a little (which seems to be denoted by
the word we translate habitation, v. 15.) so when they meet with any
affliction, it instructs them not to despair of better days. So those words are
to be understood v. 16. Which are commonly not only in Sermons, but in Books
also applied to falling into sin: And that men may the more securely indulge
themselves in their sins, and yet think themselves good men, they have very
cunningly added something to them. For they are commonly cited thus, A just man
falls seven times a day. Which last words [ a day, or in a day] are not in
any translation of the Bible (much less in the Original) but only some corrupt
Editions of the Vulgar Latin: which against the plain scope of the Context, and
the meaning of the words, seems to understand this place of falling into sin.
When the word fall never signifies so; but always trouble and calamity: as
abundance of learned men have long ago observed; particularly Tarnovius; and
since him, Amama, and Grotius. Nor needs there any other proof of it, than
those places (which are many) wherein falling and rising again being opposed;
both of them have respect to calamities: and the former signifies, being
plunged into them, and the other, getting out of them. And so, in the Latin
tongue adversities, are called casus, falls, as every body knows.

And therefore we must make use of other places, for the confuting the fancy of
perfection in this life; and for the comfort of those, who are cast down by
their lapses into sin: And take heed of reading the holy Scriptures so
carelessly, as to turn our Medicine into poison: which is the fault of those,
who from such mistakes, give way to their evil affections; and let them carry
them into sin.

[g] Against this there follows a severe caution, in the Wise man, who would
not have us so much as indulge our selves in that pleasure, we are apt to take,
in seeing our Enemies fall into such troubles, as they have given us v. 17. And
to this he annexes another which cannot be too often repeated ( v. 19.) against
fretting at the prosperity of those who do ill: which he often prohibits; but
does it now in the words of his Father David, XXXVII. Psalm. 1. whose authority
was justly held very great in that Church: and who had made many observations,
from his own experience, of the shortness of their felicity; and the sudden
changes, with which they were often surprised and astonished.

[h] An instance he gives of this in the next precept ( v. 21, 22.) which,
says Melancthon (so careful were the Reformers to prevent all Sedition and
Rebellion) is to be reckoned among the principal sentences, that are to be
observed in this Book: commanding obedience, and directing the order of it.
"For first he commands us to obey God; and then the King: whose office it is to
see the Laws of God observed by his Subjects; and to make such Laws as are not
repugnant to God's Laws; and to punish the contumacious; and to pronounce all
sentences according to the Laws, etc. And in dubious cases, their decrees ought
to prevail; not only because there is a probable reason on their side, but
because of the Authority given from above unto Magistrates: whom God would have
us in civil affairs, though dubious before, to obey. And because God gives us
sometimes more mild and gentle, sometimes less kind. He would have us also to
bear onera duriora, if they be tolerable, and obedience be not a sin. For he
threatens here a severe vengeance to those that are seditious: so he translates
the word Schonim; which the Chaldee translates fools ( changelings in our
language) for they are no better, who invert and change this order (as some
understand the word) either by advancing the will of the Prince above all Law,
without any regard to what God himself has enacted; or by pretending Religion
and the fear of the Lord, for rebellion against the King, who ordains nothing
against God's Law."

[i] But there is no necessity of glossing upon that word (which we render
given to change) for though it be diversely translated, the sense is still the
same. And some of the varieties that are of opinions, about the sense of the
latter part of the 22 verse, I have expressed in the Paraphrase, and made them
agree well enough. Lud de Dieu is alone by himself (as far as I can find) who
would have that word we render both of them, to signify their years: and the
meaning to be; who knows how soon their life may be at a miserable end?

Among the following sentences, which are rules also of Wisdom, there is no
difficulty; but a little in v. 26. and 28. Where I have endeavored to
comprehend several expositions; and connext them together in my Paraphrase: but
think not fit to enlarge this Preface any further, by giving a particular
account of them.

1. BE not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them.


1. LET it not vex thee into impatience and indignation, to see men thrive who
are bent upon nothing but wickedness; much less move thee to think them happy
men, and to wish thy self among them: but avoid their company, and much more
their course of life. See Arg. [a]

2. For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief.


2. For who would grow rich and great by the misery of others? and such men's
thoughts are always contriving how to ruin those that stand in the way of their
wicked designs: and their tongues are employed in lies, calumnies, false
accusations, and all manner of forgeries; not only to give trouble and
vexation unto their neighbors, but to undo them.

3. Through wisdom is an house builded, and by understanding it is established:


3. An estate may be gotten, and a family raised by such wise and pious means,
as I have recommended in this Book: and there need no other arts but virtue and
prudent management, to settle and continue it.

4. And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant
riches.


4. For as true learning and knowledge is the best furniture of the mind; so it
is best able to furnish every room in the house; not only with all things
necessary, but with what may serve for ornament and for the pleasure of life.

5. A wise man is strong, yea, a man of knowledge increases strength.


5. Wisdom also is able to supply the defect of bodily strength, for a man's
defense against unjust invaders of his possessions: or if he have outward
strength and power, his skill and dexterity will add such force unto it, as
will make it more effectual.

6. For by wise counsel thou shall make thy war: and in multitude of
counselors there is safety.


6. For experience tells us, that victory does not depend so much, upon mighty
armies; as upon exact conduct, good discipline and subtle contrivance: and the
safety of a Nation does not lie merely in the multitude of the people; but in
the number of wise men, to direct and govern all affairs, (XI. 14.) See Arg. [b]

7. Wisdom is too high for a fool: he opens not his mouth in the gate.


7. Who are the more valuable, because it is no easy thing to be an
accomplished person in all the parts of wisdom; which are above the reach of
vain, rash and heady men: who are not admitted either to judge, or to advise in
the common Council of the City; where wise men are not afraid, nor ashamed to
speak, and that with great authority.

8. He that devises to do evil, shall be called a mischievous person.


8. He that devises new ways and arts of cheating, or doing mischief unto
others, is one of the worst of men; and shall be branded with the odious name
of An inventour of evil things (I. Romans 30.)

9. The thought of foolishness is sin: and the scorner is an abomination to men.


9. To contrive any thing that is hurtful unto others, though out of rashness
and folly, is a sin: but he that makes a jest of it when it is done, and laughs
at those who tell him it is a sin; is such a pestilent wretch, that he is, or
ought to be, extremely abhorred of all mankind.

10. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.


10. To despond and desist from any good design, much more to despair of
deliverance, when thou fallest into any distress, is an argument of great
weakness and feebleness of mind: and yet, if thou art remiss in the study of
Wisdom in a prosperous condition, thy spirit will be apt to sink, and be
dejected in a worse. See Arg. [c]

11. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that
are ready to be slain:


11. Use thy best endeavors to deliver innocent persons, who by false
accusations, or other ways, are dragged to execution; or are in present danger
of losing their life: and do not think, thou can with a safe conscience
withdraw thy self, from succouring them in that distress.

12. If thou say, Behold, we knew it not: does not he that pondereth the
heart consider it? and he that keeps thy sold, does not he know it? and
shall not he render to every man according to his works?


12. I know the common excuse which men are apt to make in this case;
protesting that they did not understand their innocence, or how to save them:
but do thou think such things will pass with God, though they do with men?
Can thou deceive Him with false pretenses? Him, that searches into the
secrets of all men's hearts? Him, that observes every, the very least, motion
of thy Soul? by whose (...) Providence, which serves all men in their kind,
thou thy self shall be deserted, as thou have deserted others. See Arg [d]

13. My son, eat thou honey, because it is good; and the honeycomb, which is
sweet to thy taste:


13. Do not slight, much less nauseate such precepts as these, my dear Child:
but as honey is most acceptable to thy palate, both for its wholesomeness, and
for its pleasure; especially that pure part of it, which drops of it self
immediately from the honeycomb; See Arg. [e]

14. So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou have found
it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off.


14. So let that knowledge be to thy mind, which tends to make thee wise and
virtuous: for as nothing is more necessary for thee, nothing more delightful;
so, if it be seriously studied and thoroughly digested, it will abundantly
reward thy pains, with prosperous success in all thy undertakings; and never
put thee in hope of any thing, which shall not answer thy expectation.

15. Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous: spoil
not his resting place.


15. It is possible indeed that a good man's condition may be very mean, nay
afflicted sometime in this world: but let not that tempt the wicked subtly to
contrive to ruin, much less by open violence to disturb his innocent repose;
nay, cast him out of his small habitation, with which he is contented:

16. For a just man falls seven times, and rises up again: but the wicked
shall fall into mischief.


16. For though a good man should meet with so many troubles, that thou
imaginest he cannot fail to perish in them: he shall overcome them all, and
flourish again; when the wicked shall sink under the calamity that befalls
them, and never be able to recover out of it. See Arg. [f]

17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when
he stumbleth:


17. It is a great piece of wisdom and virtue also, to pity others in their
trouble, and not to show any sign of joy and mirth, when thou see any man,
though he be thy enemy, in a calamitous condition: no, not so much as (upon thy
own account) to take any inward pleasure in his downfall.

18. Lest the LORD see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath
from him.


18. For though no body sees it, God does; and such inhumane affections are so
displeasing to Him, that they may provoke Him to translate the calamity from
thy enemy unto thee: and thereby damp thy sinful joy with a double sorrow;
first to see him delivered from his trouble, and then to find thy self involved
in it.

19. Fret not thy self because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the
wicked.


19. Let not thy anger kindle (or if it do, quench it presently, that it may
not tempt thee to impatience) when thou see naughty men thrive and prosper:
and do not imagine them to be happy men, and thereby be provoked to follow them,
in their impious courses. See Arg. [g]

20. For there shall be no reward to the evil man, the candle of the wicked
shall be put out.


20. For though a wicked man may live bravely for a time, yet it shall end
quite otherways than he expected: and his splendor (such as it is) if not in
his own days, yet in his posterity, be utterly extinguished.

21. My son, fear thou the LORD, and the king: and meddle not with them that
are given to change.


21. Take care therefore, my dear Child, that thy Religion (which teaches thee
in the first place to worship, reverence, and obey the great Lord and Governor
of all the world) make thee humbly obedient to the King, as God's Vicegerent
here on earth: and have nothing to do with those, whose discontent with the
present state of things, or their love of novelty, makes them affect a change
of Government; and depart from their duty both to God and man. See Arg. [h]

22. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them
both?


22. For an unexpected and dreadful calamity shall unavoidably and violently
seize on them: but when, and how either God or the King will punish them none
can tell; or what terrible vengeance they will take, both upon those that move
rebellion, and those that associate with them. See Arg. [i]

23. These things also belong to the wise. It is not good to have respect of
persons in judgment.


23. These things also that follow, belong to the wise and virtuous conduct of
thy life. It is a very evil thing, if thou art a Judge, to consider the quality
of the person (either his greatness, or his relation, or the friendship thou
have with him, etc.) and not the merits of the cause, that is brought before
thee.

24. He that says unto the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the people
curse, nations shall abhor him.


24. And whoever he be, that contrary to the plain evidence which is given in
against the wicked, shall pronounce him innocent, and make a bad cause to be
good; the whole Country shall curse him, and wish the Divine vengeance may
overtake him: nay, other Nations, who hear of his unjust proceedings, shall
have him in great detestation.

25. But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall
come upon them.


25. But they that give a check to vice and wickedness, by punishing evil doers
according to their deserts, shall not only have inward satisfaction in their
own mind; but increase of joy, by hearing others speak well of them: nay, God
himself, the fountain of all good, shall plentifully bestow his blessings upon
them.

26. Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer.


26. It is not only justice but kindness, to pass a righteous Sentence,
without fear or favor; and upon all occasions to speak appositely and
consonant to truth: and as such persons give others a singular pleasure, so
they shall be beloved most dearly, and honored by all.

27. Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thy self in the field; and
afterward build thine house.


27. Do every thing in order: and first mind those things which are most
necessary; contenting thy self with a little hutt in the field, till thou have
gotten an estate, by a careful improvement of thy pasturage and of thy
tillage: and then it will be timely enough to build thee an house, and to bring
a wife into it.

28. Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause: and deceive not with
thy lips.


28. Do not testify any thing against thy neighbor rashly, much less when
thou have no ground at all for thy accusation; nor seduce any body into a false
opinion of him, by crafty insinuation; much less suborn them secretly by
promises of rewards, to say that which is not true of him; when outwardly thou
carriest thy self fair to him, and pretendest to be his Friend.

29. Say not, I will do so to him as he has done to me: I will render to the
man according to his work.


29. Suppose he has been injurious in that kind to thee heretofore, and thou
have now an opportunity to be revenged; let not that tempt thee to resolve with
thy self to do to him, as he has done to thee: taking upon thee that, which
God has declared belongs to Himself alone (XXXII. Deuteronomy. 35.) to recompense
unto him, according to his deservings.

30. I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void
of understanding:


30. And, to that which I have just now said ( v. 27.) concerning diligence, I
will add this observation; which I my self made, as I took a view of the state
of my Subjects: among whom I found one so lazy and void of consideration; that
though he had good land in the field, and a fruitful vineyard;

31. And lo, it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the
face thereof, and the stonewall thereof was broken down.


31. Yet, such was his wretched sloth, instead of corn I was surprised with the
sight of thorns and thistles, which had overrun his whole field; nor was there
any thing but nettles to be seen in his vineyard: or if there had been any
fruit in either, it would have been lost for want of a fence; which was fallen
down, and laid all open to the beasts of prey.

32. Then I saw, and considered it well: I looked upon it, and received
instruction.


32. Which rufull spectacle so deeply affected my heart, and brought so many
thoughts into my mind; that I learnt, by beholding those miserable effects of
idleness, to cure that vice in my self, and to correct it in others.

33. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep:


33. And I cannot do it better, than in those words before used (VI. 10, 11.)
If thou will not rouse up thy self, O sluggard, but, rolling thy self on thy
bed, ridiculously desire thy pains may be spared, and that thou may still be
suffered without any disturbance to enjoy a little more sleep, and to lay aside
all care of thy business, when thou have loytered too long already;

34. So shall thy poverty come, as one that travelleth; and thy want as an
armed man.


34. Then poverty shall come swiftly (though in silent and unobserved paces)
upon thee; and, before thou art aware, leave thee as naked, as if thou were
stripped by a highway man: nay, the most extreme want and beggary shall
unavoidably seize on thee, like an armed man, against whom thou can make no
resistance.

The End of the Second Part of the Book of PROVERBS.
THE THIRD PART Of the BOOK of PROVERBS.
CHAP. XXV.
ARGUMENT.
[a] Here begins the THIRD PART of the Book of Proverbs; which are a Collection
made by some belonging to Hezekiah: and acknowledged here (in the entrance of
the Book) as well as the former, to be Solomon's. Who spoke a great many
Proverbs (we read 1 King. IV. 32.) which no doubt were preserved by his
Successors in a Book; if he did not set them down there himself. Out of which
Volume, some good men had selected such as they thought most useful for the
people: and besides those in the foregoing Chapters, which had been compiled,
either in his own days, or soon after; these also which follow, were thought
good to be added in the days of Hezekiah. Who restoring the service of God in
the Temple to its purity and splendor (2 Chronicles. XXIX. 3, etc. XXX. 1, etc.
XXXI. 2, 3, etc.) took care in all likelihood for the better instruction of the
people in piety, to revive the Schools of the Prophets also: and to press them
(as he had done the Priests) to do their duty faithfully; in teaching the Laws
of God, and informing the people in all things that might be profitable for
them.

Out of which Schools some were chosen, it is probable, to attend the King
himself; who are called his men or servants: who out of their great zeal to
promote useful learning, culled out more Proverbs from among that great heap
of three thousand (which would have been too great a bulk to have been all
published, and perhaps all of them not concerning manners, or good government)
and such especially as they saw would do good to the Prince as well as to the
people: of which nature are those that are put into this Collection; many of
which belong to the right administration of the public affairs. I am not able
to produce express authority for all this; but I think it may be fairly
conjectured from those words, 2 Chronicles. XXXI. ult. where we read of the pains
Hezekiah took, about the Law, and about the Commandments; as well as about the
service of the house of God.

But who the persons were, that he employed in transcribing these Proverbs out
of the ancient Records, is more obscure. Some of the Hebrews say, Shebna the
Scribe, and his Officers or Clerks that were under the principal Secretary.
Others add Eliakim and Joah (who are joined together with him in 2 King. XVIII.
26, 37.) Others fancy them to have been Esaiah (a person of great quality, near
of kin to the King, and very familiar with him) together with Hoseah and Micah;
who all lived in the days of Hezekiah, and might possibly undertake this
excellent Work. In which they insert some things, which are to be found, in the
foregoing parts of this Book, in words but little different, as v. 24. of this
Chapter, and Chapter XXVI. 13, 15, 22. and other places; of which I cannot stay
here to give an account.

[b] They begin the Book with a Sentence, which the Lord Bacon applies to all
the learning and wisdom of Solomon. "In which, says he, Solomon challenges
nothing to himself, but only the honor of the inquisition, and invention of
Truth: which it is the glory of God to conceal, and the glory of a King to find
out. As if the Divine Majesty took delight to hide his works, to the end to
have them found out; and as if Kings could not attain a greater honor (or
pleasure or recreation either) than to employ themselves in that business:
considering the great command they have of wits, and means; whereby the
investigation of all things may be effected." Thus he L. VI. of the Advanc. of
Learn. Chapter 6.

Which is a very ingenious gloss; if we refer both parts of the Sentence to one
and the same matter: tacitly admonishing Hezekiah, and in him all succeeding
Kings, not to spend their time in any thing so much; as in searching after
truth; and endeavoring to understand not only the secrets of Government, but
of the Laws of God, and of all his Works: that they may not be imposed upon by
false colors and deceitful glosses; which cunning wits are apt to put upon
causes that are brought before them; nay, upon the Book of God it self.

But if the words be well examined, they will be found to speak rather of
different matters; which God conceals, and into which Kings penetrate. By which
some understand one thing, and some another: but taking the word Elohim to
relate to God's Government of the World; that which I have said in the
Paraphrase, seems to me nearest to the business. And Jansenius his exposition
is not forced; who discourses to this purpose. It is part of God's glory that
he need search into nothing; because He perfectly knows all things: and yet
need not declare that He takes notice of every thing (because he can do it
when he pleases) but rather seem to dissemble his knowledge; in which he
wonderfully declares his patience and long suffering toward us. But Kings on
Earth must not herein imitate Him; for it is their honor to search diligently
and enquire into the state of their Kingdom; and to correct presently what they
find amiss; lest it be out of their power, when it is strengthened by long
custom and numerous offenders. But especially in difficult and intricate
businesses, covered with darkness and obscurity, perplexed with many windings
and turnings, and with crafty and subtle conveyances; there to spy light, and
by wisdom and diligence to rip up a foul matter, and searching the cause to
the bottom to make a discovery of all, is a thing most worthy of a King, and
tends highly to his honor. In short, as it makes for the glory of God, that he
need enquire into nothing; but, when he knows all things, yet conceals that
knowledge: so, on the contrary side, it makes for the glory of Kings, that when
they are forced to confess, that they are ignorant, as well as other men, of
many things; they make such diligent enquiry, that they discover and detect
those things, which others have entangled, and would have buried in darkness.

To some such purpose, all Interpreters expound these words, save one: who
refers both part of the Sentence to Kings (understanding by Elohim, Gods,
Judges and Princes) in this sense; wise Kings preserve the reverence which is
due to their persons and place, by concealing carefully their own intentions
and counsels; and by finding out the designs of other men. Thus Maldonate;
which I mention, because it is a great truth, though not the sense of the
words; but rather the meaning of the following verse, v. 2.

[c] Which concerns Kings also, as some of those that come after likewise do
(which would incline one to think this Part of the Book of Proverbs, was
particularly collected for the use of Hezekiah) and has received this gloss
from the same great man I named before, the Lord Bacon: who gives this as one
of the chief reasons, why the hearts of Kings are inscrutable, because, "they
being at the very top of humane desires, have not, for the most part, any
particular ends proposed to themselves (none at least to which they vehemently
and constantly aspire) by the site and distance of which ends, we may be
directed to take the measure and scale of the rest of their actions: whereas
there is no private person, who is not altogether like a Traveller, that goes
intently aiming at some certain terms of his journey, where he may stay and
rest: from whence one may probably conjecture, what he will do, or not do.
For if any thing conduce to the end at which he aims, it is likely he will do
it; but if it cross his design, he will not. Therefore he passes this judicious
observation, upon the whole: that Princes are best interpreted by their
natures, and private persons by their ends." Adv. of Learn. B. VIII. Chapter 2.

But from hence also he observes (in his first Book) that it is best not to be
too inquisitive to penetrate into the hearts of Kings: since we are so ignorant
of the things we see with our eyes every day: which the custom of the Levant
aims at, that makes it an heinous offense to gaze and fix their eyes upon
Princes: which is barbarous in the outward ceremony, but good in the moral: For
it becomes not Subjects to pry too far into their Princes counsels. But it may
as well check the ambition, as the curiosity of private persons; because they
can hardly be sure of that favor, which they may imagine their Prince has for
them: there being such depths in their inclinations and affections as they
cannot sound.

But in the next verses Princes are admonished that there is no policy like
true Virtue, to support their Thrones: and that in order to it they should not
keep so much as one ill man about them: who oft-times corrupts the whole Court,
and disturbs the whole Kingdom.

[d] And in the next verse he admonishes Subjects, not to be vainly ambitious;
nor bold and forward to thrust themselves into Offices, or into a rank that
does not belong to them: but to be modest, especially in the Prince's presence;
and (according to our Savior's rule) to be invited to honor, rather than
greedily seek it. And withal he secretly commends to Kings, the care of
keeping up their state and dignity: not suffering every body to intrude into
their presence, but giving a check to proud, bold and saucy persons.

Then follow private instructions, not to be too forward to go to Law; and when
we do, to manage Suits fairly, without aspersing those with whom we contend;
and without breaking the Laws of Friendship: which require us, not to discover
the secrets wherewith another has entrusted us, ver. 9, 10.

[e] In the eleventh verse I have followed Maimonides his interpretation of the
word Maskijoth; in his Preface to his More Nevochim. And it being doubtful,
whether by apples of gold, he mean, apples that look like gold, or apples made
of gold; I have expressed both.

[f] But I must not give a particular account of every verse; and therefore I
shall only add, that I have taken the meaning of the 16. and 17. verses to be,
that moderation is good in all things, especially in those that please us: As
honey does; which was so plentiful in those Countries (as it is in many other)
that it was ordinarily found in the woods, and holes of rocks, etc. as may be
seen in Bochart. L. IV. C. 12. P. 11. De Sac. Animal.

[g] In the 20th verse I have followed Melancthon in what he observes out of
Pliny concerning nitre (whose nature is not now well known) that it is
exasperated by vinegar or lime. But in the latter end of the verse, I have kept
to our Translation, which by leb ra understands an heart ill affected by grief
or sorrow: which he takes literally for an evil or wicked heart. And makes this
the meaning (which some others have followed) that pertinacious sinners, are
made more furious by admonitions.

In all ancient Translations there follows after this verse, this Sentence. As
a moth in a garment or a worm in wood; so is heaviness in the heart of man. But
S. Hierom, in the latter end of his Commentaries upon Esaiah, tells us that it
was sub obelo in Origen's Works, where he noted all superfluous additions, with
that mark.

[h] I must not omit neither, that the 23d verse, will admit of a quite
contrary sense, to that in our Translation; and is by some rendered thus; As the
north wind begets rain (for so it does in some Climates) so a backbiting
tongue raises up anger and indignation (which appear in the countenance, both
of him that believes the calumny, and of him that is calumniated; when be knows
how he is abused.)

[i] There is no great difficulty in v. 26. But Interpreters are divided about
this, whether he speak of a just man's falling into sin; or into some calamity.
Melancthon understands the latter, and makes this the sense, that even wise
men's minds are extremely troubled, when they see the wicked prevail against the
virtuous: of which he gives a great many examples. But I have taken in both;
and have referred it also to all manner of sufferings, and not restrained it to
public injustice, as the Lord Bacon does; who has this excellent observation
upon the place (Book VIII. Chapter 2. Parab. 25.) This Parable teaches us, that
States and Republics must above all things beware of an unjust and infamous
Sentence, in any cause of great importance; especially where the innocent is
not absolved, but he that is not guilty condemned. For injuries ravaging among
private persons do indeed trouble and pollute the streams of Justice, yet only
as in the smaller rivulets: but such unjust judgments, as I mentioned, from
which examples are derived, infect and distain the very fountain of Justice.
For when the Courts of Justice side with Injustice, the state of things is
turned, as into a public Robbery; and Homo homini fit lupus, and one Man preys
upon another.

[k] With this verse, de Dieu connects the next v. 27. and gives the easiest
account that I find any where, of the Hebrew Text: only translating that
particle, but; which we translate so; as it is often taken in the Scripture.
And his sense is this; "Though the just may be trampled under foot for a while
by the wicked, yet their glory shall not perish: but remain so fresh and sweet,
that it shall be a glorious thing to enquire into their glorious actions." So
he would have the verse translated thus, to eat much honey indeed is not good;
but to search out their glory ( viz. of just men) is glory. And if we take the
verse by it self, then the sense may be this, as the Belgic Interpreters
translate it (of whom, he, if I mistake not, was one) to eat much honey is not
good: but to search into excellent things is a great commendation; and we
cannot therein easily offend by excess: which is quite contrary to the Vulgar
Latin, whose sense and meaning (though not the words) may be defended, even
without repeating the word not, as we do in our Translation: in this manner. As
honey, though pleasant to the taste, oppresses the stomach, if it be
immoderately used: so upon a curious search into things sublime and glorious
(though they be most sweet and desirable to our understanding) we shall find
our selves overwhelmed with a greater glory than we can bear. And so the latter
part of the verse, should word for word be thus translated: The search of their
glory ( viz. of things as sweet as honey, but transcending our knowledge) is
glory: viz. too bright for our weak minds.

[l] The last verse, which in the Hebrew belongs to all men, whose passions are
unruly, is by the Vulgar restrained to him, that cannot command his tongue:
which is part of the sense. For as men may go out of a City without Walls when
they will; so every thing is blurted out by him, even the greatest secrets; and
by too much liberty he disobliges others and undoes himself.

1. THese are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah
copied out.


1. BEsides the foregoing lessons sententiously delivered by Solomon; these
also were collected out of his Works, by some of the Servants of that good King
Hezekiah: who setting himself with all his heart to reform the people of Judah;
among other things wherein God blessed his endeavors (2 Chr. XXXI. 21.) caused
these Proverbs to be transcribed, out of the ancient records, for their fuller
instruction. See Arg. [a]

2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honor of kings is to
search out a matter.


2. The Almighty Creator and Sovereign of the world declares his supereminent
Majesty, Authority and Wisdom (which cannot be ignorant of any thing) and
procures to himself the greatest veneration, by concealing the reasons of his
decrees, and of his judgments: But earthly Princes, whose knowledge is very
imperfect, do themselves the greatest honor, when they decree and judge
nothing but after the strictest search and examination; and give the clearest
reason for their proceedings. See Arg. [b]

3. The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is
unsearchable.


3. It is as impossible for vulgar minds to penetrate into the secrets of
State, and understand the counsels and designs of wise Princes (and the various
ways and means whereby they project to effect their ends) as it is to know how
far it is from hence to the highest heavens; or how far to the center of the
earth, upon which we tread. See Arg. [c]

4. Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel
for the finer.


4. As when the Finer has separated the dross from the silver, it will become
so pliable, that he may cast or work it into what form he pleases:

5. Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be
established in righteousness.


5. So let the King not only remove the wicked (who are the scum of the
Nation) from his counsels and company, but punish them severely; and his people
will be easily molded to righteousness, piety and all manner of virtue: which
will settle his Kingdom in peace, and make his Government durable.

6. Put not forth thy self in the presence of the king, and stand not in the
place of great men.


6. And among other virtues, learn humility and modesty, if thou art a Subject;
though never so rich: and do not make thy self taken notice of, by too splendid
an appearance at Court; much less by intruding thy self into the place, where
none but the great Officers or Nobles ought to come. See Arg. [d]

7. For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither: then that thou
should be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen.


7. For it will be much more for thine honor, and thy satisfaction too, if
standing at a distance, thou art invited to come up higher (whither of thy self
thou durst not presume to go) than to have a check given thee for thy
forwardness, and to be disgracefully thrust out of the presence of the Prince;
unto whom thou have adventured to approach too near.

8. Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end
thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame.


8. Take some time to consider well, both the goodness of thy cause, and its
weightiness, and how to manage it; before thou bring an action at Law against
thy neighbor: lest in conclusion thou wish it had not been begun; when he puts
thee to open shame, by showing thou have impleaded him wrongfully, or for a
trifle.

9. Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself; and discover not a secret to
another.


9. Nay, let me advise thee, though thy cause be just and good (yet the event
being doubtful) to debate things privately, and if it be possible to make up
the difference between your selves; especially if it be about a secret
business, which ought not easily to be divulged: or if it cannot be composed,
yet let not hatred or anger provoke thee to discover other secrets, merely to
disgrace thy adversary, when they appertain not to the cause.

10. Lest he that hears it put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not away.


10. Lest not only every one that hears, reproach thee for thy
perfidiousness; but he be enraged to retort such infamous things upon thee, as
shall stick so close, that thou shall never be able to wipe off the dirt, nor
recover thy credit, as long as thou live.

11. A word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.


11. A word of counsel, reproof or comfort handsomely delivered, in due time,
and place, etc. is no less grateful and valuable; than golden balls, or
beautiful apples, presented in a silver network basket. See Arg. [e]

12. As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover
upon an obedient ear.


12. A good man will not think himself reproached, but rather obliged by a
prudent reproof: which meeting with an attentive, considering and patient mind,
makes a man receive it so kindly; that he esteems him who bestows it, as much
as if he had hung a Jewel of gold in his ear, or put the richest ornament about
his neck.

13. As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to
them that send him: for he refreshes the soul of his masters.


13. A trusty messenger (or Ambassador) that faithfully and dexterously,
executes his commission, to the satisfaction of the persons that sent him; is
as welcome, when he returns, as the coldest drink or air is to the Reapers in
the time of harvest: for he revives the spirit of his Masters, who were ready
to faint, with fear of ill success in his business.

14. Whosoever boasts himself of a false gift, is like clouds and wind without
rain.


14. He that raises high expectations by promising much, and then deceives
them by performing little or nothing; leaves him, that depended on these
promises, as sad as the Country people are; after the clouds have made a great
show, and the wind a great sound, but are followed by no showers of rain.

15. By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaks the
bone.


15. It is not prudent violently to oppose a Prince in his resolutions; who
will more easily yield to reason, if one give way to his heat, and patiently
expect the fittest time to represent things to him: but this must be done also
with soft and tender language; which is apt to bow the stiffest minds, and work
upon the hardest hearts.

16. Have thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be
filled therewith and vomit it.


16. All pleasures should be used like honey; which, when it offers it self,
eat as much as suffices thee for thy refreshment, not as much as thou desire:
for as moderately taken it strengthens the body, and prolongs life; so too much
of it disturbs the stomach, and turns the pleasure into pain and torment. See
Arg. [f]

17. Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house: lest he be weary of thee, and
so hate thee.


17. Which is wholesome advice, even in the enjoyment of a good Neighbor, or
Friend (the sweetest thing in the World) do not upon every light occasion
interrupt his weightier affairs: lest having too much of thy company, it grow
not only troublesome but loathsome to him; and his love turn into hatred of
thee.

18. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a maul, and a
sword, and a sharp arrow.


18. There is nothing more pernicious than him, that makes no conscience of
bearing false witness against his neighbor: whose tongue alone serves him
instead of a maul to beat down a man's fame, or break in pieces his estate;
nay, instead of a sword, to take away his life; and of a sharp arrow, to
destroy him not only when he is near, but much more when he is afar off, not
able to answer for himself.

19. Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken
tooth, and a foot out of joint.


19. As a broken tooth or leg out of joint, not only fails a man, when he
comes to use them, but likewise puts him into pain; so does a faithless person
serve them that depend upon him, when they have the greatest need of his help:
and such also is the confidence that a faithless person himself places in
riches, or craft, or great friends, etc. which some time or other will
disappoint him to his great grief, when he expects the most from them.

20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon
nitre: so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart.


20. It is as improper to sing pleasant songs to a man full of grief, as to
take away his garment from him in sharp weather, or to pour vinegar upon nitre:
for as the one increases his sense of cold, and the other irritates the nitre:
so such unseasonable mirth makes a sad man's heart, far more heavy and
sorrowful than it was before. See Arg. [g]

21. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat: and if he be thirsty,
give him water to drink:


21. If he that hates thee be hungry or thirsty, or wants any other
necessaries, take that opportunity to express thy kindness to him; by
succouring him in his need, and thereby preserving him from perishing.

22. For thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the LORD shall reward
thee.


22. For if he have the least spark of goodness in him, it will work a change
in his mind; and make him throw off all his enmities: or if it have the
contrary effect, he shall have so much the sorer punishment; and thou shall not
lose thy reward, which the Lord himself will give thee.

23. The northwind drives away rain: so does an angry countenance a backbiting
tongue.


23. As the sharpness of the North wind scatters clouds, and drives away rain;
so a severe countenance, full of indignation against him that traduces his
neighbor secretly, not only gives a check, but puts a stop, to his slanderous
tongue: which would not tell such lies, if they were not greedily received. See
Arg. [h]

24. It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a brawling
woman and in a wide house.


24. It is more desirable (as was said before XXI. 9.) to dwell poorly,
inconveniently, and alone in the open air, exposed to all the injuries of the
weather; nay, to be coopt up in a little corner on the house top; than to have
a spacious habitation and numerous family, governed by a contentious, brawling
wife: whose perpetual scoldings within doors, upon all occasions, is far worse
than the thunder, lightning and blustering winds, which may molest him without.

25. As cold waters to a thirsty soul: so is good news from a far country.


25. Good and certain news, especially from a far Country (from whence it is
hard to have any true intelligence) is as grateful to him, that longed to hear
of his Friends there, as cool water is to a thirsty Traveller; especially when
he meets with it in remote and unhabited places, where he did not expect it.

26. A righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled fountain,
and a corrupt spring.


26. A truly religious, just and charitable man, is such a blessing unto all
about him, that they suffer no less when he is oppressed (and thrown out of
authority) by the violence or craft of wicked men, or when he disgraces himself
by any foul sin, or loses his courage and dare not oppose impiety; than they
do, when dirt and filth is cast into a public Fountain; or a spring is stopped
up, or corrupted and made useless. See Arg. [i]

27. It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own glory, is
not glory.


27. Honey is very pleasant to the taste; but to eat much of it (as was said
before v. 16.) is so far from being wholesome, that it is hurtful: and in like
manner to hunt greedily after honor and glory, of which men are very desirous,
proves at last not honorable, but reproachful to them. See Arg. [k]

28. He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a city that is broken
down, and without walls.


28. He that cannot govern his passions, especially his anger, but suffers them
to break out upon all occasions, lies open to innumerable mischiefs; like a
City unwalled, or whose fortifications are decayed; which is exposed to the
rapine of every enemy. See Arg. [l]

CHAP. XXVI.
ARGUMENT.
[a] This Chapter begins with a tacit Admonition unto Kings (for whose use
principally this last Part of the Book of Proverbs was collected, as I noted in
the beginning of the foregoing Chapter) to be very careful in disposing
preferments only to worthy persons. For bad men are made worse by them; and
they do as much hurt to others, by the abuse of their power to the
discouraging of virtue, and promoting vice, as snow or hail does to the fruits
of the earth, when they are ripe and ready to be gathered. So that we may make
this Aphorism out of Solomon's words, that the blending of summer and winter,
would not cause a greater disorder in the natural world, than the disposal of
honor to bad men (and consequently throwing contempt upon the good) does in
the world moral: where wicked men when they are in power, if they can do no
more, will at least pronounce Anathema's against those that do not deserve it.

[b] So the Hebrews understand the next verse; which I have extended further:
and translated also those two words zippor and deror, a sparrow and a wild
pigeon (see LXXXIV. Psalm. 3.) For deror signifying here a particular bird; in
all likelihood zippor does so too: and then all agree it signifies a sparrow,
as the other ( Bochart. has proved) does (not a swallow but) a ring-dove, or
turtle, or some of that kind; which are famous for swiftness and strength of
flight. And the meaning of this verse is, that curses which fly out of men's
mouths causelessly, shall no more alight where they would have them; than a
sparrow which wanders uncertainly, or a dove that flies away swiftly, will
settle according to their direction: or thus, such curses fly as swiftly as
those birds (whose property it is to wander and fly up and down) over the head
of him against whom they are directed; and never touch him.

Melancthon by curses in this place understands calumnies; of which the world
is too full: which shall not rest upon a good man long, before they be
confuted. But he himself is forced to confess that sometimes they do great
mischief first; and instances in Joseph, Palamedes, Aristides, Theamenes and
Socrates; who lost his life by this means. After which, he observes, the
Tragedy of Palamedes being acted (in which the Poet bewailed the death of the
best of the Greeks, who sung like a sweet nightingale, but hurt no man) the
Citizens expelled the accusers of Socrates out of Athens. But this does not so
well agree with the Hebrew word; which signifies such evil speaking, as amounts
to a curse: which the Wise man says shall not rest upon a man when it is
causeless, but fly away like a bird that settles no where till it comes to its
proper place: As the curse returns many times, and settles upon him that made
it, when it lights not on him that was cursed: which sense, one reading of the
Hebrew words expresses plainly enough: and therefore I have not omitted it.

[c] After which observations, there follows another to show, that a lewd fool
should rather be sent to a house in correction, than have any preferment, v. 3.
Nothing less will cure him, as it follows v. 4, 5. where he admonishes us, how
vain it is to hold any discourse with him; any further than merely to show that
he is a fool; and if it be possible to confute (not what he says but) the vain
opinion he has conceived of himself. Saint Cyprian has given a good account
of these two verses, in the beginning of his Letter to Demetrian: who having
babled a long time against Christianity, like a mad man, with loud clamours
only and no sense, the good Father thought fit to answer him with neglect, and
overcome rage with patience; thinking it to no more purpose to go about to
repress an irreligious man with Religion, or restrain a mad man with meekness,
than to offer light to the blind, or speak to the deaf, or reason with a brute.
But when Demetrian at last offered something that looked like an Argument, S.
Cyprian could not any longer keep silence; lest his modesty should be thought
distrust of his cause; and whilst he disdained to refute false criminations, he
should seem to acknowledge the crime.

Melancthon wholly refers both verses to reproaches and calumnies: which he
shows it is fit, either utterly to neglect; or to confute in a few words.

[d] Then the Wise man proceeds to show, that such a fool is very unfit to be
so much as sent on a message: which he will neither deliver right, nor return a
good answer. The first seems to be expressed by cutting off the legs; as much
as to say, a business committed to such a person, will no more proceed, than a
man can go without legs: the latter by drinking in injury; as much as to say,
instead of having satisfaction in what he desires, he must be content to
swallow abundance of affronts and ill dealing.

[e] After this follow several other observations about Fools; in some of
which, there are words of no small difficulty: which I cannot here particularly
explain, as some may desire, because it would take up too much room. But I have
expressed the sense of them, as well as I could, in the Paraphrase. As for
example, the word Dalju v. 7. signifying something of elevation or lifting up,
I have explained dancing; than which nothing is more unsuitable to a lame man:
as speeches full of reason in themselves, are most absurd, when witlesly
applied by a fool.

[f] And the word Margoma, in the 8th verse, which is very variously translated
by Interpreters, I have expressed in two senses of it: but look upon it as
superfluous to trouble the Reader with what learned men (such as Scaliger and
Seldom, etc.) have written concerning the heaps of stones in the highway, into
which superstitious people were wont to cast one as they passed by, in honor
of Mercury, etc. For I do not think this custom was as old as Solomon's time.
Nor is it necessary to understand such a heap of stones, as covered the dead
bodies of those who were stoned to death: but in general any heap of pebles; or
else a sling, as the Chaldee and the LXX. whom we follow, expound it.

[g] And v. 10. the first word rab, great, may be applied either to God, or to
a Prince: and that either good or bad. All which I have taken notice of; and
expressed the different senses wherein the word cholalti is used. But there is
one signification more of the word rab, which the Lutherans generally follow
(which I think fit to mention here, because I have not touched on it in the
Paraphrase, and it makes no improper sense of the place) who take it for a
Master in any sort of Art or Learning; and expound it thus: A master in his art
forms all things excellently well: but he that hires a fool (or a bungler, as
we speak) gives his money to have his work spoiled. Thus Melancthon; who takes
it to be an Admonition belonging to prudence in the choice of fit persons for
every business; not believing those that crack and brag what they are able to
do, etc. ex. gr. plurimi sunt impostores, qui volunt videri medici: plurimi
indocti concionatores, qui adulantur vulgo aut potentioribus. And he heaps up
many excellent sayings to this purpose, that men should meddle only with that
which they understand: concluding with this Admonition to the people, which
they should always remember; Ignorance makes men impudent. And thus Castalio
took the word rab; but to this sense, A wise man does his business himself; and
not by fools, who mar it all.

[h] Among other examples of the Wise man's observation v. 11. Melancthon
mentions this; which is not commonly noted. The Sodomites being divinely
delivered by the help of Abraham, who overthrew the Army that had spoiled them,
and recovered the spoil; forgetting their former punishment and mavelous
deliverance, ran furiously into more foul sins, wherein they utterly perished,
by a most terrible vengeance.

[i] Then follow, after one observation concerning a conceited fellow, several
observations about Sloth: some of which had been noted before in the foregoing
parts of this Book, but are here put together by the men of Hezekiah in some
order; and with some additions. For here seem to be three degrees of sloth
represented. The first, when a man is loath to stir out of doors, about his
business in the field, v. 13. the second, when he is loath so much as to leave
his bed, v. 14. and the third and highest, when he will scarce put his hand to
his mouth, v. 15. by which hyperbolical expression he most admirably sets forth
the incredible laziness of some men; which increases upon them continually, if
they will not shake it off. And yet so presumptuous (he observes v. 16.) they
are withal, that they laugh at those, who take a great deal of pains to be
wise: and fancy themselves much wiser, because, without any pains, they can
find fault sometime in other men's Works. Nay, this very thing perhaps, they
think a piece of folly, to study hard; imagining it to be the greatest wisdom,
to enjoy their ease and reap the benefit of other men's labors.

After which follows an Admonition against rash intermeddling in other men's
affairs; against backbiters, and dissemblers; especially such as are malicious;
and cover the malignity of their minds, under fair shows of love, or perhaps of
Friendship. In several of which verses the words are capable of more senses
than one; which I have endeavored to knit together in the Paraphrase. An
example of which I might give particularly, in v. 24. where the word jinnaker
may be rendered either he pretends to be what he is not, or he is known to be
what he is.

[k] And what Solomon says in the next verse concerning him that flattereth
another, some extend to all wicked men; none of which are to be trusted: but,
as one of our own Writers advises, though a wicked man have done thee seven
courtesies, and promise fair for the eighth; yet do not trust him: for there
are seven abominations in his heart. And though thou may think thou have some
hank upon him, do not depend upon it; for he can unfetter himself from them
all, as Samson from the green withs and cords, wherewith the Philistines bound
him, unless God mightily restrain him.

[l] But I only observe one thing more; that the last verse is capable of this
sense; which I have in part touched: A Liar is not capable to be a Friend; for
if he be reprehended, truth makes him hate the person that detects his
falsehood: if he be not reprehended, his fulsome flatteries will alienate from
him, the mind of his Friend.

1. AS snow in summer, and as rain in harvest; so honor is not seemly for a
fool.


1. AS snow or rain are so unseasonable, that they do a great deal of hurt in
summer time, when the fruits of the earth are ready to be gathered: so is
dignity and authority very ill placed in the hands of a fool or wicked man; who
knows not how to use it, but will do mischief both to himself and others with
it. See Arg. [ a]

2. As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse causeless
shall not come.


2. Though men are too prone in their passion to wish evil to others, or by
mistake to pronounce solemn curses against them; yet there is no reason to fear
such rash imprecations or unjust censures: for they shall do no harm (unless
it be to him that makes them) but pass by the innocent like a sparrow, that
wanders no body knows whither; or a wild dove, than which few birds fly away
more swiftly. See Arg. [b]

3. A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fools back.


3. A horse that will not stir without a whip, and an ass that will not go
without a goad, or will go only his own way, without a bridle to turn about
his stiff neck; are fit emblems of a senseless sot: who must be treated like a
beast, and by smart punishments be excited unto his duty, to which he has no
list; and checked from running into that evil, to which he is inclined.

4. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him.


4. For words will not reclaim a wicked fool; with whom if thou have occasion
to contend, observe these two Rules: Answer him not at all, because it is to no
purpose; at least, not in his own way, with bawling, railing and reproaches,
which is to be as very a fool as himself. See Arg. [c]

5. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.


5. But if he grow insolent by thy silence, fancying that he is unanswerable;
then say so much only as may serve to take down his presumption, and make it
appear that he is a fool: for nothing is more dangerous, than to let him go
away with an high opinion of his own abilities.

6. He that sends a message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the feet, and
drinks damage.


6. He that sends a witless man, or one that minds nothing but his pleasure, to
treat about his business; shall be sure not only to miscarry in it, but to
suffer exceeding great damage by his ill management. See Arg. [d]

7. The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth of fools.


7. A wise saying as ill becomes a fool, as dancing does a creeple: for as his
lameness never so much appears, as when he would seem nimble; so the others
folly is never so ridiculous, as when he would seem wise. See Arg. [e]

8. As he that binds a stone in a sling: so is he that gives honor to a
fool.


8. As a stone put into a sling, stays not long there, so is that honor thrown
away which is bestowed upon a fool: who not knowing how to use his authority
(unless it be to do mischief, even to him that conferred it on him) it is as
ill placed in his hands, as a diamond when it is cast into a heap of common
stones. See Arg. [f]

9. As a thorn goes up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the
mouth of fools.


9. It is as dangerous for a fool to meddle with a Proverb, as for a drunkard
to handle a thorn; wherewith he hurts himself: but the sharpest saying, no more
touches a fool with any compunction, though spoken by his own mouth; than the
drunkard feels the thorn, when it runs into his hand, and gives him a grievous
wound.

10. The great God that formed all things, both rewards the fool, and
rewards transgressors.


10. The great God, who made all things, governs them also most wisely and
equally; dispensing, for instance, his punishments suitable to men's sins,
whether out of ignorance, or of wilful wickedness: whom a good Prince
imitates; but a bad proves an universal grievance, by employing either fools or
profane persons in his service; who vex the rest of his subjects. See Arg. [g]

11. As a dog returns to his vomit; so a fool returns to his folly.


11. As a dog when he has vomited up the meat which made him sick, is no
sooner well but he returns to it and eats it up again; forgetting how ill it
agreed with him: so an imprudent person commits the same error over again, for
which he formerly smarted; and a lewd sinner shamelesly and greedily repeats
the crimes, of which he has repented as grievous and hurtful to him. See Arg.
[h]

12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool
than of him.


12. Such a sottish person is hardly curable: and yet, if he be not altogether
insensible of his folly, nor refuse admonition; there is more hope of his
amendment, than of his who takes himself to be so wise and virtuous, that he
despises his betters, and thinks he is above instruction.

13. The slothful man says, There is a lion in the way, a lion is in the
streets.


13. He that has no mind to labor, never wants pretenses for his idleness:
for his fancy represents such terrible and insuperable difficulties to him, as
seldom happen; and frights him with a vain conceit of them, when he might soon
satisfy himself, there are none at all. See Arg. [i] See XXII. 13.

14. As the door turns upon his hinges, so does the slothful upon his bed.


14. As a door turns to and fro upon its hinges, but never stirs from thence;
so is a sluggard fixed to his bed: where he turns from one side to the other
(and is uneasy even in his sloth) but still remains in his idle posture.

15. The slothful hides his hand in his bosom, it grieveth him to bring it
again to his mouth.


15. All things seem so hard to such a lazy wretch, that it is not easy to
persuade him to pull his hand from under his arm: but even this appears like a
tiresome business, though it be only to put his meat into his mouth. See XIX.
24.

16. The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men that can render a
reason.


16. Yet one of these idle companions, whose wit serves him only to prate, and
carp at men's honest labors; takes himself to be much wiser than a great many
able persons, who can give a satisfactory account of any thing that is proposed
to them.

17. He that passes by and meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is like
one that takes a dog by the ears.


17. As he that takes an angry dog by the ears, is in danger to be bitten;
whether he hold him, or let him go: so he that furiously ingages in other men's
quarrels, whom he lights upon by chance, and in which he is not concerned,
shall hardly escape the displeasure of one or both of them; which soever part
he takes, or if he take neither.

18. As a mad man who casts firebrands, arrows, and death:


18. As he that throws flames, darts, or other deadly or destructive thing, and
hides his malice by feigning himself mad; is far more dangerous than he that is
mad indeed:

19. So is the man that deceives his neighbor, and says, Am not I in sport?


19. So he is worse than an open enemy, who cunningly abuses his neighbor, and
under a fair show puts foul cheats upon him; and then asks him, why he resents
it so heinously? for he was only in jest; and intended merely to try how he
would take it.

20. Where no wood is, there the fire goes out: so where there is no
talebearer, the strife cease.


20. Look upon him as an incendiary, that carries tales and whispers false
stories; and expel him from the family which he has disturbed by backbiting:
for as the fire will go out, if you take away the wood that feeds it; so will
quarrels and contentions cease, when he is thrust out of doors that blows up
the flame.

21. As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious man
to kindle strife.


21. Avoid also an angry man, who is hard to please, and apt to find fault with
every thing: for provoking language as quickly passes into quarrels, as dead
coals do into burning, or wood into fire, when they are laid upon them.

22. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the
innermost parts of the belly.


22. But there is never need of greater caution, than when a whisperer makes a
show of harmless intentions, and of love and kindness, when he traduces others;
nay seems perhaps to do it very unwillingly, and with great grief of heart;
and not without excuses also, for the persons whom he backbites: for his words
are stabs, which give them the most deadly wounds; and sink deep into the minds
of those that hear them. See XVIII. 8.

23. Burning lips, and a wicked heart, are like a potsherd covered with silver
dross.


23. Ill and angry language suits as well with ill will as silver dross with a
piece of a broken pot: and he that studies to hide his hatred under most
affectionate words, will as certainly be detected and vilified; as a potsherd
that makes a fair show at a distance, when it is covered merely with the scum
of silver.

24. He that hates, dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit within him.


24. And yet there is nothing more usual, than for him that hates thee, to
counterfeit the greatest kindness to thee; when he means thereby only the more
easily and securely to deceive and undo thee: though let him study never so
much to disguise his inward rancour, he commonly lets fall some word or other,
whereby it may be discovered; nay, it may be known sometime by his
extraordinary expressions of Friendship, beyond all reason and measure.

25. When he speaks fair, believe him not: for there are seven abominations
in his heart.


25. And thou will the more certainly discover it, if thou observest this Rule,
not to be too credulous; no, not when he gives thee the kindest words, and
beseeches thee to believe him: but to remember, that if hatred still remain in
his heart, it will suggest to him the most detestable designs against thee, and
that without number. See Arg. [k]

26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed before
the whole congregation.


26. And it were well, if such a man would think, that it is hard for him to
carry on his malicious designs so craftily, but, though a private person may
not be able to find out his wickedness, yet, when he comes to be examined by
the public Council, some or other will discover it: and then that dissembled
hatred, which he thought to have hid in secrecy, will be openly exposed to the
view of all the world.

27. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone, it
will return upon him.


27. For by the righteous judgment of God (as has been anciently observed VII.
Psalm. 15 IX. 15.) the wicked are not only disappointed in their designs, but
involve themselves in that mischief, which they intended to do to others: just
like a man that falls into a pit, dug with his own hands; or that is crushed
in pieces by a stone, which returns upon him, as he rolls it up a steep place
for the oppression of another.

28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a flattering
mouth works ruin.


28. A forger of falsehood is not content to undo others by his calumnies, but
his guilt makes him hate those men above all others; unless it be him that
confutes his falsehood and proves him a liar: whom he cannot endure, because he
disables him from doing any farther mischief unto others; which is the design
of all his glosing and flattering words, which prove at last the ruin of
himself. See Arg. [l]

CHAP. XXVII.
ARGUMENT.
[a] This Chapter begins with a most useful Admonition, of the inconstancy and
uncertainty of all things here below: like to which there are a great many in
other Authors, which several Writers have collected (but I shall not trouble
the Readers withal) particularly Melancthon: who observes that the Wise man
here teaches us modesty; and prohibites these two great vices: confidence in
our selves, or any thing we have; and rash undertaking unnecessary things, out
of a foolish hope they will succeed according to our desires. Wise and good men
should only meddle within the bounds of their calling; and depend also on God
for his blessing: but not attempt things without just cause, presuming they can
carry them as they please. Thus Pericles, says he, made an unnecessary War, for
a slight reason; which many then judged ought to have been neglected: and
Alcibiades in like manner passed over into Sicily: and Hannibal made War upon
the Romans: and Pompey would needs try his fortune (as they called it) in War,
when he might have kept peace, upon honest conditions. All these were
destructive to their Countries, and the Proverb was verified in them (...),
Vain men devise vain things, according as their desires lead them.

[b] And there is nothing more foolish than the vanity of praising themselves;
which follows in the next verse ( v. 2.) and is noted by all Authors; who have
many sharp sayings about it, which I also pass over. But shall take notice
(because it is still more useful) what the same good man Melancthon observes
upon the third verse; that fools and unskilful people are more apt to be angry
than others: because they consider not the infirmity of mankind, and that there
are many errors of others which ought to be born withal, and cured after a
gentle manner: whence that true saying Imperito nunquam quicquam injustius est.
But as Goodness is most eminent in God; who himself bears with many evils in
us, and commands us to forgive and it shall be forgiven us: so wise men bend
their minds to goodness and lenity; remembering the common infirmities of all
men, their own as well as others. Nor can there be a more lively picture of the
implacable spirit of a fool, than that which our Savior himself has drawn in
the Gospel; of a cruel Servant, who when he had been forgiven sixty tonne of
Gold by his Master, would not forgive his fellow servant an hundred pence,
Matthew. XVIII. This Sentence of Solomon therefore, says he, admonishes us to
avoid the company of fools, qui neque cognoscere neque ignoscere norunt; as
well as to be so wise our selves, as to moderate our passions, and to be
mindful of humane weakness. For nihil magnum quod non est placidum, as Seneca
speaks: like unto which he adds other sayings out of Homer and Pliny.

[c] In the next verse but one some think the Wise man speaks of such Friends
as are too tender and delicate; and for fear of offending others, have not the
courage to tell them of their errors: whom the great Lord Bacon follows; and
thinks Solomon prefers an open Enemy before such a Friend: which I do not take
to be the meaning; but shall here set down his excellent observation upon these
words ( Adv. of Learn. Book VIII. Chapter 2. Parab. 29.) "The Parable, says he,
reprehends the soft nature of such Friends as will not use the privilege which
Friendship gives them, in admonishing their Friends with freedom and
confidence, as well of their errors, as of their dangers. For what shall I
do? says such a tenderhearted Friend, or which way shall I turn my self? I
love him as dearly as any man can do another: and if any misfortune should
befall him, I could willingly pawn my own person for his redemption. But I know
his disposition; if I deal freely with him, I shall offend him; at least make
him sad: and yet do him no good. And I shall sooner estrange him from my
Friendship, than reclaim him from those courses, upon which his mind is
resolved: Such a Friend as this, Solomon here reprehends as weak and worthless,
and says that a man may reap more profit from a manifest Enemy, than from such
an effeminate Friend. For he may perhaps hear that by way of reproach from an
Enemy, which, through too much indulgence, was but faintly whispered by a
Friend."

[d] And one great reason why men are loath to tell others of their faults, is
because they are wont to take it heinously. If men were more willing to receive
reproof, others would more faithfully give it: of which the Wise man therefore
admonishes us, v. 6. where the word Nataroth is so difficult, that it admits
various interpretations: some of which I have expressed in the Paraphrase. And
made v. 7. a caution against the immoderate enjoyment of pleasures: which
commend themselves to us, by their rarer use. As the next, v. 8. is a caution
against unsettledness of mind, and discontent with our present condition;
which, not only spoils all our pleasures, but, often carries men restlessly to
their ruin: where Melancthon suggests this useful Meditation, that there is
no condition of life, no function, without its cares, troubles and dangers;
which makes men soon weary of it: according to the ancient saying, Optat
ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus. But the Wise man would have us
understand, that nothing is more dangerous than this; and therefore to take
care lest, tired and broken with disgusts, we lightly desert that kind of life,
to which we are rightly called. All the ancient wisdom has observed, that
such desultory humors never thrive: about which they have many Proverbs, with
which I shall not fill these Papers.

[e] After this follow some advices about Friendship, and other things; which
have been noted before, in the foregoing parts of this Book. And then he seems,
v. 14. to lay open the guise of Flatterers, who hope to curry favor with their
Benefactours, by extolling their bounty with extravagant praises. So I have
expounded that verse, not merely of those that praise others, but praise them
for their kindness to themselves: as the word Barak properly imports. The
intention of which is only to get still more from them: which is commonly the
end of all those, that praise others immoderately, for their rare qualities and
perfections; hoping thereby to make them extraordinary kind to them, above all
other men. Thus the Lord Bacon has observed about this matter: whose gloss
upon these words is this (in the forenamed place, Parable 33.) "Moderate and
seasonable praises, uttered upon occasion, conduce both to men's fame and
fortune; but immoderate, streperous and unseasonably poured out, profit
nothing: nay, rather, according to the sense of this Parable, they do much
prejudice. For, first, they manifestly betray themselves, either to proceed
from too much affection, or from studious affectation; whereby they may rather
ingratiate themselves with him whom they praise by false commendations; than
adorn his person by just and deserved attributes: secondly, sparing and modest
praises commonly invite such as are present to add something of their own to
the commendation: contrariwise, profuse and immodest praises invite the hearers
to detract and take away something that belongs to them: thirdly (which is the
principal point) too much magnifying a man stirs up envy toward him: seeing
all immoderate praises look a reproach to others, who merit no less."

But beside this, I cannot quite pass by the gloss which some have made upon
these words: who by jaschkem babboker (which I have applied only to their too
much assiduity in praising others, as if one should say, from morning to night)
understand making too much haste to praise men; when it is, as we speak, but
early days with them: and they have made no progress in those virtues for which
they are commended. And then the sense is, there is nothing more dangerous,
than to cry up men too soon, for their parts or for their virtues; before they
be sufficiently tried, and have made a due improvement: for this, instead of
doing them service, proves many times their ruin: making them, that is,
entertain a vain opinion of their own worth, and grow idle, or negligent, etc.
and so dwindle away to nothing.

[f] What he says afterward of a railing wife, ver. 16. may be thus expressed,
in short: There are three things that cannot be concealed; because they betray
themselves: the wind, a strong persume, and a scolding wife: with which some
join the next verse, v. 17. as a remedy for the mischief of a brawling wife;
and thus render it: As iron is easily joined with iron; so is a man with his
equal. And therefore the best way for a man to avoid the trouble of a bad wife,
is not to choose one for his consort, because she is rich, or because she is
beautiful only; but because she is like him in humor, and inclination, and
condition, etc. Thus the Tigurine Version. And de Dieu to the same purpose; who
makes this Proverb, no more than that of like to like; which best agree
together. But this is too narrow; and therefore I have followed ours, and
indeed all the ancient Translations: who take this to be of the same
signification with another old saying, one man is no body: and therefore God
has formed us to have a communion with each other. The necessity of which is
expressed in abundance of ancient Aphorisms; which admonish us to confer with
others, and to hearken to the counsel and judgment of the wise. And daily
experience shows us how dangerous it is (...), to be a man's own counselor:
and what is said of Artificers may be applied unto all; every man is his own
worst Master. To which purpose Melancthon alleges that of Euripides (...),
conversation brought forth arts: when men, that is, not only observed one
another works; but conferred their thoughts together; and assisted one
another inventions. "And he pertinently observes, that the Christian Doctrine,
in the beginning of the Reformation, was corrupted by those, who would not hear
others: but skulk't like bats that fly the light; and devised new opinions out
of their own heads, abhorrent from the approved form of Doctrine. Tales multi
nunc sunt, etc. There are many such now adays, who glory that they are (...),
and admire their own dreams; refusing to hearken to the sound judgment of other
men. But let us, says he be obedient to such precepts as this: which includes
in it, first Modesty, in consideration of our own frailty; and then Prudence,
in advising with those, who may teach us that of which we are ignorant. Thus he
observes out of Synesius, that Apelles was wont to make Lysippus the Statuary,
Judge of all his Pictures: and Lysippus on the other side, made Apelles Judge
of all his Statues; before they would expose them to be seen by others."

[g] The next verse but one, v. 19. is understood so variously by Interpreters,
that it is a labor to number their expositions: some of which are directly
contrary to the other. For according as they take the face to be represented in
water; either perfectly, or so lubricously and moveably, that it is hard to
discern what sort of face it is: so they make it either easy, or impossible to
understand the hearts of other men. Melancthon took it in the latter sense;
inculcating the old wholesome Lessons, (...), and Quos credis fidos, effuge,
tutus eris, etc. But now it is generally expounded the other way: and some
expound it of men's own hearts, and some of the hearts of other men. I have in
the Paraphrase expressed two of those interpretations, which I looked upon as
most simple. And think fit here to mention that of Castalio, who applies it to
a man's self in this manner: as a man may know what kind of face he has, if he
will look into the water: so he may know what kind of man he is, if he will
examine his Conscience. And this of Maldonate who is alone (as far as I can
find) in his exposition, which is this, as a man's face may be seen in the
water; so his heart, or his inward affections, may be seen in his Countenance:
taking man in the conclusion of the Sentence, for the outward man, i. e. his
countenance: and making the Hebrew run thus, as a man's face is answerable to
that face which appears in the water: so his heart is answerable to his
countenance. The Lord Bacon, as I have expressed it in the beginning of my
Paraphrase on this verse, takes the end of this Parable to be, "to distinguish
between the mind of wise men, and of those that are not wise: comparing the
former to waters, or glasses which receive and represent the form and images of
things; whereas the other are like to earth or rude and unpolished stone,
wherein nothing is reflected. And the mind of a wise man (which is so capable
that it observes and comprehends an infinite diversity of natures and customs)
is the more aptly compared to a glass or mirror; because in a glass he can see
his own image, together with the images of other men: which his eyes cannot do
alone without the help of a glass."

And so this Parable, it seems to me, may not unfitly be expounded after this
manner: A man may see himself while he looks upon other men; as well as know
other men, by considering his own inclinations.

[h] This Preface is already so long, that I must not mention the various
interpretations of the twenty first verse. I have expressed that which is
nearest to our Translation; and seems to be the truest touchstone of this sort,
whereby to try the goodness or badness of men's minds. Some of which are so
incorrigible, he shows in the next verse, that the sorest afflictions will not
amend them.

[i] And then in conclusion he presses every one to diligence about his own
business: and especially commends the pastoral care, which men should have
about their flocks and their herds: which are the best sort of possessions, he
shows, in several regards. First because most durable, for they are always
increasing of themselves, v. 24. secondly, because easily preserved without
much labor, or fraudulent arts; God himself providing liberally for them, v.
25. thirdly, because most profitable; yielding all things necessary for food
and raiment, v. 26, 27.

[k] Where he mentions particularly in the last verse, the milk of the goats,
and of no other creature: because they had abundance of them, and their milk
was in daily use; both for meat and for medicine. And for medicine the Ancients
preferred it before all other, as most moderate, and temperate. So Galen and
Paulus Aegineta; the last of which writes thus: Woman's milk is the most
temperate of all other; next to that goats; and next to that asses; then sheep;
and lastly cows milk. From whence it was ( Bochartus conjectures (who has
heaped up a great deal on this Subject, L. II. de Sacris Animal. Cap. ult.
Part. I.) that Jupiter, a King in Crete about Abraham's time (and looked upon
afterward as the greatest God) is said to have been nourished by a goat: that
is, by the best of nourishments.

1. BOast not thy self of to morrow; for thou know not what a day may bring
forth.


1. BE not so confident of thy present power, riches or any thing else, as to
grow presumptuous, and brag what thou will do, or enjoy hereafter: for thou
can not be secure of this very day (wherein thou make such large promises
to thy self of the future) which may produce something, for any thing thou
know, that shall spoil all thy designs, and frustrate all thy expectations,
which thou have for to morrow. See Arg. [a]

2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger and not
thine own lips.


2. Be not so blinded with self-love, as to praise thy self; which is both
indecent and imprudent, for others will only the more undervalue thee: but
take care to do praiseworthy things, which will force commendations even from
strangers and foreigners, who cannot be thought too partial to thee; for this
will make thee truly honorable.

3. A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty: but a fools wrath is heavier than
them both.


3. We feel there is heaviness in a stone, and that a bag of sand is a weighty
load; but neither of them is so intolerable as the effects of a fool's wrath,
which cannot be shaken off so soon as they may be: for he cannot easily be
appeased by us, nor can he moderate himself; till his anger has carried him to
the most barbarous cruelty. See Arg. [b]

4. Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before
envy?


4. And yet envy is still worse than this; for though in a fury a man has no
pity, but is transported by his violent passion beyond all bounds (like an
inundation of waters) yet his wrath appearing openly, it may be avoided, and in
time it is composed and allayed; nay, perhaps he repents of it: but envy (or a
desire of revenge) is a lurking evil, which increases daily without remorse;
and is more exasperated by time, till it find some means or other to do the
mischief it desires.

5. Open rebuke is better than secret love.


5. He that takes an ingenuous liberty to tell others plainly of their faults,
and rebuke them freely, when need requires, to their very face, is a better
Friend, and more valuable (though perhaps he please them less) than he that
has more of the passion of love in his heart, but makes it not known by such
good effects. See Arg. [c]

6. Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are
deceitful.


6. Just reproofs, though never so smart and severe from one that loves us,
ought to be thankfully accepted, because they proceed from his care of us, and
fidelity to us: but the most tender expressions of kindness from an enemy,
ought to be suspected, to be false and treacherous; especially, when he heaps
them upon us in great abundance, and with such earnestness and seeming passion,
that we had need to pray him to forbear, and pray God to preserve us from being
too credulous. See Arg. [d]

7. The full soul loatheth an honycomb; but to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet.


7. As hunger makes men relish the most distastefull food, when full stomachs
loath the most delightful: so poverty has this advantage of plenty, that it
disposes men to be thankful for the smallest blessings, though mixed with care
and trouble; when the richer sort, if they be not very careful, are apt to be
unsatisfied with, nay to nauseate their most delicious enjoyments, upon which
they have a long time surfeited.

8. As a bird that wandreth from her nest: so is a man that wandreth from his
place.


8. Men seldom change for the better; but as a bird that forsakes its nest
exposes it self to danger, and cannot easily settle again: so he whose levity,
or discontent, makes him rashly leave his country, or trade, or office, wherein
he was well placed, too often undoes himself, but rarely mends his condition.
See Arg. [d]

9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so does the sweetness of a man's
friend by hearty counsel.


9. As Balsom and fragrant perfumes marvellously refresh and comfort the
natural spirits, when they droop and are tired: so does the very presence of a
true-hearted Friend, and much more his faithful counsel, rejoice a man's soul;
especially when he is at such a loss, that he knows not how to advise himself.

10. Thine own friend and thy fathers friend forsake not; neither go into thy
brothers house in the day of thy calamity: for better is a neighbor that is
near, than a brother far off.


10. Forsake not therefore a Friend, whom thou, or thy Father before thee has
tried and found sincere; but betake thy self to him when thou art in distress,
rather than to thy natural Brother or Kinsman, if he be not also thy Friend:
and above all other, choose a Friend near thee, if it be possible; for as a man
that is closely joined unto us in near affection, is better than one of our
nearest kindred, whose heart is not knit to us; so a good neighbor near at
hand, is better than either Friend or Brother who is so far off, that we may
perish before he come to our assistance.

11. My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that
reproacheh me.


11. My dear child, if thou have any love for him, that was the instrument of
giving thee a being, let such precepts as these make thee wise and good: which
will both give me the highest joy, and furnish me with an answer unto such, as
are apt to object the child's miscarriages, to want of care in his parents.

12. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself: but the simple pass
on, and are punished.


12. He whose long experience and observation of things, has made him cautious
and circumspect, foreseeing a calamity before it comes, withdraws himself in
good time from the danger, into a place of safety: but inconsiderate and
credulous persons are so easily abused by crafty men, that they not only quite
overlook the mischief which even they intend against them, and go on securely
in their accustomed track till it overtake them; but make haste to fall into
it, notwithstanding any caution that is given them.

13. Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him
for a strange woman.


13. It is a great weakness to trust him who is so rash, as to be bound for one
whose ability and honesty is utterly unknown to him; especially for a woman
whose way of life makes her credit justly suspected: therefore have nothing to
do with such an inconsiderate person; without the utmost security that he can
give thee for the payment of what he ows thee.

14. He that blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the
morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.


14. He that spends all his time in nothing else but proclaiming his praises
extravagantly, who has bestowed great benefits upon him, disparages rather
than commends his Benefactour; in doing so much for a base flatterer: who
magnifying rather his own deserts than the others bounty, incurrs hereafter his
just displeasure. See Arg. [e]

15. A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentious woman are
alike.


15. He is in an ill case, the roof of whose house is so ruinous, that in a
very rainy day, when he shall be wet if he go abroad, he cannot be dry at
home: and he is no better, that has a scolding wife, who torments him her self
if he stay at home; and makes him tormented with the jeers of others, if he go
abroad.

16. Whosoever hides her, hides the wind, and the ointment of his right hand,
which bewrays it self.


16. For it is altogether as impossible for him, to keep the wind from blowing,
and from being heard when it blows; or to enclose a fragrant perfume in his
hand, so that it shall not be smelt; as to make her hold her tongue, or to
conceal her bawling humor, which she her self proclaims. See Arg. [f]

17. Iron sharpneth iron, so a man sharpneth the countenance of his friend.


17. As nothing is more natural, so nothing more powerful than society: for as
iron is sharpened and brightned by iron, so one wit whets another, one friend
incourages and cheers another; nay, all sorts of passions are stirred up, and
men are made either good or bad, by natural conversation. See Arg. [f]

18. Whosoever keeps the fig tree, shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that
waits on his master shall be honored.


18. As he that diligently looks after the fig tree (especially whilst it is
young and tender) and preserves it from suffering by drought, by vermin, or by
wild beasts, etc. shall at last eat of its pleasant fruit: so he that
faithfully defends his master's person or reputation, and takes care his estate
be not wasted, shall in due time be largely rewarded by him for his integrity.

19. As in water face answers to face: so the heart of man to man.


19. The inclinations and designs of other men appear as plainly to the mind of
those that are wise, as their faces appear to themselves in the water: where,
as every man will find such a countenance represented to him (whether sour or
smiling) as he brings when he looks into it; so he ought to expect no other
affections from others, but such as he expresses toward them. See Arg. [g]

20. Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are never
satisfied.


20. The appetite of man is as unsatiable as his eyes, which still desire some
new sight: and are as far from being filled with all that they have seen, as
the infernal places with all the souls they have received; or the grave with
all the bodies it has devoured.

21. As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a man to his
praise.


21. As gold and silver is tried by putting it into the fire; which discovers
whether it be pure or adulterate: so a man is discovered what he is, by trying
how he can bear praises, commendations and great applauses; which will
presently show either the virtue or the vanity of his mind. See Arg. [h]

22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, among wheat with a pestel,
yet will not his foolishness depart from him.


22. The folly and wickedness of some men is so incurable, that though, unto
reproofs, and chidings, and threatenings, you should add stripes and blows; nay,
beat and knock them, like wheat in a mortar; bruising their bodies, till (as we
speak) they are black and blew, they would not grow a whit the wiser, or the
better for it.

23. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy
herds.


23. Whether thou art a private person or a Prince, let me advise thee to look
after thy business thy self; and not to trust merely to thy servants and
ministers: but go sometimes and take an exact survey of the state of thy
affairs; and more particularly make it part of thy care to visit thy flocks and
thy herds, and know in what case they are. See Arg. [i]

24. For riches are not for ever: and does the crown endure to every generation?


24. For as no riches are so durable as these, which increase and multiply
continually; so the greatest estate, even in these, unless it be well managed,
will in time be brought to nothing: nay, the crown it self will not continue to
many generations, without due care to preserve its revenue; of which these
ought to be thought the best and most lasting portion.

25. The hay appears, and the tender grass shows it self, and herbs of the
mountains are gathered.


25. For the maintenance of which the earth brings forth plentifully, without
any more pains of thine, than only in the spring time to drive the flocks and
herds into pastures; and to look after them, when the earth brings forth grass
and young herbs for their food; and to gather hay in due season, which even the
mountains afford, for their fodder and winter provision.

26. The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of thy field.


26. And if thou take care to preserve them, they will preserve thee: for the
sheep and the lambs will afford thee wool to make thee clothes; and with the
price of thy goats thou may purchase a field, for the sowing of corn to make
thee bread.

27. And thou shall have goats milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy
household, and for maintenance for thy maidens.


27. And both of them, especially the goats, shall yield thee milk enough for
thy own food, and for the sustenance of all thy family; both men servants and
maidens: who may hence be provided with all things necessary for their
livelihood. See Arg. [k]

CHAP. XXVIII.
ARGUMENT.
This Chapter consists, as the foregoing did, of several mixed observations:
some belonging to the concerns of private persons; others to the public.

[a] It begins with the difference between a good and a bad Conscience; which
discovers it self, when there is any danger, of which men are apprehensive. And
in the next verse, he observes the difference between a Nation, when it is bad
and when it is good: when its manners are depraved, they fall into confusion:
and when they grow better (for most Interpreters take the word Adam in the
latter part of the verse collectively, for the body of the people) then they
keep their Government, and live happily. Especially when they have a wise and
prudent Prince; who is here also to be understood, in opposition to Many
Princes, either together or successively: by whom a Nation is miserably
harassed, when its wickedness brings upon it such a punishment. So Melancthon
understands v. 2. "The complaints, says he, are very usual concerning the
negligence of Princes, their exactions, oppressions, want of care to administer
justice, etc. and the people still accuse them and their Court: but God accuses
both Princes and people; and for the sins of the people, he gives them ill
Governors; as Solomon here teaches, that for the transgression of a country,
i. e. both of Prince and people, many are the Princes thereof: that is, none
reign long; or many reign together, opposing, and thrusting out, one another.
Now for the cure of this he gives a singular Admonition, necessary both for
Prince and people, which is this: that a prudent and wise man makes Empire
durable. That is, a wise Prince will sometime depart from his own right to
quiet things; and suffer some inconveniences to prevent greater: as Fabius and
Cicero did. And on the other side, people are to be advised, lest they draw
greater mischiefs upon themselves by seditious counsels than those which they
study to remedy."

[b] And there is none greater he seems to tell us in the next verse ( v. 3.)
than when power comes into the hands of a beggarly fellow: who is void of all
humanity, and forgets even what he himself was, and all the miseries of
poverty; which he perpetuates upon them who are poor already. So Maldonate (and
he alone I think) expounds that phrase veen lechem, and there is no food, to
signify, before the corn be grown out of the earth: and by the sweeping rain
understands not such rain as beats out the corn when it is in the ear; but
which washes away the seed before it spring up. Even so, he that spoils the
poor, takes away from them, after a manner, what they have not; and extirpates
the very seed of future riches, which he deprives them of all means of
gathering. Upon which subject the Lord Bacon has discoursed very ingeniously
in his VIIIth Book of the Advancement of Learning, Chapter II. Parab. 24. "This
Parable, says he, was by the ancients expressed and shadowed forth under the
fable of two horseleeches; one full, and the other hungry. For oppression
coming from the poor and necessitous person, is far more grievous than that of
the rich and the full; because it seeks out all tricks for exactions, and
leaves no corner unsearch't where money may be found. This kind of oppression
was wont also to be resembled to sponges; which being dry suck in strongly; but
not so, being moist. And the Parable comprehends in it a profitable
instruction, both to Princes and to people. To Princes, that they commit not
the government of Provinces or Offices of charge to indigent and indebted
persons: And to the people, that they suffer not their Kings to struggle with
too much want."

But none have glossed better upon this place, than an excellent Prelate of
ours, Bishop Sanderson in his Sermon upon XXIV. Prove. 10, 11. where he
discourses to this effect. "That it is in matter of power, as it is in matter
of learning. They that have but a smattering of scholarship, it is observed,
are the forwardest to make ostentation of the few scraps they have, for fear
there should be no notice taken of their learning, if they should not show it
when they can; and yet then they do it so untowardly, that when they think
most of all to show their scholarship, they most of all, by some gross mistake
or other, betray their ignorance. Even just so it is in the case of power, when
men of base spirits and condition have gotten a little of it into their hands;
who conceive their neighbors will not be sensible what goodly men they are, if
they do not by some act or other, show forth their power to the world: But
having minds too narrow to comprehend any brave and generous way to do it;
they cannot frame to do it by any other means, than by trampling upon those
that are below them; which they do beyond all reason, and without any mercy."

Which he illustrates very handsomely upon 1 Samuel XII. 3. "If a mean man, says
he, in any of our Towns or Hamlets, be a little gotten up to overtop most of
his neighbors in wealth; or be put into some small authority, to deal under
some great man for the disposing his farms or grounds; or have something to
sell to his necessitous neighbor, who must buy upon that day; or have a little
money lying by him to furnish another; who, to supply his present needs, must
sell off somewhat of that little he has, though at an under rate; or the like;
it is scarce credible (did not every days experience make proof of it) how such
a man will skrew up the poor wretch that falls into his hand, etc. conclude
hence, all ye that are of generous births and spirits, how unworthy that
practice would be in you; wherein men of the lowest minds and conditions can,
in their proportion, not only equal, but even exceed you: which should make
you not only to hate oppression, because it is wicked; but even to scorn it,
because it is base."

[c] After this, follow several bad characters of other men: and among the rest
of him that oppresses his brother by usury and increase, v. 8. where these two
words, Neschech, and Tarbith, do not seem to signify, greater extortion, and
more moderate gain. For all usury is Neschech, as it respects the debtor of
whom it is taken; and Tarbith, in respect of the creditour who is the gainer by
it; whether it be great or less, that the one gives and the other receives. If
there be any other difference between these two; it either lies in this, that
there were several sorts of usury whereby men increased their estates; or the
one signifies the advantage men made of their money, and the other the
advantage they made of their goods. About which I do not think fit to trouble
the Reader any further: nor to examine whether their opinion be true, who say;
the King was to take away their unjust gain, and give it to better men. I have
left that undetermined, whether God or man should punish the Usurer, but have
expressed all that the Law forbids in this case: which was to take interest (as
we speak) of their Brethren, especially of their poor Brethren; which some
think are only meant: but I have contented my self to say, are principally
meant.

[d] And in the next verse but two ( v. 11.) he observes that such men as grow
rich, though it be by fraud or oppression, are apt to have a mighty conceit of
their own wisdom: which understanding men, though never so poor, see through,
and discern to be, at best, but craft: and many times to be no more than that,
which we call purse-pride, when they have no more wit, but just to save and
hoard up money. Upon which place some observe, that Solomon secretly intimates
riches to be an impediment to wisdom; and poverty a great advantage: because
the one is apt to blow men up into a vain opinion of themselves; and the other
to make them humble and modest: the former of which is the greatest Enemy, and
the latter the best Friend to Wisdom. Certain it is, that money having so
large a command, as to be able to purchase not only dignity, but great
veneration from the multitude; they that have it, are apt to look no further
neither for wisdom nor virtue: which made a confident of Caesar's (as the Lord
Bacon observes) give him this counsel, that if he would restore the decayed
state of the Roman Commonwealth, he must by all means take away the estimation
of wealth: for these, says he, and all other evils, together with the
reputation of money, shall cease; if neither public offices, nor any other
dignities, which commonly are coveted, be exposed to sale. And the truth is,
says that Lord ( Adv. of Learn. Book I.) as it was rightly said that blushing
is the color of virtue, though sometime it come from vice; so we may truly
affirm that poverty is the fortune of virtue, though sometime it may proceed
from misgovernment and improvidence. And he adds further, that the magnificence
of Princes and great men, had long since turned into barbarism and rudeness; if
the poverty of Learning had not kept up civility, and decency of life.

[e] For bad Princes, Solomon shows, v. 12. bring great contempt and misery
upon a Nation; as all bad men ( v. 13, 14.) bring mischief upon themselves. But
no Princes are more grievous to their Subjects, than such as are needy, and yet
have no goodness. So I understand, with the LXX. verse 15. where that word we
render ranging, is well translated by the Vulgar an hungry bear, as Bochartus
has shown.

[f] Who also seems to me, to have expressed the sense of the next verse most
fully; when he observes, that according to the manner of the Hebrew Language,
there is something wanting in one part of the verse; which is to be supplied
out of the other. As when the Psalmist says in LXXXIV. Psalm. 11. one day in
thy courts, is better than a thousand; he means elsewhere, out of his courts.
And XCI. Psalm. 7. a thousand shall fall on thy side ( viz. the left hand) and
ten thousand on thy right hand. In like manner we are to understand this verse,
as if he had said, A Prince that wants understanding and is a great oppressor,
shall shorten his days: but he that hates covetousness shall prolong them. See
Par. I. de Animal. S. L. III. C. 25.

[g] In the two next verses I have endeavored to connect several Senses
together; as he that examins them will perceive. And in the 21 st v. have taken
some notice of the Lord Bacon's observation; that men may be bribed by
something else besides money, to pervert justice: and more commonly by other
respects than by that. His words are these (B. VIII. Advanc. of Learn. Chapter II.
Parab. 23.) Easiness of humor in a Judge, is more pernicious than the
corruption of Bribes. For all persons do not give bribes; but there is hardly
any cause, wherein somewhat may not be found, that may incline the mind of the
Judge, if respect of persons lead him. For one man shall be respected as his
Countryman, another as an ill-tongu'd man, another as a rich man, another as a
favorite, another as commended by a Friend; to conclude, all is full of
iniquity where respect of persons bears sway: and for a very slight matter, as
it were for a bit of bread, judgment is perverted.

[h] The rest of the Chapter contains plain observations, concerning several
sorts of good and bad men: and concludes with the repetition of a remark, he
had made before v. 12. about the state of public affairs; which are then in an
ill condition, when bad men get into authority. For virtuous men begin then to
be so ill treated, that they fly or hide themselves; to avoid the abuses which
they see will be put upon them. This the LXX. suggest, when they translate the
first clause of the verse, thus; in places where the impious bear sway, the
righteous sigh and groan; i. e. some are imprisoned, and sent into obscurity,
by the unjust prosecution of the wicked; and others obscure themselves, and
groan in secret under those oppressions: till there be a turn of affairs (which
Solomon here intimates they may expect in due time) by the fall of those wicked
persons, and the preferment of better: which invites virtuous men to appear
again; and, by the countenance they then receive, to propagate piety among the
people: who are so ready to conform themselves to the example of their
Governors, that there is no blessing we should pray for so earnestly as this;
especially when the days are evil. Then that saying of the Son of Syrach should
be perpetually in every good man's mind, to support and comfort him; when he is
constrained perhaps to lie hid and conceal himself, to avoid trouble and
danger, the power of the earth is in the hand of the Lord, and in due time he
will set over it one that is profitable, X. Ecclus. 4. read the foregoing
verses.

1. THE wicked flee when no man pursues: but the righteous are bold as a lion.


1. AN evil conscience makes men timorous and cowardly, like a faint-hearted
Soldier who runs away at the appearance of an enemy, and never so much as
looks back to see whether he pursue him: but men of integrity are not easily
affrighted; but proceed like a young Lion, with an undaunted resolution, even
in hazardous undertakings.

2. For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof: but by a man
of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged.


2. There are many mischiefs that people draw upon themselves by their
wickedness, and this especially; that falling into factions, every one thinks
himself fit to govern; and, throwing down one ruler after another, they can
come to no settlement, till they grow better and more considerate: and then,
some truly prudent and pious person arises; who takes the right course to heal
these breaches, and prolong the Government in peace and tranquillity. See Arg.
[a]

3. A poor man that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain which leaves
no food.


3. But there is none more wicked and intolerable, than a needy fellow, that is
got into power; but has lost all sense of the miseries of the poor: whom he
squeezes and spoils, like a violent rain, which instead of refreshing the corn,
as gentle showers do, beats it down and lays it so flat; that it can never
recover; but a famine comes upon the land. See Arg. [b]

4. They that forsake the law, praise the wicked: but such as keep the law,
contend with them.


4. From such a man there is none so wicked but he shall receive encouragement;
For they that make not the Law of God their rule, but their own lusts, will
employ and promote the vilest person, and find something or other to commend
him for: but they that resolutely observe God's Law, are so far from approving
such a wicked wretch, that they oppose him; and declare, as we say, open war
against him.

5. Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the LORD, understand
all things.


5. For the minds of men, that give up themselves to wickedness, are so
depraved, that some time they do not so much as understand, and at no time
regard the difference between right and wrong; much less the difference that
God does and will make between them: but men piously affected understand, and
consider, all things of this nature so exactly, that they are careful not to
offend, in the least, against their neighbor.

6. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, than he that is
perverse in his ways, though he be rich.


6. An honest upright man, that acts sincerely in all that he does, though he
be never so poor, is far happier and more useful and commendable, than a
crafty person, that knows how to wind and turn himself every way; though by his
fraud and tricks, he grow never so rich and great, v. XIX. 1.

7. Whosoever keeps the law, is a wise son: but he that is a companion of riotous
men, shameth his father.


7. He that studies the Law of God, and observes the rules of sobriety and
temperance and other virtues which it prescribes, is likely to prove a wise
Son; in whom his Parents may find comfort: but he that had rather go into merry
company, than into the School of the Wise, and there spend his time and his
money in sensual pleasures, is a shame, as well as a vexation to them.

8. He that by usury and unjust gain increases his substance, he shall gather
it for him that will pity the poor:


8. He that increases his estate by usury, for the money or goods which he
lends to his poor Brother (contrary to the Laws provided in that case XXII.
Exodus 24. XXIII. Deuteronomy. 19, 20.) shall not be able to make his family so great
as he intended: but those riches shall be translated into some other hands;
which will exercise that charity, which he neglected. See Arg. [c]

9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abomination.


9. He that refuses to hearken unto God and to obey his Laws, deceives
himself, if he thinks by his prayers to please Him, and make an amends for his
crimes: for God will be so far from harkening unto him, that he will abominate
such prayers, as tend to nothing, but to make God a partner with him in his
sins.

10. Whosoever causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall
himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good things in possession.


10. He that studies by false suggestions, and deceitful representations, to
seduce upright men into dangerous practices, shall fall himself irrecoverably
into that very mischief, which he designed for them: while they preserving
their integrity, shall remain not only safe, but in a flourishing condition.

11. The rich man is wise in his own conceit: but the poor that has
understanding searches him out.


11. A man, whose labors and cares have such success, that he grows very rich
and is courted and complemented by every body; is apt to fancy himself much
wiser than other men: but when a man of mean condition, who applies himself
more to understand the value of things than to get riches, comes to discourse
with him; he easily discovers, and makes it appear, that he is but a fool. See
Arg. [d]

12. When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when the wicked
rise, a man is hidden.


12. When the righteous are advanced to places of trust and authority, there is
excessive joy among all virtuous men; and the whole Kingdom feels the happy
effects of it, in beautiful order, peace, security and plenty at home; and in
the honor and reputation it has abroad: but when the wicked get up into
power, it makes a rufull change; being wholly employed in finding reasons to
ruin others; whose safety then lies in concealing themselves and their estates.
See v. 28.

13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy.


13. He that studies to hide or extenuate, rather than to leave his sins, shall
be so far from escaping by his impudent denial, that he shall make himself
obnoxious to severer punishments: but he that ingenuously acknowledges he has
done amiss: and not only promises to do so no more, but gives some proof of
his amendment, shall obtain pardon both from God and man.

14. Happy is the man that fears always: but he that hardens his heart,
shall fall into mischief.


14. From which happiness if he would not relapse, let him constantly preserve
a pious fear and dread of God and of his displeasure in his mind; and be
cautious and circumspect in all his actions: for if he be presumptuously
confident and careless, and because God is so gracious regard neither his
commands nor his threatenings; he will fall back into deeper guilt, and misery.

15. As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people.


15. A lion and a bear, are not more dreadful to the weaker beasts, especially
when hunger presses them to seek a prey, than a needy Prince, who fears not God
and loves not man, is to the poorer sort: who have not wherewithal to fill his
unsatiable desires; and yet are the surest to be invaded, because the least
able to resist his power. See Arg. [e]

16. The prince that wants understanding, is also a great oppressor: but he
that hates covetousness shall prolong his days.


16. But it is very great ignorance not only of Religion, but of all things
else, that makes a Prince grievously oppress and pillage his people; which
makes his reign short, as well as unhappy: when he that, hating such exactions,
is kind to his Subjects, prolongs his days in much tranquillity. See Arg. [f]

17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the
pit, let no man stay him.


17. He that murders a man, and, pressed with the weight of his guilt or
pursued by the avenger of blood, flies to save himself, shall never think
himself safe; but lead a restless life to his very grave: for all men looking
upon him as a common enemy shall refuse to succor him; no, though they see him
falling headlong into a pit, which he is not aware of, they shall not stop him,
but let him perish.

18. Whosoever walks uprightly, shall be saved: but he that is perverse in his
ways, shall fall at once.


18. There is no such way to be safe, as to be honest and sincere in all a
man's words and actions; for he that endeavors to preserve himself by fraud
and deceit, though he can wind, and turn, and has several shifts he thinks to
save himself, yet in one or other of them he shall perish: for the time will
come, when he will blindly choose the wrong course; and commonly when he begins
to fall, he sinks utterly and cannot possibly recover himself.

19. He that tilleth his land, shall have plenty of bread: but he that
follows after vain persons, shall have poverty enough.


19. He that is a good husband in the management of his estate, shall have the
satisfaction of providing sufficiently, if not plentifully for himself and his
family: but he that is careless, and follows the courses of loose and wicked
companions, can reap no other fruit of his negligence, but the most miserable
want and beggary.

20. A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that makes haste to
be rich, shall not be innocent.


20. He that is true to his word, and just in all his dealings, shall have
abundance of blessings from God, and be well spoken of by men: but he whose
eager desires make him heap up wealth, by right or by wrong, brings such guilt
upon himself, as makes him execrable unto both.

21. To have respect of persons, is not good: for, for a piece of bread that
man will transgress.


21. It is a wicked thing in a Judge to incline to consider the quality of the
person, and not the merits of the cause that is brought before him: For though
perhaps at the first he could not be corrupted under a great sum of money, yet,
having accustomed himself to it, he will at last sell his Sentence at the
lowest rates; nay, be moved by the smallest considerations to forsake the
rules, which ought to guide him. See Arg. [g]

22. He that hastes to be rich, has an evil eye, and considers not that
poverty shall come upon him.


22. An envious covetous wretch, that cannot look upon what another has
without grudging, is push't on, by his impatient desires, to get riches,
without making any distinction between good and evil: never considering. in
that disturbance of mind wherein he lives, that all may be gone in a moment;
and he then stand in need of the mercy of those, whom he would not pity.

23. He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor than he that
flattereth with the tongue.


23. He that rebukes a man for his evil courses may displease him, nay, anger
him at the first: but when he considers that he could have no other end in it
but his good, he will have a greater kindness for such a man, than for one that
humors him in every thing; and with flattering words sooths him up in those
faults, which he ought to take the freedom to reprehend.

24. Whosoever robs his father or his mother, and says, It is no transgression;
the same is the companion of a destroyer.


24. He that lays hands upon all that he can rap and rend from his father or
mother, and thinks it is no sin, or no great one (pretending they keep him too
short, and have no need of it themselves, or do not use it, etc.) not only
keeps the company of spend-thrifts; but is wicked enough to be a high way man,
and murder others to feed his own luxury.

25. He that is of a proud heart, stirs up strife: but he that puts his
trust in the LORD, shall be made fat.


25. A man of a proud and insolent spirit, of ambitious and vast desires, is
never quiet; but as he lives in perpetual quarrels, so has no satisfaction in
what he injoys; nay, many times wastes it all in suits and contentions: but he
who, confiding in the good Providence of the Almighty, has an humble and
contented mind, lives peaceably with others, and comfortably within himself;
nay thrives many times and abounds with plenty of all good things.

26. He that trusts in his own heart, is a fool: but whosoever walks wisely, he
shall be delivered.


26. He that relies wholly upon his own judgment, is like to miscarry; because
he follows the conduct of a fool: but he that, distrusting himself, takes good
advice and follows it, escapes many mischiefs, into which the other rashly
runs; and is delivered out of many dangers, in which the other perishes.

27. He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack: but he that hides his eyes,
shall have many a curse.


27. He that relieves those that are in want, shall be so far from wanting
himself, that he shall thereby procure God's blessing to increase his estate:
but he that regards not the miseries of others, nor is willing so much as to
know them, for fear of having his compassion moved toward them, shall draw
upon himself the curse of God as well as men; and fall into many and grievous
misfortunes.

28. When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the
righteous increase.


28. When wicked men are advanced unto power and authority, they favoring such
only as are like to themselves it makes good men scarce; who are forced to
withdraw, and hide themselves from their tyranny: but when they perish (as they
shall at last) and good men come in their place, then the righteous openly show
themselves; and the number of them increases, by their example, and by the
encouragement they enjoy under righteous Governors. See Arg. [h]

CHAP. XXIX.
ARGUMENT.
[a] This Chapter concludes the Collection of Proverbs, made by the men of
Hezekiah; and contains more advices proper to a Prince (as he was) than any of
the rest: but ushers them in, with a General admonition, how dangerous it is
not to profit by reproofs or corrections (such as He and his people had by the
hand of Senacherib) which when they work upon men's spirits there is some hope
of them: but when they become refractory, inflexible and obstinately reject
them, they are near to a final destruction. This wicked temper of mind, he
expresses by hardening the neck: which is a Metaphor, as Bochartus truly
observes (L. III. de Sacr. Animal. C. 41. P. 1.) taken from Oxen; who being put
forward draw back and withdraw their necks and shoulders from the yoke: and
sometimes are so headstrong and stiffnecked, that they cannot be brought to
submit to it: unto which the Scripture often alludes, both in the Old Testament
and the New: for instance, XXXII. Exodus 9. VII. Act. 51. And hither belong
those expressions XLVIII. Isa. 4. where he says his people had an iron sinew,
etc. and that in V. Jer. 5. where he says they had broken the yoke and burst
the bonds.

[b] Then follows a tacit Admonition unto Princes, to be good, by describing
the happiness which a Nation then enjoys: which they had noted twice before in
the foregoing Chapter, v. 12. and 28. but thought it so considerable and so
needful, that they insert it here again; and the latter part of it once more,
v. 16. Being a famous observation of his father David, XII. Psalm. 9. where he
takes notice, how the wicked flourish, and go about confidently into every
place, nay, take the liberty to do as they list, when men of no account are
exalted to power: who take no care to oppose growing wickedness, and to keep
every man within the bounds of his duty.

[c] And after an Admonition ( v. 3.) that the study of Wisdom is the only
preservative against the lust of uncleanness; which, in the preface to this
Book it is observed, destroys abundance of young mea, and their estates also
(for lust is very blind, and very prodigal) the next observation ( v. 4.) is
concerning Kings again: where ish Terumoth, which we translate a man that
receives gifts, is in the Hebrew phrase a man of oblations. For so the word
Terumoth always signifies, throughout the whole Bible, the heave offerings,
which were offered to God: which would make one think that ish Terumoth (a man
of heave offerings) signifies here, a Prince that is sacrilegious; and robs the
Church of its proper goods: or, if we will not take it in that strict sense, it
denotes one that will suffer himself to be pacified by gifts, and bribed to
wink at the most enormous crimes, which he ought to have severely punished: or,
that is so unjust, as to find fault, perhaps with the most innocent persons, on
purpose that they may appease him, by offering him a part of their estate to
save all the rest: one or other of these is the most literal exposition of the
words. But I have contented my self with the LXX. (who render it (...)) to use
only general expressions in the Paraphrase which include all these; and
whatsoever else that is contrary to the duty of his office. Rabbi Solomon does
not differ much from the sense of the LXX. when he translates it, a proud man,
who heaves and lifts up himself in his own thoughts, imagining he is above all
laws, and not bound to observe them.

[d] In the next verse ( v. 5.) I have not wholly neglected the sense of the
LXX. who refer the last clause to the flatterer himself: who cannot escape the
hatred of those, whom he has ruined by his pernicious praises, or base
compliances, with all their humors, etc. which is more fully expressed in the
following Sentence, v. 6. where I have interpreted one part of the verse by the
other.

[e] And then seems to follow again, a double admonition to Princes, or those
that govern under them. First, not through laziness or contempt to refuse to
examine a poor man's complaint, and do him right, v. 7. secondly, not through
profaneness, pride, or carelessness to scorn admonitions; especially any
warning that is given of danger, etc. v. 8. For when he says the righteous
considers the cause of the poor, he seems to mean a righteous Prince, or Judge
(and so I have explained it in the Paraphrase) for who else is to consider of
the din (as it is in the Hebrew) the cause of the poor which is to be judged?
None, but they, and the Advocates who are to plead it: all which persons are
obliged in conscience, to search into the truth of things; not to be sparing of
their pains (though matters be intricate, though the labor be like to be long,
though they shall get nothing by it) to find out the bottom of a business:
which he that refuses to do, nay, perhaps rejects the complaint of the poor,
or beats them off with bugg words; or, out of the hardness of his heart, or the
love of ease, or fear of great men, or any other respect will not give them
audience, or not consider and redress their grievance; Solomon pronounces him a
wicked, an impious person; and accordingly God will proceed against him.

[f] Such men indeed may scorn these threatenings, nay, laugh at them: but
thereby they will endanger the bringing all things into confusion; as Solomon
observes in the succeeding words, v. 8. where men of scorn (as it is in the
Hebrew) signify such as mock at Religion, and at all things that are serious:
whom the LXX. call (...), lawless, pestilent men; that regard neither God nor
man, but only their own wicked humor: which brings the Kingdom or place where
they live into the greatest danger. Which we express by the word ensnare; and
other Translations by words of the like import: which I have expressed in the
Paraphrase, but shall not mention here, because I would leave room to insert
the most admirable discourse of the Lord Bacon upon this verse. "It may seem
strange, says he, (B. VIII. Advanc. of Learn. Chap. II. Par. 12.) that in the
description of men, made and framed, as it were, by nature to the ruin and
destruction of a State, Solomon has chosen the character not of a proud and
insolent man, not of a tyrannical and cruel, not of a rash and violent, not of
an impious and lewd, not of an unjust and oppressive, not of a seditious and
turbulent, not of an incontinent and voluptuous, no nor of a foolish and unable
person: but of a SCORNER. But this is a judgment most worthy the wisdom of
that great King, who best knew the causes of the conservation or subversion of
a State. For there is not commonly the like plague unto Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, as when Counselors, or Senators, and such as sit at the helm
of government, are by nature scorners. For first, such persons, that they may
win the reputation of undaunted Statesmen, do ever extenuate the greatness of
dangers: and insult over those who give them their just weight, as timorous and
faint hearted people. Secondly, they scoff at all mature delays, and meditated
debatings of matters, by consultation and deliberation, as a thing too much
tasting of an oratory vein, and full of tediousness; but nothing conducing to
the sum and issue of business. As for Fame ( thirdly) at which a Princes
Counsels should especially level, they contemn it as the spittle of the vulgar,
and a thing that will quickly be blown over. The power and authority of Laws (
fourthly) they regard not at all; but look upon them as Cob-webs, that ought
not to stop matters of consequence. Fifthly, counsels, and precautions,
foreseeing of events afar off, they reject as mere dreams and melancholy
apprehensions. Sixthly, men truly prudent, and well seen in affairs, of great
resolution and counsel, they defame with gibes and jests. In a word, they do at
once overturn all the foundations of civil Government: which is the more to be
attended, because they secretly undermine it, and do not assault it by open
force. And it is a practice which is not yet so suspected among men, as it
deserves."

[g] The latter end of the next verse ( v. 9.) some refer to the fool, others
to the wise man. They that refer it to the fool understand it two ways, much to
the same purpose. Some thus, the fool will always be angry or deride, so that
the wise man cannot put in a word. Others thus, the wise man shall be either
irritated, or derided by the fool perpetually. As much as to say, he shall get
nothing, if he contend with a fool, but either to be derided or provoked to
anger by him. This I have taken some notice of, in my Paraphrase: but the
other, being the most common opinion, that he speaks of the way of a wise man's
dealing with a fool, I have principally regarded. And the Lord Bacon has made
this very pertinent reflection upon it (in the forenamed Book and place Parab.
3.) which it will be profitable to set down here. "It is accounted a wise rule,
not to contend with our betters: but it is a no less useful admonition, which
Solomon here gives us, not to contend with a worthless person; whom we cannot
meddle withal, but upon disadvantageous terms. For to overcome, is no victory;
but to be conquered a foul disgrace. And it is all one, in the management of
this contention, whether we deal sometime in a jesting way with him, and
sometime in a way of disdain and scorn. For which way soever we turn, we shall
come off with the loss of our credit, and not be able handsomely to disengage
our selves. But the worst of all is, when the person with whom we contend has
something of the fool in him (as Solomon speaks) That is, if he be both witless
and wilful: have some heart, but no brain."

[h] The tenth verse I have expounded of a Magistrate, that has the courage to
make inquisition after, and prosecute notorious offenders: and, in the latter
part of it, have put two senses together. As I have done also in the next ( v.
11.) where the word Ruach, Spirit, being differently interpreted, has produced
several expositions. For some take it to signify anger; others to signify
words, or the sense of the mind. They that take it for anger, expound it thus,
A fool shows all his anger immediately, but a wise man keeps it in, till he
has a fitting opportunity, to express it most to purpose. If we understand it
of words, the sense is; a fool blurts out every thing that comes in his head,
but a wise man speaks only as much as is necessary. If it signify the sense
of the mind, then this is the meaning, a fool utters all that he knows; but a
wise man conceals many things. But the great person before named (in the same
Chapter Parab. 15.) thinks none of these hit the mark. "For this Parable, says
he; corrects principally, not the futility of vain men, who utter easily as
well what ought to be kept secret, as what may be spoken; nor the bold liberty
of such as without discretion and judgment, fly upon all men and upon all
matters; nor talkativeness, which troubles others even to a surfeit; but
another vice more close and retired, viz. that government of discourse, which
of all other is not prudent and politic. And that is, when a man so orders his
discourse, in private conferences; as whatsoever is in his mind, which he
conceives any way pertinent to his purpose, out it comes at once, and, as it
were in one breath, and in a continued speech. This is that which does much
prejudice business. For first a speech broken off by inter locutions, and
instilled by parts, penetrates deeper than that which is continued: because
that in a continued discourse the weight of things is not precisely and
distinctly taken; nor by some convenient pauses suffered to fix: but one reason
drives out another, before it be thoroughly settled in the mind of the hearer.
Secondly, there is no man master of such powerful and happy eloquence, as to
be able, at the very first dash, as we speak, to strike him dumb and altogether
speechless, with whom he discourses: but he will have something to answer, and
perhaps to object on the other side. And then it falls out that those things,
which should have been reserved for replication and refutation, being disclosed
already and tasted beforehand by this unadvised anticipation, quite lose their
strength and their grace. Thirdly, if a man do not pour out all he has to say
at once, but deliver himself by parcels; now one thing, and anon casting in
another; he shall perceive by the looks and the answer of him, with whom he
discourses, how every particular passage affects him, and what acceptance they
find with him: so as what is yet remaining to be spoken, he may with the
greater caution, either suppress, or select what is to his purpose." Thus that
great person: who herein has followed the LXX. who express the sense, rather
than translate the words, in this manner; a man void of understanding brings
out his whole mind: but a wise man dispenses it part by part.

[i] The like observation he makes upon the next verse ( v. 12.) where by lies,
or words of falsehood (as the Hebrew has it) the LXX. truly understand (...),
an unjust report, that hurts our neighbor by calumnies, or false accusations
(as the word commonly signifies in Scripture, particularly Psalm. LII.) unto
which if a Ruler lend his ear, he will never want lewd Informers or rather
Slanderers in his Court to work upon that inclination. Melancthon has observed
upon this verse, that the love of lies (as he translates it) comprehends a
great many vices; according as there are diverse sorts of lies: which are all
repugnant to that eminent Virtue of Truth; in which a Prince ought to excel,
viz. vanity, or perfidiousness, breach of promises, calumnies, suspicions,
sophistry; which defends bad causes by colorable pretenses to please great
men; and persuades the Prince by plausible arguments, that he is tied to no
rules: unto any of which if a Prince be inclined; his Ministers will not fail
to make him break his word perpetually; to abuse him with false stories; to
infuse into his mind unjust suspicions; and to find colors for any thing,
though never so wicked: of all which he gives examples.

But none has opened this Parable comparably to the Lord Bacon, in the place
before mentioned (Parab. 13.) "where he takes it for an easy credulous temper,
in a Prince, to believe Detractours and Sycophants without examination. From
whence proceeds such a pestilential breath, as infects and corrupts all his
Servants. For some of them feel out the fears and jealousies of the Prince, and
increase them by fictitious tales. Others awake and stir up the furies of envy;
especially against those that are best deserving in the State. Others seek to
wash away their own guilt, and the stain of a foul conscience, by defaming
better men. Others promote the suits of their friends, and their preferments,
by traducing and debasing the merit of their competitours. Others compose
fabulous representations of their enemies, as if they were upon a stage; and
innumerable such like. And these are the arts of such of the Prince's Servants,
as are of a more wicked disposition. As for those, who are by nature better
inclined, and by education more civilized, when they perceive their innocence
to be no safe sanctuary (their Prince not knowing how to distinguish between
truth and falsehood) they put off the probity of their manners, and accommodate
themselves also to the air of the Court, and are carried about therewith, in a
servile manner. For (as Tacitus says of Claudius) there is no safety with that
Prince, into whose mind all things are conveyed, as it were, by infusion and
direction from others. And Comines says very well, It is better to be servant
to a Prince whose suspicions have no end, than to one whose credulity has no
measure."

After this, there follows in the next verse but one, another Admonition to
Princes, v. 14. And then a double Admonition to private Parents, to take care
of the good education of their Children; as the best way to make a Kingdom
happy, and to prevent the increase of wickedness. About which he interposes an
Observation between these two: in the explanation of all which verses, I have
had some respect to the LXX. without any injury to our Translation.

[k] And so I have done in the next v. 18. where by vision or rather prophecy
they understand (...), an expounder of the Laws of God to the people; which was
the office of the Prophets: who had a great stroke also in the Government (as
Melancthon observes) and by their counsels, when they were followed, made the
Kingdom flourishing. As Elisha for about 70 years governed the counsels of
their Kings in the greatest calamities; particularly in the siege of Samaria:
After whose death the Kingdom endured not much above an 100. years, agitated by
perpetual seditions. Thus Esaiah, by his counsels, moderated the calamities of
Judah for several years: after which followed the ruin of the Nation; in which
notwithstanding, by the counsels of Jeremiah a good part of the people were
saved. From such examples, says he, we may gather, that when prophecy ceased,
the people were scattered (so he translates the word Para) because for want of
wholesome Counselors there follows in Empires strifes of ambition, and
seditions, which all tend to utter ruin: yet the second part of this sentence,
says he, admonishes us, that a remnant should be safe in their dispersions,
viz. such as kept the Divine Doctrine. For want of which God takes away men's
instructers, when they are not obedient to wholesome precepts. So the LXX.
translate this verse (minding the sense rather than the words) there is no
expounder of the Law, to a wicked lawless Nation, etc. God strips them even of
their teachers; as some translate the word Para, perish: which has various
significations, most of which I have expressed in the Paraphrase; because they
all agree well enough to this place.

[l] There is an exposition of the next words, v. 19. which would be very
natural, if the Wise man spoke only of the commands of Masters to their
Servants; which they pretend sometime not to hear, that they may not do as
they are bidden. But he speaks of their not amending the faults, of which they
have been already told: which is not the quality of all servants; and therefore
I have said a slave. Or else we must interpret it, as the LXX. do of (...), a
stubborn, obstinate servant; whose heart is hardened against all words that can
be spoken to him, good or bad.

[m] But I must make no more glosses, for fear of prolonging this Preface too
much beyond its just bounds. And therefore I shall conclude it, with the Lord
Bacon's observation upon v. 21. (where the LXX. have expressed but a little
part of the sense) "that both Princes and private Masters, should keep a mean
in the dispensation of their grace and favor toward servants: which mean is
threefold. First, that Servants be promoted by steps (or degrees) not by leaps.
Secondly, that they be now and then accustomed to repulses. Thirdly (which
Machiavel well advises) that they have ever in their sight before them,
something whereunto they may further aspire. For unless these courses be taken,
in raising of Servants, Princes shall instead of thankful acknowledgments, and
dutiful observance, be repaid with nothing but disdain and contumacy. For from
sudden promotion, arises insolence; from constant attainment of their desire,
proceeds impatience of being denied; and there being nothing remaining that
they can further wish, alacrity and industry will cease."

1. HE that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy.


1. HE that having received frequent reproofs from good men, and perhaps
corrections from God, will not yield in the least, but absolutely refuses to
be guided by them, and submit unto them; is in danger to fall, and that on a
sudden, into utter and irrepairable ruin. See Arg. [a]

2. When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the
wicked bears rule, the people mourn.


2. When just and merciful Governors make virtuous men grow numerous (XXVIII.
28.) a Kingdom is happy: but when an ungodly man rules, the wicked get into
places of trust; and make the people miserably groan under their oppressions.
See Arg. [b]

3. Whosoever loves wisdom, rejoices his father: but he that keeps company
with harlots, spends his substance.


3. A young man, whose love of wisdom and virtue, preserves his body as pure
as his mind, and his estate as entire as both, gives the greatest joy to his
Father: As on the contrary, nothing can be a greater grief to him, than to see
his Son so sottish, as to maintain a company of harlots; whose covetousness,
being as unsatiable as their lust, devoureth all that he has. See Arg. [c]

4. The king by judgment stablisheth the land: but he that receives gifts,
overthrows it.


4. A King that administers Justice exactly to all his Subjects, restores his
Kingdom to a good estate, though it has been before in great disorder: But he
who, having no respect to equity and right, takes the most illegal courses to
enrich himself, subverts it utterly; though it be never so well settled. See
Arg. [c]

5. A man that flattereth his neighbor, spreads a net for his feet.


5. He that sooths up his neighbor, by commending all that he does, though
never so directly against his interest, is so far from being his friend, as he
imagins, that he is a traitor to him; and leads him unawares into such
dangers, that when he finds himself perplexed in them, he will treat that
flatterer as his greatest enemy. See Arg. [d]

6. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare: but the righteous
does sing and rejoice.


6. A naughty man has an heavy heart at last, when he finds himself undone by
those very arts, whereby he thought to have ruined others: but pious men are
always cheerful, nay, full of joy; both to think that they are in safe and
secure ways, and to see the evil doer caught in his own wickedness.

7. The righteous considers the cause of the poor: but the wicked regards
not to know it.


7. A righteous man, when he is in authority, not only readily receives, and
patiently weighs, the complaints of the poorest person; but is at the pains to
study his cause, that he may fully understand it and do him right, though he
thereby incurr hatred to himself from the adverse party: but a wicked man will
not attend unto it, or not use due care to be well instructed in it. See Arg.
[e]

8. Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away wrath.


8. There are no greater fools than Scorners, who by laughing at all things
serious, whether sacred or civil, put a Kingdom into combustion, when it is
disposed to be quiet; nay, turn things topsyturvy, and endanger its utter ruin,
unless good and cautious men prevent it: who by their piety, turn away the
divine vengeance; and by their prudence and other virtues, divert the fury of
men, which those scorners have raised. See Arg. [f]

9. If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or laugh,
there is no rest.


9. Let a man be never so wise, it is to no purpose for him to dispute or to
enter into any contest with an obstinate fool: for which way soever he deal
with him, whether roughly or gently, whether angrily, or pleasantly, there will
be no end of the controversy; but the fool will still have the last word; nay,
it is well if he do not either restlessly rage, or laugh one to scorn. See Arg.
[g]

10. The bloudthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.


10. Men enormously wicked, who stick not to kill those that oppose their
desires, above all others hate and would destroy an upright Magistrate; whose
integrity makes him courageously endeavor to bring them to condign punishment:
but such a person, all virtuous men love the more heartily, and labor to
defend and preserve from their violence; or to revenge his death, if he should
perish by them. See Arg. [h]

11. A fool utters all his mind: but a wise man keeps it in till afterward.


11. A fool is so inconsiderately transported by his passion, or conceit of
himself, that when he comes to treat of any business, he can put no stop to his
discourse; but runs on, till he has poured out all that he thinks upon that
Subject: but a wise man represses the heat and forwardness of his spirit, that
he may pause and take time, to declare his mind, not altogether, but by
parcels. See Arg. [h]

12. If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked.


12. A Prince who hearkens to the false suggestions of those, that tell him he
may do what he pleases, or who easily believes, without any examination, all
the stories and accusations that are brought him against others; fills his
whole Court with so many wicked men, that it is hard to find an honest
Minister, or Officer among them. See Arg. [i]

13. The poor and the deceitful man meet together: the LORD lightneth both
their eyes.


13. The world is made up of several sorts of men; of poor, for instance, who
are fain to borrow, and of rich who lend them money, and perhaps oppress them:
but these would all agree well enough, when they meet together, if they would
but consider, that there is one LORD who makes the Sun to shine equally on all;
and who intends all should live happily, though in an unequal condition. See
XXII. 2.

14. The king that faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be established
for ever.


14. A King that administers justice equally to all his Subjects, and cannot be
moved by the power or interest of the greatest persons to deny it to the
meanest; but faithfully and sincerely sets himself to help the poor to their
right, or to defend them from violence and wrong; takes the surest course to
settle himself in the affections of his people, and continue his Kingdom for
many generations.

15. The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself, brings
his mother to shame.


15. The way to make a Child wise and virtuous, is not only to instruct him in
his duty, but to check him when he is in fault; and that not merely by reproof,
but by the sharp discipline of the rod, when the other will do no good: for if
he be left to follow his own will, or rather to wander after his own
inclinations, without such restraints, he will prove, in all likelihood, a
disgrace to his mother, by whose indulgence he was spoiled; nay, fly perhaps in
her face, and openly reproach her. X. 1.

16. When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increases: but the
righteous shall see their fall.


16. When the wicked grow numerous, by growing great ( v. 2.) men take the
greater license to transgress; and wickedness increases by having authority on
its side: but let not the righteous hereby be discouraged; for the wickeder men
are, the shorter is their reign; and they that preserve their virtue shall have
the pleasure to behold their downfall.

17. Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest: yea, he shall give delight
unto thy soul.


17. It may seem most for thy ease to let thy Child alone, without giving him
correction or reproof; but let me advise thee to put thy self to this trouble,
to save thy self a greater ( viz. many anxious and restless thoughts, which his
ill doing will raise in thee) or rather to give thy self the highest delight,
when by thy care of his education, he proves a great ornament unto thee.

18. Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that keeps the law,
happy is he.


18. Where there are none to instruct the people, and expound the will of God
unto them, they first grow idle and careless, and then run into all
licentiousness; till, growing refractory and ungovernable, they be abandoned by
God to destruction: but when they are not only well taught, but also strictly
observe the Laws of God, they remain in a prosperous and happy condition. See
Arg. [k]

19. A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand, he
will not answer.


19. A Slave, and he that is of a servile nature, is not to be amended by
reason and persuasions; no, nor by reproofs, or threats: for, though he hear,
and understand too, what you say yet, he will not obey, till he be forced unto
it by blows. See Arg. [l]

20. See thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fool,
than of him.


20. Observe it when you will, you shall commonly find that he who is forward
to speak to a business, before his betters, or before he understand it, or has
considered it, is so conceited of himself, that a man wholly ignorant, may
sooner be rightly informed, than he who is so well persuaded of his own
sufficiency.

21. He that delicately brings up his servant from a child, shall have him
become his son at the length.


21. It is so hard for a man of base condition, to bear a sudden preferment
handsomely, that it is dangerous to express too much kindness to a Servant at
the very first; by feeding him delicately, clothing him finely, or indulging
him too much ease, liberty and familiarity: for this is the way to make him
saucy, if not contumacious; nay, to domineer and take upon him, as if he were a
Son, and perhaps endeavor to disinherit the Heir of the Family. See Arg. [m]

22. An angry man stirs up strife, and a furious man abounds in
transgression.


22. A man prone to anger is very troublesome, and unpeaceable; being apt to
quarrel about trifles: and, as he offends very often so, if he let it proceed
to rage and fury, he falls into abundance of sins; both in word and deed,
against God, and against his neighbor.

23. A man's pride shall bring him low: but honor shall uphold the humble in
spirit.


23. Proud and contumelious behavior, instead of procuring men respect, throws
them into the contempt and hatred of all; and at last into destruction: but he
whose meek and lowly mind makes him kind and obliging, shall be highly
esteemed; and the esteem he has shall be his support, when others fall to ruin.

24. Whosoever is partner with a thief, hates his own soul: he hears cursing,
and bewrays it not.


24. He that partakes with a thief, by harboring him when he is pursued, or by
receiving stolen goods, etc. has the same guilt upon him with the thief
himself; and as he has put his own life in danger to save the thiefs, so this
will engage him to run his soul into greater danger, to save his life: for
being adjured to discover what he knows, he will go near to forswear himself;
for fear of being hanged.

25. The fear of man brings a snare: but whosoever puts his trust in the LORD,
shall be safe.


25. As all inordinate fear bereaves a man of counsel and power to help
himself; so he that stands in too great fear of what men can do unto him, will
be ensnared in many sins, and perils also, to avoid their displeasure: but he
that confides in the Lord, has his wits always about him, and, being raised
above such low considerations, preserves his integrity; and that, by God's good
providence over him, will preserve him in safety.

26. Many seek the rulers favor, but every man's judgment comes from the LORD.


26. There are multitudes of men, who are ambitious to be known to their
Prince, and obtain his favor for honor and preferment; but few remember that
there is a greater Lord than he, the Sovereign of all the world, whose grace
and favor should be principally sought: for He determins and orders what every
man's portion shall be; and will both judge of men's deserts better than any
earthly King can do; and deal with them according as they behave themselves, in
that condition wherein they are.

27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the
way, is abomination to the wicked.


27. There is such a perfect antipathy between virtue and vice, that all truly
good men extremely abominate him that does mischief in the world, though he be
never so great and powerful: as, on the contrary, the evil doer has every man
that behaves himself uprightly, though never so useful, in utter abhorrence
and detestation.

The END of the THIRD PART.
CHAP. XXX.
ARGUMENT.
[a] This Chapter contains a new Collection of pithy Sayings; which some fancy
to be Solomon's: and therefore translate the two first words, thus; the words
of the Collector, or gatherer. But why Solomon should call himself by this
name, and also, instead of the Son of David, style himself the Son of Jake,
seems to me unaccountable. And therefore it is most reasonable to follow our
Translation (unto which the wisest of those that adhere to the Vulgar, are
forced to consent, as most literal) and to look upon this Chapter as a Fragment
of some wise Sentences, delivered by one whose name was Agur, and his Fathers
name Jake: unless we will conceive that this Son of Jake (whosoever he was) had
gotten the name of Collector; because, though he was a very wise man yet, he
composed nothing himself: but only gathered, out of other wise men's works,
such instructions, as he thought most profitable, and comprised, in a few
words, a great deal of sense.

[b] Which conjecture if it be admitted, nothing can better explain his
disclaiming the title of a Wise man ( v. 2.) which he would not assume to
himself, because he was only a Collector from other Authors, and did not
pretend to have discovered or invented any thing himself.

But take it how we will, some of his Observations are here annexed to the
Proverbs of Solomon; after the manner of other Writings of this nature. In
which (as Melancthon notes) the greater part of a Book belonging to one
Author, some notable speeches of others have been inserted: as some of the
Sibyllin Verses, they say, were into the Poem of Phocyllides.

[c] And these words of Agur are called Massa, which we translate Prophecy,
either to denote the weightiness of the Sentences; or that they were culled and
selected out of some work of his, then remaining in their records, as fit (in
the judgment of the men of Hezekiah, who perhaps extracted them) to accompany
the Proverbs of Solomon. And they seem to me to be Answers to several
Questions, propounded to him by his Scholars, Ithiel (who was the principal)
and Ucal: who came to him, as if he had been an Oracle, to be resolved in some
hard doubts: asking him in the first place, just as they did Apollo of old (as
Aben Ezra conjectures) Who was the wisest man? To which he replies, v. 2. He
that is sensible of his own ignorance: much like the saying of Socrates, this
only I know, that I know nothing: and of Pythagoras, who also refused the name
of Wise; which made much for the reputation of his wisdom.

[d] Upon this subject Agur inlarges, ver. 3, 4. wishing his Scholars,
especially Ithiel (who I suppose asked the question in the name of the rest) to
be sensible how imperfect all humane knowledge is; by considering how little or
nothing we know of the works of God, which none can understand (though they be
perpetually before our eyes) but he alone that made them. And therefore advises
him to make it his principal study, to understand what belonged to his own duty
(which is the best part of knowledge) v. 5. and herein also to be content with
what God has revealed; and not pretend to be wiser than He has made us, v. 6.

[e] After which, he gives Answers, as I take it, unto other questions, which
Ithiel propounded to him. And first about Prayer. For Agur having repressed
their busy humor of inquiry into all manner of things, had raised, we may
suppose, some devotion in his Scholars hearts; which made them desire to be
directed in it. And he gives them most wise advice, v. 7, 8. to be very
cautious what they prayed for; just as in Plato ( Alcibiad. 2.) we find
Socrates giving Alcibiades instructions about this, as a principal part of
virtue; in the practice of which, he tells him, there had need to be the
greatest care, lest we imprudently ask those things that are not good for us.
But he could not give Alcibiades such directions about this matter, as Agur
here gives Ithiel and the rest of his Scholars. Whom he informs, that the true
knowledge of God is the chiefest good; and therefore to be desired in the first
place, above all other goods: and then (according to our Saviors rule, in
aftertimes) having first sought the things that belong to Religion, he directs
them to beg of God moderate desires of all earthly things; believing that we
are safer in a mediocrity, or middle estate, than either in fullness or in want.
To which purpose Melancthon and others have gathered together many sayings out
of other Writers. But none have given such reasons for this choice of a middle
state, as this wise man, v. 9.

[f] After which, he seems to answer a question, which Ithiel propounded about
moral virtue: which having been largely treated of by Solomon, he only gives
him one caution against hard heartedness to Slaves, and Servants; v. 10. of
which the Hebrew Nation were generally very guilty: and thereby unmeet for that
favor which they begged of God in their Prayers; which ought to have disposed
them to be favorable unto others.

[g] And then he gives the character of four sorts of men, who are execrable
unto God; and therefore ought to be avoided by all those that would be good, v.
11, 12, 13, 14. which I must pass by, without any further account of them, but
what I have given in the Paraphrase: because the fifteenth verse has much
difficulty in it, and therefore requires some time to be spent in opening it.
Bochartus thinks to solve some of the difficulty by giving a new signification
of the word Aluka. But all Interpreters, in a manner, taking it for that thick
worm in watrish places, which we call an horse-leech, I do not think fit to
forsake our Translation: nor to refer the beginning of the verse to that
immediately foregoing (as some do, in this manner; detractors can no more leave
off evil speaking, than the horse-leech leave off sucking, etc.) but rather to
those words immediately following in this same verse; which, notwithstanding, I
take to have some connection with all the four foregoing, as I have expressed it
in the Paraphrase. For it seems to me to be an Answer to some such Question as
this (which the Desciples had propounded to their Master Agur, after the manner
of oenigmatical discourses, or riddles) what is most unsatiable? which he
chooses to give an account of in this place; the better to represent the nature
of those wicked men he had spoken of before: especially of the two last; the
proud; and the tyrannical or extortioner; whose desires are a gulf, that can
never be filled.

And at the first he seems to have thought but of two things, viz. the grave,
and the barren womb; which might be called the daughters of the horse-leech,
because they are so perfectly of the like nature, in regard of their
unsatiableness. But he presently adds another; nay, a fourth came into his
mind, as no less greedy: viz. the thirsty earth (which in those hot Countries
sucks up all the rain as fast as it falls, though never so much) and the fire,
which devours all the fuel that is laid upon it. And this he expresses after
the manner of the Hebrews: who intending to mention four things or more,
separate them at first, and begin with a lesser number; and proceed then to all
that they designed. There are many examples of it in I. Amos 3, 5, 9, etc. and
here in this Book of Proverbs, VI. 16. and below in this Chapter, v. 18, 21,
etc. Indeed there is no example like this, where the sentence begins with two,
and then says three, and then four: but that might be usual of which we have no
exact example; and therefore I do not look upon this as a sufficient objection,
against this way of explaining this verse. Which the LXX. has taken, in the
Roman Edition; which runs thus, the horse-leech has three beloved daughters,
and these three are never satisfied: and there is a fourth that says not, it
suffices.

There are those who compare certain vices, with these four unsatiable things,
and not ineptly: the desire of revenge, to the grave; libidinous desires, to
the barren womb; covetousness (or rather drunkenness) to the thirsty earth; and
ambition to the devouring fire. And it is easy to show, how fitly all these
are resembled to the horse leech: it being the vulgar saying, that harlots (for
instance) are the horse-leeches of young men, sucking all their money from
them, and exhausting their bodies too. And the Servant in Plautus, when he was
about to rob the Chests of the two old men says, jam ego me vortam in
hirudinem, etc. now I will turn my self into a horse-leech, and suck out their
very blood.

But I forbear such things, because there are others, more necessary to be
added for the understanding the rest of the Chapter.

[h] And that which next follows, v. 17. is a reflection upon the first
generation of wicked men (mentioned, v. 11.) who sinned against the first
Commandment of the second Table (as we speak) and for their rebellion against
their Parents were adjudged to death by the Law of Moses, XXI. Exodus 15, 17.
XX. Lev. 9. XXI. Deuteronomy. 18. And to make them more detestable, their carkases
perhaps were thrown into some loathsome places, called the valley of carkases,
or dead bodies (XXXI. Jer. 40.) and the valley of crows (as Bochartus
conjectures) or ravens; whom the Wise man here speaks of. And besides this,
they who abused their Parents, being of a villainous nature, were likely to turn
Rogues; and to commit Robberies, Murders, Treasons, or such like horrid
crimes: which would bring them to the gallows (as we speak) or some such
infamous death. The Jews indeed might not suffer the body of one that was
hanged, after he had been put to death, to remain upon the gibbet, beyond the
evening of that day, wherein he was executed. But they were not forbidden to
let him lie unburied, in some polluted place, when he was taken down: And in
some cases, we find, they did let dead bodies hang a long time, as we read 2 Samuel XXI. And therefore Paulus Fagius (upon XX. Exodus 12.) expounds these words
of Agur after this manner; disobedient children shall come to an ignominious
death, and end their days by an halter, or other punishment; and so become
crows meat. But there is no necessity of this explication. For we may conceive
such a wicked person, to be drowned by the just judgment of God upon him; and
his body to lie floating on the water; or to be cast on shore, where the ravens
(who frequent the waters) come and pick out his eyes; at which they are
observed to fly, sooner than any other part. He might perish also in other
Countries, where the infamous punishment of the gibbet was in use; or be slain
in battle; and left there to be a prey to beasts and birds. Among which the
Raven is the rather mentioned, some think, because the young ones are so
impious (as Vossius speaks, L. III. de Idol. Cap. 85.) as to fall upon the old
ones and kill them, when they are hungry (which is affirmed by Aelian and
others) and therefore more fitly employed to pick out the eyes of undutifull
Children. But I look upon this as having more of fancy, than solidity in it:
for others, for the quite contrary reason, make the Eagles here named, because
they are a bird full of piety; as has been observed out of Aben Ezra, by our
learned Dr. Castle. whose discourse in his Speech ( in Schol. Theol. p. 31.) I
shall here set down for the explication of one word in this verse; wherein he
differs from all others: which is (...). This word the Hebrews interpret
doctrina, and understand the verse thus, the eye that despises the doctrine or
the lesson of his mother, etc. But there is no known root in their language
from whence to derive this signification of it: and therefore that Doctor, out
of the neighboring languages, translates it rather senium, old age: which is
most agreeable to the sense of the place. For that which is despised by the eye
is some corporal defect (as crookedness, wrinkles, shaking of the head, etc.
and such like things which attend old age) not any thing belonging to the mind.
And besides, says he, it better agrees with what follows of the Eagles young
ones picking out such an eye: for they are observed to bear a regard to their
ancients, and to have a kind of piety in them.

[i] In the next words, ( v. 18, 29, 20.) he resolves another riddle, they put
to him; which was this: what things are most obscure and unaccountable, though
ordinary and common? of which I have given the best explication I could in the
Paraphrase; but cannot further explain here, without making this Preface (which
must necessarily be longer than ordinary, unless I should give no account of
several things in the following verses which require explication) a great deal
too much exceed the proportion which belongs to it.

[k] Next to these four inscrutable things, he subjoyns four more, which are
very grievous, or rather intolerable, because of their great indignity, v. 21,
22, 23. the two first belong to men, and the disturbance of the Commonwealth;
the two last to women, and the disturbance of private Families. And there are
reasons peculiar to each: ex. gr. a Slave is intolerable when he gets the
Scepter into his hand (as they have done sometimes) partly because such
persons, being ill bred, generally have base principles; and are accustomed to
vile things; and grow insolent by their good fortune: partly, because they are
full of fears and suspicions, especially that they are despised and contemned;
and therefore believing they are not loved, they will be feared, and care not
what cruelties they exercise to keep men under. Part of which the Jews object
to themselves in Schebet Judah; where they bring in a Philosopher laying this
to their charge, that they affecting dominion in the City of Toledo, proceeded
to such boldness and sauciness, that they would openly strike Christians: which
fulfilled, says he, that of Solomon XXX. 22.

[l] The like might be said of the other three; but I shall only observe
concerning the last, that there being another way of explaining it, besides
that which is most obvious, I have not omitted it: because the LXX. go that
way, who thus render it, When a servant maid casts her mistress out of doors.
And there is a third way, which I have not mentioned, because it is not so
agreeable to the words; when the mistress is not expelled, but the maid also is
taken to wife and preferred in the husbands love; as N. de Lyra takes it:
examples of which we have in history, that have proved very fatal to families.
But this Preface, as I said, would be too long if I should name them; therefore
I pass to the next.

[m] Which seems to be an Answer to this Question, Quid est magnum in minimo?
What is great in little? or rather in the least? v. 24, 25, 26, etc. where he
teaches us several things: first not to admire merely bodily bulk, strength, or
beauty; but rather wisdom, diligence and sagacity to understand and pursue our
own interest: secondly, to admire the wisdom and power of God in the smallest
things: and thirdly (as Melancthon adds) to reflect upon our own degenerate
state, who neglect our own greatest good; nay, mind not self-preservation, but
rather destroy our selves by vice and wickedness: and lastly, not to refuse
admonition from the brutes. Among which, says he, the Ants teach us industry
and forecast; the Rabbits, not to attempt any thing above our strength; the
Locusts, to preserve society by industry, and not to break it by sedition and
disturbance of the public order; and the Spider, to endeavor to excel in
some art or other. All of them teach us not to rely merely on strength, but to
use counsel and prudence.

The first and second of which reflections I find in S. Chrysostom, who
discourses admirably (Hom. XII. ad pop. Antioch. p. 139.) of the wonderfulness
of the divine artifice, which in so small a body as that of the Ant, has
contrived such a perpetual desire of labor. To which if we attend, we cannot
but receive this Instruction, (...) not to affect softness and delicacy, nor
fly from sweat and labors. And when the Wise man sends us, says he, to learn
of these little Creatures, he does just as we are wont to do in Families; when
the greater and the better sort have offended in any thing, we endeavor to
shame them, by pointing to the little Children, saying, (...) behold, one that
is a great deal less than thou, how towardly, how attentive and ready he is, to
do as he is bidden.

[n] But that word which we translate Conies, v. 26. (which are not so small a
Creature, as Solomon here speaks of, nor make their holes in Rocks) Bochartus
has evidently proved signifies a Mouse in those Countries (whose hinder legs
are longer than the forelegs) called by the Arabians in their language
Aljarbuo; whose craft I have briefly expressed in the Paraphrase.

[o] In what is said of the Locusts also, v. 27. I have followed him: who
observes that to go forth, is a Scripture phrase for making war. In which the
General was wont to divide the prey among the Soldiers, after a Victory: but
the Locusts, having no settled constant Commander, divide among themselves. Yet
I have not neglected our Translation.

[p] Which in the 28th verse has forsaken the ancient Interpreters, who take
Semamith, not for a Spider but, for a small sort of Lizzard; from its spots
called stellio; which is accounted by all Authors a very crafty Creature: and
to which the characters here given by Solomon do most properly belong. As the
same Bochartus has shown at large L. IV. C. 7. de Sacr. Anim. Part 1. But if
any have a list to understand hereby, some sort of Spider, they may read
Coelius Secundus his little Book called Araneus: In which he represents the
wonderful wisdom of God, in the structure of this small Creature; together
with its admirable agility, and cunning; both in weaving its webs and nets; and
in hunting for its prey particularly for young Lizzards) and in preserving it
self; and its foresense of dangers, and of opportunities to catch its prey: For
instance, against rainy weather; when other little Creatures grow dull in their
motion and in their sight. In short, he observes, that as there is nothing, in
appearance so mean, so abject, so small, in which the Creator of all is not to
be adored, and whose usefulness is not very great; so there are five things
which are admirable in that sort of Spider, which he describes: the inexhausted
matter which it spins out of so small a body; the wisdom of its contrivances;
strength in fighting; knowledge of the future; and usefulness for medicine.

[pp] And from all these four, some have noted, that an abridgment may be made
of all that is necessary for the conservation of a Kingdom in good estate:
where first, care must be taken for provision of food, which we learn from the
Pismire; then for secure and commodious dwelling, which we learn from the
second sort of Creature; and then that there be concord and agreement among
domestics and citizens, which we learn from the third; and lastly that labor,
industry and ingenuous arts be encouraged and advanced, which we learn from the
fourth.

[q] After the consideration of these four little Creatures, of small strength
and contemptible aspect, he places four other which are great, stately and
undaunted, v. 29, 30, etc. In which there are two considerable difficulties;
one about that word in v. 31. which we translate a Greyhound (the vulgar a
Cock; though Maldonate ingeniously conjectures the true reading in S. Hierom
was Gallicus canis, which afterward came to be corrupted into Gallus) but I
take rather for a Horse (as our margin has it) being a far braver, and more
stately Creature than either of those; especially when he pranses, and is
managed by a good rider.

The other is about the last words of the same verse: which are the character
he gives of a King (who perhaps is immediately placed after the He-goat;
because that Creature in Scripture is an Emblem of Majesty VIII. Dan. 5. 21.
XIV. Isa. 9. L. Jer. 8, etc.) Alkum immo which Bochartus translates, against
whom none of his Subjects ought to rise. For though many do; yet it is so
contrary to their duty, and so dangerous, that he therefore calls him Alkum,
against whom none arises. So Pallas was called by the Phoenicians, Ela Alkuma,
the Goddess against whom none made insurrection. And the City in Boeotia that
was sacred to her (she being reputed to be born there) was called Alalcomenas:
for though it was small and built in a plain, yet it always remained untouched
and inviolated, because out of reverence to the Goddess, (...), (as Strabo
speaks) all men abstained from all force and violence to it. Thus he discourses
in his Epist. quae Resp. ad tres Quest. p. 43. And I find he had said it before
in his Phaleg, Second Part, L. 1. Cap. 16. where he translates melec Alcum, Rex
invictus, an invincible King.

But there is another conjecture, of a very learned man of our own Mr. Pocock
(Not. ad Gregor. Abul. Pharai. p. 203.) which is so patt, that I could not omit
it in my Paraphrase. For, according to the Arabic use of the word Alkum (out
of which language both Rabbis and Christians take the liberty to expound the
Hebrew words of the Bible, when they are singular) the sense is still more
pregnant; and sounds thus: A King with whom his people is; or whom his people
follow. For as when there is such a happy agreement between King and people,
there is nothing more comely; so then he appears with the greatest and most
awful Majesty, and strikes terror into all his enemies.

[r] The two last verses, if we take them severed from the foregoing; are an
advice how to be happy: which the whole Chapter shows in effect, is, to
endeavor to be innocent. But because no man can be so wise, as never to do a
foolish thing; he seems, in conclusion, to tell what is next to that, viz. when
we have miscarried any way, not to justify it; but to appease those whom we
have offended, by silence; taking shame to our selves, and not defending what
we have done amiss, much less making complaints of others, etc. For (as I have
expressed it in the Paraphrase, v. last) by insisting upon our innocence, or
charging others, or exaggerating faults, very great mischiefs may ensue.

But these two verses may be connected with that which precedes; (though I have
not been bold to do it, because Interpreters go the other way) and v. 32. may
be an advice to Subjects if they have offended their Prince any way, and been
so foolish as to oppose him, not to persist in their error; much less defend
it, and clamor upon the Government, etc. but sit down in silence, bewailing
the guilt, and imploring a pardon. And then v. 33. may be looked upon as Advice
to Princes, not to oppress their Subjects; and thereby provoke them to rebel
against them.

The Vulgar Latin seems to refer both to Princes: for thus runs the sense of v.
32. according to that Translation (which I cannot indeed reconcile concile well
with the Hebrew) It sometimes happens, that he who is advanced on high (to a
throne suppose) appears to be a fool: who if he had understood ( viz. his
danger, or his folly, or what had been best for him) would have put his hand
upon his mouth: that is, never have desired that dignity, which perhaps he
earnestly sought. And, though I know not how to justify this Translation, it
agrees well with what follows (which may well be applied unto Princes) that it
is great folly to strain things too far. Either the Laws, which if extended to
the utmost rigor, will, by such hard construction, become the bane of humane
society; or their taxes and exactions beyond what the people can bear. For by
squeezing them too much, most dangerous seditions and rebellions have happened
under excellent Princes.

And thus Melancthon understands the beginning of this verse ( v. 33.) that
Empires and Governments ought to be moderate; according to two excellent
sayings of Plato and Solon; which he alleges: and then concludes that, anger
also ought to be repressed (according to the admonition in the last words) lest
public discords arise, which draw after them vast ruins: and oft-times arise
from light causes; which ought to have been mollified and cured by some
moderation, and not exasperated into a flame.

1. THe words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spoke unto
Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Vcal.


1. HEre now follow some memorable Sayings, of Agur, who was the Son of Jacche;
out of whose Works these weighty Sentences were collected, which he uttered,
like a prophetical Teacher, to Ithiel, one of his most eminent Scholars, and to
Vchal, another of them; but especially to the former. See Arg. [a] [c]

2. Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a
man.


2. Who admiring his Wifedom, and desiring to be resolved in many difficulties,
Agur modestly and humbly said; do not call me wife: for I am so far from that
acuteness, which is natural to him who excells in wisdom, that I am stupid, in
comparison with such a person; nay, I cannot arrogate to my self the
understanding of a common man. See Arg. [b] [c]

3. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.


3. And as for improvements, which are made by the help of knowing persons, I
have not had the advantages of many other men: for I was never brought up in
the Schools of the Prophets, where I might have learnt some wisdom; much less
have I received the knowledge of such sacred mysteries, as thou inquirest
after; the most I can pretend unto, is only to know what belongs to a pious
life. See Arg. [d]

4. Who has ascended up into heaven, or descended? who has gathered the wind
in his fists? who has bound the waters in a garment? who has established all
the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou
can tell?


4. But had I a greater reach, or been better bred, it would have been
impossible for me, to give an account of the works of God; much less of God
himself. For where is he among all the Wise men, that ever went up into Heaven
and came down again, to tell us the order, and the motion of the Stars; and all
the rest that is done there? Nay, who is it, that can so much as give us the
least account of the Wind, but God alone? who has it perfectly in his power,
to make it cease, and blow again, as He pleases. And, to come lower yet, who
but He has tied up the Waves of the Sea, that they should not exceed their
bounds? or who has fixed the Earth (on which thou dwell, and therefore art
better acquainted withal) within such limits, as it never breaks? By what name
is he called, that can explain these things? or, if thou know, tell me the
name of his Son, or of his Family; that, if he be dead, we may enquire of them.

5. Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in
him.


5. The most that any man can do for thy satisfaction, is this; to send thee
to the Book of God, and bid thee be content with what He has there revealed of
Himself, and of his Will; which in every part of it is so sincere, and free
from all mixture of deceit, that thou may safely rely upon it; and take his
word, that He will protect and defend all those, who, in obedience to his
commands, trust Him for what He has promised.

6. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.


6. Let this suffice thee; and do not pretend to greater acquaintance with his
will, than really thou have; by adding any thing of thy own to God's word, and
vouching it for his: which may bring thee into great danger of the severest
punishments from Him; for being guilty of the worst of forgeries, in
counterfeiting divine inspiration.

7. Two things have I required of thee, deny me them not before I die.


7. And in Answer to the Question about Prayer (what things thou should ask
of God) I have not much to say neither; for I would not have thee multiply
words, but say, as I am wont to do: I humbly beg only two things of Thee, O
God; which I most earnestly beseech Thee I may not want, as long as I stay in
this world.

8. Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches,
feed me with food convenient for me:


8. The first is for my mind; that I may be perfectly secured from being
deceived my self by false opinions, especially concerning Thee and Religion;
and from being any ways guilty of deceiving other men: and then, for the supply
of my bodily necessities, I desire Thou would neither give me scarcity, nor
superfluity; but, if I may choose, a middle between both: making me such a
competent allowance as may be sufficient to maintain me decently, in that state
and condition of life, wherein Thou have placed me. See Arg. [e]

9. Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the LORD? or lest I be poor,
and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.


9. For I am sensible how great danger there is, either in having abundance of
wealth, which may tempt me to be so profane and irreligious, as not only to
forget the donour of all good things, but atheistically to contemn thy worship
and service; nay, insolently profess, that I know no such being as the LORD,
nor have any thing to do with Him: or in a beggarly condition, which may press
me, first to be injurious unto others for my own relief; and then to run into
the fearful crime of perjury, to purge my self from the charge of theft. XXII.
Exodus 8, 11.

10. Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be
found guilty.


10. As for rules of behavior toward others, they are generally well known;
and therefore I only admonish thee to avoid one thing (to which our Nation is
too prone) that is, not to abuse any poor Slave, whose condition is wretched
enough; and therefore, for instance, rather excuse than aggravate his fault to
his Master, who perhaps is too rigorous: and be sure never to load him with
unjust accusations, lest, being wronged by thee and not knowing how to right
himself, he appeal to the Lord and pray Him to punish thee; and thou, being
found guilty, feel the heavy effects of his vengeance. See Arg. [f]

11. There is a generation that curses their father, and does not bless their
mother.


11. And now, to answer your inquiry, what company you should keep? There are
four sorts of men, I would have you set a mark upon, and cautiously shun.
First, they that are foully ungrateful to them, from whom they have received
many benefits: for such a sort of men there is, who have no sense of
obligations, no, not to their Parents, to whom they have the greatest; but rail
upon their Father, nay, wish him dead; and cannot speak a good word of their
Mother.

12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not
washed from their filthiness.


12. Next to these, are a sort of hypocrites; who have a great opinion of their
own purity, and would be thought by others very virtuous: but hide the greatest
filthiness, both in their minds and lives (which either they do not see, or
will not take care to purge away) under this outward garb of holiness.

13. There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are
lifted up.


13. There is a third sort, whose pride and arrogance is so lofty, that it
appears in their very countenance; and makes them superciliously overlook all
other men, as if they were not worthy of the least respect from them.

14. There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth as
knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.


14. But the fourth and last sort is most mischievous, whose ravenous cruelty
has no example; unless you conceive a Lion or Wolf, that has teeth, both
small and great, as sharp as swords or knives, coming with open mouth to devour
every Creature, that is weaker than themselves: such is the savage oppression
of tyrants, extortioners, calumniatours, etc. who have no mercy upon the poor
and needy; but make their condition (which moves compassion in other men) so
insufferable, that they are weary of living any longer in the world.

15. The horse-leach has two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are three
things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is enough:


15. And here I will satisfy one of your other Questions, What Creature is
most unsatiable? I answer, the Horse-leech; which sucks the blood of other
Creatures, till it burst: as those wicked men do the livelihood of the poor,
till they ruin themselves. And in this perpetual craving more and more, without
any end, there are two things so like the Horse-leech, that they may be called
her Daughters: nay, there are three that are never satisfied; or rather four
whose desires cannot be filled. See Arg. [g]

16. The grave, and the barren womb, the earth that is not filled with water,
and the fire that says not, It is enough.


16. They are these: Death, or the Grave; which, having consumed so many past
Generations, will as greedily swallow up and consume all that are yet to come:
the barren Womb; which is wont to be desirous of Children beyond measure: the
Earth, which drinks up all the rain that falls upon it, and still thirsts for
more: and the Fire, which devours all the fuel that is thrown into it, and
never ceases to burn, as long as there is any thing to feed it.

17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the
ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.


17. I will not end this, till I have pronounced the doom of the first sort of
wicked men, now mentioned ( v. 11.) who are so ungrate full to their Parents,
as not only to disobey their commands, but to scorn, nay and, deride their
persons; and mock at the infirmities of their old age: whose villainies shall
bring them to an infamous end, and expose their dead bodies for a prey to the
Ravens (which frequent the Brooks, that run in the Valleys) and to the young
Eagles; who shall pick out those eyes, in which their scorn and derision of
their Parents, was wont to appear. See Arg. [h]

18. There be three things which are two wonderful for me, yea, four which I
know not:


18. To your next Question, my Answer is; that there are three things, whose
motions are beyond my reach: nay, a fourth, which is the most unaccountable of
all the rest. See Arg. [i]

19. The way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the way
of a ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a maid.


19. First, the wonderful swiftness of an Eagles flight into the air, quite
out of our sight (XXIII. 5.) secondly, the manner of a Serpent's speedy
creeping, without any feet, to the top of a slippery rock: thirdly, the way
that a Ship makes in the Sea, though it seem sometime to sink to the bottom of
the water, and again to mount up into the air: But, above all, the slipperiness
of youth (which is more inconstant than the air, etc.) and especially the
impatience, and restless tossings of a young man's mind, his cunning and
slights, when he goes a woing; and the wonderful arts he has to slide into
the heart of a maid, and win her love.

20. Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eats, and wipeth her mouth,
and says, I have done no wickedness.


20. And yet, the subtilty of an adulterous woman, is equal to this; both in
crafty contrivances of secret ways to enjoy her filthy pleasures; and in
casting a mist before her Husbands eyes to conceal them, when she is in danger
to be discovered. For having defiled his Bed, she not only looks modestly and
demurely, but professes the greatest innocence; and behaves her self, as if she
were the honestest Woman, and the kindest Wife too in the world: like one that,
having eaten some forbidden meat, wipes her mouth, and says she has not so
much as tasted it; but abhors to let it come within her lips.

21. For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it cannot
bear:


21. And, to satisfy your other Question, What things are most intolerable? my
answer is; that three things make such a disturbance, that men groan under the
load of them: nay, there are four, which are an unsupportable grievance unto
those that are oppressed by them. See Arg. [k]

22. For a servant when he reigns, and a fool when he is filled with meat,


22. First, the insolent cruelty of a vile Slave, when he is advanced to a
Throne: secondly, the petulant rudeness of a fortunate fool; especially when he
grows debauched, and is in one of his drunken fits:

23. For an odious woman when she is married, and an handmaid that is heir to
her mistress.


23. And thirdly, a woman, whose moroseness, pride and passion (and such like
ill qualities) make her hated by every body; when she gets an Husband: and
lastly, a poor maid servant, when she is puffed up by an estate, left her by
her mistress; or, which is worse, that having supplanted her mistress, and
thrust her, first out of her husbands affections; and then out of doors,
succeeds in her place, and becomes his wife. See Arg. [l]

24. There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they are
exceeding wise:


24. To those four intolerable things, of which all complain, I will add four
more, that are very contemptible, but much admired: for though they have no
bodily bulk, their wisdom is exceeding great, and very elaborate. See Arg. [m]
[pp]

25. The ants are a people not strong; yet they prepare their meat in the
summer;


25. First, the Ants; which are a creature so infirm, that one crush of our
foot kills multitudes of them, and yet so provident, as well as industrious,
that they prepare granaries under ground, with wonderful art, to receive their
food: which they gather and lay up in harvest time; and secure it too, that it
may serve for all the year. See VI. 8.

26. The conies are but a feeble (...) make they (...) ^ouses in the (...);


26. Secondly, the mountain Mice, are a feeble sort of creature also, but they
have a Leader to give them notice of any danger; and are so cunning that they
provide for their safety in high rocks: into which they have several entrances
and out-lets; that if they be assaulted in one port, they may escape at
another. See Arg. [n]

27. The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands;


27. Next the Locusts, which herein indeed differ from the former, that they
have no King to govern them; yet go forth, like Soldiers to battle, in good
order: and when they fall upon the spoil, divide it among themselves, without
any quarrel or contention. See Arg. [o]

28. The spider takes hold with her hands, and is in kings palaces.


28. Lastly, (The Spider, which weaves a curious web, or rather) The little
spotted Lizzard, which takes fast hold even on the flat ceiling of houses; and
there goes (with its body hanging down into the air) in pursuit of its prey:
which as it nimbly catches; so it intrudes it self to hunt for it, even in
Kings Palaces. See Arg. [p]

29. There be three things which go well, yea, four are comely in going:


29. And here after the consideration of these four contemptible things, it
will be fit to answer your last Question, What things are most stately? and
there are three, or rather four things, whose motion is majestic, and go after
a goodly manner.

30. A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turns not away for any,


30. First the Lion, when he is come to his full growth; who is the most
heroical and undaunted of all creatures; never turning his back for fear of the
greatest multitude of hunters, or Dogs that set upon him.

31. A greyhound, an he-goat also, and a king, against whom there is no rising
up.


31. Next to him, a strong and generous Horse; especially, when he is girt and
equipped (as we speak) for the battle: And then the He-goat with his long
beard; when he walks in pompous state before the flock. And lastly, a
prosperous King, of invincible courage; especially when he reigns in the hearts
of his people, and marches at the head of an unanimous, victorious Army; whom
none dare rise up to oppose. See Arg. [q]

32. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have
thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.


32. If thy pride or thy passion has engaged thee, in some foolish action,
whereby thou have disgraced thy self; or made thee contrive and endeavor any
thing that is unwarrantable; do not add one fault to another, by excusing it,
or blaming any body but they self for it; much less by quarrelling at those
that admonish thee of it, and reprehend thee for it: but stop at the first
motion to this, and silently acknowledge thy error. See Arg. [r]

33. Surely the churning of milk brings forth butter, and the wringing of the
nose brings forth blood: so the forcing of wrath brings forth strife.


33. For from little things there is an easy progress unto greater. And just
as you see Milk is first pressed out of the Cows udder, and then being shaken
in the churn is forced into butter; and as the Nose being wrung, though at the
first it only purge it self yet if it be harder pressed, there comes out
blood: even so, words passing to and fro, raise an heat, and that, if
continued, stirs up anger; and that, making men vehemently insist upon their
opinion, or their desire, turns into scolding; and that, in the issue, grows up
to quarrels, and irreconcilable enmities.

CHAP. XXXI.
ARGUMENT.
[a] It is generally taken for granted, both by Hebrew and Christian Writers,
that King Lemuel, whose Mother gave him the Precepts contained in this Chapter,
was Solomon: whom Bathsheba took care early to instruct in his duty; being, as
some of no small name fancy, divinely inspired with the gift of Prophecy. But,
as all this depends merely upon conjecture, and that without the least ground,
so there is no good reason assigned why Solomon should here be called Lemuel;
and not by the name he has both in the beginning of the Preface to this Book,
I. Prove. 1. and in the entrance of the First Part Chap. X. I. and of the last
Collection also (XXV. I.) made by the men of Hezekiah: whom Grotius fancies to
be the King here mentioned, under the name of Lemuel; only for this reason,
that this Chapter follows the Collection of Proverbs made by his Servants:
which has no force at all in it; for the words of Agur follow more
immediately; which he cannot ascribe to Hezekiah.

And therefore it is more reasonable to conceive this Lemuel to have been a
Prince, in some other Country; who had gathered some weighty Sentences taught
him by his Mother (whose name is unknown) which it was thought fit to adjoyn to
the foregoing: because they are very wise, and of great moment; as if they
proceeded from a prophetical spirit. And it is only the vanity of the Jewish
Nation, who would enclose all wisdom within the bounds of their own Country,
which has made them ascribe that which follows in this Chapter to Solomon and
Bathsheba. For which, as I said, there is no color: but it appears by the
History of the Queen of Sheba, and the Embassies which came from the Kings
thereabouts, who sent to hear the wisdom of Solomon (1 King. IV. ult.) that
there were even in those times, great persons very inquisitive after knowledge,
as there had been, in the times foregoing, in those Eastern Countries, and in
Egypt; which was famous for wise men, 1 King. IV. 30. where we read of the
wisdom of the Children of the East (i. e. Arabia where Job a considerable
Prince, and the rest of his Friends, lived in former ages) and the wisdom of
Egypt. Of which Country some have thought those famous men to have been, who
are mentioned in the next words, v. 31. where this demonstration is given that
Solomon's wisdom excelled all the wisdom of those Countries, for he was wiser
than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, etc. upon which
words, Gasper Sanchez notes, that the Seder Olam says, these were Egyptian wise
men. But it is not good to take things upon trust; for I find upon examination
of the place (which is Chap. XX. of the greater Book of that name) that it
says no such thing, but only this, that the Sons of Zara, Zimri, Ethan,
Heman, Chalcol and Dara (mentioned 1 Chronicles. II. 6.) were Prophets; who
prophesied in Egypt. But however this be, that very Book acknowledges in the
next Chapter; that there were Prophets in other Countries, before the Law of
Moses was given: though after the delivery of it, the holy Spirit, they fancy,
forsook all the world but them; immediately upon the speaking of those words,
XXXIII. Exodus 16. XXXIV. 6. For which assertion, as there is not the least
shadow of reason, so supposing it were true, it must notwithstanding be
confessed that there remained still among other Nations, many excellent and
wise persons both men and women: who had such communication also with the Jews,
that many of them were proselyted to their Religion: which might have
countenanced their Authors if they had said (and it seems to me a better fancy
than any they have) that Lemuel's Mother was a Jewish Lady married to some
Prince of another Country; by whom she had this Son; and took care of his
Institution in the Divine wisdom of her people.

And by the use of the word bar three times, for a Son, in the beginning of
this Instruction (which is no where used in this Book before, nor in the whole
Bible more than once, II. Psalm. 12.) one would guess this Lemuel to have been
some great person in Chaldaea. For in the next verse also ( v. 4.) we meet with
the word Melachin ( Kings) according to the termination in the Language of that
Country.

[b] But this is all uncertain, and therefore I proceed no further in it: but
only note, that whosoever was the Mother of Lemuel, she was mightily
solicitous to have him do well: as appears by verse the second. Which some
think to be a passionate expression, when she saw him begin to incline to evil
courses; as if she had said: What do thou mean, my Son, etc. But it is more
likely, that it proceeded from a tender concern for his well-doing, as soon as
ever he grew up; whilst he was yet innocent and untainted. And that he might so
continue, she gives him three or rather four of the most proper Advices, that
could be thought of for a Prince.

[c] First, to subdue that lust, which she knew to be very violent in youth;
especially in young Kings; who have more provocations, and are apt to take more
license than other men: but bring thereby such mischiefs upon themselves, and
their Kingdoms, as are not to be repaired; but often end in their destruction,
v. 3.

[d] In order to this, she admonishes him, in the second place, to avoid
drunkenness; and to preserve himself perfectly sober: whereby he would be fit
also for counsel; and be able likewise to give a right judgment, when Causes
were brought before him, v. 4. which some extend so far, as to think she would
not have him drink any wine at all, or other strong liquors. (of which there
were several made, of honey, or dates, and diverse other things; which go under
the common name of Schechar) But it is more reasonable to look upon it, as a
caution, against excess: which is dangerous in all men, but especially in those
that are to govern others, as well as themselves. For then they blurt out the
greatest secrets, as the Vulgar translate the latter part of the verse; or grow
furious and outrageous, as the LXX. translate the same passage: but both of
them without any ground that I can see in the Hebrew Text.

[e] In which follows, v. 5. the true reason of this prohibition; and then an
account ( v. 6.) of their condition, to whom a larger quantity than ordinary,
of wine or strong drink, is fit to be allowed. Not to Kings, who have
innumerable ways to relieve their cares, and to divert themselves when any
thing troubles them: but to poor miserable people, that are ready to faint
under their heavy burdens and oppressions. For whom this is a present relief;
and the only one sometime they are capable of; when they are in a very
melancholy condition. And they that are of such a temper, or are otherways made
exceeding sad, can better bear a great deal of wine, without any disorder, than
the sanguine; and they who are gay and merry. There are those, that by men
ready to perish, have understood such as were condemned to dye, and going to
execution. Unto whom it was the custom to give a draught of wine, to support
their spirits; and, in the degenerate ages of the Jewish Commonwealth, they put
something into it to intoxicate the poor wretches, so that they might be
insensible of pain. And some imagine this custom took its original from this
place in the Proverbs; though it be not the true sense of the words. For the
latter part of this verse, (and that which follows v. 7.) gives the best
explication of the first: and they show he speaks of those that were miserably
poor. And so the best Hebrew Expositours interpret those words, XXVI. Deuteronomy. 4.
my Father was a Syrian, ready to perish: that is, extreme poor; and in want of
all things.

[f] And thus having enlarged this second Advice a little, she passes to the
third: which is ( v. 8.) to take such care that Justice be exactly administered
(without which no Kingdom can subsist) as himself to undertake the defense of
those, who were in danger to lose a good cause; for want of an Advocate to
plead it for them, or to open the true state of it, etc. Especially she
commends to him, the patronage of Strangers, Orphans, and poor indigent people.
The first of which in the Hebrew, are called children of change; or that are
passed by: That is, persons who have changed their country; or that are in
danger to suffer grievous alterations in their condition, if right be not done
them; or who are deserted by all, and have none to stand by them. Several other
ways there are to explain the phrase; but to the same purpose.

[g] But the great care of Parents, being to see their Son well married, she
concludes with the description of such a wife, as she would have him seek:
which takes up the rest of the Chapter, from v. 10. to the end. And it is in
the form of a Poem (as S. Hierom takes it) consisting of a sort of Iambick
verses: each of which begins with a new Letter of the Alphabet in order; the
tenth with Aleph, the eleventh with Beth, and so to the bottom. Which was an
elegant sort of composure among the Ancients, and a great help to memory also;
as we see in several Psalms, and other parts of Scripture.

Now whether she composed these verses her self, or got her sense expressed by
some eminent Poet, cannot be known; nor is it material. But I do not think fit
to follow the conjecture of Huetius (in his late Demonstr. Evang.) who imagins
the words of Lemuel's Mother to end with the ninth verse: and here to begin a
distinct composition of some other person; suppose Solomon. For though this
following Poem, be disjoined from the foregoing words, in the LXX; and differs
herein from the rest that in the beginning of every verse, the order of the
Hebrew Alphabet is observed; yet there being no words in the head of it (as
there is Chap. XXX. and the beginning of this Chapter) to denote it to belong
to another Author, I take it to be of the same piece with the first nine
verses. That is, to be a Copy of Verses, delivered to Lemuel by his Mother, in
commendation of an excellent woman: which perhaps she did not make her self
(though there be no proof of that, and both Deborah and Hannah we find were
Poets) but, notwithstanding, being recommended to him by her; would, she
thought, have the same authority with him, as if she had been the Author. And
it is very observable, that the general character of such a woman as she would
have him marry, is escheth chajil, a virtuous woman, we translate it. Which
word chajil, signifies both strength (or rather valor and courage) and riches
and virtue. And, in the description of fitting persons for the Magistracy,
Jethro in general says they should be anschee chajil (XVIII. Exodus 21.) which
we translate able men: and then follows more particularly wherein their ability
should consist, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness. I take
therefore escheth chajil to include in it a great fear of God (mentioned
afterward v. 30.) which is so powerful as to endue one with the courage to do
well, when piety is contemned; nay, laughed at and abused: and have not
therefore omitted this, among other words, to express the force of this phrase.

[h] And then follow, after this, abundance of other good qualities, which are
included in this: such as chastity; and such a care of her husbands estate,
that be might have a perfect confidence in her management; love to him without
moroseness; diligence in all household affairs; frugality; gentleness in the
government of her family; a prudent care in the education of her children; and
in setting all the family to some employment or other; and increasing also her
husbands estate, and yet giving liberally to the poor; affability, and
courtesy to all, etc. which excellent indowments if her Son found in a wife,
she knew it would be a certain means to preserve him, from following other
women ( v. 3.) when he took perfect delight in her company: and from
drunkenness also ( v. 4.) which few fall into, who entirely love their wives,
and study to please them in all things: for they generally abhor this loathsome
vice. In order to this she would have him marry such an one, as he could
perfectly confide in; and never in the least suspect of any levity, or
unfaithfulness, or carelessness, when he was abroad, v. 11. and would never be
cross to him; but always loving, and kind, and pleasing, when he was at home,
v. 12.

[i] An excellent houswife also; prone to take any pains her self, that she
might give a good example to others: particularly, in the Linen, and Woollen
Manufacture; in which the greatest women, it appears by ancient Authors,
constantly employed themselves heretofore, with such diligence, as is highly
praised in their Books v. 13. where to express her propension to this work, he
ascribes a willingness and forwardness to her hands; just as XXI. Prove. 25. he
makes the hands of the sluggard, to be averse to labor.

[k] Which turns to a great account, she shows, both in foreign commodities, v.
14. and in the purchase of land, v. 16. which the good houswife her self views,
and walks about with great expedition ( v. 17.) tucking up her garments (as we
speak) that she may be fit for motion every where: and not minding fine clothes
more than her business, nor for fear of spoiling them, neglecting that; but
preferring strength in her arms acquired by labor, before the ornaments
wherewith they are wont to be adorned.

[l] The profit of which she finds is so great, that it makes her love labor
better than sleep; and when there is haste of work, to continue it all night:
so v. 18. may be expounded.

After which follows v. 19. another instance of her humble greatness. Then her
charity to the poor, v. 20. her care of her own family, v. 21. where the last
word having different senses, I have expressed them all in the Paraphrase.

[m] And then is wisely mentioned, v. 22. her magnificence in the hanging of
her house, and of her bed, and in her own apparel: which was the more
allowable, when the poor were not neglected; and the decking her self and
house, did not make her forget their necessities. The particular words there I
have not room to explain. Nor those which follow, v. 24. (after she had
mentioned the honor her husband would get by such a wife, v. 23.) for I think
it is needful rather to give a brief account of v. 25.

[n] Which seems not unfitly translated by Castalio to this sense, that she
being thus amply provided, and fortified, as it were, against all accidents;
need not fear any want in future times. But considering what follows, v. 26,
27. I have chosen only to touch on that sense; and to take strength and honor
for the excellent qualities belonging to her: which I have called her principal
ornaments; because the Hebrews are wont to express that which adorns any
person, and is most proper to them, by the name of clothing: as CXXXII. Psalm.
9. thy Priests shall be clothed with righteousness.

[o] The rest I must wholly omit, and only observe that the fear of the LORD
in the conclusion ( v. 30.) is the foundation of all these virtues (which will
either not be found, where there is no devout sense of God; or not be constant
and equal, but vary as several passions govern and rule their spirits)
especially when it is in such a high degree, that a woman values her self for
the fear of the Lord, more than any thing else. So the LXX. translate it; A
prudent woman is commended; but she praises the fear of the Lord: which may
have this sense also, that her virtues commend Religion unto others. Religion
it self is honored by her excellent virtues: which are so exemplary, that they
make others in love with them, as well as with her.

I conclude all with the Observation of Melancthon, that this Description,
which he calls Speculum honestae Matronae, is altogether simple and plain,
without any such allegories as Simonides used, who said, he was happy that
married a wife like a Be: and that all this, in a manner, is comprehended by
the Apostle in those words to Timothy 1. II. ult. she shall be saved in
Childbearing, if they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness; with
sobriety. Faith, says he, is the acknowledgment of the true God, and
confidence in his Son Jesus Christ (that is, belief of the whole Gospel) out of
which springs the love of God, and from thence the love of her Husband and
Children: and then holiness or sanctification, which is that virtue we call
chastity: and lastly temperance, as he translates it, moderation in meat and
drink; or rather, all manner of sober behavior, and prudence, in the
Government of the family, and in the moderation of all sorts of expenses, etc.
which things the Apostle particularly mentions; because in the enumeration of
Virtues, it is the manner of the holy Writers, to name those only, which are
most proper and suitable to every ones state and vocation.

1. THE words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him.


1. UNto those Sayings of Agur, let these of King Lemuel be added and
considered: which are weighty Sentences also (XXX. 1.) which his Mother taught
him, with such authority, as if she had been a Prophetess. See Arg. [a]

2. What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows?


2. And with no less tenderness and affection also, saying; Hearken, my Dear
Son, for whose well-doing, O how much am I concerned? I want words to express
the care I have about it: I am at a loss how to instruct thee according to my
wishes: what shall I desire thee to do for my sake, who endured so much for
thee; when I carried thee in my womb, and brought thee forth from thence? what
shall I pray thee to do? for whom I have made so many prayers to God; and vows
too, if I might but see thee come safe into the world, and grow to be a man,
and sit upon a Throne. See Arg. [b]

3. Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroys
kings.


3. In the first place, let me prevail with thee, as thou love me, and as
thou love thy self, to be chaste in thy desires of bodily pleasures, and not
to give up thy self to follow thy lust after women; which will destroy the
strength of thy body, weaken thy mind, and exhaust thy treasures: that is,
engage thee in such courses, as are the bane of Kings; and, by making them
neglect their Government, have brought many of them and their Kingdoms to utter
ruin. See Arg. [c]

4. It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for
princes strong drink.


4. And next to this, O Lemuel, Kings of all other men, Kings, I say, should be
sparing, very sparing in the use of wine, and of all other intoxicating drink:
and so should their Counselors, and Commanders of Armies, and Judges, and all
other Ministers and Officers. See Arg. [d]

5. Lest they drink and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the
afflicted.


5. For they may injure more than themselves, when they are in drink. If a
Cause, for instance, be brought before a Prince or a Judge, and his thoughts
are confused by the fumes of wine; he may quite forget the standing Rules
whereby he ought to determine it: and things appearing to him quite otherwise
wise than they are, he may not only judge amiss, but unjustly condemn those
that ought to have been acquitted; and undo poor and afflicted people, by
giving away their right, when the comfort of their whole life depends upon his
justice.

6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that
be of heavy hearts.


6. If the liberal use of wine and strong drink, is to be indulged to any body,
it is to those miserable wretches, and the meaner sort of persons: whom it may
be charity to comfort therewith, when they are in danger to perish, for want of
the necessary supports of life; or are oppressed with grief and sorrow in any
other deplorable condition. See Arg. [e]

7. Let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.


7. Then bring forth plenty of wine, and set it before such a disconfolate
person: let him drink freely till he has cheered his heart, and raised his
drooping spirits, and be able to think of something else, beside his poverty
and misery; nay, till he be so merry, as quite to forget the cares and
wearisome labors, that it brings upon him.

8. Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are appointed to
destruction.


8. And that is the third thing I beg of thee, to administer justice exactly to
all thy Subjects, and not merely commit the care of it unto others: but sit thy
self upon the bench; and if thou see a man in danger to lose his right,
because he is not able to make it out, and through fear, or ignorance, or want
of elocution, cannot speak for himself, keep not silence, but undertake his
defense; especially if it be the cause of strangers, who understand not the
Laws, and perhaps are in danger to suffer some great damage, in their bodies,
credits or estates. See Arg. [f]

9. Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and
needy.


9. And when thou have cleared the righteousness of their cause, fear not to
pronounce the sentence boldly, according as the Laws require: Let no man
persuade thee to admit of delays, but bring the business to a speedy issue;
that he who is poor, nay, a mere beggar, may neither be oppressed by doing him
injustice, or by deferring to do him right.

10. Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.


10. And now, next to this, I shall commend a good Wise unto thee: In the
choice of whom, a singular care ought to be employed. But alas! such a woman as
I would have is scarce, and hard to be found. One that is not only
industrious, but pious, and can command her self, as well as govern her family:
being inricht with all those virtuous qualities, which make her far more
valuable, than all the pearls or precious stones, that women love to be adorned
withal. See Arg. [g]

11. The heart of her husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall have
no need of spoil.


11. I can only give the character of her (which may serve to direct others as
well as thee, in their search after such a person) in whose chastity, as well
as prudence, frugality, and fidelity in ordering all affairs at home, her
Husband has such a confidence, that he may go abroad, and attend the public
affairs; without the least care or solicitude what will become of his domestic
concerns; and not be tempted to enrich himself, or supply his own necessities,
with the spoil of other men. See Arg. [h]

12. She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.


12. She will not only endeavor to answer his love, with an equal affection,
but to provoke and excite it, by pleasing him in every thing; and avoiding
whatsoever is ungrateful to him: nay, by deserving well of him, and studying
to promote the interest of him and of his family, and to maintain his honor
and reputation; and that not only by fits and in a good humor, but all the
days of her life; even after he is dead, if she survive him. See Arg. [h]

13. She seeks wool, and flax, and works willingly with her hands.


13. Idleness is so hateful to her, that she need not be desired to employ her
self in some piece of good houswifery: but of her own accord sets up a Linen
and Woollen Manufacture; to which she applies her own hands so willingly, as
well as dexterously, that it appears she delights in the work. See Arg. [i]

14. She is like the merchants ships, she brings her food from afar.


14. And therewith she maintains her family without expense, by carrying on as
gainful a traffic for foreign commodities (which she gets in exchange for
these) as if her husband set out a Fleet of Merchant Ships; to fetch them from
far distant Countries.

15. She rises also while it is yet night, and gives meat to her household,
and a portion to her maidens.


15. Nor does she indulge her self in over much sleep, but is an early riser
before the break of day; to make provision for those that are to go abroad to
work in the fields; and to set her maidens their several tasks at home.

16. She considers a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she
planteth a vineyard.


16. So far she is from wasting her husbands estate, that by her prudent
management she continually increases it: first purchasing a field for corn,
when she meets with one, that she judges worth her money; and then, out of the
mere product of her own labors, adding a vineyard to it, which she causes to
be well planted.

17. She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms.


17. And as her diligence is unwearied, so she is neither slow in he
rdispatches, nor refuses any pains: but nimbly bestirs her self, and goes
roundly (as we say) a-about her business: nay, exercises her arms to the
strongest labors, both within doors and without. See Arg. [k]

18. She perceives that her merchandise is good: her candle goes not out by
night.


18. For, finding by sweet experience not only how wholesome labor is, but
what great profit her traffic yields, she does not conclude her work with the
day; but continues it as much in the night as can be spared from necessary
sleep. See Argument [l]

19. She lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.


19. And she does not think it beneath her quality to put her hands to the
spindle: but twists the thread or the yarn with her own fingers; and winds them
with her own hands.

20. She stretches out her hand to the poor; yea, she reaches forth her hands
to the needy.


20. Which she stretches out with no less forwardness to relieve the poor:
being not only for getting all she can, but for giving liberally, out of her
gains, to needy people; whom she supplies cheerfully as well as bountifully;
and extends her charity not only to those who are near, but to those who are
remoter from her.

21. She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her household are
clothed with scarlet.


21. Yet such is her prudence withal, that her own Family and domestic
Servants are in no danger to suffer hereby, in the hardest winter: for she
provides them with change of raiment, for the several seasons, and with double
garments when the weather is cold; nay, not only clothes them, but adorns them
so, that they may appear in a splendid manner, when they are to wait upon her.
See Arg. [l]

22. She makes her self coverings of tapestry, her clothing is silk and purple.


22. The furniture of her House also is very noble, and her own apparel suitable
to it: in which her greatness is, not the less but, the more conspicuous;
because they are of her own making. See Arg. [m]

23. Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits among the elders of the
land.


23. And so are her husbands robes; which make him noted, when he comes into
the Courts of Judicature, and sits among the Senators of the Country: who call
him a happy man in such a wife, as does him honor, and eases him of all his
cares, but only those of the public business; which her wisdom, diligence
and prudent management, gives him leisure wholly to attend.

24. She makes fine linen, and sells it, and delivers girdles unto the
merchant.


24. For such is her industry, that she exercises more arts than one or two, to
enrich her family; making, for instance, very fine linen, with embroidered
belts, and girdles curiously wrought; which she sells to the Phoenician
Merchant.

25. Strength and honor are her clothing, and she shall rejoice in time to
come.


25. But her principal ornaments are, the firmness, constancy and vigor of her
mind; her modest, comely and decent behavior; her generous and honorable way
of dealing with every one: which (accompanied with the forenamed diligence,
etc.) make her so happy, that they free her from all fear of what may be
hereafter; and prepare her to meet old age, and death it self, with joyful
satisfaction. See Arg. [n]

26. She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of
kindness.


26. Unto which add, this singular grace; that as she is neither silent nor
talkative, so she loves not to talk of frivolous, but of serious things; of
which, when occasion serves, she discourses pertinently and judiciously, not
expressing her passion but her wisdom: which shows it self, not only in the
constant softness and sweetness of her unprovoking language; but in the
instructions and exhortations she gives unto doing good, exercising mercy,
living peaceably and lovingly together; which is the Lesson she inculcates
every where.

27. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness.


27. But especially in her own family, where she narrowly observes the motions
and manners of every one; whom she neither suffers to gad abroad at their
pleasure, nor to labor at home without good instructions: but teaches them how
to live as they ought; and by this, if she did nothing else, deserves the bread
she eats.

28. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he
praises her:


28. Happy are the Sons of such a mother, whose care, both of their good
Education, and to make provision for them, excites them, when they are grown
up, to extol her virtues: happy is the husband of such a wife, whom he can
never sufficiently commend; but having recited all her praises, says,

29. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.


29. Daughters may do much by their houswifry, but nothing like to the care of
a virtuous wife; and of all the wives that have done worthily, and mightily
advanced the state of their family, there were never any comparable unto thee;
whose merits far transcend them all.

30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that fears the
LORD, she shall be praised.


30. A hansome shape and graceful behavior is very taking; and so is a good
complexion and lovely features: but, alas! as the greatest beauty soon fades
and vanishes, so many ill qualities may lie concealed under goodly looks (which
will utterly spoil all the happiness that a man promised himself, in such a
choice) and therefore a truly religious woman, who dare not any way offend the
Lord, is that amiable person, and she alone, who will please a man always, and
deserve perpetual praises.

31. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in
the gates.


31. Let every one extol her virtue, for I cannot do it enough; let her not
want the just commendations of her pious labors: but while some are magnified
for the nobleness of the stock from whence they spring, others for their
fortune, others for their beauty, others for other things; let the good deeds
which she her self has done be publicly praised in the greatest Assemblies;
where if all men should be silent, her own works will declare her excellent
worth.

THE END.

