A CHARGE Given by the most Eminent and Learned Sr. FRANCIS BACON Knight. Late Lord
Chancellor of England, at a Sessions holden for the VERGE, in the Reign of the
Late King JAMES. DECLARING The Latitude of the Jurisdiction thereof, and the
Offenses therein inquireable, as well by the Common Law, as by several STATUTES
herein particularly mentioned.

Lex vitiorum emendatrix, virtutum commendatrix est. LONDON, Printed for Robert
Pawley at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane near the Temple. 1662.

Sir FRANCIS BACON'S CHARGE At the SESSIONS of the VERGE.
YOU are to know and consider well, the Duty and Service to which you are
called, and whereupon you are by your Oath charged. It is the happy estate and
condition of the Subject of this Realm of England, that he is not to be
impeached in his Life, Lands, or Goods, by flying rumors and wandering fames
and reports, or secret and private Inquisitions; But by the Oath and
Presentment of men of honest condition, in the face of Justice: But this happy
estate of the Subject, will turn to hurt and inconvenience, if those that hold
that part which you are now to perform, shall be negligent and remiss in doing
their duty; for as of two evils it were better men's doings were looked into
over strictly and severely, then that there should be a notorious impunity of
Malefactors; as was well and wisely said of ancient time, A man were better
live where nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful: This therefore
rests in your care and conscience, forasmuch as at you Justice begins, and the
Law cannot parsue and choose offenders to their deserved Fall^ except you first
put then up and dis\cover them, whereby they may be brought to answer; for your
Verdict is concluding to condemn. But it is necessary to charge, and without it
the Court cannot proceed to condemn.

Considering therefore that you are the Eye of Justice, ye ought to be single
without partial affection; watchful, not asleep, nor false asleep, winking at
Offenders, and sharp sighted to proceed with underst^nding and discretetion;
for in a word, if you shall not present unto the Court all such offenses, as
shall appear unto you either by evidence given in, or otherwise (mark what I
say) of your own knowledge, which have been committed within the Verge, which
is as it were the Limits of your Survey, but shall smother and conceal any
offense willingly, then the guiltiness of others will cleave to your
Consciences, before God; and besides, you are answerable in some degree to the
King and his Law, for such your default and Suppression; and therefore take
good regard unto it, you are to serve the King and his people, you are to keep
and observe your Oath, you are to acquit your selves: But there is yet more
cause why you should take more especial regard to your Presentiments, then any
other grand Juries, within the Counties of this Kingdom at large, for as it is
a nearer degree and approach unto the King, which is the fountain of Justice
and Government, to be the Kings Servant, then to be the Kings Subject: So this
Commission ordained for the Kings Servants and Household, ought in the execution
of Justice to be exemplary unto other places; David says (who was a King) The
wicked man shall not abide in my house; as taking knowledge that it was
impossible for Kings to Banish Wickedness, by the extending of all their power
and care, over all their Land or Empire; yet at least they ought to undertake
to God for their House.

We see further that the Law does so esteem the Dignity of the Kings settled
Mansion house, as it has laid unto it a Plot of twelve miles round, which we
call the Verge, to be Subject to a special exempted Jurisdiction, depending
upon his Person and great Officers; this is as a half pace, or Carpet spread
about the Kings Chair of Estate, which therefore ought to be cleared and void
more then other places of the Kingdom; for if offenses shall be shrouded under
the Kings Wings, what hope is there of Discipline and Justice in more remote
parts? We see the Sun, when it is at the Brightest, there may be perhaps a Bank
of Clouds in the North or West, or remote regions, but near his Body few or
none; for where the King comes there should come Peace, and Order, and an awe
and reverence in men's hearts.

Articuli super Chartas c. 3.13. R. 2. c. 3.33. H. 8. c. 12.
And this jurisdiction was in ancient time executed, and since by Statute
ratified by the Lord Steward, with great Ceremony in the nature of a peculiar
Kings Bench, for the Verge, for it was thought a kind of Ecclipsing to the
Kings Honor, that where the King was, any Justice should be sought but
immediately from his own Officers: But in respect that office was often void,
this Commission has succeeded, which change I do not dislike, for though it
has less State, yet it has more strength Legally; Therefore I say, you that
are a Jury of the Verge, should leave and give a Pattern unto others in the
care and conscience of your Presentiments.

Concerning the particular points and Articles whereof you shall inquire, I
will help your memory and mine own with order; neither will I lead you or
trouble my self with every Branch of several offenses, but stand upon those
that are principal and most in use: The offenses whereof, that you are to
present are of four Natures.


The Service of Almighty God, God and the Church.
upon whose Blessing the Peace, Safety, and good estate of King and Kingdom
does depend, may be violated, and God dishonored in three manners; by
Profanation, by contempt, and by division, or breach of Unity.

First, Profanations.
if any man has depraved or abused in word or Deed the Blessed Sacrament, 1.
E. 6. c. 1, and 1. Eliz. c. 2.1. M. c. 3.5. E. 6. c. 4.13. E. 1. Stat. of
Winton.
or disturbed the Preacher or Congregation in the time of Divine Service, or if
any have maliciously stricken with weapon, or drawn weapon in any Church or
Churchyard, or if any Fair or Market have been kept in any Church yard, these
are Prophanations within the purview of several Statutes, and those you are to
present; for Holy things, Actions, Times, and Sacred places, are to be
preferred in reverence and Divine respect.

For contempts of our Church and Service, they are comprehended in that known
name, which too many (if it pleased God) bear Recusancy, which offense has
many Branches and Dependencies, the Wife Recusant, she tempts; the
Church-Papist, he feeds and relevies; the corrupt Schoolmaster he sows ta^es,
the Dissembler, he conformeth and does not communicate.

Therefore if any person, Man, or Woman, Profanations.
Wife, or Sole, above the age of Sixteen years, not having some lawful excuse,
have not repaired to Church according to the several Statutes, the one for the
Weekly, the other for the Monthly repair, you are to present both the offense,
and the time how long; Again, such as maintain, relieve, keep in Service of
Livery, Recusants, though themselves be none, you are likewise to present; for
these are like the Roots of Nettles, which sting not themselves, but bear and
maintain the stinging Leaves: So if any that keeps a Schoolmaster that comes
not to Church, or is not allowed by the Bishop, for that Infection may spread;
for so such Recusants as have been convicted and conformed, and have not
received the Sacrament once a year, for that is the Touchstone of their true
Conversion; and of these offenses of Recusants, take you especial regard.
Twelve Miles from Court is no region for such Subjects. In the Name of God, why
should not Twelve miles about the Kings Chair be as free from Papist Recusants,
as twelve Miles from the City of Rome, the Popes Chair is from Protestants.
There are Hypocrites and Atheists, and so I fear there be amongst us: But no
open contempt of their Religion is endured. If there must be Recusants, it were
better they lurked in the Country, then here in the Bosom of the Kingdom.

Breach of Unity.
For matter of Division and Breach of unity, it is not without a mystery, that
Christ's Coat had no Seam, nor no more should the Church, if it were possible.
Therefore if any Minister refuse the Book of Common Prayer, or wilfully
swearveth in Divine Service, from that Book, or if any person whatsoever do
scandalize that Book, or if any person whatsoever, do and speak openly and
maliciously in derogation of it, such men do but make a rent in the Garment,
and such are by you to be enquired of. But much more, such as are not only
differing, but in a sort opposite unto it, by using a superstitious and corrupt
form of Divine Service, I mean such as say or hear Mass.

These Offenses which I have recited to you, are against the Service and
Worship of God, there remain two which likewise pertain to the Dishonor of
God; the one, is the abuse of his Name, by Perjury; the other is, the adhearing
to Gods declared Enemies, evil and outcast spirits by Conjuration and
Witchcraft.

For Perjury, Perjury.
it is hard to say whether it be more odious to God, or pernicious to man; for
an Oath, says the Apostle, is the end of Controversies; if therefore that
Boundary of Suits be taken away or mis-set, where shall be the end? Therefore
you are to enquire of wilful and corrupt perjury in any of the Kings Courts,
yea, of the Court Barons and the like, and that as well of the Actors, as of
the Procurers and Subborners.

For Witchcraft, Conjuration and Witchcraft.
by the former Law it was not Death, except it were actual and gross of
invocation of evil Spirits, or making Covenant with them, or taking away Life
by Witchcraft: But now by an Act in his Majesty's times, 1. Jacob. c. 12.
Charms and Sorceries in certain cases of procuring of unlawful love or Bodily
hurt, and others, are made Felony, the second offense; the first being
Imprisonment and Pillory.

Supremacy placed with offenses of State.
And here I do conclude my first part concerning Religion and Ecclesiastical
Causes; wherein it may be thought, that I do forget matters of Supremacy, or of
Jesuits, and Seminaries, and the like, which are usually sorted with Causes of
Religion: But I must have leave to direct my self according to mine own
persuasion, which is, that whatsoever has been said or written on the other
side; All the late Statutes which inflict capital punishment upon Extollers of
the Popes Supremacy; Deniers of the Kings Supremacy, Jesuits and Seminaries,
and other Offenders of that nature, have for their principal scope, not the
punishment of the Error of Conscience, but the repressing of the peril of the
estate. This is the true Spirit of the Laws, and therefore I will place them
under my second Devision, which is of Offenses which concern the King and his
estate, to which now I come.

The King and the State.
These Offenses therefore respect either the Safety of the Kings Person, or the
Safety of his Estate and Kingdom, which though they cannot be dissevered in
deed, yet they may be distinguished in speech. First then, if any have
conspired against the life of the King, The Kings person.
which God have in his custody, or of the Queens Majesty, or of the most noble
Prince their eldest Son; the very compassing and very imagination thereof is
High Treason, if it can be proved by any fact that is overt; for in the case of
so sudden, dark, and pernicious, and peremptory attempts, it were too late for
the Law to take a Blow before it gives, and this High Treason of all other is
most heinous of which you shall enquire, though I hope there be no cause.

There is another capital offense that has an affinity with this, Privy
Councellor.
whereof you here within the Verge are most properly to enquire; the Kings
Privy Council are as the principal Watch over the Safety of the King, so as
their Safety is a portion of his; if therefore any of the Kings Servants within
his Chequer Roll (for to them only the Law extends) have conspired the death of
any the Kings Privy Council; this is Felony, and thereof you shall enquire.

And since we are now in that Branch of the Kings Person. Representation of
person.
I will speak also of the Kings Person by representation and the Treasons which
touch the same.

The Kings Person and Authority is represented in three things, in his Seals,
in his Moneys, and in his principal Magistrates; if therefore any have
counterfeited, clipped, or scaled his moneys, or other moneys current, this is
high Treason; so to kill certain great Officers or Judges, executing their
Office.

The state.
We will pass now to those Treasons, which concern the safety of the Kings
State, which are of three kinds answering to three perils which may happen to
an estate; these perils are Foreign Invasions, open Rebellion, and Sedition,
and privy practice, to alienate and estrange the hearts of the Subject, and to
prepare them, either to adhear to enemies, or to burst out into tumults, and
commotions of themselves.

Invasion and Rebellion.
Therefore if any person have solicited or procured any invasion from
Foreigners, or if any have combined to raise and stir the People to Rebellion
within the Realm, these are high Treasons, tending to the overthrow of the
State of this Commonwealth, and to be enquired of.

Alienation of hearts.
The third part of practice has diverse branches, but one principal root in
these our times, which is the vast and over-spreading ambition and usurpation
of the Sea of Rome; for the Pope of Rome is, according to his last challenge
and pretenses, become a Competitor and Corival with the King, for the hearts
and allienations of the people, and to make them as Fuel ready to take fire
upon any of his Commands. This is that yoke which this Kingdom has happily
cast off, even at such time when the Popish Religion was nevertheless
continued, and that diverse States which are the Popes Vassalls do begin to
shake of.

If therefore any person have maintained and extolled the usurped authority of
the Bishop of Rome, Supremacy, Treason, etc. 5 Eliz. c. 1. Jesuits.
within the Kings Dominions, by writing, preaching, or deed, advisedly, or
directly, and maliciously. 3 Iac. c. 4. and 5.
Or if any person have withdrawn and reconciled any of the Kings Subjects from
their obedience, or any withdrawn and reconciled themselves; or if any Subject
has refused and second time, to take the Oath of Supremacy lawfully tendered;
28 El. c. 2.
or if any Jesuit or Seminary come and abide within this Realm; these are by
several Statutes made in cases of Treason, the Law accounting these things as
preparatives, and the secret motions of seditions and revolts, these you are to
enquire both of the actors, etc. receivers, maintainers, 13 El. c. 2. 23 El. c.
1.
and concealers, etc, Traitors, as well as the principal in some cases; some
other, in misprissions of Treason, and in some other, Felony; as namely, that
of the relieving of Jesuits and Priests; the bringing in and dispersing of
Agnus Dei; Agnus Dei.
crosses, pictures, or such trash, is likewise praemunire, and so is the Denial
to take the Oath of Supremacy the first time.

And because in the Disposition of a State to troubles and perturbations,
Militar.
Military men are most tickle and dangerous; therefore if any of the Kings
Subjects go over to serve in Foreign parts, and do not first endure the Touch,
that is, take the Oath; or if he have born office in any Army, and do not enter
into bond with Sureties as is prescribed, this is made Felony, and of such you
shall enquire.

Prophecies
Lastly, because the vulgar people are sometimes led with vain and fond
Prophecies, if any such shall be published, to the end to move stirs or
tumults, this is not Felony, but punished by a years Imprisonment, and loss of
goods; and of this also shall you enquire.

You shall likewise understand that the escape of any prisoner committed for
treason, is treason; whereof you are likewise to enquire.

The people capital.
Now come I to the third part of my Division, that is, those offenses which
concern the Kings people, and are capital, which nevertheless, the Law terms
offenses against the Crown, in respect of the Protection that the King has of
His People, and the interest he has in them and their welfare; for touch them
touch the King; these offenses are of three natures: The first concerns the
preservation of their lives; the second of honor and honesty of their persons
and Families; and the third of their substance.

Life.
First for life; I must say unto you in general, that Life is grown so cheap in
these times, it is set at the price of words, and every petty scorn and
disgrace, can have no other reparation, nay so many men's lives are taken away
with impunity, that the very life of the Law is almost taken away with the
execution; and therefore though we cannot restore the life of those men that
are slain, yet I pray let us restore the Law to her life, by proceeding with
due severity against the Offenders; and most specially this plot of ground,
which is the Kings Carpet, ought not to be stained with blood, crying in the
Ears of God and the King; it is true nevertheless, that the Law does make
diverse just differences of Life taken away; but yet no such differences as the
wanton humors and braveries of men, have under a reverend name of honor and
reputation invented.

The highest degree is where such a one is killed, unto whom the Offender did
bear Faith and Obedience; as the Servant to the Master, the Wife to the
Husband, the Clerk to the Prelate; and I shall ever add, for so I conceive of
the Law, the child to to the Father or Mother, and this the Law terms petty
Treason.

The second is, where a man is slain upon forethought Malice, which the Law
terms Murder, and it is an offense horrible and odious, and cannot be
blanched, nor made fair but foul.

The third is, where a man is killed upon a sudden heat or affray, whereunto
the Law gives some little favor, because a man in fury is not himself, 1. Iac.
c. 8.
Ira furor brevis, wrath is a short madness; and the Wisdom of Law in His
Majesty's time has made a subdivision of the stab given, where the party
stabbed is out of defense, and had not given the first Blow, from other
Manslaughters.

The fourth degree, is that of killing a man in the parties own defense, or by
misadventure, which though they be not Felonies, yet nevertheless the Law does
not suffer them to go unpunished; because it does kindle sparks of a bloody
mind in the one, and defense in the other.

And the fifth is, where the Law does admit Fortification, not by Plea, for a
man may not (that sheddeth blood) justify the fact with pleading Non-guilty;
the case is found by verdict, being disclosed upon the evidence, as where a man
in the Kings high way and peace is assailed to be murdered or robbed, or when
a man defending his house, which is his Castle, against unlawful violence; or
when a Sheriff or Minister of Justice, is resisted in the execution of his
office; or when the Patient dies in the Chyrurgions hands, upon cutting or
otherwise, for these cases the Law does privilege, because of the necessity,
and because of the innocence of the intention.

Thus much for the death of man, of which cases you are to enquire, together
with the accessories before and after the Fact.

For the second kind which concerns the honor and chastnesse of persons and
families; Honesty of Life.
you are to enquire of the ravishment of Women, of the taking of Women out of
the possession of their Parents or Guardians against their will, or marying, 1
Iac. c. 11.
or abusing them, or double marying, where there was not first seven years
absence, and no notice that the party so absent was alive, and other Felonies
against the honesty of life.

For the third kind, which concerns men's substance, you shall inquire of
Burglaries, Robberies, Cutting of Purses, and taking of any thing from the
person; and generally all other stealths, as well such as are plain as those
that are disguised, whereof I will by and by speak: But first I must require
you to use diligence in presenting specially those purloynings and
imbezillments, which are of plate, vessels, or whatsoever within the Kings
house. The Kings House is an open place, it ought to be kept safe by Law, and
not by Lock, and therefore needs the more severity.

Now for colored or disguised robberies, 28 E. 1. Articuli super Chartasc.
2.31 El. c. 4.33 H. 6. c. 1.21 H. 8. c. 7.
I will name two or three of them; the Purveyor that takes without warrant, two
or three of them is no better then a Thief, and it is Felony; the servant that
has the keeping of His Majesty's Goods, and goes away with them, though he
came to the possession of them lawfully, it is Felony. Of these you shall
likewise enquire, principal and accessaries; the voluntary escape of a Felon is
also Felony.

The people not capital.
For the last part, which is of Offenses concerning the people not capital,
there are many. But I select only such as I think fittest to be remembered unto
you, still dividing to give you the better light, they are of three Natures.


Force.
For the first, you shall enquire of Riots and unlawful Assemblies, of forcible
entries, and detainets with force; and properly all assaults of striking,
drawing weapon or other violence, within the Kings house, and the precincts
thereof: for the Kings house, from whence examples of peace should flow, in
the farthest parts of the Kingdom, as the ointment of Aarons head to the
skirts of his garment, ought to be sacred and inviolate from force and brawls,
as well in respect of reverence to the place, as in respect of danger and
greater trouble, and of all example to the whole Kingdom; and therefore in
that place all should be full of peace, order, regard, forbearance, and silence.

Besides open force, there is a kind of force that comes with an open and
armed hand, but disguised, that is, no less hateful and hurtful, and that is,
abuse and oppression by authority.

And therefore you shall enquire of all Extortions in Officers, and Ministers;
as Sheriffs, Bailiffs of hundred, Escheators, Coroners, Constables, Ordinaries,
and other; who by color of Office do pole the people.

For frauds and deceipts, I do chiefly commend to your care, the frauds and
deceipts in that which is the chief means of all just contract and permutation,
which is, Weights and Measures, wherein, although God has pronounced, that a
false weight is an abomination, yet the abuse is so common and so general, I
mean of Weights, and I speak upon knowledge and late examination, that if one
were to build a Church, he should need but false Weights, and not seek them far
off, the Bills or Piles of Brass to make the Bells, and the Weight of Lead to
make the Battlements: And herein you are to make special enquiry, whether the
Clerk of the Market within the Verge, to whom properly it appertains, have done
his duty.

For Nusances and Grievances, Nuisance.
I will for the present only single out one, That you present the decays of
Highways and Bridges; for where the Majesty of a Kings House draws recourse
and access, it is both disgraceful to the King, and also diseaseful to the
people, if the ways near about be not fair and good; wherein it is strange to
see the chargeable Pavement and Cawseys in the entrances of Towns abroad beyond
the Seas, whereas London, the second City, at the least, of Europe, in glory,
in greatness, and in wealth, cannot be discerned by the fairness of the ways,
though a little perhaps by the Broadnesse of them from a Village.

Breach of Statutes.
For the last part, because I pass these things over briefly, I will make
mention to you of three Laws.


Kings Pleasure.
You shall therefore enquire of the unlawful taking of Partridges, and
Pheasants, or Foul, the detraction of the Eggs of the said Wild-fowl, the
killing of Hares or Deer, and the stealing of Venison, or Hares: for that which
is for exercise, and sport, and courtesy, should not be turned to Gluttony and
Sale Victual.

You shall also enquire whether Bakers, Food.
and Brewers keep their Assize, and whether as well they, as Butchers,
Inn-holders, and Victuallers, do sell that which is wholesome, and at reasonable
prices; and whether they do link and combine to raise prices.

Lastly, you shall enquire whether the good Statute be observed, Manufactures.
whereby a man may have that he thinks he has, and not be abused or
misserved in that he buys: I mean, 5 Eliz. c. 4.
the Statute that requires that none use any mannual occupation, but such as
have been seven years Apprentice to it, which Law being generally transgressed,
makes the people buy in effect Chaff for Corn, for that which is miswrought
will miswear.

There be many more things inquireable by you, throughout all the former parts,
which it were overlong in particular to recite; you may be supplied either out
of your own experience, or out of such Bills and Informations as shall be
brought unto you, or upon any question that you shall demand of the Court,
which will be ready to give you any further direction, as far as it is fit: But
these which I have gone through are the principal points of your charge, which
to present, you have taken the Name of GOD to witness; and in the Name of GOD
perform it.

Dixi.
FINIS.

