CASES OF TREASON.

Written BY SIR FRANCIS BACON, KNIGHT, HIS MAJESTY'S Solicitor General.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of JOHN MORE, and are sold by Matthew
Walbancke, and William Coke. Anno 1641.

The Contents.
Chap. I. CAses of Treason. page 1. Chap. II. The punishment, trial, and
proceeding in cases of Treason. page 4. Chap. III. Cases of Misprision of
Treason. page 6. Chap. IIII. The punishment, trial, and proceeding in cases of
Misprision of Treason. Ibid. Chap. V. Cases of petie Treason. page 7. Chap. VI.
The punishment, trial, and proceedings in cases of petie Treason. Ibid. Chap.
VII. Cases of Felony. page 8. Chap. VIII. The punishment, trial, and
proceedings in cases of Felony. page 11. Chap. IX. Cases of Felony de se, with
the punishment, trial, and proceedings. page 14. Chap. X. Cases of Praemunire.
Ibid. Chap. XI. The punishment, trial, and proceeding in cases of Praemunire.
page 16. Chap. XII. Cases of Abjuration and Exile, and the proceedings therein.
Ibid. Chap. XIII. Cases of Heresy, and the trial and proceedings therein.
page 18. Chap. XIIII. The Kings Prerogative in Parliament. Ibid. Chap. XV. The
Kings Prerogative in matters of War or Peace. page 19. Chap. XVI. The Kings
Prerogative in matters of moneys. page 20. Chap. XVII. The Kings Prerogative in
matters of Trade and Traffic. Ibid. Chap. XVIII. The Kings Prerogative in the
persons of his Subjects. page 21. Chap. XIX. An Answer to the Question proposed
by Sir Alexander Hay Knight, touching the Office of Constables. page 22. Chap.
XX. Three ends of the Institution of the Court Leete. page 24. Chap. XXI. The
jurisdiction of Justices itinerantes in the Principality of Wales. page 31.
CASES OF TREASON.
CHAP. I.
WHere a man does compass or imagine the death of the King, the Kings Wife,
the Kings eldest Son, and Heir apparent, if it appear by any overt act, it
is Treason.

Where a man does violate the Kings Wife, the Kings eldest daughter, unmarried,
the Wife of the Kings eldest Son, and Heir apparent, it is Treason.

Where a man does levy war against the King in the Realm, it is Treason.

Where a man is adherent to the Kings enemies, giving them aid and comfort, it
is Treason.

Where a man counterfeiteth the Kings great Seal, privy Signet, Sign
manual, it is Treason: likewise his money.

Where a man brings into this Realm false money, counterfeited to the
likeness of English, with intent to merchandise or make payment thereof, and
knowing it to be false money, it is Treason.

Where a man counterfeiteth any coin current in payment within this Realm, it
is Treason.

Where a man does bring in any money being current within the Realm, the same
being false and counterfeit, with intent to utter it, and knowing the same to
be false, it is Treason.

Where a man does clipp, waste, round, or file any of the Kings money, or any
foreign coin, current by Proclamation, for gains sake, it is Treason.

Where a man does any way impair, diminish, falsify, skale or lighten money
current by Proclamation, it is Treason.

Where a man kills the Chancellor, the Treasurer, the Kings Justices in Eire,
the Kings Justices of Assizes, the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, being in
their several places, and doing their Offices, it is Treason.

Where a man procures or consents to Treason, it is Treason.

Where a man does persuade or withdraw any of the Kings Subjects from his
obedience, or from the Religion by his Majesty established, with intent to
withdraw any from the Kings obedience, it is Treason.

Where a man is absolved, reconciled, or withdrawn from his obedience to the
King, or promises obedience to any foreign Power, it is Treason.

Where any Jesuit, or any other Priest ordained since the first year of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, shall come into, or remain in any part of this
Realm, it is Treason.

Where any person being brought up in a College of Jesuits, or Seminaries,
shall not return within six months after Proclamation made, and within two
days after his return, submit himself to take the oath of Supremacy, if
otherwise he do return, and not within six months after Proclamation made,
it is Treason.

Where a man committed for Treason, does voluntarily break Prison, it is
Treason.

Where a Jailer does voluntarily permit a man committed for Treason to escape,
it is Treason.

Where a man relieveth or comfort a Traitor, and knows of the Offense, it
is Treason.

Where a man does affirm or maintain any Authority of Jurisdiction
spiritual, or does put in ^^e or execute any thing for the advancement or
setting forth thereof, the third time, it is Treason.

Where a man refuses to take the oath of Supremacy being tendered by the Bishop
of the Diocese, if he be any Ecclesiastical person; or by Commission out of
the Chancery, if he be a temporal person; such Offense the second time is
Treason.

CHAP. II. The punishment, trial, and proceeding in cases of Treason.
IN Treason the corporal punishment is by drawing on a hurdle from the place
of the prison to the place of execution, by hanging and being cut down alive,
bowelling and quartering, and in women, burning.

In Treason there ensues a corruption of blood in the line ascending and
descending.

In Treason, lands and goods are forfeited, and inheritances, as well intailed
as fee simple, and the profits of estates for life.

In Treason, the Escheats go to the King, and not to the Lord of the Fee.

In Treason, the land forfeited shall be in the Kings actual possession
without Office.

In Treason there be no accessaries, but all are principalls.

In Treason no Sanctuary, nor benefit of Clergy, or peremptory challenge is
allowed.

In Treason, if the party stand mute, yet nevertheless judgment and attainder
shall proceed all one as upon verdict.

In Treason no Council is to be allowed, nor bail permitted to the party.

In Treason no witnesses shall be received upon oath for the parties
justification.

In Treason, if the fact be committed beyond the seas, yet it may be tried in
any County where the King will award his Commission.

In Treason, if the party be non sanae memoriae, yet if he had formerly
confessed it before the Kings Council, and that it be certified that he was
of good memory at the time of his examination and confession, the Court may
proceed to judgment without calling or arraigning the party.

In Treason, the death of the party before conviction discharges all
proceedings and forfeitures.

In Treason, if the parties be once acquitted, he should not be brought in
question again for the same fact.

In Treason, no new case not expressed in the Statute of 25. E. 3. or made
Treason by any special Statute since, ought to be judged Treason, without
consulting with the Parliament.

In Treason, there can be no prosecution but at the Kings suit, and the Kings
pardon discharges.

In Treason, the King cannot grant over to any subject power and authority to
pardon it.

In Treason, a trial of a Peer of the Kingdom is to be by special
Commission before the Lord high Steward, and those that pass upon him to be
none but Peers: The proceeding is with great solemnity, the Lord Steward
sitting under a cloth of Estate with a white rod of Justice in his hand, and
the Peers may confer together, but are not any ways shut up; and are
demanded by the Lord Steward their voices one by one, and the plurality of
voices carries it.

In Treason, it has been an ancient use and favor from the Kings of this
Realm to pardon the execution of hanging, drawing, and quartering; and to make
warrant for their beheading.

The proceeding in case of Treason with a common Subject is in the Kings Bench,
or by Commission of Oyer and Terminer.

CHAP. III. Cases of Misprision of Treason.
WHere a man concealeth high Treason only, without any consorting or abetting,
it is misprision of Treason.

Where a man counterfeiteth any foreign coin of gold or silver not current
in the Realm, it is misprision of Treason.

Where a man fixes an old Seal to a new Patent, it is misprision of Treason.

CHAP. IIII. The punishment, trial, and proceeding in cases of misprision of
Treason.
THe punishment of Misprision of Treason is by perpetual imprisonment, loss
of the issues and profits of their lands during life, and loss of goods and
chattels.

The proceeding and trial is as in cases of high Treason.

In misprision of Treason bail is not admitted.

CHAP. V. Cases of petie Treason.
WHere a Servant kills his Master, the Wife the Husband, the spiritual man
his Prelate, to whom he is subordinate, and owes faith and obedience, it is
petie Treason.

Where a Son kills the Father or Mother, it has been questioned whether it
be petie Treason, and the late experience and opinion seems to sway to the
contrary, though against law and reason in my judgment.

Where a Servant kills his or her Master or Mistress after they are out of
service, it is petie Treason.

CHAP. VI. The punishment, trial, and proceedings in cases of petie Treason.
IN petie Treason, the corporal punishment is by drawing on an hurdle, and
hanging, and in a woman burning.

In petie Treason, the forfeiture is the same with the case of Felony.

In petie Treason, all Accessaries are but in case of Felony.

CHAP. VII. Cases of Felony.
WHere a man commits murder or homicide of malice prepensed, it is felony.

Where a man commits murder (that is) breaking of an house with an intent to
commit felony, it is felony.

Where a man commits manslaughter, that is homicide of sudden heat, and not
of malice prepensed, it is felony.

Where a man rides armed with a felonious intent, it is felony.

Where a man does maliciously and feloniously burn any man's house, it is
felony.

Where a man does maliciously etc. burn corn upon the ground, or in stack, it
is felony.

Where a man does maliciously cut out another man's tongue, or put out his eyes,
it is felony.

Where a man robs or steals, viz. takes away another man's goods, above
the value of 12. d. out of his possession, with intent to conceal it, it is
felony.

Where a man imbezileth and withdraws any of the Kings Records at
Westminster, whereby a judgment is reversed, it is felony.

Where a man having the custody of the Kings Armor, Munition, or other
Abiliments of War, does maliciously convey away the same, it is felony, if it
be to the value of 20. shillings.

Where a Servant has goods of his Masters, delivered unto him, and goes away
with them, it is felony.

Where a man conjures, or invokes wicked Spirits, it is felony.

Where a man does use or practice witchcraft, whereby any person shall be
killed, wasted, or lamed, it is felony.

Where a man practices any witchcraft, to discover treasure hid, or to disover
stolen goods, or to provoke unlawful love, or to impair or hurt any man's
cattle or goods the second time, having been once before convicted of like
offense, it is felony.

Where a man uses the craft of multiplication of gold or silver, it is felony.

Where a man receives a Seminary Priest, knowing him to be such a Priest, it
is felony.

Where a man takes away a woman against her will, not clayming her as his ward
or bondwoman, it is felony.

Where a man or woman marries again, his or her former husband or wife being
alive, it is felony.

Where a man commits buggery with man or beast, it is felony.

Where any persons, above the number of twelve, shall assemble themselves with
intent to put down enclosures, or bring down prices of victuals, etc. and do
not depart after proclamation, it is felony.

Where a man shall use any words to encourage or draw any people together, ut
supra, and they do assemble accordingly, and do not depart after
proclamation, it is felony.

Where a man being the Kings sworn servant, conspireth to murder any Lord of
the Realm, or any privy Councellor, it is felony.

Where a Soldier has taken any parcel of the Kings wages, and departs
without license, it is felony.

Where a Recusant, which is a seducer, and perswader, and enciter of the Kings
subjects against the Kings Authority in Ecclesiastical causes, or a perswader
of Conventicles, or shall refuse to abjure the Realm, it is felony.

Where vagabonds be found in the Realm, calling themselves Egyptians, it is
felony.

Where a Purveyor does take without warrant, or otherwise does offend against
certain special Laws, it is felony.

Where a man hunts in any Forest, Park, or Warren, by night or by day, with
vizzard or other disguisements, and is examined thereof and concealeth his
fact, it is felony.

Where one steals certain kind of Hawks, it is felony.

Where a man commits forgery the second time, having been once before
convicted, it is felony.

Where a man transporteth Rams or other sheep out of the Kings Dominions the
second time, it is felony.

Where a man being imprisoned for felony breaks prison, it is felony.

Where a man procures or consents to felony to be done, it is felony, as to
make him accessory before the fact.

Where a man receives or relieveth a felon, it is felony, as to make him
accessory after the fact.

Where a woman, by the constraint of her husband, in his presence, joyneth with
him in committing of felony, it is not felony in her, neither as principal,
nor as accessory.

Homicide, or the killing of a man is to be considered in four kinds,
Chance-medley. Se defendend^. Manslaughter. Wilful Murder.


CHAP. VIII. The punishment, trial, and proceedings in cases of Felony.
IN felony, the corporal punishment is hanging, and it is doubtful whether
the King may turn it into beheading in the case of a Peer, or other person of
dignity, because in treason the striking off the head is part of the Judgment,
and so the King pardons the rest: but in felony, it is no part of the
judgment, and the King cannot alter the execution of law; yet presidents have
been both ways: If it be upon indictment, the King may, but upon an appeal
he cannot.

In felony there follows corruption of blood, except it be in cases made
felony by special Statutes, with a proviso that there shall be no corruption
of blood.

In felony, lands in fee simple, and goods and chattels are forfeited, and the
profits of estates for life are likewise forfeited, but not lands intailed: And
by some customs lands in fee simple are not so forfeited; The Father to the
bough,
The Son to the Plough,
as in Gavel-kinde, in Kent, and other places.

In felony, the Escheats go to the Lord of the Fee, and not to the King,
except he be Lord: But profits for the estates for lives, or in tail during
the life of tenant in tail, go to the King; And the King has likewise annum,
and diem, and vastum.

In felony, lands are not in the King before Office, nor in the Lord before
entry or recovery in a writ of Escheate, or death of the party attainted.

In felony, there can be no proceeding with the accessory before there be a
proceeding with the principal: If he die, or plead his pardon, or have his
Clergy before attainder; the accessory can never be dealt with.

In felony, if the party stand mute, and will not put himself upon trial, or
challenge peremptorily above that the law allows, he shall have judgment not
of hanging* but of penance of pressing to death; but there he saves his lands
and forfeits only his goods.

In felony, at the common law, the benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary was allowed;
but now by Stat. it is taken away in most cases.

In felony, bail may be admitted where the fact is not notorious, and the
person not of ill name.

In felony, no Council is to be allowed to the party, no more then in treason.

In felony, if the fact be committed beyond the Seas, or upon the Seas, super
altum mare, there is no trial at all in one case, nor by course of Jury in the
other, but by the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.

In felony, no witness shall be received upon oath for the parties
Justification, no more then in treason.

In felony, if the party be non sonae memoria, although it be after the fact,
he cannot be tried nor adjudged, except it be in course of Outlawry, and that
is also erroneous.

In felony, the death of the party before conviction discharges all
proceedings and forfeitures.

In felony, if the party be once acquit, or in peril of Judgment of life
lawfully he shall never be brought in question again for the same fact.

In felony, the prosecution may be either at the Kings suit, or by way of
appeal; the defendant shall have his course, and produce witnesses upon oath,
as in civil causes.

In felony, the King may grant hault justice to a subject, with the Regality of
power to pardon it.

In felony, the trial of Peers is all one as in case of treason.

In felony, the proceedings are in the Kings Bench, or before Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, or of Gaol delivery, and in some case before Justices of the
Peace.

CHAP. IX. Cases of Felony de se, with the punishment, trial, and proceedings.
IN the civil law, and other laws, they make a difference of cases of felony
de se; for where a man is called in question upon any capital crime, and
kills himself to prevent the law, there they give the judgment in all
points of forfeiture, as if they had been attainted in their life time: And on
the other side, where a man kills himself upon impatience of sickness, or
the like, they do not punish it at all: but the law of England takes it all
in one degree, and punishes only with loss of goods to be forfeited to the
King, who generally grants them to his Almoner, where they be not formerly
granted unto special liberties.

CHAP. X. Cases of Praemunire.
WHere a man purchases or accepts any provision, that is, collation of any
spiritual benefice or living from the Sea of Rome, it is Praemunire.

Where a man shall purchase any process to draw any people of the Kings
allegiance out of the Realm, in plea whereof the cognizance pertaines to the
Kings Court, and comes not in person to answer his contempt in that behalf
before the King and his Council, or in his Chancery, it is Praemunire.

Where a man does sue in any Court which is not the Kings Court, to defeat or
impeach any judgment given in the Kings Court, and does not appear to answer
his contempt, it is Praemunire.

Where a man does purchase or pursue in the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any
process, sentence of excommunication, bull, or instrument, or other thing
which touches the King in his Regality, or his Realm in prejudice, it is
Praemunire.

Where a man does affirm or maintain any foreign kind of Jurisdiction
spiritual, or does put in ure or execution any thing for the advancement or
setting forth thereof; such offense the second time committed is Praemunire.

Where a man refuses to take the oath of Supremacy being tendered by the
Bishop of the Diocese, if it be an Ecclesiastical person; or by a Commission
out of the Chancery, if it be a temporal person, it is Praemunire.

Where a Deane and Chapter of any Church upon the Conge de Lier of an
Archbishop or Bishop does refuse to elect any such Archbishop or Bishop as is
nominated unto them in the Kings Letters missive, it is Praemunire.

Where a man does contribute or give relief to any Jesuit or Seminary
Priests, or to any person brought up therein, and called home, and not
returning, it is case of Praemunire.

Where a man is a Broker of an usurious contract above ten in the hundred, it
is Praemunire.

CHAP. XI. The punishment, trial, and proceeding in cases of Praemunire.
THe punishment is by imprisonment during life, forfeiture of goods, forfeiture
of lands in fee simple, and forfeiture of the profits of lands intailed, or for
life.

The trial and proceeding is as in cases of misprision of Treason, and the
trial is by Peers where a Peer of the Realm is the offender.

Striking any man in the face of the Kings Courts, is forfeiture of lands,
perpetual imprisonment, and loss of that hand.

CHAP. XII. Cases of Abjuration and Exile, and the proceedings therein.
WHere a man commits any felony, for the which at this day he may have
privilege of Sanctuary, and confesses the felony before the Coroner, he shall
abjure the liberty of the Realm, and choose his Sanctuary; and if he commit
any new offense, or leave his Sanctuary, he shall lose the privilege thereof,
and suffer as if he had not taken Sanctuary.

Where a man not coming to the Church, and being a Popish Recusant, does
persuade any the Kings subjects to impugn his Majesty's Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, or shall persuade any subject to come to any unlawful
conventicles, and shall not after conform himself within a time, and make his
submission, he shall abjure the Realm, and forfeit his goods and lands during
life; and if he depart not within the time prefixed, or return, he shall be
in the degree of a Felon.

Where a man being a Popish Recusant, and not having lands to the value of 20.
Marks per annum, nor goods to the value of 40. l. shall not repair to his
dwelling, or place where he was borne, and there confine himself within the
compass of five miles, he shall abjure the Realm; and if he return, he
shall be in case of a Felon.

Where a man kills the Kings Dear in Chases or Forests, and can find no
sureties after a years imprisonment, he shall abjure the Realm.

Where a man is a trespasser in Parkes, or in Ponds of fish, and after three
years imprisonment cannot find sureties, he shall abjure the Realm.

Where a man is a Ravisher of any child whose marriage belongs to any person,
and marries the said child after years of consent, and is not able to
satisfy for the marriage, he shall abjure the Realm.

CHAP. XIII. Cases of Heresy, and the trial and proceedings therein.
THe declaration of Heresy, and likewise the proceedings and judgment upon
Heretics is by the common laws of this Realm referred to the Jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, and the secular arm is reached to them by the common Laws,
and not by any Statute for the execution of them by the Kings writ de Haeretico
comburendo.

CHAP. XIIII. The Kings Prerogative in Parliament.
THe King has an absolute negative voice to all Bills that pass the
Parliament, so as without his royal assent they have a mere nullity, and not
so much as Authoritas praescripta, or Senatus consulta had, notwithstanding the
intercession of Tribunes.

The King may summon Parliaments, dissolve them, prorogue them, and adjourne
them at his pleasure.

The King may add voices in the Parliament at his pleasure, for he may give
privilege to Borough Towns as many as he will, and may likewise call and
create Barons at his pleasure.

No man can sit in Parliament except he take the oath of Allegiance.

CHAP. XV. The Kings Prerogative in matters of War or Peace.
THe King has power to declare and proclaim war, and to make and conclude
peace and truce at his pleasure.

The King has power to make leagues and confederacies with foreign States,
more straight and less straight, and to revoke and disannull them at his
pleasure.

The King has power to command the bodies of his Subjects for the service of
his wars, and to muster, train, and levy men, and to transport them by sea
or land at his pleasure.

The King has power in time of war to execute Marshall Law, and to appoint
all Officers of war at his pleasure.

The King has power to grant his Letters of Mart and reprisall for remedy to
his Subjects upon foreign wrongs, at his pleasure.

The King has power to declare Laws by his Letters Patents for the government
of any place conquered by his Arms, at his pleasure.

The King may give Knighthood, and thereby enable any subject to perform
Knights service, at his pleasure.

CHAP. XVI. The Kings Prerogative in matters of moneys.
THe King may alter his standard in baseness or finenesse of his coin at his
pleasure.

The King may alter his stamp in form at his pleasure.

The King may alter the valuations of his coin, and raise and fall moneys at
his pleasure.

The King by his Proclamation may make moneys of his own current, or not
current, at his pleasure.

The King may take or refuse the Subjects bullion and coin, more or less
money.

The King by his Proclamation may make foreign money current, or not current.

CHAP. XVII. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Trade and Traffic.
THE King may constrain the person of any of his subjects not to go out of
the Realm at all.

The King may restrain any of his subjects to go out of the Realm into any
special part foreign.

The King may forbid the exportation of any commodities out of the Realm.

The King may forbid the importation of any commodities into the Realm.

The King may set a reasonable Impost upon any foreign wares that come into
the Realm, and so of native wares that go out of the Realm.

CHAP. XVIII. The Kings Prerogative in the persons of his Subjects.
THe King may create any Corporation or Body politic, and enable them to
purchase, and grant, and to sue, and be sued, and that with such restrictions
and modifications as he pleases.

The King may denizen and enable any forreigner for him and his descendents
after the Charter, though he cannot naturalize nor enable him to make pedigree
from Ancestors Paramount.

The King may enable any attainted person (by his Charter of pardon) to
purchase, and to purge his blood for the time to come, though he cannot
restore his blood for the time past.

The King may enable any dead person in law, as men professed, to take and
purchase to the Kings benefit.

CHAP. XIX. An Answer to the Question proposed by Sir Alexander Hay Knight,
touching the Office of Constables.
1. TO the first, Of the original of the Authority of Constables, it may be
said, Caput inter nubila condit, for the Authority was granted upon the
ancient Laws and Customs of this Kingdom practiced long before the Conquest,
and intended and instituted for the conservation of the peace, and repressing
of all manner of disturbance and hurt of the people, and that as well by way of
prevention as punishment; but yet so, as they have no judicial power, to hear
and determine any cause, but only a ministerial power, as in the answer of
the seventh Article more at large is set down.

As for the Office of the High Constable, the original of that is yet more
obscure; for though the High Constables Authority has the more ample circuit,
he being over the Hundred, and the petie Constable over the Village; yet I do
not find that the petie Constable is subordinate to the High Constable, or to
be ordered or commanded by him: and therefore, I doubt, the High Constable was
not ab origin, but that when the business of the Country increased, the
authority of the Justices of peace was enlarged by diverse Statutes, then, for
conveniencie sake the Office of High Constables grew in use for the receiving
of the commands and precepts from the Justices of peace, and distributing them
to the petie Constables; and in token of this, the election of High Constables
in most parts of the Kingdom is by the appointment of the Justices of peace,
whereas the election of the petie Constable is by the people.

But there be two things unto which the Office of Constable has special
reference, and which of necessity, or at lea^^ a kind of congruity, must
precede the Jurisdiction of that Office, either the things themselves, or
somewhat that has a similitude or analogy toward them.

1. The one is the division of the Territory, or gross of the Shires into
Hundreds, Villages, and Towns; for the High Constable is Officer over the
Hundred, and the pety Constable is over the Town or Village.

2. The other is the Court Leete, unto which the Constable is a proper
attendant and minister, for there the Constables are chosen by the Jury, there
they are sworn, and there that part of their Office which concerns
information is principally to be performed; for the Jury is to present
offenses, and the offenders are chiefly to take light from the Constables of
all matters of disturbance and nuisance of the people, which they (in respect of
their Office) are presumed to have best and most particular knowledge of.

CHAP. XX. Three ends of the Institution of the Court Leete.
1. THe first end of the institution of the Court Leet is, To take the oath of
Allegiance of all males above the age of twelve years.

2. The second, To enquire of all offenses against the peace; and for those
that are against the Crown and Peace both, to enquire of only, and certify
to the Justices of Jail delivery; but those that are against the peace simply,
they are to enquire and punish.

3. The third is, To enquire of, punish, and remove all public nusances and
grievances concerning infection of Air, corruption of victuals, ease of
chaffer, and contract of all other things that may hurt or grieve the people in
general, in their health, quiet, and welfare.

And to these three ends, as matters of policy subordinate, the Court Leet
has power to call upon the pledges that are to be taken for the good
behavior of the resiants that are not tenants, and to enquire of all defaults
of Officers, as Constables, Ale-tasters, etc. and for choice of Constables, as
aforesaid.

The jurisdiction of these Leets is ever remaining in the King, and in that
case exercised by the Sheriff in his turn, which is the grand Leete, granted
over to subjects; but yet it is still the Kings Court.

2. To the second, as was said, The election of the pety Constable is at the
Court Leet by the Inquest that makes the presentiments; the election of the head
Constables is by the Justices of the peace at their quarter Sessions.

3. To the third, The Office is annual, except they be removed.

4. To the fourth, They be men (as it is now used) of inferior, yea, of base
condition, which is a mere abuse or degenerating from the first institution;
for the pety Constables in Towns ought to be of the better sort of resiants in
the said Town, save that they ought not to be aged, or sickly, but men of
able bodies in respect of the keeping watch and toil of their place, neither
ought they to be in any man's livery: And the high Constables ought to be of
the ablest sort of freeholders, and of the substantial'st sort of Yeomen, next
to the degree of Gentlemen; but they ought to be such as are not encumbered
with any other Office, as Mayor, Undersheriffe, Bailiffe, etc.

5. To the fifth, They have no allowance, but are bound by duty to perform
their Offices gratis, which may the rather be endured, because it is but
annual, and they are not tied to keep or maintain any servants or
under-ministers, for that every one of the Kings people are bound to assist
them.

6. To the sixth, Upon complaint made (of his refusal) to any one Justice of
peace, the said Justice may bind him over to the Sessions, where (if he
cannot excuse himself by some just allegation) he may be fined and
imprisoned for his contempt.

7. To the seventh, The authority of Constables, as it is substantive, and of
it self, or substituted, and astricted to the warrants and commands of the
Justices of peace; so again it is original, or additionall; for either it was
given them by the common Law, or else annexed by diverse statutes. And as for
subordinate power, wherein the Constable is only to execute the commandments
of the Justices of peace, and likewise the additionall power which is given by
diverse Statutes, it is hard to comprehend them in any brevitie; For that they
do correspond to the Office and Authority of the Justices of peace, which is
very large, and are created by the branches of several Statutes, which are
things of diverse and dispersed natures: But for the original and substantive
power of a Constable, it may be reduced to three heads: 1. For matter of peace
only. 2. For matter of peace and the Crown. 3. For matter of nuisance,
disturbance, and disorder, although they be not accompanied with violence and
breach of peace.


For pacifying of quarrels begun, the Constables may upon hot words given, or
likelihood of breach of peace to ensue, command them in the Kings name to keep
the peace, and depart, and forbear: And so he may where an affray is made,
part the same, and keep the parties asunder, and arrest and commit the
breakers of the peace, if they will not obey, and call power to assist him for
the same purpose.

For punishment of breach of peace past, the law is very sparing in giving any
authority to Constables, because he has no power judicial, and the use of
his Office is rather for preventing or staying of mischief, then for punishing
of offenses; for in that part he is rather to execute the Warrants of the
Justices, or when sudden matter arises upon his view, or notorious
circumstances, to apprehend offenders, and carry them before the Justice of
peace, and generally to imprison in like cases of necessity, where the case
will not endure the present carrying before the Justices. And thus much for the
matters of peace.

For matters of the Crown, the Office of the Constable consists chiefly in
four parts: 1. The first is Arrest. 2. The second is Search. 3. The third is
Huy and Cry. 4. And the fourth is Seizure of Goods.


All which the Constable may perform of his own authority, without any
warrant of the Justices of peace.

1. For first, If any man will lay murder or felony to another charge, or do
suspect him of murder or felony, he may declare it to the Constable, and the
Constable ought upon such declaration or complaint, carry him before a Justice,
and if by common voice or fame any man be suspected, the Constable of duty
ought to arrest him, and bring him before a Justice, though there be no other
accusation.

2. If any house be suspected for the receiving or harboring of any felon,
the Constable, upon complaint or common fame, may search.

3. If any fly upon the felony, the Constable ought to raise Huy and Cry, and
search his goods, and keep them safe without impairing, and to inventary them
in the presence of honest neighbors.

4. For matters of common nuzance and grievance, they are of a very variable
nature, according to the several comforts which man's life and society
requires, and the contraries which infest the same.

In all which, be it matter of corrupting air, water, or victuals, or
stopping, straightning, or indangering passage, or general deceipts in
weights, measures, sizes, or counterfeiting wares, and things vendible; the
Office of the Constable is to give (as much as in him lies) information of
them, and of the offenders in Leets, that they may be presented, But because
Leets are kept but twice in the year, and many of these things require present
or speedy remedy, the Constable in things of notorious and vulgar nature, ought
to forbid and repress them in the mean time.

8. To the eighth, They are for their contempt to be fined and imprisoned by
the Justices in their Sessions.

9. To the ninth: The Oath they take is in this manner.

You shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve the King, and the Lord
of this Law-day; and you shall cause the peace of our Lord the King to be well
and duly kept, to your power: And you shall arrest all those that you see
committing riots, debates, and affrayes in breach of peace: And you shall well
and duly endeavor your self to your best knowledge, that the Statutes of
Winchester for Watch, Huy and Cry, and the Statutes made for the punishment of
sturdy beggars, vagabonds, rogues, and other idle persons coming within your
Office be truly executed, and the offenders punished: And you shall endeavor,
upon complaint made, to apprehend barreters and riotous persons making
affraies, and likewise to apprehend Felons; and if any of them make resistance
with force and multitude of mis-doers, you shall make outcry, and pursue them
till they be taken; and shall look unto such persons as use unlawful games;
and you shall have regard unto the maintenance of Artilery; and you shall well
and duly execute all process and precepts sent unto you from the Justices of
peace of the County; and you shall make good and faithful presentiments of all
bloudsheds, outcries, affraies, and rescues made within your Office; and you
shall well and duly, according to your power and knowledge, do that which
belongs to your Office of Constable, to do for this year to come. So help
etc.

10. To the tenth, The authority is the same in substance, differing only in
extent; The pety Constable serving only for one Town, Parish, or Borough, the
head Constable serving for the whole Hundred; Neither is the pety Constable
subordinate to the head Constable for any commandment that proceeds from his
own authority; but it is used, that the precepts of the Justices be delivered
unto the high Constables, who being few in number, may better attend the
Justices, and then the head Constables, by virtue thereof, make their precepts
over to the pety Constables.

11. To the eleventh, In case of necessity he may appoint a deputy, or in
default thereof, the Steward of the Court Leet may; which deputy ought to be
sworn.

Now to conclude, the Office of Constables consists wholly in these three
things* viz.

Their Office concerning 1. The conservation of the peace. 2. The serving the
Precepts and Warrants of the Justices. 3. Their attendance for the execution of
Statutes.


CHAP. XXI. Of the jurisdiction of Justices itinerantos in the Principality of
Wales.
THese Justices have power to hear and determine all criminal causes, which
are called in the Laws of England, the Pleas of the Crown; and herein they
have the same jurisdiction that the Justices have in his Majesty's Bench, Kings
Bench.
commonly called the Kings Bench.

They have jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil causes which are
called in the Laws of England, Common Pleas.
Common Pleas; and do take knowledgement of all sines levied of lands or
hereditaments, without suing out any Dedimus potestatem; and herein they have
the same jurisdiction that the Justices of the common Pleas do execute at
Westminster.

Also they may hear and determine all Assizes upon disseisines of lands or
hereditaments, wherein they equal the jurisdiction of the Justices of Assise.
Just. of Assise.


Justices of Oyer and Terminer may hear and determine all notable violences
and outrages perpetrated or done within their several precincts of the
Principality of Wales.

The Prothonotary his Office is to draw all pleadings, and to enter and
engrosse all Records and Judgments in civil causes. In the Kings gift.


The Clerk of the Crown his Office is to draw and engrosse all proceedings,
arraignements, and judgments in criminal causes.

The Marshall, whose Office is to attend the persons of the Judges at their
coming, sitting, and going from the Sessions or Court. (...) the disposing of
the judge.


The Crier, he is tanquam publicus Praeco, to call forth such persons whose
appearances are necessary, and to impose silence to the people.

There is a Commission under the great Seal of England to certain Gentlemen,
giving them power to preserve the peace, and to resist and punish all turbulent
persons whose misdemeanors may tend to the disquiet of the people; and these
be called the Justices of peace, and every of them may well and truly be
called and termed Eirenarcha.

The chief of them is called Custos Rotulorum, in whose custody all the
Records of their proceedings are resident.

Others there are of that number called Justices of Peace and Quorum, because
in their Commission they have power to sit and determine causes concerning
breach of peace, and misbehaviour; the words of their Commission are conceived
thus, Quorum such and such, unum vel duos etc. esse volumus; and without some
one or more of them of the Quorum, no Sessions can be holden: And for the
avoiding of a superfluous number of such Justices (for through the ambition of
many, ^^ese Justices ^^^ointed by L. Keeper.
it is counted a credit to be burdened with that authority) the Statute of 38.
H. 8. has expressly prohibited that there shall be but eight Justices of
Peace in every County. These Justices do hold their Sessions quarterly.

In every Shire where the Commission of the peace is established, there is a
Clerk of the peace for the entering and engrossing of all proceedings before the
said Justices. And this Officer is appointed by the Custos Rotulorum.

Every Shire has its Sheriff, which word being of the Saxon English, is as
much to say as Shire Reeve, or Minister of the County: His Function of Office
is twofold: 1. Ministerial. 2. Judicial.


As touching his ministerial Office, he is the minister and executioner of
all the process and precepts of the Courts of Law, 34. H. 8. cap. 16.
and thereof ought to make return and certificate.

As touching his Judicial Office, he has authority to hold two several
Courts of distinct natures* The one called the Turn, because he keeps his
turn and circuit about the Shire, and holds the same Court in several
places, wherein he does enquire of all offenses perpetrated against the common
Law, and not forbidden by any Statute or Act of Parliament, and the
jurisdiction of this Court is derived from Justice distributive, and is for
criminal offenses, and it held twice every year.

The other is called the County Court, wherein he does determine all petie and
small causes civil under 40.5. arising within the said County, and thereof it
is called the County Court.

The jurisdiction of this Court is derived from Justice Commutative, and is
held every month: The Office of the Sheriff is annual, and in the Kings
gift, whereof he is to have a Patent.

Every Shire has an Officer called an Escheator, which is an Office to attend
the Kings Revenue, and to seize into his Majesty's hands all lands, either
escheated goods, or lands forfeited, and therefore is called Escheator; And he
is to enquire by good enquest of the death of the Kings Tenants, and to whom
their lands are descended, and to seize their bodies and lands for Ward, if
they be within age, and is accomptable for the same; and this Officer is named
by the Lord Treasurer of England.

(...) H. 8.20.
There are in every Shire two other Officers called Crowners or Coroners: they
are to enquire by inquest in what manner, and by whom every person dies of a
violent death, and to enter the same of Record; which is matter criminal, and
a plea of the Crown, and therefore they are called Corones, or Crowners, as
one has written, because their enquiry ought to be public in Corona populi.

These Officers are chosen by the freeholders of the Shire, by virtue of a writ
out of the Chancery, De Coronatore elegendo: and of them I need not to speak
more, because these Officers are in use elsewhere.

Forasmuch as every Shire is divided into Hundreds, it is also by the said
Statute of 34. H. 8. cap. 26. ordered that two sufficient Gentlemen or Yeomen
shall be appointed Constables of every Hundred. Constables of the Hundred.


Also there is in every Shire one Jail or Prison appointed for the restraint
of liberty of such persons as for their offenses are thereunto committed,
Gaolers Office.
until they shall be delivered by course of law.

In every Hundred of every Shire the Sheriff thereof shall nominate sufficient
persons to be Bailiffes of that Hundred, and Underministers of the Sheriff;
and they are to attend upon the Justices in every of their Courts and Sessions.

FINIS.

