The Right Honble Sr Francis Bacon Baron of Verulam Viscount of St Albans Ld
High Chancellor of England



BACONIANA. Or Certain Genuine REMAINS OF SR. Francis Bacon, Baron of VERULAM,
AND Viscount of St. ALBANS;

In Arguments Civil and Moral, Natural, Medical, Theological, and
Bibliographical; Now the First time faithfully Published.

An ACCOUNT of these Remains, and of all his Lordship's other Works, is given
by the Publisher, in a Discourse by way of INTRODUCTION.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

A TABLE OF THE Contents.
Baconiana Politico-moralia. Under this Head are Contained,
1. SIR Francis Bacon 's Charge against Frances Countess of Somerset, about
poisoning of Sir Tho. Overbury. p. 3. 2. His Charge against Robert, Earl of
Somerset, touching the same matter. p. 14. 3. His Letter to the University of
Cambridg, when he was sworn Privy-Counsellor. In Latin, p. 37. In English, p.
39. 4. His Letter to King James, touching the Chancellor's Place. p. 41. 5. His
Letter to King James, for the Relief of his Estate. p. 45. 6. His Remaining
Apothegms. p. 53. 7. A Supply of his Ornamenta Rationalia, or Judicious
Sentences. 1. Out of the Mimi of Publius, in Latin and English. p. 60. 2. Out
of his own Writings. p. 65.

Baconiana Physiologica, Containing
I. A Fragment of his Abecedarium Naturae, in Latin, p. 77. and English, p.
84. II. His Inquisition, touching the Compounding of Metals. p. 92. III. His
Articles of Questions, touching Minerals. 1. Concerning the Incorporation and
Union of Metals. p. 104. 2. Dr. Meveril's Answers to them. p. 110. 3.
Concerning the Separation of Metals and Minerals. p. 114. 4. Dr. Meverel's
Answers to them. p. 116. 5. Concerning the Variation of Metals and Minerals. p.
118. 6. Dr. Meverel's Answers. p. 123. 7. Concerning the Restitution of Metals.
p. 127. 8. Dr. Meverel's Answer. p. 128.
IV. The Lord Bacon's Inquisition, concerning the Versions, Transmutations,
Multiplications and Effections of Bodies. p. 129. V. His Speech about the
Recovery of Drowned Mineral Works. p. 131. VI. His Experiments about Weight in
Air and Water. p. 134. VII. His Experiments for Profit. p. 138. VIII. His
Experiments about the Commix^ure of Liquors, by Simple Composition only. p.
140. IX. A Catalogue of Bodies Attractive and not Attractive, with Observations
upon them, in Latin, p. 145. in English, p. 149.
Baconiana Medica. Under this Head are Contained,
1. His Paper about Prolongation of Life, called by him Grains of Youth. p.
155. 2. A Catalogue of Astringents, Openers, and Cordials, instrumental to long
Life. p. 161. 3. An Extract, by his Lordship, out of his Book of the
Prolongation of Life, for his own use. p. 167. 4. His Medical Receipts, against
the Stone, etc. p. 171.
Baconiana Theologica. Under this Head are Contained,
1. His Questions of the Lawfulness of a War, for the Propagation of Religion.
p. 179. 2. Two Prayers of his, one called the Students, the other the Writers
Prayer. p. 181, 182.
Baconiana Bibliographica. Under this Head are Contained,
I. Papers (written by Himself) relating to his Books. As 1. His Letter to the
Queen of Bohemia, to whom he sent his Book of a War with Spain. p. 187. 2. A
Letter of the Lord Bacon's to the University of Cambridg, upon his sending to
them his Book De Augm. Scient. in Latin, p. 189, in English, p. 190. 3. His
Letter to the same University, upon his sending to them his Novum Organum, in
Latin, p. 191. in Engl. p. 192. 4. His Letter to Trinity College in Cambridg,
upon his sending to them his Book of the Advancement of Learning, in Latin, p.
193. in English, p. 194. 5. His Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln, about his
Speeches, etc. p. 195. 6. His Letter to Father Fulgentio, about all his
Writings in English, p. 196. 7. To Marquess Fiat (about his Essays) in French,
p. 201. in English, p. 202. 8. Part of his last Testament concerning his
Writings. p. 203.
II. Papers (written by others) relating to his Books and Life. As 1. A Letter
to him from the University of Oxford (in Latin, p. 204. in English, p. 206.)
upon his having sent to them his Book De Augmentis Scientiarum. 2. A Letter
from Dr. Maynwaring to Dr. Rawley, about the Lord Bacon's Confession of Faith.
p. 209. 3. A Letter from Dr. Rawley to Mounsieur Aelius Deodate in Latin, p.
214. in English, p. 215. concerning his publishing the Lord Bacon's Works. 4.
Mounsieur Deodate's Answer, in Latin, p. 217. and English, p. 219. 5. Mr.
Isaac Gruter's Three Letters to Dr. Rawley (in Latin, p. 221, 231, 238. in
English, p. 225, 234, 240.) concerning the Lord Bacon's Works. 6. An Account of
the Life, and Writings of the Lord Bacon, by Sir W. Dugdale, together with
Insertions by the Publisher. p. 242. 7. A Character of the Lord Bacon, by Dr.
Heylin. p. 263. 8. A Character by Dr. Sprat. p. 264. 9. A Character of his
Philosophy, by Mr. Cowley. p. 267.

Liber cui Titulus (Baconiana, etc.)
IMPRIMATUR.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, Nov. 20. 1678. Geo. Thorp, Revmo. in C. P. and D. Dom.
Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

ERRATA.
In the Introduction.
PAge 6. Line 24. Read Sprang: P. 11. l. 12. r. Site. l. 28. for that, r. the.
P. 13. Margent, l. 2. for with, r. inter. P. 15. l. 26. for to, r. and. P. 16
l. 9. for to, r. for. P. 24. l. 18. r. ^nlarged. l. 25. for were, r. wear. P.
27. l. 23. for his, r. this. P. 40. l. 9. for precious, r considerable. P. 43.
l. 29. r. compare them. P. 57. l. 13. for of, r. the. P. 59. l. 16. for Edward
3d. r. Edit. 3d. P. 60. l. 8. put a period after published. P. 62. l. 19. r.
Methodical. P. 71. l. 24. r. though they.

In the Book.
P. 20. l. 11. blot out but. P. 33. l. 4. for in, r. is. P. 37. l. 23. r.
relictum. P. 61. l. 21. blot out even. P. 79. l. 24. blot out Add. P. 83. l.
12. r. vell^cationes. P. 85. l. 21. for Impossibility, r. in Possibility. P.
89. l. 20. for interspect, r. intersperse. P. 95. l. 19. r. it will. P. 119. l.
2. r. Arborescents. P. 125. l. 18. r. fittest. P. 132. l. 26, 27. for the whole
Intellects, r. your noble Intellects. P. 135. l. 29. r. differ. P. 139. l. 11.
r. rawns. P. 146. l. 7. for hewed, r. ^eaved. P. 148. l. 10. r. ipsam. P. 149.
l. 10. for Sheaves, r. Shivers. P. 16. 2 l. 9. r. mullein. P. 165. l. 13. r.
Cupparus. P. 167. l. 2. r. Pulls. P. 168. l 28. for with juice, r. which I use.
P. 189. l. 16. r. legitime. P. 192. l. 15. r. it is. P. 199. l. 19, 20. r.
prodromi. P. ^01. l. 4. for file, r. filz. l. 9. for non, r. mon. l. 23. for
ex, r. et. P. 208. l. 9. blot out etc. P. 215. l. 3. r. generosissime Domine.
l. 4. r. addictissimus. P. 218. l. 2. r. contriverim. P. 222. l. 23. for tum,
r. Tu. P. 232. l. 23. r. vertit. P. 237. l. 4. r. would. P. 239. l. 4. r.
^nerat. l. 12. r. consecrari. l. 14. r. segnescens. P. 249. l. 29, 30. for
carried, r. varied. P. 250. l. 5. r. you to call. P. 253. l. 19. r. Courts. P.
254. Margent l. 1. for R. this, r. L. this. P. 257. Margent l. 1. for ^Twas, r.
they were. P. 259. l. 8, 9. after Nature, put a Semicolon; after parted, a
Colon.

A DISCOURSE, BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION,

In which the Publisher endeavors an Account of the PHILOSOPHY, MECHANIC
INVENTIONS, and WRITINGS, of Sir FRANCIS BACON, Baron of Verulam, and Viscount
of St. Albans; And particularly of these REMAINS now set forth by him under the
Title of BACONIANA.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1679.

AN ACCOUNT Of all the Lord BACON'S WORKS.
IT is my purpose to give a true and plain Account, of the Designs and Labors
of a very great Philosopher amongst us; and to offer to the World, in some
tolerable Method, those Remains of his, which to that end, were put into my
Hands.

Something of this has been done already by his Lordship himself; and
something further has been added by the Reverend Dr. Rawley: But their Remarks
lay scattered in diverse Places; and here they are put under one View, and have
received very ample Enlargements.

In this last and most comprehensive Account, I have, on purpose, used a loose
and Asiatic Style, and wilfully committed that venial fault with which the
Laconian (in Boccalini) is merrily taxed, who had said that in three words,
which he might possibly have expressed in two. I hoped, by this means, to serve
the more effectually, ordinary Readers, who stand chiefly in need of this
Introduction; and whose Capacities can be no more reached by a close and strict
Discourse, than Game can be taken by a Net unspread.

For any praise upon the account of this small Performance, it is not worth the
while to be solicitous about it. Yet sometimes, mean Men get a stock of
Reputation, by gathering up the Fragments of the Learned; as Beggars (they say)
have gotten Estates by saving together the Alms of the Rich. If that falls not
out here where it is not expected, it will be abundantly enough to me if the
Inferior Reader may have Benefit, and any Honor may be done to the Memory of
his Lordship, whose more General Encomium I shall first set down, and then
annex a particular Narrative of those Designs and Labors of his, which may be
said, not only to merit, buteven to exceed all my Commendations.

I begin (as I said) with his Lordship's Praise, in a more general way. And
here I affirm, with good assurance (for Truth is bold) that amongst those few,
who by the strength of their private Reason, have resisted popular Errors, and
avanced real and useful Learning; there has not arisen a more Eminent Person,
than the Lord High Chancellor Bacon. Such great Wits, are not the common Births
of Time: And they, surely, intended to signify so much who said of the Phoenix
(though in Hyperbole as well as Metaphor) that Nature gives the World that
Individual Species, but once in five hundred Years.

It is true, There lived in part of the last, and this, Century, many memorable
Advancers of Philosophical Knowledge. I mean not here such as Patricius, or
Telesius, Brunus, Severinus the Dane, or Campanella. These, indeed, departed
from some Errors of the Ancients, but they did not frame any solid Hypothesis
of their own. They only spun new Cobwebs, where they had brushed down the old.
Nay, I intend not, in this place, either de Chart, or Gassendi, They were,
certainly, great Men, but they appeared somewhat later, and descended into the
depths of Philosophy, after the Ice had been broken by others. And those I take
to have been chiefly Copernicus, Father Paul the Venetian, Galileo, Harvey,
Gilbert, and the Philosopher before-remembred, Sir Francis Bacon, who, if all
his Circumstances be duly weighed, may seem to excel them all. He was by
Profession, a common Lawyer; by Office, in the Queen's time, one of the Clerks
of the Council; in the Reign of King James, one of the King's Counsel Learned,
then Solicitor General, and one of the Judges in the Knight-Marshals Court;
then Attorney General, and one of the King's Privy Council; then Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, and during the Kings absence in Scotland, Lord Protector: And
last of all, Lord High Chancellor of England. So that in such a Life as his, so
thickly set with Business of such Height, it is a Miracle that all Seeds of
Philosophy were not daily overdropped, and in a short time, quite choked; and
that any one of them sprung up to Maturity. And yet his prosper'd beyond those
of the Philosophers beforementioned, though they were not pressed on with such
a crowd of secular Business.

For Copernicus, he concerned himself especially in the Revolutions of the
Heavenly Bodies, in reviving and perfecting the obsolete Doctrine of Philolaus,
touching the motion of the Earth, and in setting free the Planets from those
many Epicycles, Eccentrics, and Concentries, in which Ptolomy, and others had
entrangled them. And he well understood the Course of the Stars, though he did
not much study that natural motive Power which carries them about in their
several Elliptics. The like Remark may be made concerning Mr. Gilbert, who
applied himself particularly to the consideration of Magnetic Powers; as also
concerning Dr. Harvey, who inquired principally into the Generation of Animals,
and the motion of the Heart: Subjects in which he made great progress, though
into the former, the help of Microscopes, would have given him further insight
See Dr. Highmore, of Generation, P. 70, 71.
; and in both, he rather pursued the proofs of his Hypotheses, than the nature
of the Mechanic force, which produced those great Effects.

Father Paul, was a more general Philosopher, and the Head of a Meeting of
Vertuosi in Venice. He excelled in Mechanics, in Mathematics of all kinds, in
Philological Learning, in Anatomy. In his Anatomical Studies, he exercised such
Sagacity, that he made further discoveries in the fabric of the Eye, and
taught Aqua-pendente, those new Speculations which he published on that
Subject; he found out (says Fulgentio) the Valvulae in the Veins, and began
the Doctrine of the Circulation of the Blood: Though there is reason to
believe, that he received the hints of it from Sir Henry Wotton, who himself
had taken them from Dr. Harvey Carts diss. de Methodo. P. 46. Herveo laus ^aec
tribuenda est quo d primam in ista materi^ glac^em f^egerit, etc.
. But, the present state of the Affairs of Venice so requiring, Father Paul
bent his Studies to Ecclesiastical Polity, and chiefly employed his Pen in
detecting the Usurpations and Corruptions of the Papacy: Endeavoring (so far
as Books could do it) to preserve the Neck of that Republic, from the Bondage
of Paul the Fifth, who attempted to set his Foot upon it.

Galileo further improved the Doctrine of Copernicus; discovered by Telescopes,
new Stars in the Heavens; wrote Dialogues concerning the System of the World,
and touching Local Motion; which latter is the Key that opens Nature. But he
descended not to the several Classes of Bodies in Nature, and the particulars
contained in them, and their respective Motions, and Uses. Neither did he
publish any thing till many Years had passed, since Mr. Bacon had formed and
modelled in his thoughts, his larger Idea of Experimental Knowledge. His
Sidereus Nuncius, came not forth till toward the midst of the Reign of King
James. And King Charles had sat some Years on his Throne, er'e he published
his Dialogue of the System of the World. Whereas Mr. Bacon had not only
published two Books of his Advancement, in the beginning of K. James's Reign,
but early in the Queen's time, (as from his Letter to Fulgentio, plainly
appears) he had written his Temporis Partus Maximus. That Book (pompous in
its Title, but solid in its Matter; like a great Feather put sometimes on a
good Head piece) contained in it, though in imperfect manner, and so far as the
greenness of his Years permitted, the principal Rudiments of his Instauration.
The work therefore of the Instauration, was an Original; and a Work so vast and
comprehensive in its design, that though others in that Age, might hew out
this, or the other Pillar; yet of him alone it seems true, that he framed the
whole Model of the House of Wisdom.

In those days in which he began his Studies, Aristotle was, in effect, the
Pope in Philosophy. The Lectures, both in his private College, and in the
public Schools, were generally Expositions upon Aristotle's Text. And every
Opinion, wrote by him as his own, was esteemed as Authentic, as if it had been
given under the Seal of the Fisher. It was, therefore, a very singular Felicity
in a young Gentleman to see further into Nature, than that celebrated
Philosopher, at whose feet he was placed. And it was as happy as it was
extraordinary, that he took distaste betimes at the Vulgar Physics. Use and
Custom in that way, might have reconciled it to him, as it had done to others
of great Learning. For a Philosopher is like a Vine, of which they say, It must
be set of a Plant, and not of a Tree.

But, though there was bred in Mr. Bacon so early a dislike of the Physiologie
of Aristotle, yet he did not despise him with that Pride and Haughtiness, with
which Youth is wont to be puffed up. He had a just esteem of that great Master
in Learning De Augm. Scient. l. 3. c. 4. Caeterum, de viro tam Eximio certe,
and, ob acumen Ingenii, mirabili, Aristotele, etc*
, and greater than that which Aristotle himself expressed toward the
Philosophers that went before him. For he endeavored (some say) to stifle all
their Labors; designing to himself an universal Monarchy over Opinions, as his
Patron Alexander did over Men. Our Hero owned what was excellent in him; but,
in his Inquiries into Nature, he proceeded not upon his Principles. He began
the Work anew, and laid the foundation of Philosophic Theory in numerous
Experiments.

By this Theory is not (as I conceive) so much to be understood, that most
abstracted, and more narrow one, of the mere nature and definition of Matter,
Motion, Place, Figure, Sight, Quantity, and the like, which a Man's Reason may
find out, by a few common and daily Appearances in Nature, or Operations of
Art: But we are to understand by it, a truer and fuller Knowledge, of the
Systeme of the World, of the several Actions and Passions of Bodies in it, and
of the diverse Ways whereby, in themselves, or by the application of Art to
them, they may be made serviceable to Humane Life.

Now this was a Work for a Man of a thousand Hands, and as many Eyes, and
depended upon a distinct, and comprehensive, History of Nature. It was a way
laborious and tedious, yet useful and honorable, and in this, like that way of
the Snail, which shines though it is slow.

Such an useful and noble Philosophy did our Author design, instead of the Art
of Disputation, which then generally prevailed, and which he compared to the
condition of Children who are apt for Talk, but not for Generation. And
certainly, that Character was most due unto himself which he gave to
Xenophanes, of whom he said, that he was a Man of a vast Conceit, and that
minded nothing but Infinitum Hist. of Life and Death. p. 15.
.

Easy it is to add to things already invented; but to Invent, and to do it
under Discouragement, when the World is prejudiced against the Invention, and
with loud Clamor hooteth at the Projector; this is not an Undertaking for
Dullness, or Cowardice. To do this, argues an Inquisitive and Sagacious Wit; A
mind free from slavish prepossession; a piercing Judgment, able to see through
the mists of Authority; a great Power in the Understanding, giving to a Man
sufficient Courage to bear up the Head against the common Current of
Philosophical Doctrines, and Force to beat out its own way in untravelled
Places.

With such Intellectual Ability, was the Lord Verulam endowed: And he stood on
the old Paths, and perceived, the unsoundness of their Bottom; their intricate
Windings; their tendency to an useless End, or rather to endless Disputation;
and the daily Justlings and Rencounters of those who travailed in them: And he
looked attentively round about him, and he espied a new, and better, and
larger, and safer way; and he journey'd far in it himself; and he left a Map of
it for Posterity, who might further pursue it; and he has been happy in being
followed, by Men of the ablest Understandings, with singular success; and the
Societies for improving of Natural Knowledge, do not at this day, depart from
his Directions, though they travel further than Death would suffer him to
adventure.

I can, at present, call to remembrance but one Man, who has undervalued his
Lordship's Method; and it is the same Man who has libelled the Holy Scriptures
themselves; the Infidel Spinoza B. D. Spinoza in Ep. 2. ad H. Oldenburg. with
op. Posth. p. 398, 399.
. This Man objecteth against his Way, that it fails in the very entrance of
it, through a mistake about the Original of Error.

His Lordship's Opinion is the same with that which de Chart insisteth on, in
his latter Philosophy. Both show that therefore Man deceives himself, because
his Will (being larger in its desires, than the Understanding is in its
Comprehensions; and hastening its opinion of such Objects as it covets to know,
before it has sufficiently attended to them, and obtained a clear and distinct
perception of them) does cause it to yield a blind and rash, and therefore
groundless Assent to insufficient Evidence.

His Lordship has expressed it thus, after his better way of saying things.
The Understanding Nov. Organ. l. 1. Aph. 49. p. 44, 45.
is not only made up of dry Light, but it receives an infusion from the Will
and Affections: And that begets such Sciences as the Heart desires. For a Man
soonest believes that which he would have to be true. Wherefore he rejects
difficult Truths, through impatience in inquiring; and sober Truths, because
they restrain his hope [or desire;] and the deeper Natural Truths, by reason of
Superstition; and the Light of Experiments, by reason of Arrogance and Pride,
lest the Mind should seem to be conversant in mean and transitory Things; and
Paradoxes, out of respect to the opinion of the Vulgar. In sum, the Will
seasons and infects the Mind, by innumerable Ways, and by such as are,
sometimes, not at all perceived.

Now, how, think you, does Spinoza show this opinion, to be a gross and
fundamental Mistake? Why, by denying that there is any such thing in Man as a
Will: (as if that general name was ever used to signify a particular Act, and
not rather to express the general notion of that Power:) By telling us that all
Volitions are particular Acts, and as fatally determined by a Chain of Physical
Causes, as any effects whatsoever of Natural Bodies. So that we are like to
learn well, from his Philosophy, how to amend our Erroneous Assent, whilst it
teaches us that it is necessary, and not to be mended, unless Men could have
other Bodies, and there were another Scheme of Nature.

It must be confessed, that the Lord I write of, was not without Infirmities,
Intellectual or Moral: And the latter of these have made the greater Noise from
the greatness of his Fall. I do not, here, pretend to speak of an Angel, but of
a Man: And no Man, great in Wit, and high in Office, can live free from
suspicion of both kinds of Errors. For that Heat which is instrumental in
making a great Wit, is apt to disorder the attention of the Mind, and the
stability of the Temper. And High Place, because it gives power to
Opportunity, though no Athority to offend, is ever looked on with a jealous
Eye: And corrupt Men who mete by their own Measures, think no Man can be Great,
and Innocent too.

His Lordship owned it under his Hand, In his Letter to King James, March 25.
1620. In the Cab.
that, He was frail, and did partake of the Abuses of the Times: And, surely,
he was a partaker of their Severities also; though they proved, by accident,
happy Crosses and Misfortunes. Methinks they are resembled by those of Sir
George Summers, who being bound, by his Employment, to another Coast, was by
Tempest, cast upon the Barmudas. And there, a Shipwrack'd Man made full
discovery of a new temperate fruitful Region, which none had before inhabited;
and which Mariners, who had only seen its Rocks, had esteemed an inaccessible
and enchanted Place. The great cause of his Suffering, is to some, a secret. I
leave them to find it out, by his words to King James See Mr. Bushels Extract.
p. 19.
, I wish (said he) that as I am the first, so I may be the last of Sacrifices
in your Times. And when from private Appetite, it is resolved, that a Creature
shall be sacrificed; it is easy to pick up sticks enough, from any Thicket
whither it has straid, to make a Fire to offer it with.

But whatsoever his Errors were, or the causes of his Misfortunes, they are
overballanc'd by his Virtues, and will die with Time. His Errors were but as
some Excrescencies, which grow on those Trees that are fit to build the Palaces
of Kings: For though they are not proper and natural Parts, yet they do not
very much deprive the Body of its use and value. And, further, (to express my
self by a more decent Image, a Comparison of his own;) His Fall will be to
Posterity, but as a little Picture of Night-work, remaining amongst the Fair
and Excellent Tables of his Acts and Works Epist* to Bishop Andrew^
.

These I distinguish, into two kinds,

His Mechanical Inventions, and his Writings.

I doubt not but his Mechanical Inventions were many. But I can call to mind
but Three, at this time, and of them I can give but a very broken Account: And,
for his Instruments and Ways in recovering deserted Mines, I can give no
account at all; though certainly, without new Tools and peculiar Inventions, he
would never have undertaken that new and hazardous Work. Of the three
Inventions which come now to my Memory, the

First was an Engine representing the motion of the Planets. Of this I can say
no more than what I find, in his own words, in one of his Miscellany Papers in
Manuscript. The words are these: I did, once, cause to be represented to me, by
Wires, the motion of some Planets, in fact as it is, without Theories of Orbs,
etc. And it seemed a strange and extravagant Motion. One while, they moved in
Spires forwards; another while they did unwind themselves in Spires backwards:
One while they made larger Circles, and higher; another while smaller Circles,
and lower: One while they moved to the North, in their Spires, another while to
the South, etc.

His Second Invention was a secret Curiosity of Nature, whereby to know the
Season of every Hour of the Year, by a Philosophical Glass, placed (with a
small proportion of Water) in a Chamber. This Invention I describe in the words
of him, from whom I had the notice of it, Mr. Thomas Bushel See his Extract. p.
17.
, one of his Lordships Menial Servants; a Man skilful in discovering and
opening of Mines, and famous for his curious Waterworks, in Oxfordshire, by
which he imitated Rain, Hail, the Rainbow, Thunder and Lightning.

This secret cannot be that Instrument which we call Vitrum Calendare, or the
Weather-Glass, the Lord Bacon in his Writings Hist. of life and death, p. 22.
, speaking of that as a thing in ordinary use, and commending, not Water In
Form^ Calid^. ^. 24. p. 176. Org.
but rectified Spirit of Wine, in the use of it. Nor (being an Instrument made
with Water) is it likely to have showed changes of the Air with so much
exactness, as the later Baroscope made with Mercury. And yet, it should seem to
be a secret of high value by the Reward, it is said to have procured. For the
Earl of Essex (as he in his Extract. page 17. reports) when Mr. Bacon had
made a Present of it to him, was pleased to be very bountiful in his Thanks,
and bestow upon his Twicknam-Park, and its Garden of Paradise, as a place for
his Studies. I confess, I have not Faith enough to believe the whole of this
Relation. And yet I believe the Earl of Essex was extremely Liberal, and free
even to Profuseness; that he was a great lover of Learned Men, being, in some
sort, one of them himself MS. Hist. of Q. Eli^. p. 39.
; and that with singular Patronage, he cherished the hopeful Parts of Mr.
Bacon, who also studied his Fortunes and Service. Yet Mr. Bacon himself, where
he professes his unwillingness to be short, in the commemoration of the
favors of that Earl; is, in this great one, perfectly silent Bacon's Apol.
conc. the Eaerl of Essex. p. 54, 55.
. But there is, in his Apology, another Story, which may seem to have given to
Mr. Bushel, the occasion of his Mistake. After the Queen had denied to Mr.
Bacon, the Solicitor's Place, for the which the Earl of Essex had been a long
and earnest suitor on his behalf, it pleased that Earl to come to him, from
Richmond, to Twicknam-Park; and thus to break with him: Mr. Bacon^ the Queen
has denied me the Place for you. -- you fare ill, because you have chosen me
for your Mean and Dependence: You have spent your thoughts and time in my
Matters; I die -- if I do not do somewhat toward your Fortune. You shall not
deny to accept a piece of Land which I will bestow upon you. And it was, it
seems, so large a piece, that he under-sold it for no less than Eighteen
Hundred Pounds.

His Third Invention was, a kind of Mechanical Index of the Mind. And of this,
Mr. Bushel In his Extract. p. 17, 18.
has given us the following Narrative and Description. His Lordship presented
to Prince Henry, Two Triangular Stones (as the First Fruits of his Philosophy)
to imitate the Sympathetical Motion of the Lodestone and Iron, although made
up by the Compounds of Meteors (as Star-shot Jelly) and other like Magical
Ingredients, with the reflected Beams of the Sun, on purpose that the warmth
distilled into them through the moist heat of the Hand, might discover the
affection of the Heart, by a visible sign of their Attraction and Appetite to
each other, like the hand of a Watch, within ten Minutes after they are laid on
a Marble Table, or the Theater of a great Looking-Glass. I write not this as a
feigned Story, but as a real Truth; for I was never quiet in my Mind, till I
had procured these Jewels of my Lord's Philosophy from Mr. Archy Primrose, the
Prince's Page.

Of this I find nothing, either in his Lordship's Experiments Not. Hist. Cent.
10. Exp. 939. etc. p. 205.
touching Emission, or Immateriate Virtues, from the Minds and Spirits of Men;
or, in those concerning the secret Virtue of Sympathy and Antipathy Ibid. Exp.
960. etc. p. 211.
Wherefore I forbear to speak further in an Argument about which I am so much
in the dark.

I proceed to subjects upon which I can speak with much more assurance, his
Inimitable Writings.

Now, of the Works of the Lord Bacon, many are extant, and some are lost, in
whole, or in part.

His Abecedarium Naturae, is in part lost, and there remains nothing of it
besides the Fragment, lately retrieved, and now first published. But this loss
is the less to be lamented, because it is made up with advantage, in the second
and better thoughts of the Author, in the two first Parts of his Instauration.
The World has sustained a much greater loss in his Historia Gravis and Levis,
which (I fear) is wholly perished. It is true, he had gone no further than the
general Delineation of this Work; but those Out-lines drawn by so great an
Artist, would have much directed others, in describing those important
Phenomena of Nature.

Also his Collection of Wise and Acute Sentences, entitled by him, Ornamenta
Rationalia; is either wholly lost; or, in some obscure place, committed to
Moths and Cobwebs. But this is, here in some sort supplied, partly out of his
own Works, and partly out of those of one of the Ancients.

Lost, likewise, is a Book which he wrote in his Youth, he called it [Temporis
Partus Maximus] See the E^ist. to Fulgen.
the Greatest Birth of Time: Or rather, Temporis Partus Masculus, the Masculine
Birth of Time. For so Gruter found it called in some of the Papers of Sir
William Boswel See the Page after the Title of Scripta Philosophica.
. This was a kind of Embrio of the Instauration: and if it had been preserved,
it might have delighted and profited Philosophical Readers, who could then have
seen the Generation of that great Work, as it were from the first Egg of it.

Of those Works of the Lord Bacon's which are Extant, some he left imperfect,
that he might pursue his Design in others; As the New Atlantis: Some he broke
off on purpose, being contented to have set others on-wards in their way; as
The Dialogue of a Holy War. In some he was prevented by Death; as in the
History of Henry the Eighth. Of some he despaired; as of the Philosophia Prima,
of which he left but some few Axioms. And lastly, some he perfected; as some
parts of the Great Instauration. And amongst all his Works, that of his
Instauration, deserves the first place. He thought so himself, saying to Dr.
Andrews, then Lord Bishop of Winchester In Epist. Dedic. before his
Advertisement touching a holy War.
, This is the Work, which, in my own judgment, (Si nunquam fallit Imago) I do
most esteem.

In this Work, he designed to take in pieces the former Model of Sciences; to
lay aside the rotten Materials; to give it a new Form, and much Enlargement;
and to found it, not upon Imagination, but Reason helped by Experience. This
Great Instauration, was to consist of Six Parts.

The First Part proposed was, the Partitions of the Sciences: And this the
Author perfected in that Golden Treatise of the Advancement of Learning,
addressed to King James, a Labor which he termed In his Letter to Sir T.
Bodley, p. 34. Resus.
the comfort of his other Labors. This he first wrote in two Books, in the
English Tongue, in which his Pen excelled. And of this First Edition that is to
be meant, which, with some Truth, and more Modesty, he wrote to the Earl of
Salisbury; telling him In a Letter in Resusc. p. 31.
, That, in his Book, he was contented to awake better Spirits, being himself
like a Bell-ringer, who is first up to call others to Church. Afterward he
enlarges the Second of those Two Discourses, which contained especially the
abovesaid Partition, and divided the Matter of it into Eight Books. And,
knowing that this Work was desired beyond the Seas, and being also aware, that
Books written in a modern Language, which receives much change in a few Years,
were out of use; he caused that part of it which he had written in English, to
be translated into the Latin Tongue, by Mr. Herbert, and some others, who were
esteemed Masters in the Roman Eloquence. Notwithstanding which, he so suited the
Style to his Conceptions, by a strict Castigation of the whole Work, that it
may deservedly seem his own. The Translation of this Work (that is, of much of
the Two Books written by him in English) he first commended to Dr. Playfer, a
Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridg; using, amongst others,
these words to him. The Collect. of Letters in Resusc. p. 33, 34.
privateness of the Language considered, wherein the Book is written, excluding
so many Readers; as, on the other side, the obscurity of the Argument, in many
parts of it, excludes many others; I must account it, a second Birth of that
Work, if it might be translated into Latin, without manifest loss of the
Sense, and Matter. For this purpose I could not represent to my self any Man,
into whose hands I do more earnestly desire that Work should fall, than your
Self: For, by that I have heard, and read, I know no Man a greater Master, in
commanding Words to serve Matter.

The Doctor was willing to serve so Excellent a Person, and so worthy a Design;
and, within a while, sent him a Specimen of a Latin Translation. But Men,
generally, come short of themselves when they strive to out-doe themselves.
They put a force upon their Natural Genius, and, by straining of it, crack and
disable it. And so, it seems, it happened to that Worthy and Elegant Man. Upon
this great Occasion, he would be over-accurate; and he sent a Specimen of such
superfine Latinity, that the Lord Bacon did not encourage him to labor further
in that Work, in the penning of which, he desired not so much neat and polite,
as clear Masculine, and apt Expression.

The whole of this Book was rendered into English by Dr. Gilbert Wats, of
Oxford; and the Translation has been well received by many. But some there
were, who wished that a Translation had been set forth, in which the Genius and
Spirit of the Lord Bacon had more appeared. And I have seen a Letter, written
by certain Gentlemen to Dr. Rawley, wherein they thus importune him for a more
accurate Version, by his own Hand. It is our humble suit to you, and we do
earnestly solicit you, -- to give your self the Trouble, to correct the too
much defective Translation of de Augmentis Scientiarum, which Dr. Watts has
set forth. It is a thousand pities, that so worthy a Piece should lose its
Grace and Credit by an ill Expositor; since those Persons, who read that
Translation, taking it for Genuine, and upon that presumption not regarding the
Latin Edition, are thereby robbed of that benefit which (if you would please
to undertake the Business) they might receive. This tends to the dishonor of
that Noble Lord, and the hindrance of the Advancement of Learning.

This Work has been also translated into French upon the motion of the Marquis
Fiat. But in it there are many things wholly omitted, many things perfectly
mistaken, and some things (especially such as relate to Religion) wilfully
perverted. Insomuch that, in in one place, he makes his Lordship to magnify
the Legend: A Book, sure of little Credit with him, when he thus began one of
his Essays Essay of Atheism.
; I had rather believe all the Fables in the Legend, and the Talmud, and the
Alcoran, than that this Universal Frame is without a Mind.

The fairest, and most correct Edition of this Book in Latin, is that in
Folio, printed at London, Anno 1623. And whosoever would understand the Lord
Bacon's Cipher In l. 6. c. 1.
, let him consult that accurate Edition. For, in some other Editions which I
have perused, the form of the Letters of the Alphabet, in which much of the
Mystery consists, is not observed: But the Roman and Italic shapes of them
are confounded.

To this Book we may reduce the first four Chapters of that imperfect Treatise,
published in Latin by Isaac Gruter Inter Scripta Philos. fol. 75.
, and called The Description of the Intellectual Globe; they being but a rude
draught of the Partition of the Sciences, so accurately and methodically
disposed, in this Book of the Advancement of Learning. To this Work, also, we
may reduce, the Treatise called Thema Coeli, published likewise in Latin, by
Gruter. And it particularly belongs to the Fourth Chapter, and the Third Book
of it; as being a Discourse tending to an improvement of the System of the
Heavens, which is treated of in that place, the Houses of which (had God
granted him life) he would have understood as well almost as he did his own.
For the same Reason, we may reduce, to the same place of the Advancement, the
Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Chapters, of the Descriptio Globi Intellectualis,
above remembered See Verulam's Scripta Philos. p. 90, etc.
.

The Second Part of his Great Instauration (and so considerable a part of it,
that the Name of the whole is given to it) is his Novum Organum Scientiarum,
written by himself in the Latin Tongue, and printed also most beautifully and
correctly in Folio, at London 1620. and in 2d^ part Res. part of this Orga. is
publ. in an Engl. Version.
. This Work he Dedicated to King James, with the following Excuse; That, if he
had stolen any time, for the Composure of it, from his Majesty's other
Affairs, he had made some sort of Restitution, by doing Honor to his Name and
his Reign. The King wrote to him, then Chancellor, a Letter of thanks, with his
own Hand Dated October. 16. 1620. See Collect. of Letters in Resusc. p. 83.
; and this was the first part of it. My Lord, I have received your Letter, and
your Book, than the which you could not have sent, a more acceptable Present,
to me. How thankful I am for it, cannot better be expressed by me, than by a
firm Resolution I have taken; First, to read it through with Care and
Attention; though I should steal some Hours from my Sleep; having, otherwise,
as little spare Time to read it, as you had to write it: And then to use the
liberty of a true Friend, in not sparing to ask you the question in any Point,
whereof I stand in doubt, (Nam ejus est explicare, cujus est condere;) as, on
the other part, I will willingly give a due commendation to such Places, as in
my Opinion, shall deserve it. In the mean time, I can with comfort, assure you,
that you could not have made choice of a Subject, more befitting your Place,
and your Universal, and Methodical Knowledge. --

Three Copies of this Organum, were sent by the Lord Bacon to Sir Henry Wotton,
one who took a pride (as himself says) in a certain Congeniality with his
Lordship's Studies. And how very much he valued the Present, we may learn from
his own words. You Lordship (said he Sir H. Wotton' s Remains, p. 298, 299.
) has done a great and ever-living Benefit to all the Children of Nature, and
to Nature her self in her uttermost extent of Latitude: Who, never before, had
so noble, nor so true an Interpreter, or (as I am readier to style your
Lordship) never so inward a Secretary of her Cabinet. But of your Work (which
came but this Week to my hands) I shall find occasion to speak more hereafter;
having yet read only the First Book thereof, and a few Aphorisms of the Second.
For it is not a Banquet that Men may superficially taste, and put up the rest
in their Pockets; but, in truth, a solid Feast, which requires due
Mastication. Therefore, when I have once, my self, perused the whole, I
determine to have it read, piece by piece, at certain Hours, in my Domestic
College, as an Ancient Author: For I have learned thus much by it already, that
we are extremely mistaken in the Computation of Antiquity, by searching it
backwards; because, indeed, the first Times were the youngest; especially in
points of Natural Discovery and Experience. --

This Novum Organum contains in it, Instructions concerning a better and more
perfect use of Reason in our Inquisitions after things. And therefore the
Second Title which he gave it was, Directions concerning Interpretations of
Nature. And, by this Art, he designed a Logic more useful than the Vulgar, and
an Organon apter to help the Intellectual Powers, than that of Aristotle. For
he proposed here, not so much the Invention of Arguments, as of Arts; and in
Demonstration, he used Induction, more than Contentious Syllogism; and in his
Induction, he did not straightway proceed from a few particular Sensible
Notions, to the most general of all; but raised Axioms by degrees, designing
the most general Notions for the last place; and insisting on such of them as
are, not merely Notional, but, coming from Nature, do also lead to her.

This Book contains Three Parts, The Preface; the Distribution of the Work of
the Great Instauration; Aphorisms, guiding to the Interpretation of Nature.

The Preface considers the present unhappy state of Learning, together with
Counsels and Advices to advance and improve it. To this Preface therefore, are
to be reduced the Indicia, and the Proem in Gruter Script. p. 285. and 479.
, concerning the Interpretation of Nature; the First Book de Augmentis
Scientiarum, which treats generally of their Dignity and Advancement; and his
Lordship' s Cogitata and Visa Pub. by Gruter among the Scripta.
, written by him, in Latin, without Intention of making them public in that
Form, and sent to Dr. Andrews Ann^ 1607. see Resusc. p. 35.
, as likewise to Sir Thomas Bodily, with a desire to receive their Censures and
Emendations. The latter returned him a free and friendly Judgment of this Work,
in a large and learned Letter, published in the Cabala, in the English Tongue,
and by Gruter in the Latin Inter Scripta Philos. p. 62.
. The like, perhaps, was done by the former, though his Answer be not extant.

To the Distribution, belongs that Latin Fragment in Gruter Inter Scripta.
p. 293.
, called, The Delineation, and Argument, of the Second Part of the
Instauration. So does that Page 208.
of the Philosophy of Parmenides and Telesius, and (especially) Democritus. For
(as he shows in the beginning of that Part) he designed first to consider the
Learning of which the World was possessed; and then to perfect that; and that
being done, to open new Ways to further Discoveries.

To the Aphorisms is reducible, his Letter to Sir Henry Savil, touching Helps
for the Intellectual Powers, written by his Lordship in the English Reusc. p
225, and^
Tongue. A part of Knowledge then scarce broken (...)^ late, S^^noza on that
Subject.
, Men believing that Nature was here rather to be followed than guided by Art;
and as necessary (in his Lordship's Opinion) as the grinding and whetting of an
Instrument, or the quenching it, and giving it a stronger Temper.

Also there belong to this place, the Fragment, called Aphorismi and Consilia,
de Auxiliis mentis. And Sententiae Duodecim de Interpretatione Naturae; both
published by Gruter in the Latin Tongue, in which his Lordship wrote them See
Script. p. 448, 451.
.

In the bringing this Labor to Maturity, he used great and deliberate Care;
insomuch that Dr. D. R* in Life of Lord Bacon.
Rawley says, he had seen Twelve Copies of it, revised Year by Year, one after
another; and every Year altered and amended in the Frame thereof, till at last
it came to the Model in which it was committed to the Press. It was like a
mighty Pyramid, long in its Erection; and it will, probably, be like to it in
its Continuance.

Now he received from many parts beyond the Seas, Testimonies touching this
Work, such, as beyond which he could not (he says, In Epi. to Bishop Andrews.
) expect at the first, in so abstruse an Argument; yet nevertheless (he says
again) he had just cause to doubt that it flew too high over Men's Heads: He
purposed therefore, (though he broke the order of Time) to draw it down to the
sense by some Patterns, of Natural Story and Inquisition.

And so he proceeded to

The Third Part of the Instauration, which he called the Phenomenon of the
Universe, or the History Natural and Experimental, subservient to the building
of a true Philosophy.

This Work consists of several Sections:

The First is his Parasceve, or Preparatory to the History Natural and
Experimental. It is a short Discourse written in Latin, by the Author, and
annexed to the Novum Organum Scientiarum. There is delivered in it, in Ten
Aphorisms, the general manner of framing a Natural History. After which
follows a Catalogue of particular Histories, of Celestial and Aereal Bodies,
and of those in the Terrestrial Globe, with the Species of them: Such as
Metals, Gems, Stones, Earths, Salts, Plants, Fishes, Fowls, Insects; Man, in
his Body, and in his Inventions mechanic and liberal.

A late Pen has traveled in the Translation of this little Description of
Natural History; and it is extant in the Second Part of the Resuscitation.

To this Parasceve, it is proper to reduce the Fragment of the Abecedarium
Naturae; and a short Discourse written in Latin by his Lordship, and published
by Gruter Se^. Ver. (...) Phil. p. 323.
: It being (what also its Title shows) a Preface to the Phenomenon of the
Universe; or, The Natural History.

Neither do we, here, unfitly place the Fable of the New Atlantis: For it is
the Model of a College to be Instituted by some King who philosophizeth, for
the Interpreting of Nature, and the Improving of Arts. His Lordship did (it
seems) think of finishing this Fable, by adding to it a Frame of Laws, or a
kind of Vtopian Commonwealth; but he was diverted by his desire of Collecting
the Natural History which was first in his esteem. This Supplement has been
lately made by another Hand See R. H. contin. of N. Atlantis Octo. Lon. 1660.
: A great and hardy Adventure, to finish a Piece after the Lord Verulam's
Pencil. This Fable of the New Atlantis in the Latin Edition of it, and in the
Franckfort Collection, goes under the false and absurd Title of Novus Atlas:
As if his Lordship had alluded to a Person, or a Mountain, and not to a great
Island, which according to Plato, perished in the Ocean.

The Second Section is, the History of Winds, written in Latin by the Author,
and by R. G. Gentleman, turned into English. It was Dedicated to King Charles,
then Prince, as the First Fruits of his Lordship's Natural History; and as a
grain of Mustard Seed, which was, by degrees, to grow into a Tree of
Experimental Science. This was the Birth of the first of those Six Months, in
which he determined (God assisting him) to write Six several Histories of
Natural Things. To wit, of Dense and Rare Bodies, of Heavy and Light Bodies; of
Sympathy and Antipathy; of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; of Life and Death; and
(which he first perfected) that of Winds, which he calls the Wings by which Men
fly on the Sea, and the Beesoms of the Air and Earth. And he, rightly,
observes concerning those Postnati (for, as he says, they are not a part of
the Six Days Works, or Primary Creatures) that the Generation of them has not
been well understood, because Men have been Ignorant of the Nature and Power of
the Air, on which the Winds attend, as Aeolus on Juno.

The English Translation of this Book of Winds, is printed in the Second Part
of the Resuscitatio, as it is called, though improperly enough; for it is
rather a Collection of Books already Printed, than a Resuscitation of any
considerable Ones, which before slept in private Manuscript.

The Third Section is, the History of Density and Rarity, and of the Expansion
and Coition of Matter in Space. This Discourse was written by his Lordship in
Latin; and was published very imperfectly by Gruter, amongst other Treatises,
to which he gave the Title of Impetus Philosophici See Verulamii Scripta, p.
336, 337, etc.
; and very perfectly and correctly by Dr. Rawley, out of whose Hands none of
his Lordship's Works came lame and ill shapen into the World.

In this Argument, his Lordship allowing that nothing is subtracted, or added
to the total Sum of Matter, does yet grant, that in the same Space there may be
much more or less of Matter; and that (for Instance sake) there is ten times
more of Matter in one Tun of Water, than in one of Air. By which his Lordship
should seem to grant, what yet I do not find he does in any other place; either
that there is a Vacuum in Nature, or Penetration of parts in Bodies.

The Third Section is, the History of Gravity and Levity, which (as before was
said) was but designed; and remains not (that I can hear of) so much as in
the rude draught of its Designation. Only, there are published his Lordship's
Topics, or Articles of Inquisition, touching Gravity and Levity, in his Book of
Advancement De Augm. Scient. l. 5. ^. 3. p 386.
; and a brief Aditus to this History, annexed to the Historia Ventorum. In that
Aditus, or Entrance, he rejects the Appetite of heavy Bodies to the Center of
the Earth, as a Scholastic Fancy: He takes it for a certain Truth, That Body
does not suffer but from Body, or that there is any local motion which is not
solicited, either from the parts of the Body it self which is moved; or from
Bodies adjacent, either contiguously, or in the next Vicinity, or at least
within the Orb of their Activity: And lastly, he commends the Magnetic
Virtues introduced by Gilbert, whom yet in this he disalloweth, that he made
himself as 'twere a Magnet, and drew every thing to his Hypothesis.

The Fourth Section is, the History of Sympathy and Antipathy. Of this we have
only the Aditus annexed to that of Historia Gravis and Levis; and a few
Instances in his Sylva Sylvarum See Exper. 95, 96, 97. 462, 480, to 498.
. In this History he designed to avoid Magical Fancies, which raise the Mind,
in these things, to an undue height; and pretense of occultness of Quality,
which lays the Mind asleep, and preventeth further Inquiry into these useful
secrets of Nature.

The Fifth Section is, the History of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, the three
Principles of the common Chemists; of which three, he thought the first to be
no primordial Body, but a Compound of the two others, knit together by an acid
Spirit. The Aditus All these Aditus are transl. into Engl. by the Trans. of the
History of Winds.
to this is annexed to that of Historia Sympathiae and Antipathiae Rerum; but
the Treatise it self was (I think) never written.

The Sixth Section is, the History of Life and Death; written by his Lordship
in Latin; and first turned into English by an injudicious Translator; and
rendered much better a second time, by an abler Pen, made abler still by the
Advice and Assistance of Dr. Rawley.

This Work, though ranked last, amongst the Six Monthly Designations; yet was
set forth in the second Place: His Lordship (as he says) inverting the Order,
in respect of the prime use of this Argument, in which the least loss of time
was, by him, esteemed very precious. The Subject of this Book (which Sir Henry
Wotton Remains, p. 455.
calls, none of the least of his Lordship's Works) and the Argument of which,
some had before undertaken Pansa de propag. vita Octo. Lips. 1615.
; but to much less purpose is the first of those, which he put in his Catalogue
of the Magnalia Naturae. And doubless, his Lordship undertook both a great and
a most desirable Work, of making Art short, and Life easy and long. And it was
his Lordship's wish, that the nobler sort of Physicians might not employ their
times wholly in the sordidness of Cures, neither be honored for necessity
only; but become Coadjutors and Instruments of the Divine Omnipotence and
Clemence, in prolonging and renewing the Life of Man: And in helping Christians
who pant after the Land of Promise, so to journey through this World's
Wilderness, as to have their Shoes and Garments, (these of their frail Bodies)
little worn and impaired.

The Seventh and greatest Branch of the Third Part of the Instauration, is his
Sylva Sylvarum, or Natural History; which contains many Materials for the
building of Philosophy, as the Organum does Directions for the Work. It is an
History not only of Nature freely moving in her Course, (as in the production
of Meteors, Plants, Minerals); but also of Nature in constraint, and vexed and
tortured by Humane Art and Experiment. And it is not an History of such things
orderly ranged; but thrown into an Heap. For his Lordship, that he might not
discourage other Collectors, did not cast this Book into exact Method; for
which reason it has the less Ornament, but not much the less Use.

In this Book are contained Experiments of Light, and Experiments of Use (as
his Lordship was wont to distinguish); and amongst them some Extraordinary, and
others Common. He understood that what was Common in one Country, might be a
Rarity in another: For which Reason, Dr. Caius, when in Italy, thought it worth
his pains to make a large and Elegant Description of Our way of Brewing. His
Lordship also knew well, that an Experiment manifest to the Vulgar, was a good
ground for the Wise to build further upon. And himself rendered Common ones,
extraordinary by Admonitions, for further Trials and Improvements. Hence his
Lordship took occasion to say Not. Hist. Cent. 1. p. 25. Exper. 93.
, that his writing of Sylva Sylvarum, was (to speak properly) not a Natural
History, but a high kind of Natural Magic: Because it was not only a
description of Nature, but a breaking of Nature into great and strange Works.

This Book was written by his Lordship in the English Tongue, and translated by
an obscure Interpreter, into French, and out of that Translation, into Latin,
by James Gruter, in such ill manner, that they darkened his Lordship's Sense,
and debased his Expression. James Gruter was sensible of his Miscarriage, being
kindly advertised of it by Dr. Rawley: And he left behind him diverse
amendments, published by his Brother Isaac Gruter, in a second Edition Amstel.
1661. in 16^.
. Yet still so many Errors have escaped, that the Work requires a Third Hand.

Mounsieur Aelius Deodatus had once engaged an able Person in the translation
of this Book; one who could have done his Lordship right, and obliged such
Readers as understood not the English Original. He began, and went through the
Three first Centuries, and then desisted; being desired by him who set him on
work, to take his hand quite off from that Pen, with which he moved so slowly.
His Translation of the Third Century is now in my Hands; but that of the two
first, I believe is lost.

His Lordship thus began that Third Century in English. All Sounds (whatsoever)
move round; that is to say, on all sides; upwards, downwards, forwards, and
backwards. This appears in all Instances.

Sounds do not require to be conveyed to the sense in a right Line, as Visibles
do, but may be arched. Though it be true, they move strongest in a right Line;
which nevertheless is not caused by the rightness of the Line, but by the
shortness of the Distance; Linea rect a brevissima. And therefore we see, if a
Wall be between, and you speak on the one side, you hear it on the other; which
is not because the Sound passes through the Wall, but archeth over the Wall.

These words are thus turned, by James Gruter, in his last Edition; and
tollerably well: Especially if we compare with some other places in his
Translation.

Omnes soni, qualescunque sint, in circulum moventur; hoc est, in omnes parts,
sursum, deorsum, antrorsum, retrorsum; quod omnes docent instantiae.

Soni non requirunt ut recta linea ad sensum devehantur, quemadmodum visibilia,
sed potest esse arcuata; quamvis verum sit, quod fortissime per rectam lineam
moveant: Neque tamen id lineae debetur rectitudini, sed minori intervallo;
Linea enim recta est brevissima. Hinc, si quis ab altera interjecti Parietis
part vocem proferat, ab altera queat exaudiri; non quod vox Parietem
transeundo penetret, sed quod arcuata ultra parietem ascendat.

But the Translator, employed by Mounsieur Deodate, turned them after this
better manner.

Omnes in universum Soni in Orbem feruntur: In omnem videlicet partem; sursum,
deorsum, antrorsum, and retrorsum. Hoc in omnibus exemplis cernitur.

Soni non in recta tantum linea ad sensum deferri necesse habent, quemadmodum
visilia; sed and inflexa and arcuata devehi possunt: Quanquam in recta linea
fortissime moveantur. Vbi tamen non hoc imputandum Rectitudini Linae, sed
brevitati Intervalli. Recta enim linea eadem brevissima est. Itaque experimur,
muro interjecto vocem, ex adversa part muri exaudiri, quae ex altera ejus
part prolata fuerit. Auditur autem, non quod per murum penetret, sed quod eum
transcendat motu flexuoso.

The Judicious Reader may discern by this little, how much this latter
Translator excelled the former, in comprehending and expressing his Lordship's
Sense. And yet I cannot say, that throughout those Three Centuries in which he
has labored, he has every where truly hit his Conceit. His Lordship had a
very peculiar Vein with him; and I may resemble it to the singurity in the Face
of Cardan, who tells us, in his own Life, that he set to Painters of diverse
Countries, yet could never have the Air of it taken by them.

Whilst I am speaking of this Work of his Lordship's, of Natural History, there
comes to my mind a very Memorable Relation, reported by him who bare a part in
it, the Reverend Dr. Rawley. One day, his Lordship was dictating to that
Doctor, some of the Experiments in his Sylva. The same day, he had sent a
Friend to Court, to receive for him a final Answer, touching the effect of a
Grant which had been made him by King James. He had hitherto, only hope of it,
and hope deferred; and he was desirous to know the event of the Matter, and to
be freed, one way or other, from the suspense of his thoughts. His Friend
returning, told him plainly, that he must thenceforth, despair of that Grant,
how much soever his Fortunes needed it. Be it so, said his Lordship; and then
he dismissed his Friend very cheerfully, with thankful acknowledgments of his
Service. His Friend being gone, he came straightway to Dr. Rawley, and said
thus to him. Well Sir! Yon Business will not go on; let us go on with this, for
this is in our Power. And then he dictated to him afresh, for some Hours,
without the least hesitancie of Speech, or discernible interruption of Thought.

To this Work of Natural History, may be reduced his Lordship's Treatises, De
Sono and Auditu, De Metallis and Mineralibus, De Magnete, De Versionibus,
Transmutationibus, Multiplicationibus, and Effectionibus Corporum, De Luce and
Lumine The Paper De Luce and Lumine is also extant among the Scripta
Philosophica, p. 485.
. All published by Dr. Rawley, in the Collection called Opuscula Varia Posthuma
Francisci Bacom.

We may likewise reduce to the same place, the Paper De Fluxu and Refluxu
Maris, published by Isaac Gruter, amongst the Scripta Scripta Philosophica. p.
178. etc.
; and that other De Ratione Inveniendi causas Fluxus and Refluxus Maris; See
this (turned into English by R. G.) in Resusc. Part 2. p. 90. See it in Latin
at the end of the Tract. De Motu, annexed to the Histor. Ventor. p. 91.
as also the Baconiana Physiologica and Medica, in these Remains.

There may be further added, his Cogitationes, De Natura Rerum; De Sectione
Corporum; Continuo and Vacuo; and the Fragment called Filum Labyrinthi sive
Legitima Inquisitio de Motu: All published by the same Mr. Gruter, in the same
Book. Likewise the Treatises, De Motus sive Virtutis activae variis Speciebus,
and Historia Naturalis and Experimentalis de Forma Calidi; joined to the
Historia Ventorum Hist. Vent. p. 129, 191. see Resusc. 2d Part. p. 53.
, and inserted also into the Organum Nov. Organ. De Motu. p. 314. de Forma
Calidi. p. 158.
; and by R. G. made English.

For it was his Lordship's design Nov. Organ. in distrib. Op. P. 13.
, not merely to exhibit an History of Bodies, but moreover to procure a
distinct and comparative one, of their Virtues, such as those of Density and
Rarity; Consistency and Fluidity; Gravity and Levity; Heat and Cold.

Such a Collection of Natural History, was of necessity to be undertaken anew.
For the Collections, which were before in Men's Hands, were but a small and
inconsiderable heap, when the Chaff and Fable were sifted from them; though the
more considerable for that Separation. And further, as his Lordship notes De
Augment. Sc^en. l. z. c. 3. p. 135.
, too many of these Histories were at first framed rather for Delight, and
Table-talk, than for Philosophy. Stories were feigned for the sake of their
Morals; and they were frequently taken upon groundless Trust; and the later
Writers borrowed out of the more Ancient, and were not Experimenters, but
Transcribers: And such a one was Pliny himself, both in his larger and lesser
Work; I mean that of Solinus, who is but Pliny contracted.

There are who have accused the Lord Bacon himself, for taking Experiments too
readily upon Trust, and without deliberate and discreet Choice. To such I will
return Answer in his own words. The Rejection Not. Hist. Cent. 1. p. 6. Exper.
25.
which I continually use; of Experiments (though it appears not) is infinite;
but yet, if an Experiment be probable in the Work, and of great use I receive
it, but deliver it as doubtful.

The Fourth Part of the Instauration designed, was Scala Intellectu s.

To this there is some sort of entrance in his Lordship's distribution of the
Novum Organum, and in a Page or two under that Title of Scala, published by
Gruter See Scripta, p. 379.
: But the Work it self passed not beyond the Model of it in the Head of the
Noble Author.

That which he intended, was a particular Explication, and Application of the
Second Part of the Instauration, (which gives general Rules for the
Interpretation of Nature) by gradual Instances and Examples.

He thought that his Rules, without some more sensible Explication, were like
Discourses in Geometry, or Mechanics, without Figures, and Types of Engines. He
therefore designed to select certain Subjects in Nature, or Art; and as it
were, to draw to the Sense a certain Scheme of the beginning and progress of
Philosophical Disquisition in them; showing by degrees, where our consideration
takes Root, and how it spreads and advances. And some such thing is done by
those who, from the Cicatricula, or from the Punctum Saliens, observe and
register all the Phenomenon of the Animal unto its Death, and after it also in
the Medical, or Culinarie, or other use of its Body; together with all the
train of the Thoughts occasioned by those Phenomenon, or by others in compare
with them.

And because he intended to exhibit such Observations, as they gradually arise;
therefore he gave to that Designed Work, the Title of the Scale, or Ladder of
the Understanding. He also expressed the same Conceit by another Metaphor See
Scriptae, p. 384.
, advising Students to imitate Men, who by going by degrees from several
Eminencies of some very high Mountain, do at length arrive at the Top, or Pike
of it.

The Fifth Part of the Instauration, designed, was, what he called Prodromi
sive Anticipationes Philosophiae Secundae. To this we find a very brief
Entrance, in the Organum In Distrib. Op. p. 17.
, and the Scripta, published by Gruter Virul. scrip. p. 385. Prodromi, etc.
. And though his Lordship is not known to have composed any part of this Work
by it self, yet something of it is to be Collected from the Axioms, and greater
Observations interspersed in his Natural Histories, which are not pure but
mixed Writings. The Anticipations he intended to pay down as Use, till he might
furnish the World wit the Principal, in

The Sixth and last Part of his Instauration, designed, which was, Philosophia
Secunda sive Scientia Activa. This General Philosophy, founded upon Sensible
Nature, or Artificial Experiments, and built up by degrees in Observations and
Axioms, he at length despaired of, and commended to Posterity. Time only can
thoroughly finish what his Lordship began, and sufficiently commend his
Diligence and Sagacity, who collected so many Materials, and disposed them into
such Order; and made in so short a Time, and (for the most part) in the midst
of Civil Business, such mighty Preparations toward the building of the House
of Wisdom.

After having mentioned the several Parts of this great Work, which concerns,
especially, Body Natural; we proceed to enumerate others of his Lordship's
Writings, which concern Civil, or Religious Matters. And though most of them
are of a mixed nature, and History is seldom written without some Political
Reflections; yet to those who are not over Nice, the division of them into
Historical and Political, may be passable.

His Historical Works are these:

The first, Is the History of Henry the Seventh Published first 1622.
, written Elegantly, by his Lordship in the English Tongue, and Addressed to
his Highness the Prince of Wales; and turned afterward into Latin. An History
which required such a Reporter: those Times being Times both of great
Revolution, and Settlement, through the Division and Union of the Roses.

This was the First Book which he Composed after his Retirement from an Active
Life See the Cat. of his Works then written in his Life, by D. R.
. Upon which occasion he wrote thus to the Bishop of Winchester In Epist. bef.
Dial of an holy War.
. Being (as I am) no more able to do my Country Service, it remains unto me,
to do it Honor: Which I have endeavored to do in my Work, of the Reign of
King Henry the Seventh.

The Second is, the Fragment of the History of Henry the Eighth, printed at the
end of his Lordship's Miscellany Works, of which the best Edition is that in
Quarto, in the Year 1629. This Work he undertook, upon the Motion of King
Charles the First, but (a Greater King not lending him time) he only began it;
for that which we have of it, was (it seems) but one Mornings Work.

The Third is, a Memorial, entitled the Felicities of Queen Elizabeth See in
the Resusc. the Letter to Mr. Matthew. p. 37.
. This was written by his Lordship, in Latin Publ. among his Opuscula. p. 177.
only. A Person of more good Will, than Ability, translated it into English
Anne 1651. in 16.
, and called it, in the singular, Her Felicity. But we have also a Version,
much more Accurate and Judicious, performed by Doctor Rawley Publ. in Resusc.
p. 181, etc.
, who was pleased to take that Labor upon him, because he understood the value
his Lordship put upon this Work; for it was such, that I find this Charge given
concerning it, in his last Will and Testament. In particular, I wish the Elogie
which I writ, in Felicem Memoriam Elizabethae, may be published.

For the Occasion of it, his Lordship tells it thus, in a Letter to Sir
George Carey Resusc. p. 45.
, then in France, to whom he sent it. -- Because one must begin, I thought to
provoke your remembrance of me by a Letter: And thinking to fit it with
somewhat besides Salutations, it came to my mind, that this last
Summer-Vacation, by occasion of a factious Book that endeavored to verify
Misera Faemina, (the Addition of the Pope's Bull) upon Queen Elizabeth; I did
write a few Lines in her Memorial, which I thought you would be pleased to
read, both for the Argument; and because you were wont to bear affection to my
Pen. Verum ut aliud ex alio: If it came handsomely to pass, I would be glad the
President de Thuanus.
Thou (who has written an History, as you know, of that Fame and Diligence)
saw it: Chiefly, because I know not whether it may not serve him for some use
in his Story: Wherein I would be glad he did right to the Truth, and to the
Memory of that Lady; as I perceive by that he has already written, he is well
inclined to do.

The Fourth is, the Beginning of the History of Great Britain. This was an
Essay, sent to King James, whose Times it considered. A Work worthy his Pen,
had he proceeded in it; seeing (as he See Collect. of Letters in Resusc. p. 30.
Letter to King James. And p. 28, 29, 30. the Letter to the Lord Chancellor
Egerton, concerning this Subject.
says) he should have written of Times, not only since he could remember, but
since he could observe; and by way of Introduction, of Times, (as he further
notes) of strange Variety; the Reign of a Child; the offer of an Usurpation by
the Lady Jane, though it were but as a Diary Ague; the Reign of a Lady married
to a Forreigner, and the Reign of a Lady solitary and unmarried.

His Lordship, who had given such proof of his Skill in writing an History of
England, leaving the World, to the unspeakable loss of the learned part of it;
his late Majesty, a great favourer of that Work, and wise in the choice of fit
Workmen, encouraged Sir Henry Wotton to endeavor it, by his Royal Invitation,
and a Pension of 500 l. per annum. This Proposal was made to that Excellent
Man, in his declining Years; and he died after the finishing some short
Characters of some few Kings; which Characters are published in his Remains
Reliqu. Wotton. p. 100.
. But this new Undertaking diverted him from a Work, in which he had made some
considerable Progress, the Life of Luther, and in it, the History of the
Reformation, as it was begun and carried on in Germany: Of which Work, the
Papers (they say) are lost, and in a Current of Time of no great depth, sunk
beyond all possible Recovery.

The Fifth is, the Imago Civilis Iulii Caesaris.

The Sixth, Imago Civilis Augusti Caesaris. Both of them Among the Opuscula. p.
195.
short personal Characters, and not Histories of their Empire: And written by
his Lordship in that Tongue, which in their Times, was at its height, and
became the Language of the World. A while since, they were translated into
English, and inserted into the First Part of the Resuscitation See Resusc. Edw.
3d. p. 214.
.

In the Seventh Place, I may reckon his Book De Sapientia Veterum, written by
him in Latin See his Letter to Mr. Matthews in Resusc. p. 38.
, and set forth a second time with Enlargement; and translated into English by
Sir Arthur Gorges This Translation is lately added to the Essays, in Octavo.
: A Book in which the Sages of former Times, are rendered more Wise than it may
be they were, by so dextrous an Interpreter of their Fables. It is this Book
which Mr. Sandys means, in those words which he has put before his Notes, on
the Metamorphosis of Ovid Page 18.
. Of Modern Writers, I have received the greatest Light from Geraldus,
Pontanus, Ficinus, Vives, Comes, Scaliger, Sabinus, Pierius, and the Crown of
the latter, the Vicount of Saint Albans.

It is true, the design of this Book was, Instruction in Natural and Civil
Matters, either couched by the Ancients under those Fictions, or rather made to
seem to be so, by his Lordship's Wit, in the opening and applying of them. But
because the first ground of it is Poetical Story, therefore let it have this
place, till a fitter be found for it.

For his Lordship's Political Writings, they are such as relate, either to
Ecclesiastical, or Civil Polity. His Writings which relate to Ecclesiastical
Polity, (for he was not willing See his Epistle to Bishop Andrews.
that all his Labors should go into the City, and none into the Church) are
the three following.

The First is a Discourse In Resusc. p. 233. it was published before without
his Lordship's Name in Quarto, 1640.
bearing the Title of Certain Considerations, touching the better Pacification
and Edification of the Church of England; and dedicated to King James. The
Second In Resusc. p. 162.
is, an Advertisement, touching the Controversies of the Church of England. The
Third is, a Dialogue touching an Holy War: All written at first in English, by
his Lordship. The First of these touches the Settlement of Doctrine: The
Second, the Settlement of Discipline amongst the Christians in England: The
Third, of Propagation of the Faith amongst Unbelievers. In all which it is
plain, that his Lordship dealt in the Affairs of the Church, as he was wont to
do in Civil Matters, Suavibus Modis, and in the Mean. Accordingly he was wont
to compare himself to the Miller of Granchester, a Village by Cambridg. Of him
his Lordship tells, that he was wont to pray for Peace among the Willows: For
whilst the Winds blew, the Wind-mills wrought, and his Water-mill was less
Custom'd See Letter to Mr Matthew, in Resusc. p. 36.
. His Lordship was for pacifying Disputes, knowing that Controversies of
Religion, would hinder the Advancement of Sciences.

His Writings which relate to Civil Polity, are very considerable; and yet they
fall much short of that which he had sometimes in design. For he aimed at the
complete Model of a Commonwealth, though he has left only some preparation
toward it in his Doctrine of Enlarging the bounds of Empire; and in a few
Abhorisms concerning Universal Justice In Augm. Scient. l. 8 c. 3. p. 668. to
p. 690, etc.
. He also made a Proposal to King James, of a Digest of the Laws of England.
But other Studies, together with want of Time and Assistance, prevented the
ripening of these Thoughts.

Now his Lordship's Writings in this Argument of Civil Polity, are either more
General, or such as have more Especial respect to the several Dominions of the
King of England. His Political Writings of a more general Nature, are his
Apothegms, and Essays, besides the Excerpta, out of the Advancement above
remembered. Both these contain much of that Matter which we usually call Moral,
distinguishing it from that which is Civil: In the handling of which sort of
Argument, his Lordship has been esteemed so far to excel, that he has had a
Comment written on him as on an Author in Ethics See V. Placcii Comment. in l.
7. Aug. Scient. de Philosophia Morali augenda. in Octavo. Franc. an. 1677.
and an Advancer of that most useful part of Learning. Notwithstanding which, I
am bold to put these Books under this Head of Matter Political: Both because
they contain a greater portion of that Matter; and because in true Philosophy,
the Doctrine of Politics and Ethics, makes up but one Body, and springs from
one Root, the End of God Almighty in the Government of the World.

The Apothegms (of which the first Apoth. printed in Oct. Lon. 1625.
is the best Edition) were (what he says also See his Epistle to Bishop
Andrews.
of his Essays) but as the Recreations of his other Studies. They were dictated
one Morning, out of his Memory; and if they seem to any, a Birth too
inconsiderable for the Brain of so great a Man; they may think with themselves
how little a time he went with it, and from thence make some allowance.
Besides, his Lordship has received much Injury by late Editions Even by that
added (but not by Dr. Rawley) to the Resuscitatio, (...). 3d.
of which some have much enlarged, but not at all enriched the Collection;
stuffing it with Tales and Sayings, too infacetiou^ for a Ploughman's
Chimney-Corner. And particularly, in the Collection not long since published In
Octavo. Lon. 1669.
, and called The Apothegms of King James, King Charles, the Marquess of
Worcester, the Lord Bacon, and Sir Thomas Moor; his Lordship is dealt with very
rudely. For, besides the addition of Insipid Tales, there are some put in which
are Beastly and Immoral Ex. gr. Apotheg. 183, 184.
: Such as were fitter to have been joined to Aretine, or Aloysia, than to have
polluted the chaste Labors of the Baron of Verulam.

To those Apothegms, may be referred these now published* The Essays, or
Counsels Civil and Moral, though a By-work also, do yet make up a Book of
greater weight by far, than the Apothegms: And coming home to Men's Business
and Bosoms, his Lordship entertained this persuasion concerning them See
Epist. Ded. to the D. of Bucks.
, that the Latin Volume might last as long as Books should last. His Lordship
wrote them in the English Tongue, and enlarged them as Occasion served, and at
last added to them the Colors of Good and Evil, which are likewise found in
his Book De Augmentis Lib. 6. c. 3. p. 453.
. The Latin Translation of them was a Work performed by diverse Hands; by those
of Doctor Hacket (late Bishop of Lichfield) Mr. Benjamin Johnson (the learned
and judicious Poet) and some others, whose Names I once heard from Dr. Rawley;
but I cannot now recall them. To this Latin Edition, he gave the Title of
Sermones Fideles, after the manner of the Jews, who called the words Adagies,
or Observations of the Wise, Faithful Sayings; that is, credible Propositious
worthy of firm Assent, and ready Acceptance. And (as I think) he alluded more
particularly, in this Title, to a passage in Ecclesiastes Eccles. 12. 10, 11.
, where the Preacher says that he sought to find out Verba Delectabilia, (as
Tremellius renders the Hebrew) pleasant Words, (that is, perhaps, his Book of
Canticles); and Verba Fidelia (as the same Tremellius) Faithful Sayings;
meaning, it may be, his Collection of Proverbs. In the next Verse, he calls
them Words of the Wise, and so many Goads and Nails given Ab eodem Pastore,
from the same Shepherd [of the Flock of Israel.]

In a late Latin Edition of these Essays, there are subjoyned two Discourses,
the one called De Negotiis, the other Faber Fortunae. But neither of these are
Works newly published, but Treatises taken out of the Book De Augmentis Lib. 8.
c. 2. p. 585, etc.
.

To this Book of Essays may be annexed, that Fragment of an Essay of Fame,
which is extant already in the Resuscitatio Resusc. p. 281.


His Lordship's Political Writings of a more special Nature, as relating to the
Polity, and various Affairs of the several Dominions of the King of England,
are very many, though most of them short.

As First, a Discourse of the Union of England and Scotland In Resusc. p. 197.
.

Secondly, Articles and Considerations, touching the Union aforesaid Page 206.
.

Thirdly, Considerations touching the Plantation in Ireland Page 255.
.

Fourthly, Considerations touching the Queen's Service in Ireland P. 16. Of
Coll. of Letters:
.

Fifthly, Considerations touching a War with Spain Pub. in the Mis. works in
Quarto, An. 1629. and reprinted in 2d. part of Resusc.
, then the Over-match in this part of the World; though now in meaner Condition.

Sixthly, His several Speeches; by which I mean not only those which go under
that Name, but likewise his several Charges; they being much of the same
Nature, though delivered ex Officio, which the other were not always. These
Speeches and Charges, are generally Methodically, Manly, Elegant, Pertinent,
and full of Wise Observations; as those are wont to be which are made by Men of
Parts and Business. And I shall not pass too great a Complement upon his
Lordship, if I shall say, That 'twas well for Cicero, and the honor of his
Orations, that the Lord Bacon composed his in another Language.

Now his Speeches and Charges are very many, and I set them down in the
following Catalogue.

His Speeches in Parliament to the Lower House, are Eight.

The First, 39* Elizabeth, upon the Motion of Subsidy Resusc. p. 1. of D. R's
Edition.
.

The Second, 5 Iacobi, concerning the Article of General Naturalization of the
Scottish Nation P. 10.
.

The Third, concerning the Union of Laws P. 24.
.

The Fourth, 5 Iacobi, being a Report in the House of Commons, of the Earls of
Salisbury, and Northampton, concerning the Grievances of the Merchants,
occasioned by the Practice of Spain P. 29.
.

The Fifth, 7 Iacobi, persuading the House of Commons, to desist from further
Question of receiving the King's Messages by their Speaker, and from the Body
of the Council, as well as from the King's Person P. 45.
.

The Sixth, 7 Iacobi, in the end of the Session of Parliament, persuading some
Supply to be given to his Majesty, which seemed then to stand upon doubtful
Terms; and passed upon this Speech P. 47.
.

The Eighth, 12 Iacobi, when the House was in great Heat, and much troubled
about the Undertakers, who were thought to be some able and forward Gentlemen,
who were said to have undertaken that the King's Business should pass in that
House, as his Majesty could wish P. 48.
.

His Speeches in the House of Lords, are Two.

The First, To the Lords, at a Conference in the Parliament, 7 Iacobi, by him
then Solicitor; moving them to join with the Commons, to obtain liberty to
treat of a Composition with his Majesty, for Wards and Tenures P. 42.
.

The Second, (when he was Chancellor) to Mr. Sergeant Richardson, chosen then
Speaker of the House of Commons; bebeing a Reply to his Excuse and Oration P.
94.
.

His Speeches to King James, were also Two.

The First, A Speech by him, chosen by the Commons, to present a Petition
touching Purveyors, delivered to his Majesty at White Hall, in the second Year
of his Reign P. 5.
.

The Second, a Speech used to the King, by him, then Solicitor, and chosen by
the Commons for the presenting of the Instrument of their Grievances, in the
Parliament 7 Iacobi P. 41.
.

His Speeches in the Chancery, are Two likewise.

The First, At the taking of his Place in Chancery, when made Lord Keeper P. 79.
.

The Second, To Sir William Jones, upon his calling to be Lord Chief Justice of
Ireland, Anno 1617. P. 89.
.

In the Star Chamber, he used a Speech to the Judges and others, before the
Summer Circuits, being then Lord Keeper, and also Lord-Protector; for his
Majesty was at that time in Scotland, Anno 1617. P. 87.
.

In the Common Pleas, he used a Speech to Justice Hutton, when he was called to
be one of the Judges in the Common Pleas. P. 93.
.

In the Exchequer-Chamber, he used a Speech to Sir John Denham, when he was
called to be one of the Barons of the Exchequer. P 91.
.

There also he used an Argument (being Solicitor General) in the Case of the
Postnati of Scotland Publ. first in 4^. Lon. 1641.
, before the Lord-Chancellor, and all the Judges of England (...)^ in Resusc.
part 2. p. 37.
. The Question in this Case was, Whether a Child born in Scotland since King
James's coming to the Crown of England, was Naturalized in England or no? His
Lordship argued for the Affirmative.

For his Charges, they were these following.

First, His Charge at the Sessions, holden for the Verge in the Reign of King
James, declaring the Latitude and Jurisdiction thereof Pub. in 4^. Lon. 1662.
and reprinted in the 2d. part of Resusc.
.

By the Verge, is meant a Plat of twelve Miles round, laid to the King's
settled Mansion House, subject to special exempted Jurisdiction, depending upon
his Person and great Officers. This his Lordship called an Half-pace, or Carpet
spread about the King's Chair of Estate; and he judged that it ought to be
cleared and void, more than other places of the Kingdom, that Offenses might
not seem to be shrouded under the King's Wings.

Secondly, His Charge in the Star Chamber against Duels See Resusc. 2d. Part.
p. 1.
; to which may be added the Decree of the Star Chamber in the same Case In part
2. of Resusc. p. 9.
.

Thirdly, His Charge in the Star Chamber against William Talbot, touching the
Doctrine of Suarez, concerning the Deposing and Killing of Excommunicated Kings
Res. 1 part. p. 53.
.

Fourthly, His Charge in the same Court against Mr. I. S. for Scandalizing and
Traducing in the Public Sessions, Letters sent from the Lords of the Council,
touching the Benevolence P. 60.
.

Fifthly, His Charge in the same Court against M. L. S. W. and H. I. for
Traducing the King's Justice in the proceedings against Weston, one of the
Instruments in the empoysoning of Sir Thomas Overbury P. 72.
.

Sixthly, His Charge in the King's Bench against Owen, for affirming
conditionally, That if the King were Excommunicated, it were lawful to kill him
P. 68.
.

Seventhly, His Charge in the King's Bench against the Lord Sanquere In part 2.
of Resusc. p. 15.
, a Scottish Nobleman, who in private Revenge, had suborned Robert Carlisle to
murder John Turner, a Master of Fence.

Eighthly, His Charge before the Lord High Steward, Lord Elesmere, and the
Peers, against the Countess and Earl of Somerset Now first publ. at the
beginning of these Remains.
.

His Lordship's Seventh Writing, touching Civil Policy in Special, is his
Reading on the Statute of Uses Pub. in 4^. Lon. 1642.
.

The Eighth is called, Observations upon a Libel, published Anno 1592, in
Defamation of the Queen's Government Resusc. p. 103.
. In these Observations, his Lordship has briefly set forth the present State
of those Times; but he has done the same thing more at large in his Memorial
of Queen Elizabeth.

The Ninth is, A true Report of the Treason of Dr. Roderigo Lopez (a Spaniard,
and a Physician attending upon the Person of the Queen; who was in Confederacy
with certain Spanish Agents, and hired by the King of Spain, to poison her
Majesty Page 151.
.

The Tenth is, His Apology touching the Earl of Essex, in which he clears
himself of Ingratitude by the plain reasons of the Case, and does not (as many
others have done) increase the suspicion by the very Excuse Publ. in 4^ Lon.
1642. and in 16^ An. 1651. and reprinted in the 2d part of Resusc.
.

The Eleventh is, Advice to King James touching Mr. Sutton's Estate, in the
settling of which, in the Hospital of the Chartreaux, the Event shows that
his Lordship was mistaken, when he called it A Sacrifice without Salt Reusc p
265.
. He proposed four other Ends of that great heap of Alms to the King's Majesty.
As first, The Erection of a College for Controversies, for the encountering and
refuting of Papists. Secondly, The Erection of a Receipt (for the word Seminary
he refused to make use of) for Converts from the persuasions of Rome, to the
Reformed Religion. Thirdly, A settlement of Stipends for Itinerary Preachers,
in Places which needed them; as in Lancashire where such care had been taken by
Queen Elizabeth. And lastly, An increase of Salary to the Professors in either
University of this Land. Wherefore his Lordship manifesting himself, not
against the Charity, but the manner of disposing it, it was not well done of
those who have publicly defamed him, by declaring their jealousies of Bribery
by the Heir.

The Twelfth is, A Proposition to King James, touching the Compiling and
Amendment of the Laws of England, written by him when he was Attorney General,
and one of the Privy Council Page 271.
.

The Thirteenth is, An Offer to King James, of a Digest to be made of the Laws
of England In the Miscelan. Works. p. 137. and 2d part of Resusc.
.

The Fourteenth is, The Elements of the Common Laws of England, in a double
Tract: The one of the Rules and Maxims of the Common Law, with their Latitude
and Extent. The other, of the Use of the Common Law, for the preservation of
our Persons, Goods, and good Names In 4^. Anno 1639.
. These he Dedicated to her Majesty, whose the Laws were, whilst the Collection
was his.

The Fifteenth is, a Draught of an Act against an usurious shift of Gain See
Resusc. part 2. p. 62.
, in delivering Commodities in stead of Money.

Touching these latter Pieces, which may be termed Writings in Iuridical
Polity, and which he wrote as a debtor to his Profession; it is beyond my
Skill, as well as out of the way of my Studies, to pass a special Judgment on
them. Only I may note it in the general, that if he reached not so far in the
Common Law, as Sir Edward Cook, and some other Ornaments of the long Robe: the
prepossession of his Mind by Philosophical Notions, and his regard to Matters
of Estate, rather than to those of Law, may be assigned as the true Causes of
it: For doubtless Parts were not wanting. On this Subject it is, that he thus
writes to Sir Thomas Bodley Coll. of Letters in Resusc. p. 34.
. I think no Man may more truly say with the Psalm, multum incola fuit Anima
mea, than my self. For I do confess, since I was of any Understanding, my Mind
has, in effect, been absent from that I have done: And, in absence are many
Errors, which I do willingly acknowledge, and amongst the rest this great one
that led the rest; That knowing my self, by inward Calling, to be fitter to
hold a Book than to play a Part, I have led my Life in civil Causes, for which
I was not very fit by Nature, and more unfit by the preoccupation of my Mind.

To a like purpose is this, in a Manuscript Letter to the Lord Chancellor
Egerton, which I have sometimes perused.

-- I am not M S. Letter of L. Bacons.
so deceived in my self, but that I know very well, (and I think, your Lordship
is major Cord, and in your Wisdom you note it more deeply than I can in my
self) that in Practicing the Law, I play not my best Game, which makes me
accept it with a nisi quid potius; as the best of my Fortune, and a thing
better agreeable to better Gifts than mine, but not to mine.

And it appears, by what he has said in a Letter to the Earl of Essex Coll.
in Resusc. p. III.
, that he once thought not to practice in his Profession. I am purposed (said
he) not to follow the practice of the Law. -- And my Reason is only, because it
drinks too much Time, which I have dedicated to better purposes.

To this Head of Polity, relating to the Affairs of these Kingdoms, we may
reduce most of his Lordship's Letters, published correctly in the Resuscitatio,
and in these Remains, and from uncorrect Copies, in the Cabala. These they
though often contain private Matters, yet commonly they have Matters of Estate
intermingled with them. Thus, his Letter to the Lord-Treasurer Burghley P. 1.
, was writ in Excuse of his Speech in Parliament, against the Triple Subsidy.
So, many of the Letters to the Earl of Essex Page ^, 5, 7.
, and Sir George Villiers P. 76.
, relate plainly to the Irish Affairs. So, some Letters to King James, relate
to the Cases of Peacham P. 48, 51.
, Owen P. 55.
, and others P. 58. I S.
; to the Matter of his Revenue (...). 57.
; to the New Company P. 59, 61, 70.
, who undertook to Dye and Dress all the Clothes of the Realm; to the
Praemunire in the King's Bench, against the Chancery P. 66.
. Most of the rest are a Miscellany, and not reducible to one certain Head.

Last of all, For his Lordship's Writings upon Pious Subjects, though for the
Nature of the Argument, they deserve the first place; yet they being but few,
and there appearing nothing so extraordinary in the composure of them, as is
found in his Lordships other Labors; they have not obtained an earlier mention.

They are only these:

His Confession of Faith, written by himself in English, and turned into Latin
by Dr. Rawley Publ. in Engl. at the end of the Resus. and in ^a^ine in the
O^^scula, p. 207.
.

The Questions about an Holy War, and the Prayers, in these Remains. And a
Translation of certain of David's Psalms, into English Verse. With this last
Pious Exercise he diverted himself in the time of his Sickness, in the Year
Twenty Five. When he sent it abroad into the World, 'Twas publ. in Land. An.
1625. in 4^ and has lately been put into the 2d part of Resusc.
, he made a Dedication of it to his good Friend, Mr. George Herbert: For he
judged the Argument to be suitable to him in his double Quality, of a Divine,
and a Poet. His Lordship had very great judgment in Poetry, as appears by his
Discourse In l. 2. de Augm. Scient. c. 13.
about it; and he had some sort of Talent that way also. Hence, when the Queen
had a purpose to Dine at his Lodging at Twicknam Park, he prepared a Sonnet See
Apol. for the Earl of Essex. p. 73.
, tending to the Reconcilement of her Majesty to the Earl of Essex then in
Disfavour. But it was very seldom that he courted these Muses, and therefore
his Vein does not appear so Elegant and Happy, as Exercise might have made it.
The truth is, it is one of the hardest things in the World, to excel in Poetry;
and to Attempt, and not to Excel, is to lose both Time and Reputation: For in
this Art, Mediocrity will not pass for Virtue. In this squeamish Age, (as
Mounsieur Rapine says, in his Judicious Reflections) Verses are Ridiculous, if
they be not Admirable. They are, it seems, like some Modern Dishes, which if
they have not an high taste, occasion Disgust.

Now of these several Works of his Lordship's already Published (of which a
great part See them in S. W. Dugdale, at the and of these Remains.
was written in that non ignobile Quinquennium, of his recess from Business)
there is not yet made any exact Collection, either in Latin, or English;
though some attempts have been made in both those Languages. The first Latin
Collection was set forth accurately, for so much of it, by Dr. Rawley, under
the Title of Opera Moralia andCivilia Londini, 1638. in Fol. see Dr. Rawley's
Letter to M. Deodate, and his Answer.
. But it contained only the History of Henry the Seventh^ the Essaies; the Book
of the Wisdom of the Ancients; the Dialogue of an Holy War; the New Atlantis;
the Book de Augmentis; the History of Winds; the History of Life and Death. The
second Latin Collection was lately published Fran. ad Moenum, 1665. in Fol.
at Francfort on the Meyn. It pretends, in the Title, to contain all his
Lordship's Extant Works, whether Philosophical, Moral, Political, or
Historical: Although, besides the Books in the forementioned Collection, it
contains only his Lordship's Life (without any mention of Dr. Rawley, who
wrote it); the Organon; the Scripta; the Sylva Sylvarum; the Felicities of
Queen Elizabeth; the Images of Julius, and Augustus Caesar; and the Epistle to
Fulgentius, without the Opuscula, to which that Epistle is annexed. In this
Collection, the Nova Atlantis is (as I noted a while ago) most absurdly called
Novus Atlas; and the other Books are most falsely Printed. And yet the Stationer
(who, I suppose by his performance, was both Corrector and Publisher) does tell
us of this Edition, that it was purged of all Faults. But his Collection cannot
be so purged, unless the whole Volume be made one entire Blot. Posterity (I
hope) will do his Lordship Honor, and Benefit to themselves, in a larger and
more accurate Collection of his Works. These Latin ones, as also the
Miscellanies, and the two parts of the Resuscitatio, (which are the only
attempt in English) being far short of perfection.

Thus far I have traveled in an Account, (such as it is) of those Genuine
Writings of the Lord Bacon, which are already published; and which, being (like
Medals of Gold) both rich in their Matter, and beautiful in their Form, have
met with a very great, and well nigh, equal number of Purchasers and Admirers.

This general Acceptance of his Works, has exposed him to that ill and unjust
usage which is common to Eminent Writers. For on such are fathered, sometimes
Spurious Treatises; sometimes most Corrupt Copies of good Originals; sometimes
their Essays and first Thoughts upon good Subjects, though laid aside by them
Unprosecuted and Uncorrected; and sometimes the very Toys of their Youth,
written by them in trivial or loose Arguments, before they had arrived either
at ripeness of Judgment, or sobriety of Temper.

The veriest Straws (like that of Father Garnet) are shown to the World as
admiral* Relics, if the least strokes of the Image of a celebrated Author,
does but seem to be upon them.

The Press has been injurious in this kind, to the Memory of Bishop Andrews,
to whom it owed a deep and solemn Reverence. It has sent forth a Pamphlet upon
an Idle Subject, under the venerable Name of that great Man, who (like the
Grass in hot Countries, of which they are wont to say that it grows Hay) was
born Grave and Sober: And still, further to aggravate the Injury, it has given
to that Idle Subject, the idler Title of the Ex-ale-tation of Ale.

In such an unbecoming manner it has dealt, long ago About the Year 1658.
, with the very Learned and Ingenious Author of the Vulgar Errors. It has
obtruded upon him, whilst alive, a dull and worthless Book stolen, for the
most part out of the Physic's of Magirus, by a very Ignorant Person: A Plagiary
so ignorant and so unskilful in his Rider, that not distinguishing betwixt
Laevis and Levis, in the said Magirus, he has told us of the Liver, that one
part of it is gibbo^s, and the other light. And yet he had the confidence to
call this Scribble, The Cabinet of Nature unlocked: An arrogant and fanciful
Title, of which his true Humility would no more have suffered him to have been
the Father, than his great Learning could have permitted him to have been the
Author of the Book. For I can assure the Reader upon my knowledge, that as he is
a Philosopher very inward with Nature, so he is one who never boasts of his
Acquaintance with her.

Neither has the Lord Bacon gone without his share in this Injustice from the
Press. He has been ill dealt with in the Letters printed in the Cabala, and
Scrinia, under his Name: For Dr. Rawley professed, that though they were not
wholly False, yet they were very corrupt and embased Copies. This I believe the
rather, having lately compared some Original Letters with the Copies in that
Collection, and found them imperfect. And to make a particular Instance; in
comparing the Letter of Sir Walter Raleigh to Sir Robert Car, of whom a Fame
had gone that he had begged his Estate; I found no fewer then forty
Differences, of which some were of moment.

Our Author has been still worse dealt with, in a Pamphlet in Octavo,
concerning the Trial of the Earl and Countess of Somerset: And likewise in one
in Quarto, which bears the Title of Bacon's Remains, though there cannot be
spied in it, so much as the Ruins of his beautiful Genius.

His Lordship, and other such memorable Writers, having formerly been subject
to such Abuses; it is probable that many will, at first, suspect the
faithfulness of this Collection; and look upon that as adulterate Ware, which
is of such a sudden here brought forth to them, out of the Dark.

But let them first make trial, and then pass Sentence. And if they have
sufficient knowledge of the peculiar Air of this Author, they will not only
believe that these Remains are his, but also set a value upon them as none of
his most useless and wast Papers. They say, the Feather of a Phoenix is of
price: And here such will own, they have some little of the Body, as well as
part of the Plumage.

It is difficult to imitate such great Authors, in so lively and exact a form,
as without suspicion, to pass for them. They who are the most artificial
Counterfeits in this way, do not resemble them as the Son does the Father, but
at best, as the dead Picture does the living Person. And those who have true
skill in the Works of the Lord Verulam, like great Masters in Painting, can
tell by the Design, the Strength, the way of Coloring, whether he was the
Author of this or the other Piece, though his Name be not to it.

For the Reader, who has been less versed in his Books, he may understand, that
nothing is here offered to him as the Labor of that Lord, which was not
written either by his own Hand, or in Copies transcribed by the most faithful
Pen of his Domestic Chaplain, Dr. William Rawley: A Person whom his Lordship
chiefly used in his Lifetime, in Writing down, Transcribing, Digesting, and
Publishing his Composures; and to whom, at his death, he expressed his Favor,
by bequeathing to him in Money, One Hundred Pounds, and in Books, the great
Bibles of the King of Spain.

I refer him, who doubts of my Veracity in this Matter, to my worthy Friend
Mr. John Rawley, (the Executor of the said Reverend Doctor) by whose care most
of these Papers have been preserved for the public Good; and who can bear me
witness, (if occasion serves) that I have not herein imposed upon the World.

It is true, that Dr. Rawley, in his Preface to the Opuscula of his Lordship,
has forbidden us to expect any more of his R^mains in Latin, or English: He
adds in express Terms, that nothing further remained in his Hands. He meant,
when he said this, that such Writings of his Lordship, were to be esteemed as
not in being, which were not worthy to appear. This meaning of his, he more
plainly delivered in his Preface to the Collection, called Resuscitatio.

There he says, That he had left nothing to a future hand, which he found to
be of moment, or communicable to the public, save only some few Latin Works
soon after to be published. He delivered himself from the Obligation of that
Promise in the Year fifty eight; publishing then, with all due care, those
Latin Works Opus. Posth. Philos. Civil. Theologica F. B. B. de Ver.
. Soon after, he was accused by an obscure Prefacer, to a new Edition of the
Essays, in Octavo, as one that had still concealed some of his Lordship's
Philosophical Treasures. In vindication of himself from this Censure, I find
him using these words in one of his papers, wherein he animadverteth on that
preface. I have published all I thought fit, or a well advised Man would have
thought fit to be published by me. He judged some papers, touching Matters of
Estate, to tread too near to the heels of Truth, and to the times of the
Persons concerned, from which now they are further removed, by the distance of
Twenty Years. He thought his Lord's Letters concerning his Fall, might be
injurious to his Honor, and cause the old Wounds of it to bleed anew; whereas
if the remembrance of them had not been fresh in the Minds of many, and in the
Books of some, the Collection of the Cabala, had revived part of it in a
corrupt Copy; and the matter of those Letters is of such a nature, (as
afterward I shall show) that it rather clears his Lordship's Fame, than
throws more dirt upon it. For the Philosophical Remains, he judged them unfit
to be committed to the Press, because they were but Fragments; and such too, as
his Lordship's last Hand had not rendered Correct. The excess of Veneration
which he had for his Lordship, inclined him to think nothing worthy to bear his
Name, which was not a Masterpiece. And for this Reason, If Surreptitious Copies
had not moved him to do his Lordship right by printing the true ones, we had
wanted diverse Papers which the World now enjoys, and receives with
thankfulness. And where the substance is Gold, Men will readily accept it,
though in the Ore and unrefined: Nor is it any disparagement to the Inventory
of his Lordship's philosophical Goods, if there are numbered amongst them
certain broken uncoined pieces of valuable Metal.

Some few imperfect Papers, about his Lordship's private Affairs, or of very
little moment in Philosophy, are still kept where they ought to be, in private
Hands. But those which have been judged worthy the Light, by those Learned and
Prudent Men whom I have consulted, are now, with no small Labor, communicated
to the World. For so blotted were some of the Papers, so torn, so disjoynted,
so intermixed in Contents of a different Nature; that the Sense, as it now
stands, may seem like Mercury reduced to its proper Form, after its diverse
Shapes and Transmutations.

Now these Remains which I have been moved to publish, I have digested
according to the nature of their Contents, and reduced them to these several
Heads of Arguments, Civil and Moral; Physiological; Medical; Theological; and
Bibliographical.

Under the first Head of Remains, Civil and Moral, are contained these Papers.

The First is, His Charges against the Countess and Earl of Somerset, touching
the death of Sir Thomas Overbury.

The proper place for these Charges was, in the first part of the Resuscitatio
Resusc. p. 7^*
, before his Charge against three Persons for Scandal, and traducing of the
King's Justice, in the proceedings against Weston. But Dr. Rawley (as appeared
by a Note of his, on the Margent of those papers) did at that time forbear the
inserting of them, lest they should be offensive to some then alive. Now, more
than Sixty Years have passed, since the end of that Tragedy; and the News of it
was told in the Ears of the World; and the Story was made public and lasting
by the Press, both before and after Se^ it in Sir W. Dugdale's Baron. of Eng.
Tome 2^. P. 425. etc.
the Doctor's death. And what Curtain soever our Prudence would draw; we could
not conceal so public a Matter. Nor is it fitting we should. For thereby we
should endeavor to hide from Men, one useful Memorial of Divine Justice: A
Memorial apt to deter Greatness from a Practice, which if it were common, there
would be no safe eating or drinking, or breathing in Courts.

At the Trial, some Body, of bad Memory, and no better Pen, wrote down most
imperfectly, a little of that which Mr. Attorney had spoken, largely and
elegantly upon this solemn Occasion: And, in the Year fifty one, (a time of
general License) this Scribble was published In the Pamphlet entitled, ^ True
and Historical Rel. of the Poison of Sir Tho. Overbury in 12^.
. The Publisher had the confidence to affirm, that the Narrative was Collected
out of the Papers of Sir Francis Bacon It Is so said in the Title Page.
, which, by the Copies I set forth, it is manifest the Relator never had seen.
But a good Name in the Title Page, was an useful Bush for the putting off the
crude and unfined Matter in the Book it self.

Little has the Relator told of much which was said by Mr. Attorney; and that
which he has told, he has repeated in such ill manner, that it is no longer
Sir Francis Bacon's, but his own.

In one Place Page 107, 108.
, he introduces Mr. Attorney, speaking thus. This is the second time since the
King's coming these thirteen Years, that any Peers have been Arraigned, and
both these times your Grace has had the Place of High Steward. The first was
Gray, and Cobham; and though they were Convicted, yet Execution followed not;
no Noble Blood has been spilt since his Majesty's Reign.

The first was Revenge, of Treason against Malcontents; and this of the
particular offense to a private Subject, against those that have been so high
in the King's Grace and Favor; and therefore deserves to be written in a
Sunbeam: but his being the best Master in in the World, hinders him not from
being the best King; for He can as well plain a Hill, as raise a Wall; a good
Lesson to put to my Lords the Peers: He is Lieutenant to him who is no
respecter of persons.

Now how curtailed, how incoherent, how mean and unelegant is this, in
comparison of that which Mr. Attorney spoke? For he spoke that which follows.

In all this mean time, the King has Reigned in his White Robe, not sprinkled
with any one drop of Blood of any of his Nobles of this Kingdom: Nay, such have
been the depths of his Mercy, as even those Noble-mens Bloods (against whom the
proceeding was at Winchester) Cobham and Gray, were attainted and corrupted,
but not spilt, or taken away; but that they remained rather Spectacles of
Justice in their continual Imprisonment, than Monuments of Justice in the
memory of their Suffering.

It is true, that the Objects of his Justice then, and now, were very
differing: For then it was the Revenge of an Offense against his own Person and
Crown, and upon Persons that were Malcontents, and Contraries to the State
and Government: But now it is the the Revenge of the Blood and Death of a
particular Subject, and the Cry of a Prisoner: It is upon Persons that were
highly in his Favor, whereby his Majesty, to his great Honor has showed to
the World, as if it were written with a Sunbeam, that he is truly the
Lieutenant of him, with whom there is no respect of Persons; That his
Affections Royal are above his Affections Private; That his Favors and
Nearness about him are not like Popish Sanctuaries, to privilege Malefactors;
and that his being the best Master in the World, does not let him from being
the best King in the World. His People, on the other side, may say to
themselves, I will lie down in peace; for God, and the King, and the Law,
protect me against the great and small. It may be a Discipline also, to great
Men, specially such as are swollen in their Fortunes from small beginnings;
that The King is as well able to level Mountains, as to fill Valleys, if such
be their desert.

In another place Page 119. Of the Arraignment of the L. of Somerset.
, he thrusts into the Speech of Sir Edward Cook, a part of Sir Francis
Bacon's, and (like the worser sort of Thieves) he does not only rob, but mangle
him. Sir Francis Bacon spoke on this manner: My Lords! He is not the Hunter
alone that lets slip the Dog upon the Deer; but he that lodges the Deer, or
rouses him, or puts him out; or he that sets a Toil that he cannot escape.

Instead of which, the Relator has substituted this absurd Sentence. It is not
he only that slips the Dog, but he that loves the Toil, that kills the Deer.

This (I thought) was not unnecessary to be said in Vindication of Mr.
Attorney's Honor, which is vilely traduced in this Pamphlet, where the Daw
would personate the Orator.

The Second Paper is, his Letter to the University of Cambridg, (to whom he was
of Counsel) upon occasion of his being Sworn of the Privy Council to the King.
This I judged fit to bear that other company which is already printed Resusc.
Letters, p. 82, 83.
, and answers to their Congratulation at his first coming to the Place of
Lord Keeper.

The Third is, his Letter to King James, touching the Place of Lord High
Chancellor of England, upon the approaching death of the Chancellor Egerton.

The Fourth is, a Letter to the same Prince, for the relief of his Estate.
This, with that other of Submission in the Cabala, seem to some to blemish his
Lordship's Honor; to others, to clear it: For in this, he appealeth to the
King himself, whether he had not ever found him direct and honest in his
Service, so as not once to be rebuked by him, during Nineteen Years Employment.
He shows that his Fall was not the King's Act; and that the Prince was ready
to reach out his Hand to stay him from falling. In the other he makes this
profession of his being free from malicious Injustice. For the Bribery and
Gifts wherewith I am charged, when the Books of Hearts shall be opened, I hope
I shall not be found to have the troubled Fountain of a corrupt Heart, in a
depraved habit of taking Rewards to pervert Justice, howsoever I may be frail,
and partake of the abuses of the Times.

The Fifth Paper is, a Collection of his remaining Apothegms, inferior in
number to those already published, but not in weight. Some of these he took
from Eminent Persons, and some from meaner ones, having set it down from his
Observation In Impet. Philosoph. p. 476. Rusticorum Proverbia nonnulla apposite
ad veritatatem dicuntur Sus rostro, etc.
, that The Bolt of the Rustic, often hits the Mark; and that the Sow, in
rooting, may describe the letter A, though she cannot write an entire Tragedy.

The Sixth is, a Supply of his Collection of Judicious and Elegant Sentences,
called by him Ornamenta Rationalia. He also gave to those Wise and Polite
Sayings, the Title of Sententiae Stellares; either because they were Sentences
which deserved to be pointed to by an Asterisc in the Margent; or because they
much illustrated and beautified a Discourse, in which they were disposed in due
place and order; as the Stars in the Firmament, are so many glorious Ornaments
of it, and set off with their Luster, the wider and less adorned Spaces.

This Collection is either wholly lost, or thrown into some obscure Corner; but
I fear the first. I have now three Catalogues in my Hands, of the unpublish'd
Papers of Sir Francis Bacon; all written by Dr. Rawley himself. In every one of
these appears the Title of Ornamenta Rationalia, but in the Bundles which came
with those Catalogues, there is not one of those Sentences to be found. I held
my self obliged, in some sort, and as I was able, to supply this defect; it
being once in my power to have preserved this Paper. For a Copy of it was long
since, offered me by that Doctor's only Son, and my dear Friend (now with God)
Mr. William Rawley, of whom, if I say no more, it is the greatness of my Grief
for that irreparable loss, which causes my Silence. I was the more negligent
in taking a Copy, presuming I might, upon any occasion, command the Original;
and because that was then in such good Hands. Now, there remains nothing with
me, but a general Remembrance of the quality of that Collection. It consisted
of diverse short Sayings, aptly and smartly expressed, and containing in them
much of good Sense in a little room.

These he either made, or took from others, being moved so to do by the same
Reason which caused him to gather together his Apothegms, which (he says) he
collected for his Recreation, his Lordship's Diversions being of more value
than some Men's Labors. Nor do such Sentences and Apothegms, differ much in
their Nature. For Apothegms are only somewhat longer, and fuller of Allusion,
and tell the Author, and the occasion of the Wise Saying; and are but the same
Kernel, with the Shell and Leaf about it. That which he faith of the one, is
true of the other. They are both Mucrones Verborum In Preface to his Apothegms.
, pointed Speeches, or Goads. Cicero (says he) calls them Salinas,
Salt Pits, that you may extract Salt out of, and sprinkle it where you will.
They serve to be interlaced in continued Speech: They serve to be recited, upon
occasion, in themselves.

Such Ornaments have been noted in all Ages and Places, and in many Collected.

Amongst the Hebrews, they had (of old) the Proverbs of Agur, and Solomon.

In Times more Modern, there have been set forth the Pirke Avoth; and the
Sentences, Proverbs, Apothegms, and Similitudes of the Hebrew Writers,
Collected in the Florilegium Hebraicum of Buxtorf.

Amongst the Egyptians, we find such Aenigmatic Proverbial Forms as these; He
has a Wing of a Bat. That is, the Man is impotent, yet daring; and so like a
Bat, which adventures to fly, though it has no Feathers. The Crab keeps the
door of the Oyster. That is, his Friend destroys him. For the Crab (they say)
puts in his Claw when the Oyster gapes, and eats it up.

Amongst the Arabians, we find the Proverbs of Lockman, or Aesop; and those
Collected by Erpenius.

Amongst the Greeks, we find the Sentences of their Seven Wise Men, of
Theognes, and Phocylides, and of diverse others preserved by Stobaeus.
Pythagorus had his (...) See Salmas. in Simplic. in Epict. ad calc. p. 12.
, of which we should have known much more, if Time had not denied us the Book
of Aristotle (...). Thence, it is thought, Lae r^ius, and Porphyrie, cite
certain Pythogoric Symbols Vide Jonsium de Script. Hist. Phil. p. 54. Also p.
76. and Jamblich. de vit^ Pythag. p. 131.
, in which among others, the Pleiades are called the Harp of the Muses; and the
Northern Bears, the Hands of Rhea. Which latter Symbol, is for such a Toy,
pretty enough, if expounded of Matter fixed, and detained from the course of
its Fluidity, by cold, or rest. But I pretend not so much intimacy with the
Magical Pythagoras, as to be his Interpreter. To Henry Stephens, we owe a
Collection of Greek Sentences, from the Comic Poets. The Monk Thalasius, wrote
an Hundred Sentences concerning Charity and Continence, after the way of the
Cloister, that is, in a pious, but less acute manner See them in the M^^ (...)
p. 106.
.

Amongst the Romans, Julius Caesar, and Macrobius wrote Collections of
Apothegms; and the Sentences of Laberius, and also of Publius, (who was,
indeed, by Birth a Syrian, but by Education and Privilege a Roman) are to this
Day preserved.

Some, awhile ago, have gathered and amassed the Sentences of Cicero, and of
both the Seneca's, though (I think) without much judgment, and as we gather
Fishes in a Net, enclosing the good and bad together. Last Year, the Sieur de
Laval, did publish his Collection of the Sentences of St. Austin Sent. tirees
des Oeuvres de S. Aug. A. Paris, 1677. in Octavo.
. And it is not long since, Mounsieur Hache set forth a whole Folio of
Sentences, Collected out of Twelve of the Tomes of the Bibliotheca Patrum Sent.
ex 12. Bib. Patr. tomis selectae per Fr. Hache, An. 1666.
.

Among the Italians, Spaniards, French, Dutch, Turks, (which two last I put
together, for the alike bluntness and coursness of their Sayings) there are
diverse Collections of Apothegms and Proverbs.

Among our Selves, we have the like, and particularly the Wise Sayings by Mr.
Cambden, and the Iacula Prudentum, in Mr. Herbert; which latter some have been
bold to accuse as having too much Feather, and too little Point. But the sense
of that Metaphor, may be more truly applied to the Collection called Flores
Edvardi Coci By Tho. Ash. Lon. 1617. in 16^.
. Those Sayings, as they are represented without the Context of that Eminent
Lawyer, are like the Flowers in an Herbal, of which no Man would put the
Generality into his Garden.

The use of such little things, no Man knew better than Sir Francis Bacon, who
could turn every saying to Advantage; and if it wanted Luster in it self, he
could by Art create it, and by setting it well.

His own Collection was (as I remember) gathered partly out of his own Store,
and partly from the Ancients, and accordingly it is supplied out of his own
Works, and the Mimi of Publius.

Under the Second Head of Remains Physiological, or Natural, is contained in
the First place,

A Fragment of his Lordship's Abecedarium Naturae. This is commonly said to be
lost, and it is well nigh so, the latter part of it only remaining. But where
the whole is good, each part is of value. And Antiquaries who travel in the
Dominions of the Grand Signior, do not despise the ancient Statues which they
find there, though Mohammedan Superstition has broken off their Heads.

This Work is said to be a Metaphysical Piece; but it is not so, in the
strictest sense. Its principal design is the Partition of things into their
several Classes; a design which his Lordship brought to more perfection in his
Organon, and Book De Augmentis Scientiarum. And though in it were handled
Condittons of Being, yet not abstractly from all Body, but with reference to
it. And therefore his Lordship did not call it Abecedarium Hyperphysicum, but
the Alphabet of Nature. And his Lordship gives express Caution, in his Book of
Advancement De Augm. Scient. l. 3. c. 2. p. 228.
, that where he speaks of Conditions of Entities, which are called
Transcendental; (such as, Much, Little, The Same, Diverse, Possible, Impossible)
he be not interpreted in a Logical, but Physical Sense. His Lordship was much
averse to high and useless Speculations, and he was wont to express that
Aversness in the following Comparison. The Lark (said he) is an high flier, and
in its flight does nothing but Sing: But the Hawk flies high, and thence
descends and catches its Prey.

The Second Paper about Natural things, is his Lordship's Inquisition touching
the Compounding of Metals.

Then follow, in the Third Place, his Articles of Questions, touching Minerals.
Of these, the first inquireth about the same Subject with the foregoing Paper;
but finding them distinguished by his Lordship, I have not joined them together.

These Questions were turned into Latin, and in that Tongue, published by Dr.
Rawley, amongst his Lordship's Opuscula; but the English Originals are now, the
first time set forth. And having by me three Copies, I publish them by that one
on which his Lordship had endorsed with his own Hand, This is the clean Copy.

Now these Inquiries being in themselves Imperfect, and without much Solution
of his Lordship's adjoined; I have here added to them the several Answers of
Dr. Meverel, to whom they were proposed by his Lordship. It has not been in my
power, as yet, to inform my self duly about this Doctor; but doubtless, he was
a Chemist, as those Times went, of the first Order. It was his Lordship's
manner, on diverse mornings, to set down Inquiries for the following Days, in
some loose Papers. And in one of them, I find this, among other Memoranda. To
send to Dr. Meverel. Take Iron and dissolve it in Aqua Fortis, and put a
Loadstone near it, and see whether it will extract the Iron: Put also a
Loadstone into the Water, and see whether it will gather a Crust about it.

After the Questions of his Lordship about Minerals, and the Answers of Dr.
Meverel, there follows, in the Fourth Place, an Inquisition concerning the
Versions, Transmutations, Multiplications, and Effections of Bodies, not
hitherto published in the English Tongue, in which his Lordship wrote it See D.
R's. Translation among the Opuscula.
.

Fifthly, There is annexed a certain Speech touching the recovery of Drowned
Mineral Works, prepared, as Mr. Bushel says, for that Parliament under which
he fell. His Lordship, no doubt, had such a Project; and he might prepare a
Speech also, for the Facilitating of it. But that this is a true Copy of that
Speech, I dare not avouch. His Lordship's Speeches were wont to be digested
into more Method; his Periods were more round, his Words more choice, his
Allusions more frequent, and managed with more decorum. And as no Man had
greater command of Words, for the illustration of Matter, than his Lordship; so
here he had Matter which refused not to be clothed in the best Words.

The Sixth Paper about Natural Things, contains certain Experiments about
weight in Air and Water.

The Seventh contains a few Proposals to the Countryman, called Experiments
for Profit. The Eighth, Experiments about the Commixture of Liquors. The Ninth,
a Catalogue of Bodies Attractive and not Attractive, with Experimental
Observations about them.

Under the Third Head of Medical Remains, is contained in the First place, a
Paper which he called Grains of Youth. In it he prescribes diverse things, as
means to keep up the Body in its Vigor. Amongst these is the Receipt of the
Methusalem Water, against the Dryness of Age, which his Lordship valued and
used.

Next follows a Catalogue of Astringents, Openers, and Cordials, Instrumental
to Health. Then comes in the Third place, an Extract, by his Lordship, for his
own use, out of the History of Life and Death, together with some new Advices
in order to Health.

Last of all, there are added Four Medical Receipts.

The First is, his Lordship's Broth and Fomentation against the Stone, which I
judged acceptable to the Public, seeing his Receipt against the Gout had been
so, though it works not an Infallible Cure. And here it may seem strange,
that his Lordship does not mention Spirit of Nitre, which he so often used, and
which a very ingenious Experimenter Dr. Grew, in his Exper. of the Lu^^^tion
arising from Affus. of Menstruums upon all sorts of Bodies. p. 10^.
has noted, to be the best of Acids against the Stone.

The Second is, the Receipt of an Ointment, called by his Lordship, Vnguentum
Fragrans sive Romanum. By this he means an Unguent which consists of
Astringents, preventing excess of Transpiration; and Cordials comforting the
Parts. And he called it (I suppose) the Roman Unguent, because that People did
eminently make use of Baths and Anointings. He himself held, that the anointing
with Oil, was one of the most potent Operations to long Life Hist. of Life and
Death, of the Oper. upon Exclusion of Air. ^. 21. P. 37.
; and that it conduced to Health, both in Winter, by the exclusion of the cold
Air; and in Summer, by detaining the Spirits within, and prohibiting the
resolution of them; and keeping of the force of the Air, which is then most
predatory. Yet it was his Lordship's opinon, that it was best to anoint without
Bathing, though he thought Bathing without Anointing bad.

The Third and Fourth, are Receipts to comfort the Stomach. One of them he
calls a Secret; and I suppose it might be communicated to him by Sir Henry
Wotton. For Sir Henry speaks of his preparation of a certain Wood In Reliqu.
Wotton. P. 473.
, as of a rare Receipt to Coroborate the Viscera, and to keep the Stomach in
Tono.

Under the Fourth Head, of Theological Remains, are contained only a few
Questions about the lawfulness of a Holy War; and two Prayers, one for a
Philosophical Student, the other for a Writer. The substance of these two
Prayers is extant in Latin, in the Organon Nov. Organum, p. 19. ad Calc.
partis primae.
, and Scripta Scripta Philos. P. 451. and after the Title Page.
.

Under the Fifth Head of Bibliographical Remains, are contained some of his
Lordship's own Papers concerning his Works, and likewise some Letters and
Discourses of others upon the same Subject, together with a few interspersed
Remarks concerning his Life.

His Lordship's Papers are these Six.

The First is, a Letter to Elizabeth, the Sister of King Charles the Martyr,
and Wife to Frederic, Prince Palatine of the Rhine; a Princess who found so
many Thorns in the Crown of Bohemia. She pleased to write to his Lordship, and
he returned Answer, and sent along with it as a Present, his Discourse of a War
with Spain; though neither came to her Hands, till after his Lordship's Death.

The Second is, a Letter to the University of Cambridg, when he sent them his
Book of the Advancement of Learning.

The Third is, a Letter to the same University, upon his sending to them his
Novum Organum: This he wrote in a loose sheet of paper; the former, in one of
the spare leaves at the beginning of the Book.

The Fourth is, a Letter to Trinity College, in Cambridg (of which Society he
had been a Member) upon his sending thither the aforesaid Book De Augmentis
Scientiarum.

The Fifth is, a Letter to the Bishop of Lincoln; in which I note the goodness
of his Lordship's Nature, whilst he still maintains his Friendship with him,
though he had succeeded him in his place of Lord Keeper. For Envy hates every
one that sits in that Chair from whence it self is fallen.

The Sixth is, a Letter to Father Fulgentio, a Divine (if I mistake not) of the
Republic of Venice, and the same who wrote the Life of his Colleague, the
excellent Father Paul.

The Seventh is, a Letter to the Marquess Fiat, then Ambassador from France,
soon after the Marriage betwixt his late Majesty and Henrietta Maria, in the
knitting of which he had been employed. This Marquess was the Person, who,
impatient of seeing so Learned a Man, was admitted to his Lordship when he was
very ill, and confined to his Bed; and who saluted him with this high
Compliment: Your Lordship has been to me hitherto like the Angels, of which I
have often heard and read, but never saw them before. To which piece of
Courtship, he returned such answer, as became a Man in those Circumstances.
Sir, the Charity of others, does liken me to an Angel, but my own Infirmities
tell me I am a Man.

The Eighth is, a Transcript out of his Lordship's Will, concerning his
Writings. There, in particular manner, he commends to the Press, the
Felicities of Queen Elizabeth. This I noted before; and observe it here again
as an Argument of the Impartiality of his Lordship's Judgment and Affection. He
was zealous in bearing testimony to the wise Administration of the Public
Affairs in those Times, in which himself advanced little either in Profit, or
Honor. For he was hindered from growing at Court by a great Man, who knew the
slenderness of his Purse, and also feared that if he grew, he might prove
Taller than himself See his Lordship's Letter to Sir R. C. in C^ll. of Letters
in 1st. part of Resusc. p. 87. and that in p. 110, 111.
. The little Art used against him, was the representing of him as a Speculator;
though it is plain, no Man dealt better, and with kinder ways, in public
Business than himself: And it generally ripened under his Hands.

For the Papers written by others, touching his Lordship and his Labors, they
are these.

The First is, a Letter from the University of Oxford, to his Lordship, upon
his sending to them his Book of Advancement of Learning, in its second, and
much enlarged Edition. It should seem by a Passage toward the end of this
Letter, that the Letter which his Lordship sent to them, together with his
Book, was written (like the first to the University of Cambridg) in one of the
spare leaves of it, and contained some wholesome Admonitions in order to the
pursuit of its Contents.

The Second is, a Letter from Dr. Maynwaring, to Dr. Rawley, concering his
Lordship's Confession of Faith. This is that Dr. Maynwaring, whose Sermon upon
Eccles. 8. 2. etc. gave such high Offense, about One and Fifty Years ago.

For some Doctrines, which he notes in his Lordship's Confession, the Reader
ought to call to mind, the times in which his Lordship wrote them, and the
distaste of that Court against the proceedings of Barnevelt, whose
State-faction blemished his Creed.

The rest are, Letters of Dr. Rawley, Mounsieur Deodate, Isaac Gruter, touching
the Edition of his Lordship's Works: An Account of his Lordship's Life and
Writings, by Sir William Dugdale, together with some new Insertions: Characters
of his Lordship, and his Philosophy, by Dr. Heylin, Dr. Sprat, and Mr. Abraham
Cowley.

All these Papers I have put under the Title of Baconiana, in imitation of
those, who of late, have published some Remains of Learned Men, and called
them, Thuana, Scaligerana, Perroniana.

These then are the particular Writings, in which I have labored, and in
setting forth of which, I have undertaken the lower Office of a Prefacer. And I
think it more desirable to write a mean Preface to a good Book, than to be
Author of a mean Book, though graced with a Preface from some excellent Pen: As
it is more Honor, with a plain White Staff, to go before the King, than being
an unpolished Magistrate of a mean and antiquated Corporation, to be ushered
forth with a Mace of Silver.

T. T.
November. 30. 1678.
The Lord Bacon's REMAINS, Civil and Moral.
The Charge Given May 24. 1616.
by way of Evidence, by Sir Francis Bacon, his Majesty's Attorney General,
before the Lord High Steward, The Lord Chancellor Egerton, Lord Ellesmere, and
the Earl of Bridgwater.
and the Peers, against Frances Countess of Somerset, concerning the poisoning
of Sir Thomas Overbury.
IT may please your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England, and you my Lords
the Peers.

I am very glad to hear this unfortunate Lady does take this Course, to confess
fully, and freely, and thereby to give Glory to God, and to Justice. It is (as
I may term it) the Nobleness of an Offender to confess; and therefore those
meaner Persons, upon whom Justice passed before, confessed not, she does. I
know your Lordships cannot behold her without compassion. Many things may move
you, her Youth, her Person, her Sex, her noble Family, yea, her Provocations,
(if I should enter into the Cause it self) and Furies about her; but chiefly
her Penitency and Confession. But Justice is the work of this Day; the
Mercy-Seat was in the inner part of the Temple; the Throne is public. But
since this Lady has by her Confession prevented my Evidence, and your Verdict;
and that this Day's labor is eased; there rests in the Legal Proceeding, but
for me to pray that her Confession may be recorded, and Judgment thereupon.

But because your Lordships the Peers are met, and that this day and to morrow
are the Days that crown all the former Justice; and that in these great Cases
it has been ever the manner to respect Honor and Satisfaction, as well as the
ordinary Parts and Forms of Justice; the Occasion it self admonishes me, to
give your Lordships and the Hearers this Contentment, as to make Declaration of
the Proceedings of this excellent Work of the King's Justice, from the
beginning to the end.

It may please your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England, this is now the
second time, within the space of thirteen years Reign of our Happy Sovereign,
that this high Tribunal Seat (ordained for the Trial of Peers) has been opened
and erected, and that with a rare event, supplied and exercised by one and the
same Person, which is a great Honor unto you, my Lord Steward.

In all this mean time the King has reigned in his white Robe, not sprinkled
with any one Drop of the Blood of any of his Nobles of this Kingdom. Nay, such
have been the Depths of his Mercy, as even those Noble-Mens Bloods, (against
whom the Proceeding was at Winchester) Cobham and Gray, were attainted and
corrupted, but not spilt or taken away; but that they remained rather
Spectacles of Justice in their continual Imprisonment, than Monuments of
Justice in the Memory of their Suffering.

It is true, that the Objects of his Justice then and now were very differing;
for then it was the Revenge of an Offense against his own Person and Crown, and
upon Persons that were Malcontents, and Contraries to the State and
Government; but now it is the Revenge of the Blood and Death of a particular
Subject, and the Cry of a Prisoner; it is upon Persons that were highly in his
Favor; whereby his Majesty, to his great Honor, has showed to the World, as
if it were written in a Sunbeam, that he is truly the Lieutenant of him with
whom there is no respect of Persons; that his Affections Royal are above his
Affections private; that his Favors, and Nearness about him, are not like
Popish Sanctuaries, to privilege Malefactors; and that his being the best
Master in the World, does not let him from being the best King in the World.
His People, on the other side, may say to themselves, I will lie down in Peace,
for God, the King, and the Law, protect me against great and small. It may be a
Discipline also to great Men, especially such as are swollen in their Fortunes
from small beginnings, that the King is as well able to level Mountains, as to
fill Valleys, if such be their desert.

But to come to the present Case, The great Frame of Justice (my Lords) in this
present Action, has a Vault, and has a Stage: A Vault, wherein these Works of
Darkness were contrived; and a Stage, with Steps, by which it was brought to
Light.

For the former of these, I will not lead your Lordships into it, because I
will engrieve nothing against a Penitent, neither will I open any thing against
him that is absent. The one I will give to the Laws of Humanity, and the other
to the Laws of Justice; for I shall always serve my Master with a good and
sincere Conscience, and I know that he accepts best. Therefore I will reserve
that till to morrow, and hold my self to that which I called the Stage or
Theater, whereunto indeed it may be fitly compared: for that things were first
contained within the Invisible Judgments of God, as within a Curtain, and after
came forth, and were acted most worthily by the King, and right well by his
Ministers.

Sir Thomas Overbury was murdered by Poison, September. 15. 1613. This foul and
cruel Murder did for a time cry secretly in the Ears of God; but God gave no
answer to it, otherwise than by that Voice, (which sometime he uses) which is
Vox Populi, the Speech of the People: For there went then a Murmur that
Overbury was poisoned; and yet the same submiss and low Voice of God (the
Speech of the Vulgar People) was not without a Counter-tenor or Counter-blast
of the Devil, who is the common Author both of Murder and Slander; for it was
given out, that Overbury was dead of a foul Disease; and his Body (which they
had made Corpus Iudaicum with their Poisons, so as it had no whole part) must
be said to be leprosed with Vice, and so his Name poisoned as well as his Body.
For as to Dissoluteness, I have not heard the Gentleman noted with it; his
Faults were of Insolency, Turbulency, and the like of that kind.

Mean time there was some Industry used (of which I will not now speak) to lull
asleep those that were the Revengers of the Blood, the Father and the Brother
of the Murdered. And in these terms things stood by the space of two years,
during which time God did so blind the two great Procurers, and dazzle them with
their Greatness, and blind and nail fast the Actors and Instruments with
security upon their Protection, as neither the one looked about them, nor the
other stirred or fled, or were conveyed away, but remained here still, as under
a privy Arrest of God's Judgments; insomuch as Franklin, that should have been
sent over to the Palsgrave with good store of Money, was by God's Providence,
and the Accident of a Marriage of his, diverted and stayed.

But about the beginning of the Progress the last Summer, God's Judgments began
to come out of their depths. And as the revealing of Murder is commonly such as
a Man said, a Domino hoc factum est; it is God's work, and it is mavelous in
our eyes: so in this particular it was most admirable; for it came forth first
by a Complement, a matter of Courtesy. My Lord of Shrewsbury, that is now with
God, recommended to a Councellor of State, (of special Trust by his place) the
late Lieutenant Called in Sir H. Wotton 's Reliq. p. 413. Elvis In Sir A.
Welden 's Court of K. James, p. 107. Elwaies. In Aulic. Coquin. p. 141.
Ellowaies. In Sir W. Dugdales Baron. of Eng. Tom 2. p. 425. Elways. In Baker,
Yelvis. p. 434.
Helwisse, only for Acquaintance, as an honest and worthy Gentleman, and
desired him to know him, and to be acquainted with him. That Councellor
answered him civilly, That my Lord did him a favor, and that he should embrace
it willingly; but he must let his Lordship know, that there did lie a heavy
imputation upon the Gentleman, Helwisse, for that Sir Tho. Overbury, his
Prisoner, was thought to have come to a violent and an untimely Death. When
this Speech was reported back by my Lord of Shrewsbury to Helwisse, percussit
ili^o animum, he was stricken with it, and being a politic Man, and of
likelihood doubting, that the matter would break forth at one time or other,
and that others might have the start of him, and thinking to make his own Case
by his own Tale, resolved with himself upon this occasion, to discover unto my
Lord of Shrewsbury, and that Councellor, that there was an Attempt (whereunto
he was privy) to have poisoned Overbury, by the hands of his Underkeeper,
Weston; but that he checked it, and put it by, and dissuaded it. But then he
left it thus, that it was but as an Attempt, or an untimely Birth, never
executed; and as if his own Fault had been no more, but that he was honest in
forbidding, but fearful of revealing, and impeaching or accusing great Persons.
And so with this fine point thought to save himself.

But that Councellor of Estate wisely considering, that by the Lieutenant's own
Tale it could not be simply a Permission, or Weakness; for that Weston was
never displaced by the Lieutenant, notwithstanding that Attempt; and coupling
the Sequel by the beginning, thought it matter fit to be brought before his
Majesty, by whose appointment. Helwisse set down the like Declaration in
writing.

Upon this Ground the King plays Salomon's part, gloria Dei celare rem, and
gloria Regis investigare rem, and sets down certain Papers of his own hand,
which I might term to be Claves Iustitiae, Keys of Justice, and may serve both
for a Precedent for Princes to imitate, and for a Direction for Judges to
follow. And his Majesty carried the Balance with a constant and steady hand,
evenly and without prejudice, whether it were a true Accusation of the one
part, or a Practice and factious Scandal of the other. Which Writing, because I
am not able to express according to the worth thereof, I will desire your
Lordships anon to hear read.

This excellent Foundation of Justice being laid by his Majesty's own hand, it
was referred unto some Counselors to examine further, who gained some Degrees
of Light from Weston, but yet left it imperfect.

After it was referred to Sir Ed. Cook, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, as a
Person best practiced in Legal Examinations, who took a great deal of
indefatigable pains in it without intermission, having (as I have heard him
say) taken at least three hundred Examinations in this Business.

But these things were not done in a Corner, I need not speak of them. It is
true, that my Lord Chief Justice, in the dawning and opening of the Light,
finding the matter touched upon these great Persons, very discreetly became
Suitor to the King, to have greater Persons than his own Rank joined with him;
whereupon your Lordships, my Lord High Steward of England, my Lord Steward of
the King's House, and my Lord Zouch, were joined with him.

Neither wanted there (this while) Practice to suppress Testimony, to deface
Writings, to weaken the Kings Resolution, to slander the Justice, and the like.
Nay when it came to the first solemn Act of Justice, which was the Arraignment
of Weston, he had his lesson to stand mute, which had arrested the whole Wheel
of Justice: but this dumb Devil, by the means of some discreet Divines, and the
potent Charm of Justice together, was cast out; neither did this poisonous
Adder stop his Ear to these Charms, but relented, and yielded to his Trial.

Then followed the other Proceedings of Justice against the other Offenders,
Turnor, Helwisse, Franklin.

But all these being but the Organs and Instruments of this Fact, (the Actors,
and not the Authors) Justice could not have been crowned without this last Act
against these great Persons; else Weston's Censure or Prediction might have
been verified, when he said, He hoped the small Flies should not be caught, and
the greater escape. Wherein the King, being in great straits between the
defacing of his Houour and of his Creature, has (according as he uses to do)
chosen the better part, reserving always Mercy to himself.

The time also of Justice has had its true Motions. The time until this Ladies
deliverance was due unto Honor, Christianity, and Humanity, in respect of her
great Belly. The time since was due to another kind of Deliverance too, which
was, that some Causes of Estate which were in the Womb might likewise be
brought forth, not for matter of Justice, but for Reason of State. Likewise
this last Procrastination of Days had the like weighty Grounds and Causes.

But (my Lords) where I speak of a Stage, I doubt I hold you upon the Stage too
long. But before I pray Judgment, I pray your Lordships to hear the Kings
Papers read, that you may see how well the King was inspired, and how nobly he
carried it, that Innocence might not have so much as Aspersion.

Frances, Countess of Somerset, has been indicted and arraigned, as accessory
before the Fact, for the Murder and Impoisonment of Sir Tho. Overbury, and has
pleaded guilty, and confesses the Indictment: I pray Judgment against the
Prisoner.

The Charge of Sir Francis Bacon, his Majesty's Attorney General, by way of
Evidence, before the Lord High Steward, and the Peers, against Robert Earl of
Somerset, concerning the poisoning of Overbury.
IT may please your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England, and you my Lords
the Peers; You have here before you Robert Earl of Somerset, to be tried for
his Life, concerning the procuring and consenting to the Impoisonment of Sir
Thomas Overbury, then the King's Prisoner in the Tower of London, as an
Accessory before the Fact.

I know your Lordships cannot behold this Nobleman, but you must remember his
great favor with the King, and the great Place that he has had and born, and
must be sensible that he is yet of your Number and Body, a Peer as you are; so
as you cannot cut him off from your Body but with grief; and therefore that you
will expect from us, that give in the King's Evidence, sound and sufficient
matter of Proof, to satisfy your Honors and Consciences.

And for the manner of the Evidence also, the King our Master (who among his
other Virtues, excels in that Virtue of the Imperial Throne, which is
Justice) has given us Commandment that we should not expatiate, nor make
Invectives, but materially pursue the Evidence, as it conduces to the Point in
question; a matter that (tho we are glad of so good a Warrant) yet we should
have done of our selves; for far be it from us, by any strains of Wit or Art to
seek to play Prizes, or to blazo^ our Names in Blood, or to carry the Day
otherwise than upon just Grounds. We shall carry the Lanthorn of Justice (which
is the Evidence) before your Eyes upright, and be able to save it from being
put out with any Winds of Evasions, or vain Defenses, that is our part; not
doubting at all, but that this Evidence in it self will carry that force, as it
shall little need Vantages or Aggravations.

My Lords, The Course which I shall hold in delivering that which I shall say
(for I love Order) is this,

First, I will speak somewhat of the nature and greatness of the Offense which
is now to be tried, and that the King, however he might use this Gentleman
heretofore, as the Signet upon his Finger (to use the Scripture Phrase) yet in
this Case could not but put him off, and deliver him into the hands of Justice.

Secondly, I will use some few words touching the Nature of the Proofs, which
in such a Case are competent.

Thirdly, I will state the Proofs.

And lastly, I will produce the Proofs, either out of the Examinations and
Matters in Writing, or Witnesses viva voce.

For the Offense it self; it is of Crimes (next unto High Treason) the
greatest; it is the foulest of Fellonies. And take this Offense with the
Circumstances, it has three Degrees or Stages; that it is Murder; that it is
Murder by Impoisonment; that it is Murder committed upon the Kings Prisoner in
the Tower: I might say, that it is Murder under the Color of Friendship; but
that is a Circumstance moral, I leave that to the Evidence it self.

For Murder, my Lords, the first Record of Justice which was in the World was a
Judgment upon Murder, in the person of Adam's first born, Cain: And though it
were not punished by Death, but with Banishment and mark of Ignominy, in
respect of the primogeniture, or of the population of the World, or other
points of God's secret Will, yet it was adjudged, and was (as I said) the first
Record of Justice. So it appears likewise in Scripture, that the murder of
Abner by Ioab, though it were by David respited in respect of great Services
past, or Reason of State, yet it was not forgotten. But of this I will say no
more. It was ever admitted, and so ranked in God's own Tables, that Murder is
of offenses between Man and Man (next to Treason and Disobedience of Authority,
which some Divines have referred to the First Table, because of the Lieutenancy
of God in Princes and Fathers) the greatest.

For Impoisonment, I am sorry it should be heard of in this Kingdom: It is not
nostri generis nec sanguinis; It is an Italian Crime fit for the Court of Rome,
where that Person that intoxicateth the Kings of the Earth with his Cup of
Poison in Heretical Doctrine, is many times really and materially intoxicated
and impoisoned himself.

But it has three Circumstances, which make it grievous beyond other Murders:
Whereof the first is, That it takes a Man in full Peace; in God's and the
King's Peace; He thinks no harm, but is comforting Nature with Refection and
Food: So that (as the Scripture says) His Table is made a Snare.

The second is, That it is easily committed, and easily concealed; and on the
other side, hardly prevented, and hardly discovered: For Murder by violence
Princes have Guards, and private Men have Houses, Attendants, and Arms: Neither
can such Murders be committed but cum sonitu, and with some overt and apparent
Act, that may discover and trace the Offender. But for Poison, the said Cup it
self of Princes will scarce serve, in regard of many Poisons, that neither
discolor nor distaste; and so passes without noise or observation.

And the last is, Because it contains not only the destruction of the maliced
Man, but of any other; Quis modo tutus erit? For many times the Poison is
prepared for one, and is taken by another: So that Men die other Men's Deaths;
Concidit infelix alieno vulnere: and it is as the Psalm calls it, Sagitta
nocte volans; The Arrow that flies by night, it has no aim or certainty.

Now for the third Degree of this particular Offense, which is, that it was
committed upon the King's Prisoner, who was out of his own Defense, and merely
in the King's protection, and for whom the King and State was a kind of
Respondent, it is a thing that aggravates the Fault much. For certainly (my
Lord of Somerset) let me tell you this, That Sir Tho. Overbury is the first Man
that was murdered in the Tower of London, since the murder of the two young
Princes.

For the Nature of the Proofs, your Lordships must consider, that Impoisonment,
of Offenses is the most secret: So secret, as if in all Cases of Impoisonment
you should require Testimony, you were as good proclaim Impunity. I will put
Book-Examples.

Who could have impeached Livia, by Testimony, of the impoisoning of the Figs
upon the Tree, which her Husband was wont, for his pleasure, to gather with his
own hands.

Who could have impeached Parisatis for the poisoning of one side of the Knife
that she carved with, and keeping the other side clean; so that her self did
eat of the same piece of Meat that the Lady did that she did impoison? The
Cases are infinite, (and indeed not fit to be spoken of) of the secrecy of
Impoisonments; But wise Triers must take upon them, in these secret Cases,
Solomon's Spirit, that where there could be no Witnesses, collected the Act by
the Affection.

But yet we are not to come to one Case: For that which your Lordships are to
try, is not the Act of Impoisonment (for that is done to your hand) all the
World by Law is concluded, ^^t to say that Overbury was impoisoned by Weston.
But the Question before you is of the procurement only, and of the abetting (as
the Law terms it) as accessory before the Fact: Which abetting is no more,
but to do or use any Act or Means, which may aid or conduce unto the
Impoisonment.

So that it is not the buying or making of the Poison, or the preparing, or
confecting, or commixing of it, or the giving or sending, or laying the Poison,
that are the only Acts that do amount unto Abetment. But if there be any other
Act or Means done or used, to give the opportunity of Impoisonment, or to
facilitate the execution of it, or to stop or divert any impediments that might
hinder it, and this be with an intention, to accomplish and atchieve the
Impoisonment; all these are Abetments, and Accessaries before the Fact. I will
put you a familiar Example. Allow there be a Conspiracy to murder a Man as he
journies by the ways and it be one Man's part to draw him forth to that Journey
by invitation, or by color of some business; and another takes upon him to
dissuade some Friend of his, whom he had a purpose to take in his Company, that
he be not too strong to make his defense: And another has the part to go along
with him, and to hold him in talk till the first blow be given. All these (my
Lords) without scruple are Abetters to this Murder, though none of them give
the Blow, nor assist to give the Blow.

My Lords, he is not the Hunter alone that lets slip the Dog upon the Deer, but
he that lodges the Deer, or raises him, or puts him out, or he that sets a
Toil that he cannot escape, or the like.

But this (my Lords) little needs in this present Case, where there is such a
Chain of Acts of Impoisonment as has been seldom seen, and could hardly have
been expected, but that Greatness of Fortune makes commonly Grossness in
offending.

To descend to the Proofs themselves, I shall keep this course.

First, I will make a Narrative or Declaration of the Fact it self.

Secondly, I will break and distribute the Proofs, as they concern the Prisoner.

And thirdly, according to that distribution, I will produce them, and read
them, or use them.

So that there is nothing that I shall say, but your Lordship (my Lord of
Somerset) shall have three thoughts or cogitations to answer it: First, when I
open it, you may take your aim: Secondly, when I distribute it, you may prepare
your Answers without confusion: And lastly, when I produce the Witnesses, or
Examinations themselves, you may again ruminate and readvise how to make your
defense. And this I do the rather, because your Memory or Understanding may not
be oppressed or overladen with length of Evidence, or with confusion of order.
Nay more, when your Lordship shall make your Answers in your time, I will put
you in mind (when cause shall be) of your omissions.

First therefore, for the simple Narrative of the Fact. Sir Tho. Overbury, for
a time was known to have had great Interest, and great Friendship with my Lord
of Somerset, both in his meaner Fortunes, and after: Insomuch as he was a kind
of Oracle of Direction unto him; and if you will believe his own vaunts (being
of an insolent Thrasonical disposition) he took upon him, that the Fortune,
Reputation, and Understanding of this Gentleman (who is well known to have had
a better Teacher) proceeded from his Company and Counsel.

And this Friendship rested not only in Conversation and Business of Court, but
likewise in Communication of Secrets of Estate. For my Lord of Somerset, at
that time, exercising (by his Majesty's special favor and trust) the Office of
the Secretary provisionally, did not forbear to acquaint Overbury with the
King's Packets of Dispatches from all parts, Spain, France, the Low Countries,
etc. And this not by glimpses, or now and then rounding in the Ear for a
favor, but in a settled manner: Packets were sent, sometimes opened by my Lord,
sometimes unbroken unto Overbury, who perused them, copied, registered them,
made Tables of them as he thought good: So that I will undertake, the time was,
when Overbury knew more of the Secrets of State, than the Council Table did.
Nay, they were grown to such an inwardness, as they made a Play of all the
World besides themselves: So as they had Ciphers and Iargons for the King, the
Queen, and all the great Men; things seldom used, but either by Princes, and
their Ambassadors and Ministers, or by such as work and practice against, or
at least upon Princes.

But understand me (my Lord) I shall not charge you this day with any
Disloyalty; only I say this for a foundation, That there was a great
communication of Secrets between you and Overbury, and that it had relation to
Matters of Estate, and the greatest Causes of this Kingdom.

But (my Lords) as it is a principle in Nature, that the best things are in
their corruption the worst: And the sweetest Wine makes the sharpest Vinegar:
So fell it out with them, that this excess (as I may term it) of Friendship,
ended in mortal Hatred on my Lord of Somerset's part.

For it fell out, some twelve months before Overbury's imprisonment in the
Tower, that my Lord of Somerset was entered into an unlawful love toward his
unfortunate Lady, then Countess of Essex; which went so far, as it was then
secretly projected (chiefly between my Lord Privy Seal and my Lord of Somerset)
to effect a Nullity in the Marriage with my Lord of Essex, and so to proceed to
a Marriage with Somerset.

This Marriage and Purpose did Overbury mainly oppugn, under pretense to do the
true part of a Friend (for that he counted her an unworthy Woman) but the truth
was, that Overbury, who (to speak plainly) had little that was solid for
Religion or Moral Virtue, but was a Man possessed with Ambition and vain Glory,
was loath to have any Partners in the favor of my Lord of Somerset, and
specially not the House of the Howards, against whom he had always professed
hatred and opposition. So all was but miserable Bargains of Ambition.

And (my Lords) that this is no sinister construction, will well appear unto
you, when you shall hear that Overbury makes his brags to my Lord of Somerset,
that he had won him the love of the Lady by his Letters and Industry: So far
was he from Cases of Conscience in this Matter. And certainly (my Lords)
howsoever the tragical misery of that poor Gentleman Overbury ought somewhat to
obliterate his Faults; yet because we are not now upon point of Civility, but
to discover the Face of Truth to the Face of Justice: And that it is material
to the true understanding of the state of this Cause, Overbury was naught and
corrupt, the Ballades must be amended for that point,

But to proceed, When Overbury saw that he was like to be dispossessed of my
Lord here, whom he had possessed so long, and by whose Greatness he had
promised himself to do wonders; and being a Man of an unbounded and impetuous
spirit, he began not only to dissuade, but to deter him from that Love and
Marriage; and finding him fixed, thought to try stronger Remedies, supposing
that he had my Lord's Head under his Girdle, in respect of communication of
Secrets of Estate, or (as he calls them himself in his Letters, Secrets of all
Natures) and therefore dealt violently with him, to make him desist, with
menaces of Discovery of Secrets, and the like.

Hereupon grew two streams of hatred upon Overbury; The one from the Lady, in
respect that he crossed her Love, and abused her Name, which are Furies to
Women; The other of a deeper and more Mineral Nature from my Lord of Somerset
himself; who was afraid of Overbury's Nature, and that if he did break from him
and fly out, he would mine into him, and trouble his whole Fortunes.

I might add a third stream from the Earl of Northampton's Ambition, who
desires to be first in favor with my Lord of Somerset, and knowing Overbury's
malice to himself, and his House, thought that Man must be removed and cut off.
So it was amongst them resolved and decreed, that Overbury must die.

Hereupon they had variety of Devices. To send him beyond Sea, upon occasion of
Employment, that was too weak; and they were so far from giving way to it, as
they crossed it. There rested but two ways, Quarrel or Assault, and Poison. For
that of Assault, after some proposition and attempt, they passed from it; It
was a thing too open, and subject to more variety of chances. That of Poison
likewise was a hazardous thing, and subject to many preventions and cautions,
especially to such a jealous and working Brain as Overbury had, except he were
first fast in their hands.

Therefore the way was first to get him into a Trap, and lay him up, and then
they could not miss the Mark. Therefore in execution of this Plot, it was
devised, that Overbury should be designed to some honorable Employment in
Foreign Parts, and should underhand by the Lord of Somerset be encouraged to
refuse it; and so upon that contempt he should be laid Prisoner in the Tower,
and then they would look he should be close enough, and Death should be his
Bail. Yet were they not at their end. For they considered, that if there was
not a fit Lieutenant of the Tower for their purpose, and likewise a fit
under-keeper of Overbury: First, They should meet with many Impediments in the
giving and exhibiting the Poison: Secondly, They should be exposed to note and
observation, that might discover them: And thirdly, Overbury in the mean time
might write clamorous and furious Letters to other his Friends, and so all
might be disappointed. And therefore the next Link of the Chain, was to
displace the then Lieutenant Waade, and to place Helwisse a principal Abetter
in the Impoisonment: Again, to displace Carry, that was the under-Keeper in
Waade's time, and to place Weston, who was the principal Actor in the
Impoisonment: And this was done in such a while (that it may appear to be done,
as it were with one breath) as there were but fifteen days between the
commitment of Overbury, the displacing of Waade, the placing of Helwisse, the
displacing of ^ary the under-Keeper, the placing of Weston, and the first
Poison given two days after.

Then when they had this poor Gentleman in the Tower close Prisoner, where he
could not escape nor stir, where he could not feed but by their Hands, where he
could not speak nor write but through their Trunks; then was the time to
execute the last Act of this Tragedy.

Then must Franklin be purveyour of the Poisons, and procure five, six, seven
several Potions, to be sure to hit his Complexion. Then must Mris Turner be the
Say-Mistris of the Poisons to try upon poor Beasts, what is present, and what
works at distance of time! Then must Weston be the Tormenter, and chase him
with Poison after Poison, Poison in Salts, Poison in Meats, Poison in
Sweetmeats, Poison in Medicines and Vomits, until at last his Body was almost
come, by use of Poisons, to the state that Mithridate's Body was by the use of
Treacle and Preservatives, that the force of the Poisons were blunted upon him:
Weston confessing, when he was chid for not dispatching him, that he had given
him enough to poison twenty Men. Lastly, Because all this asked time, courses
were taken by Somerset, both to divert all means of Overbury's Delivery, and to
entertain Overbury by continual Letters, partly of Hopes and Projects for his
Delivery, and partly of other Fables and Negotiations; somewhat like some kind
of Persons (which I will not name) which keep Men in talk of Fortune-telling,
when they have a fellonious meaning.

And this is the true Narrative of this Act of Impoisonment, which I have
summarily recited.

Now for the Distribution of the Proofs, there are four Heads of Proofs to
prove you guilty (my Lord of Somerset) of this Impoisonment; whereof two are
precedent to the Imprisonment, the third is present, and the fourth is
following or subsequent: For it is in Proofs, as it is in Lights; there is a
direct Light, and there is a reflection of Light, or Back-Light.

The first Head or Proof thereof is, That there was a root of Bitterness, a
mortal Malice or Hatred, mixed with deep and bottomless Fears, that you had
toward Sir Thomas Overbury.

The second is, That you were the principal Actor, and had your hand in all
those Acts, which did conduce to the Impoisonment, and which gave opportunity
and means to effect it; and without which the Impoisonment could never have
been, and which could serve or tend to no other end, but to the Impoisonment.

The third is, That your hand was in the very Impoisonment it self, which is
more than needs to be proved; that you did direct Poison, that you did deliver
Poison, that you did continually hearken to the success of the Impoisonment,
and that you spurred it on, and called for dispatch, when you thought it
lingered.

And lastly, That you did all the things after the Impoisonment, which may
detect a guilty Conscience for the smothering of it, and avoiding punishment
for it, which can be but of three kinds. That you suppressed, as much as in you
was, Testimony: That you did deface, and destroy, and clip, and misdate all
Writings that might give light to the Impoisonment; and that you did fly to the
Altar of Guiltiness, which is a Pardon, and a Pardon of Murder, and a Pardon
for your Self, and not for your Lady.

In this (my Lord) I convert my speech to you, because I would have you attend
the Points of your Charge, and so of your Defense the better. And two of these
Heads I have taken to my self, and left the other two to the King's two
Sergeants.

For the first main part, which is the mortal Hatred coupled with Fear, that
was in my Lord of Somerset toward Overbury, although he did palliate it with a
great deal of hypocrisy and dissimulation even to the end; I shall prove it
(my Lord Steward, and you my Lords and Peers) manifestly, by matter both of
Oath and Writing. The root of this Hatred was that that has cost many a Man's
Life; that is, Fear of discovering Secrets. Secrets (I say) of a high and
dangerous nature; wherein the course that I will hold shall be this.

First; I will show that such a Breach and Malice was between my Lord and
Overbury, and that it burst forth into violent Menaces and Threats on both
sides.

Secondly; That these Secrets were not light, but of a high nature, for I will
give you the Elevation of the Pole. They were such as my Lord of Somerset for
his part had made a Vow, That Overbury should neither live in Court nor
Country. That he had likewise opened himself, and his own fears so far, that if
Overbury ever came forth of the Tower, either Overbury or himself must die for
it. And of Overbury's part, he had threatened my Lord, That whether he did live
or die, my Lord's shame should never die, but he would leave him the most
odious Man of the World. And farther that my Lord was like enough to repent it,
in the place where Overbury wrote, which was the Tower of London. He was a true
Prophet (...) that: So here in the height of the Secrets.

Thirdly; I will show you, that all the King's Business was by my Lord put into
Overbury's Hands: So as there is work enough for Secrets, whatsoever they were.
And like Princes Confederates, they had their Ciphers and Iargons.

And lastly; I will show you that it is but a Toy to say that the Malice was
only in respect he spoke dishonourbly of the Lady; or for doubt of breaking the
Marriage: For that Overbury* was a Coadjutor to that Love, and the Lord of
Somerset was as deep in speaking ill of the Lady, as Overbury. And again, it
was too late for that Matter, for the Bargain of the Match was then made and
past. And if it had been no more but to remove Overbury from disturbing of the
Match, it had been an easy matter to have banded over Overbury beyond Seas, for
which they had a fair way; but that would not serve their turn.

And lastly, Periculum periculo vincitur, to go so far as an Impoisonment, must
have a deeper malice than flashes: For the Cause must bear a proportion to the
Effect.

For the next general Head of Proofs, which consists in Acts preparatory to the
middle Acts, they are in eight several points of the Compass, as I may term it.

First; That there were devices and projects to dispatch Overbury, or to
overthrow him, plotted between the Countess of Somerset, the Earl of Somerset,
and the Earl of Northampton, before they fell upon the Impoisonment: For always
before Men fix upon a course of Mischief, there be some rejections; but die he
must one way or other.

Secondly; That my Lord of Somerset was principal Practicer (I must speak it)
in a most perfidious manner, to set a Train or Trap for Overbury to get him
into the Tower; without which they never durst have attempted the Impoisonment.

Thirdly; That the placing of the Lieutenant Helwisse one of the Impoisoners,
and the displacing of Waade, was by the means of my Lord of Somerset.

Fourthly; That the placing of Weston the under-Keeper, who was the principal
Impoisoner, and the displacing of Carry, and the doing of all this within
fifteen days after Overbury's Commitment, was by the means and countenance of
my Lord of Somerset. And these two were the active Instruments of the
Impoisonment: And this was a Business that the Ladies power could not reach
unto.

Fifthly; That because there must be a time for the Tragedy to be acted, and
chiefly because they would not have the Poisons work upon the sudden: And for
that the strength of Overbury's Nature, or the very custom of receiving Poison
into his Body, did overcome the Poisons that they wrought not so fast,
therefore Overbury must be held in the Tower. And as my Lord of Somerset got
him into the Trap, so he kept him in, and abused him with continual hopes of
Liberty; and diverted all the true and effectual means of his Liberty, and made
light of his Sickness and Extremities.

Sixthly; That not only the Plot of getting Overbury into the Tower, and the
devices to hold him and keep him there, but the strange manner of his close
keeping (being in but for a Contempt) was by the device and means of my Lord of
Somerset, who denied his Father to see him, denied his Servants that offered to
be shut up close Prisoners with him, and in effect handled it so, that he was
close Prisoner to all his Friends, and open and exposed to all his Enemies.

Seventhly, That the Advertisement which my Lady received from time to time,
from the Lieutenant or Weston, touching Overbury's state of Body or Health,
were ever sent up to the Court, though it were in Progress, and that from my
Lady: such a thirst and listening this Lord had to hear that he was dispatched.

Lastly, There was a continual Negotiation to set Overbury's Head on work, that
he should make some recognition to clear the honor of the Lady; and that he
should become a good Instrument toward her and her Friends: All which was but
entertainment: For your Lordships shall plainly see diverse of my Lord of
Northampton's Letters (whose hand was deep in this Business) written (I must
say it) in dark Words and Clauses; That there was one thing pretended, and
another intended; That there was a real Charge, and there was somewhat not
real; a main drift and a dissimulation. Nay further, there be some passages
which the Peers in their wisdom will discern to point directly at the
Impoisonment.

After this Inducement followed the Evidence it self.

The Lord Bacon's Letter to the University of Cambridg.
Rescriptum Procuratoris Regis Primarii, ad Academiam Cantabrigiensem, quando
in Sanctius Regis Consilium cooptatus fuit.
GRatae mihi fuere Literae vestrae, atque Gratulationem vestram ipse mihi
gratulor. Rem ipsam ita mihi Honori, and voluptati fore duco, si in hac mente
maneam, ut Publicis Utilitatibus, studio indefesso, and perpetuis curis, and
puro affectu, inserviam. Inter parts autem Reipublicae, nulla Animo meo
charior est, quam Academiae and Literae. Idque and vita mea anteacta declarat,
and scripta. Itaque quicquid mihi accesserit, id etiam vobis accessisse
existimare potestis. Neque vero Pacrocinium meum vobis sublatum aut diminutum
esse credere debetis. Nam and ea pars Patroni, quae ad consilium in causis
exhibendum spectat, integra manet; Atque etiam (si quid gravius accideri^)
ipsum perorandi Munus (licentia Regis obtenta) relict^m est; Quodque Iuris
Patrocinio deerit, id auctiore potestate compensabitur. Mihi in votis est, ut
quemadmodum a privatorum and clientelarum negotiis, ad Gube^nacula Reipublicae
translatus jam sum; Ita and postrema Aetatis meae pars (si vita suppetit) etiam
a publicis curis ad otium and Literas devehi possit. Quinetiam saepius subit
illa Cogitatio, ut etiam in tot and tantis Negotiis, tamen singulis annis
aliquos dies apud vos deponam; Vt ex majore vestrarum rerum notitia vestris
utilitatibus melius consulere possim.

5. Julij 1616. Amicus ves^er maxim Fidelis and Benevolus. Fr. Bacon.

The same in English by the Publisher.
The Answer of the Lord Bacon, then Attorney General, to the University of
Cambridg, when he was sworn of the Privy Council to the King.
YOur Letters were very acceptable to me; and I give my self joy, upon your
Congratulation. The thing it self will (I suppose) conduce to my Honor and
Satisfaction, if I remain in the mind I now am in; by unwearied study, and
perpetual watchfulness, and pure affection, to promote the Public Good. Now
among the Parts of the Commonwealth, there are none dearer to me than the
Universities, and Learning. And This, my manner of Life hitherto, and my
Writings, do both declare. If therefore any good Fortune befalls me, you may
look upon it as an accession to your selves. Neither are you to believe, that
my Patronage is either quite removed from you, or so much as diminished. For,
that part of an Advocate which concerns the giving of Counsel in Causes,
remains entire. Also (if any thing more weighty and urgent falls out) the
very Office of Pleading (the King's leave being obtained) is still allowed me.
And whatsoever shall be found wanting in my Juridical Patronage, will be
compensated by my more ample Authority. My wishes are, that as I am translated
from the Business of private Men, and particular Clients, to the Government of
the Commonwealth; so the latter part of my Age (if my Life be continued to me)
may, from the Public Cares, be translated to leisure and study.

Also this thought comes often into my mind, amidst so many Businesses, and of
such moment, every year to lay aside some days to think on You: That so, having
the greater insight into your Matters, I may the better consult your Advantage.

July the 5th 1616. Your most faithful and kind Friend, Fr. Bacon.

Sir Francis Bacon's Letter to King James touching the Chancellors Place.
It may please Your most Excellent Majesty.
YOur worthy Chancellor Chaenc. Egerton.
(I fear) goes his last day. God has hitherto used to weed out such Servants
as grew not fit for Your Majesty. But now He has gathered to Himself one of
the choicer Plants in Your Majesty's Garden. But Your Majesty's Service must
not be mortal.

Upon this heavy Accident, I pray your Majesty, in all humbleness and
sincerity, to give me leave to use a few words. I must never forget when I
moved your Majesty for the Attorney's Place, that it was your own sole Act, and
not my Lord of Somerset's; who, when he knew your Majesty had resolved it,
thrust himself into the Business to gain thanks. And therefore I have no reason
to pray to Saints.

I shall now again make Oblation to your Majesty; first of my Heart; then of my
Service; thirdly, of my Place of Attorney; and fourthly, of my Place in the
Star Chamber.

I hope I may be acquitted of Presumption, if I think of it; both because my
Father had the Place, which is some civil inducement to my desire, (and I pray
God your Majesty may have twenty no worse years than Queen Elizabeth had in her
Model after my Father's placing) and chiefly because the Chancellor's place,
after it went to the Law, was ever conferred upon some of the Learned Counsel,
and never upon a Judge. For Audley was raised from King's Sergeant; my Father
from Attorney of the Wards; Bromlie from Solicitor; Puckering from Queen's
Sergeant; Egerton from Master of the Rolls, having newly left the Attorney's
place. --

For my self, I can only present your Majesty with Gloria in Obsequio; yet I
dare promise, that if I sit in that Place, your Business shall not make such
short turns upon you as it does; But when a Direction is once given, it shall
be pursued and performed: And your Majesty shall only be troubled with the true
Care of a King; which is to think what you would have done in chief; and not
how for the Passages.

I do presume also, in respect of my Father's Memory, and that I have been
always gracious in the Lower House, I have some interest in the Gentlemen of
England; and shall be able to do some good Effect in rectifying that Body of
Parliament, which is Cardo Rerum. For, let me tell your Majesty, That that part
of the Chancellor's place, which is to judge in equity between Party and Party,
that same Regnum Iudiciale (which since my Father's time is but too much
enlarged) concerns your Majesty least, more than the acquitting of your
Conscience for Justice. But it is the other Parts of a Moderator amongst your
Council; of an Overseer over your Judges; of a Planter of fit Justices and
Governors in the Country, that imports your Affairs, and these Times, most.

I will add likewise, that I hope, by my Care, the Inventive Part of your
Council will be strengthened; who, now commonly, do exercise rather their
Judgments than their Inventions; and the Inventive Part comes from Projectors,
and Private Men; which cannot be so well: In which kind my Lord of Salisbury
had a good Method. --

To conclude; If I were the Man I would be, I should hope, that as your Majesty
of late has won Hearts by Depressing, you should in this lose no Hearts by
Advancing. For I see your People can better skill of Concretum than Abstractum;
and that the Waves of their Affection flow rather after Persons than Things. So
that Acts of this nature (if this were one) do more good than twenty Bills of
Grace.

If God call my Lord Chancellor, the Warrants and Commissions which are
requisite for the taking of the Seal, and for working with it, and for reviving
of Warrants under his Hand, which die with him, and the like, shall be in
readiness. And in this Time presses more, because it is the end of a Term, and
almost the beginning of the Circuits; so that the Seal cannot stand still. But
this may be done as heretofore, by Commission, till your Majesty has resolved
on an Officer. God ever preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and bounden Servant, F. Bacon.

A Letter written About a year and half after his Retirement.
by the Lord Bacon to King James, for Relief of his Estate.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty.
IN the midst of my misery, which is rather assuaged by Remembrance than by
Hope; my chiefest worldly comfort is, to think, That since the time I had the
first Vote of the Commons House of Parliament for Commissioner of the Union,
until the time that I was this last Parliament, chosen by both Houses for their
Messenger to your Majesty in the Petition of Religion, (which two were my first
and last Services) I was ever more so happy as to have my poor Services
graciously accepted by your Majesty, and likewise not to have had any of them
miscarry in my Hands. Neither of which points I can any ways take to my self,
but ascribe the former to your Majesty's Goodness, and the latter to your
prudent Directions; which I was ever careful to have and keep. For as I have
often said to your Majesty, I was toward you but as a Bucket, and a Cistern,
to draw forth and conserve, your self was the Fountain. Unto this comfort of
nineteen years prosperity, there succeeded a comfort even in my greatest
adversity, somewhat of the same nature; which is, That in those offenses
wherewith I was charged, there was not any one that had special relation to
your Majesty, or any your particular Commandments. For as, toward Almighty
God, there are Offenses against the first and second Table, and yet all against
God. So with the Servants of Kings, there are Offenses more immediate against
the Sovereign: Although all Offenses against Law are also against the King.
Unto which Comfort there is added this Circumstance, That as my Faults were not
against your Majesty, otherwise than as all Faults are; so my Fall was not your
Majesty's Act, otherwise than as all Acts of Justice are yours. This I write
not to insinuate with your Majesty, but as a most humble Appeal to your
Majesty's gracious remembrance, how honest and direct you have ever found me in
your Service; whereby I have an assured belief, that there is in your Majesty's
own Princely Thoughts, a great deal of serenity and clearness to me your
Majesty's now prostrate and cast-down Servant.

Neither (my most gracious Sovereign) do I by this mention of my Services, lay
claim to your Princely Grace and Bounty, though the privilege of Calamity does
bear that form of Petition. I know well, had they been much more, they had been
but my bounden Duty. Nay, I must also confess, that they were from time to
time, far above my merit, over and super-rewarded by your Majesty's Benefits
which you heaped upon me. Your Majesty was and is that Master to me, that
raised and advanced me nine times; thrice in Dignity, and six times in Office.
The places indeed were the painfullest of all your Services; But then they had
both Honor and Profits: And the then Profits might have maintained my now
Honor, if I had been wise. Neither was your Majesty's immediate liberality
wanting toward me in some Gifts, if I may hold them. All this I do most
thankfully acknowledge, and do herewith conclude, That for any thing arising
from my self to move your Eye of pity toward me, there is much more in my
present Misery, than in my past Services; save that the same your Majesty's
Goodness, that may give relief to the one, may give value to the other.

And indeed, if it may please your Majesty, this Theme of my Misery is so
plentiful, as it need not be coupled with any thing else. I have been some Body
by your Majesty's singular and undeserved favor, even the prime Officer of
your Kingdom. Your Majesty's Arm has been over mine in Council, when you
presided at the Table; so near I was: I have born your Majesty's Image in
Metal, much more in Heart: I was never in nineteen years Service chidden by
your Majesty, but contrariwise often overjoyed, when your Majesty would
sometimes say, I was a good Husband for you, though none for my self:
sometimes, That I had a way to deal in Business suavibus modis, which was the
way which was most according to your own Heart: And other most gracious
speeches of Affection and Trust, which I feed on to this day. But why should I
speak of these things which are now vanished, but only the better to express
the Downfall?

For now it is thus with me: I am a year and an half old in Misery; though I
must ever acknowledge, not without some mixture of your Majesty's Grace and
Mercy; For I do not think it possible, that any you once loved should be
totally miserable. Mine own Means, through mine own Improvidence are poor and
weak, little better than my Father left me. The poor Things which I have had
from your Majesty, are either in Question, or at Courtesy. My Dignities remain
Marks of your Favor, but Burdens of my present Fortune. The poor Remnants
which I had of my former Fortunes in Plate or Jewels, I have spread upon poor
Men unto whom I owed, scarce leaving my self a convenient Subsistence. So as to
conclude, I must pour out my Misery before your Majesty, so far as to say, Si
deseris tu, perimus.

But as I can offer to your Majesty's compassion little arising from my self to
move you, except it be my extreme Misery, which I have truly laid open; so
looking up to your Majesty's own self, I should think I committed Cain's fault
if I should despair. Your Majesty is a King, whose Heart is as unscrutable for
secret motions of Goodness, as for depth of Wisdom. You are, Creator-like,
Factive, and not Destructive. You are the Prince, in whom has been ever noted
an aversation against any thing that savoured of an hard Heart; as, on the
other side, your Princely Eye was wont to meet with any motion that was made on
the relieving part. Therefore as one that has had the happiness to know your
Majesty near hand, I have (most Gracious Sovereign) Faith enough for a Miracle,
much more for a Grace, that your Majesty will not suffer your poor Creature to
be utterly defaced, nor blot that Name quite out of your Book, upon which your
Sacred Hand has been so often for new Ornaments and Additions.

Unto this degree of compassion, I hope God above, (of whose Mercy toward me,
both in my Prosperity and Adversity I have had great Testimonies and Pledges,
though mine own manifold and wretched unthankfulnesses might have averted them)
will dispose your Princely Heart, already prepared to all Piety. And why should
I not think, but that thrice Noble Prince, who would have pulled me out of the
Fire of a Sentence, will help to pull me (if I may use that homely phrase) out
of the Mire of an abject and sordid condition in my last days: And that
excellent Favorite of yours, (the goodness of whose Nature contendeth with the
greatness of his Fortune; and who counts it a Prize, a second Prize, to be a
good Friend, after that Prize which he carries to be a good Servant) will kiss
your Hands with joy for any Work of Piety you shall do for me. And as all
commiserable Persons (especially such as find their Hearts void of all malice)
are apt to think that all Men pity them; I assure my self that the Lords of
your Council, who out of their Wisdom and Nobleness, cannot but be sensible of
humane Events, will in this way which I go for the Relief of my Estate, further
and advance your Majesty's Goodness toward me: For there is, as I conceive, a
kind of Fraternity between Great Men that are, and those that have been, being
but the several Tenses of one Verb. Nay, I do further presume, that both Houses
of Parliament will love their Justice the better, if it end not in my ruin. For
I have been often told, by many of my Lords, as it were in excusing the
severity of the Sentence, that they knew they left me in good Hands. And your
Majesty knows well, I have been all my life long acceptable to those
Assemblies, not by flattery, but by moderation, and by honest expressing of a
desire to have all things go fairly and well.

But if it may please your Majesty, (for Saints I shall give them Reverence,
but no Adoration; my Address is to your Majesty the Fountain of Goodness) your
Majesty shall, by the Grace of God, not feel that in Gift, which I shall
extremely feel in Help: For my Desires are moderate, and my Courses measured to
a Life orderly and reserved, hoping still to do your Majesty honor in my way.
Only I most humbly beseech your Majesty, to give me leave to conclude with
those words which Necessity speaks: Help me, (dear Sovereign Lord and Master)
and pity me so far, as I that have born a Bag, be not now in my Age forced in
effect to bear a Wallet; nor I that desire to live to study, may not be driven
to study to live. I most humbly crave pardon of a long Letter, after a long
silence. God of Heaven ever bless, preserve, and prosper your Majesty.

Your Majesty's poor ancient Servant and Beadsman, Fr. St. Alb.

Certain Apothegms of the Lord Bacon's, hitherto unpublished.
1. PLutarch said well, It is otherwise in a Commonwealth of Men than of Bees.
The Hive of a City or Kingdom is in best condition, when there is least of
noise or Buzze in it.

2. The same Plutarch said, of Men of weak Abilities set in Great Place, that
they were like little Statues set on great Bases, made to appear the less by
their Advancement.

3. He said again; Good Fame is like Fire. When you have kindled it, you may
easily preserve it; but if once you extinguish it, you will not easily kindle
it again; at least, not make it burn as bright as it did.

4. The Answer of Apollonius to Vespasian, is full of excellent This Apothegm
is also found in his Essay of Empire, P. 107
Instruction: Vespasian asked him, What was Nero's overthrow? He answered, Nero
could touch and tune the Harp well; but in Government, sometimes he used to
wind the Pins too high, sometimes to let them down too low. And certain it is,
that nothing destroys Authority so much as the unequal and untimely
enterchange of Power pressed too far, and relaxed too much.

5. Queen Elizabeth seeing Sir Edward -- in her Garden, looked out at her
Window, and asked him in Italian, What does a Man think of when he thinks of
nothing? Sir Edward (who had not had the effect of some of the Queen's Grants
so soon as he had hoped and desired) paused a little, and then made answer,
Madam, He thinks of a Woman's Promise. The Queen shrunk in her Head, but was
heard to say, Well, Sir Edward, I must not confute you. Anger makes dull Men
witty, but it keeps them poor.

6. When any Great Officer, Ecclesiastical or Civil, was to be made, the Queen
would enquire after the Piety, Integrity, Learning of the Man. And when she was
satisfied in these Qualifications, she would consider of his Personage. And
upon such an Occasion she pleased once to say to me, Bacon, How can the
Magistrate maintain his Authority when the Man is despised?

7. In Eighty Eight, when the Queen went from Temple Bar along Fleetstreet, the
Lawyers were ranked on one side, and the Companies of the City on the other;
said Master Bacon to a Lawyer that stood next him, do but observe the
Courtiers. If they bow first to the Citizens, they are in Debt; if first to us,
they are in Law.

8. King James was wont to be very earnest with the Country Gentlemen to go
from London to their Country Houses. And sometimes he would say thus to them;
Gentlemen, at London you are like Ships in a Sea, which show like nothing; but
in your Country Villages, you are like Ships in a River, which look like great
things.

9. Soon after the death of a great Officer, who was judged no advancer of the
King's Matters, the King said to his Solicitor Bacon, who was his Kinsman; Now
tell me truly, what say you of your Cousin that is gone? Mr. Bacon answered,
Sir, since your Majesty does charge me, I Will e'ne deal plainly with you, and
give you such a character of him, as if I were to write his Story. I do think
he was no fit Counselor to make your Affairs better; but yet he was fit to
have kept them from growing worse. The King said, On my So'l, Man, in the first
thou speak like a True Man, and in the latter like a Kinsman.

10. King James, as he was a Prince of great Judgment, so he was a Prince of a
mavelous pleasant humor; and there now come into my mind two instances of it.

As he was going through Lusen by Greenwich, he asked what Town it was? they
said, Lusen. He asked a good while after, What Town is this we are now in? They
said, still 'twas Lusen. On my So'l, said the King, I will be King of Lusen.

11. In some other of his Progresses, he asked how far 'twas to a Town whose
name I have forgotten; they said, Six miles. Half an hour after he asked again;
one said, Six miles and an half: The King alighted out of his Coach, and crept
under the Shoulder of his Led Horse. And when some asked his Majesty what he
meant; I must stalk, said he, for yonder Town is shie and flies me.

12. Count Gondomar sent a Complement to my Lord St. Albans, wishing him a good
Easter. My Lord thanked the Messenger, and said, He could not at present
requite the Count better, than in returning him the like; That he wished his
Lordship a good Passover.

13. My Lord Chancellor Elsmere, when he had read a Petition which he disliked,
would say; What! you would have my hand to this now? And the Party answering,
yes; He would say further; Well, so you shall. Nay, you shall have both my
hands to it. And so would, with both his hands, tear it in pieces.

14. I knew a See this also in his Essay of Dispatch, p. 143.
Wise Man, that had it for a byword, when he saw Men hasten to a Conclusion;
Stay a little that we may make an end the sooner.

15. Sir Francis Bacon was wont to say of an angry Man who suppressed his
Passion, That he thought worse than he spoke: and of an angry Man that would
chide, That he spoke worse than he thought.

16. He was wont also to say, That Power in an ill Man, was like the Power of a
black Witch; He could do hurt, but no good with it. And he would add, That the
Magicians could turn Water into Blood, but could not turn the Blood again to
Water.

17. When Mr. Attorney Cook, in the Exchequer, gave high words to Sr. Francis
Bacon, and stood much upon his higher Place; Sir Francis said to him, Mr.
Attorney! The less you speak of your own greatness, the more I shall think of
it; and the more, the less.

18. Sir Francis Bacon coming into the Earl of Arundel's Garden, where there
were a great number of Ancient Statues of naked Men and Women, made a stand,
and as astonished, cried out, The Resurrection.

19. Sir Francis Bacon (who was always for moderate Counsels) when one was
speaking of such a Reformation of the Church of England, as would in effect
make it no Church; said thus to him, Sir, The Subject we talk of is the Eye of
England: And if there be a speck or two in the Eye, we endeavor to take them
off; but he were a strange Oculist who would pull out the Eye.

20. The same Sir Francis Bacon was wont to say, That those who left useful
Studies for useless Scholastic Speculations, were like the Olympic Gamsters,
who abstained from necessary Labors, that they might be fit for such as were
not so.

21. He likewise often used this Comparison. See the Substance of this in Nov.
Org. Ed. Lugd. Bat. p. 105. and inter Cogitata and visa. p. 53.
The Empirical Philosophers are like to Pismires; they only lay up and use
their Store. The Rationalists are like to Spiders; they spin all out of their
own Bowels. But give me a Philosopher, who like the Be, has a middle faculty,
gathering from abroad, but digesting that which is gathered by his own virtue.

22. The Lord St. Alban, who was not overhasty to raise Theories, but proceeded
slowly by Experiments, was wont to say to some Philosophers who would not go
his Pace; Gentlemen! Nature is a Labyrinth, in which the very have you move
with will make you lose your way.

23. The same Lord when he spoke of the Dutchmen, used to say, That we could
not abandon them for our safety, nor keep them for our profit. And sometimes he
would express the same sense on this manner; We hold the Belgic Lion by the
Ears.

24. The same Lord, when a Gentleman seemed not much to approve of his
Liberality to his Retinue, said to him; Sir, I am all of a Piece; If the Head
be lifted up, the inferior parts of the Body must too.

25. The Lord Bacon was wont to commend the Advice of the plain old Man at
Buxton that sold Beesoms; A proud lazy young Fellow came to him for a Beesom
upon Trust; to whom the Old Man said; Friend! have thou no Money? borrow of thy
Back, and borrow of thy Belly; they will never ask thee again, I shall be dunning
thee every day.

26. Solon See this in his Essay of the true Greatness of Kingdoms. p. 171.
said well to Craesus, (when in ostentation he showed him his Gold) Sir, if any
other come that has better Iron than you, he will be master of all this Gold.

27. Jack Weeks said of a great Man (just then dead) who pretended to some
Religion, but was none of the best livers; Well, I hope he is in Heaven. Every
Man thinks as he wishes; but if he be in Heaven, 'twere pity it were known.

Ornamenta Rationalia.
A supply (by the Publisher) of certain weighty and elegant Sentences, some
made, others collected, by the Lord Bacon; and by him put under the abovesaid
Title; and at present not to be found.
A Collection of Sentences out of the Mimi of Publius; Englished by the
Publisher.
1. A Leator, quanto in Art est melior, tanto est nequior.

A Gamster, the greater Master he is in his Art, the worse Man he is.

2. Arcum, intensio frangit; Animum, remissio.

Much bending breaks the Bow; much unbending, the Mind.

3. Bis vincit, qui se vincit in Victoria.

He conquers twice, who upon Victory overcomes himself.

4. Cum vitia prosint, peccat, Qui recte facit.

If Vices were upon the whole matter profitable, the virtuous Man would be the
sinner.

5. Been dormit, qui non sentit, quod male dormiat.

He sleeps well, who feels not that he sleeps ill.

6. Deliberare utilia, mora est tutissima.

To deliberate about useful things, is the safest delay.

7. Dolor decrescit, ubi quo crescat non habet.

The flood of Grief decreaseth, when it can swell no higher.

8. Etiam Innocents cogit mentiri dolor.

Pain makes even the Innocent Man a Liar.

9. Etiam celeritas in desiderio, mora est.

(...) in desire, swiftness it self is delay.

10. Etiam capillus unus habet umbram suam.

The smallest Hair casts a shadow.

11. Fidem qui perdit, quo se servat in reliquum?

He that has lost his Faith, what has he left to live on?

12. Formosa Facies muta commendatio est.

A beautiful Face is a silent commendation.

13. Fortuna nimium quem fovet, Stultum facit.

Fortune makes him a Fool, whom she makes her Darling.

14. Fortuna obesse nulli contenta est semel.

Fortune is not content to do a Man but one ill turn.

15. Facit gratum Fortuna, quam nemo videt.

The Fortune which no Body sees, makes a Man happy and unenvied.

16. Heu! quam miserum est ab illo laedi, de quo non possis queri.

O! what a miserable thing it is to be hurt by such a one of whom it is in vain
to complain.

17. Homo toties moritur quoties amit^it s^os.

A Man dies as often as he loses his Friends.

18. Haeredis fletus, sub persona risus est.

The Tears of an Heir are laughter under a Vizard.

19. Iucundum nihil est, nisi quod reficit varietas.

Nothing is pleasant, to which variety does not give a relish.

20. Invidiam far, aut fortis, aut foelix potest.

He may bear envy, who is either courageous or happy.

21. In malis sperare bonum, nisi innocens, nemo potest.

None but a virtuous Man can hope well in ill circumstances.

22. In vindicando, criminosa est celeritas.

In taking revenge, the very haste we make is criminal.

23. In calamitoso risus etiam injuria est.

When Men are in calamity, if we do but laugh we offend.

24. Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui iterum Naufragium facit.

He accuses Neptune unjustly, who makes Shipwreck a second time.

25. Multis minatur, qui uni facit injuriam.

He that injures one, threatens an hundred.

26. Mora omnis ingrata est, sed facit sapientiam.

All delay is ungrateful, but we are not wise without it.

27. Mori est foelicis antequam Morte^ invocet.

Happy he who dies e're he calls for Death to take him away.

28. Malus ubi bonum se simulat, tunc est pessimus.

An ill Man is always ill; but he is then worst of all when he pretends to be a
Saint.

29. Magno cum periculo custoditur, quod multis placet.

Lock and Key will scarce keep that secure, which pleases every body.

30. Male vivunt qui se semper victuros putant.

They think ill who think of living always.

31. Male secum agit Aeger, Medicum qui haeredem facit.

That sick Man does ill for himself, who makes his Physician his Heir.

32. Multos timere* debet, quem multi timent.

He of whom many are afraid, ought himself to fear many.

33. Nulla tam bona est Fortuna, de qua nil possis queri.

There Is no Fortune so good but it bates an Ace.

34. Pars beneficii est, quod petitur, st been neges.

It Is part of the Gift, if you deny gentilely what is asked of you.

35. Timidus vocat se cautum, parcum sordidus.

The Coward calls himself a wary Man; and the M^ser says he is frugal.

36. O Vita! misero longa, foelici brevis.

O Life! an Age to him that is in misery, and to him that is happy, a moment.

A Collection of Sentences out of some of the Writings of the Lord Bacon.
1. IT is a strange desire which Men have, to seek Power and lose Liberty.

2. Children increase the cares of Life; but they mitigate the remembrance of
Death.

3. Round dealing is the honor of Man's Nature; and a mixture of falsehood is
like allay in Gold and Silver, which may make the Metal work the better, but it
embaseth it.

4. Death opens the Gate to good Fame, and extinguisheth Envy.

5. Schism, in the Spiritual Body of the Church, is a greater scandal than a
corruption in Manners: As, in the natural Body, a Wound or Solution of
Continuity, is worse than a corrupt Humor.

6. Revenge is a kind of wild Justice, which the more a Man's Nature runs to,
the more ought Law to weed it out.

7. He that studieth Revenge, keeps his own Wounds green.

8. Revengeful Persons live and die like Witches. Their life is mischievous,
and their end is unfortunate.

9. It was an high Speech of Seneca, ( after the manner of the Stoic's) That
the good Things which belong to Prosperity, are to be wished; but the good
things which belong to Adversity, are to be admired.

10. He that cannot see well, let him go softly.

11. If a Man be thought secret, itinviteth discovery: as the more close Air
sucketh in the more open.

12. Keep your Authority wholly from your Children, not so your Purse.

13. Men of Noble Birth are noted to be envious toward new Men when they rise.
For the distance is altered; and it is like a deceit of the Eye, that when
others come on, they think themselves go back.

14. That Envy is most malignant which is like Cain's, who envyed his Brother,
because his Sacrifice was better accepted, when there was no body but God to
look on.

15. The lovers of Great Place are impatient of Privateness, even in Age which
requires the Shadow: like old Townsmen that will be still sitting at their
Street-Door, though there they offer Age to scorn.

16. In Evil, the best condition is, not to will; the next, not to can.

17. In great Place, ask counsel of both Times: of the Ancient Time, what is
best; and of the latter Time, what is fittest.

18. As in Nature things move more violently to their Place, and calmly in
their Place: So Virtue in Ambition is violent; in Authority, settled and calm.

19. Boldness in civil Business, is like Pronuntiation in the Orator of
Demosthenes; the first, second, and third thing.

20. Boldness is blind: wherefore it is ill in Counsel, but good in Execution.
For in Counsel it is good to see dangers, in Execution not to see them, except
they be very great.

21. Without good Nature, Man is but a better kind of Vermin.

22. God never wrought Miracle to convince Atheism, because his ordinary Works
convince it.

23. The great Atheists indeed are Hypocrites, who are always handling Holy
Things, but without feeling; so as they must needs be cauteriz'd in the end.

24. The Master of Superstition is the People. And in all Superstition, wise
Men follow Fools.

25. In removing Superstitions, care would be had that (as it fares in ill
Purgings) the good be not taken away with the bad, which commonly is done, when
the People is the Physician.

26. He that goes into a Country before he has some entrance into the
Language, goes to School, and not to travel.

27. It is a miserable state of mind (and yet it is commonly the case of Kings)
to have few things to desire, and many things to fear.

28. Depression of the Nobility may make a King more absolute, but less safe.

29. All Precepts concerning Kings, are, in effect, comprehended in these
Remembrances; Remember thou art a Man; Remember thou art God's Vicegerent. The
one bridleth their Power, and the other their Will.

30. Things will have their first or second agitation. If they be not tossed
upon the Arguments of Counsel, they will be tossed upon the Waves of Fortune.

31. The true composition of a Counselor, is rather to be skilled in his
Masters Business than his Nature; for then he is like to advise him, and not to
feed his humor.

32. Private Opinion is more free, but Opinion before others is more reverend.

33. Fortune is like a Market, where many times if you stay a little the price
will fall.

34. Fortune sometimes turns the handle of the Bottle, which is easy to be
taken hold of; and after the belly, which is hard to grasp.

35. Generally it is good to commit the beginning of all great Actions, to
Argus with an hundred Eyes; and the ends of them to Briareus with an hundred
hands; first to watch, and then to speed.

36. There Is great difference betwixt a cunning Man and a wise Man. There be
that can pack the Cards, who yet cannot play well; they are good in Canvasses
and Factions, and yet otherwise mean Men.

37. Extreme self-lovers will set a Man's House on fire, tho it were but to
roast their Eggs.

38. New Things, like Strangers, are more admired, and less favored.

39. It were good that Men in their Innovations, would follow the Example of
Time it self, which indeed innovateth greatly, but quietly; and by degrees
scarce to be perceived.

40. They that reverence too much old Time, are but a scorn to the New.

41. The Spaniards and Spartans have been noted to be of small dispatch. Mi
venga la muerte de Spagna; let my death come from Spain, for then it will be
sure to be long a coming.

42. You had better take, for Business, a Man somewhat absurd, than overformal.

43. Those who want Friends to whom to open their Griefs, are Cannibals of
their own Hearts.

44. Number it self imports not much in Armies, where the People are of weak
courage. For (as Virgil says) it never troubles a Wolf how many the Sheep be.

45. Let States, that aim at Greatness, take heed how their Nobility and Gentry
multiply too fast. In Coppice Woods, if you leave your Staddles too thick, you
shall never have clean Underwood, but Shrubs and Bushes.

46. A Civil War is like the heat of a Fever; but a Foreign War is like the
heat of Exercise, and serves to keep the Body in health.

47. Suspicions among thoughts, are like Bats among Birds, They ever fly by
twilight.

48. Base Natures, if they find themselves once suspected, will never be true.

49. Men ought to find the difference between saltness and bitterness.
Certainly he that has a Satirical Vein, as he makes others afraid of his Wit,
so he had need be afraid of others Memory.

50. Discretion in Speech is more than Eloquence.

51. Men seem neither well to understand their Riches, nor their Strength: of
the former they believe greater things than they should, and of the latter much
less. And from hence certain fatal Pillars have bounded the progress of
Learning.

52. Riches are the Baggage of Virtue; they cannot be spared, nor left behind,
but they hinder the march.

53. Great Riches have sold more Men than ever they have bought out.

54. Riches have Wings; and sometimes they fly away of themselves, and
sometimes they must be set flying to bring in more.

55. He that defers his Charity 'till he is dead, is (if a Man weighs it
rightly) rather liberal of another Man's, than of his own.

56. Ambition is like Choler; if it can move, it makes Men active; if it be
stopped, it becomes adust, and makes Men melancholy.

57. To take a Soldier without Ambition, is to pull off his Spurs.

58. Some ambitious Men seem as Skreens to Princes in matters of Danger and
Envy. For no Man will take such parts, except he be like the Seeld Dove, that
mounts and mounts because he cannot see about him.

59. Princes and States should choose such Ministers as are more sensible of
Duty than Rising; and should discern a busy Nature from a willing Mind.

60. A Man's Nature runs either to Herbs or Weeds; Therefore let him seasonably
water the one, and destroy the other.

61. If a Man look sharply and attentively, he shall see Fortune; for though
she be blind, she is not invisible.

62. Usury brings the Treasure of a Realm or State into few hands: For the
Usurer being at certainties, and others at uncertainties; at the end of the
Game, most of the Money will be in the Box.

63. Beauty is best in a Body that has rather dignity of Presence, than beauty
of Aspect. The beautiful prove accomplished, but not of great Spirit; and
study, for the most part, rather Behavior than Virtue.

64. The best part of Beauty, is that which a Picture cannot express.

65. He who builds a fair House upon an ill Seat, commits himself to Prison.

66. If you will work on any Man, you must either know his Nature and Fashions,
and so lead him; or his Ends, and so persuade him; or his weaknesses ^^d
disadvantages, and so awe hi^^, or those that have interest in him, and so
govern him.

67. Costly Followers (among whom we may reckon those who are importunate in
Suits) are not to be liked; lest while a Man makes his Train longer, he makes
his Wings shorter.

68. Fame is like a River that bears up things light and swollen, and drowns
things weighty and solid.

69. Seneca says well, That Anger is like Rain, which breaks it self upon that
it falls.

70. Excusations, Cessions, Modesty it self well governed, are but Arts of
Ostentation.

71. High Treason is not written in Ice; that when the Body relenteth, the
Impression should go away.

72. The best Governments are always subject to be like the fairest Crystals;
wherein every Isicle or Grain is seen; which, in a fouler Stone is never
perceived.

73. Hollow Church Papists are like the Roots of Nettles, which themselves
sting not; but yet they bear all the stinging Leaves.

Baconiana Physiologica. Or, Certain REMAINS OF Sir Francis Bacon, Baron of
Verulam, and Viscount of St. Alban. IN ARGUMENTS Appertaining to Natural
Philosophy.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

THE Lord Bacon's Physiological Remains.
Fragmentum Libri Verulamiani cui Titulus Abecedarium Naturae.
CVm tam multa producantur a Terra and Aquis, tam multa pertranseant Aerem, and
ab eo excipiantur, tam multa mutentur, and solvantur ab Igne, minus perspicuae
forent Inquisitiones caeterae, nisi Natura Massarum istarum quae toties
occurrunt been cognita, and explicata. His adjungimus Inquisitiones de
Coelestibus and Meteoricis, cum and ipsae sint Massae Majores, and ex
Catholicis.

Mass. Maj.
Inquisitio sexagesima septima. Triplex Tau, sive de Terra.

Mass. Maj.
Inquisitio sexagesima octava. Triplex Upsilon, sive de Aqua.

Mass. Maj.
Inquisitio sexagesima nona. Triplex Psy, sive de Aere.

Mass. Maj.
Inquisitio septuagesima. Triplex Chy, sive de Igne.

Mass. Maj.
Inquisitio septuagesima prima. Triplex Psi, sive de Coelestibus.

Mass. Maj.
Inquisitio septuagesima secunda. Triplex Omega, sive de Meteoricis.

Conditiones Entium.
Supersunt ad inquirendum in Abecedario Conditiones Entium, quae videntur esse
tanquam Transcendentia, and parum stringunt de Corpore Naturae, tamen eo, quo
utimur, inquirendi modo, haud parum afferent Illustrationis ad reliqua. Primo
igitur, cum optime observatum fuerit a Democrito Naturam rerum esse copia
Materiae, and Individuorum varietate amplam, atque (ut ille vult) infinitam;
Coitionibus vero and speciebus in tantum finitam, ut etiam angusta, and tanquam
paupercula, videri possit. Quandoquidem tam paucae inveniantur species, quae
sint aut esse possint, ut exercitum millenarium vix conficiant: Cumque Negativa
Affirmativis subjuncta, ad informationem Intellectus plurimum valiant;
constituenda est Inquisitio de Ente, and non Ente. Ea ordine est septuagesima
tertia, and qua^druplex Alpha numeratur.

Cond. Ent.
Quadruplex Alpha; sive de Ente and non Ente.

Ad Possibile and Impossible, nil aliud est, qu^m Potentiale ad Ens, aut non
Potentiale ad Ens. De eo Inquisitio septuagesima quarta consicitur; quae
quadruplex Beta numeratur.

Cond. Ent.
Quadruplex Beta; sive de Possibili and Impossibili.

Etiam Multum, Paucum, Rarum, Consuetum sunt potentialia ad Ens in Quanto. De
iis Inquisitio septuagesima quinta esto, quae quadruplex Gamma numeretur.

Cond. Ent.
Quadruplex Gamma; sive de Multo and Pauco.

Durabile and Transitorium, Aeternum and Momentaneum, sunt potentialia ad Ens
in Duratione. De illis septuagesima sexta Inquisitio esto, quae quadruplex
Delta numeratur.

Cond. Ent.
Quadruplex Delta; sive de Durabili and Transitorio.

Natural and Monstrosum, sunt potentialia ad Ens, per cursum Naturae, and per
deviaationes ejus. De iis Inquisitio septuagesima septima esto, quae quadruplex
Epsilon numeratur.

Cond. Ent.
Quadruplex Epsilon; sive de Naturali and Monstroso.

Natural and Artificiale sunt potentialia ad Ens, sine Homine, and per
Hominem. De iis Inquisitio septuagesima octava conficitor, quae quadruplex Zeta
numeretur.

Cond. Ent.
Quadruplex Zeta; sive de Naturali and Artificiali.

Exempla in explicatione ordinis Abecedarij, non adjunximus, quia ipsae
Inquisitiones continent totas Acies Exemplorum.

Tituli secundum quos Ordo Abecedarij est dispositus, nullo modo eam
Authoritatem habento, ut pro veris, and fixis rerum divisionibus recipiantur.
Hoc enim esset profiteri scire nos quae inquirimus. Nam nemo res vere
dispertit, qui non naturam ipsarum penitus cognovit. Satis sit, si ad ordinem
inquirendi (id quod nunc agitur) commode se habeant.

Norma Abecedarij.
Abecedarium hoc modo conficimus and regimus. Historia and Experimenta, omnino
primas parts tenent. Ea si enumerationem and seriem rerum particularium
exhibeant, in Tabulas conficiuntur, aliter sparsim excipiuntur.

Cum vero Historia and Experimenta saepissime nos deserant, praesertim Lucifera
illa, and Instantiae Crucis, per quas, de veris rerum causis, Intellectui
constare possit; Mandata damus de Experimentis novis. Haec sint tanquam
Historia Designata. Quid enim aliud nobis primo viam ingredientibus relinquitur?

Modum Experimenti subtilioris explicamus, ne error subsit, atque ut alios, ad
meliores modos excogitandos, excitemus.

Etiam Monita, etcautiones, de Rerum fallacijs and inveniendi erroribus, quae
nobis occurrunt, aspergimus. Observationes nostras, super Historiam, and
Experimenta, subteximus, ut Interpretatio Naturae magis sit in Procinctu.

Etiam Canones, sed tamen Mobiles, and Axiomata inchoata, qualia nobis
inquirentibus, non prominciantibus, se offerunt constituimus. Vtiles enim sunt,
si non prorsus verae.

Denique tentament a quaedam Interpretationis quandoque molimur, lice t prorsus
humi repentia, and vero Interpretationis nomine, nullo modo (ut arbitramur)
decoranda. Quid enim nobis supercilio opus est, aut impostura, cum toties
profiteamur, nec nobis Historiam and Experimenta, qualibus opus est, suppetere,
nec absque his, Interpretationem Naturae perfici posse, ideoque nobis satis
esse, si initiis rerum non desimus.

Perspicuitatis autem, and Ordinis gratia, Aditus quosdam ad Inquisitiones,
instar praefationum, substernimus. Item Connexiones and Vincula, ne
Inquisitiones sint magis abruptae, interponimus.

Ad usum vero vellication^s quasdam, de Practica suggerimus.

Etiam Optativa eorum, quae adhuc non habentur, una cum proximis suis, ad
erigendam humanam industriam, proponimus.

Neque sumus nescii, Inquisitiones inter se, aliquando complicari, ita ut
nonulla ex Inquisitis, in Titulos diversos incidant. Sed modum eum adhibebimus,
ut and repetitionum fastidia, and rejectionum molestias, quantum fieri possit,
vitemus; postponentes tamen hoc ipsum (quando necesse fuerit) perspiiuitati
docendi, in Argumento tam obscuro.

Haec est Abecedarii Norma and Regula. Deus Vniversi Conditor, Conservator, and
Instaurator, Opus hoc and in Ascensione ad Gloriam suam, and in Descensione ad
bonum humanum, pro sua erga homines benevolentia and Misericordia pro^tegat and
regat, per Filium suum unicum Nobiscum Deum.

The same in English by the Publisher.
A Fragment of a Book written by the Lord Verulam, and Entitled, The Alphabet
of Nature.
SEeing so many things are produced by the Earth, and Waters; so many things
pass through the Air, and are received by it; so many things are changed and
dissolved by Fire; other Inquisitions would be less perspicuous, unless the
Nature of those Masses which so often occur, were well known and explained. To
these we add Inquisitions concerning Celestial Bodies, and Meteors, seeing they
are some of greater Masses, and of the number of Catholic Bodies. See the
distribution, in l. 2. c. 3. de Augm. Scient. p. 234, 135, 136. Ed. Lugd. Bat.
l 3. c. 4. p. 231. And c. 4. Globi Intellect. p. 88, 89.


Greater Masses.
The 67th Inquisition. The threefold Tau, or concerning the Earth.

The 68th Inquisition. The threefold Vpsilon, or concerning the Water.

The 69th Inquisition. The threefold Phi, or concerning the Air.

The 70th Inquisition. The threefold Chi, or concerning the Fire.

The 71st Inquisition. The Threefold Psi, or concerning Celestial Bodies.

The 72d Inquisition. The threefold Omega, or concerning Meteors.

Conditions of Entities.
THere yet remain, as Subjects of our Inquiry, in our Alphabet, the Conditions
of Beings, which seem, as it were, Transcendentals, and such as touch very
little of the Body of Nature. Yet by that manner of Inquisition which we use,
They will considerably illustrate the other Objects.

First; Therefore seeing (as Democritus excellently observed) the Nature of
Things is in the plenty of Matter, and variety of Individuals, large, and (as
he affirms) Infinite; but in its Coitions and Species so Finite, that it may
seem narrow and poor; seeing so few Species are found, either in actual Being,
or Impossibility, that they scarce make up a muster of a Thousand; And seeing
Negatives, subjoined to Affirmatives, conduce much to the Information of the
Understanding: It is fit that an Inquisition be made concerning Being, and not
Being. That is the 73d in order, and reckoned the Fourfold Alpha.

Conditions of Beings.
The fourfold Alpha; or, concerning Being, and not Being.

Now Possible and Impossible, are nothing else but Conditions potential to
Being, or not potential to Being. Of this the 74th Inquisition consists, and is
accounted the fourfold Beta.

Conditions of Beings.
The fourfold Beta; or concerning Possible and Impossible.

Also, Much, Little; Rare, Ordinary; are Conditions potential to Being in
Quantity. Of them let the 75th Inquisition consist, and be accounted the
fourfold Gamma.

Conditions of Beings.
The fourfold Gamma; or, concerning much and little.

Durable and Transitory, Eternal and Momentary, are potential to Being in
Duration. Of these let the 76th Inquisition consist, and be called the
fourfold Delta.

Conditions of Beings.
The fourfold Delta; or, concerning Durable and Transitory.

Natural and Monstrous, are potential to Being, either by the course of Nature,
or by its deviations from it. Of these let the 77th Inquisition consist, which
is accounted the fourfold Epsilon.

Conditions of `Beings.
The fourfold Epsilon; or, concerning what is Natural or `Monstrous.

Natural and Artificial, are potential to Being, either with or without the
Operation of Man. Of these let the 78th Inquisition consist, and be accounted
the fourfold Zeta.

Conditions of Beings.
The fourfold Zeta; or, of that which is Natural and Artificial.

We have not subjoined Examples in the Explication of the Order of this our
Alphabet: for the Inquisitions themselves contain the whole Array of Examples.

It is by no means intended, that the Titles, according to which the Order of
this Alphabet is disposed, should have so much authority given to them, as to
be taken for true and fixed partitions of Things. That were to profess we
already knew the things after which we inquire; for no Man does truly dispose
of things into their several Classes, who does not beforehand very well
understand the Nature of them. It is sufficient, if these Titles be
conveniently adapted to the Order of Inquiry; the thing which is at present
designed.

The Rule (or Form) of the Alpha^et.
After this manner we compose and dispose our Alphabet.

We begin solely with History and Experiments. These, if they exhibit an
enumeration and series of particular Things, are disposed into Tables;
otherwise they are taken seperately, and by themselves.

But seeing we are often at a loss for History and Experiments, especially such
as are Luciferous [or Instructive] and [as we call See Nov. Organ. l. 2. Aph.
36. p. 254. Lugd. Bat.
them] Instances of the Cross; by which the Understanding might be helped in
the knowledge of the true Causes of Things: We propose the task of making new
Experiments. These may serve as an History in Design. For what else is to be
done by us who are but breaking the Ice?

For the mode of any more abstruse, Experiment, we explain it, lest any mistake
arise about it; and to the intent also that we may excite others to excogitate
better Methods.

Also we interspect certain Admonitions and Cautions concerning such Fallacies
of Things, and Errors in Invention, as we meet with in our way.

We subjoin our Observations upon History and Experiments, that the
Interpretation of Nature may be the more in readiness and at hand.

Likewise we lay down Canons (but not such as are fixed and determined) and
Axioms which are, as it were, in Embrio: Such as offer themselves to us in the
quality of Inquirers, and not of Judges. Such Canons and Axioms are profitable,
though they appear not yet manifestly, and upon all accounts true.

Lastly; We meditate sometimes certain Essays of Interpretation, though such as
are low and of small advance, and by no means to be honored (in our opinion)
with the very name of Interpretation.

For what need have we of Arrogance or Imposture, seeing we have so often
professed, that we have not such a supply of History and Experiments as is
needful; and that without these, the Interpretation of Nature cannot be brought
to perfection. Wherefore it is enough for us, if we are not wanting to the
beginning of Things.

Now, for the sake of Perspicuity, and Order, we prepare our way by Avenues,
which are a kind of Prefaces to our Inquisitions. Likewise we interpose bonds
of Connection, that our Inquisitions may not seem abrupt and dis-jointed.

Also we suggest for use, some Hints of Practice. Furthermore, we propose
wishes of such things as are hitherto only desired and not had, together with
those things which border on them, for the exciting the Industry of Man's Mind.

Neither are we ignorant, that those Inquisitions are sometimes mutually
entangled; so that some things of which we inquire [even the same things]
belong to several Titles. But we will observe such measure, that (as far as may
be) we may shun both the nauseousness of Repetition, and the trouble of
Rejection, submitting notwithstanding to either of these, when in an Argument
so obscure, there is necessity of so doing, in order to the more intelligible
teaching of it.

This is the Form and Rule of our Alphabet.

May God, the Creator, Preserver, and Renewer of the Universe, protect and
govern this Work, both in its ascent to his Glory, and in its descent to the
Good of Mankind, for the sake of his Mercy and good Will to Men, through his
only Son [Immanuel] God-with-us,

Inquisitions touching the Compounding of Metals, by Sir Francis Bacon, Baron
of Verulam.
TO make proof of the Incorporation of Iron with Flint, or other Stone. For if
it can be incorporated without overgreat charge, or other incommodity, the
cheapness of the Flint or Stone, does make the Compound Stuff profitable for
diverse Uses. The Doubts may be three in number.

First; Whether they will incorporate at all, otherwise than to a Body that
will not hold well together but become brittle and uneven?

Secondly; Although it should incorporate well, yet whether the Stuff will not
be so stubborn as it will not work well with a Hammer, whereby the charge in
working will overthrow the cheapness of the material?

Thirdly; Whether they will incorporate, except the Iron and Stone be first
calcined into Powder? And if not, Whether the charge of the Calcination will
not eat out the cheapness of the material?

The Uses are most probable to be; First for the Implements of the Kitching; as
Spits, Ranges, Cobirons, Pots, etc. then for the Wars, as Ordinance,
Portcullasses, Grates, Chains, etc.

Note; The finer Works of Iron are not so probable to be served with such a
Stuff; as Locks, Clocks, small Chains, etc. because the Stuff is not like to be
tough enough.

For the better use in comparison of Iron, it is like the Stuff will be far
lighter; for the weight of Iron to Flint, is double and a third part; and,
secondly, it is like to rust not so easily, but to be more clean.

The ways of trial are two. First; By the Iron and Stone of themselves, wherein
it must be inquired, What are the Stones that do easiliest melt. Secondly; With
an Additament, wherein Brimstone is approved to help to the melting of Iron or
Steel. But then it must be considered, Whether the Charge of the Additament
will not destroy the Profit.

It must be known also what proportion of the Stone the Iron will receive to
incorporate well with it, and that with once melting; for if either the
proportion be too small, or that it cannot be received but peece-meal by
several meltings, the Work cannot be of value.

To make proof of the incorporating of Iron and Brass. For the cheapness of the
Iron in comparison of the Brass, if the Uses may be served, does promise
Profit. The Doubt will be, touching their incorporating: for that it is
approved, that Iron will not incorporate, neither with Brass nor other Metals
of it self by simple fire: So as the inquiry must be upon the Calcination, and
the Additament, and the charge of them.

The Uses will be for such things as are now made of Brass, and might be as
well served by the compound Stuff; wherein the Doubts will be chiefly of the
toughness and of the beauty.

First; Therefore, if Brass Ordinance could be made of the compound Stuff, in
respect of the cheapness of the Iron, it would be of great use.

The Vantage which Brass Ordinance has over Iron, is chiefly, as I suppose,
because it will hold the blow, though it be driven far thinner than the Iron
can be, whereby it saves both in the quantity of the Material, and in the
charge and commodity of mounting etcarriage, in regard by reason of the
thinness it bears much less weight: there may be also somewhat in being not
so easily overheated.

Secondly; For the Beauty; those things wherein the beauty or luster are
esteemed, are, Andirons, and all manner of Images, and Statues, and Columns,
and Tombs, and the like. So as the doubt will be double for the Beauty; the one
whether the color will please so well, because it will not be so like Gold as
Brass? the other, whether it will pollish so well? Wherein for the latter it is
probable it will; for Steel glosses are more resplendant than the like Plates
of Brass would be; and so is the glittering of a Blade. And besides, I take it,
Andiron Brass, which they call White Brass, has some mixture of Tin to help
the luster. And for the Golden Color, it may be by some small mixture of
Orpiment, such as they use to Brass in the Yellow Alchymy, will easily recover
that which the Iron loses. Of this the Eye must be the Judge upon proof made.

But now for Pans, Pots, Curfues, Counters, and the like; the beauty will not
be so much respected, so as the compound Stuff is like to pass.

For the better use of the compound Stuff, it will be sweeter and cleaner than
Brass alone, which yields a smell or soilness, and therefore may be better
for the Vessels of the Kitchen and Brewing. It will also be harder than Brass
where hardness may be required.

For the trial, the Doubts will be two: First; The over-weight of Brass toward
Iron, which will make Iron float on the top in the melting. This perhaps will
be helped with the Calaminar Stone, which consents so well with Brass, and as
I take it, is lighter than Iron. The other Doubt will be, the stiffness and
dryness of Iron to melt; which must be helped either by moistning the Iron, or
opening it. For the first, Perhaps some mixture of Lead will help. Which is as
much more liquid than Brass, as Iron is less liquid. The opening may be helped
by some mixture of Sulphur, so as the trials would be with Brass, Iron,
Calaminar Stone, and Sulphur; and then again with the same composition, and an
addition of some Lead; and in all this the Charge must be considered, whether
it eat not out the Profit of the cheapness of Iron?

There be two Proofs to be made of incorporation of Metals for magnificence and
delicacy. The one for the Eye, and the other for the Ear. Statua Metal, and
Bell Metal, and Trumpet Metal, and String Metal; in all these, though the
mixture of Brass or Copper, should be dearer than the Brass it self, yet the
pleasure will advance the price to profit.

First; Therefore for Statua-Metal, see Pliny's Mixtures, which are almost
forgotten, and consider the charge.

Try likewise the mixture of Tin in large proportion with Copper, and observe
the Color and Beauty, it being polished. But chiefly let proof be made of the
incorporating of Copper or Brass with Glass-Metal, for that is cheap, and is
like to add a great glory and shining.

For Bell-Metal. First, It is to be known what is the Composition which is now
in use. Secondly, It is probable that it is the dryness of the Metal that does
help the clearness of the sound, and the moistness that dulleth it: and
therefore the Mixtures that are probable are Steel, Tin, Glass-Metal.

For String-Metal, or Trumpet-Metal, it is the same reason; save that
Glass-Metal may not be used, because it will make it too brittle; and trial may
be made with mixture of Silver, it being but a delicacy with Iron or Brass.

To make proof of the Incorporation of Silver and Tin, in equal quantity, or
with two parts Silver, and one part Tin, and to observe whether it be of equal
beauty and luster with pure Silver; and also whether it yield no soiliness more
than Silver? And again, whether it will endure the ordinary Fire, which
belongs to Chafing-dishes, Posnets, and such other Silver Vessels? And if it
do not endure the Fire, yet whether by some mixture of Iron it may not be made
more fixed? For if it be in Beauty, and all the Uses aforesaid equal to Silver,
it were a thing of singular profit to the State, and to all particular Persons,
to change Silver Plate or Vessel into the Compound Stuff, being a kind of
Silver Electre, and to turn the rest into Coin. It may be also questioned,
Whether the Compound Stuff will receive gilding as well as Silver, and with
equal luster? It is to be noted, That the common allay of Silver Coin is Brass,
which does discolor more, and is not so neat as Tin.

The Drownings of Metals within other Metals, in such sort as they can never
rise again, is a thing of great profit. For if a quantity of Silver can be so
buried in Gold, as it will never be reduced again, neither by Fire, nor parting
Waters, nor otherways; and also that it serve all Uses as well as pure Gold, it
is in effect all one, as if so much Silver were turned into Gold; only the
weight will discover it: but that takes off but half of the profit; for Gold
is not fully double weight to Silver, but Gold is twelve times price to Silver.

The burial must be by one of these two ways, either by the smallness of the
proportion, as perhaps fifty to one, which will be but six pence gains in fifty
shillings: or it must be helped by somewhat which may fix the Silver, never to
be restored or vapour'd away, when it is incorporated into such a Mass of Gold;
for the less quantity is ever the harder to sever; and for this purpose Iron is
the likest, or Coppel Stuff, upon which the Fire has no power of consumption.

The making of Gold seems a thing scarcely possible; because Gold is the
heaviest of Metals, and to add Matter is impossible: and again, to drive Metals
into a narrower room than their natural extent bears, is a condensation
hardly to be expected. But to make Silver seems more easy, because both
Quicksilver and Lead are weightier than Silver; so as there needs only
fixing, and not condensing. The degree unto this that is already known, is
infusing of Quicksilver in a Parchment, or otherwise in the midst of molten
Lead when it cools; for this stupifieth the Quicksilver that it runs no
more. This trial is to be advanced three ways. First, By iterating the melting
of the Lead, to see whether it will not make the Quicksilver harder and
harder. Secondly, To put Realgar hot into the midst of the Quicksilver,
whereby it may be condensed, as well from within as without. Thirdly, To try it
in the midst of Molten Iron or Molten Steel, which is a Body more likely to fix
the Quicksilver than Lead. It may be also tried, by incorporating Powder of
Steel, or Copple Dust, by pouncing into the Quicksilver, and so to proceed to
the stupifying.

Upon Glass, four things would be put in proof. The first, means to make the
Glass more Crystalline. The second, to make it more strong for falls, and for
fire, though it come not to the degree to be malleable. The third, to make it
colored by Tinctures, comparable or exceeding precious Stones. The fourth, To
make a compound Body of Glass and Galletyle; that is, to have the color milkey
like a Chalcedon, being a Stuff between a Procelane and a Glass.

For the first; It is good first to know exactly the several Materials, whereof
the Glass in use is made; Window-glass, Normandy and Burgundy, Alehouse-glass,
English drinking-Glass: and then thereupon to consider what the reason is of
the coarseness or clearness; and from thence to rise to a consideration how to
make some Additaments to the coarser Materials; to raise them to the whiteness
and crystalline splendor of the finest.

For the second; We see Pebbles, and some other Stones will cut as fine as
Crystal, which if they will melt, may be a mixture for Glass, and may make it
more tough and more Crystalline. Besides, we see Metals will vitrify; and
perhaps some portion of the Glass of Metal vitrified, mixed in the Pot of
ordinary Glass-Metal, will make the whole Mass more tough.

For the third; It were good to have of colored Window-Glass, such as is
colored in the Pot, and not by Colors -- Here something is wantin^ in the
C^py.


It is to be known of what Stuff Galletyle is made, and how the Colors in it
are varied; and thereupon to consider how to make the mixture of Glass-Metal
and them, whereof I have seen the Example.

Inquire what be the Stones that do easiliest melt. Of them take half a pound,
and of Iron a pound and a half, and an ounce of Brimstone, and see whether they
will incorporate, being whole, with a strong fire. If not, try the same
quantities calcined; and if they will incorporate, make a Plate of them, and
burnish it as they do Iron.

Take a pound and a half of Brass, and half a pound of Iron; two ounces of the
Calaminar Stone, an ounce and a half of Brimstone, an ounce of Lead; calcine
them, and see what body they make; and if they incorporate, make a Plate of it
burnished.

Take of Copper an ounce and a half, of Tin an ounce, and melt them together,
and make a Plate of them burnished.

Take of Copper an ounce and a half, of Tin an ounce, of Glass-Metal half an
ounce; stir them well in the boiling, and if they incorporate, make a Plate of
them burnished.

Take of Copper a pound and a half, Tin four ounces, Brass two ounces; make a
Plate of them burnished.

Take of Silver two ounces, Tin half an ounce; make a little Say-Cup of it, and
burnish it.

To enquire of the Mater^als of every of the kind of Glasses, coarser and
finer, and of the Proportions.

Take an equal quantity of Glass-Metal, of Stone calcined, and bring a Pattern.

Take an ounce of vitrified Metal, and a pound of ordinary Glass-Metal, and see
whether they will incorporate; and bring a Pattern.

Bring Examples of all colored Glasses, and learn the Ingredients whereby they
are colored.

Inquire of the substance of Galletyle.

Articles of Questions touching Minerals; written originally in English by the
Lord Bacon, yet hitherto not published in that Language.
The Lord Bacon's Questions and Solutions concerning the Compounding,
Incorporating, or Union of Metals or Minerals; which Subject is the first
Letter of his Lordships Alphabet.
Q. WIth what Metals Gold will Incorporate by simple Colliquefaction, and with
what not? and in what quantity it will incorporate; and what kind of Body the
Compound makes?

A. Gold with Silver, which was the Ancient Electrum.

Gold with Quicksilver. Gold with Lead. Gold with Copper. Gold with Brass. Gold
with Iron. Gold with Tin.
So likewise of Silver.
Silver with Quicksilver. Silver with Lead. Silver with Copper. Silver with
Brass. Silver with Iron. (Plinius Secund. lib. 33. ix. miscuit denario Triumvir
Antonius ferrum.) Silver with Tin.
So likewise of Quicksilver.
Quicksilver with Lead. Quicksilver with Copper. Quicksilver with Brass.
Quicksilver with Iron. Quicksilver with Tin.
So of Lead.
Lead with Copper. Lead with Brass. Lead with Iron. Lead with Tin. Pl. 34. ix.
So of Copper.
Copper with Brass. Copper with Iron. Copper with Tin.
So of Brass.
Brass with Iron. Brass with Tin.
So of Iron.
Iron with Tin.
What be the Compound Metals that are common and known? and what are the
proportions of their Mixtures? As,
LAtten of Brass, and the Calaminar Stone.

Pewter of Tin and Lead.

Bell-Metal of etc. and the counterfeit Plate, which they call Alchimy.

The Decompositees of three Metals or more, are too long to enquire of, except
there be some Compositions of them already observed.

It is also to be observed, whether any two Metals which will not mingle of
themselves, will mingle with the help of an other; and what.

What Compounds will be made of Metal with Stone and other Fossiles; As Latten
is made with Brass and the Calaminar Stone; As all the Metals incorporate with
Vitriol; all with Iron poudered; all with Flint, etc.

Some few of these would be inquired of, to disclose the nature of the rest.

Whether Metals or other Fossiles will incorporate with molten Glass, and what
Body it makes?

The quantity in the mixture would be well considered; for some small quantity
perhaps will incorporate, as in the Allays of Gold and Silver Coin.

Upon the Compound Body, three things are chiefly to be observed; The Color;
the Fragility or Pliantness; the Volatility or Fixation, compared with the
simple Bodies.

For present use or profit, this is the Rule: Consider the price of the two
simple Bodies; consider again the dignity of the one above the other in use;
then see if you can make a Compound that will save more in price than it will
lose in dignity of the use.

As for Example; Consider the price of Brass-Ordnance; consider again the price
of Iron-Ordnance, and then consider wherein the Brass-Ordnance does excel the
Iron-Ordnance in Use: Then if you can make a Compound of Brass and Iron that
will be near as good in use, and much cheaper in price, then there is profit
both to the Private, and the Commonwealth. So of Gold and Silver, the price is
double of twelve: The dignity of Gold above Silver is not much, the splendour is
a like, and more pleasing to some Eyes, as in Cloth of Silver, silvered
Rapiers, etc. The main dignity is, That Gold bears the Fire, which Silver does
not, but that is an excellency in Nature, but it is nothing at all in use; for
any dignity in use I know none, but that silvering will fully and canker more
than gilding; which if it might be corrected with a little mixture of Gold,
there is profit: And I do somewhat marvel that the latter Ages have lost the
Ancient Electrum, which was a mixture of Silver with Gold: whereof I conceive
there may be much use, both in Coin, Plate, and Gilding.

It is to be noted, That there is in the version of Metals impossibility, or at
least great difficulty, as in making of Gold, Silver, Copper. On the other
side, in the adulterating or counterfeiting of Metals, there is deceit and
villainy. But it should seem there is a middle way, and that is by new
Compounds, if the ways of incorporating were well known.

What Incorporation or Inbibition Metals will receive from Vegetables, without
being dissolved in their Substance: As when the Armorers make their Steel more
tough and pliant, by aspersion of Water or Juice of Herbs; when Gold being
grown somewhat churlish by recovering, is made more pliant by throwing in
shreds of tanned Leather, or any Leather oiled.

Note; That in these and the like shows of Inbibition, it were good to try by
the Weights whether the weight be increased or no; for if it be not, it is to
be doubted that there is no inbibition of Substance, but only that the
application of that other Body, does dispose and invite the Metal to another
posture of parts than of it self it would have taken.

After the Incorporation of Metals by simple Colliquefaction, for the better
discovery of the Nature, and Consents, and Dissents of Metals, it would be
likewise tried by incorporating of their Dissolutions.

There is to be observed in those Dissolutions which will not easily
incorporate, what the Effects are: As the Bullition; the Precipitation to the
bottom; the Ejaculation toward the top; the Suspension in the midst; and the
like.

Note; That the dissents of the Menstrual or strong Waters, may hinder the
incorporation, as well as the dissents of the Metals themselves; Therefore
where the Menstrua are the same, and yet the Incorporation follows not, you
may conclude the Dissent is in the Metals; but where the Menstrua are several,
not so certain.

Dr. Meverell's Answers to the Lord Bacon's Questions, concerniug the
Compounding, Incorporating, or Union of Metals and Minerals.
GOld will incorporate with Silver in any proportion. Plin. lib. 33. cap. 4.
Omni Auro inest Argentum vario pondere, alibi dena, alibi nona, alibi octava
part -- ubicunque quinta Argenti portio invenitur, Electrum vocatur. The Body
remains fixed, solid, and colored, according to the proportion of the two
Metals.

Gold with Quicksilver easily mixeth, but the product is imperfectly fixed; and
so are all other Metals incorporate with Mercury.

Gold incorporates with Lead in any proportion.

Gold incorporates with Copper in any proportion, the common Allay.

Gold incorporates with Brass in any proportion. And what is said of Copper, is
true of Brass, in the union of other Metals.

Gold will not incorporate with Iron.

Gold incorporates with Tin, the ancient Allay, Isa. 1. 25.

What was said of Gold and Quicksilver, may be said of Quicksilver and the rest
of Metals.

Silver with Lead in any proportion.

Silver incorporates with Copper. Pliny mentions such a mixture; for
triumphales Statuae, lib. 33. ix. miscentur Argento, tertia pars aeris Cyprii
tenuissimi, quod coronarium vocant, and Sulphuris vivi quantum Argenti. The
same is true of Brass.

Silver incorporates not with Iron. Wherefore I wonder at that which Pliny has
lib. 33. ix. Miscuit denario Triumvir Antonius ferrum. And what is said of
this, is true in the rest, for Iron incorporateth with none of them.

Silver mixes with Tin.

Lead incorporates with Copper. Such a mixture was the Pot-Metal whereof Pliny
speaks lib. 34. ix. Ternis aut quaternis libris plumbi Argentarii in centenas
aeris additis.

Lead incorporates with Tin. The mixture of these two in equal proportions, is
that which was anciently called Ptumbum Argentarium, Plin. 34. xvii.

Copper incorporates with Tin. Of such a mixture were the Mirrors of the
Romans. Plin. atque ut omnia de speculis peragantur hoc loco, optima apud
Majores erant Brundis^na, stanno and aere mistis. lib. 83. ix.

Compounded Metals now in use.
1. Fine Tin. The mixture is thus; Pure Tin a 1000 pound, temper 50 pound,
Glass of Tin 3 pound.

2. Course Pewter is made of fine Tin and Lead. Temper is thus made; The dross
of pure Tin four pound and a half, Copper half a pound.

3. Brass is made of Copper and Calaminaris.

4. Bell-Metal. Copper 1000 pound, Tin from 300 to 200 pound, Brass 150 pound.

5. Pot-Metal, Copper and Lead.

6. White Alkimie is made of Pan-Brass, 1 pound, and Arsenicum, 3 ounces.

7. Red Alkimie is made of Copper and Auripigmen.

There be diverse imperfect Minerals, which will incorporate with the Metals.
Being indeed Metals inwardly, but clothed with Earths and Stones. As Pyritis,
Calaminaris, Mysi, Chalcyti, Sorry, Vitriolum.

Metals incorporate not with Glass, except they be brought into the form of
Glass.

Metals dissolved. The dissolution of Gold and Silver disagree, so that in
their mixture, there is great Ebullition, Darkness, and in the end a
precipitation of a black Powder.

The mixture of Gold and Mercury agree.

Gold agrees with Iron. In a word, the dissolution of Mercury and Iron agree
with all the rest.

Silver and Copper disagree, and so do Silver and Lead. Silver and Tin agree.

The Lord Bacon's Articles of Inquiry concerning Minerals. The second Letter of
the Cross-Row, touching the separation of Metals and Minerals.
SEparation is of three sorts; The First, is the separating of the pure Metal
from the Ore, or Dross, which we call Refining. The Second, is the drawing one
Metal or Mineral out of another, which we call Extracting. The Third, Is the
separating of any Metal into his Original, or Materia Prima, or Element, or
call them what you will; which Work we will call Principiation. For Refining,
we are to enquire of it according to the several Metals; as Gold, Silver, etc.
Incidently we are to inquire of the First Stone or Ore, or Marcasite of Metals
severally, and what kind of Bodies they are, and of the degrees of Richness.
Also we are to enquire of the means of Separating, whether by Fire, parting
Waters, or otherwise. Also for the manner of Refining, you are to see how you
can multiply the heat, or hasten the opening, and so save charge in the Fining.

The means of this in Three manners, that is to say, In the Blast of the Fire;
In the manner of the Furnace, to multiply Heat by Union, and Reflection; and by
some Additament, or Medicines which will help the bodies to open them the
sooner.

Note the Quickening of the Blast, and the Multiplying of the Heat in the
Furnace, may be the same for all Metals; but the Additaments must be several,
according to the Nature of the Metals. Note again, That if you think that the
multiplying of the Additaments in the same proportion, that you multiply the
Ore, the Work will follow, you may be deceived: for quantity in the Passive
will add more Resistance, than the same quantity in the Active will add force.

For Extracting, you are to enquire what Metals contain others, and likewise
what not; As Lead, Silver; Copper, Silver, etc.

Note, Although the Charge of Extraction should excede the Worth, yet that is
not the matter. For at least it will discover Nature and Possibility, the other
may be thought on afterward.

We are likewise to inquire what the differences are of those Metals which
contain more or less other Metals, and how that agrees with the poorness or
richness of the Metals or Ore in themselves. As the Lead that contains most
Silver is accounted to be more brittle, and yet otherwise poorer in it self.

For Principiation, I cannot affirm whether there be any such thing or not; and
I think the Chemists make too much ado about it, but howsoever it be, be it
Solution, or Extraction, or a kind of Conversion by the Fire; it is diligently
to be inquired what Salts, Sulphur, Vitriol, Mercury, or the like Simple Bodies
are to be found in the several Metals, and in what quantity.

Doctor Meverel's Answers to the Lord Bacon's Questions, touching the
separations of Metals and Minerals.
1. FOr the means of Separating. After that the Ore is washed, or cleansed from
the Earth, there is nothing simply necessary, save only a Wind Furnace well
framed, narrow above and at the Hearth, in shape Oval, sufficiently fed with
Charcoal and Ore, in convenient proportions.

For Additions in this First Separation, I have observed none; the Dross, the
Mineral brings, being sufficient. The Refiners of Iron observe, that that
Iron-Stone is hardest to melt, which is fullest of Metal, and that easiest
which has most Dross. But in Lead, and Tin, the contrary is noted. Yet in
melting of Metals, when they have been calcined formerly by Fire, or
Strong Water, there is good use of Additaments, as of Borax, Tartar, Ammoniac,
and Saltpeter.

2. In Extracting of Metals. Note, That Lead and Tin contain Silver. Lead and
Silver contain Gold. Iron contains Brass. Silver is best separated from Lead,
by the Test. So Gold from Silver. Yet the best way for that is Aqua Regia.

3. For Principiation. I can truly and boldly affirm, that there are no such
principles as Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, which can be separated from any
perfect Metals. For every part so separated, may easily be reduced into perfect
Metal without Substitution of that, or those principles which Chemists imagine
to be wanting. As suppose you take the Salt of Lead; this Salt, or, as some
name it Sulphur, may be turned into perfect Lead, by melting it with the like
quantity of Lead which contains principles only for it self.

I acknowledge that there is Quicksilver and Brimstone found in the imperfect
Minerals; but those are Nature's remote Materials, and not the Chemists
Principles. As if you dissolve Antimony by Aqua Regia, there will be real
Brimstone swimming upon the Water; as appears by the color of the Fire when it
is burnt, and by the smell.

The Lord Bacon's Articles of Inquiry concerning Metals, and Minerals.
THe Third Letter of the Cross-Row, touching the Variation of Metals into
several Shapes, Bodies, or Natures, the particulars whereof follow,

Tincture. Turning to Rust. Calcination. Sublimation. Precipitation.
Amalgamatizing, or Turning into a soft body. Vitrification. Opening or
Dissolving into Liquor. Sproutings, or Branchings, or Arboress^s. Induration
and Mollification. Making Tough or Brittle. Volatility and Fixation.
Transmutation, or Version.
For Tincture; It is to be inquired how Metal may be tinged through and
through, and with what, and into what Colors; As tinging Silver Yellow,
tinging Copper White, and tinging Red, Green, Blew, especially with keeping the
Luster.

Item, Tincture of Glasses. Item, Tincture of Marble, Flint, or other Stone.
For turning into Rust, two things are chiefly to be inquired; By what
Corasives it is done, and into what Colors it turns; As Lead into White, which
they call Cerus; Iron into Yellow, which they call Crocus Martis; Quicksilver
into Vermilion; Brass into Green, which they call Verdigrease.

For Calcination, how every Metal is calcined, and into what kind of Body, and
what is the exquisitest way of Calcination.

For Sublimation; To enquire the manner of Subliming, and what Metals endure
Subliming, and what body the Sublimate makes.

For Precipitation likewise; by what strong Water every Metal will precipitate,
and with what Additaments, and in what time, and into what body.

So for Amalgama, what Metals will endure it, what are the means to do it, and
what is the manner of the body.

For Vitrification likewise; what Metals will endure it, what are the means to
do it, into what Color it turns, and further where the whole Metal is turned
into Glass, and where the Metal does but hang in the Glassy parts; Also what
weight the Vitrified body bears, compared with the Crude body; Also because
Vitrification is accounted a kind of Death of Metals, what Vitrification will
admit of turning back again, and what not.

For Dissolution into Liquour, we are to enquire what is the proper Menstruum
to dissolve any Metal, and in the Negative, what will touch upon the one, and
not upon the other, and what several Menstrua will dissolve any Metal, and
which most exactly. Item the Process or Motion of the Dissolution, the manner
of rising, boiling, vapouring more violent, or more gentle, causing much heat
or less. Item the Quantity or Charge that the strong Water will bear, and then
give over. Item the Color into which the Liquor will turn. Above all it is to
be enquired, whether there be any Menstruum to dissolve any Metal that is not
Fretting, or Corroding, and opens the Body by Sympathy, and not by
Mordacity, or violent Penetration.

For Sprouting or Branching, though it be a thing but transitory, and a kind of
Toy or Pleasure, yet there is a more serious use of it; for that it discovers
the delicate Motions of Spirits, when they put forth and cannot get forth, like
unto that which is in Vegetables.

For Induration, or Mollification; It is to be enquired what will make Metals
harder and harder, and what will make them softer and softer. And this enquiry
tends to two ends: First, for Use; As to make Iron soft by the Fire makes it
Malleable. Secondly, Because Induration is a degree toward Fixation, and
Mollification toward Volatility, and therefore the Enquiry of them will give
light toward the other.

For Tough and Brittle, they are much of the same kind, but yet worthy of an
Enquiry apart, especially to join Hardness with Toughness, as making Glass
malleable, etc. and making Bl^des strong, to resist and pierce, and yet not
easy to break.

For Volatility and Fixation. It is a Principal Branch to be enquired: The
utmost degree of Fixation is that whereon no Fire will work, nor strong Water
joined with Fire, if there be any such Fixation possible. The next is when Fire
simply will not work without strong Waters. The next is by the Test. The next
is when it will endure Fire not blown, or such a strength of Fire. The next is
when it will not endure, but yet is malleable. The next is when it is not
malleable, but yet is not fluent, but stupefied. So of Volatility, the utmost
degree is when it will fly away without returning. The next is when it will
fly up, but with ease return. The next is when it will fly upwards over the
Helm by a kind of Exufflation without Vapouring. The next is when it will melt,
though not rise. The next is when it will soften, though not melt. Of all these
diligent Enquiry is to be made in several Metals, especially of the more
extreme degrees.

For Transmutation, or Version. If it be real and true, it is the furthest part
of Art, and would be well distinguished, from Extraction, from Restitution, and
from Adulteration. I hear much of turning Iron into Copper; I hear also of the
growth of Lead in weight, which cannot be without a Conversion of some body
into Lead: but whatsoever is of this kind, and well expressed, is diligently to
be inquired, and set down.

Doctor Meverel's Answers to the Lord Bacon's Questions, concerning the
Variation of Metals and Minerals.
1. FOr Tinctures, there are none that I know, but that rich variety which
springs from mixture of Metals with Metals, or imperfect Minerals.

2. The imperfect Metals are subject to rust, all of them except Mercury, which
is made into Vermilion by Solution, or Calcination. The rest are rusted by any
salt, sour, or acid Water. Lead into a white body called Cerussa. Iron into a
pale red called Ferrugo. Copper is turned into green, named Aerugo, Aes Viride.
Tin into white. But this is not in use, neither has it obtained a name.

The Scriptures mention the rust of Gold, but that is in regard of the Allay.

3. Calcination. All Metals may be calcined by strong Waters, or by admixtion
of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. The imperfect Metals may be Calcined by
continuance of simple Fire; Iron thus calcined is called Crocus Martis.

And this is their best way. Gold and Silver are best calcined by Mercury.
Their Color is Gray. Lead calcined is very Red. Copper, duskie Red.

4. Metals are sublimed by joining them with Mercury, or Salts. As Silver with
Mercury, Gold with Sal Ammoniac, Mercury with Vitriol.

5. Precipitation, is, when any Metal being dissolved into a strong Water, is
beaten down into a Powder by salt Water. The chiefest in this kind is Oil of
Tartar.

6. Amalgamation, is the joining, or mixing of Mercury with any other of the
Metals. The manner is this, in Gold, the rest are answerable: Take six parts of
Mercury, make them hot in a Crusible, and pour them to one part of Gold made
redhot in another Crusible, stir these well together that they may incorporate;
which done, cast the Mass into cold Water and wash it. This is called the
Amalgama of Gold.

7. For Vitrification. All the imperfect Metals may be turned by strong Fire
into Glass, except Mercury; Iron into Green; Lead into Yellow; Brass into Blew;
Tin into pale Yellow. For Gold and Silver, I have not known them Vitrified,
except joined with Antimony. These Glassie bodies may be reduced into the form
of Mineral bodies.

8. Dissolution. All Metals, without exception, may be dissolved.

1. Iron may be dissolved by any tart, ^alt, or vitriolated Water, yea, by
common Water, if it be first calcined with Sulphur. It dissolves in Aqua forti
with great ebullition and heat, into ared Liquor, so red as Blood.

2. Lead is fittiest dissolved in Vinegar, into a pale Yellow, making the
Vinegar very sweet.

3. Tin is best dissolved with distilled Salt Water. It retains the color of
the Menstruum.

4. Copper dissolves as Iron does, in the same Liquor, into a Blew.

5. Silver has his proper Menstruum, which is Aqua fortis. The color is
Green, with great heat and ebullition.

6. Gold is dissolved with Aqua Regia, into a yellow Liquor, with little heat
or ebullition.

7. Mercury is dissolved with much heat and boiling, into the same Liquors
which Gold and Silver are. It alters not the color of the Menstruum.

Note. Strong Waters may be charged with half their weight of fixed Metals, and
equal of Mercury; if the Workman be skilful.

9. Sprouting. This is an accident of dissolution. For if the Menstruum be
overcharged, then within short time the Metals will shoot into certain Crystals.

10. For Induration, or Mollification, they depend upon the quantity of fixed
Mercury and Sulphur. I have observed little of them, neither of Toughness nor
Bitterness.

11. The degrees of Fixation and Volatility I acknowledge, except the two
utmost, which never were observed.

12. The Question of Transmutation is very doubtful. Wherefore I refer your
Honor to the fourth Tome of Theatrum Chymicum: and there, to that Tract which
is entitled Disquisitio Heliana; where you shall find full satisfaction.

The Lord Bacon's Inquiries concerning Metals and Minerals. The fourth Letter
of the Cross-Row, touching Restitution.
FIrst, Therefore it is to be inquired in the Negative, what Bodies will never
return, either by their extreme Fixings; as in some Vitrifications, or by
extreme Volatility.

It is also to be inquired of the two means of Reduction; and first by the
Fire, which is but by congregation of Homogenial parts.

The second is, by drawing them down by some Body that has consent with them.
As Iron draws down Copper in Water; Gold draws Quicksilver in vapor;
whatsoever is of this kind, is very diligently to be inquired.

Also it is to be inquired what time, or age, will reduce without help of fire,
or body.

Also it is to be inquired what gives impediment to Union, or Restitution,
which is sometimes called Mortification; as when Quicksilver is mortified with
Turpentine, Spittle, or Butter.

Lastly, It is to be inquired how the Metal restored, differs in any thing
from the Metal rare; as whether it become not more churlish, altered in color,
or the like.

Doctor Meverel's Answers touching the Restitutions of Metals and Minerals.
REduction is chiefly effected by Fire, wherein if they stand and nele, the
imperfect Metals vapor away, and so do all manner of Salts which separated
them in minimas parts before.

Reduction is singularly helped by joining store of Metal of the same nature
with it in the melting.

Metals reduced are somewhat churlish, but not altered in color.

The Lord Verulam's Inquisition concerning the Versions, Transmutations,
Multiplications, and Effections of Bodies, written by him originally in
English, but not hitherto published in that Language.
EArth by Fire is turned into Brick, which is of the nature of a Stone, Quere
the Manner.
and serves for Building as Stone does: And the like of Tile.

Naphtha, which was the Bituminous Mortar, used in the Walls of Babylon, grows
to an entire and very hard Matter like a Stone.

In Clay Countries, where there is Pebble and Gravel, you shall find great
Stones, where you may see the Pebbles, or Gravel, and between them a Substance
of Stone as hard, or harder than the Pebble it self.

There are some Springs of Water, wherein if you put Wood, it will turn into
the nature of Stone: So as that within the Water shall be Stone, and that above
the Water continue Wood.

The slime about the Reins and Bladder in Man's Body, turns into Stone: And
Stone is likewise found often in the Gall; and sometimes, though rarely, in
Vena Porta.

Quere what time the substance of Earth in Quarries, asks to be turned into
Stone?

Water, as it seems, turns into Crystal, as is seen in diverse Caves, where
the Crystal hangs in Stillicidiis.

Try Wood, or the Stalk of Herbs, buried in Quicksilver, whether it will not
grow hard and stony?

They speak of a Stone engendered in a Toad's head.

There was a Gentleman, digging in his Moat, found an Egg turned into Stone,
the White and the Yolk keeping their Color, and the Shell glistring, like a
Stone cut with corners.

Try somethings put into the bottom of a Well; As Wood, or some soft Substance:
but let it not touch the Water, because it may not putrify.

They speak, that the White of an Egg, with lying long in the Sun will turn
Stone.

Mud in Water turns into shells of Fishes, as in Horse-Muscles, in fresh Ponds,
old and overgrown. And the substance is a wondrous fine substance, light and
shining.

A Speech touching the recovering of Drowned Mineral Works, prepared for the
Parliament (as Mr. Bushel affirmed) by the Viscount of St. Albans, then Lord
High Chancellor of England. See Mr. Bee's Extract. p. 18, 19.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe King, my Royal Master, was lately (graciously) pleased to move some
Discourse to me concerning Mr. Sutton's Hospital, and such like worthy
Foundations of memorable Piety: Which humbly seconded by my self, drew his
Majesty into a serious consideration of the Mineral Treasures of his own
Territories, and the practical discoveries of them by way of my Philosophical
Theory: Which he then so well resented, that, afterward, upon a mature
digestion of my whole Design, he commanded me to let your Lordships understand,
how great an inclination He ^ath to further so hopeful a Work, for the Honor
of his Dominions, as the most probable means to relieve all the Poor thereof
without any other Stock or Benevolence, than that which Divine Bounty should
confer on their own Industries and honest Labors, in recovering all such
Drowned Mineral Works as have been, or shall be, therefore, deserted.

And, my Lords, All that is now desired of his Majesty and your Lordships, is
no more than a gracious Act of this present Parliament to authorize Them
herein, adding a Mercy to a Munificence, which is, the Persons of such strong
and able Petty-Felons, who, in true penitence for their Crimes, shall implore
his Majesty's Mercy and Permission to expiate their Offenses by their Assiduous
Labors, in so innocent and hopeful a Work.

For, by this unchangeable way (my Lords) have I proposed to erect the
Academical Fabric of this Island's Salomon's House, modelled in my New
Atlantis. And I can hope (my Lords) that my Midnight Studies to make our
Countries flourish and outvy European Neighbors in mysterious and beneficent
Arts, have not so ingratefully affected (...) (...) Intellects, that you will
delay or resist his Majesty's desires, and my humble Petition in this
Benevolent, yea, Magnificent Affair; Since your Honorable Posterities may be
enriched thereby, and my Ends are only, to make the World my Heir, and the
learned Fathers of my Salomon's House, the successive and sworn Trustees in the
dispensation of this great Service, for God's Glory, my Prince's Magnificence,
this Parliaments Honor, our Countries general Good, and the propagation of my
own Memory.

And I may assure your Lordships, that all my Proposals in order to this great
Architype, seemed so rational and feasible to my Royal Sovereign, our Christian
Solomon, that I, thereby, prevailed with his Majesty to call this Honorable
Parliament, to Confirm and Empower me in my own way of Mining, by an Act of the
same, after his Majesty's more weighty Affairs were considered in your Wisdoms;
both which he desires your Lordships, and you Gentlemen that are chosen as the
Patriots of your respective Countries, to take speedy care of: Which done, I
shall not then doubt the happy Issue of my Undertakings in this Design, whereby
concealed Treasures, which now seem utterly lost to Mankind, shall be confined
to so universal a Piety, and brought into use by the industry of Converted
Penitents, whose wretched Carcases the Impartial Laws have, or shall dedicate,
as untimely Feasts, to the Worms of the Earth, in whose Womb those deserted
mineral riches must ever lie buried as lost Abortments, unless those be made
the active Midwives to deliver them. For, my Lords, I humbly conceive Them to
be the fittest of all Men to effect this great Work, for the Ends and Causes
which I have before expressed.

All which, my Lords, I humbly refer to your Grave and Solid Judgments to
conclude of, together with such other A^sistances to this Frame, as your own
Oraculous Wisdom shall intimate for the Magnifying our Creator, in his
inscrutable Providence, and admirable Works of Nature.

Certain Experiments made, by the Lord Bacon, about Weight in Air and Water.
A New Sovereign of equal Weight in the Air to the piece in Brass, overweigheth
in the Water 9 Grains. In three Sovereigns the difference in the Water is but
24 Grains.

The same Sovereign overweigheth an equal weight of Lead, 4 Grains in the
Water, in Brass Grains for Gold. In three Sovereigns about 11 Grains.

The same Sovereign overweigheth an equal weight of Stones in the Air, at least
65 Grains in the Water. The Grains being for the weight of Gold, in Brass Metal.

A Glass filled with Water weighing, in Troy Weights, 13 ounces and 5 drams,
the Glass and the Water together, weighs severally, viz. The Water 9 ounces
and a half, and the Glass 4 ounces and a dram.

A Bladder weighing 2 ounces 7 drams and a half, a Pebble laid upon the top of
the Bladder makes 3 ounces 6 drams and a half, the Stone weighs 7 drams.

The Bladder (as above) blown, and the same fallen, weighs equal.

A Sponge dry weighs 1 ounce, First Time.
26 grains: The same Sponge being wet, weighs 14 ounces, 6 drams, and 3
quarters: the Water weighs in several 11 ounces, one dram, and a half; and
the Sponge 3 ounces, and a half, and 3 quarters of a dram.

The Sponge and Water together weigh 15 ounces, Second Time.
and 7 drams: in several the Water weighs 11 ounces, and 7 drams, and the
Sponge 3 ounces, 7 drams and a half.

Three Sovereigns made equal to a weight in Silver in the Air, differs in the
Water.

For false Weights, one Beam long, the other thick.

The Stick and Thread weigh half a dram, and 20 grains, being laid in the
Balance.

The Stick tied to reach within half an inch of the end of the Beam, and so
much from the Tongue, weighs 28 grains; the difference is 22 grains.

The same Stick being tied to hang over the end of the Beam an inch and a half,
weighs half a dram, and 24 grains; exceeding the weight of the said Stick in
the Balance by 4 grains.

The same Stick being hanged down beneath the Thread as near the Tongue as is
possible, weighs only 8 grains.

Two weights of Gold being made equal in the Air, and weighing severally 7
drams; the one Balance being put into the Water, and the other hanging in the
Air, the Balance in the Water weighs only 5 drams and 3 grains, and abateth
of the weight in the Air 1 dram, and a half, and 27 grains.

The same trial being made the second time, and more truly and exactly betwixt
Gold and Gold, weighing severally (as above) and making a just and equal weight
in the Air, the one Balance being put into the Water, the depth of five
inches, and the other hanging in the Air, the Balance in the Water weighs
only 4 drams, and 55 grains, and abateth of the weight in the Air 2 drams, and
5 grains.

The trial being made betwixt Lead and Lead, weighing severally 7 drams in the
Air, the Balance in the Water weighs only 4 drams, and 41 grains, and
abateth of the weight in the Air 2 drams and 19 grains; the Balance kept the
same depth in the Water, as abovesaid.

The trial being made betwixt Silver and Silver, weighing severally 7 drams in
the Air, the Balance in the Water weighs only 4 drams, and 25 grains. So it
abateth 2 drams, and 35 grains; the same depth in the Water observed.

In Iron and Iron, weighing severally each Balance, in the Air 7 drams, the
Balance in the Water weighs only 4 drams and 18 grains; and abateth of the
weight in the Air 2 drams, and 42 grains; the depth observe as above.

In Stone and Stone, the same weight of 7 drams, equally in the Air, the
Balance in the Water weighs only 2 drams, and 22 grains, and abateth of the
weight in the Air 4 drams, and 38 grains; the depth as above.

In Brass and Brass, the same weight of 7 drams, in each Balance, equal in the
Air, the Balance in the Water weighs only 4 drams, and 22 grains, and
abateth in the Water 2 drams, and 38 grains; the depth observed.

The two Balances being weighed in Air and Water, the Balance in the Air
overweigheth the other in the Water one dram, and 28 grains; the depth in the
Water as aforesaid.

It is a profitable Experiment which shows the weights of several Bodies in
comparison with Water. It is of use in lading of Ships, and other Bottoms, and
may help to show what Burden, in the several kinds, they will bear.

Certain sudden Thoughts of the Lord Bacon's, set down, by him, under the Title
of Experiments for Profit.
MUck of Leaves.

Muck of River, Earth, and Chalk.

Muck of Earth closed, both for Saltpeter and Muck.

Setting of Wheat and Pease.

Mending of Crops by steeping of Seeds.

Making Pease, Cherries, and Strawberries come early.

Strengthening of Earth for often returns of Radishes, Parsnips, Turnips, etc.

Making great Roots of Onions, Radishes, and other Esculent roots.

Sowing of Seeds of Trefoil.

Setting of Woad.

Setting of Tobacco, and taking away the (...).

Grafting upon Boughs of old Trees.

Making of a hasty Coppice.

Planting of Osiers in wet Grounds.

Making of Candles to last long.

Building of Chimneys, Furnaces, and Ovens, to give Heat with less Wood.

Fixing of Log-Wood.

Other means to make Yellow and Green fixed.

Conserving of Orenges, Limons, Citrons, Pomgranats, etc. all Summer.

Recovering of Pearl, Coral, Turchoise, Color, by a Conservatory of Snow.

Sowing of Fennel.

Brewing with Hay, Haws, Trefoil, Broom, Heps, Bramble-Berries, Woodbines, wild
Thime, instead of Hops, Thistles.

Multiplying and Dressing Artichokes.

Certain Experiments, of the Lord Bacon's, about the Commixture of Liquors
only, not Solids, without Heat or Agitation, but only by simple Composition,
and Settling.
SPirit of Wine mingled with common Water, although it be much lighter than
Oil, yet so, as if the first fall be broken, by means of a Sop, or otherwise,
it stays above; and, if it be once mingled, it severeth not again, as Oil
does. Tried with Water colored with Saffron.

Spirit of Wine, mingled with common Water, has a kind of clouding, and motion
showing no ready Commixture. Tried with Saffron.

A dram of Gold dissolved in Aqua Regis, with a dram of Copper in Aqua forti
commixed, gave a Green Color, but no visible motion in the parts. Note, That
the dissolution of the Gold, was twelve parts Water, to one part Body: And of
the Copper was six parts Water, to one part Body.

Oil of Almonds commixed with Spirit of Wine, severeth, and the Spirit of Wine
remains on the top, and the Oil in the bottom.

Gold dissolved commixed with Spirit of Wine, a dram of each, does commix, and
no other apparent alteration.

Quicksilver dissolved with Gold dissolved, a dram of each, does turn to a
moldy Liquor, black, and like Smith's water.

Note, The dissolution of the Gold was twelve parts Water, ut supra, and one
part Metal: That of Water was two parts, and one part Metal.

Spirit of Wine, and Quicksilver commixed, a dram of each, at the first showed
a white Milky substance at the top, but soon after mingled.

Oil of Vitriol commixed with Oil of Cloves, a dram of each, turns into a red
dark Color; and a substance thick, almost like Pitch: And upon the first
motion gathers an extreme Heat, not to be endured by touch.

Dissolution of Gold, and Oil of Vitriol commixed, a dram of each, gathers a
great Heat at the first, and darkneth the Gold, and makes a thick Yellow.

Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Vitriol, a dram of each, hardly mingle; the Oil of
Vitrriol going to the bottom; and the Spirit of Wine lying above in a Milky
substance. It gathers also a great Heat, and a sweetness in the Taste.

Oil of Vitriol and dissolution of Quicksilver, a dram of each; makes an
extreme strife, and casts up a very gross fume, and after casts down a
white kind of Curds, or Sands; and on the top a slimish substance, and
gathers a great Heat.

Oil of Sulphur, and Oil of Cloves commixed, a dram of each, turn into a thick
and red-coloured substance; but no such Heat, as appeared in the Commixture
with the Oil of Vitriol.

Oil of Petroleum, and Spirit of Wine, a dram of each, intermingle otherwise
than by Agitation, as Wine and Water do; and the Petroleum remains on the top.

Oil of Vitriol, and Petroleum, a dram of each, turn into a moldy Substance,
and gathers some warmth; there residing a black cloud in the bottom, and a
monstrous thick Oil on the top.

Spirit of Wine, and Red-wine Vinegar, one ounce of each, at the first fall,
one of them remains above, but by Agitation they mingle.

Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Almonds, one ounce of each, mingle not; but the Oil
of Almonds remains above.

Spirit of Wine, and Vinegar, an ounce of each, commixed, do mingle, without
any apparent separation, which might be in respect of the Color.

Dissolution of Iron, and Oil of Vitriol, a dram of each, do first put a Milky
substance into the bottom; and after incorporate into a moldy Substance.

Spirit of Wine commixed with Milk, a third part Spirit of Wine, and two parts
Milk, coagulateth little, but mingleth; and the Spirit swims not above.

Milk and Oil of Almonds mingled, in equal portions, do hardly incorporate, but
the Oil comes above, the Milk being poured in last; and the Milk appears in
some drops, or bubbles.

Milk one ounce, Oil of Vitriol a scruple, does coagulate; the Milk at the
bottom where the Vitriol goes.

Dissolution of Gum Tragacanth, and Oil of Sweet Almonds, do not commingle, the
Oil remaining on the top, till they be stirred, and make the Muselates somewhat
more liquid.

Dissolution of Gum Tragacanth, one ounce and a half, with half an ounce of
Spirit of Wine, being commixed by Agitation, make the Muselates more thick.

The White of an Egg with Spirit of Wine, does bake the Egg into Clots, as if
it began to Poch.

One ounce of Blood, one ounce of Milk, do easily incorporate.

Spirit of Wine does curdle the Blood.

One ounce of Whey unclarified, one ounce of Oil of Vitriol, make no apparent
alteration.

One ounce of Blood, one ounce of Oil of Almonds, incorporate not, but the Oil
swims above.

Three quarters of an ounce of Wax, being dissolved upon the Fire, and one
ounce of Oil of Almonds put together and stirred, do not so incorporate, but
that when it is cold, the Wax gathers and swims upon the top of the Oil.

One ounce of Oil of Almonds, cast into an ounce of Sugar seething, sever
presently, the Sugar shooting toward the bottom.

A Catalogue of Bodies, Attractive, and not Attractive, made by the Lord Bacon,
together with Experimental Observations about Attraction.
These following Bodies, Draw.
AMber, Ieat, Diamond, Sapphire, Carbuncle, Iris, the Gem. Opale, Amethist,
Bristollina, Crystal, Clear Glass, Glass of Antimony, diverse Flowers from
Mines, Sulphur, Mastick, hard sealing Wax, the harder Rosin, Arsenic.

These following Bodies, do not Draw.
Smaragd, Achates, Corneolus, Pearl, Iaspis, Chalcedononius, Alablaster,
Porphyrie, Coral, Marble, Touchstone, Haematites, or Boodstone, Sinyris,
Ivory, Bones, Eben-Tree, Cedar, Cypress, Pitch, softer Rosin, Camphire,
Galbanum, Ammoniac, Storax, Benjoin, Lodestone, The drawing of Iron excepted.
Asphaltum.

These Bodies, Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, draw not, though never so finely
polished.
In Winter, if the Air be sharp and clear, Sal Gemmeum, Rock Alum, and Lapis
Specularis will draw.

These following Bodies are apt to be Drawn, if the Mass of them be small.
Chaff, Woods, Leaves, Stones, all Metals (...), and in the Mine; Earth, Water,
Oil.

Si fiat versorium ex Metello aliquo, more Indicis Magnetici, and fini alteri
apponatur succinum, leniter fricatum, versorium convertit se.

Succinum calefactum ab Igne, sive tepeat, sive ferveat, sive in^lammetur, non
trahit.

Bacillum ferreum candens, Flamma, Candela ardens, Carbo ignitus, admota
festucis aut versoriis, non trahunt.

Succinum in majore mole, si fuerit politum, allicit, licet non fricatum; si in
minore, aut impurius, sine frictione non trahit.

Crystallus, Lapis Specularis, Vitrum, Electrica cetera, si urantur, aut
torreantur, non trahunt. Pix. Resina mollior. Benjoin. Asphaltum. Camphora.
Galbanum. Ammoniacum. Storax. Assa. Haec coelo calidiore neutiquam prorsus
trahunt; at tempore frigidiore obscure and inf^rme trahunt.


Vapidus Aer succino, etc. afflatus, vel ab ore, vel ab Aere humidiore,
virtutem trahendi suffocat.

Si charta aut linteum interponatur inter succinum and paleam, non fit motus
aut Attractio.

Succinum aut Electrica calefacta ex Radiis Solis, non expergefiunt ad
trahendum, sicut ex Frictione.

Succinum fricatum, and Radiis Solis expositum diutius vires trahendi retinet,
nec tam cito eas deponit ac si in umbra positum esset.

Fervor ex speculo comburente succino, etc. conciliatus, non juvat ad trahendum.

Sulphur accensum, and Cera dura inflammata, non trahunt.

Succinum cum citissime a frictione, festucae vel versorio apponitur, optime
trahit.

Virtus Electrica viget in retentione ad tempus non minus quam in Attractione
prima.

Flamma apposito succino intra orbem Activitatis non trahitur.

Gutta Aquae admoto succino trahitur in Conum. Electrica, si durius
affricentur, impeditur Attractio.

Quae aegre alliciunt in claro coelo, in crasso non movent.

Aqua imposita succino virtutem trahendi suffocat, licet ipsum Aquam trahat.

Sarca ita succino circundatum, ut tangat, attractione tollit; sed interpositum
ut non tangat, non omnino tollit.

Oleum succino appositum motum non impedit; nec succinum digito oleo madefacto
fricatum, vires trahendi perdit.

Firmius provocant, and diutius retinent Succinum, Gagates, and hujusmodi,
etiam minore cum frictione: Adamas Crystallum, Vitrum, diutius teri debent, ut
manifesto incalescant antequa m trahant.

Quae Flammae approximant, licet propinqua distantia, a succino non trahuntur.

Fumum extincta lucerna succinum, etc. trahit. Fumus ubi exit and crassus est,
fortius trahit succinum; cum ascenderit, and rarior fit, debilius. Corpus ab
Electricis attractum non manifesto alteratur, set tantum incumbit.

The same in English by the Publisher.
IF there be made a Turn-Pin of any Metal, after the fashion of a Magnetic
Needle, and Amber be applied to one end of it, after having been gently rubbed,
the Pin will turn.

Amber heated by the Fire, be it warmish, hot, or set on fire, it does not draw.

A little Bar of Iron red hot, Flame, a lighted Candle, a hot Coal, put nigh
Shea^^s (or Straws) or Turn-Pins (or Compass-Needles) do not draw.

Amber, in a greater Mass, if it be Polite, draws, though not rubbed: In a
lesser quantity, and in a less polite Mass, it draws not without rubbing.

Crystal, Lapis Specularis, Glass, and other such Electric Bodies, if burnt, or
scorched, draw not.

Pitch, the softer Rosin, Benjoin, Asphaltum, Camphire, Galbanum, Ammoniac,
Storax, Assa, these draw not at all when the Air is hot: But when it is cooler,
they draw weakly, and so that we can just perceive them to do so.

Reaking Air, blown upon Amber, etc. from the Mouth, or from a moister
Atmosphere; choaketh the attractive Virtue.

If a Paper, or a piece of Linen, be put between Amber and Chaff, there is no
Motion, or Attraction made.

Amber, or other Electrics, warmed by the Sunbeams, have not their attractive
Virtue so awakened, as by Rubbing.

Amber rubbed, and exposed to the Beams of the Sun, retains its attractive
force the longer; and does not so soon lose it, as it would do in the shadow.

Heat derived from a Burning-Glass to Amber, etc. does not help its Attraction.

Sulphur, and hard Wax, set on fire, do not draw.

Amber, when immediately after rubbing, it is applied to a Shiver, or a
Compass-Needle, draws best of all.

The Electric Virtue is as vigorous, for a time, in its Retention, as it was in
its first Attraction.

Flame (Amber being put within the sphere of its Activity) is not drawn by it.

A drop of Water, Amber being applied toward it, is drawn into a Cone.

If Electric Bodies be rubbed too hard, their attraction is, thereby, hindered.

Those Bodies, which in a clear Sky do scarce draw, in a thick Air move not at
all.

Water put upon Amber choaketh its attractive force, though it draws the
Water it self.

Fat For by Sarca, I suppose, he means Sarcia.
so encompassing Amber, that it touches it, takes away its attraction; but
being so put betwixt it and the Object to be drawn, as not to touch it, it does
not take it away.

Oil put upon Amber, hinders not its motion: Neither does Amber, rubbed with
the Finger moistened with Oil, lose its attractive Virtue.

Amber, Ieats, and the like, do more strongly excite, and longer retain the
Objects they draw, although the rubbing be but little. But Diamonds, Crystal,
Glass, ought to be rubbed longer, that they may appear hot, ere they be used
for attraction.

Flames nigh to Amber, though the distance be very small, are not drawn by it.

Amber, etc. draw the smoke of a Lamp newly extinguished.

Amber draws Smoke more strongly when it comes forth, and is more gross; and
more weakly, when it ascends and becomes thinner.

A Body drawn by Electric Bodies, is not manifestly altered, but only leans it
self upon them.

Baconiana Medica. OR, REMAINS OF Sir Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, and
Viscount St. Albans; Touching Medical Matters.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

THE Lord Bacon's Medical Remains.
A Medical Paper of the Lord Bacon's, to which he gave the Title of Grains of
Youth.
Grains of Youth.
TAke of Nitre 4 grains, of Amber-Grease 3 grains, of Orris-pouder 2 grains, of
white Poppy-Seed the fourth part of a grain, of Saffron half a grain, with
Water of Orange Flowers, and a little Tragacanth; make them into small grains,
four in number. To be taken at four a Clock, or going to Bed.

Preserving Ointments
Take of Deers-suet 1 ounce, of Myrrh 6 grains, of Saffron 5 grains, of
Bay Salt 12 grains, of Canary-Wine of two Years old, a Spoonful and a half:

Spread it on the inside of your Shirt, and let it dry, and then put it on.

A Purge familiar for opening the Liver.
Take Rubarb 2 drams, Agaric, Trochiscat 1 dram and a half, steep them in
Claret Wine burnt with Mace: Take of Wormwood 1 dram, steep it with the rest,
and make a mass of Pills, with Syrup. Acetos. simplex.

But drink an opening Broth before it, with Succory, Fennel, and Smallage
Roots, and a little of an Onion.

Wine for the Spirits.
Take Gold perfectly refined 3 ounces, quench it six or seven times in good
Claret Wine: Add of Nitre 6 grains, for two Draughts. Add of Saffron prepared 3
grains, of Amber-grease 4 grains, pass it through an Hippocras Bag, wherein
there is a dram of Cinnamon gross beaten, or to avoid the dimming of the Color,
of Ginger. Take two Spoonfuls of this to a Draught of fresh Claret Wine.

The Preparing of Saffron.
Take 6 grains of Saffron, sleept in half parts of Wine and Rose Water, and a
quarter part Vinegar; then dry it in the Sun.

Wine against Adverse Melancholy, preserving the Senses and the Reason.
Take the Roots of Bugloss, well scraped, and cleansed from their inner Pith,
and cut them into small slices; steep them in Wine of Gold extinguished ut
supra, and add of Nitre 3 grains, and drink it ut supra, mixed with fresh Wine:
The Roots must not continue steeped above a quarter of an Hour; and they must
be changed thrice.

Breakfast-Preservative against the Gout and Rheumes.
To take once in the Month at least, and for two Days together, one grain of
Castorei, in my ordinary Broth.

The Preparation of Garlic.
Take Garlic 4 ounces, boil it upon a soft Fire, in Claret Wine, for half an
Hour. Take it out, and steep it in Vinegar; whereto add 2 drams of Cloves, then
take it forth, and keep it in a Glass for use.

The Artificial Preparation of Damask-Roses, for Smell.
Take Roses, pull their Leaves, then dry them in a clear Day, in the hot Sun;
then their smell will be as gone. Then cram them into an Earthen Bottle, very
dry and sweet, and stop it very close; they will remain in Smell and Color
both fresher, than those that are otherwise dried. Note, The first drying, and
close keeping upon it, preventeth all Putrefaction, and the second Spirit
comes forth, made of the remaining Moisture not dissipated.

Sometimes to add to the Maceration, 3 grains of Tartar, and 2 of Enula, to cut
the more heavy and viscous Humors; lest Rubarb work only upon the lightest.

To take sometimes the Oxymel before it, and sometimes the Spanish Honey simple.

A Restorative Drink.
Take of Indian Maiz half a pound, grind it not too small, but to the fineness
of ordinary Meal, and then bolt and serce it, that all the husky part may be
taken away. Take of Eringium Roots 3 ounces, of Dates as much, of Enula 2
drams, of Mace 3 drams, and brew them with Ten-shilling Beer, to the quantity
of four Gallons: And this do, either by decocting them in a Pottle of Wort, to
be after mingled with the Beer, being new tapped, or otherwise infuse it in the
New Beer in a Bag.

Use this familiarly at Meals.

Against the waste of the Body by Heat.
Take sweet Pomgranates, and strain them lightly, not pressing the Kernel, into
a Glass; where put some little of the Peel of a Citron, and two or three
Cloves, and three grains of Amber-grease, and a pretty deal of fine Sugar. It
is to be drunk every Morning whilst Pomgranates last.

Methusalem Water.
Against all Asperity and Torrefaction of Inward parts, and all Adustion of the
Blood, and generally against the Dryness of Age.
Take Crevises very new, q. s. boil them well in Claret Wine; of them take only
the shells, and rub them very clean, especially on the inside, that they may be
thoroughly cleansed from the Meat. Then wash them three or four times in fresh
Claret Wine, heated, still changing the Wine, till all the Fish-taste be quite
taken away. But in the Wine wherein they are washed, steep some tops of green
Rosemary; then dry the pure shell thoroughly, and bring them to an exquisite
Powder. Of this Powder take 3 drams. Take also Pearl, and steep them in Vinegar
twelve Hours, and dry off the Vinegar; of this Powder also 3 drams. Then put
the Shell Powder, and Pearl Powder together, and add to them of Ginger one
scruple, and of white Poppy Seed half a scruple, and steep them in Spirit of
Wine (wherein six grains of Saffron has been dissolved) seven Hours. Then upon
a gentle heat, vapor away all the Spirit of Wine, and dry the Powder against
the Sun without Fire. Add to it of Nitre one dram, of Amber-grease one scruple
and a half; and so keep this Powder for use, in a clean Glass. Then take a
Pottle of Milk, and slice in it of fresh Cucumers, the inner Pith only (the
Rind being pared off) four ounces, and draw forth a Water by Distillation. Take
of Claret Wine a Pint, and quench Gold in it four times.

Of the Wine, and of the water of Milk, take of each three ounces, of the
Powder one scruple, and drink it in the Morning; stir up the Powder when you
drink, and walk upon it.

A Catalogue of Astringents, Openers, and Cordials, instrumental to Health.
Collected by Sir Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam.
Astringents.
REd Rose, Blackberry, Myrtle, Plantane, Flower of Pomegranate, Mint, Aloes
well washed, Mirabolanes, Sloes, Agresta, Fraga, Mastich, Myrrh, Saffron,
Leaves of Rosemary, Rubarb received by Infusion, Cloves, Service-Berries,
Corna, Wormwood, Bole Armeniac, Sealed Earth, Cinque-foil, Tincture of Steel,
Sanguis Draconis, Coral, Amber, Quinces, Spikenard, Galls, Alum, Bloodstone,
Mummy, Amomum, Galangal, Cypress, Ivy, Psyllum, Houseleek, Sallow, Mulleni,
Vine, Oak-leaves, Lign-Aloes, Red Sanders, Mulberrie, Medlers, Flowers of
Peach-Trees, Pomegranates, Pears, Palmule, Pith of Kernels, Purslain, Acacia,
Laudanum, Tragacanth, Thus Olibani, Comfrey, Shepherdspurse, Polygonium.

Astringents (both hot and cold) which corroborate the Parts, and which
confirm, and refresh such of them as are loose, or languishing.

Rosemary, Mint, especially with Vinegar, Cloves, Cinnamon, Cardamom,
Lign-Aloes, Rose, Myrtle, Red Sanders, Cotonea, Red-Wine, Chalybeat-Wine,
Fivefinger-Grass, Plantane, Apples of Cypress, Barberries, Fraga,
Service-Berries, Corneille's, Ribes, Sowr-Pears, Rambesia.

Astringents Styptic, which, by their Styptic Virtue, may stay Fluxes.

Sloes, Acacia, Rind of Pomegranates infused, at least three Hours, the Styptic
Virtue not coming forth in lesser time. Alum, Galls, Juice of Sallow, Syrup of
unripe Quinces, `Balaustia, the Whites of Eggs boiled hard in Vinegar.

Astringents which, by their cold and earthy Nature, may stay the motion of the
Humors tending to a Flux.

Sealed Earth, Sanguis Draconis, Coral, Pearls, the shell of the Fish Dactylus.

Astringents which, by the thickness of their substance, stuff as it were the
thin Humors, and thereby stay Fluxes.

Rice, Beans, Millet, Cauls, dry Cheese, fresh Goats-Milk.

Astringents which, by virtue of their Glutinous substance, restrain a Flux,
and strengthen the looser Parts.

Karabe Perhap^ he meant the fruit of Ka^obe.
, Mastich, Spodium, Hartshorn, Frankincense, dried Bulls Pistle, Gum
Tragacanth.

Astringents Purgative, which, having by their purgative, or expulsive Power,
thrust out the Humors, leave behind them of Astrictive Virtue.

Rubarb, especially that which is tosted against the Fire; Mirabolanes, Tartar,
Tamarinds, [an Indian Fruit like Green Damasens].

Astringents which do very much suck and dry up the Humors, and thereby stay
Fluxes.

Rust of Iron, Crocus Martis, Ashes of Spices.

Astringents, which by their Nature, do dull the Spirits, and lay asleep the
Expulsive virtue, and take away the acrimony of all Humors.

Laudanum, Mithridate; Diascordium, Diacodium.

Astringents, which by cherishing the strength of the parts, do comfort and
confirm their Retentive power.

A Stomacher of Scarlet Cloth.

Whelps, or young healthy Boys, applito the Stomach.

Hypocratic Wines, so they be made of austere Materials.

Openers.
SUcchory, Endive, Betony, Liverwort, Petroselinum, Smallage, Asparagus, Roots
of Grass, Dodder, Tamarisk, Juncus Odoratus, Lacca, Copparus, Wormwood,
Chamaepitis, Fumaria, Scurvy Grass, Eringo, Nettle, Ireos, Elder, Hyssop,
Aristolochia, Gentian, Costus, Fennel-root, Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue,
Daffodilly, Asarum, Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, Acorns, Abretonum, Aloes, Agaric,
Rubarb infused, Onions, Garlic, Bother, Squilla, Sowbread, Indian Nard, Celtic
Nard, Bark of Laurel-Tree, Bitter Almonds, Holy Thistle, Camomile, Gunpowder,
Sows (Millipedes) Ammoniac, Man's Urine, Rue, Park-Leaves (Vitex) Centaury,
Lupines, Chamaedris, Costum, Ammeas, Bistort, Camphire, Daucus Seed, Indian
Balsam, Scordium, Sweet Cane, Galingal, Agrimony.

Cordials.
FLowers of Basil Royal, Flores Caryophillati, Flowers of Bugloss and Borage,
Rind of Citron, Orenge-Flowers, Rosemary, and its Flowers, Saffron, Musk,
Amber, Folium, [ i. e. Nardi Folium,] Balm-Gentle, Pimpernel, Gems, Gold,
Generous Wines, Fragrant Apples, Rose, Rosa Moschata, Cloves, Lign-Aloes, Mace,
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Cardamom, Galingal, Vinegar, Kermes-berry, Herba* Moschata,
Betony, White Sanders, Camphire, Flowers of Heliotrope, Pennyroyal, Scordium,
Opium corrected, White Pepper, Nasturtium, white and red Bean, Castum Dulce,
Dactylus, Pine, Fig, Egg-shell, Vinum Malvaticum, Ginger, Kidneys, Oysters,
Crevises (or River-Crabs) Seed of Nettle, Oil of Sweet Almonds, Sesamium Oleum,
Asparagus, Bulbous Roots, Onions, Garlic, Eruca, Daucus Seed, Eringo, Siler
Montanus, the smell of Musk, Cynethi Odor, Caraway Seed, Flower of Pul^s,
Anniseed, Pellitory, anointing of the Testicles with Oil of Elder, in which
Pellitory has been boiled, Cloves with Goats-Milk, Olibanum.

An Extract by the Lord Bacon, for his own use, out of the Book of the
Prolongation of Life, together with some new Advices in order to Health.
1. ONce in the Week, or at least in the Fornight, to take the Water of
Mithridate distilled, with three parts to one, or Strawberry-water to allay it;
and some grains of Nitre and Saffron, in the Morning between sleeps.

2. To continue my Broth with Nitre; but to interchange it every other two
Days, with the Juice of Pomgranates expressed, with a little Cloves, and Rind
of Citron.

3. To order the taking of the Maceration, Viz. Of Rubarb infused into a
draught of white Wine and Beer, mingled together, for the space of half an
Hour, once in six or seven Days. See the Lord Bacon 's Life by Dr. Rawley,
toward the end.
as follows.

To add to the Maceration, six grains of Cremor Tartari, and as much Enula.

To add to the Oxymel, some Infusion of Fennel-roots in the Vinegar, and four
grains of Angelica-seed, and Juice of Limons, a third part to the Vinegar.

To take it not so immediately before Supper; and to have the Broth specially
made with Barley, Rosemary, Thyme, and Cresses.

4. To take once in the Month at least, and for two Days together, a grain and
a half of Castor in my Broth, and Breakfast.

5. A Cooling Clyster to be used once a Month, after the working of the
Maceration is settled.

Take of Barley-water, in which the Roots of Bugloss are boiled, three ounces,
with two drams of Red-Sanders, and two ounces of Raisins of the Sun, and one
ounce of Dactyles, and an ounce and a half of Fat Carycks; let it be strained,
and add to it an ounce and a half of Syrup of Violets: Let a Clyster be made.

Let this be taken (with Veal) in the aforesaid Decoction.

6. To take every Morning, the Fume of Lign-Aloes, Rosemary and Bays dried,
with Juice; but once in a Week to add a little Tobacco, without otherwise
taking it in a Pipe.

7. To appoint every Day an Hour, ad Affectus Intentionales and sanos. Qu. de
particulari.

8. To remember Mastichatories for the Mouth.

9. And Orenge-flower Water to be smelt to, or snuffed up.

10. In the third Hour after the Sun is risen, to take in Air from some high
and open Place, with a ventilation of Rosae Moschatae, and fresh Violets; and
to stir the Earth, with infusion of Wine and Mint.

11. To use Ale with a little Enula Campana, Cardu^s, Germander, Sage, Angelica
Seed, Cresses of a middle age, to beget a robust heat.

12. Mithridate thrice a Year.

13. A bit of Bread dipped in Vino Odorato, with Syrup of dry Roses, and a little
Amber, at going to Bed.

14. Never to keep the Body in the same posture above half an Hour at a time.

15. Four Precepts. To break off Custom. To shake off Spirits ill disposed. To
meditate on Youth. To do nothing against a Man's Genius.

16. Syrup of Quinces for the Mouth of the Stomach. Enquire concerning other
things useful in that kind.

17. To use once during Supper time, Wine in which Gold is quenched.

18. To use anointing in the Morning lightly with Oil of Almonds, with Salt and
Saffron, and a gentle rubbing.

19. Ale of the second Infusion of the Vine of Oak.

20. Methusalem Water, of Pearls and Shells, of Crabs, and a little Chalk.

21. Ale of Raisins, Dactyles, Potatoes, Pistachios, Honey, Tragacanth, Mastich.

22. Wine with Swines-flesh, or Hartsflesh.

23. To drink the first Cup at Supper hot, and half an Hour before Supper,
something hot and Aromatiz'd.

24. Chalybeats, four times a Year.

25. Pilulae ex tribus, once in two Months, but after the Mass has been
macerated in Oil of Almonds.

26. Heroic Desires.

27. Bathing of the Feet once in a Month, with Lie ex Sale nigro, Camomile,
sweet Marjoram, Fennel, Sage, and a little Aqua Vitae.

28. To provide always an apt Breakfast.

29. To beat the Flesh before Rosting of it.

30. Macerations in Pickles.

31. Agitation of Beer by Ropes, or in Wheel-Barrows.

32. That Diet is good which makes Lean, and then Renews. Consider of the ways
to effect it.

Medical Receipts of the Lord Bacon's.
The First Receipt, or his Lordship's Broth and Fomentation for the Stone.
The Broth.
TAke one dram of Eryngium Roots, cleansed and sliced; and boil them together
with a Chicken. In the end, add of Elder-Flowers, and Marigold-Flowers
together, one pugil, of Angelica-Seed half a dram, of Raisins of the Sun stoned
fifteen, of Rosemary, Thyme, Mace, together, a little.

In six ounces of this Broth, or thereabouts, let there be dissolved of white
Cremor Tartari three grains.

Every third or fourth Day, take a small Toast of Manchet, dipped in Oil of
Sweet Almonds new drawn, and sprinkled with a little Loaf-Sugar.

You may make the Broth for two Days, and take the one half every Day.

If you find the Stone to stir, forbear the Toast for a Course or two.

The Intention of this Broth, is, not to Void, but to Undermine the Quarry of
the Stones in the Kidneys.

The Fomentation.
Take of Leaves of Violets, Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, together, one
Handful. Of Flowers of Camomile and Mellilot, together one Pugil. The Root of
Marshmallows one ounce; of Annis and Fennelseeds, together one ounce and a
half, of Flax-seed two drams. Make a Decoction in Spring Water.

The Second Receipt, showing the way of making a certain Ointment, which his
Lordship called, Unguentum Fragrans sive Romanum; The Fragrant, or Roman
Unguent.
TAke of the Fat of a Deer, half a pound; of Oil of Sweet Almonds two ounces.
Let them be set upon a very gentle Fire, and stirred with a stick of Juniper,
till they are melted.

Add of Root of Flower de Luce poudered, Damask Roses poudered, together, one
dram; of Myrrh dissolved in Rosewater, half a dram; of Cloves, half a scruple;
of Civet, four grains; of Musk, six grains; of Oil of Mace expressed, one drop;
as much of Rosewater as suffices to keep the Unguent from being too thick.

Let all these be put together in a Glass, and set upon the Embers, for the
space of an Hour; and stirred with a stick of Juniper.

Note, That in the Confection of this Ointment, there was not used above a
quarter of a pound, and a tenth part of a quarter of Deers Suet: And that all
the Ingredients, except the Oil of Almonds, were doubled, when the Ointment was
half made, because the Fat things seemed to be too Predominant.

The Third Receipt. A Manus Christi for the Stomach.
TAke of the best Pearls very finely pulverized, one dram; of Sal Nitre, one
scruple; of Tartar, two Scruples; of Ginger and Gallingal, together, one ounce
and a half; of Calamus, Root of Enula Campana, Nutmeg, together, one scruple
and a half; of Amber, sixteen grains; of the best Musk, ten grains; with
Rose Water, and the finest Sugar, let there be made a Manus Christi.

The Fourth Receipt. A Secret for the Stomach.
TAke Lignum Aloes in gross shavings, steep them in Sack, or Alacant, changed
twice, half an Hour at a time, till the bitterness be drawn forth. Then take
the Shavings forth and dry them in the shade, and beat them to an Excellent
Powder. Of that Powder, with the Syrup of Citrons, make a small Pill, to be
taken before Supper.

Baconiana Theologica: OR A FEW REMAINS OF THE Lord Bacon, Relating To Divine
Matters.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

THE Lord Bacon's Theological Remains.
The Lord Bacon's Questions about the Lawfulness of a War for the Propagating
of Religion.
Questions wherein I desire Opinion, joined with Arguments and Authorities.
WHether a War be lawful against Infidels, only for the Propagation of the
Christian Faith, without other cause of Hostility?

Whether a War be lawful, to recover to the Church, Countries, which formerly
have been Christian, though now Alienate, and Christians utterly extirped?

Whether a War be lawful, to free and deliver Christians that yet remain in
Servitude, and subjection to Infidels?

Whether a War be lawful in Revenge, or Vindication, of Blasphemy and
Reproaches against the Deity and our Savior? or for the ancient effusion of
Christian Blood, and Cruelties upon Christians?

Whether a War be lawful for the Restoring, and purging of the Holy Land, the
Sepulcher, and other principal places of Adoration and Devotion?

Whether in the Cases aforesaid, it be not Obligatory to Christian Princes, to
make such a War, and not permissive only?

Whether the making of a War against the Infidels, be not first in order of
Dignity, and to be preferred before extirpations of Heresies, reconcilements of
Schisms, reformation of Manners, pursuits of just Temporal Quarrels, and the
like Actions for the Public Good, except there be either a more urgent
Necessity, or a more evident Facility in those Inferior Actions or except they
may both go on together in some Degree?

Two Prayers composed by Sir Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, and Viscount of
St. Albans.
The First Prayer, called by his Lordship, The Student's Prayer.
TO God the Father, God the Word, God the Spirit, we pour forth most humble and
hearty Supplications; that He, remembering the Calamities of Mankind, and the
Pilgrimage of this our Life, in which we wear out Days few and evil; would
please to open to us new Refreshments out of the Fountains of his Goodness, for
the alleviating of our Miseries. This also, we humbly and earnestly beg, that
Humane things, may not prejudice such as are Divine; neither that from the
unlocking of the Gates of Sense, and the kindling of a greater Natural Light,
any thing of Incredulity, or Intellectual Night, may arise in our Minds toward
Divine Mysteries. But rather that by our Mind, thoroughly cleansed and purged
from Fancy and Vanities; and yet subject, and perfectly given up to the Divine
Oracles, there may be given unto Faith, the things that are Faith's. Amen.

The Second Prayer, called by his Lordship, The Writer's Prayer.
THou, O Father! who gave the Visible Light as the Firstborn of thy
Creatures, and did pour into Man the Intellectual Light, as the top and
consummation of thy Workmanship; be pleased to protect and govern this Work,
which, coming from thy Goodness, returns to thy Glory. Thou, after Thou had
reviewed the Works which thy Hands had made, beheldest that every Thing was
very Good; and Thou did rest with Complacencie in them. But Man, reflecting
on the Works, which he had made, saw that all was Vanity and vexation of
Spirit, and could, by no means, acquiesee in them. Wherefore, if we labor in
thy Works with the sweat of our Brows, Thou will make us partakers of thy
Vision, and thy Sabbath. We humbly beg that this Mind may be steadfastly in us;
and that Thou, by our Hands, and also by the Hands of others, on whom Thou
shall bestow the same Spirit, wilt please to conveigh a largeness of new Alms
to thy Family of Mankind. These things we commend to Thy everlasting Love, by
our Jesus, thy Christ, God with us. Amen.

Baconiana Bibliographica: OR CERTAIN REMAINS OF THE LORD BACON Concerning His
Writings.

To these are added Letters and Discourses by others, upon the same Argument;
In which also are contained some Remarks concerning his Life.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1679.

Remains Bibliographical, Written by the Lord Bacon HIMSELF.
The Lord Chancellor Bacon's Letter to the Queen of Bohemia In^he year 1625.
in Answer to one from her Majesty, and upon sending to her his Book about a
War with Spain.
It may please your Majesty,
IHave received your Majesty's Gracious Letter from Mr. Secretary Morton, who
is now a Saint in Heaven. It was at a time, when the great Desolation of the
Plague was in the City, and when my self was ill of a dangerous and tedious
Sickness. The first time that I found any degree of Health, nothing came sooner
to my Mind, than to acknowledge your Majesty's great Favor, by my most humble
Thanks: And because I see your Majesty takes delight in my Writings, (and to
say truth, they are the best Fruits I now yield) I presume to send your Majesty
a little Discourse of mine, touching a War with Spain, which I writ about two
Years since; which the King your Brother liked well. It is written without
Bitterness, or Invective, as Kings Affairs ought to be carried: But if I be not
deceived, it has Edge enough. I have yet some Spirits left, and remnant of
Experience, which I consecrate to the King's Service, and your Majesty's; for
whom I pour out my daily Prayers to God, that he would give your Majesty a
Fortune worthy your rare Virtues: Which some good Spirit tells me, will be in
the end. I do in all reverence kiss your Majesty's Hands, ever resting

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted Servant. Francis St. Alban.

A Letter of the Lord Bacon's to the University of Cambridg, upon his sending
to their Public Library, his Book of the Advancement of Learning.
Franciscus Baro de Verulamio, Vicecomes Sancti Albani, Almae Matri inclytae
Academiae Cantabrigiensi, Salutem.
DEbita Filii, qualia possum, persolvo. Quod vero facio, idem and ^vos hortor;
ut Augmentis Scientiarum strenue incumbatis, and in Animi modesti^ libertatem
ingenii retineatis, neque Talentum a veteribus concreditum in sudario
reponatis. Affuerit proculdubio and Affulserit divini Luminis Gratia, si
humiliata, and submissa Religioni Philosophia, Clavibus sensus ligitime, and
dextre utamini, and amoto omni contradictionis studio, quisque cum Alio, ac si
ipse secum, disputet, Valete.

The same in English by the Publisher.
Francis, Baron of Verulam, and Viscount of St. Albans, to the Indulgent
Mother, the famous University of Cambridg, Health.
I Here repay you, according to my Ability, the Debts of a Son. I exhort you
also, to do the same thing with my self: That is, to bend your whole might
toward the Advancement of the Sciences, and to retain freedom of Thought,
together with humility of Mind; and not to suffer the Talent which the Ancients
have deposited with you, to lie dead in a Napkin. Doubtless, the favor of the
Divine Light will be present and shine amongst you, if Philosophy being
submitted to Religion, you lawfully and dexterously use the Keys of Sense; and
if all study of Opposition being laid aside, every one of you so dispute with
another, as if he were arguing with himself.

Fare ye well.
A Letter of the Lord Bacon's, to the University of Cambridg, upon his sending
to their public Library, his Novum Organum.
Almae Matri Academiae Cantabrigiensi.
CVm vester filius sim and Alumnus, voluptati mihi erit, Partum meum nuper
editum vobis in gremium dare: Aliter enim velut pro exposito eum haberem. Nec
vos moveat, quod via nova sit. Necesse est enim talia per Aetatum, and
seculorum circuitus evenire. Antiquis tamen suus constat honos; ingenij
scilicet: Nam Fides verbo Dei, and experientiae tantum debetur. Scientias
autem, ad Experientiam retrahere, non conceditur: At easdem ab Experientia de
integro excitare, operosum certe sed pervium. Deus vobis, and studiis vestris
faveat.

Filius vester Amantissimus, Franc. Verulam, Cancel.

The same in English by the Publisher.
SEeing I am your Son, and your Disciple, it will much please me to repose in
your Bosom, the Issue which I have lately brought forth into the World; for
otherwise I should look upon it as an exposed Child. Let it not trouble you,
that the Way in which I go is new: Such things will of necessity, happen in the
Revolutions of several Ages. However, the Honor of the Ancients is secured:
That, I mean, which is due to their Wit. For Faith is only due to the Word of
God, and to Experience. Now, for bringing back the Sciences to Experience, is
not a thing to be done: But to raise them anew from Experience, is indeed, a
very difficult and laborious, but not a hopeless Undertaking. God prosper you
and your Studies.

Your most loving Son, Francis Verulam, Chancel.

A Letter of the Lord Bacon's, written to Trinity College in Cambridg, upon his
sending to them his Book of the Advancement of Learning.
Franc. Baro de Verulamio, Vice-comes Sancti Albani percelebri Collegio Sanctae
and Individuae Trinitatis in Cantabrigia, Salutem.
REs omnes earumque progressus initiis suis debentur. Itaque cum initia
Scientiarum, e fontibus vestris hauserim; incrementa ipsarum vobis rependenda
existimavi. Spero itidem fore, ut haec nostra apud vos, tanquani in solio
nativo, felicius succrescant. Quamobrem and vos hortor, ut salva animi
modestia, and erga Veteres reverent^, ipsi quoque scientiarum augmentis non
desitis: Verum ut post volumina sacra verbi Dei and Scripturarum, secundo loco
volumen illud magnu^ Operum Dei and Creaturarum, strenue and prae omnibus
Libris (qui pro Commentariis tantum haberi debent) evolvatis.

Valete.
The same in English by the Publisher.
Francis, Baron of Verulam, Viscount of St. Albans, to the most Famous College
of the holy and undivided Trinity in Cambridg, Health.
THe progresses of Things, together with themselves, are to be ascribed to
their Originals. Wherefore, seeing I have derived from your Fountains, my first
beginnings in the Sciences, I thought it fit to repay to you the Increases of
them. I hope also, it may so happen, that these Things of ours may the more
prosperously thrive among you, being replanted in their native Soil. Therefore,
I likewise exhort you, that ye your selves, so far as is consistent with all
due Modesty, and Reverence to the Ancients, be not wanting to the Advancement
of the Sciences: But that, next to the study of those sacred Volumns of God,
the holy Scriptures, ye turn over that great Volume of the Works of God, his
Creatures, with the utmost diligence, and before all other Books, which ought
to be looked on only as Commentaries on those Texts. Farewell.

The Lord Chancellor Bacon's Letter to Dr. Williams, then Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, concerning his Speeches, etc.
MY very good Lord, I am much bound to your Lordship, for your Honorable
Promise to Dr. Rawley: He chooses rather to depend upon the same in general,
than to pitch upon any particular; which modesty of Choice I commend.

I find that the Ancients (as Cicero, Domesthenes, Plinius Secundus, and
others) have preserved both their Orations and their Epistles. In imatation of
whom, I have done the like to my own: Which nevertheless, I will not publish
while I live: But I have been bold to bequeath them to your Lordship, and Mr.
Chancellor of the Duchy. My Speeches (perhaps) you will think fit to publish:
The Letters, many of them; touch too much upon late Matters of State, to be
published; yet I was willing, they should not be lost. I have also by my Will,
erected two Lectures in Perpetuity, in either University one; with an Endowment
of 200 l* per Annum apiece. They to be for Natural Phylosophie, and the
Sciences thereupon depending; which Foundations I have required my Executors to
order, by the advice and direction of your Lordship, and my Lord Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield. These be my thoughts now. I rest

Your Lordships most Affectionate to do you Service.

A Letter written in Latin, by the Lord Verulam, to Father Fulgentio, the
Venetian, concerning his Writings; and now Translated into English by by the
Publisher.
Most Reverend Father,
I Must confess my self to be a Letter in your Debt; but the Excuse which I
have, is too too just. For I was kept from doing you right by a very sore
Disease, from which I am not yet perfectly delivered.

I am now desirous to communicate to your Fatherhood, the Designs I have
touching those Writings which I form in my Head, and begin; not with hope of
bringing them to Perfection, but out of desire to make Experiment, and because
I am a Servant to Posterity: (For these things require some Ages for the
ripening of them.)

I judged it most convenient to have them Translated in the Latin Tongue, and
to divide them into certain Tomes.

The first Tome consists of the Books of the Advancement of Learning, which
(as you understand) are already finished, and published; and contain the
Partition of Sciences, which is the First part of my Instauration.

The Novum Organum should have immediately followed. But I interposed my Moral
and Political Writings, because they were more in Readiness.

And for them, they are these following. The first is, The History of Henry the
7th, King of England. Then follows that Book which you have called in your
Tongue, Saggi Morali. But I give a graver name to that Book; and it is to go
under the Title of Sermones Fideles, [Faithful Sayings,] or Interiora Rerum,
[The Inside of Things.] Those Essays will be increased in their number, and
enlarged in the handling of them.

Also that Tome will contain the Book of the Wisdom of the Ancients. And this
Tome (as I said) does, as it were, interlope, and does not stand in the Order
of the Instauration.

After these, shall follow the Organum Novum, to which a second part is yet to
be added, which I have already comprised and measured in the Idea of it. And
thus, the Second Part of my Instauration, will be finished.

As for the Third Part of the Instauration, that is to say, the Natural
History, it is plainly a Work for a King, or a Pope; or for some College, or
Order; and cannot be, by Personal Industry, performed as it ought.

Those Portions of it, which have already seen the Light (to wit, concerning
Winds, and touching Life and Death). They are not pure History, by reason of
the Axioms, and larger Observations, which are interposed. But they are a kind
of mixed Writings, composed of Natural History, and a rude and imperfect
Instrument [or Help] of the Understanding.

And this is the Fourth Part of the Instauration. Wherefore that Fourth Part
shall follow, and shall contain many Examples of that Instrument, more exact,
and much more fitted to Rules of Induction.

Fifthly, There shall follow a Book, to be entitled by us, Prodromus
Philosophiae Secundae, [The Forerunner of Secondary Philosophy]. This shall
contain our Inventions about new Axioms, to be raised from the Experiments
themselves, that they, which were before as Pillars lying [uselesly] along, may
be raised up. And this we resolve on for the Fifth Part of our Instauration.

Lastly, There is yet behind, the Secondary Philosophy it self, which is the
Sixth Part of the Instauration. Of the perfecting this, I have cast away all
hopes; but in future Ages, perhaps, the Design may bud again. Notwithstanding,
in our Prodromi^, [or Prefatory Works,] (such I mean only, which touch, almost,
the Vniversals of Nature) there will be laid no inconsiderable foundations of
this Matter.

Our Meanness (you see) attempteth great Things; placing our hopes only in
this, that they seem to proceed from the Providence and Immense Goodness of God.

And I am, by two Arguments, thus persuaded.

First, I think thus from that zeal and constancy of my Mind, which has not
waxed old in this Design, nor after so many Years, grown cold and indifferent.
I remember, that about Forty Years ago, I composed a Iuvenile Work about these
things, which with great Confidence, and a Pompous Title, I called Temporis
Partum Maximum, Or, it may ^e, Masculum, as I find it ^ead e^sewhere.
[or the most considerable Birth of Time.]

Secondly, I am thus persuaded, because of its infinite Usefulness; for which
reason it may be ascribed to Divine Encouragement.

I pray your Fatherhood, to commend me to that most Excellent Man, Signior
Molines, to whose most delightful and prudent Letters I will return answer
shortly, if God permit. Farewell, most Reverend Father.

Your Most assured Friend, Francis St. Alban.

A Letter of the Lord Bacon's, in French, to the Marquess Fiat, relating to his
Essays.
Monsieur l' Ambassadeur mon Fil^z,
VOyant que vostre Excellence faict et traite Marriages, non seulement enter les
Princes d' Angleterre et de France, mais aussi enter les Langues (puis que
faictes traduire ^on Liver de l' Advancement des Sciences en Francois) in ai
bien voulu vous envoyer mon Liver dernierement imprime, que in avois pourveu
pour vous, mais in estois en doubt, de le vous envoyer, pour ce qu' il estoit
escrit en Anglois. Mais a' cest' Heure pour la raison susdicte ie le vous
envoye. C' est un Recompilement de mes Essays Morales et Civiles; mais
tellement enlargies et enrichies, tant de Nombre que de Poix, que c' est de
fait un Oeuvre nouveau. Ie vous baise les Mains, et rest,

Vostre tres Affectionee Ami, (...) tres humble Serviteur.

The same in English, by the Publisher.
My Lord Ambassador, My Son,
SEeing that your Excellency makes, and treats of Marriages, not only betwixt
the Princes of France and England, but also betwixt their Languages (for you
have caused my Book of the Advancement of Learning, to be Translated into
French) I was much inclined to make you a Present of the last Book which I
published, and which I had in readiness for you.

I was sometimes in doubt, whether I ought to have sent it to you, because it
was written in the English Tongue. But now, for that very Reason, I send it to
you. It is a Recompilement of my Essaies Moral, and Civil; but in such manner
enlarged and enriched both in Number and Weight, that it is in effect, a new
Work. I kiss your Hands, and remain

Your most Affectionate and most humble Servant, etc.

A Transcript (by the Publisher) out of the Lord Bacon's last Will, relating
especially, to his Writings.
FIrst, I bequeath my Soul and Body, into the Hand of God, by the blessed
Oblation of my Savior; the one at the time of my Dissolution, the other at the
time of my Resurrection.

For my Burial, I desire it may be at St. Michael's Church, near St. Albans.
There was my Mother buried; and it is the Parish Church of my Mansion House of
Gorhambury; and it is the only Christian Church within the Walls of Old
Verulam. I would have the Charge of my Funeral not to exceed 300 l. at most.

For my Name and Memory, I leave it to Foreign Nations, and to mine own
Countrymen, after some Time be passed over.

But toward that durable part of Memory, which consists in my Writings, I
require my Servant, Henry Percy, to deliver to my Brother Constable, all my
Manuscript-Compositions, and the Fragments also of such as are not Finished; to
the end that, if any of them be fit to be Published, he may accordingly dispose
of them. And herein I desire him, to take the advice of Mr. Seldom, and Mr.
Herbert, of the Inner Temple, and to publish or suppress what shall be thought
fit. In particular, I wish the Elegy, which I writ in felicem Memoriam
Elizabethae, may be Published. --

Papers written by others, concerning the Writings of the Lord Bacon.

A Letter from the University of Oxford, to the Lord Bacon, upon his sending to
them his Book De Augmentis Scientiarum.
Praenobilis, and (quod in Nobilitate paene miraculum est) Scientissime
Vicecomes!
NIhil concinnius tribuere, Amplitudo vestra, nihil gratius accipere potuit
Academia, quam Scientias: Scientias, quas prius inopes, exiguas, incultas
emiserat, accepit tandem nitidas, proceras, Ingenii tui copiis (quibus unice
augeri potuerant) uberrime dotatas. Grande ducit munus illud sibi a peregrino
(si tamen peregrinus sit, tam prope consanguineus) auctius redire, quod
Filiolis suis instar Patrimonii impendit; and libenter agnoscit hic nasci
Musas, alibi tamen quam domi suae crescere. Creverunt quidem, and sub Calamo
tuo, qui tanquam strenuus literarum Alcides, Columnas tuas, Mundo immobiles,
propria Manu in Orb Scientiarum, plus ultra statuisti. Euge exercitatissimum
Athletam, qui in aliorum patrocinandis virtutibus occupatissimus, alios; in
scriptis propriis, teipsum superasti. Quippe in illo Honorum tuorum fastigio,
viros tantum literatos promovisti, nunc tandem (o dulce prodigium!) etiam and
literas. Onerat Clientes beneficii hujus augustior Munificentia; cujus in
accipiendo Honor apud nos manet, in fruendo emolumentum transit usque in
Posteros. Quin ergo si Gratiarum talioni impares sumus, juncto robore alterius
saeculi Nepotes succurrant, qui reliquum illud, quod tibi non possunt, saltem
nomini tuo persolvent. Felices illi, nos tamen quam long feliciores, quibus
honorifice conscriptam tua manu Epistolam, quibus oculatissima lectitandi
praecepta, and Studiorum Concordiam, in front voluminis demandasti: Quasi
parum esset Musas de tua penu locupletare, nisi ostenderes quo modo and ipsae
discerent. Solenniori itaque Osculo acerrimum judicij tui Depositum excepit
frequentissimus Purpuratorum Senatus; exceperunt pariter minoris ordinis
Gentes; and quod omnes in publico Librorum Thesaurario, in Memoria singuli
deposuerunt.

Dominations vestrae Studiosissima Academia Oxoniensis. E Domo nostra
Congregationis, 20. December. 1623.


The Superscription was thus;

To the Right Honorable Francis, Baron of Verulam, and Vicount of St Alban,
our very good Lord.

The same Letter in English, by the Publisher.
Most Noble, and -- most learned Viscount.
YOur Honor could have given nothing more agreeable, and the University could
have received nothing more acceptable, than the Sciences. And those Sciences
which She formerly sent forth, Poor, of low Stature, Unpolished; she has
received Elegant, Tall; and by the supplies of your Wit (by which alone they
could have been Advanced) most rich in Dowry. She esteems it an extraordinary
favor to have a return with Usury, made of that by a Stranger (if so near a
Relation may be called a Stranger) which She bestows as a Patrimony, upon her
Children: And She readily acknowledges, that though the Muses are born in
Oxford, they grow elsewhere. Grown they are, and under your Pen, who, like some
mighty Hercules in Learning, have by your own Hand, further advanced those
Pillars in the Learned World, which by the rest of that World, were supposed
immovable.

We congratulate you, you most accomplished Combatant, who by your most
diligent Patronage of the Virtues of others, have overcome other Patrons, and,
by your own Writings, your self. For by the eminent height of your Honor, you
advanced only Learned Men; now at last (O ravishing Prodigy!) you have also
advanced Learning it self.

The ample Munificence of this Gift, lays a Burden upon your Clients, in the
receiving of which, We have the Honor; but in the enjoying of it, the
Emolument will descend to late Posterity. If therefore we are not able of our
selves, to return sufficient and suitable Thanks, our Nephews of the next Age
ought to give their Assistance, and pay the Remainder, if not to your Self, to
the Honor of your Name. Happy they; but we how much more happy, etc. To whom
you have pleased to do the honor of sending a Letter, written by no other than
by your own Hand: To whom you have pleased to send the clearest Instructions,
for reading [your Work] and for concord in our Studies, in the Front of your
Book. As if it were a small thing for your Lordship to enrich the Muses out of
your own Stock, unless you taught them also a Method of getting Wealth.
Wherefore this most accurate Pledge of your Understanding, has been with the
most solemn Reverence, received in a very full Congregation, both by the
Doctors and Masters; and that which the common Vote has placed in our Public
Library, every single Person has gratefully deposited in his Memory.

Your Lordships most devoted Servant, The University of Oxford.
From our Convocation-house December. 20. 1623.
A Letter written by Dr. Roger Maynwaring, to Dr. Rawley, concerning the Lord
Bacon's Confession of Faith.
SIR,
I Have at your Command, surveigh'd this deep and devout Tract of your deceased
Lord; and send back a few Notes upon it.

In the first Page, Line 7, That is, in Resuscit. p. 117. l. 8. to, for ever,
in P. 118.
are these words:

I believe, that God is so Holy, Pure, and Jealous, that it is impossible for
Him to be pleased in any Creature, though the Work of his own Hands: So that
neither Angel, Man, nor World, could stand, or can stand, one moment in his
Eyes, without beholding the same in the Face of a Mediator: And therefore, that
before Him, with whom all things are present, the Lamb of God was slain before
all Worlds: Without which eternal Counsel of his, it was impossible for Him to
have descended to any work of Creation; but he should have enjoyed the blessed
and individual Society of Three Persons in Godhead, only, for ever.

This Point I have heard some Divines question, Whether God, without Christ,
did pour his Love upon the Creature? And I had, sometimes, a Dispute with Dr.
Sharp, The same (I think) who was committed to the Tower, having taught Hoskins
his Allusion to the Sicilian Vespers. See Reliqu. Wotton. p. 434.
of your University, who held, that the Emanation of the Father's Love to the
Creature, was Immediate. His Reason, amongst others, was taken from that Text,
So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son. Something of that
Point, I have written amongst my Papers, which on the sudden, I cannot light
upon. But I remember that I held the Point in the Negative, and that St.
Austin, in his Comment on the Fifth Chapter to the Romans, gathered by Beda, is
strong that way.

In Page 2, line the 9th to the 13th, That is, in Resusc. p. 118. l. 9. to
refer.
are these words:

-- God, by the Reconcilement of the Mediator, turning his Countenance toward
his Creatures, (though not in equal Light, and Degree) made way unto the
Dispensation of his most holy and secret Will; whereby some of his Creatures
might stand and keep their State; others might (possibly) fall, and be
restored; and others might fall, and not be restored in their Estate, but yet
remain in Being, though under Wrath and Corruption; all with respect to the
Mediator: Which is the great Mystery, and perfect Center of all God's Ways with
his Creatures; and unto which all his other Works and Wonders do but serve and
refer.

Here absolute Reprobation seems to be defended, in that the Will of God is
made the Reason of the Not-restitution of some: At leastwise his Lordship
seems to say, that 'twas God's will that some should fall: Unless that may be
meant of Voluntas Permissiva [his will of Permission.]

In Page the 2d, at the end, That is, in Resusc. p. 118. l. 24. etc.
where he says, [Amongst the Generations of Men, he Elected a small Flock,] if
that were added [of fallen Men,] it would not be amiss; lest any should
conceive that his Lordship had meant, the Decree had passed on Massa
incorrupta, [on Mankind considered before the Fall.]

In Page the 4th, lines the 13th and 14th, That is, in Resusc. p. 119. l. 36.
etc.
are these words.

Man made a total defection from God, presuming to imagine, that the
Commandments and Prohibitions of God, were not the Rules of Good and Evil, but
that Good and Evil had their own principles and beginnings.

Consider whether this be a Rule Universal, that the Commands and Prohibitions
of God are the Rules of Good and Evil. For; as St. Austin says, many things
are Prohibita quia mala, [For that reason forbidden, because they are Evil:] As
those Sins which the Schools call Specifical.

In Page 7, lines the 23d and 24th, That is, in p. 120. l. 40, 41, etc.
are these words.

The three Heavenly Unities -- exceed all Natural Unities. That is to say, The
Unity of the Three Persons in Godhead; the Unity of God and Man in Christ; and
the Unity of Christ and the Church; the Holy Ghost being the Worker of both
these latter Unities: For by the Holy Ghost, was Christ Inearnate, and
quickened in Flesh; and by the Holy Ghost is Man Regenerate, and quickened in
Spirit.

Here two of the Unities are ascribed to the Holy Ghost. The First seems
excluded; yet Divines say, that Spiritus Sanctus est Amor, and vinculum Patris
and Filii, [The Holy Ghost is the Love, and the Bond of the Father and the Son.]

In Page 8, line the 13th, That is, in Resusc. p. 121. l. 8, and 9.
are these words.

Christ -- accomplished the whole Work of the Redemption, and Restitution of
Man, to a state Superior to the Angels.

This [Superiour] seems to hit upon that place, (...) Luke 20. 36.
, which argues but Equality. Suarez (De Angelis lib. 1. cap. 1.) says, that
Angels are Superior to Men, Quoad gradum Intellectualem, and quoad immediatam
habitationem ad Deum: [Both in respect of the degree of their Intellectual
Nature, and of the nearness of their habitation to God.] Yet St. Austin
affirms, Naturam humanam in Christo perfectiorem esse Angelica. [That the
Humane Nature in Christ, is more perfect than the Angelical.] Consider of this.
And thus far, not as a Critic, or Corrector, but as a Learner. For Corrigere,
Res est tanto magis ardua, quanto
Magnus, Aristarcho, Major, Homerus erat.


In haste, Your Servant, Roger Maynwaring.

A Letter written by Dr. Rawley, to Monsieur Deodate, concerning his publishing
of the Lord Bacon's Works.
Generosissime and Amicissime Domine,
RVri nunc demum ago, Vere and Iejunio ineunte: Maestus, defuisse mihi
facultatem teipsum invisendi, ante discessum: At Certus, nunquam defuturum me
occasioni cuicunque, teipsum demerendi, and omni Officio, sive Amoris sive
Observantiae, prosequendi. Curabo, prout vires suppetent, Impressionem Librorum
Illustrissimi Herois, Cui olim inservisse, atque etiamnum inservire, praecipuum
mihi duco. Ne qua suspicio Fidei meae suboriatur; quam primum commodum erit,
praestabo. Cupio, Amicitiam, and Notitiam hanc inter Nos initam, perpetuam
fore: Ac Literis, ejusdem Tesseris and Fotricibus (si velis) subinde
reflorescere, te vel Parisiis, Agente; Quas, si unquam mihi Felicitas tanta
contingere possit, tui gratia etiam invisere sperabo. Neu credas me Verbis
tantum opulentum, Factis inopem; Quin potius negotia molestissima obfuisse, dum
in Urbe praesens fueram. Reliquum erit, ut Te unice colat, and redamet, and
Tibi semer optima precetur;

Generosissime, Dominationi tuae Servus addictimus and Amicus perpetuus, Guil.
Rawley.
Martii 9. 1632.
The same in English by the Publisher.
Most noble and dear Sir,
I Am now, at last, in the Country, the Spring and Lent coming on. I am sorry
that I had not the opportunity of waiting on you before I left the Town: But, I
am sure, I shall never be wanting in serving you upon all Occasions, and in
performing toward you all Offices, either of Friendship, or Observance.

I will (to the utmost of my Power) take care to publish the [remaining]
Labors of that Illustrious Hero, [the Lord Verulam;] esteeming it my greatest
happiness, to have formerly served him, and still to do so. And that I may
avoid all suspicion of being worse than my Word, I will perform my Promise with
all convenient speed. I desire that this Friendship, and mutual Inwardness
begun betwixt us, may always continue, and (if you please) live and flourish by
Letters, the Badges and Nourishers of it, even when you are at Paris: A place,
which (if ever I be so happy) I will see for your sake, as well as for other
Reasons. Pray, think not that I am free of my Words, and frugal of my Deeds,
but rather that my thick and very troublesome Occasions, whilst I was in the
City, would not suffer me to kiss your Hands. It remains, that I heartily
Honor you, and retaliate your Love, and wish you all the good in the World, as
being

Sir, Your most faithful Servant, and constant Friend. William Rawley.
March the 9th. 1632.
A Letter written by Monsieur Aelius Deodate, to Dr. Rawley, in answer to his
of March the 9th, 1632. touching his publishing the Lord Bacon's Works.
Reverendo Viro Domino Gulielmo Rawley, sacrae Theologiae Doctori, and Regiae
Majestatis Capellano, Amico colendissimo.
Reverende Vir, and Amicissime Domine,
PAucis abhinc diebus redditae sunt mihi gratissimae and exoptatissimae tuae
literae, quibus pro solatio suavissimae tuae consuetudinis, per improvisum tuum
ex urbe discessum mihi ereptae, novam, arctae, and in perpetuum duraturae
amicitiae tuae fiduciam mihi spondes. Hoc munere (quod quidem omni mutui amoris
and observantiae officio pro viribus demereri sedulo satagam) vix quicquam
potuit mihi obtingere charius; adeo tua Virtus, and Illustrissimi Herois nostri
(cujus afflatus Divinos in sinu foves) aeternum colenda Memoria, mihi in precio
est. Promptam ejus Operum Editionem, quam polliceris, tam avide expecto, ut spe
eam jam totam pene continuerim: Ne patere, quaeso, quovis casu, ullam huic
desiderio meo, moram injici: Cum etiam (quod and agnoscis) multis nominibus,
maxim tua intersit, eam quanto citius promoveri. Parum foeliciter mihi cessit
votum, pro versione Libri Experimentorum, ut percipies ex ejus specimine, quod
ad te mitto: Ea propter illum, qui id laboris fuerat aggressus, rogavi, ut ab
eo desisteret, cujus id solum quod videbis paucis foliis exaratum, hactenus
praestitit, cum ante duos annos, perficiendum suscepisset. De tempore mei in
Galliam reditus, nondum statui: Ejus te, ante discessum, faciam certiorem, and
tibi futurae nostrae, per literas, communicationis internuncios indicabo. Vale.

Reverentiae tuae Observantissimus Servus, Aelius Deodatus.
Londini, Aprilis 4. 1633.
The same in English by the Publisher.
To the Reverend, his most Honored Friend, William Rawley, Doctor of Divinity,
and Chaplain to the King's Majesty.
Reverend and most dear Sir,
A Few Days ago, I received your most acceptable and most desired Letter, in
which, to comfort me for the loss of your most agreeable Company (of which I
was deprived by your sudden leaving the Town) you make me a new promise of a
near and lasting Friendship. Nothing could have happened to me more pleasing,
than this Kindness (which I shall diligently endeavor, to the utmost of my
Power, by all ways of Love and Observance, to deserve); so much I value your
own Worth, and the ever estimable Memory, of our most Illustrious Hero, a
portion of whose Spirit, resides in your Breast.

I so greedily expect the speedy Edition of his Works, which you have promised;
that I have already almost devoured the whole of it in my Hopes. Suffer not (I
beseech you) any delay by any means, to obstruct this my earnest desire:
Seeing, especially, it much concerns your self (as you confess) upon many
accounts, to promote it with all Expedition.

My design of a Translation of the Natural History, has not succeeded so
happily as I could wish, as you will perceive by the Specimen which I send to
you. Wherefore I desired him, who had undertaken the Work, to desist from it,
he having done only that little which you will see in a few Leaves; whereas he
undertook the doing of the whole, two Years ago. I am not yet resolved about
the time of my returning into France. I will let you know it e're I go, and
tell you by whom our Letters may be conveyed to one another. Farewell.

Reverend Sir, Your most humble Servant, Aelius Deodate, Advocate.
London, April 4. 1633.
The First Letter of Mr. Isaac Gruter, to Dr. Rawley, concerning the MSS of the
Lord Bacon.
Reverendo Doctissimoque viro Gulielmo Rawleio, S. P. D. Isaacus Gruterus.
Vir Reverende,
FRatris mei cruda mors, cui latinam Naturalis Historiae Verulamianae versionem
debemus, perdiu me subsistere coegit in natali nobis Zelandia, dum mortualis
familiae negotia expedio. Domum reversus ad Batavos invenio literas tuas sane
quam gratissimas; sed quod dolebam, sero responso ob sonticam ab Haganis
absentiae causam, excipiendas. Veniam meretur qui peccat invitus, tarditatisque
a fortuna impositam necessitatem pensare conabitur affectus studio, nunquam
post hac indormituro amicitiae obsequiis and offerenti se occasioni. Viri
istius institutum, qui Baconi Historiam Naturalem, ut eam priores meae
designarunt, Gallice dedit, paucis verbis comprehensum exhibent fratris mei
prolegomena; quae velim videas, and judicium de iis censoriamque, ubi laborat
fides, notam transmittas proximis literis. Editio ille Germani mei, quam cum
voluptate summa inspexisse te scribis, mox emendatior prodibit ex secundis
defuncti curis, cum auctuario ejusdem argumenti, expungendae Atlantidi
substituendo. Quod non aliud futurum ab ista hominis Galli interpretatione,
Latio donando, cum Anglice reperiri non queat unde sua vertit; nisi tu haec ut
spuria and adulterina damnaveris, ubi videre contigerit librum. Observationes
tuas in male intellecta perperamque versa ex Anglico Historiae Naturalis quod a
te evulgatus legitur (qualia in primis conatibus interpretis non indigenae, and
indies tunc cum adolesceret aetate proficientis haud pauca occurrere nemo
mirabitur, qui noverit Physiologicam argumenti late patentis varietatem,
perplexi ex tot rerum congerie, sua non ubique vocabula apud Antiquos
habentium, Horat.
and praesenti nota signandas appellationes requirentium) velim mihi non
invideas, conferendas cum (...) emendationibus solicit elaboratis; an and
feliciter, tum cum paucis istarum elegantiarum intelligentibus disticies. Mitto
indicem eorum, quae ex Boswelliani Musei scriniis chartaceis penes me exstant
vel propria manu descripta, vel alterius apud vos, sed Baconi manum and limam
experta; ut Boswellus olim mihi, admisso ad interiores familiaritatis aditus,
commemoravit In apographis meis (ut testabitur index hisce literis comes)
reperies historiam Densi and Rari, sed imperfectam, opusculo licet longiuscule
producto. De Gravi and Levi in manibus habui integrum and grande volumen, sed
quod praeter nudam delineatae fabricae compagem ex titulis, materiam, prout eam
conceperat illustris Baconus, absolventibus, nihil descriptionis continebat.
Includitur hisce exemplar contextus, sola capitum lemmata complexi, and plenam
ex ista (...) tractationem nunc frustra requirentis. De Denso and Raro quae
asservas ab extrema Authoris incude, quaeque in appendicem venient fragmenta,
utinam cum ineditis Physiologicis Virulamei, in apographa per me redactis ex
legato Boswelliano, subjicere liceat prelo Batavo, sibi invicem commendationem,
si junctius prodeant, praestitura. Agere jam caepi cum Typographo magnae in
istis industriae and curiositatis; faxo nihil just queri possis de fide nostra
and candore, si editionem illam mihi permiseris, consummandam non sine
honorifica tui mentione. Sed utcunque constitues, nihil detractum volo
amicitiae officiis, ulterius ab hoc ingressu quacunque occasion provehendae.
Ludovicus Elsevirius Amstelodamo nuper ad me scripsit meditari se, fore brevi
inchoandam, in quarto editionem eorum omnium, quae Bacono circumferuntur
Auth^^e, vel Latin vel Anglice, sed haec in R^manum Sermonem vertenda,
peti^tque a me eatenus consilium, and si quid e manuscriptis and
interpretatione confer possem adminiculi, quo auctiora and quantum pote,
ornatiora prodeant opera, diu faventissimis Eruditi mundi praeconiis and
applausu confestatissimo excepta. Tu si quid in mente aut manu habes unde
affulgeat adjumenti spes in molitione tam celebri, and plurimum conciliatura
existimationis istam editionem procurantibus, fac intelligam, and habe me porro
inter devotissimos Baconiani nominis and virtutum tuarum cultores. Vale.
Exspecto quae tibi cognita de Verulamij majoribus, Nicolao Patre imprimis, de
adolescentia nostri, studiis apud Cantabrigienses, peregrinationibus,
honoribus, Cancellariatu and exauthoratione, Parlamentariae authoritatis
decreto. Ista floride and liberaliori in lauds meritissimas stylo, hoc ultimum
cauto pertractando, suscipiam, ne hominibus calumniari aut probra serere natis
praebeatur noxiae garrulitatis e mea Commentatione de viri long Doctissimi
vita and morte, materies.

Hagae Comitis, Maii 29. 1652.
The same, in English, by the Publisher.
To the Reverend, and most Learned, William Rawley, Isaac Gruter wishes much
Health.
Reverend Sir,
BY reason of the immature Death of my Brother, to whom we owe the Latin
Translation of the Lord Bacon's Natural History, I have been forced to stay a
long while in our Native Country of Zealand, in order to the settling of the
Domestic Affairs of the Person deceased. Returning home to Holland, I found
your Letter, which, I assure you, was most acceptable to me; yet at this I was
concerned, that my necessary absence from the Hague had occasioned so late an
Answer to it. He deserves pardon who offends against his will: And who will,
endeavor to make amends for this involuntary delay, by the study of such
kindness as shall be vigilant in Offices of Friendship, as often as occasion
shall be offered.

The Design of him, who translated into French, the Natural History of the Lord
Bacon, (of which I gave account in my former Letters) is briefly exhibited in
my Brother's Preface, which I desire you to peruse; as also, in your next
Letter, to send me your Judgment concerning such Errors as may have been
committed by him.

That Edition of my Brother's, of which you write, that you read it with a
great deal of Pleasure, shall shortly be set forth with his Amendments,
together with some Additions of the like Argument to be substituted in the
place of the New Atlantis, which shall be there omitted. These Additions will
be the same with those in the Version of the formentioned Frenchman, put into
Latin; seeing we could not find the English Originals from which he translates
them: Unless you, when you see the Book, shall condemn those Additions as
adulterate.

For your Observations on those Places, either not rightly understood, or not
accurately turned out of the English by you published, (which, from one not a
Native, in his first Essay, and growing in Knowledge together with his Years, if
they be many, no Man needs wonder at it, who understands the Physiological
variety of an Argument of such extent, and rendered difficult by such an heap of
things of which it consists, and for the expressing of which there is not a
supply of words from the Ancients, but some of a new stamp, and such as may
serve for present use, are required) I entreat you not to deny me the sight of
them: That so I may compare them with the Corrections which my Brother (now
with God) did make with a very great deal of pains. But, whether the truth of
them answers his diligence, will be best understood by your self, and those few
others by whom such Elegancies can be rightly judged of.

I send you here a Catalogue of those writings These were the Papers which J.
Gruter, afterward published, under the title of Scripta Philosophica.
which I had, in MS. out of the study of Sir William Boswel, and which I now
have by me, either written by the Lord Bacon himself, or by some English
Amanuensis, but by him revised; as the same Sir Willam Boswel (who was pleased
to admit me to a most intimate familiarity with him) did himself tell me. Among
my Copies (as the Catalogue which comes with this Letter shows) you will find
the History of rare and dense Bodies, but imperfect, though carried on to some
length.

I had once in my hands, an entire and thick Volume concerning Heavy and Light
Bodies, but consisting only of a naked delineation of the Model, which the Lord
Bacon had framed in his Head, in titles of Matters, without any description of
the Matters themselves. There is here enclosed, a Copy of that Contexture This
Letter came to my hands without that Copy. See, in lieu of it, Topica de Gravi
and Levi, in lib. 5. cap. 3. de Augm. Scien.
containing only the Heads of the Chapters, and wanting a full handling from
that rude Draught; which supplement I despair of

For the Book of Dense and Rare Bodies, which you have by you, perfected by the
Author's last Hand, as likewise the Fragments which are an Appendix to it, I
could wish that they might be here published in Holland, together with those
hitherto unpublish'd Philosophical Papers copied by me, out of M S S. of Sir
William Boswel; seeing, if they come out together, they will set off, and
commend one another.

I have begun to deal with a Printer, who is a Man of great Diligence and
Curiosity. I will so order the matter, that you shall have no reason to
complain of my Fidelity and Candor, if you leave that Edition to me. Care shall
be taken by me, that it be not done without honorable mention of your self.
But be it what it will you shall resolve upon, it shall abate nothing of the
offices of our Friendship, which, from this beginning of it, shall still
further be promoted upon all occasions.

Lewis Elzevir, wrote me word lately, from Amsterdam, that he was designed to
begin shortly, an Edition in Quarto, of all the Works of the Lord Bacon, in
Latin, or English: But not of the English, without the Translation of them
into Latin. And he desired my advice, and any assistance I could give him by
Manuscripts, or Translations; to the end that, as far as possible, those Works
might come abroad with advantage, which have been long received with the
kindest Elogies, and with the most attested Applause of the Learned World. If
you have any thing in your Mind, or your Hands, whence we may hope for
assistance in so famous a Design, and conducing so much to the Honor of those
who are Instrumental in it, pray let me know it, and reckon me henceforth
amongst the devout Honourers of the name of the Lord Bacon, and of your own
Virtues.

I expect from you what you know, about the Ancestors of the Lord Bacon,
especially concerning his Father, Nicholas Bacon; concerning his Youth, his
Studies in Cambridg, his Travels, his Honors, his Office of Chancellor, and
his deposal from it by Sentence of Parliament. The former I will undertake in a
more florid and free Style, expatiating in his just Praises; the latter, with a
wary Pen, lest out of my Commentary of the Life of this most Learned Man,
matter be offered of pernicious Prating, to Slanderers, and Men of dishonest
Tempers.

From the Hague, May, 29. 1652.
The second Letter of Mr. Isaac Gruter, to Dr. Rawley, concerning the Writings
of the Lord Bacon.
V. R. Gulielmo Rawlejo, S. S. Theologiae Doctori S. P. D. Isaacus Gruterus.
Vir Reverende,
DE responsi tui tarditate queri non licet, cum and difficultas trajectus
facile moram injiciat ex anno in hiemem declivi dum tuas dares, atque abunde in
iis inveniat quo se pascat desiderium; tanto uberiori accessione, quanto
cunctantius ad manus nostras fortassis pervenisse dici potest. Et quamvis
pauxillum erat quod praeter gratias proindiculo reponerem, ejus tamen id
momenti visum est, ut supprimere diutius noluerim; praesertim cum nefas mihi
haberetur Smithum responso carere, virum amicissimum, and cujus in Res nostras
studio quicquid in me est curae debetur affectusque, nihil imminuti part, in
quam sane non levem, Rawleius venit, ut in Trigam, coaluisse dici queat optime
consentientes animos. Illustrissimi Herois Verulamii quam sancta apud me sit
existimatio, etsi perquam solicit ostendisse me putabam, faciam tamen ut in
posterum religiosius me operam dedisse quo hoc literato orbi innotesceret
negari haud possit. Neque enim procedet ista contrahendi omnia Baconiana in
unum volumen molitio, nisi te consulto, and ad symbolas tam insigni editione
dignas invitato; ut lectoris jam pridem ex praevio eorum quae circumferuntur
gustu, cupidi concilietur gratia ex illibata auctarii non poenitendi novitate.
Gallo interpreti, and qui sua nescio unde consarcinavit centonesque consuit,
locus non dabitur in magno Syngrammate. Ut autem separatim cum Historia
Naturali excudatur exoticum opus per excerpta hinc inde corrogatum, and
latinitate mea donatum, spero a te impetrari patieris. Interesse enim puto cum
Verulamiana genuina Gallici Sermonis induta cultu passim prostent, ut sciat
transmarinus lector e quibus filis contexta sit istius libri tela, and quam
verum sit quod Anonymus iste in prefatione ad Lectorem de te innominato
scribit. Verba ejus frater meus B. M. Latin (...) in prima editione Historiae
Naturalis, cum de fide Authoris ignoti dubitaret. Ego in secunda dabo, repetita
and justis confossa notis, ut moneantur in quorum manus perventurum sit istud
opus, supposititium esse, a^t potius ex avulsis sparsim laciniis consutum,
quicquid specioso Verulamii titulo munitum venditat Author. Nisi forte
speciatim tuo nomine suggerere libet, isti loco inserenda in cautelam, and ne
quid Gloriae celeberimi viri detrahat vel malignitas, vel inconsideratum
studium. Virgil.
Si me fata meis paterentur ducere vitam auspiciis, in Angliam evolarem, ut
quicquid Verulamianae officinae servas in scriniis tuis ineditum, coram
inspicerem, and oculos saltem haberem arbitros, si possessio negetur mercis
nondum publicae. Nunc vota impatientis desiderii sustentabo spe aliquando
videndi, quae fidis mandata latebris occasionem exspectant ut tuto in lucem
educantur, non enecentur suffocato partu. Utinam interim videre liceat
Apographum epistolae ad Henricum Savilium circa adjumenta facultatum
intellectualium; caetera enim Latinae monetae persuadeor statione sua moveri
non posse in temporarium usum. Vale.

Trajecti ad Mosam, Martii 20. S. N. CIO IOC LV.
The same in English, by the publisher.
To the Reverend William Rawley, D. D. Isaac Gruter wishes much health.
Reverend Sir,
IT is not just to complain of the slowness of your Answer, seeing that the
difficulty of the Passage, in the season in which you wrote, which was toward
Winter, might easily cause it to come no faster: Seeing likewise, there is so
much to be found in it which may gratify Desire, and perhaps, so much the
more, the longer it was e're it came to my Hands. And although I had little to
send back, besides my Thanks for the little Index, A Note of some Papers of the
Lord Bacon's in D. R's. hands.
yet that seemed to me of such moment, that I would no longer suppress them;
especially because I accounted it a Crime to have suffered Mr. Smith Of
Christ's College in Cambridg, and Keeper of the public Library there.
to have been without an Answer: Mr. Smith, my most kind Friend, and to whose
care in my Matters, I owe all Regard and Affection, yet without diminution of
that part (and that no small one neither) in which Dr. Rawley has place: So
that the Souls of us Three so thoroughly agreeing, may be aptly said to have
united in a Triga.

Though I thought that I had already, sufficiently showed, what Veneration I
had for the Illustrious Lord Verulam, yet I shall take such care for the
future, that it may not possibly be denied, that I endeavored most zealously
to make this thing known to the learned World.

But neither shall this Design, of setting forth in one Volume, all the Lord
Bacon's Works, proceed without consulting you, and without inviting you to cast
in your Symbol, worthy such an excellent Edition: That so the Appetite of the
Reader, provoked already by his published Works, may be further gratified by
the pure novelty of so considerable an Appendage.

For the French Interpreter, who patched together his Things I know not whence
Certain spurious Papers added to his Translation of the Advancement of Learning.
, and tacked that motley piece to him; they shall not have place in this great
Collection. But yet, I hope, to obtain your leave to publish apart, as an
Appendix to the Natural History, that Exotic Work, gathered together from this
and the other place [of his Lordships Writings] and by me translated into
Latin. For seeing the genuine Pieces of the Lord Bacon are already Extant, and
in many Hands, it is necessary that the Foreign Reader be given to understand,
of what Threads the Texture of that Book consists and how much of Truth there is
in that, which that shameless person does in his Preface to the Reader, so
stupidly write of you.

My Brother, of blessed Memory, turned his words into Latin, in the first
Edition of the Natural History, having some suspicion of the Fidelity of an
unknown Author. I will, in the second Edition, repeat them, and with just
severity, animadvert upon them: That they, into whose hands that Work comes,
may know it to be suppositious, or rather patched up of many distinct Pieces;
how much soever the Author bears himself upon the specious Title of Verulam.

Unless, perhaps, I should particularly suggest in your Name, that these words
were there inserted, by way of Caution; and lest Malignity and Rashness should
any way blemish the Fame of so eminent a Person.

Si me, Fata, meis, paterentur ducere vitam Auspiciis -- (to use the words of
Virgil.) If my Fate would permit me to live according to my Wishes, I wo^ud
fly over into England, that I might behold whatsoever remains, in your
Cabinet, of the Verulamian Workmanship, and at least make my Eyes witnesses of
it, if the possession of the Merchandise be yet denied to the Public.

At present I will support the Wishes of my impatient desire, with hope of
seeing, one Day, those [Issues] which being committed to faithful Privacie,
wait the time 'till they may safely see the Light, and not be stifled in their
Birth.

I wish, in the mean time, I could have a sight of the Copy of the Epistle to
Sir Henry Savil, concerning the Helps of the Intellectual Powers: For I am
persuaded, as to the other Latin Remains, that I shall not obtain, for present
use, the removal of them from the place in which they now are. Farewell.

Maestricht, March 20. New Style, 1655.
The Third Letter written by Mr. Isaac Gruter, to Dr. Rawley, concerning the
Writings of the Lord Bacon.
Reverendo, Doctissimoque viro Gulielmo Rawleio, S. Theologiae Doctori S. P. D.
Isaacus Gruterus.
Vir Reverende and amicissime,
QVanta in part honoris deputarem missa Verulamii posthuma, quae e tuo non ita
pridem Museo Latina prodiere, actae protinus Gratiae significarunt, si curam
amici, qui hic operam suam non frustra requiri passus est, haud luserit fortuna
trajectus, varia e causa saepe dubij. Nunc tanto majus mihi istud beneficium
est, quanto insigniorem frugem praestitit lectio non ignava, and par cum
quibusdam ex officina Baconiana a me editis collatio; aucticrem enim tibi
debemus Historiam densi and rari, sed and alia isto contenta Volumine priusquam
non conspecta. Vnum mirabar, non exstare ibi caeteris aggregatam Verulamii
Epistolam ad Henricum Savilium, de adjumentis facultatum Intellectualium, si ex
literis olim tuis non vane mihi recordanti subjicit Titulum appellata memoria,
saltem inscriptione non long dissimili. Si per oblivionem ibi forte non
comparet, scriniis tamen vestris inerrat, optem videre Apographum, in cujus usu
bonam fidem non desiderabis; nisi Anglicano Sermon scripta locum invenerit in
majori opere, quod vernacula duntaxat complectitur. Id si nos scire patiaris,
and an obtinendi Libri, in quo and Oratoria, fors and Epistolica, digeruntur,
maternae Linguae partus, spes ex promisso fuerit non immodesta, animo meo
consecrari^ tui memoriam, in cujus veneratione nunquam defatigabitur segnesce^^
alacritas obstrictissimi affectus. Vale.

Trajecti ad Mosam, unde post duos tresve menses Novomagum migro, Batavis
futurus propior. Per Smithaeum tamen transmittere ad me perges, si quid
volueris.

Kal. Julii, St. N. CIO IOC LIX.
The same in English, by the Publisher.
To the Reverend, and most Learned, William Rawley, D. D. Isaac Gruter wishes
much Health.
Reverend Sir, and my most dear Friend,
HOw much I hold my self honored by your Present of the Lord Bacon's
Posthumous Works, published lately by you in Latin, my thanks immediately
returned, had let you understand, if ill Fortune in the Passage (which is, for
diverse causes, uncertain) had not deluded the care of a Friend, who did here
with much readiness, undertake the Conveyance of them.

Now, the Gift is by so much the greater, by how much the more benefit I reaped
by diligent reading of those Papers, and by comparing them with some of the
Lord Bacon's Works, which I my self had formerly published. For to you we owe
the more enlarged History de Denso and Raro, as also many other things,
contained in that Volume, which saw not the Light before. One Paper I wonder I
saw not amongst them, the Epistle of the Lord Bacon to Sir Henry Savil, about
the Helps of the Intellectual Powers, spoken of long ago in your Letters, under
that, or some such Title, if my Memory does not deceive me. If it was not
forgotten, and remains among your private Papers, I should be glad to see a
Copy of it, in the use of which, my Faithfulness shall not be wanting. But,
perhaps, it is written in the English Tongue, and is a part of that greater
Volume, which contains only his English Works. If you will please to let me
understand so much, and likewise give me assurance of obtaining that Book, in
which the Speeches, and it may be the Letters of the Lord Bacon, written by him
in English, are digested; you will render your Memory sacred in my Mind, in the
veneration of which, the cheerfulness of a most devoted affection shall never
be weary. Farewell.

From Maestricht, from whence, after two or three Months, I remove to Nimmeghen
nigher to Holland. But you may convey to me, any thing you desire, by Mr. Smith.

July, 1st. New Style, 1659.
A brief Account of the Life, and particularly of the Writings of the Lord
Bacon, written by that learned Antiquarie, Sir William Dugdale, Norroy King of
Arms, in the second Tome of his Book entitled, The Baronage of England Page
437. 438, 439.
; together with diverse Insertions by the Publisher.
Francis, Lord Verulam, Vicount St. Alban.
[16 Iac.]
COnsidering that this Person was so Eminent for his Learning, and other great
Abilities, as his Excellent Works will sufficiently manifest; though a short
Narrative Impr. Land. an. 1670.
of his Life, is already set forth by Doctor William Rawley, his domestique
Chaplain, I am not willing to omit the taking notice of such particulars, as
are most memorable of him; and therefore shall briefly recount; partly from
that Narrative, and partly from other Authorities, what I have observed in
order thereto.

As to his Parentage, he was Ibid.
the youngest of those two Male Children, which Sir Nicholas Bacon of Redgrave,
in Com. Suff. Knight, had by Anne his Wife, one of the six Daughters of Sir
Anthony Cook, of Giddy-Hall, in Com. Essex. Knight, (a person much honored for
his Learning, and being Tutor to King Edward the Sixth) all those Daughters
being exquisitely skilled Annal. Eliz. per Cambd. in an. 1576.
in the Greek and Latin Tongues.

Which Nicholas, having been a diligent Student of the Laws in Life of, etc. by
Dr. Rawley.
Gray's Inn, was made Pat. 38 H. 8. p. 6.
the King's Attorney in the Court of Wards, in 38 H. 8. and upon the death of
that King, (which soon after happened) had his Patent for the same trust,
renewed Pat. 1 E. p. 3. m. 36.
by his Son and Successor, King Edward the Sixth. In the sixth year of whose
Reign, he was constituted Orig. Iucrid. p. 298.
Treasurer for that Noble Society of Gray's Inn, whereof he had been so long a
Member. And being grown famous for his Knowledge, was shortly after, viz. in 1
Eliz. made Pat. 1 ^. p. 3.
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and Knighted, M. 6. in offic Arm. f.
ib. 67. b.
which Office in his time, was by Act of Parliament made equal in Authority
with the Chancellours.

What I have otherwise observed of this Sir Nicholas Bacon, is, Annal. Eliz. ut
supra in ^n. 1564.
that being no friend to the Queen of Scots, (then Prisoner in England) he was
Annal. Eliz. ut supra in ^n. 1564.
privy, and assenting to what Hales had published, in derogation to her Title,
as next and lawful Successor to Queen Elizabeth; asserting that of the House of
Suffolk before it, for which, Hales suffered Ibid.
Imprisonment, and had not Cecil stood his faithful friend, Ibid.
so might he; nothing being more distastful to Queen Elizabeth, than a dispute
upon that point. Next, that in 14 Eliz. upon those Proposals made by the
Nobility of Scotland, for her enlargement, he opposed Ibid. in an. 1571.
it; alleging, Ibid. in an. 1571.
that no security could balance the danger thereof. Lastly, That upon his
death, which happened in April, An. 1579. (21 Eliz.) this Character Ib. in an.
1579.
is given of him by the learned Cambden, viz. that he was Vir praepinguis,
ingenio acerrimo, singulari prudentia, summa eloquentia, tenaci memoria, and
sacris consiliis alterum columen: Of person very corpulent, most quick Wit,
singular Prudence, admirable Eloquence, special Memory, and another Pillar to
the Privy Council.

Of his Death, this is said This Account is inserted by the Publisher, who took
it out of a Paper of the Lord Bacon's.
to be the occasion. He had his Barber rubbing and combing his Head. And,
because it was very hot, the Window was open to let in a fresh Wind. He fell
asleep, and awaked all distempered, and in a great sweat, Said he to the
Barber, Why did you let me sleep? Why, my Lord, said he, I durst not wake your
Lordship. Why then, says my Lord Keeper, you have killed me with Kindness. So
he removed into his Bedchamber, and within a few days died.

Whereupon, being Interred on the South Side of the Quire in St. Paul's
Cathedral, within the City of London, he had a noble Monument, Hist. of St.
Paul's Cath. p. 71.
there erected to his Memory, with this Epitaph: Hic Nicolaum ne Baconem
conditum existima illum, tam diu Britannici Regni secundum columen; Exitium
malis, Bonis Asylum; caeca quem non extulit ad hunc honorem sors; sed Aequitas,
Fides, Doctrina, Pietas, unica and Prudentia. Neu forte raptum creed, qui unica
brevi, vita perenni emerit duas, agit vitam secundam caelites inter animas.
Fama implet orbem, vita quae illi tertia est. Hac positum in ara est Corpus,
olim animi Domus, Ara dicata sempiternae Memoriae.

That is, This Translation is done by the Publisher, for the benefit of the
English Reader.
Think not that this Shrine contains that Nicholas Bacon, who was so long the
second Pillar of Great Britain; the Scourge of the Vicious, and the Sanctuary
of the Good: Whom blind Fortune did not exalt to that height of Honor; but his
Equity, Fidelity, Learning, Piety, singular Prudence. Neither believe him to be
by chance snatched away, who, by one short Life, purchased two in Life Eternal.
He lives his second Life among the Heavenly Spirits. His Fame fills the
World, which is his third Life. In this Altar is reposed his Body, sometime the
House of his Soul; an Altar dedicated to his perpetual Memory.

Thus much touching the Parentage of this Francis; his Birth Li^e of, etc. by
Dr. Rawley.
being at York-House in the Strand, upon the twenty second day of January, Anno
1560. (2 Eliz.) It is observed, Life of, etc. by Dr. Rawley.
that in his tender Years, his Pregnancy was such, as gave great indication of
his future high Accomplishments; in so much, as Queen Elizabeth took notice of
him, and called him The young Lord Keeper; also, that asking him, how old he
was, though but a Boy, he answered, that he was two years younger than her
Majesty's most happy Reign.

As to his Education, he was Ibid.
of Trinity College, in Cambridg, under the tuition of Doctor John Whitgift,
then Master there, but afterward the renowned Archbishop of Canterbury. Where
having with great proficiency, spent some time, he was sent Ibid.
into France, with Sir Amias Paulet, her Majesty's Leiger Ambassador, and
thence entrusted with a Message Ibid.
to the Queen, which he performed with much approbation; and so returned.

After this, coming from Travail, and applying himself to the study of the
Common Law, he was seated Ibid.
in Gray's Inn. Where in short time, he became so highly esteemed for his
Abilities, as that in 30 Eliz. (being then but 28 years of Age) that honorable
Society, chose Orig. Iurid. p. 295. a.
him for their Lent Reader: And in 32 Eliz. was made Pat. 32 Eliz. p. 11.
one of the Clerks of the Council.

In 42 Eliz. being Orig. Iu. 295. b.
double Reader in that House, and affecting much the Ornament thereof, he
caused Ib. 272. b.
that beautiful Grove of Elms, to be planted in the Walks, which yet remain.
And upon the 23 of July, 1 Iac. was Knighted MS. in offic. Arm.
at White Hall. Shortly after which, viz. in 2 Iac. he was made Pat. 2 Jac. p.
12.
one of the King's Council learned, having therewith a grant Pat. 2 Jac. p. 12.
of forty Pounds per annum Fee; and in 5 Iac. constituted Pat. 11. Jac. p. 5.
his Majesty's Solicitor General. In 9 Iac. he was made Pat. 9. Jac. p.
joint Judge with Sir Thomas Vavasor, then Knight Marshal, of the Knight
Marshal's Court, then newly erected within the Verge of the King's House, and
in 11 Iac. (27 October.) being made Pat. 5 Jac. p. 14.
Attorney General, was sworn Annal. R. Jac. per Cambd.
of the Privy Council.

In 14 Iac. he was constituted lb. in an. 1617.
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, (7 Martii) being then fifty four years of Age.

An Insertion by the Publisher.
It is said in a The Court of King James, p. 115, 116.
Libel, (in which are many other notorious Slanders,) that the Duke of
Buckingham, to vex the very Soul of the Lord Chancellor Egerton, in his last
Agony, did send Sir Francis Bacon to him for the Seals; and likewise that the
dying Chancellor, did hate that Bacon should be his Successor, and that his
Spirit not brooking this usage, he sent the Seals by his Servant to the King,
and shortly after, yielded his Soul to his Maker. In which few words there are
two palpable Untruths.

For first, The King himself sent for the Seal, not the Duke of Buckingham: And
he sent for it, not by Sir Francis Bacon, Aulicus ^cquinariae. p. 171.
but by Secretary Winwood, with this Message, that himself would be his
Under-Keeper, and not dispose of the Place of Chancellor while he lived* Nor
did any receive the Seal out of the King's sight, till the Lord Egerton died;
which soon fell out.

Next, The Lord Chancellor Egerton was willing that Master Attorney Bacon,
should be his Successor; and ready to forward his Succession; So far was he
from conceiving hatred against him, either upon that, or any other Account.

The Lord Egerton was his Friend in the Queen's time; and I find Mr. Bacon
making his acknowledgements in a Letter to him, in these words, which I once
transcribed from the unpublish'd Original. For my placing, your Lordship best
knows, that when I was most dejected with her Majesty's strange dealing
toward me, it pleased you of your singular favor, so far to comfort, and
encourage me, as to hold me worthy to be excited, to think of succeeding your
Lordship in your second Place: Signifying, in your plainness, that no Man
should better content your self. Which your exceeding favor you have not since
carried from; both in pleading the like signification into the hands of some of
my best Friends; and also in an honorable and answerable Commendation of me,
to her Majesty. Wherein I hope, your Lordship (if it please you call to mind)
did find me, neither overweening, in presuming too much upon it, nor much
deceived in my opinion of the Event, for the continuing of it still in your
self; nor sleepy in doing some good Offices to the same purpose.

This favor of the Lord Egerton's, which began so early, continued to the
last. And thus much Sir Francis Bacon testified in a Letter to Sir George
Villiers, of which this is a part. Resuscit. p. 65. of the Collect. of Letters.
My Lord Chancellor told me, yesterday, in plain terms, that if the King would
ask his opinion, touching the Person that he would commend to succeed him, upon
Death, or Disability; he would name me, for the fittest Man. You may advise,
whether use may not be made of this Offer. And the like appears by what Master
Attorney wrote to King James, during the sickness of my Lord Chancellor.
Amongst other things, he wrote this to the King. Ibid. p. 50.
It pleased my Lord Chancellor, out of his ancient and great Love to me, which
many times, in Sickness, appears most; to admit me to a great deal of Speech
with him this Afternoon; which, during these three Days, he has scarcely done
to any.

In the same Court of K. James, p. 119.
Libel, my Lord Bacon is reproached as a very necessitous Man, and one, for
that Reason, made Keeper by the Duke, to serve such Turns, as Men of better
Fortunes would never condescend to. And this, also, is a groundless and
uncharitable Insinuation. He had now enjoyed, a good while, many profitable
Places, which preserved him from Indigence, though his great Mind did not
permit him to swell his Purse by them, to any extraordinary Bigness. And, in
the Queen's time, when he was in meaner Circumstances, he did not look upon
himself as in that estate of Necessity, which tempts generous Minds to vile
things. Hear himself representing his Condition; no Man knew it better, or
could better express it. Thus he states his Case in the aforesaid unpublish'd
Letter to the Lord Chancellor Egerton, of the whole of which, I sometime had
the perusal, though now much of it is lost, and, as I believe, beyond all
recovery. My Estate (said he) I confess a truth to your Lordship, is weak, and
Indebted, and needs Comfort. For both my Father (though, I think, I had
greatest part in his Love of all his Children) in his Wisdom served me in, as a
last Comer: And my self, in mine own Industry, have rather referred, and
aspired to Virtue, than to Gain; whereof I am not yet wise enough to repent me.
But the while, whereas Solomon speaks, That Want comes first as a Wayfaring
Man, and after as an Armed Man; I must acknowledge my self to be in primo gradu;
for it steals upon me. But, for the second, that it should not be able to be
resisted; I hope in God, I am not in that case. For the preventing whereof, as
I do depend upon God's Providence all in all; so in the same, his Providence I
see, opened unto me, three not unlikely expectations of Help. The one, my
Practice; the other, some proceeding in the Queen's Service; the third, the
Place I have in Reversion, which as it stands now unto me, is but like
another Man's Ground buttalling upon my House, which may mend my Prospect, but
it does not fill my Barn.

This Place he means, was the Registers Office in the Star Chamber, which
fell to him in the time of King James, and was worth about 1600 l. by the Year.

But to return from this Digression. When Sir Francis Bacon was constituted
Lord Keeper, the King admonisht him, that he should Seal nothing rashly; as
also that he should Judge uprightly, and not extend the Royal Prerogative too
high. After which, viz. upon the seventh Day of May, (which was the first Day
of Easter Term next ensuing) he made his solemn proceeding Ibid.
to Westminster Hall, in this order. First, The Writing Clerks and inferior
Officers belonging to the Court of Chancery. Next the Students of the Law. Then
the Gentlemen of his own Family. After them, the Sergeant at Arms, and bearer
of the Great Seal, on foot. Then himself on Horsback, in a Gown of Purple
Satin, riding betwixt the Lord-Treasurer, and Lord Privy Seal. Next diverse
Earls, Barons, and Privy-Councellors. Then the Judges of the Courts at
Westminster, whose place in that proceeding, was assigned after the
Privy-Councellors. And when he came into the Court, the Lord-Treasurer, and
Lord Privy Seal, gave him his Oath, the Clerk of the Crown reading it.

Upon the fourth of January, 16 Iac. he was made Lord Chancellor Claus. 16 Jac.
in dorso. p. 15.
of England. On the eleventh of July next ensuing, created Pat. 16. Jac. p. 11.
Lord Verulam, and on the 27th of January, 18 Iac. advanced Pat. 18 Jac. p. 4.
to the dignity of Vicount St. Alban; his solemn Investiture Annal. R. Jac. in
an. 1621.
being then performed at Theobalds; his Robe carried before him by the Lord
Carew, and his Coronet by the Lord Wentworth. Whereupon he gave the King
sevenfold thanks; Annal. R. Jac. in an. 1621.
first, for making him his Solicitor; secondly, his Attorney; thirdly, one of
his Privy Council; fourthly, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; fifthly,
Lord-Chancellor; sixthly, Baron Verulam; and lastly, Vicount St. Alban.

But long he enjoyed not that great Office of Lord-Chancellor: for in Lent, 18
Iac. Corruption in the exercise thereof being objected Orig. Iurid. in Chr. p.
102.
against him, (of which it is believed, his Servants were most guilty, and he
himself not much accessory) the Great Seal was taken This is inserted by the
Publisher.
from him.

This Fall Ibid.
he foresaw, yet he made no show of that base and mean Spirit, with which the
Libel before remembered, does unworthily charge him Court of K. James, 122, 123.
. The late King, of blessed Memory (then Prince) made a very differing
observation upon him. Returning from Hunting, Aul. Coqu. p. 174.
he espied a Coach attended with a goodly Troop of Horsemen, who, it seems,
were gathered together to wait upon the Chancellor to his House at Gorhambury,
at the time of his Declension. The Prince smiling, said, Well! Do we what we
can, this Man scorns to go out like a Snuff. And he commended his undaunted
Spirit, and excellent Parts, not without some Regret, that such a Man should be
falling off.

It is true, that after the Seal was taken from him, he became a great example
of Penitence and Submission. But it was a Submission which both manifested his
just sense of his Fault, and the more Venial Nature of it, as arising from
Negligence, rather than Avarice and Malice.

He showed by it, that there was not in his Heart that stiffness of Pride,
which openly denies or justifies those Crimes of which it self is secretly
convinced: But it appeared not by any thing, during all the time of his Eclipse
of Fortune, that there was any abjectness of Spirit in him. The many and great
Works which he wrote, show a mind in him, not distracted with Anxiety, nor
depressed with Shame, nor slow for want of Encouragement, nor broken with
Discontent. Such a Temper is inconsistent with such noble Thoughts and Designs,
such strict Attention, such vigor of Conceit, such a Masculine Style, such
quickness in Composition, as appeared in his learned Labors.

When the Great Seal was taken from him, it was committed to the Custody of
Henry Vicount Mandevil, (at that time President of the Council) and certain
other Lords Commissioners: And upon the tenth of July after, to Ib. p. 104.
Doctor John Williams, Dean of Westminster, afterward Bishop of Lincoln.

Toward his rising years, he married Life of, etc. by Dr. Rawley.
Alice, one of the Daughters and Coheirs to Benedict Barnham, Alderman of
London, with whom he had an ample Portion; but by her had no Children, to
perpetuate his Memory, which his learned Works, being for the most part
composed in the five last years of his Life, will amply supply, being then
totally retired from all Civil Affairs, and applying himself daily to
Contemplation and Study; the particulars were these, Ibid.
viz.

The History of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.
Abcedarium Naturae; or a Metaphysical piece now lost. Part of it is here
retrieved by the Publisher.
Historia Ventorum. Historia Vitae and Mortis. Historia Densi and Rari, not yet
Printed. 'Twas Published at London, An. 1658.
Historia Gravis and Levis, which is also lost. A Discourse of a War with
Spain. A Dialogue touching an Holy War. The Fable of the New Atlantis. A
Preface to a Digest of the Laws of England.
The beginning of the History of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
De Augmentis Scientiarum; or the Advancement of Learning, put into Latin,
with several Enrichments and Enlargements. Councils Civil and Moral; Or his
Book of Essays, likewise enriched and enlarged. The Conversion of certain
Psalms into English Verse.
The Translation of the History of King Henry the Seventh, into Latin; as also
of the Councils, Civil and Moral, and Dialogue of the Holy War.
His Book de Sapientia Veterum, revised. Not Printed. 'Twas Printed with the
Book de Denso and Raro, 1658.

Inquisitio de Magnete. Topica Inquisitionis de Luce and Lumine.
Sylva Sylvarum, or his Natural History.
He departed Ibid.
this Life, upon the ninth day of April, 1626, (being Easter Day) in the sixty
sixth year of his Age, at the Earl of Arundel's House in High-Gate, near
London, to which place he casually repaired about a Week before; and was Buried
Ibid.
in the North-side of the Chancel in St. Michael's Church at St. Albans,
according to the appointment by his last Will and Testament; because Ibid.
the Body of his Mother lay there Interred, it being the only Church remaining
within the Precinct of Old Verulam, where he has a Monument of White Marble,
representing his full Body in a contemplative posture, sitting in a Chair;
erected by Sir Thomas Meautys, Knight, formerly his Secretary, but afterward
Clerk of the Council to King James, and King Charles the First. On which is
this following Epitaph, Composed by the Learned Sir Henry Wotton, Knight.

Franciscus Bacon, Baro de Verulam, S. Albani Vicecomes: Seu, notioribus
titulis Scientiarum Lumen, facundiae Lex, sic sedebat.

Qui, postquam omnia Naturalis sapientiae, and Civilis Arcana evolvisset,
Naturae decretum explevit. Composita solvantur, Anno. Dom. MDCXXVI. Aetatis
Lxvi.

Tanti viri memoriae Thomas Meautus superstitis cultor; defuncti Admirator. H.
P.

That is, Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, This is a Translation of the
Publishers.
Vicount of St. Albans: Or in more conspicuous Titles;

The Light of the Sciences, the Law of Eloquence, sat on this manner.

Who, after he had unfolded all the Mysteries of Natural and Civil Wisdom,
obeyed the Decree of Nature*

Let the Companions be parted: i. e. Soul and Body.
, in the Year of our Lord 1626, and the sixty sixth year of his Age.

Thomas Meautys, a Reverencer of him whilst Alive, and an Admirer of him now
Dead, has set up this to the Memory of so great a Man.

CHARACTERS OF THE Lord Bacon.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1679.

A CHARACTER OF THE Lord Bacon,
Given by Dr. Peter Heylin, in his Life of Archbishop Laud, Part 1. Page 64.
Anno 1620.
THe Lord Chancellor Bacon, was a Man -- of a most strong Brain, and a Chemical
Head; designing his Endeavors to the perfecting of the Works of Nature; or
rather improving Nature to the best Advantages of Life, and the common Benefit
of Mankind. Pity it was, he was not entertained with some liberal Salary,
abstracted from all Affairs both of Court and Judicature, and furnished with
Sufficiency, both of Means and Helps, for the going on in his Design: Which had
it been, he might have given us such a body of Natural Philosophy, and made it
so subservient to the Public Good, that neither Aristotle, nor Theophrastus,
amongst the Ancients; nor Paracelsus, or the rest of our latter Chemists, would
have been considerable.

A Character of the Lord Bacon, given by Dr. Sprat, in his History of the Royal
Society, Part 1. Sect. 16. Page 35, 36.
-- THe Third sort of New Philosophers have been those, who have not only
disagreed from the Ancients, but have also proposed to themselves the right
Course of slow and sure Experimenting: And have prosecuted it as far as the
shortness of their own Lives, or the multiplicity of their other Affairs, or
the narrowness of their Fortunes, have given them leave. Such as these, we are
to expect to be but few: For they must divest themselves of many vain
Conceptions, and overcome a thousand false Images, which lie like Monsters in
their way, before they can get as far this. And of these, I shall only mention
one Great Man, who had the true Imagination of the whole extent of this
Enterprise, as it is now set on foot; and that is, the Lord Bacon. In whose
Books there are, every where scattered, the best Arguments that can be produced
for the defense of Experimental Philosophy; and the best directions that are
needful to promote it. All which he has, already adorned with so much Art; that
if my desires could have prevailed with some excellent Friends of mine, who
engaged me to this Work, there should have been no other Preface to the History
of the Royal Society, but some of his Writings. But, methinks, in this one Man,
I do at once find enough occasion, to admire the strength of Humane Wit, and to
bewail the weakness of a Mortal Condition. For, is it not Wonderful, that he,
who had run through all the degrees of that Profession, which usually takes up
Men's whole time; who had Studied, and Practiced, and Governed the Common Law:
Who had always lived in the Crowd, and born the greatest burden of Civil
Business; Should yet find leisure enough for these retird Studies, to excel all
those Men, who separate themselves for this very purpose? He was a Man of
strong, clear, and powerful Imaginations: His Genius was searching, and
inimitable: And of this I need give no other Proof, than his Style it self;
which as, for the most part, it describes Men's minds, as well as Pictures do
their Bodies: So it did His, above all Men living. The Course of it Vigorous,
and Majestical: The Wit bold and familiar: The Comparisons fetched out of the
way, and yet the most easy: In all, expressing a Soul equally skilled in Men,
and Nature. All this, and much more, is true of him: But yet his Philosophical
Works do show, that a single and busy Hand, can never grasp all this whole
Design, of which we treat. His Rules were admirable: Yet his History not so
faithful as might have been wished in many places: He seems rather to take all
that comes, than to choose; and to heap rather than to register. But I hope
this Accusation of mine, can be no great injury to his Memory; seeing, at the
same time, that I say he had not the strength of a thousand Men, I do also
allow him to have had as much as Twenty.

A Character of the Lord Bacon's Philosophy, by Mr. Abraham Cowley, in his Poem
to the Royal Society.
-- SOme few exalted Spirits this latter
Age has shown,
That labored to assert the Liberty
(From Guardians, who were now Usurpers Grown)
Of this Old Minor Herbert in Auctorem Instauration is -- Scientiarum,
subpupillari statu Degentium olim, Emancipator.
still, Captived Philosophy;
But 'twas Rebellion called, to Fight
For such a long oppressed Right.
Bacon at last, a mighty Man, arose,
Whom a Wise King and Nature chose
Lord-Chancellor of both their Laws,
And boldly undertook the injured Pupils Cause.
3.
Authority, which did a Body boast,
Though 'twas but Air condensed and stalked about,
Like some old Giant's more Gigantic Ghost,
To terrify the learned Rout
With the plain Magic of true Reason's light,
He chased out of our sight,
Nor suffered Living Men to be misled
By the vain shadows of the Dead:
To Graves, from whence it rose, the conquered Phantom fled;
He broke that Monstrous God, which stood
In midst of the Orchard, and the whole did claim,
Which with a useless Sith of Wood,
And something else not worth a Name,
(Both vast for show, yet neither fit
Or to defend, or to beget;
Ridiculous and senseless Terror!) made
Children and superstitious Men afraid.
The Orchards open now, and free;
Bacon has broke that Scar-crow Deity;
Come, enter, all that will,
Behold the rip'ned Fruit, come gather now your fill.
Yet still, methinks, we fain would be
Catching at the forbidden Tree,
We would be like the Deity;
When Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil we,
Without the Senses aid within our selves would see:
For it is God only who can find
All Nature in his Mind.
4.
From Words, which are but Pictures of the Thought,
(Though we our Thoughts from them perversely drew)
To Things, the Minds right Object, he it brought,
Like foolish Birds to painted Grapes we flew;
He sought and gathered for our use the true;
And when, on heaps, the chosen Bunches lay,
He pressed them wisely the Mechanic way,
'Till all their Juice did, in one Vessel join,
Ferment into a nourishment Divine,
The thirsty Soul's refreshing Wine.
Who to the Life an exact Piece would make,
Must not from others Work a Copy take;
No, not from Reubens, or Vandike;
Much less content himself to make it like
The Ideas, and the Images which lie
In his own Fancy, or his Memory.
No, He, before his sight, must place
The natural and living Face;
The real Object must command
Each judgment of his Eye, and motion of his Hand.
5.
From these, and all long Errors of the way,
In which our wandering Predecessors went,
And like the old Hebrews many years did stray
In Deserts but of small extent,
Bacon, like Moses, led us forth at last,
The barren Wilderness he past,
Did on the very Border stand
Of the blessed promised Land,
And, from the Mountains top of his exalted Wit,
Saw it himself, and showed us it.
But Life did never to one Man allow
Time to discover Worlds, and conquer too;
Nor can so short a Line sufficient be
To fadom the vast depths of Nature's Sea.
The work he did we ought to admire,
And were unjust if we should more require
From his few years, divided 'twixt the excess
Of low Affliction, and high Happiness:
For who on things remote can fix his sight,
That Is always in a Triumph, or a Fight?
FINIS.

