THE COMMON PRINCIPILES OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Clearly proved, and singularly improved: Or, a Practical CATECHISM, wherein
some of the most concerning-foundations of our Faith are solidely laid down:
And that Doctrine, which is according to Godliness, sweetly, yet pungently
pressed home, and most satisfyingly handled.

By that worthy and faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Hew Binning, late
Minister of the Gospel at Goven

The 5. Impression, carefully corrected and amended.

1 Timothy 4. 6. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou
shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the Word of faith and
of good Doctrine, whereunto thou have attained.

Heb. 5. 12. For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God.

1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby.

Joh. 17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.



Printed by R. S. Printer to the Town of Glasgow, 1666.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe holy and learned Author of this little Book, having outrun his years,
hastened to a maturity before the ordinary season, in so much that ripe Summer
Fruit was found with him by the first of the Spring: for before he had lived
twenty five years complete, he had got to be Philologus, Philosophus,
Theologus, eximius, whereof he gave suitable proofs, by his labors, having first
professed in Philosophy three years, with high approbation, in the Universitie
of Glasgow, and thence was translated to the Ministry of the Gospel in a
Congregation adjacent, where he labored in he work of the Gospel near four
years, leaving an epistle of commendation upon the hearts of his Hearers: But
as few burning and shining lights have been of long continuance here: so he
(after he had served his own generation by the will of God and many had rejoiced
in his light for a season) was quickly transported to the land of Promise, in
the 26th, year of his age. He lived deservedly esteemed and beloved, and died
much lamented, by all descerning Christians who knew him: And, indeed, the loss
which the Churches of Christ in these parts, sustained in his death, w^ ^he
greater upon a double account: First, that he was a person fitted with
dexterity to vindicate School divinity, and Practical Theology* from the
superfluity of vain and fruitless perplexing questions, wherewith latter times
have corrupted both, and (...) it upon his spirit in all his way to reduce that
native Gospel-simplicitis, which (in most parts of the world, where literature
is in esteem, and where the Gospel is preached) is almost exiled from the
School and from the Pulpit; a specimen whereof the judicious Reader may find in
this little Treatis. Besides ^e was a person of eminent moderation, and
sobriety of spirit (a rare grace in this generation) whose heart was much
drawn forth in the study of healing ways and condeseensions of love among
Brethren; one who longed for the recovering of the Humanity of Christianity,
which has been well near lost in the bitter divisions of these times, and the
animosities which have followed thereupon.

That which gave the rise to the publishing of this part of his manuscripts,
was partly the longing of many (who knew him) after some fruit of his labors,
for the use of the Church; and partly the exceeding great usefulness of the
Treatise, wherein, I am bold to say, that some fundamentals of the Christian
Religion and great Mysteries of Faith, are handled with the greatest
Gospel-simplicity and most dexterious plainness, and are brought down to the
meanest capacity, and vulgar understanding, with abundant evidence of a great
height and reach of useful knowledge in the Author. Who had he lived to have
perfected the explication of the grounds of Religion in this manner, as he
intended, in his opening the Catechism unto his particular Congregation, he
had been, upon this single account, famous in the Churches of Christ: But now,
by this imperfect opus post humum, thou are left to judge ex ungue leonem.

The Authors Method was his peculiar gift, who being no stranger to the Rules
of Art, knew well how to make his method subserve the matter which he handled
for though he tell not always that his discourse has so many parts, thou
may not think it wants method, it being maximum artis celare artem, that the
same spirit which enabled him to conceive, and communicate to others, these
sweet mysteries of Salvation, may help thee with profit to read and peruse
them, is the desire of him who is

Thine in the service of the Gospel, PATRICK GILLESPIE.

THE CONTENTS
SERMON I. Romans 11. 36. Of him, and through him, etc. 1 Cor. 10, 31. Of the
chief End of Man.
THe Fundamentals of Religion, necessary to be pondered and imprinted into the
soul. Page 1. Our chief end first to be considered. p. 2 God is independent and
self-sufficient, but the most perfect of the Creatures are from another, as
their first cause, and for another, as their last end. p. 3 Self-seeking in
Creatures monsterous p. 4 What self-seeking in God is. ibid. Man is in a
peculiar way for God. p. 5 Sin has exautorated Man. ibid. What it is to
glorify God, and how Gods glorifying of us, and our glorifying of him differs.
p. 6, and 7 How proper it is for man to praise God. p. 8 Whether we can always
have an express particular thought of God and his glory in every action. p. 9
Man is come short of all he was created for. ibid. Glorifying of God the end of
Man's second Creation. p. 10 We are to consider for what purpose we were made.
p. 11 Believing the most compendious way of glorifying God. ib. p. 12.
SERMON II. Psalm. 73. 24, 25. etc. 1 John 1. 3. Joh. 17. 21, 22. Union and
Communion with God, the principal end, and great design of the Gospel.
GODS glory, and man's happiness, inseparably linked together. p. 13 Man's
dignity above the rest of the creatures. p. 14 A twofold Union betwixt God and
Adam, whence communion with him flowed. p. 14, 15 The Fall has broken off
Communion with him, by dissolving the Union. p. 16 Christ the repairer of the
breach betwixt God and man. p. 17, 18. There is neither full seeing of God, nor
full enjoying of him here. p. 19 The Union of a believing soul with God, is a
great depth. p. 20 Love an uniting and transforming thing. ibid. Christ's Union
with the Father is the foundation of our Union with God, and among ourselves;
not simply that Union of Essence between the Father and the Son, but the Union
of God with Christ as Mediator. p. 21 How should an Union and Communion with
God draw forth our souls in desires after such a blessedness. p. 22 The
enjoyment of God the scope and design which few drive. ibid. He who ingages not
his whole soul to God, cannot truly engage any part of it to him. p. 23.
SERMON III. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Of the Scriptures.
THat which most men seek, is not true happiness. p. 24 The principles of
reason, and light of nature, are become so dark, that they cannot direct us in
the pathway to everlasting blessedness. p. 25 The authority of the Scriptures
divine. p. 26 How the Apostles and Prophets knew that they spoke truth, and how
men may be persuaded that the Scriptures are the Word of God. ibid. The
simplicity and plainness of the Scripture. p. 27 The Spirit of God must open a
man's eyes before he understand the Scriptures. p. 28 The Utility of the
Scriptures. p. 29 The Scriptures a Doctrine of Eternal life. p. 30 The
sharpness of the Scripture mingled with sweetness. p. 31 Some cannot hear the
word of reproof, others prefer their own vain imaginations to the Word of God.
p. 32, 33
SERMON IV. Joh. 5. 39. Ephesians. 2. 20. Of the Scriptures.
THe Lamp of the Word without, and the light of the Spirit within, necessary
for directing us in the way to eternal life. p. 34 Why the multitude find no
sweetness in the Scriptures p. 35 How eternal life is to be found in the
Scripture p. 36 It may commend the Scriptures to us, that Eternal life is to be
found in them. p. 37 We are to lay this present perishing life in the balance
with eternal life, and compare both the happiness and miseries of this life
with eternal blessedness. p. 38 Many groundlessely fancy, that they have a
right to everlasting life. p. 39 Most of the Hearers of the Gospel have either
to knowledge at all, or nothing but knowledge. p. 40 Life Eternal is no where
to be found out but of Jesus Christ. p. 41, 42 Some foolishly think; that if
they do all they can, then God ought to be pleased p 43 Christ the only
pacificatory sacrifice. p. 44 Christ is either the subject, or end, of all that
is in the Scriptures. p. 45 The march which divides between heaven and hell,
is, coming to Christ. p. 45, 46 The necessity of searching the Scriptures, and
what search it must be. p. 47 The Rule whereby to measure our profiting in the
Scriptures. p. 48, 49
SERMON V. Ephesians. 2. 20. Of the Scriptures.
BElievers, the Temple of the living God. p. 50 Christ in the Scriptures a sure
foundation to build upon; all other foundations, sandy and unsure. p. 51 How
firm and stable a foundation the Word of the Lord is. p. 52 A Promise lays an
obligation on the Promiser, which a command does not on the commander. p. 53
All the Promises are Yea, and Amen, in Christ. ibid The chief point of
Obedience is faith, and what that is. p 54 Christ is the Cornerstone as well
as the foundation: which should strongly persuade Christians to an union in
Affection. p. 55 What kind of foundation Christ is. ibid. Some prefer their own
imaginations to the Word of the Lord, under the dark notion of new light. p. 56
Many have nothing but the word of man for the foundation of their Faith. p. 57.
SERMON VI. 2 Timothy 1 13. Of the Scriptures.
ALL Religion may be reduced to these two what we are to believe, and what we
ough to do. p. 58 God manifests himself differently to Man, according to his
different state. p. 59, 60 The marvellousness of mercy in saving of lost
sinners. p. 61 62 What manner of Persons Believers ought to be p. 63, 64
^belief ruined man at first. p. 65 A twofold mistake of the nature of Faith.
ibid. What course a soul is to take who questions its interest. p. 66, 67 The
mistake of the nature of Faith leads many wellmeaning persons into labyrinth.
p. 68 What Faith is. p 69 What a soul ought to do that is sentenced by the law.
ibid. The faith of a Christian no fancy. p. 70, 71 Love is unitive and
operative. ibid. Love is put for all obedience, and how it is the fulfilling of
the. p. 72 God is pleased with no service that proceeds not from love, and why.
p. 73, 74 How to attain to the distinct knowledge of our love to God, and the
way to increase it. p. 75 Who cannot hold fast the truth. p. 76 When man lost
his holiness, he could not retain his happiness. ibid. The necessity of holding
fast the form of sound words and of forbearing strange words. p. 77
SERMON VII, and VIII. Exodus 3. 13, 14. Of the Name of God.
IT is impossible to declare what God is. p. 78 How we may know that there is a
God. ibid. Natural men are Atheists. p. 79 God's Name a mystery that cannot be
conceived or expressed. p. 80, 81, 82, 83. This name, I AM THAT I AM, imports
his unsearchableness. p. 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93 His absolutness
and soveraignity. p. 94 His unchangeableness and Eternity. p. 95, 96, 97 How
impossible it is for a mortal creature to find out God to perfection, yet so
much may be known of him as is sufficient to teach us our duty, and man us
happy in obedience. p. 98, 99 The saving knowledge of God a self-emptying, and
self-abasing thing. p. 100, 101 Why God has called himself by so many names.
ibid.
SERMON IX. Exodus 24. 5, 6, 7. What God is to us.
GOD is loath to depart, even when he is provoked to go away. p. 102, 103, 114
Infirmity and iniquity puts us into an incapacity of nearness with God. p. 105,
106 It is God himself who only can teach a soul to know what he is. p. 107 One
who considers how all-sufficient God is, and how empty and insufficient all
other things are, must needs cleave to him. p. 108 God vents himself toward
the creatures, either in a way of Justice or Mercy. p. 109 There is a Tribunal
of Justice, and a Throne of Mercy erected in the word, so that every sentenced
sinner may appeal from the Bar of Justice to Christ Jesus, sitting on the
Throne of Mercy. p. 110, 111. The Name of the Lord, rightly considered, is
sufficient to answer all possible objections that a sinner can make against
coming to Christ; and what those objections are. p. 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,
117 Many souls suck delusion and destruction out of the sweet and saving
Promises of life, which are held forth in the Gospel. p. 118, 119.
SERMON X. Joh. 4. 24. What God is.
THe knowledge of what God is, presupposed to all true worship and Christian
walking: p. 120 How misshapen apprehensions we have of God. p. 121 That God is a
spirit, shows us that he is not like any visible thing. p. 122 That he is
invisible, and dwells in light inaccessible. ib. That he is most perfect, and
most powerful. p. 123, 124 That he cannot be circumscribed by any place. p. 125
And there is no comprehension of his knowledge. p. 126, 127 It were of
excellent use and advantage for us to be all the day in the faith of Gods
infinite knowledge and omniscience. p. 128.
SERMON XI. Joh. 4. 26. The true knowledge that God is, and that he is to be
worshipped, goes together.
HOw inexcusable they are, who profess to believe a Diety, and do not worship
him. p. 129 It is the souls honor and happiness to worship God. p. 130 It Is
all one, not to worship God at all, and not to worship him as he has
commanded. p. 131 What will worship, and what true worship is. p. 132 The most
part of worship, though commanded, has no truth in it. p. 133 Truth in worship
is opposed to Ceremony. p. 134 Many place all their Religion in externalls. p.
135 Men ought to be most taken up with that in Religion upon which God lays
most weight, and wherein he is most delighted. p. 136 It compleats our worship,
when the thing commanded is performed, according as it is commanded. p. 137
What is the right manner in worshipping God. p. 138 The best little acquainted
with spiritual worship. p. 139 True worship must have the stamp of Gods
spiritual nature engraven on it. p. 140 External worship necessary under the
Gospel. p. 141 The soul and spirit must be the first mover and chief agent in
spiritual worship. p. 142 The greatest part of our Religion is bodily exercise.
ibid. What makes Religion burdensome and unpleasant to us. p. 143 Formality in
worship, the greatest controversy against the land. ibid.
SERMON XII. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 John 5. 7. Of the Unity of Gods essence and the
Trinity of Persons.
GOdliness and Mystery. p. 144 There is an unlawful curiosity in men, to know
those things that are kept secret. p. 145 We are to believe the mystery of the
Trinity, though we know not how it is. p. 146 The light of reason may convince
men, that there is but one God. p. 147 Why Christ is called the Word p. 148,
149 Of the three Witnesses upon earth. p. 150
SERMON XIII. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Joh. 5. 7. Of the Unity of the Godhead, and Trinity
of Persons.
THe whole Word of God profitable. ibid. The unsearchableness of this mystery
of the Trinity ought to compose our hearts to a reverend apprehension of Gods
divine Majesty. p. 151 Since there is but one God, we ought to have no other
besides him. p. 152, 153 We have much and strong consolation both from the
thing witnessed, and from the Witnesses that bear testimony. p. 154, 155 Faiths
victory is from the object of it, the Lord God Almighty. p. 156 Few consider
that Jesus Christ the Savior is the Eternal Son of God, and the sad
consequences thereof. p. 157 We are ready so far to mis-conceive of God, as if
the Father, and the holy Ghost, were not so well minded to the Salvation of
sinners as Jesus Christ. p. 158 The mystery of the Trinity affords us this
plain instruction, how me ought to worship God. p. 159
SERMON XIV. Eccles. 1. 11. Job 23. 13. Of the Decrees of God.
GODS absolute and self-sufficient perfection admits of no accession of
blessedness from the things which he has made. p. 160 The Eternal purpose and
Decree of God, it it most wise. p. 161 It is most absolute and free, having no
cause without himself. p 162 It is the first rise of all things past, present,
and to come. p. 163 It reaches to every particular being, and act, so that
nothing falls out by chance. p. 164, 165 The purpose of God is one, and
unchangeable. p. 166, 167 How we are to understand those Scriptures, which
speak of his repenting. p. 168, 169 Whatever God has purposed from Eternity,
that he executes in time. p. 170 Gods commands do not so much signify what he
intends to effectuate, as what is our duty. ibid. How comfortable it is for a
Christian to consider, that whatsoever falls out, is according to an Eternal
Counsel. p. 171 The Counsel of God irresistible. p. 172 The consideration of
Gods Eternal Counsel should teach us that sweet Lesson of submission, wherein
we are so much wanting, and so unwilling to learn p. 173 Want of submission
makes a man's yoke heavy, and his bands strong. p. 174 From the absolute
Dominion of God over all things, we are to learn confidence in him in all
things, and for all things. p. 175, 176 Who are heirs of the promise. p. 177 It
is a wellspring and fountain of consolation to the people of God that he is in
one mind. p. 178
SERMON XV. Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 9. 22, 23. Of Predestination.
PRedestination a Mystery not to be curiously or boldly enquired into. p. 179
For the right up-taking of Predestination, we must know that there is not a
plurality of purposes in God, but one entire purpose concerning all things. p.
180 As also, that it is not the creature, or any thing in the creature, which
is first in his mind, but himself, and his own glory. p. 181 How men miscarry
in conceiving of the purposes of God, while they subject the most High to the
Rules of Carnal Reason: where, of the Arminian foreknowledge, and how it
derogates both from the Sovereignty of God, and the wisdom of God. ib. p. 182
Some make that first in his intention, which is last in execution. p. 183, 184,
185, 186, 187 Gods saving the vessels of mercy, by a Redeemer, is not simply to
manifest the glory of his goodness, but of his gracious and merciful goodness.
p. 188 189, 190
SERMON XVI. Romans 9. 22. Eccles. 11. Of Predestination.
HOw to silence all the secret surmises and mutinies of the heart concerning
Predestination p. 191, 192 How great wickedness it is, to enquire into a cause
of his will ibid. Men speak wickedly for God in the matter of Predestination p.
193, 194, 195 The Objections of Carnal Reason against Predestination, tending
to accuse God and justify men, answered. p. 196, 197, 198, 199
SERMON XVII. Heb. 11. 3. Of Creation.
GOD is the Creator of all things, and these things which he has made prove
him to be God. p. 200, 201 When this visible world was made. p. 202 The
wickedness of men's curiosity, in enquiring what God was doing before he made
the world, and why he was so long in applying himself to this work. ibid. p.
203 The Lord in the beginning of the world declares more manifestly his
Eternity, his Self-sufficiency, and his Liberty. p. 204, 205 God made all
things very good, to declare his goodness and wisdom. p. 106 The course of
nature is one continued wonder. ibid. The power of God does eminently appear in
making all things of nothing, and how easy it was for him to do so. p. 207 Why
the Lord took six days to perfect the work of Creation. p. 208
SERMON XVIII. Heb. 11. 3. Heb. 11. 4. Of Creation.
IT is not believed, or laid to heart, that God made the Heaven and the Earth.
p. 209, 210 The faith of Gods making the world is of singular use to a
Christian through his whole course. p. 211 212, 213
SERMON XIX. Genesis 1. 26. 27. Of the Creation of Man.
THe singular respect that God has put upon Man, in creating him after His Own
Image ibid. 214 How necessary it is for us to know the happy estate wherein we
were created. p. 215 We are to consider what that Image of God was, which was
stamped on man in the beginning. p. 216 217. 218 We should consider from what
we are fallen, and how great that fall is. p. 219, 220
SERMON XX. Romans 11. 36. Psalm. 103. 13. Mat. 10. 29. Of Providence
THe Providence of God is either not at all believed, or superficially
considered. ib. 221, 222 The most common and known truths most sweet. p. 223
All things depend upon God as their producing, conserving, and final cause,
and what power the Faith thereof has to conform us to his Will. p. 224 The
upholding of the World is a kind of repeated and continued Creation. p. 225 It
is a most suitable exercise for a Christian to deduce all things from God as the
first cause, and to reduce them all to him again with glory, as the last end.
p. 226 How God governs the World. p. 227 The faith of Gods Supremacy over all
things would increase our fear of God, and abate our fear of others. p. 228
SERMON XXI. Genesis 2. 17. Genesis 1. 26. Of the first Covenant made with Man.
THe several draughts and lineaments of Gods Image, whereinto man was created.
ibid. 229 p. 230 Man in innocence enjoyed a freedom from all fear of misery,
and had a dominion over the creature. p. 231 There was a law imprinted in Adams
heart, and a law prescribed unto him. p. 232 Of the positive law prescribed
unto Adam, and of the reasons thereof. p 233 Many perform commanded duties, not
because they are commanded. p. 234 The command and will of God should persuade
to obediente, without any more enquiry or debate about the matter. p. 235, 236
SERMON XXII. Gal. 3. 12. Of the first Covenant.
THe wonderful condescension of God, in entering into covenant with Man. p.
237, 238 To speak strictly, there cannot be a proper covenant betwixt God and
man. ibid. Why God deals with man in the terms of a covenant. p. 240, 241 The
terms of the first covenant, and what obedience it required. p. 242 Of the
difference betwixt the first and second covenant. ibid. Whether the first
covenant did require faith, and what kind of Faith. p. 244 How the Law is not
of Faith. ibid. What the Fall has made man now. p. 245
SERMON XXIII. Eccles. 7. 29. Of the state wherein man was created, and how the
Image of God is defaced.
TRue Religion consists in the knowledge of God and of our selves. p. 246 That
which we have to know of man, is, what God made him at the first, and what he
has now made himself. p. 247 We are to consider the sad consequence of the
Fall. p. 248 All men's invention about the remedy of his misery vain. p. 249 How
necessary it is for us, both to consider what we were, and what we now are. p.
250, 251
SERMON XXIV. Romans 5. 12. Of sin by imputation and propagation.
HOw, and whence it is that Adams first transgression is imputed to all his
posterity. p. 252 Gods gracious purpose in permitting the Fall. p. 253 Sin is
entered into the word by imputation, p. 254 The hainousness of sin. p 255 What
Original sin is, which is propagated to all Adams posterity. p. 256 A right
sight of Original corruption is a humbling sight. p. 257 How profitably to
look upon the evils of others. ibid. Few are truly persuaded of the evil of
their nature p. 258 Sin brings death into the world with it, and the extent of
that death. p. 259, 260
SERMON XXV 1 Timothy 1. 15. Of the way of Man's delivery.
THe Doctrine of salvation by Jesus Christ, most sweet to a soul made sensible
of its mercy. p. 261 Our help comes from that airth out of which we could not
have expected it. p 262 Our sin and Gods justice, made salvation impossible to
man. ibid. Christ satisfies justice for us, and conquers our corruptions also.
p. 263 How acceptable would the news of a Savior be to us, if we knew our
misery without him. p. 264 The great thing which keeps men from reaping any
real advantage by the Gospel, is this, that men do not either see the necessity
and excellency of these things, or, That they do not believe the reality of
them. p. 265
OF THE CHIEF END OF MAN. Romans 11. 36. Of Him, and through Him, and for Him,
are all things: to whom be glory for ever. And 1 Cor. 10, 31. Whatsoever ye do,
do all to the glory of God.
ALL that men have to know, may be comprised under these two Heads, What their
end is, and what is the right way to attain to that end: and all that we have
to do, is, by any means to seek to compass that end. These are the two
cardinal points of a man's knowledge and exercise: Quo and qua cundem est,
Whither to go, and what way to go. If there be a mistake in any of these
fundamentals, all is wrong. All Arts and Sciences have their principles and
grounds, that must be presupposed to all solid knowledge and right practice; So
has the true Religion some fundamental principles, which must be laid to
heart, and imprinted into the soul, or there can be no superstructure or true
and saving knowledge; and no practice in Christianity that can lead to a
blessed end. But as the principles are not many, but a few common and easy
grounds, from which all the conclusions of Art are reduced; so the Principles
of true Religion are few, and plain. They need neither burden your memory, nor
confound your understanding; that which may save you is near hand; says the
Apostle, Romans 10. in thy mouth: it is neither too far above us, nor too far
below us. But, alas! your not considering of these common, and few, and easy
grounds, makes them both burdensome to the memory, and dark to the
understanding. As there is nothing so easy, but it becomes difficult, if you
do it against your will, nihil est tam facile, quin difficile fiat, si invitus
feceri: So there is nothing so plain, so common but it becomes dark and hard,
if you do not indeed consider it, and lay it to heart.

That which is in the first place to be considered, is, our End. As in all
other arts, and every petty business, it has the first place of consideration,
so especially in the Christian Religion. It is the first cause of all humane
actions, and the first Principle of all deliberate motions: Except you would
walk at random, not knowing whither you go, or what you do, you must once
establish this and fix it in your intention. What is the great end and purpose
wherefore I am created, and sent into the world? If this be not either
questioned, or not rightly constituted, you cannot but spend your time, Vel
nihil agendo, vel aliud agendo, vel male agendo, you must either do nothing, or
nothing to purpose, or, that which is worse, that which will undo you. It is
certainly the wrong establishing of this one thing, that makes the most part of
our motions, either altogether irregular, or unprofitable, or destructive and
hurtful: Therefore as this point has the first place in your Catechism, so it
ought to be first of all laid to heart, and pondered as the one necessary
thing. One thing is need full, says Christ, Luke 10. 22. And if any thing be
in a superlative degree needful, this is it. O that you would choose to
consider it, as the necessity and weight of it requires.

We have read two Scriptures, which speak to the ultimate and chief end of man,
which is the glorifying of God by all our actions, and words, and thoughts. In
which we have these things of importance. 1. That Gods glory is the end of our
being. 2. That Gods glory should be the end of our doing. And 3. The ground of
both these, because both being and doing are from him, therefore they ought to
be both for him. He is the first cause of both, and therefore he ought to be
the last end of both. Of him, and through him, are all things, and therefore
all things are also for him, and therefore all things should be done to him.

God is independent altogether, and self-sufficient: This is his royal
prerogative, wherein he infinitely transcends all created perfections: He is of
himself, and for himself, from no other, and for no other, but of him, and for
him are all things. He is the fountainhead, you ought to follow all the
streams up to it, and then to rest: for you can go no further. But the
creature, even the most perfect work besides God, it has these two ingredients
of Limitation and Imperfection in its bosom: It is from another, and for
another. It has its rise out of the fountain of Gods immense, power and
goodness, and it must run toward that again, till it empty all its faculties
and excellencies, into that same sea of goodness. Dependence is the proper
notion of a created being: Dependence upon that infinite independent being, as
the first immediate cause, and the last immediate end: You see then, that this
principle is engraven in the very nature of man. It is as certain an evident,
that man is made for Gods glory, and for no other end, as that he is from Gods
power, and for no other cause: Except men did violent their own conscience, and
put out their own eyes, as the Gentiles did, Romans 1. 19. etc. That which might
be known of man's chief end, is manifest in them, so that all men are without
excuse. As God his Being is indepen^ent, so that he cannot be expressed by any
name, more ^table then such as he takes to himself, I am that I am: ^mporting a
boundless, ineffable, absolute, and trancendent being, beside which, no
creature deserves so much as to have the name of being, or to be made mention
of in one day with his Name; because his glorious light makes the poor derided
shadow of light in other creatures, to desappear, and to evanish out of the
World of Beings: So it is the glorious perfection of his Nature, that he does
all things for himself, for his own Name. Pro. 16. 4. and his glory is as dear
to him, as himself, Isai. 42. 8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and therefore
my glory I will give to no other, and 48 11. This is no ambition. Indeed, for a
man to seek his own glory; or, search into it, is no glory, Prove. 25. 27. but
rather a man's shame: Self-seeking in creatures is a monstrous and incongruous
thing; it is as absurd, and unbeseeming a creature, to seek its own glory, as
to attribute to it self its own being. Shall the thing formed, say to the
Potter, Thou have not made me, that were rediculous: and shall the thing formed
say, It Is made for it self, that were as rediculous. Self denial is the
ornament and beauty of a creature and therefore humility is an ornament and
clothing, 1 Pet. 5. 5. And honor upholds the humble in spirit, Pro. 29. 23.
But Gods self-seeking, and seeking of his own glory, is his eminent excellency:
it is indeed his glory, because he is, and there is none else, there is nothing
beside him but that which has issued forth from his incomprehensible fullness:
and therefore it is all the reason of the world, that as he is the beginning,
so he should be the end of all things, Rev. 1. 8. And there is the more reason
of it, that his Majesty's seeking of his own glory, is not prejudicial to the
creatures good, but the very communication of his fullness goes along with it;
so that in glorifying himself, he is most beneficial to his own creatures.
Poor creatures, indigent at home, yet are proud of nothing, and endeavor in
seeking of themselves, to ingross all perfections into their own bosoms:
ambition, and vainglory, robs and spoils others excellencies, to cloth it
self withal; and then boasts it self in these borrowed feathers. But our
blessed Lord is then doing most for our advantage, when he does all for his own
glory; He needs not go abroad to seek perfection, but to manifest what he is in
himself; he communicates of himself to us O. blessed self-seeking, that gave us
a being, and well being, that makes no advantage by it, but gives advantage. He
has the honor of all, but we have the profit of al.

All things are of him, and for him; but man in a peculiar and proper way. As
God in making of man, he was pleased of his goodness, to stamp him with a
character of his own Image, and in this he puts a difference between man and
other creatures; that he should have more plain and distinct engravings of
Divine Majesty upon him, which might show the glory of the workman: so it
appears that he is in a singular way made for God, as his last end. As he is
set nearer God, as the beginning and cause, than other creatures; so he is
placed nearer God as the end. All creatures are made ultimo, lastly for God,
yet they are all made proxime nextly for man: Therefore David falls out a
wondering, O Lord, what is man that thou magnifiest him, and have given him
dominion over the works of thy hands, and put all under his feet! Psalm 8. 6.
The creature comes out in a direct line from God, as the beams from the body of
the Sun, and it is directed toward the use and service of mankind, from whom
all the excellency and perfection that is in it should reflect toward God
again. Man is both proxime and ultimo for God. We are to return immediately to
the fountain of our being; and thus our happiness and well-being is
perpetuated. There is nothing interveening between God and us, that our use and
service and honor should be derected toward: But all the songs and
perfections of the creature, that are among the rest of the creatures, meet all
in man as their Center, for this purpose, that he may return with them all to
the glorious Fountain from whence they issued: thus we stand next God, and in
the middle between God and other creatures. This, I say, was the condition of
our creation, we had our being immediately from God as the beginning of all, and
we were to have our happiness and well-being by returning immediately to God as
the end of all. But sin coming in between God and us, has displaced us, so
that we cannot now stand next God, without the intervention of a Mediator, and
we cannot stand between God and the creatures, to offer up their praise to him;
but there is one Mediator between God and man, that offers up both man's
praises, and the creatures songs which meet in man.

Now seeing God has made all things for himself, and especially man for his
own glory, that he may show forth in him the glory and excellency of his power,
goodness, holiness, justice, and mercy: It is not only most reasonable that man
should do all things that he does to the glory of God, but it is even the
beauty and perfection of a man, the greatest accession that can be to his
being, to glorify God by that being. We are not our own, therefore we ought
not to live to our selves; but to God whose we are.

But you may ask, what is it to glorify God, Does our goodness extend to him?
Or, is it an advantage to the Almighty, that we are righteous? No indeed; and
herein is the vast difference between Gods glorifying of us, and sanctifying of
us, and our glorifying and sanctifying of him: God calls things that are not,
and makes them to be; but we can do no more, but call things that are, and that
far below what they are. Gods glorifying is creative, ours only declarative. He
makes us such, we do no more but declare Him to be such: this then is the
proper work that man is created for to be a witness of Gods glory, and to give
testimony to the appearances, and out-breakings of it, in the ways of power,
and justice, and mercy, and truth. Other creatures are called to glorify God,
but it is rather a Proclamation to dull and senseless men, and a provocation of
them to their duty. As Christ said to the Pharisees, If these children hold
their peace, the stones would cry out. So may the Lord turn himself from stupid
and senseless men, to the stones and woods, and seas, and sun, and moon, and
exhort them to man's duty, the more to provoke and stir up our dullness, and to
make us consider that it is a greater wonder, that man whom God has made so
glorious, can so little express Gods glory; then if stupid and senseless
creatures should break out in singing, and praising of his Majesty. The
creatures are the books wherein the lines of the song of Gods praises are
written, and man is made a creature capable to read them and to tune that long.
They are appointed to bring in Brick to our hand, and God has fashioned us for
this employment, to make such a building of it: We are the mouth of the
creation, but ere God want praises when our mouth is dumb, and our ears deaf,
God will open the mouths of ashes. of Babes and Sucklings, and in them perfyte
praises. Psalm. 8. 1. 2, Epictetus said well; Si Luscinia essem, canerem ut
Luscinia; cum autem homo sim, quod agam? Laudebo Deum, nec unquam cessabo. Is I
were a Lark, I would sing as a Lark, but seeing I am a man, what should I do
but praise God without ceasing? It is as proper to us to praise God, as for a
bird to chaunt: All beasts have their own sounds; and voices peculiar to their
own nature; this is the natural sound of a man. Now as you would think it
monstrous to hear a melodious bird croping as a Raven; so it is no less
monstrous and degenerate to hear the most part of the discourses of men;
savouring nothing of God. If we had known that innocent estate of man, O how
would we think he had fallen from heaven! We would imagine that we were thrust
down from heaven (where we heard the melodious songs of Angels) into hell, to
hear the howlings of damned spirits. This then is that we are bound unto, by
the bond of our Creation this is our proper office, and station God once set us
into, when he assigned every creature its own use and exercise; this was our
portion (and O the noblest of all, because nearest the Kings own person) to
acknowledge in our hearts inwardly, and to express in our words and actions
outwardly, what a one he is, according as he has revealed himself in his word;
and works: It Is great honor to a creature to have the meanest employment in
the Court of this great King. But, O what is it to be set over all the Kings
house, and over all his Kingdom? But then what is that, in respect of this, to
be next to the King, to wait on his own person (so to speak) therefore the
godly man is described, as a waiting maid, or servant Psalm. 123 2. Well then,
without more discourse upon it, without multiplying of it into particular
branches, to glorify God, is in our souls to conceive of him, and meditate on
his Name, till they receive the impression and stamp of all the letters of his
glorious Name; and then to express this in our words and actions, in commending
of him and obeying of him. Our soul should be as wax to express the Seal of his
glorious Attributes of justice, power, goodness, holiness, and mercy: and as
the Water that receives the beams of the Sun, reflects them back again, so
should our spirits receive the sweet warming beams of his love and glorious
excellency, and then reflect them toward his Majesty, with the desires and
affections of our souls. All our thoughts of him, all our affections toward
him, should have the stamp of singularity, such as may declare there is none
like him, none besides him, our love, our meditation, our acknowledgement
should have this character on their front, There is none beside thee, Thou art,
and none else: And then a soul should by the cords of affection to him, and
admiration of him, be bound to serve him. Creation puts on the obligation to
glorify him in our body and spirits, which are his; but affection only puts
that to exercise: All other bonds leaves our natures at liberty, but this
constrains, 2 Cor. 5. 13. it binds on all bonds, it ties on us all divine
obligations. Then a soul will glorify God, when love so unites it to God, and
makes it one spirit with him, that his glory becomes its honor, and becomes
the principle of all our inward affections, and outward actions. It is not
always possible to have an express particular thought of God, and his glory,
in every action and meditation; but, for the most part, it ought to be so: And
if souls were accustomed to meditation on God, it would become their very
nature, altera natura, pleasant and delightsome. However, if there be not
always an express intention of Gods glory, yet there ought to be kept always
such a disposition and temper of spirit, as it may be construed to proceed from
the intention of Gods glory; and then it remains in the seed and fruit, if not
in it self.

Now when we are speaking of the great end and purpose of our Creation, we call
to mind our lamentabel and tragical Fall from that blessed station we were
constitute into: All men have sinned and come short of the glory of God, Romans
3. 23. His being in the world was for that glory, and he is come short of that
glory: O strange short-comming! short of all that he was ordained for! What is
he now meet for? For what purpose is that chief of the works of God now? The
salt, if it lose its saltness is meet for nothing for wherewithal shall it be
seasoned? Mark, 9. 50. Even so, when man is rendered unfit for his proper end,
he is meet for nothing, but to be cast out and trod upon: he is like a withered
branch that must be cast into the fire, Ioh. 15. 6. Some things if they fail in
one use, they are good for another; but the best things are not so, Corruption
optimi, pessima: As the Lord speaks to the house of Israel, shall wood be taken
off the vine tree for my work, even so the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Ezech. 15.
2, 3, 4, 5. If it yield not Wine, it is good for nothing: so, if man do not
glorify God, if he fall from that, he is meet for nothing but to be cast into
the fire of hell, and burnt for ever; he is for no use in the Creation, but to
the fuel to the fire of the Lords indignation.

But behold! the goodness of the Lord and his kindness and love has appeared
toward men, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us through Jesus Christ, Tit. 3. 4, 5. Our Lord Jesus, by
whom all thing were created, and for whom, would not let this excellent
workmanship perish so, therefore he goes about the work of Redemption: a second
Creation more laborious and also more glorious than the first; that so he might
glorify his Father, and our Father: Thus the breach is made up, thus the
unsavory salt is seasoned, thus the withered branch is quickened again for that
same fruit of praises and glorifying of God. This is the end of his second
Creation, as it was of the first: we are his workmanship created to good works
in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2. 10. This is the work of God, to believe in him, to set
to our seal, and to give our testimony to all his Attributes, Ioh. 6. 29. and
3. 33. We are bought with a price, and therefore we ought to glorify him with
our souls and bodies, he made us with a word, and that bound us, but now he has
made us again and paid a price for us, and so we are twice bound not to be our
own but his, 1 Cor. 6. ult. And so to glorify him in our bodies and spirits. I
beseech you gather your spirits, call them home about the business. We once
came short of our end, Gods glory and our happiness; but know that it is
attainable again; we lost both, but both are found in Christ Awake then and
stir up your spirits, else it shall be double condemnation, when we have the
offer of being restored to our former blessed condition, to love our present
misery better. Once establish this point within your souls, and therefore ask,
why came I hither? To what purpose am I come into the world? If you do not ask
it, what will you answer, when he asks you at your appearance before his
Tribunal? I beseech you what will many of you say in that day, when the Master
returns and takes an account of your dispensation? You are sent into the world
only for this business, to serve the Lord: Now, what will many of you answer?
If you speak the truth (as then you must do it, you cannot lie then) you must
say, Lord, I spent my time in serving my own lusts, I was taken up with other
businesses, and had no leisure, I was occupied in my calling etc. even as if an
Ambassador of a King should return him his account of his negotiation, I was
busy at Cards and Dice, I spent my money and did wear my clothes: Though you
think your plowing, and borrowing and trafficking, and reaping very necessary,
yet certainly, these are but as trifles and toys to the main business. O what
dreadful account will souls make! they come here for no purpose but to serve
their bodies and senses, to be slaves to all the creatures, which were once put
under man's feet: Now man is under the feet of all, and he has put himself so.
If you were of these creatures, then you might be for them; you seek them as if
you were created for them, and not they for you, and you seek your selves, as
if you were of your selves, and had not your descent of God. Know, my beloved,
that you were not made for that purpose, nor yet redeemed either to serve your
selves, or other creatures, but that other creatures might serve you, and ye
serve God, Luke 1. 74, 75. And this is really the best way to serve our selves,
and to save our selves, to serve God: Self-seeking, is self-destroying;
self-denying is soul-saving, He that seeks to save his life shall lose it, and
he that loses his life shall find it, and he that denies himself and follows
me, is my disciple. Will ye once sit down in good earnest about this business.
It is lamentable to be yet to begin to learn to live, when ye must die; ye will
be out of the world almost, ere you bethink your self. Why came I into the
world? Quidam tunc vivere incipiunt, cum definendum est; imo quidam ante vivere
defierunt quam inciperent; this is of all most lamentable, many souls end their
life, before they begin to live: For what is our life, but a living death,
while we do not live to God, and while we live not in relation to the great end
of our life and being? the glory of God. It were better, says Christ, that
such had never been born. You who are created again in Jesus Christ, it most of
all concerns you to ask, Why am I made? and why am I redeemed? And to what
purpose? It is certainly, that you may glorify your heavenly Father, Mat. 5.
16. Psalm. 58. 13. And you shall glorify him if you bring forth much fruit, and
continue in his love, Ioh. 15. 8. And this you are chosen and ordained unto,
ver. 16. And therefore abide in him, that you may bring forth fruit; ver. 4.
And if you abide in him by believing, you do indeed honor him; and he that
honors the Son, honors the Father, Ioh. 5. 23. Here is a compendious way
to glorify God: receive salvation of him freely, righteousness and eternal
life, and this sets to a seal of Gods truth, and grace and mercy; and who so
counts the Son worthy to be a Savior to them, and sets to their seal of
approbation to him whom God the Father has sent and sealed; he also honors
the Father, and then he that honors the Father, has it not for nothing; For
them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. says the Lord, And he that
serves me, him will my Father honor, Joh. 12. 26. As the believing soul cares
for no other, and respects no other but God, so he respects no other, but such
a soul, I will dwell in the humble, and look unto the contrite; there is mutual
respects and honors. God is the delight of such a soul, and such a soul is
Gods delight: that soul sets God on a high place, in a throne in its heart, and
God sets that soul in a heavenly place with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6. yea, he comes
down to sit with us, and dwell in us, off his throne of Majesty, Isa. 66. 1, 2.
and 15, 57

Psalm. 73. 24. to the end. Thou will guide me with thy counsel, etc. Whom have
I in heaven but Thee? etc. It is good for me to draw near to God, 1 John 1. 3.
These things declare we to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And
John 17. 21, 22, 23. That they all may be one as we are one; I in them, and
they in me, that they may be perfect in one, etc.
IT is a matter of great consolation, that Gods glory and our happiness are
linked together; so that whosoever sets his glory before them singly to aim at,
they take the most compendious and certain way to true blessedness. His glory
is the ultimat end of man, and should be our great and last scope: But our
happiness, which consists in the enjoyment of God, is subordinate to this, yet
inseparable from it. The end of our Creation is communion and fellowship with
God, therefore man was made with an immortal soul capable of it: and this is
the greatest dignity and eminency of man above the creatures. He has not only
impressed from Gods finger, in his first moulding, some characters resembling
God in righteousness and holiness; but is created with a capacity of
receiving more of God, by communion with him. Other creatures have already all
they will have, all theycan have of conformity to him; but man is made liker
than all and is fitted and fashioned to aspire to more liknesse and conformity,
so that his soul may shine more and more to the perfect day.

There was an Union made already in his first moulding, and communion was to
grow as a fragrant and sweet fruit out of this blessed root. Union and
similitude is the ground of fellowship and communion. That union was gracious,
that communion would have been glorious; for grace is the seed of glory. There
was a twofold Union between Adam and God, an Union of state, and an Union of
nature: He was like God, and he was Gods friend. All the creatures had some
liknesse to God, some engravings of his power, and goodness, and wisdom: but
man is said to be made according to Gods Image, Let us make man like unto us.
Other creatures had similitudinem vestigii, but man had similitudinem faciei.
Holiness and righteousness is Gods face, the very excellency and glory of all
his Attributes, and the Lord stamps the image of these upon Man. Other
Attributes are but like his back-parts, and he leaves the resemblance of his
footsteps upon other creatures. What can be so beautiful as the Image of God
upon the soul? Creatures, the nearer they are to God, the more pure and
excellent. We see in the Fabric of the World, bodies the higher they are, the
more pure and cleanly, the more beautiful. Now then, What was man that was made
a little lower than the Angels? In the Hebrew, a little lower than God, tantum
non Deus. Seeing man is set next to God, his glory and beauty, certainly
surpasses the glory of the Sun and Heavens. Things contiguous and next other
are like other: The water is liker air than the earth, therefore it is next the
air: The air is liker Heaven than water, therefore it is next to it. Omne
contiguum spirituali, est spirituale. Angels and men next God, are spirits as
he is a Spirit. Now similitude is the ground of friendship. Pares paribus
congregantur, similitude necessitudinis vinculum. It is that which conciliats
affection among men; so it is here by proportion. God sees that all is very
good, and man the best of his works; and he loves him, and makes him his
friend, for his own Image which he beholds in him.

At length from these two roots this pleasant and fragrant fruit of Communion
with, and enjoyment of God, grows up: this is the entertainment of friends, to
delight in one another, and to enjoy one another, Amicorum omnia communia Love
makes all common, it opens the treasure of Gods fullness, and makes a vent of
divine bounty toward man, and it opens the heart of man, and makes it large as
the sand of the sea to receive of God. Our receiving of his fullness, is all
the entertainment we can give him. O what blessedness is this, for a soul to
live in him, and it lives in him when it loves him, Anima est ubi amat, non ubi
animat, and to taste of his sweetness, and be satisfied with him, this makes
perfect onnenesse: and perfect onnenesse with God (who is the fountain of life,
and in whose favor is life) is perfect blessedness.

But we must stand a little here, and consider our misery, that has fallen
from such an excellency; how are we come down from Heaven wonderfully? Sin has
interposed between God and man, and this dissolves the union, and hinders the
communion: An enemy is come between two friends and puts them at odds, and Oh!
an eternal odds; sin has sown this discord, and alineated our hearts from
God. Man's glory consisted in the irradiation of the soul from Gods shining
countenance, this made him light, Gods face shined on him. But sin interposing,
has eclipsed that light, and brought on an eternal night of darkness over
the soul: And thus we are spoiled of the Image of God, as when the earth comes
betwixt the Sun and Moon. Now then, there can no beams of divine savor and
love break through directly toward us, because of the cloud of our sins, that
separates between God and us, and because of the partition wall of Ordinances,
and the handwriting which was against us, Gods holy Law, and severe Justice,
Col. 3. 14.

Then, What shall we do? How shall we see his face in joy? Certainly it had been
altogether impossible, if our Lord Jesus Christ had not come, who is the light
and life of men: the Father shines on him, and the beams of his love reflects
upon us, from the Sun: The love of God, and his favorable countenance, that
cannot meet with us in a direct and immediate beam, they fall on us in this
blessed compass, by the intervention of a Mediator. We are rebels, staning at
distance with God, Christ comes between a Mediator, and Peacemaker to
reconcile us to God: God is in Christ, reconciling the World. God first makes
an union of Natures with Christ, and so he comes near to us, down to us, who
could not come up to him; and then he sends out the Word of Reconciliation, the
Gospel, the tenor whereof is this, 1 Ioh. 1. 3. That which we have seen and
heard declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship with the Father and his
Son. It is a voice of peace, and invitation to the fellowship of God: Behold
then, the happiness of man is th^very end and purpose of the Gospel. Christ is
the repairer of the breaches, the second Adam aspired to quicken what Adam
killed: He has slain the emnity, and cancelled the handwriting that was
against us, and so made peace by the blood of his cross; and then having
removed all that out of the way, he comes and calls us unto the fellowship
which we were ordained unto from our Creation. We who are rebels, are called to
be friends; I call you not servants, but friends. It is a wonder that the
creature should be called a friend of God: but, O great wonder, that the rebel
should be called a friend; and yet that is not all, we are called to a nearer
union, to be Sons of God; this is our privilege, Ioh. 1. 12. This is a great
part of our fellowship with the Father and his Son, we are the Fathers
children, and the Sons brethren, acd if children then heirs, and heirs of God,
and if brethren, then coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17.

Thus the Union is begun again in Christ, but as long as sin dwells in our
mortal bodies, it is not perfect, there is always some separation, and some
enmity in our hearts, and so there is neither full seeing of God (for we know
but in part, and we see darkly) nor full enjoying of God; for we are saved by
hope, and we live by faith, and not by fight. But this is begun which is the
seed of eternal communion, we are here partakers of the Divine Nature. Now
then it must aspire unto a more perfect union with God whose Image it is: And
therefore the Soul of a Believer is here still in motion toward God as his
element. There is here an union in affection, but not completed in fruition,
affectu non effectu, the soul pants after God, Whom have I in heaven or earth
but thee? My ^esh and my heart fails, a believing soul looksupon God as its
only portion, accounts nothing misery but to be separated from him, and nothing
blessedness, but to be one with him: this is the Lodestone of the affections,
and desires the Center which they move toward, and in which they will rest: It
is true indeed, that oftentimes our hearts and our flesh fails us, and we
become ignorant and brutish: our affections cleave to the earth, and tentations
with their violence turn our souls toward another end than God, as there is
nothing more easily moved and turned wrong, then the needle that is touched
with the Adamant, yet it settles not in such a posture, it recovers it self and
rests never till it look toward the North, and then it is fixed: even so
tentations and the corruptions and infirmities of our hearts desturb our
spirits easily, and wind them about from the Lord toward any other thing: but
yet we are continuing with him, and he keeps us with his right hand, and
therefore though we may be moved, yet we shall not be greatly commoved, we may
fall but we shall rise again: he is the strength of our heart, and therefore he
will turn our heart about again, and fix it upon its own portion: Our Union
here consists more in his holding of us by his power, then our taking hold of
him by faith: Power and good will encamps about both faith and the soul, we are
kept by his power through faith, 1 Pet. 1. And thus he will guide the soul, and
still be drawing it nearer to him; from it self, and from sin, and from the
world, till he receive us into Glory, and until we be one as with the Father
and the Son, he in us and we in him, that we may be made perfect in one, as it
is in the words read.

This is strange, a greater unity and fuller enjoyment, a more perfect
fellowship, then ever Adam in his innocence would have been capable of, what
soul ca conceive it? What tongue express it? None cann for it is that which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into Man's heart to concive. We must
suspend the knowledge of it, till we have experience of it. Let us now believe
it, and then we shall find it. There is a mutual inhabitation which is
wonerfull: Persons that dwell one with another have much society and fellowship,
but to dwell one in another is a strange thing, I in them, and they in me; and
therefore God is often said to dwell in us, and we to dwell in him. But that
which makes it of all most wonderful, and incomprehensible, is that glorious
unity and communion between the Father and the Son, which it is made an Emblem
of, As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.
Can you conceive that unity of the Trinity? Can you imagine that reciprocal
inhabitation, that mutual communion between the Father and the Son? No, it
has not entered into the heart to conceive it. Only thus much we know, that it
is most perfect, it is most glorious, and so much we may apprehend of this
unity of the Saints with God. O, love is an uniting and transforming thing. God
is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him. He
dwells in us by love, this makes him work in us, and shine upon us: love has
drawn him down from his seat of Majesty, to visit poor Cottages of sinners,
Isa. 66. 1, 2. and 15, 47. And it is that love of God reflecting upon our
souls, that carries the soul upward to him, to live in him, and walk with him:
O how does it constrain a soul to live to him, and draw it from it self, 2 Cor.
5. 15. Then the more unity with God, the more separation from our selves, and
the world; the nearer God the farther from our selves, and the farther from
ourselves the more happy, and the more unity with God, the more unity among our
selves, among the brethren of our family: Because we are not fully one with our
Father, therefore there are many differences between us and the brethren,
because we are not one perfectly in him, therefore we are not one as he and the
Father is one. But when he shall be in us, and we in him, as the Father is in
the Son, and the Son in the Father, then shall we be one among our selves, then
shall we meet in the unity of the faith, into a perfect man, into the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. Christ is the uniting
Principle, while the Saints are not wholly one, uni tertio, they cannot be
perfectly one inter se among themselves. Consider this, I beseech you; Christ's
union with the Father, is the foundation of our union to God, and our union
among our selves; this is comfortable, the ground of it is laid already. Now it
is not simply the unity of the Father and the Son in essence that is here
meant, for what shadow and resemblance can be in the world, of such an
incomprehensible mystery? But it is certainly the Union and Communion of God
with Christ Jesus as Mediator, as the head of the Church, which is his Body.
Therefore, seeing the Father is so wonderfully well pleased and one with
Christ, his wel-beloved Son and Messenger of the Covenant, and chief party
contracting in our name, he is by virtue of this, one with us, who are his seed
and members. And therefore, the members should grow up in the head, Christ,
from whom the whole body makes increase according to the effectual working of
the spirit in it, Ephesians 5. 15* 16. Now if the union between the Father and Christ
our Head cannot be dissolved, and cannot be barran and unfruitful, then
certainly the spirit of the Father, which is given to Christ beyond measure,
must effectually work in every member, till it bring them to the unity of the
Faith, and to the measure of the perfect man which is the fullness of Christ.
So then every believing soul is one with the Father as Christ is one, because
he is the Head and they his members, and the day is coming that all the members
shall be perfectly united to the Head, Christ, and grow up to the perfect man,
which is the stature of Christ's fullness, and then shall we all be made perfect
in one; we shall be one as he is one, because he and we are one perfect man,
Head and Members.

Now to what purpose is all this spoken? I fear it does not stir up in our
souls a desire after such a blessed life; whose heart would not be moved at the
sound of such words? Our fellowship is with the Father and his Son, we are made
perfect, he in us, and we in him: Certainly that soul is void of the Life of
God, that does not find some sparkle of holy ambition kindled within, after
such glorious and blessed condition. But these things sevour not, and taste not
to the most part; the natural man knows them not, for they are spiritually
discerned. How lamentable is it, that Christ is come to restore us to our lost
blessedness, and yet no man almost considers it or lays it to heart: O how
miserably, twice miserable is that Soul, that does not draw near to God in
Christ, when God has come so near to us in Christ? that goes a whoring after
the lust of the eyes, and flesh, and after the imaginations of their own heart,
and will not be guided by Christ the way and life to glory? Thou shall destroy
them, O Lord, Psalm. 73. 27. All men are far off from God, from the womb: Behold
we may have access to God in Christ: woe to them that are yet far off, and
will not draw near, they shall all perish. I exhort you to consider what you are
doing. The most part of you are going away from God, you were born far off, and
you will yet go further; know what you will meet with in that way, Destruction.

Ye have never yet asked in earnest, for what purpose you came into the World:
What wonder you wander and walk at random, seeing you have not proposed to your
selves any certain scope and aim? It is great folly. You would not be so
foolish in any petty business: But O how foolish men are in the main
business. The light of the body is the eye, if that be not light, the whole
body is full of darkness. If your intention be once right established all your
course will be orderly, but if you be dark and blind in this point, and have
not considered it, you cannot walk in the light, your whole way is darkness:
The right consideration of the great End would shine unto you, and direct your
way; but, while you have not proposed this end unto your self, the enjoyment of
God, you must spend your time, either in doing nothing to that purpose, or
doing contrary to it. All your other lawful business, your callings and
occupations are but in the by, they are not the end, nor the way, but you make
them only your business, they are altogether impertinent to this end. And the
rest of your walking in lust and ignorance, is not only impertinent, but
inconsistant with it, and contrary to it. If you think that you have this
before your eyes, to enjoy God, I pray you look upon the way you choose: Is
your drunkenness, your swearing, your uncleanness, your contentions and
railings, and such works of the flesh; are those the way to enjoy God? Shall not
these separate between God and you? Is your eating, and drinking sleeping as
beasts, and laboring in your callings, are these all the means you use to
enjoy God? Be not deceived, you who draw not near God by Prayer often in
secret, and by faith in his Son Christ, as lost miserable sinners to be saved,
and reconciled by him, you have no fellowship with him, and you shall not enjoy
him afterward. You whose hearts are given to your covetousness, who have many
lovers and idols besides him, you cannot say, Whom have I besides thee in the
earth? No, you have many other things beside God. You can have nothing of God,
except you make him all to you, unless you have him alone. My undefiled is
one, Cant. 6. 9. He must be alone, for his glory he will not give to another:
If you divide your affections, and pretend to give him part; and your lusts
other part, you may be doing, but he will not divide his glory so, he will give
no part of it to any other thing. But as for those souls that come to him and
see their misery without him, O know how good it is! Its not only good, but
best; yea only good, it is bonum, and it is optimum; yea, it is unicum, there
is none good, save one, even God, and there is nothing good for us but this
one, to be near God, and so near, that we may be one, one spirit with the Lord,
for he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit: Rejoice in your portion, and
long for the possession of it. Let all your meditations, and affections, and
conversion proclaim this, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and none in the earth
beside thee. And certainly he shall guide you to the end, and receive you into
glory, then you shall rest from your labors, because you shall dwell in him, and
enjoy that which you longed and labored for. Let the consideration of our end
unite the hearts of Christians here. O what an absurd thing is it, that those
who shall lodge together at night and be made perfect in one should not only go
contrary ways but have contrary minds and affections.

Of the SCRIPTURES. 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scriptures is given, etc.
WE told you, that there was nothing more necessary to know, then what our end
is, and what the way is that leads to that end: We see the most part of men
walking at random, running an uncertain race, because they do not propose unto
themselves a certain scope to aim at, and whither to direct their whole course.
According to men's particular inclinations and humors, so do the purposes and
designs of men vary; and often do the purposes of one man change according to
the circumstances of time, and his condition in the World. We see all men
almost running cross one to another; one drives at the satisfaction of his
lust by pleasure, another fancies a great felicity in honor, a third in
getting riches, and thus men divide themselves, whereas, if it were true
happiness that all were seeking, they would all go one way toward one end. If
men be not in the right way, the faster they seem to move toward the mark, the
farther they go from it, wandering from the right way (suppose men intend well)
will put them farther from that which they intend. Si via in contrarium ducat,
ipsa velocitas as majoris intervalli causa est: Therefore it concerns us all
most deeply, to be acquainted with the true path of blessedness: For if we
once mistake, the more we do, the swister we move; the more distant we are from
it indeed. And there is the more need, because there are so many bypath that
lead to destruction: What say I, by paths? No, high ways, beaten-paths, that
the multitude of men walk in, and never challenge, nor will endure to be
challenged, as if they were in an error. In other journeys men keep the plain
high way, and are afraid of any secret by-way, lest it lead them wrong: At hic,
via quaeque tritissima maxim decipit. Here the high pathed way leads wrong;
and, O far wrong! to Hell. This is the meaning of Christ's Sermon, Enter in at
the strait gate, but walk not in the broad way where many walk, for it leads to
destruction; Therefore I would have this persuasion once begotten in your
souls, that the course of the world, the way of the most part of men is
dangerous, is damnable. O consider, whither the way will lead you, before you
go further. Do not think it a folly to stand still now, and examine it, when ye
have gone on so long in their company. Stand, I say, and consider; be not
ignorant as beasts, that know no other thing than to follow the drove. quae
pergunt, non quae eundum est, sed quae itur, they follow not whither they ought
to go, but whither most go: You are men, and have reasonable souls within you,
therefore I beseech you be not composed, and fashioned according to custom,
and example, that is brutish, but according to some inward knowledge and
reason. Retire once from the multitude, and ask in earnest at God, what is the
way: Him that fears him, he will teach the way that he should choose; the
way'to this blessed end is very strait, very difficult; you must have a guide
in it, you must have a lamp and a light in it, else you cannot but go wrong.

The principles of reason within us are too dark and dim, they will never lead
us through the pits and snares in the way: these indeed shined brightly in
Adam, that he needed no light without him, no voice about him: But sin has
extinguished it much, and there remains nothing but some little spunk, or
sparkle under the ashes of much corruption, that is but insufficient in it
self, and is often more blinded and darkened by lusts: so that if it were never
so much refined, as it was in many heathens, yet it is but the blind leading
the blind, and both must fall into the ditch. Our end is high and divine, To
glorify God and to enjoy Him, therefore our reason caligat ad suprema; it can
no more steadfastly behold that glorious end, and move toward it, then our weak
eyes can behold the Sun: Our eyes can look downward upon the earth, but not
upward to the Heavens. So we have some remnant of reason in us that has some
petty and poor ability for matters of little moment, as the things of this
life: But if once we look upward to the glory of God, or eternal happiness,
our eyes are dazzled, our reason confounded, we cannot steadfastly behold that,
Ephesians. 4. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 13. 14.

Therefore the Lord has been pleased to give us the Scriptures, which may be a
Lamp unto our feet, and a guide unto our way, whereunto we shall do well to take
heed, as unto a candle or a light that shines in a dark place, till the day
dawn, 2 Pet. 1. 6. These are able to make us wise unto salvation. Let us here
what Paul speaks of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scriptures is given, etc. Where
you have two points of high concernment, The Authority of the Scriptures, and
their Utility. Their Authority, for they are given by Divine Inspiration: Their
Utility, for they are profitable for Doctrine, etc. and can make us perfect,
and well furnished to every good work.

The Authority of it, is in a peculiar way divine, of him, and through him are
all things: All Writings of men, according to the truth of the Scriptures, have
some Divinity in them, in as much as they have of truth, which is a Divine
thing; Yet the Holy Scriptures are by way of excellency attributed to God, for
they are immediately inspired of God: Therefore Peter says, that the Scriptures
came not in old time by the will of Man, but holy men spoke as they were moved
by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. God by his Spirit; as it were, acted the part
of the soul, in the Prophets and Apostles; and they did no more but utter what
the Spirit conceived: The holy Ghost inspired the matter and the words, and
they were but tongues and pens to speak and write it unto the people; here
needed no debate, no search in their own minds, for the truth, no inquisition
for light, but light shined upon their souls so brightly, so convincingly, that
it puts it beyond all question, that it was the mind and voice of God. You need
not ask, How they did know that their dreams or visions were indeed from the
Lord? And that they did not frame any imagination in their own hearts, and
taught it for his Word, as many did? I say, you need no more ask that, than
ask; How shall a man see light, or know the Sunshine? light makes it self
manifest, and all other things, its seen by its own brightness: even so the
holy men of God, needed not any mark or sign to know the Spirits voice, his
revelation needed not the light of any other thing, it was light it self, he
would certainly over power the soul and mind, and leave no place of doubting:
God who cannot be deceived, and can deceive no man, has delivered us this
Doctrine. O, with what reverence should we receive it, as if we heard the Lord
from heaven speak. If you ask, How you shall be persuaded that the Scriptures
are the Word of God, his very mind opened to men and made legible? Truly, there
are some things cannot be well proved, not because they are doubtful, but
because they are clear of themselves, and beyond all doubt and exception.
Principles of Arts must not be proved, but supposed, till you find by trial
and experience afterward that they were indeed really true. There are no
question, such characters of Divinity, and Majesty imprinted in the very
Scriptures themselves, that whosoever has the eyes of his understanding
opened, though he run he may read them, and find God in them. What Majesty is
in the very simplicity and plainness of the Scriptures? They do not labor to
please men's ears, and adorn the matter, with the curious garments of words, and
phrases, but represent the very matter it self to the soul, as that which in it
self is worthy of all acceptance, and needs no humane eloquence to commend it.
Painting does spoil native beauty, external ornaments would disfigure some
things that are of themselves proportioned and lovely, therefore the Lord
chooses a plain and simple style, which is foolishness to the world: but in
these swaddling clothes of the Scriptures, and this poor Cottage the Child
Jesus, the Lord of Heaven and Earth is contained. There is a jewel of the
mysterious wisdom of God, and man's eternal blessedness in the Mineral: What
glorious and astonishing humility is here? What humble and homly Glory and
Majesty also? He is most high, and yet none so lowly. What excellent consent
and harmony of many writters, in such distant times? Wonder at it! All speak
one thing, to one purpose, to bring men to God, to abase all glory and exalt
him alone. Must it not be one Spirit that has quickened all these, and breathes
in them all this one heavenly Song of Glory to God on high, and good will
toward men. Other Writers will reason these things with you, to convince you
and persuade you; and many thinks them more profound and deep for that reason,
and do despise the baseness of the Scriptures: But to them whose eyes are
opened, the Majesty and authority of God commanding, and asserting, and
testifying to them is more convincing, from its own bare assertion, then all
humane reason.

Although there be much light in the Scriptures to guide men's way to Gods
glory and their own happiness; yet certainly, it will all be too small purpose
if the eyes of our understanding be darkened and blinded. If you shall surround a
man with daylight, except he open his eyes he cannot see. The Scriptures are
a clear Sun of life, and righteousness; but the blind soul compassed with
that light is nothing the vviser; but thinks the lamp of the Word shines not
because it sees not, it has its own dungeon within it; therefore the Spirit
of God must open the eyes of the blind, and enlighten the eyes of the
understanding, that a soul may see vvonderfull things in Gods Law, Psalm. 119.
5. 8. Ioh. 1. 5. The light may shine in the darkness, but the darkness cannot
comprehend it. I vvonder not that the most part of men can see no Beauty, no
Majesty, no excellency in the holy Scriptures to allure them; because they are
natural and have not the spirit of God, and so cannot know these things, for
they are spiritually discerned, 2 Cor. 2. 14. etc. Therefore as the inspiration
of God did conceive this writting at first, and preached this Doctrine unto the
world; so there can no soul understand it, or profit by it, but by the
inspiration of the Almighty: Verily there is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding, says Job. When the spirit
comes into the soul to engrave the Characters of that Law and truth into the
heart, which were once engraven on Tables of Stone, and not written with Pen
and Ink, then the spirit of Christ Jesus writes over and transcribes the
Doctrine of the Gospel, on fleshly Tables of the heart, draws the lineaments of
that faith, and love, preached in the word upon the soul; then the soul is the
Epistle of Christ; written not with ink and pen, but with the spirit of the
living God, 2 Cor. 3. 3. And then the soul is manifestly declared to be such,
when that which is impressed on the heart, is expressed in the outward man in
walking, that it may be read of all men. Now the soul having thus received the
Image of the Scriptures on it, understands the Spirits voice in them, and sees
the truth and divinity of them. The eye must receive some species and likeness
of the object before it see it, it must be made like to the object ere it can
behold it. Intelligens in actu fit ipsum intelligible: So the soul must have
some inspiration of the holy Ghost, before it can believe with the heart the
inspyred Scriptures.

Now for the utility and profit of the Scripture, who can speak of it,
according to its worth? Some things may be over-commanded, nay, all things, but
this one, God speaking in his word to mankind. Many Titles are given to humane
writings, some are called accurate, some subtle, some ingenious and quick some
profound and deep, some plain, some learned: But call them what they please,
the Scriptures may vindicate to it self these two Titles as its own
prerogative: Holy and profitable. The best speaker in the world in many words
cannot want sin. The best Writer has some dross and refuse; but here, all is
holy, all is profitable: Many Books are to no purpose but to feed and inflame
men's lusts; many serve for nothing but to spend and drive over the time,
without thought; most part are good for nothing, but to burden and over-weary
the world, to put them in a fancy of knowledge which they have not; many serve
for this, only to nourish men's curiosity, and vain imaginations, and
contentions, about words and notions, but here is a Book profitable, all
profitable. If you do not yet profit by it, you can have no pleasure in it, its
only ordained for souls profiting, not for pelasing your fancy, not for matter
of curious speculation, not for contention and strife about the interpretation
of it. Many Books have nothing in them, but specious Titles to commend them;
they do nothing less then what they promise, they have a large and fair entry
which leads only into a poor Cottage, but the Scriptures has no hyperbolick
and superlative styles to allure men, they hold out a plain and common gate,
and entry, which will undoubtly lead to a pleasant Palace; others and prodesse
volunt and delectare, but these certainly and prodesse volunt and possunt, they
both can profit you and will profit you. I wish that souls would read the
Scriptures, as profitable Scriptures, with intention to profit. If you do not
read with such a purpose, you read not the Scriptures of God, they become as
another Book unto you. But what are they profitable for? For Doctrine, and a
Divine Doctrine. A Doctrine of life and happiness: Its the great promise of
the New Covenant, You shall be all taught of God; the Scriptures can make a man
learned and wise, learned to salvation. It is foolishness to the world, but
the world through wisdom know not God. Alace! what do they then know? Is there
any besides God? And is there any knowledge besides the knowledge of God? You
have a poor petty wisdom among you, to gather riches and manage your business;
others have a poor imaginary wisdom that they call learning; and generally
people think, To pray to God is but a paper-skill, a little Book-craft; they
think the knowledge of God is nothing else but to learn to read the Bible.
Alace! mistake me not, it is another thing to know God: The Doctrine of Jesus
Christ written on the heart, is a deep profound learning, and the poor, simple
and rudest people may by the Spirits teaching become wiser than their Ancients,
than their Ministers: O! its an excellent point of learning, to know how to be
saved: What is it, I pray you, to know the course of the Heavens? To number the
Orbs, and the Stars in them? To measure their Circumference, to reckon their
motions, and yet not to know him that sits on the Circle of them, and not to
know how to inhabit and dwell there: If you would seek unto God and leek eyes
opened to behold the mystery of the World, ye would become wiser then your
Pastors, you would learn from the Spirit to pray better, you would find the way
to heaven better then they can teach you, or walk in it.

Then it is profitable for reproof and correction: It contains no Doctrine very
pleasant to men's natural humors; it is, indeed, most pleasant, but to a fight
and ordered taste. You know, the distemper of the eye, or the perverting of the
taste, will mis-represent pleasant things, and sweet things to the senses, and
make them appear ill favored and bitter: But, I say to a discerning spirit,
there is nothing so sweet, so comely. I have seen an end of all perfection, but
none of thy Law: Thy Word is sweeter to me than the honey, or the honey comb. If
a soul be pre-possessed with the love of the world, and the lusts of the world,
it cannot favor and taste to them; that vicious quality in the mind, will make
the pleasant Gospel unpleasant: I piped unto you, and you have not danced. But
however, the Scriptures are then most profitable, when they are least pleasant
to our corruptions; and therefore it is an absolute and entire Piece, Et
prodesse volunt and delectare, Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuitutile dulvi.
There are sharp reproofs, and sad corrections of his holy Law, which must make
way for the pleasant and sweet Gospel: This is a reproof of life, a wounding
before healing, that who so refuse them despise their own soul, but the car
that hears them abides among the wise, Prove. 15. 31. Woe unto that soul that
correction, or reproof, or threatening is grievous unto, He shall die, ver. 10.
He is brutish, Prove. 12. 1. There is a generation of men, tha^ can endure to
hear nothing but Gospel-promises, that cry out against all reproving of sins,
and preaching of Gods wrath against unbelieving sinners, as legal and meddling
with other men's matters, especially, if they reprove the sins of Rulers; their
public State-enormities: As if the whole Word of God were not profitable; as
if reproofs were not as wholesome as consolations; as if threatenings did not
contribute to make men flee from the wrath to come into a City of refuge. Let
such persons read their own Character out of wise Solomon, Correction is
grievous to them that forsake the way. Reprove a wise man and he will love
thee, and he will be yet wiser, Pro. 9. 9. If we were pleasers of men, then
were we not the servants of Jesus Christ: Let us strive to profit men, but not
to please them: Peace, peace which men's own hearts fancy would please them,
but it were better for them to be awakened out of that dream, by reproof, by
correction; and he that will do so, shall find more favor of him afterward,
than he that flattereth him with his tongue, Prove. 28. 23. Well then, let this
be established in your hearts as the foundation of all true Religion; that the
Scriptures are the Word of the eternal God; and that they contain a perfect and
exact Rule, both of glorifying God, and of the way to enjoy him; they can make
you perfect to every good work. I shall say no more on this, but beseech you, as
ye love your own souls, be acquainting your selves with them. You will hear, in
these days, of men pretending to more divine and spiritual discoveries, and
revelations, than the Scriptures contain: But, my brethren, these can make you
wise to salvation, these can make you perfect to every good work: Then, what
needs more? All that is beside salvation, and beyond perfection, count i^
superfluous and vain, if not worse, if not diabolical. Let others be wise to
their own destruction; let them establish their own Imaginations for the Word
of God; and Rule of their Faith, but hold you fast what you have received and
contend earnestly for it; add nothing and deminish nothing: Let this Lamp shine
till the day dawn, till the morning of the Resurrection, and walk ye in the
light of it, and do not kindle any other sparkles, else ye shall lie down in the
grave in sorrow, and rise in sorrow: Take the Word of God as the only Rule, and
the perfect Rule, a Rule for all your Actions, Civil, Natural and Religious,
for all must be done to his glory, and his Word teaches how to attain to that
End. Let not your Imaginations, let no others Example, let not the Preaching of
men, let not the Conclusions, and Acts of Assemblies be your Rule, but in as
far as you find them agreeing with the perfect Rule of Gods holy Word: All
other Rules are regulae regulatae; they are but like publications and
intimations of the Rule it self. Ordinances of Assemblies are but like the
Herauld-promulgation of the Kings Statute and Law; if it vary in any thing from
his intention, its not valid and binding. I beseech you take the Scriptures for
the Rule of your walking, or else you will wander; the Scripture is Regula
regulans, a ruling Rule. If you be not acquainted with It, you must follow the
opinions, or examples of other men, and what if they lead you unto destruction?

Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them, etc. Ephesians. 2. 20. And are built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.
AS in darkness there is need of a Lanthorn without, and the light of the eyes
within; for neither can we see in darkness without some Lamp, though we have
never so good eyes, nor yet see without eyes; though in never so clear a
Sunshine: So there is absolute need, for the guiding of our feet in the
dangerous, and dark paths to Eternal life (that is full of pits and snares) of
the Lamp, or Wood, written or preached, without us; and the illumination of the
holy Ghost within us. These are conjoined, Isa. 56. 21. This is my Covenant,
the spirit that is upon thee, and the words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor the mouth of thy seed, etc. There are words
without, and there must needs be a Spirit within, which makes us to behold the
truth and grace contained in these words. There is a Law written without; with
pen and ink, and there is a Law written within upon the heart, with the Spirit
of the living God: The Law without is the Pattern and exact copy; the Law within
is the Transcript, or the Image of God upon the heart, framed and fashioned
according to the similitude of it, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Heb. 8. 10. So then, there
needs be no more question about the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, among
those who have their senses exercised to descern between good and ill, than
among men who see and taste, concerning light and darkness, sweet and bitter.
The persuasion of a Christian is fetched deeper than the reasons of men; their
faith is the evidence (...) (...) not seen, its an eye, a supernatural eye;
whereby a soul beholds that Majesty and excellency of God shinning in the word,
which though it shine about the rest of the World, yet it is not seen, because
they cannot know it, nor descern it. Wonder not that the multitude of men
cannot believe the report that is made, that there is so few who find any such
excellency and sweetness in the Gospel as is reported, because, says Isai.
53. 1. the arm of the Lord is not revealed to them; the hand of God must first
write on their heart ere they understand the Writtings of the Scriptures, his
arm must creat an eye in their souls, an eternal light, before it can behold
that glorious brightness of Gods shinning in the word. The word is Gods
testimony of himself, of his grace and mercy and good will to mankind. Now no
man can receive this testimony, unless it be sealed and confirmed by the holy
Ghost into the heart: says Peter, We are his witnesses of these things, and so
also is the holy Ghost whom God has given to those that obey him. Acts 5. 32.
The word witnesses to the ear and the spirits testifies to our spirits the
truth and worth of that, and therefore the spirit is a seal and a witness. The
word is the Lord's voice to his own Children: Bastards cannot know it, but my
sheep hear my voice, Joh. 10 4. 16. You know no difference between the bleeting
of one sheep and another, but the poor lambs know their mothers voice; there is
a secret instinct of nature, that is more powerful than many marks and signs:
Even so those that are begotten of God know his voice, they descern that in it
which all the world that hear it cannot descern, there is a sympathy between
their souls and that living Word, that word is the immortal seed they are
begotten of, and there is a natural instinct to love that; and to mediate in
it, such an inclination to it as in new born babes to the breasts, so the
Children of God do desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow
thereby, a^ they were born of it, 1 Pet. 2. 2. In these Scriptures which we
read in your audience, you have something of their excellency, and our duty;
there is a rich jewel in them, a precious pearl in that field, even Jesus
Christ, and in him eternal life, and therefore we ought to search the
Scriptures for this jewel, to dig in the field for this pearl, the Doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, is a sure foundation whereupon souls may build their
eternal felicity, and the hope of it: Jesus Christ is the very chief stone in
that foundation whereupon the weight of all the Saints and all their hope
hangs. And therefore we ought to lean the weight of our Souls only to this
truth of God, and build our faith only upon it, and square our practice only by
it.

We shall speak something of the first, that it may be a spur to the second.
The Jews had some respective opinion of the word of God, they knew that in them
waseternall life, they thought it a Doctrine of life and happiness, and so
cried up Moses Writtings, but they would not believe Christ's words, they erred,
not understanding the Scriptures, and so set the Writtings of Moses Law at
variance, with the preaching of Christ's Gospel: What a pittyfull mistake was
this? they thought they had eternal life in the Scriptures, and yet they did
not receive nor acknowledge him whom to know was eternal life, therefore our
Lord Jesus sends them back again to the Scriptures, go and search them, you
think, and you think well, that in then you may find the way to eternal life,
but while you seek it in them you mistake it: These Scriptures testify of me
the end of the Law, but you cannot behold the end of that Ministry, because of
the blindness of your hearts, Romans 10. 3. 2 Cor. 3. 14. Therefore search
again, unfold the ceremonies, I am wrapped in them, and life eternal with me,
dig up the Law till you find the bottom of Gods purpose in it till you find
the end of the Ministration and you shall find me, the way, and truth, and life,
and so you shall have that eternal life which now you do but think you have and
are beguiled. While you seek it out of me, in vain you think you have it, for
it is not in the Scriptures, but because they testify of me the life and the
light of men. May not this now commend the word to us? Eternal life is in it.
Other Writings and discourses may tickle the ears with some pleasing eloquence,
but that is vanishing, its but like a Musicians voice, some may represent some
petty and momentary advantage, but how soon shall an end be put till all that?
so that within a little time the advantage of all the Books of the world shall
be gone. The statutes and Laws of Kings and Parliaments can reach no further
then some temporal reward or punishment, their highest pain is the killing of
this body, their highest reward is some evanishing and sading honor or
perishing richest But he shows his word and judgments to us, and has not
dealt so with every nation, Psalm. 147. 19. 20. And no nation under the whole
heaven has such Laws and Ordinances, eternal life and eternal death is wrapped
up in them, these are rewards and punishments suitable to the Majesty and
Magnificence of the eternal Lawgiver. Consider I beseech you, what is folded
up here, the Scriptures show the path of life, life is of all beings most
excellent, and comes nearest the blessed being of God. When we say [life] we
understand a blessed life, that only deserves the name. Now this we have lost
in Adam, death is past upon all men, but that death is not the worst, its but a
consequence of a soul death, the immortal soul, whose life consists in
Communion with God, and peace with him is separated from him by sin, and so
killed when its cut off from the fountain of life, what life can it have any
more, than a beam that is cut off by the intervention of a dark body from the
sun. Now then what a blessed Doctrine must it be that brings to light life and
immortality, especially when we have so much miserably lost it, and involved
our souls into an eternal death? Life is precious in it self, but much more
precious to one condemned to die, to be caught out of the paws of the Lion, to
be brought back from the Gibbet. O how will that commend the favor of a little
more time in the World. But then if we knew what an eternal misery we are
involved into, and stand under a sentence binding us over to such an
inconceivable and insupportable punishment as is the curse and wrath of God. O
how precious an esteem would souls have of the Scriptures, how would they be
sweet unto their soul, because they show unto us a way of escaping that pit of
misery, and a way of attaining eternal blessedness, as satisfying and
glorious, as the misery would have been vexing and tormenting. O that ye would
once lay these in the balance together, this present life and eternal life.
Know ye not that your souls are created for eternity, that they will eternally
survive all these present things? Now, how do ye imagine they shall live after
this life? your thoughts and projects, and designs are confined within the poor
narrow bounds of your time, when you die in that day your thoughts shall perish,
all your imaginations and purposes, and providence shall have an end then, they
reach no further then that time, and if you should wholly perish too, it were
not so much matter: but for all your purposes and projects, to come to an end,
when you are but beginning to live, and enter eternity, that is lamentable
indeed. Therefore I say, consider what ye are doing, weigh these in a balance
eternal life, and the present life, if there were no more difference, but the
continuence of the one, and shortness of the other, that this worlds standing
is but as one day, one moment to eternity, that ought to preponderate in your
souls, do we not here flee away as a shadow upon the mountains? are we not as a
vapor that ascends and for a little time appears a solid body, and then
presently vanishes? Do we not come all into the stage of the world, as for an
hour to act our part and be gone, now then, what is this to endless eternity?
When you have contained as long as since the World began, you are no nearer the
end of it, ought not that estate then to be most in your eyes, how to lay up a
foundation for the time to come. But then compare the misery and vexation of
this life, with the glory and felicity of this eternal life; what are our
days, but few and full of trouble. Or, if you will take the most blessed
estate you have seen or heard of in this world, of Kings and rich men, and help
all the defects of it by your imaginations: Suppose unto your selves the highth
and pith of Glory, and abundance, and power that is attainable on earth, and
when your fancy has busked up such a felicity, compare it with eternal life:
O how will that vanish out of your imaginations; if so be you know any thing of
the life to come, you will even think that an odious comparison, you will think
all that earthly felicity, but light as vanity, every man at his best estate
is altogether vanity. Eernall life will weigh down eternally, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 18.
O but it has an exceeding weight in it self; one moment of it, one hours
possession and taste of it, but then what shall the endless endurance of it add
to its weight? Now there are many that presume they have a right to eternal
life, as the Jews did, you think, says he, that you have it, you think well
that you think its only to be found in the Scriptures, but you vainlie think
that you have found it in them: And there is this reason of it, because you
will not come to me that you may have life, verse. 40. If you did understand the
true meaning of the Scriptures, and did not rest on the outward Letter and
Ordinances, you would receive the testimony that the Scriptures give of me.
But now you hear not me the Fathers substantial Word, therefore you have not
his Word abiding in you, verse. 38. There was nothing more general among that
people than a vain carnal confidence and presumption of being Gods people, and
having interest in the promise of life eternal, as it is this day in the
visible Church. There is a multitude that are Christians only in the Letter,
and not in the Spirit, that would never admit any question concerning this
great matter of having eternal life, and so by not questioning it, they come
to think they have it, and by degrees their conjectures and thoughts about this
arises to the stabilitie of some feigned and strong persuasion of it. In the
Old Testament the Lord strikes at the roots of their persuasions, by
discovering unto them how vain a thing it was, and how abominable before him,
to have an external profession of being his people, and to glory in external
Ordinances and Privileges, and yet to neglect altogether the purging of their
hearts, and consciences, from lusts and Idollis^s, and to make no conscience of
walking righteously toward men: Their profession was contradicted by their
practice, Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and yet come and stand
in my house. Jer. 7. 8. 9. does not that say as much as if I had given you
liberty to do all these abominations? Even so it is this day, the most part
have no more of Christianity but a name, they have some outward privileges of
Baptism, and hearing the Word, and, it may be, have a form of knowledge, and a
form of worship, but in the mean time they are not baptized in heart, they are
in all their conversation even conformed to the Heathen world; they hate
personal reformation, and think it too precise and needless: Now, I say, such
are many of you, and yet ye would not take it well to have it questioned,
whether ye shall be partakers of Eternal life: you think you are wronged when
that is called in question. Oh, that it were beyond all question indeed. But
know assuredly, That you are but Christians in the Letter; in the Flesh, and
not in the Spirit: Many of you have not so much as a form of knowledge, have
not so much as the Letter of Religion. You have heard some names in the
preaching often repeated, as Christ, and God, and Faith, and Heaven, and Hell,
and you know no more of these but the name; you consider not, and meditate not
on them: And those who know the truth of the Word, yet the Word abides not,
nor dwells in you; you have it in your mouth, you have it in your mind or
understanding, but it is not received in love, it does not dwell in the heart,
Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, Col. 3. 16. you have it imprisoned
in your minds, and shut up into a corner where it is useless, and can do no
more but witness against you, and scarce that; as the Gentiles incarcerated and
detained the truth of God, written by nature within them, in unrighteousness,
Romans 1. 18. So do many of you detain the knowledge of his word in
unrighteousness, it has no place in the heart, gets no liberty and freedom to
walk through the affections, and so to order the conversation of men: And
therefore the most part of men do but fancy to themselves an interest and
right to eternal life, you think it, and do but think it; it is but a strong
imagination, that has no strength from the grounds of it, no stabilitie from
any evidence or promise, but merely from it self; or it is but a light and vain
conjecture that has no strength in it, because there is no question or doubts
admitted which many try the strength of it: But then I suppose, that a man
could attain some answerable walking, that he had not only a form of
knowledge, but some reality of practice, some inward heat of affection and zeal
for God and godliness, yet there is one thing that wants, and if it be wanting
will spoil all: And it is this which Christ reproves in the Jews, You will not
come to me to have life: The Scri-Scriptures testify of me, but you receive
not their testimony. Suppose a man had as much equity and justice toward
men, piety toward God, and sobriety toward himself, as can be found among the
best of men, let him be a diligent reader of the Scriptures, let him love them,
and meditate on them day and night, yet if he do not come out of himself, and
leave all his own righteousness as dung behind him, that he may be found in
Jesus Christ, he has no life, he cannot have any right to life eternal. You
may think this a strange assertion, that if a man had the righteousness and
holiness of an Angel, yet he could not be saved without denying all that, and
fleeing to Christ as an ungodly man: And you may think it as strange a
supposell, that any person that reads the Scriptures, and walks righteously,
and has a zeal toward God, yet are such as will not come to Christ, and will
not hear him whom the Father has sent.

But the first is the very substance of the Gospel, There is no other Name by
which men may be saved, but by Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12. Life eternal is all
within him, All the treasures of grace, and wisdom, and knowledge are seated in
him, Col. 1. 19. and 2, 3. All the light of life and salvation is imbodied in
this Sun of Righteousness, since the Eclipse of man's felicity in the Garden.
Adam was a living soul, but he lost his own life, and killed his Posterity.
Christ Jesus the second common man in the world is a quickening Spirit, he has
not only life in himself, but he gives it more abundantly; and therefore you
have it so often repeated in John, who was the Disciple most acquainted with
Christ, In him was life, and the life was the light of men, 1. 4. And he is the
bread of life, that gives life to the World. Joh. 6. 33. and 35. He is the
resurrection and the life, 11. 25. and The way, the truth, and life, 14. 6. The
Scriptures do not contain eternal life, but in as far as they lead to him who
is life, and whom to know and embrace is eternal life: And therefore (says
he) These are they which testify of me. Men lived immediately in God when he
was in innocence, he had life in himself from God; but then he began to live
in himself, without dependence on God the fountain of life, and this himself
being interposed between God and his life, it evanished, even as a Beam by the
interveening of any gross body between it and the Sun. Now man's light and life
being thus eclipsed and cut off, the Lord is pleased to let all fullness dwell
in his Son Jesus Christ, and The fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily,
Col. 2. 9. that since there was no access immediately to God for life (a
flamming fire, and sword of Divine Justice compassing and guarding the tree of
Life, left man should touch it) there might be access to God in a Mediator
like unto us, that we might come to him, and might have life from God by the
intervention of Jesus Christ.

Look then what is in the holy Scriptures, and you shall find it but a letter of
death and ministration of condemnation while it is separated from him; Christ
is the very life and spirit of the Scriptures, by whose virtue they quicken our
souls; if you consider the perfect Rule of Righteousness in the Law, you
cannot find life there, because you cannot be conformed unto it; the holiest
man offends in every thing, and that holy Law being violated in any thing will
send thee to hell with a curse, Cursed is he that abides not in every thing.
If you look upon the promise of life, Do this and live: What comfort can you
find in it, except you could find doing in your selves? And can any man living
find such exact obedience as the Law requires? There is a mistake among many,
They conceive that the Lord cannot be well pleased with them, if they do what
they can: but be not deceived, the law of God requires perfect doing, it will
not compound with thee, and came down in its terms, not one jot of the rigor
of it will be remitted: If you cannot do all that is commanded, all you do will
not satisfy that promise; therefore thou must be turned over from the promise
of life to the curse, and there thou shall find thy name written: Therefore it
is absolutely necessary, that Jesus Christ be made under the Law, and give
obedience in all things, even to the death of the Cross, and so be made a
curse for us and sin for us, even he who knew no sin, and thus in him you find
the law fulfilled, Justice satisfied, and God pleased; in him you find the
promise of life, indeed established, in a better, surer way than was first
propounded, you find life by his death, you find life in his dying for you: And
again consider the Ceremonial Law, What were all those Sacrifices and
Ceremonies? Did God delight in them? Could he savor their incense, and sweet
smells, and eat the fat of Lambs and be pacified? No, he detastes and abhorres
such imaginations, because that people did stay in the Letter, and went no
further then the Ceremony; he declares, that it was as great abomination to him
as the offering up of a Dog, while they were separated from Jesus Christ, in
whom his soul rested, and was pacified; they were not expiatious, but
provocatious; they were not propitiations for sin, but abominations in
themselves. But take these as the shadows of such a living substance, take them
as remembrances of him who was to come; and behold Jesus Christ lying in these
swaddling clothes of Ceremonies until the fullness of time should come that he
might be manifested in the flesh, and so you shall find eternal life in those
dead beasts, in those dumb Ceremonies: If you consider this Lamb of God slain
in all these Sacrifices, from the beginning of the world, then you present a
sweet smelling savor to God, then you offer the true propitiation for the sins
of the world, then he will delight more in that sacrifice than all other
personal obedience.

But what if I should say, that the Gospel it self is a killing Letter, and
ministration of death, being severed from Christ? I should say nothing amiss,
but what Paul speaks, that his Gospel was a savor of death to many; take the
most powerful Preaching, the most sweet discourse, the most plain Writings of
the free grace and salvation in the Gospel, take all the preachings of Jesus
Christ himself and his Apostles, and you shall not find life in them, unless ye
be led by the Spirit of Christ unto himself who is the resurrection and the
life; It will no more save you than the Covenant of works; unless that word
abide and dwell in your hearts, to make you believe in him, and embrace him
with your souls, whom God has sent; suppose you heard all, and heard it
gladly, and learned it, and could discourse well upon it, and teach others, yet
if you be not driven out of your selves, out of your own righteousness, as
well as sin, and persued to this City of refuge Jesus Christ, you have not
eternal life. Your knowledge of the truth of the Gospel and your obedience to
Gods Law will certainly kill you; and as certainly, as your ignorance and
disobedience, unless you have embraced in your soul that good thing Jesus
Christ contained in these truths, who is the Diamond of that Golden Ring of the
Scriptures, and unless your souls embrace these promises as soul-saving, as
containing the chief good, and worthy of all acceptance, as well as your mind
receive these as true and faithful sayings, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

Thus ye see Christ Jesus is either the subject of all in the Scriptures, or
the end of it all, he is the very proper subject of the Gospel: Paul knew
nothing but Christ crucified in his preaching; and he is the very proper end
and scope of the law for righteousness, Romans 10. 3. All the preaching of a
covenant of works, all the curses and threatenings of the Bible, all the
rigidexactions of obedience, all come to this one great design; not that we may
set about such a walking to please God, or do something to pacify him, but
that we being concluded under, sin and wrath on the one hand, and an
impossibility to save our selves on the other hand, Gal. 3. 22. Rom 5. 20, 21.
may be pursued into Jesus Christ for righteousness, and life, who is both able
to save us, and ready to welcome us. Therefore the Gospel opens the door of
salvation, in Christ the Law is behind us with fire and sword, and destruction
pursuing us, and all for this end, that sinners may come to him and have life.
Thus the Law is made a Pedagogue of the soul to lead to Christ; Christ is
behind us, cursing, condemning, threatening us, and he is before us with
stretched-out arms, ready to receive us, bless us and save us, inviting,
promising, exhorting to come and have life. Christ is on mount Sinai,
delivering the Law with thunders, Act. 7. 38. and he is on mount Sion, in the
calm voice, he is both upon the mountain of cursings and blessings, and on both
doing the part of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19, 20. It is love, that is in his heart
which made him first cover his Countenance with frowns and threats, and it is
love that again displayes it self in his smilling countenance. Thus souls are
enclosed with love pursuing, and love receiving: And thus the Law which seems
most contrary to the Gospel, testifies of Christ, it gives him this testimony,
that except salvation be in him, it is no where else. The Law says, it is not
in me, seek it not in obedience, I can do nothing but destroy you, if you abide
under my jurisdiction. The Ceremonies and Sacrifices say, if you can behold the
end of this Ministry (if a Vail be not on your hearts, as it was on Moses
face, 2 Cor. 3 13, 14) you may see where it is, its not in your obedience, but
in the death and sufferings of the Son of God, whom we represent. Then the
Gospel takes all these Coverings and Vails away, and gives a plain and open
testimony of him, There is no Name under heaven to be saved, but by Christ's.
The Old Testament speak by figures and signs, as dumb men do, but the New
speaks in plain words, and with open face. Now, I say, for all this that there
is no salvation but in him, yet many souls, not only those who live in their
gross sins, and have no form of godliness, but even the better sort of
people, that have some knowledge and civility, and a kind of zeal for God, yet
they do not come to him that they may have life, Romans 10. 1, 2, 3. they do not
submit to the righteousness of God. Here is the march that divides the ways of
Heaven and Hell, coming to Jesus Christ, and forsaking our selves: the
confidence of these souls is chiefly or only in that little knowledge or zeal,
or profession they have, they do not as really abhore themselves for their own
righteousness as for their unrighteousness, they make that the covering of
their nakedness, and filthiness, which is in it self as menstruous and
unclean as any thing. It is now the very propension and natural inclination of
our hearts to stand upright in our selves: Faith bows a souls back, and take
on Christ's righteousness, but presumption lifts up a soul upon its own bottom,
How can ye believe that seek honor one of another? The engagement of the soul
to its own credit or estimation, the engagement of self-love, and self-honour,
do lift up a soul that it cannot submit to Gods righteousness, to
righteousness in another. And therefore many do dream and think that they have
eternal life, who shall awake in the end, and find that it was but a dream or
night-fancy.

Now from all this, I would enforce this duty upon your consciences, to search
the Scriptures, if you think to have eternal life, search them if you would
know Christ, whom to know is eternal life, then again search them, for these
are they that testify of him. Searching imports diligence, much diligence, its
a serious work, its not a common seeking of an easy and common thing, but its
a search and scrutiny for some hidden thing, or some special thing. Its not
bare reading of the Scriptures that will answer this duty, except it be
diligent and daily reading, and its not that alone, except the Spirit within
meditate on them, and by meditation accomplish a diligent search. There is some
hidden secret that you must search for, that is enclosed within the covering of
words, and sentences, there is a mystery of wisdom that you must apply your
hearts to search out, Eccles. 7. 5. Jesus Christ is the Treasure that is hid in
this field, O precious treasure of eternal life! Now then, souls, search into
the fields of the Scriptures, Pro. 2. 4. for him as for hid treasure. It is not
only truth you must seek and buy, and not sell it, but it is life you would
search: Here is an object that may not only take up your understandings, but
satisfy your hearts. Think not you have found all when you have found the
truth there, and learned it; no, except you have found life there, you have
found nothing, you have missed the treasure. If you would profit by the
Scriptures, you must bring both your understandings, and your affections to
them, and depart not till they both return full: If you bring your
understanding to seek the truth, you may find truth, but not truly: you may
find it, but you are not found of it: you may lead truth captive, and unclose
it in a prison of your mind and encompasse it about with a guard of corrupt
affections, that it shall have no issue, no out going to the rest of your soul
and ways, and no influence on them; you may know the truth, but you are not
known of it, and brought in captivity to the obedience of it. The Treasure that
is hide in the Scriptures are Jesus Christ, whose entire and perfect Name is,
Way, Truth, and Life. He is a living truth and true Life: Therefore Christ is
the adaequat object of the soul, commensurable to all its faculties. He has
Truth in him to satisfy the mind, and he has Life and Goodness in him to
satiate the heart: therefore if thou would find Jesus Christ, bring thy whole
soul to seek him, as Paul expresses it. He is true and faithful, and worthy
of all acceptance, then bring thy judgment to find the light of truth, and
thy affections to embrace the life of goodness that is in him. Now, as much as
ye find of him, so much have ye profited in the Scriptures: If you find
commands there that you cannot obey, search again and you may find strength
under that command; digg a little deeper, and you shall find Jesus the end of an
impossible command; and when you have found him, you have found life and
strength to obey, and you have found a prepitiation and sacrifice for
trantgressing and not obeying. If you find curses in it, search again and you
shall find Jesus Christ under that, made a curse for us; you shall find him the
end of the curse, for righteousness to every one that believes. When you know
all the Letter of the Scripture, yet you must search into the Spirit of it,
that it may be imprinted into your spirits: all you know does you no good but
as its received in love, unless your souls become a living Epistle, and the
Word without be written on the heart, you have found nothing. As for you that
cannot read the Scriptures, if it be possible, take that pains to learn to read
them. O if you knew what they contain, and whom they bear witness of, you
would have little quietness till you could read, at least his love-epistle to
sinners: And if you cannot learn, be not discouraged, but if your desires
within be servent, your endeavors to hear it read by others will be more
earnest. But it is not so much the reading of much of it that profits, as the
pondering of these things in our hearts, and digesting them by frequent
meditation, till they become the food of the Soul: This was David's way, and by
this he grew to the stature of a tall and well-bodied Christian.

Ephesians. 2. 20. And builded upon the foundation of the Apostles, etc.
BElievers are the Temple of the living God, in which he dwells and walks: 2
Cor. 6. 16. Every one of them is a little Sanctuary and Temple to His Majesty,
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts in your hearts, though he be the high and lofty one
that inhabits eternity, yet he is pleased to come down to this poor Cottage of
a creatures heart, and dwell in it: Is not this as great a humbling and
condescending, for the Father to come down off his Throne of Glory, to the poor
base footstool of the creatures soul, as for the Son to come down in the state
of a servant, and become in the form of sinful flesh. But then he is a Temple
and Sanctuary to them, and he shall be to you a Sanctuary, Isa. 8. A place of
refuge, a secret hiding place. Now, as every one is a little separated retired
Temple, so they all conjoined make up one Temple, one visible body in which he
dwells: Therefore Paul calls them living stones, built up into a spiritual house
to God, 1 Pet. 2. 5 All these little Temples make up one house and Temple fitly
joined together, in which God shows manifest signs of his presence and working:
unto this the Apostle in this place alludes. The Communion, and Union of
Christians with God, is of such a nature, that all the relations and points of
conjunction in the creatures are taken to resemble it, and hold it out to us.
We are Citizens, says he, and Domestics, household men, and so dwell in his
house; and then we are his House beside: Now ye know there are two principal
things in a House, the Foundation and the Cornerstone; the one supports the
building, the other units it, and holds it together: These two parts of this
spiritual building are here pointed at; the foundation of every particular
stone, and of the whole building is the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
as holding out Jesus Christ to souls, the Rock on which our house shall be
builded: Not the Apostles or Prophets, far less Pastors and Teachers since;
for they are but at best, workers together with God, and employed in the
building of the house; not yet their Doctrine, but as it holds out that true
foundation that God had laid in Sion, Isa. 28. which is Jesus Christ, for other
foundation can no man lay. And then the Cornerstone is that same Jesus Christ,
who reaches from the bottom even to the top of the building, and immediately
touches every stone, and both quickens it in it self, and unites them together.

Well then, here is a sure foundation to build our eternal happiness upon, the
word of God that endures for ever holds it out to us: all men are building upon
something, every man is about some establishment of his hopes, lays some
foundation of his confidence, which he may stand upon. They are one of the two
that Christ speaks of: Luk 6. 46. One builds on the Rock, another on the Sand:
now as the foundation is, so is the house; a changeable foundation makes a
falling house, a sure foundation makes an unchangeable house; a house without a
foundation will prove quickly no house: Now whatsoever men build their hope and
confidence upon, beside the word of God, his sure Promise and sure Covenant,
and Jesus Christ in them, they build upon no foundation, or upon a sandy
foundation. All flesh is grass, and the flower and perfection of it is as the
flower of the field; here is the name and character of all created perfections,
of the most excellent endowments of mind, of all the specious actions of men;
its all but vanishing, and vanity, every man at his best estate is such; yea,
altogether such: You who have no more to build upon but your prosperity and
wealth, O that is but sand and dung; would any man build a house upon a
dunghill. You who have no other hope, but in your own good prayers and
meanings your own reformations, and repentances, your professions, and
practices; know this, that your hope is like a spiders house, like the web that
she has laboriously exercised her self about all the week over, and then when
you lean upon that house it shall fall through and not sustain your weight:
whatsoever it be, beside this living stone Jesus Christ, who is the very
substance of the Word and Promises, it shall undoubtedly prove thy shame, and
confusion. But behold the opposition the Prophet makes between the word and
these other things, the word of our God shall stand for ever: Isa. 40. 6, 7 8.
And therefore Peter makes it an incorruptible seed, of which Believers are
begotten, 1 Pet. 1. 23. It is the unchangeable truth and immutable
faithfulness of God that makes his word so sure, its builded up to the
Heavens. Therefore the Psalmist often commends the Word of the Lord as a tried
word, as purified seven times, it has endured the trial and proof of all men,
of all tentations, of all generations, it has often been put in the furnace of
questions and doubtings, it has often been tried in the fire of afflictions,
but it came forth like pure Gold, without dross. This is faiths foundation,
God has spoken in his holiness, and therefore, though all men be liars, yet
God will be found true, he deceives none, and is deceived of none. The Lord
has taken a Latitude to himself in his working, he loves to show his
Sovereignty in much of that; and therefore he changes it in men, and upon men
as he pleases, yet he has condescended to limit and bound himself by his
word, and in this to show his faithfulness. And therefore, though heaven and
earth should pass away, though he should innihilate this world, and create new
ones, yet not on jot of his world shall sail. The earth is established sure,
though it has no foundation, for the Word of his command supports it: And yet
a Believers confidence is on a surer ground: Though the earth should be
removed, yet it cannot pass or fail, says our Lord: And therefore the Psalmist
uses to boast in God, That though the earth were moved, and the floods lifted
up their voice, yet he would not fear, because his foundation was unshaken for
all that; the word is not removed, when the world is moved, and the fore he was
not moved: The worlds stability depends upon a word of command, but our
salvation depends on a word of promise. Now, you know, promises put an
obligation upon the person, which commands do not, a man may change his
commands as he pleases to his children or servants, but he may not change his
promises, therefore the promises of God put an obligation upon him, who is
truth it self, not to fail in performance; or rather he is to himself, by his
unchangeable will and good pleasure, by his faithfulnsse and truth, an
oblidging and binding Law: When no creature could let bounds to him, he
incloses himself within the bounds of promise to us, and gives all flesh
liberty to challenge him if he be not faithful.

Now all the promises of God are yea, and Amen, in Jesus Christ, that is,
established, and confirmed in him: Christ is the surety of them, and so the
certainty and stability of them depends upon him, at least, to our sense; for
God in all his dealing condescends to our weakness, that we may have strong
consolation: A Promise might suffice to ground our faith, but he adds an Oath
to his promise, and he takes Christ surety for the performance; and therefore
Christ may be called the Truth indeed, the substantial Word of God, for he is
the substance of the written and preached Word; and then he is the very
certainty and assurance of it, the Scriptures testify of him, and lead us to
this Rock higher than we, to build upon, and against this the gates of hell
cannot prevail: If the Word lead not a soul unto Christ himself, that four has
no foundation; though thou hear the Word, though thou know the Word, yea,
suppose thou could teach others, and instruct the ignorant, yet all that will
be no foundation, as good as none, except thou do it: And what is it to do the
Word, but to believe in him whom the Word testifies of: this is the work of
God, to resign thy soul to his mercies, and merits, and have no confidence in
the flesh: To scrape out all the rubbish of works, and performances, and parts,
out of the foundation, and singly to roll thy souls weight upon Gods promises,
and Christ's purchase, to look, with Paul, on all things beside, in thee, and
about the, as dung and dross, that thou can lean no weight upon, and to remove
that dunghill from the foundation of thy hope, that Jesus Christ may be the
only foundation of thy soul, as God has laid him in the Church for a sure
foundation, That who so believes in him may not be ashamed: What ever beside,
a soul be established on, though it appear very solid, and the soul be settled
and fixed upon it, yet a day will come that will unsettle that soul, and raze
that foundation: either it shall be now done in thy conscience, or it must be
done at length, when that great tempest of Gods indignation shall blow from
heaven against all unrighteousness of men, in the day of accounts, then shall
thy house fall, and the fall of it shall be great. But a soul established upon
the sure promises, and upon Christ, in whom they are Yea, and Amen, shall abide
that storm, and in that day have confidence before God, have wherewith to
answer, in Jesus Christ, all the challenges of divine justice, and the
accusations of conscience, He that trusts in him shall be as Mount Sion, which
cannot be moved. You see all things else change, and therefore men's hopes and
joys perish; even here, the tentations and revolutions of the times undermines
their confidence, and joy; and the blasts of the Northern wind of affliction
blows away their hopes.

Now as Christ is the Foundation, so he is the Cornerstone of the building: It
is Christ who has removed that Partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles, even
the Ceremonies of the one, and the Atheism of the other: He is our peace, who
has made of two one. The two sides of the House of God are united by this
Cornerstone Jesus Christ. Thus we who were the Temples of Satan, are made the
Temples of God, thus poor stranger-Gentiles, who had no interest in the
Covenant of Promises, come to share with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to be
founded upon the Doctrine of the Prophets, who taught the Jewish Church: Christ
is the bond of Christians, this is the Head, into which all the members should
grow up into a Body. Distance of Place, difference of Nations, distinction of
Languages, all these cannot separate the Members of Jesus Christ, they are more
one, though consisting of diverse Nations, Tongues, and Customs, and
dispositions, than the people of one Nation, or Children of one Family: for one
Lord; one Spirit, unites all: Alas, that all are not united in affection and
judgment; why do the sides of this House contend, and wrestle one against
another? when here is such a Cornerstone joining them together? Are not there
many Christians who cannot endure to look one upon another, who are yet both
placed in one building of the Temple of God? Alace this is sad and shameful!
But that which I would especially have observed in this, is that Jesus Christ
is such a foundation that reaches throughout the whole building, and
immediately touches every stone of the Building; it is such a Foundation as
rises from the bottom to the top; and therefore Jesus Christ is both the
Author and finisher of our Faith, the beginning and the end; the first stone
and the last (...) of our building must rise upon him, and by him; the least
degree of grace, and the greatest perfection of it both are in him; and
therefore Christians should be most dependent creatures; dependent in their
first being, and in after well-being, in their being, and growing, wholly
dependent upon Christ, that out of his fullness they may receive grace, and
then more grace for grace, that all may appear to be grace indeed. Now I
beseech you, my beloved in the Lord, to know whereupon ye are builded, or ought
to be builded. There are two great errors in the time, take heed of them, one
is the Doctrine of some, and another is the practice of the most part: Some do
prefer their own fancies, and night-dreams, and the imaginations of their own
heart to the Word of God, and upon pretense of Revelation, of new Light, do
cast a mist upon that Word of God, which is a light that has shined from the
beginning. Be not deceived, but try the Spirits whether they be of God, or not.
There are many pretend too much of the Spirit, and therefore cry out against
the Word, as Letter, as Flesh: But, my Brethren, believe not every Doctrine
that calls it self a Spirit, that spirit is not of God that hears not Gods
voice, as Christ reasons against the Jews, seek ye more of the Spirit of Christ
which he promises, who is a Spirit that teaches all things, and brings to
remembrance these blessed sayings, and leads us to all truth: It shall be both
safest and sweetest to you to meditate on the word of the Prophets and
Apostles, and the entrance into it shall give you light: an old light which was
from the beginning, and therefore a true light (for all truth is eternal) and
yet a new light to your sense and feeling: It Is both an old command, and a new
command; an old word, and a new word; if thou search by the Spirits
inspiration, that old word shall be made new, that Letter made spirit and life:
Such are the words that Christ speaks, But yet there are many who do not reject
the Scriptures in judgment, who notwithstanding do not build on them in
practice; Alas it may be said of the most part of professed Christians among
us, that they are not builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
but upon the sayings of fallible and weak men! What ground have many of you for
your Faith but because the Minister says so, You believe so? the most part
live in an implicit faith, and practice that in themselves which they condemn
in the Papists. You do not labor to search the Scriptures, that upon that
foundation you may build your faith in the questioned truths of this Age, that
so you may be able to answer to those that ask a reason of the Faith that is in
you. Alas simple souls, you believe every thing and yet really believe nothing,
because you believe not the Word as the Word of the living God, but take it
from men upon their authority! Therefore when a temptation comes, when any
gainsayings of the truth you cannot stand against it, because your Faith has
no foundation but the sayings of Men, or Acts of Assemblies. And therefore as
men whom you trust with holding out light unto you, hold out darkness in stead
of light, you embrace that darkness also; But I beseech you, be builded upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, not upon them but upon that
whereon they were builded, the infallible truths of God. You have the
Scriptures, search them; since you have reasonable souls, search them: other
men's faith will not save you, you cannot see to walk to heaven by other men's
light, more than you can see by their eyes: You have eyes of your own, souls of
your own, subordinate to none but the God of Spirits, and Lord of Consciences,
Jesus Christ: and therefore examine all that is spoken to you from the Word,
according to the Word, and receive no more upon trust from men, but as you find
it upon trial to the truth of God.

1 Timothy (...). 13. Hold fast that form of sound Words, which thou have heard of
me in Faith, and Love. etc.
HEre is the sum of Religion, here you have a compend of the Doctrine of the
Scriptures: All Divine Truths may be reduced to these two Heads. Faith, and
Love, What we ought to believe, and what we ought to do: This is all the
Scriptures teach and this is all we have to learn. What have we to know, but
what God has revealed of himself to us? And, what we have to do, but what he
commands us? In a word, what have we to learn in this world, but to believe in
Christ, and love him, and so live to him? This is the duty of man, and this is
the dignity of man, and the way to eternal life: Therefore the Scriptures that
are given to be a Lamp to our feet, and a Guide to our paths, contain an
perfect and exact rule credendorum and faciendorum, of Faith and Manners, or
Doctrine and Practice. We have in the Scriptures many truths revealed to us of
God, and of the works of his hands; many precious truths, but that which most
of all concerns us, is to know God and our selves, this is the special
Excellency of the reasonable creature, that its made capable to know its
Creator, and to reflect upon its own being. Now, we have to know of our selves,
What we are now, and what man once was; and accordingly, to know of God, what
he once revealed of himself, and What he does now reveal: I say, The Sc^iptures
holds out to our consideration a twofold estate of Mankind, and according to
these, a twofold revelation of the Mystery of God: We look on Man now, and we
find him another thing than he was once; but we do not find God one thing at
one time, and another thing at another time; for there is no shadow of change
in him, and, He is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: Therefore we
ask not What he was, and what he is now, but how he manifests himself
differently, according to the different estates of Man; as we find in the
Scriptures, man once righteous and blessed, Eccles. 7. 29. and God making him
such according to his own Image Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 25. in righteousness and
true holiness; we find him in communion and friendship with God, set next to
the Divine Majesty, and above the works of his hands, and all things under his
feet: How holy was he? And how happy? And happy he could not choose but be,
since he was holy, being conformed, and like unto God in his will, and
affection, chosing that same delight, that same pleasure with God, in his
understanding, knowing God and his will; and likewise, his own happiness: in
such a conformity, he could not but have much communion with him, that had such
conformity to him, Union being the foundation of communion and great peace and
solid tranquillity in him.

Now, in this state of mankind God expresses his goodness, and wisdom, and
power, his holiness and righteousness. These are the Attributes that shine
most brightly. In the very morning of the Creation God revealed himself to man
as a holy and just God, whose eyes could behold no iniquity; and therefore he
made him upright, and made a Covenant of life and peace with him, to give him
immortal and eternal life, to continue him in his happy estate, if so be he
continued in well-doing. Romans 10. 5. Do this and live. In which Covenant,
indeed there was some outbreakings of the glorious grace and free
condescendency of God; for it was no less free grace, and undeserved favor,
to promise life to his obedience, than now to promise life to our Faith; so
that if the Lord had continued that Covenant with us, we ought to have called
it grace, and would have been saved by grace as well as now; though it be true,
that there is some more occasion given to man's nature to boast and glory in
that way, yet not at all before God, Romans 4. 2.

But we have scarcely found man in such an estate till we have found him
sinful and miserable, and fallen from his excellency. That Sun shined in the
dawning of the Creation, but before ye can well know what it is, its eclipsed,
and darkened with sin and misery; as if the Lord had only set up such a creature
in the Firmament of Glory, to let him know how blessed he could make him, and
wherein his blessedness consists; and then presently to throw him down from
his excellency; when ye find him mounting up to the Heavens, and spreading
himself thus in holiness, and happiness, like a Bay Tree: Behold again, and
you find him not; though you seek him, you shall not find him, his place does
not know him: He is like one that comes out with a great Majesty upon a Stage
and personates some Monarch, or Emperor, in the World, and then ere you can
well gather your thoughts to know what he is, he is turned off the Stage, and
appears in some base and despicable appearance, so quickly is man stripped of all
these glorious ornaments of holiness, and puts on the vile rags of sin and
wretchedness, and is cast down from the Throne of eminency above the
creatures, and from fellowship with God, to be a slave and servant to the dust
of his feet, and to have communion with the devil and his angels. And now ye
have man holden out in Scripture as the only wretched Piece of the Creation,
as the very plague of the World; The whole Creation groaning under him, Romans 8.
and in pain to be delivered of such a burden, of such an Execration and Curse,
and Astonishment: You find the testimony of the Word condemns him altogether,
concludes him under sin, and then under a curse, and makes all flesh guilty in
Gods sight. The Word speaks otherwise of us than we think of our selves, Their
imagination is only evil continually. Genesis 6. 5. O then, What must our
affections be, that are certainly more corrupt! What then must our way be? All
flesh has corrupted their way, and done abominable works, and none does good.
Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3. But many flee in unto their good hearts as their last
refuge, when they are beaten from these outworks, of their actions and ways
but the Scripture shall storm that also; The heart is deceitful above all
things, who can know it? Jer. ^7. 9. It is desperately wicked. In a word, Man is
become the most lamentable spectacle in the world; acompend of all wickedness,
and misery; enclosed within the walls of inability and impossibility to help
himself, shut up within the prison of despair, a stinking loathsome and irksome
dungeon. It is like the mytie pit that Jeremiah was cast into, that there was
no out-coming, and no pleasant abode in it.

Now, Man's estate being thus, nay, having made himself thus, and sought out to
himself such sad inventions. Eccles. 7. 29. and having destroyed himself. Hos.
13. 9. What think ye? Should any pity him? If he had fallen in such a pit of
misery ignorantly, and unwillingly he had been an object of compassion; but
having cast himself headlong into it, who should have pity on him? Or, who
should go aside to ask how he does, or bemoan him? Ier. 15. 5. But behold the
Lord pities man as a Father does his Children. Psalm. 103. His compassions fail
not; He comes by such a loathsome and contemptible object, and casts his skirts
over it, and says, Live. Ezekiel. 16. And makes it a time of love. I say, no
flesh could have expected any more of God, than to make man happy and holy, and
to promise him life in well-doing: But to repair that happiness after it is
wilfully lost, and to give life to evil doers and sinners, O how far was it
from Adams expectation when he fled from God? Here then is the wonder, that
when men and Angels were in expectation of the revelation of his wrath from
heaven against their wickedness, and the execution of the curse man was
concluded under, that even then God is pursuing man, and pursues him with love,
and opens up to him his very heart and bowels of love in Jesus Christ? Behold
then the second revelation and manifestation of God, in a way of grace, pure
grace, of mercy and pity toward lost sinners. The kindness of God has
appeared, not by Works, but according to his abundant mercy showed in Christ
Jesus. Tit. 3. 4. 5. So then we have this purpose of Gods love unfolded to us
in the Scriptures, and this is the substance of them, both Old and New
Testament, or the end of them, Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law to all
sinners concluded under sin, and a curse: by it our Lord Jesus, the good
Ebedmelech, comes and casts down a cord to us, and draws us up out of the pit
of sin and misery; he comes to this prison, and opens the doors to let captives
free; so then we have holden out to us a Redeemer, as a repairer of our
breaches; God in Christ reconciling the world. O Israel thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy Help found. Hos. 13. 9. He finds to himself a ransom to
satisfy his justice Job 33. 24. He finds a propitiation to take away sin, a
sacrifice to pacify and appease his wrath; he finds one of our Brethren, but
his own Son in whom he is well pleased. And then holds out all this to sinners
that they may be satisfied in their own consciences, as he is in his own mind.
God has satisfied himself in Christ, you have not that to do: he is not now to
be reconciled to us, for he was never really at odds, though he covered his
countenance with frowns and threats, since the Fall, and has appeared in fire,
and hunders and whirlwind, which are terrible, yet his heart had always love
in it to such persons; and therefore he is come near in Christ, and about
reconciling us to himself; Here is the business then, to have our souls
reconciled to him, to take away the enmity within us, and as he is satisfied
with his Son, so to satisfy our selves with him, and be as well pleased in his
Redemption and purchase, as (...) ^er is, and then you believe indeed in him.

Now if this were accomplished, what have we more to do, but to love him, and
to live to him? when you have found in the Scripture; and believed with the
heart, what Man once was, and what he now is, what God once appeared, and what
he now manifests himself in the Gospel, ye have no more to do, but to search
in the same Scriptures what ye henceforth ought to be: Ye who find your estate
recovered in Christ, ask what manner of persons we ought to be? And the
Scripture shall also give you that form of sound words which may not only teach
you to believe in him, but to love him, and obey his commands: The Law that
before condemned you, is now by Christ put in your hands to guide you, and
conduct you in the way, and teaches you to live henceforth to his glory. The
grace of God that has appeared to all men. Tit. 2. 12. teaches us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live godly, and righteously
and soberly in this present world. Here is the sum of the rule of your
practice and conversation piety toward God, equity toward men, and sobriety
toward our selves, self-denial and world-denyall, and lust-denyal, to give up
with the world, and our own lusts, henceforth to have no more to do with them,
to resign them, not for a time, not in part, but wholly and for ever in
affection, and by parts in practice and endeavor, and then to resign and give
up our selves to him, to live to him, and live in him.

Thus we have given you a sum of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, of that
which is to be believed, and that which is to be done as our duty. Now we shall
speak a word of these two Cardinal Graces, which are the compend of all
Graces, as the objects of them are the Abridgement of the Scriptures: Faith and
Love, these sound words can profit us nothing, unless we hold them fast with
Faith and Love.

Faith is like the Fountain-grace, streams come out of it, that cleanses the
Conscience from the guilt of sin, and purifieth the heart from the filth of
sin, because it is that which comes to the Fountain opened up in the house of
David, and draws water out of these Wells of Salvation? If you consider the
fall and ruin of Mankind; you will find infidelity and unbelief the fountain
of it, as well as the seal of it. Unbelief of the Law of God, of his promises
and threatening. This was first called in Question, and when once called in
Question, it is half denied. Has God said so, that you shall die? Its not far
off, you shall not surely die: Here then was the very beginning of man's ruin,
he did not retain in his knowledge, and believe with his heart the truth and
faithfulness; and holiness of God, which unbelief was conjoined, and
intermingled with much pride, you shall be as Gods: he began to live out of God,
in himself, not remembering that his life was a stream of that Divine Fountain,
that being cut off from it would dry up. Now therefore our Lord Jesus Christ;
an expert Savior, and very learned, and complete for this work, he brings man
up out of this pit of misery, by that same way he fell into it, he fell down by
unbelief, and he brings him up out of it by faith: This is the cord that is
cast down to the poor Soul in the Dungeon, or rather his Faith is the dead grip
of the cord of Divine Promises, which are sent unto the captive prisoners, and
by virtue thereof he is drawn out, into the light of Salvation. Unbelief of the
Law of God did first destroy man, now the belief of the Gospel saves him. The
not believing of the Lords threatenings, was the beginning of his ruin, the
believing of his precious promises is his Salvation. I say more, as our
Destruction began at the Unbelief of the Law, so our salvation must begin at
the belief of it. The Law and Divine Justice went out of his sight, and so he
sinned; now the Law entering into the Conscience, discovers a man's sins, and
makes sin abound, and that is the beginning of our remedy, to know our disease.
But as long as this is hid from a Man's eyes, he is shut up in unbelief, he is
sealed and confirmed in his miserable estate, and so kept from Jesus Christ the
remedy. Thus unbelief, first and last destroys: Faith might have preserved
Adam, and Faith again might restore thee, who has fallen in Adam.

There is a great mistake of Faith among us, some taking it for a strong and
blind confidence; that admits of no questions or doubts in the soul; and so
vainly persuading themselves that they have it; and some again conceiving it to
be such an assurance of Salvation, as instantly comforts the soul, and loses
all objections, and so foolishly vexing their own souls and disquieting
themselves in vain, for the want of that which if they understood what it is,
they would find they have it. I say, many souls conceive that to be the best
Faith, that never doubted, and has always lodged in them, and kept them in
peace since they were born. But seeing all men were once aliens from the common
wealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenant of Promise, and without God in
the World, and so without Christ also, it is certain that those souls who have
always blessed themselves in their own hearts and cried peace, peace, and were
never afraid of the wrath to come, have embraced an imagination and dream of
their own hearts, for true Faith. It is not big and stout words that will prove
it; men may defy the Devil and all his works, and speak very confidently, and
yet, God knows they are captives by him, at his pleasure, and not far from
that misery which they think they have escaped. Satan works in them with such a
crafty conveyance, that they cannot perceive it, and how should they perceive
it? For we are by nature dead in sins, and so cannot feel nor know that we are
such: It is a token of life to feel pain, a certain token, for dead things are
senseless. You know how Juglers may deceive your very senses, and make them
believe they see that which is not, and feel that which they feel not: O how
much more easy is it for Satan such an ingenious and experimented spirit,
assisted with the help of our deceitful hearts, to cast such a mist over the
eyes of hearts, and make them believe any thing? how easily may he hide our
misery from us, and make us believe its well with us? And thus multitudes of
souls perish, in the very opinion of Salvation: that very thing which they call
Faith, that strong ungrounded persuasion, it is no other thing than the unbelief
of the heart, unbelief, I mean of the Holy Law, of Divine Justice, and the
wrath to come; for if these once entered into the souls consideration, they
would certainly cast down that strong hold of vain confidence, that Satan keeps
all the House in peace by: Now this secure and presumptuous despising of all
threatenings, and all convictions, it is vernished over to the poor soul, with
the color and appearance of Faith in the Gospel: They think, to believe in
Christ, is nothing else but never to be afraid of Hell, whereas it is nothing
else but a soul fleeing into Christ for fear of hell; and fleeing from the
wrath to come to the city of Refuge.

Now again, there are some other souls quite contrary minded, that run upon an
other extremity: they once question, whether they have Faith; and always
question it. You shall find them always out of one doubt into another, and
still returning upon these debates, whether am I in Christ or not? And often
peremptorily concluding that they are not in him, and that they believe not in
him: I must confess that a soul must once question the matter, or they shall
never be certain; nay, a soul must once conclude that it is void of God, and
without Christ, but having discovered that, I see no more use and fruit of your
frequent debates and janglings about interest: would say then unto such souls,
that if you now question it, it is indeed the very time to put it out of
question. And how? Not by framing or seeking answers to your objections, not by
searching into thy self to find something to prove it, not by mere disputing
about it, for when shall these have an end? But simply and plainly by setting
about that which is questioned. Are you in doubt, if you be Believers? How shall
it be resolved than? but by believing indeed. It is now the very time thou art
called to make application of thy soul to Christ, if thou think that thou
cannot make application of Christ to thy soul: If thou cannot know if he be
thine, then how shall thou know it, but by choosing him for thine, and embracing
him in thy soul? Now, I say, if that time which is spent about such
unprofitable debates, were spent in solid and serious endeavors about the
thing in debate; it would quickly be out of debate; if you were more in the
obedience to those commands, then in the dispute, whether you have obeyed or
not, you would sooner come to satisfaction in it. This I say the rather:
because the weightier and principal parts of the Gospel are those direct acts
of Faith, and Love to Jesus Christ: both these are the outgoings of the soul to
him: Now again, examination of our Faith and Assurance are but secondary and
consequent reflections upon our selves, and are the soul-returning in again to
it self, to find what is within. Therefore, I say; a Christian is principally
called to the first, and always called: it is the chief duty of man, which for
no evidence, no doubting, no questioning should be left undone: If you be in
any hesitation whether you are Believers or not: I am sure the chiefest things
and most concerning, is rather to believe then to know it: it is a Christians
being to believe: it is indeed his comfort and wel-being to know it, but if you
do not know it then by all means so much the more set about it presently, let
the soul consider Christ and the precious promises, and lay its weight upon
him: This you ought to do, and not to leave the other undone.

2. Secondly, I say to such souls, that it is the mistake of the very nature of
Faith that leads them to such perplexities, and causes some inevidence: It is
not so much the inevidence of marks, and fruits that makes them doubt, as the
misapprehension of the thing it self; for as long as they mistake it in its own
nature, no sign, no mark can satisfy in it. You take Faith to be a persuasion
of Gods love, that calms and quiets the mind. Now, such a persuasion needs no
sign to know it by, it is manifest by its own presence, as light by its own
brightness. It were a foolish question to ask any, How they knew that they
were persuaded of another affection? The very persuasion it self makes it
self more certain to the soul then any token. So then while you question
whether you have Faith or not, and in the mean time take Faith to be nothing
else but such a persuasion, it is in vain to bring any marks or signs to
convince you that you have Faith, for if such a persuasion and assurance were
in you; it would be more powerful to assure your hearts of it self than any
thing else; and while you are doubting of it, it is more manifest that you have
it not, than any signs or marks can be able to make it appear that you have it.
If any would labor to convince a blind man; that he saw the light, and give
him signs and tokens of the lights shining, the blind man could not believe
him; for it is more certain to himself that he sees not, than any evidence can
make the contrary probable: You are still wishing and seeking such a Faith as
puts all out of question. Now, when Ministers bring any marks to prove you have
true Faith, it cannot satisfy or settle you, because your very questioning
proves, that ye have not that which ye question; if you had such a persuasion,
you would not question it. So then, as long as you are in that mistake
concerning the nature of Faith, all the signs of the word cannot settle you.

But, I say, if once you understood the true nature of Faith, it would be more
clear in it self unto you, than readily marks and signs could make it,
especially in the time of temptation: If you would know then, what it is
indeed: Consider what the Word of God holds out concerning himself, or us, and
the solid belief of that in the heart has something in the nature of saving
Faith in it. The Lord gives a testimony concerning Man, That he is born in sin,
that he is dead in sin, and all his imaginations are only evil continually.
Now, I say, to receive this truth into the soul upon Gods Testimony in a point
of Faith: the Lord in his Word concludes all under sin and wrath; ^o then, for
a soul to conclude it self also under sin and wrath, is a point of Faith: Faith
is the souls testimony to Gods truth, the Word is Gods Testimony: Now then, if
a soul receive this testimony within, whether it be Law or Gospel, it is an act
of Faith; if a soul condemn it self, and judge it self, that is a setting to
our seal that God is true, who speaks in his Law, and so its a believing in
God. I say more, To believe with the heart, that we cannot believe, is a great
point of found belief, because it is a sealing of that Word of God. The heart is
desperately wicked, and of our selves we can do nothing. Now, I am persuaded, if
such souls knew this, they would put an end to their many contentions and
wranglings about this point, and would rather bless God that has opened their
eyes to see themselves, then contend with him for that they have no Faith: It
is light only that discovers darkness, and Faith only that descerns unbelief:
Its life and health only, that feels pain and sickness, for if all were alike,
nothing could be found, as in dead bodies: Now, I say to such souls as believe
in God the Lawgiver, believe also in Christ the Redeemer: and what is that? It
is not to know that I have Interest in him: No, that must come after; it is the
Spirits sealing after believing which puts it self out of question, when it
comes: and so if you had it, you needed not many signs to know it by, at least
you would not doubt of it, more than he that sees the light can question it.
But I say, to believe in Christ is simply this: I, whatsoever I be: ungodly,
wretched, polluted, desperate, am willing to have Jesus Christ for my Savior,
I have no other help, or hope, if it be not in him, it is, I say, to lean the
weight of thy soul on this foundation stone laid in Zion, to embrace the
promises of the Gospel albeit general, as worthy of all acceptance, and wait
upon the performance of them. It is no other thing, but to make Christ welcome,
to say, even so, Lord Jesus, I am content in my soul that thou be my Savior,
to be found in thee, not having my own righteousness, I am well pleased to
cast away my own as dung, and find my self on other not an ungodly man. Now it
is certain that ^any souls that are still questioning whether they have Faith,
yet do find this in their souls, but because they know not that it is Faith
which they find, they go about to seek that which is not Faith, and where it is
not to be found, and so disquiet themselves in vain, and hinder fruitfulness.

Now, the Faith of a Christian is no fancy, it is no light vain imagination of
the brain, but it dwells in the heart (with the heart man believes) and it
dwells with love. Faith and love we need not be curious to distinguish them: it
is certain that love is in it, and from it, its in the very bosom of it,
because faith is a soul embracing of Christ, it is a choosing of him for its
portion: and then upon the review of this goodly portion, and from
consideration what he is, and has done for us, the soul loves him still more,
and is impatient of so much distance from him. We find them conjoined in
Scripture, but they are one in the heart: O that we studied to have these
jointly engraven on the heart; as they are joined in the word, so our heart
should be a living Epistle: Faith and Love are two words, but one thing under
different notions: they are the outgoings of the soul to Christ for life, the
breathings of the soul after him, for more of him, when it has once tasted how
good he is: Faith is not a speculation, or a wandering thought of Truth, it is
the truth not captivated into the mind, but dwelling in the heart, and getting
possession of the whole man: you know, a man and his will are one, not so a man
and his mind, for he may conceive the truth of many things he loves not, but
what ever a man loves, that and he, in a manner, becomes one with another: Love
is unitive, it is the most excellent union of distant things. The will commands
the whole man, and has the office of applying of all the faculties of their
proper works, Illa imperat, aliae exsequuntur, therefore when once Divine truth
gets entry into the heart of a man, and becomes one with his will, and
affection, it will quickly command the whole man to practice and execute, and
then he that receives the truth in Love, is found a walker in the truth: Many
persons captivate truth in their understandings, as the Gentiles did, they
held, or detained it in unrighteousness: but because it has no liberty to
descend into the heart, and possess that Garrison, it cannot command the man.
But O it is better to be truths captive, then to captive truth, says the
Apostle, ye obeyed from the heart the truth to which ye were delivered, Romans 6.
O a blessed captivity, to be delivered over to truth; that is indeed freedom,
for truth makes free, Ioh. 8. And it makes free where it is in freedom, give
it freedom to command thee, and it shall indeed deliver thee from all strange
Lords, and thou shall obey it from the heart, when it is indeed in the heart.
When the truth of God, whether promises, or threatenings, or commands are
impressed into the heart, you shall find the expressions of them in the
conversation: Faith is not an empty assent to the truth, but a receiving of it
in love, and when the truth is received in love, then it begins to work by
love, Faith works by love, says Paul, Gal. 5. 6. That now is the proper nature
of its operation, which expresses its own nature: Obedience proceeding from
love to God, flows from Faith in God, and that shows the true and living
nature of that Faith: If the soul within receive the seal and impression of the
truth of God, it will render the image of that same truth in all its actions.

Love is put for all obedience, its made the very sum and compend of the Law,
and fulfilling of it: for the truth is, its the most effectual and constraining
principle of obedience, and withal the most sweet and pleasant: The love of
Christ constrains us, to live to him, and not henceforth to our selves, 2 Cor.
5. 15. As I said, a man and his will is one: if you engage it, you bind all; if
you gain it, it will bring all with it. As it is the most ready way to gain any
party, to engage their head whom they follow, and upon whom they depend; let a
man's love be once gained to Christ, and the whole train of the souls faculty,
of the outward senses and operations, will follow upon it: It was an excellent,
and pertinent question, that Christ asked Peter, when he was going away (if
Peter had considered Christ's purpose in it, he would not have been so hasty and
displeased) Peter love thou me, then feed my sheep? If a man love Christ he
will certainly study to please him, and though he should do never so much in
obedience, its no pleasure except it be done out of love: O this, and more of
this in the heart, would make Ministers feed well, and teach well, and would
make people obey well? If ye love me, keep my commands; Love devouts and
consecrats all that is in a man, to the pleasure of him whom he loves;
therefore it fashions and conforms one even against nature to another humor
and affection: it constrains not to live to our selves, but to him, its joy and
delight is in him, and therefore all is given up and resigned to him: Now as it
is certain that if you love much you will do much, so it is certain that little
is accepted for much, that proceeds from love, and therefore our poor maimed
and halting obedience, is called the fulfilling of the law; he is well pleased
with it, because love is ill pleased withit: love thinks nothing too much, all
too little, and therefore his love thinks any thing from us much, since love
would give more; he accepts that which is given the lovers mite cast into the
Treasure, is more then ten times so much outward obedience from another man; He
meets love with love, if the souls desire be toward the love of his name, if
love offer though a farthing, his love receiving it, counts it a Crown, love
offering a present of duty finds many imperfections in it, and covers any good
that is in it, seems not to regard it, and then beholds it as a recompense; his
love receiving the present from us, covers a multitude of infirmities that are
in it. And thus what in the desire and endeavor of love on our part, and what
in the acceptance of what is done on his part, love is the fulfilling of the
Law. Its an usual proverb, all things are as they are taken, Love is the
^ulfilling of the Law, because our loving Father takes ^t so, he takes as much
delight in the poor childrens willingness, as in the more aged's strength: the
offer and endeavor of the one pleases him, as well as the ^erformance of the
other.

The love of God is the fulfilling of the Law, for it (...) a living Law, it is
the Law written on the heart, it is ^e Law of a spirit of life within, Quis
legem detamen, ^bus? major lexamor sibi ipsi est. You almost need not prescribe
any rules, or let over the head of love the authority and pain of a command,
for it is a greater Law to it self, it has within its own bosom as deep an
engagement and obligation to any thing that may please God, as you can put upon
it; for it is in it self the very engagement and bond of the soul to him. This
it is indeed which will do him service, and that is the service which he likes:
it is that only serves him constantly and pleasantly, and constantly it cannot
serve him, which does it not pleasantly, for it is delight only that makes it
constant. Violent motions may be swift, but not durable, they last not long:
fear and terror is a kind of external impulse, that may drive a soul swiftly
to some duty; but because that is not one with the soul, it cannot endure long,
its not good company to the soul. But Love making a duty pleasant, becomes one
with the soul, it incorporates with it, and becomes like its nature to it, that
though it should not move so swiftly, yet it moves more constantly. And what is
love but the very motion of the soul to God! and so till it have attained that;
to be in him, it can find no place of rest. Now this is only the service that
he is pleased with, which comes from love, because he sees his own image in it;
for love in us, its nothing else but the impression and stamp that Gods love to
us, makes on the heart; it is the very reflection of that sweet warm beam, so
then when his love reflects back unto himself, carrying our heart and duty with
it, he knows his own superscription, he loves his own Image in such a duty:
He that loves me, and continues in my love, I will love him, and I and my
Father will come and make our abode with him, Ioh. 14. 23. Here now is an
evidence that he likes it, for he must needs like that place he chooses to
dwell in; he who has such a glorious Mansion, and Palace above he must needs
love that soul dearly, that he will prefer it to his high and holy place.

Now, I know it will be the secret question and complaint of some souls. How
shall I get love to God? I cannot love him, my heart is so desperately wicked, I
cannot say as Peter, Lord thou know that I love thee. I shall not insist upon
the discovery of your love unto you by marks and signs, only I say, if thou
indeed from thy heart desires to love him, and art grieved that there is not
this love in thy soul to him, which becomes so love-worthy a Savior, then thou
indeed love him, for he that loves the love of God, loves God himself: And
wherefore a^t thou sad for want of that love, but because thou love him in
some measure, and withal finds him beyond all that thou can think and love:
But I say, that which most concerns thee, is to love still more, and that thou
would be more earnest to love him, then to know that thou loves him.

Now I know no more effectual way to increase love to Jesus Christ, then to
believe his love. Christ Jesus is the Author and Finisher, both of Faith and
Love, and we love him, because he first loved us. Therefore the right discovery
of Jesus Christ, what he is, and what he has done for sinners, is that which
will of all things most prevail, to engage the soul unto him: But as long as ye
suspend you Faith upon the being, or increase of your Love, and obedience (as
the manner of too many is:) you take even such a course as he, that will not
plant the Tree till he see the fruit of it; which is contrary to common sense
and reason.

Since this then is the sum of true Religion, to believe in Christ, and to love
him, and so live to him; we shall wind up all that is spoken, into that
exhortation of the Apostles, Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have
heard. You have this Doctrine of Faith and Love delivered unto you, which may
be able to save your souls: Then I beseech you, hold them fast, salvation is in
them, they are sound words, and wholesome words; words of life, spirit and life
(as Christ speaks) as well as words of truth: But how will you hold them fast
that have them not at all, that know them not though you hear them? You who are
ignorant of the Gospel, and hear nothing but a sound of words in stead of sound
and wholesome words, how can you hold them fast? Can a man hold the wind in the
hollow of his hand, or keep in a sound within it? You know no more but a sound;
and a wind that passes by your ear, without observing either truth or life in
it. But then again, you who understand these sound words, and have a form of
knowledge, and of the Letter of the Law, what will that avail you? You cannot
hold it fast except you have it within you, and it is within you indeed when it
is in your heart, when the form of it is engraven upon the very soul in love.
Now though you understand the sound of these words and the sound of truth in
them, yet you receive not the living Image of them, which is Faith and Love.
Can you paint a sound! Can you form it, or engrave it on any thing? Nay, but
these sound words are more substantial and solid, they must be engraven on the
heart else you will never hold them; they may be easily plucked out of the
mouth and hand, by temptation, unless they be enclosed, and laid up in the
secret of the heart; as Mary laid them. The truth must hold thee fast, or thou
can not hold it fast, it must captivate thee, and bind thee with the Golden
chains of affection, which only is true freedom, or certainly thou will let it
go. Nay, you must not only have the truth received by love into your heart, but
as the Apostle speaks, you must also hold fast the form of sound words.
Scripture- words are sound words; the Scriptures method of teaching is sound
and wholesome: There may be unsound words used in expressing true matter; and
if a man shall give liberty to his own luxuriant Imagination, to expatiat in
notions, and expressions, either to catch the ear of the Vulgar, or to appear
some new discoverer of light, and Gospel-mysteries, he may as readily fall into
error and darkness, as into truth and light. Some men do busk up old truths,
Scripture-truths, into some new dress of language, and notions, and then give
them out for new discoveries, new lights; but in so doing, they often hazard
the loosing of the truth it self. We should beware and take heed of strange
words, that have the least appearance of evil, such as Christed; and Godded;
let us think it enough to be wise according to the Scripturs, and suspect all
that, as vain, empty, unsound, that tends not to the increase of faith in
Christ, and love and obedience unto him. As ordinarily the Dialect of those,
called Antinomians, is giving, and no granting, that they had no unsound mind,
yet I am sure they use unsound word to express sound matter: the clothes
should be shaped to the person: Truth is plain and simple, let words of truth
also be full of simplicity. I say no more, but leave that upon you, that you
hold fast even the very words of the Scriptures, and be not bewitched by the
vain pretentions of Spirit all Spirit pure and spiritual service, and such
like, to the casting off of the word of truth, as Letter, as Flesh, and such is
the high attainment of some in these days an high attainment indeed, and a
mighty progress in the way to destruction, the very last discovery of that
Antichrist and Man of sin. Oh, make much of the Scripture, for you shall neither
read nor hear the like of it in the world: Other books may have sound matter,
but there is still something in manner, or words unsound, no man can speak to
you truth in such plainness, and simplicity in such soundness also. But here
is both sound matter, and sound words, the truth holden out truly, health and
salvation holden out in as wholesome a manner as is possible. Matter and manner
are both divine.

Exodus 3. 13, 14. When they shall say unto me, What is his Name? What shall I
say? And God said, I AM THAT I AM.
WE are now about this question, What God is? But, who can answer it? Or if
answered, who can understand it? It should astonish us in the very entry, to
think that we are about to speak and to hear of his Majesty, Whom eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of any creature to
consider what he is. Think ye, blind men could have a pertinent discourse of
light and colors? would they form any suitable notion of that they had never
seen, and cannot be known but by seeing? What an ignorant speech would a deaf
man make of Sound, which a man cannot so much as know what it is, but by
hearing of it? How then can me speak of God, who dwells in such accessible
light; that, though we had our eyes opened, yet they are far less proportioned
to that resplendent brightness, than a blind eye is to the Suns light.

It uses to be a question, If there be a God? or, how it may be known that
there is a God? It were almost blasphemy to move such a question, if there were
not so much Atheism in the hearts of men, which makes us either to doubt, or
not firmly to believe, and seriously to consider it. But what may convince
souls of the Divine Majesty? Truly, I think, if it be not evident by its own
brightness, all the reason that can be brought, is but like a candles light to
see the Sun by. Yet, because of our weakness, the Lord shines upon us in the
Creatures, as in a Glass; and this is become the best way to take up the
glorious brightness of his Majesty, by reflection in his Word and Works. God
himself dwells in light inaccessible, that no man can approach unto; if any look
straight to that Sun of Righteousness, he shall be astonished, and amazed,
and see no more than in the very darkness: But the best way to behold the Sun,
is to look upon it in a pail of Water; and the surest way to know God by, is to
take him up in a state of humiliation and condescension, as the Sun in the
Rainbow, in his Word and Works, which are the Mirrours of his Divine Power and
goodness, and do reflect upon the hearts and eyes of all men the beams of that
increated light: If this be not the speech, that day utters unto day, and
night unto night, One self-being gave me a being; and if thou hear not that
language that is gone out into all the earth, and be not, as it were, noised
and possessed with all the sounds of every thing about thee, above thee,
beneath thee; yea, and within thee, all singing a melodious song to that
excellent Name which is above all names; and conspiring to give testimony to
the fountain of their being: If this, I say, be not so sensible unto thee, as
if a tongue and voice were given to every creature to express it, then,
indeed, we need not reason the business with the who has lost thy senses; do
but, I say, retire inwardly, and ask in sobriety and sadness, what thy
conscience thinks of it? And undoubtedly, it shall confess a Divine Majesty, at
least, tremble at the apprehension of what it either will not confess, or
slanderly believes: The very evidence of truth shall extort an acknowledgement
from it. If any man denied the Divine Majesty, I would seek no other argument
to persuade him, than what was used to convince an old Philosopher, who denied
the fire, they put his hand in it till he found it; so I say, return within to
thine own conscience and thou shall find the scorching heat of that Divine
Majesty burning it up, whom thou would not confess. There is an inward
feeling and sense of God that is imprinted in every soul by nature, that leaves
no man without such a testimony of God that makes him with out excuse: There is
no man so impious, so atheistiall, but whether he will or not, he shall feel at
some times that which he loves not to know or consider of; so that what rest
secure consciences have from the fear and terror of God, it is like the sleep
of a drunken man, who even when he sleeps does not rest quietly.

Now, although this inward stamp of a Deity be engraven on the minds of all,
and every creature without have some marks of his glory stamped on them; so
that all things a man can behold above him, or about him, or beneath him, the
most mean and inconsiderable creatures are pearls and transparent stones that
casts abroad the rays of that glorious brightness which shines on them; as if
a man were enclosed into a City builded all of precious stones, that in the
Sunshine all and every parcel of it, the streets, the houses, the roofs, the
windows, all of it, reflected into his eyes those Sun beams in such a manner,
as if all had been one mirror; though, I say, this be so, yet such is the
blockishnesse and stupidity of men, that they do not, for all this, consider
the glorious Creator; so that all these Lamps seem to be lighted in vain, to
show forth his glory, which though they do every way display their beams upon
us; that we can turn our eye no where, but such a ray shall penetrate it, yet we
either do not consider it, or the consideration of it takes not such deep root
as to lead home to God; therefore the Scriptures calls all natural men
Atheists, They have said in their heart, There is no God, Psalm. 14 1. All men
almost confess a God with their mouth, and think they believe in him; but
alas! Behold their actions, and hearts, what testimony they give, for a man's
walking and conversation is like an eyewitness, that one of them deserves more
credit than ten ear-witnesses of profession. Plus valet oculatus testis unus,
quam auriti december. Now, I may ask of you, What would ye do? How would ye walk,
if ye believed there were no God? Would ye be more dissolute and profane, and
more void of Religion? Would not Humane Laws bind you as much in that case as
they now do? For that is almost the restraint that is upon many, the fear of
temporal punishment, or shame among men; ^et your walking beside a heathens
conversation, and save that you say ye believe in the true God, and he denies
him, there is no difference: Your transgressions speaks louder than your
professions, that there is no fear of God before your eyes. Psalm. 36. 1. Your
practice belies your profession, you profess that you know God but in works you
deny him, says Paul. Tit. 1. 16. Ore quod dicitis, opere negatis. In these
words read in your audience, you have a strange question, and a strange answer;
a question of Moses, and an answer of God: The occasion of it was the Lords
giving to Moses a strange and uncouth Message, he was giving him commission to
go and speak to a King to dismiss and let go 600000 of his Subjects, and to
speak to a numerous nation, to depart from their own dwellings, and come out
whither the Lord should lead them: Might not Moses then say within himself, who
am I, to speak such a thing to a King? Who am I, to lead out such a mighty
People? Who will believe that thou have sent me? Will not all men call me a
deceiver, an Enthysiastical Fellow that takes upon me such a thing? Well then
says Moses to the Lord; Look, when I shall say, that the God of their Father
sent me unto them, they will not believe me; they have now forgotten thy
Majesty, and think that Thou art even like the Vanities of the Nations; they
cannot know their own portion from other Nations vain-Idols, which they have
given the same Name unto, and call God as well as thou art called: Now
therefore says he, when they ask me what thy proper Name is by which thou art
distinguished from all Idols, and all the works of thine own hands, and of men's
hands, what shall I say unto them? Here is the Question. But why asks thou my
Name, says the Lord to Jacob Genesis 32 29. Importing, that it is a high
presumption, and bold curiosity, to search such a wonder? Ask not my Name,
says the Angel to Manoah, for it is secret or wonderful Judge 13. 18. Its a
mystery, a dark hidden mystery, not for want of light, but for too much light;
its a secret, its wonderful; out of the reach of all created capacity Thou
shall call his Name wonderful. Isai. 6. 9. What name can express that in
comprehensible Majesty? The mind is more comprehensive than words, but the mind
and soul is too narrow to conceive him, O then! How short a garment must all
words, the most significant and comprehensive and superlative words be?
Solomon's soul and heart was enlarged as the sand of the sea, but O! its not
large enough for the Creator of it. What is his Name, or, What is his Sons
Name, if thou can tell? Prove. 30. 4. The Lord himself cannot express it to
our capacity, because we are not capable of what he can express, much less of
what he is, if he should speak to us of himself as he is, O! it should be dark
sayings, hid from the understandings of all living; we could reach no more of
it, but that it is a wonder, a secret. Here is the highest attainment of our
knowledge, to know there is some mystery in it, but not, What that mystery is:
Christ has a Name above all names; How then can we know that Name? It was
well said by some of old, Deus est (...), and yet (...) multorum nominum and
tamen nullius nominis and tamen nihil omnium, because he is all in all, and yet
none of all; Deus est quod vides, and quod non vides; you may call him by all
the works of his hands, for these are beams of his increated light, and streams
of his inexhaustible sea of goodness; so that what ever perfection is in them,
all that is eminently, yea infinitely in him; Therefore, says Christ, There is
one God, even God; and he calls himself the light, and life, and therefore you
have so many names of God in Scripture; there is no quality, no property or
virtue, that has the least shadow of goodness, but he is that essentially,
really, eternally and principally; So that the creature deserves not such
names, but as they participat of his fulness; he is the true light, the true
life: the Sun is not that true light, though it gives light to the Moon, and to
men, for it borrows its light and shinin from him g; all creatures are, and
shine but by reflection; Therefore these names do agree to them but by a
Metaphor, (so to speak) the propriety and truth of them is in him. As it is but
a borrowed kind of speech, to call a Picture or Image, a man, only because of
the representation and likeness to him, it communicates in one name with him,
Even so) in some manner) the creatures are but some shadows, pictures or
remblances and equivocal shapes of God; and whatever name they have, of good,
wise, strong, beautiful, true or such like, its but a barrowed speech from
God, whose Image they have, and yet poor vain man would be wise, thought wise
really, intrinsecally in himself, and properly, and calls himself so, which is
as great abuse of language, as if the Picture should call it self a true and
living man. But then, as you may call him al things because he is eminently and
gloriously all that is in all, the fountain and end of all, yet we must again
deny that he is any of these things, unus omnia and nihil omnium: we can find
no name to him; for what can we call him, when you have said, He is light; you
can form no other notion of him but from the resemblance of this created light;
but alas! that he is not, he so infinitely transcends that, and is distant from
it, as if he had never made it according to his likeness; His Name is above
all these names: but what it is himself knows, and knows only: If ye ask what
he is, we may glance at some notions and expressions, to hold him out: In
relation to the creatures, we may call him Creator, Redeemer, light, life,
omnipotent, good, merciful, just and such like: But if you ask what is his
proper Name in relation to himself, ipse novit, Himself knows that, we must be
silent, and silence in such a subject is the rarest Eloquence.

But let us hear what the Lord himself speaks, in answer to this Question, if
any can tell, sure he himself knows his own Name best; I am (says he) what I
am, sum qui sum, go tell them that I am has sent thee A strange answer, but an
Answer only pertinent for such a Question; What should Moses make of this?
What is he the wiser of his asking? Indeed he might be the wiser, it might
teach him more by silence, then all Humane Eloquence could instruct him by
speaking: His Question was curious, and behold an answer short and dark, to
confound vain and presumptuous mortality. I am what I am, an answer that does
not satisfy curiosity, for it leaves room for the first Question, and what art
thou? But abundant to silence says and sobriety, that it shall ask no more,
but sit down and wonder.

There are three things I conceive imported in this Name, Gods
unsearchablenesse, Gods unchangeablenes, and Gods absoluteness. His
ineffability, his eternity, and his sovereignty and independent substance, upon
whom all other things depend.

I say, 1. His unsearchablenesse: you know it is our manner of speech when we
would cover any thing from any, and not answer any thing distinctly to them, we
say, it is what it is. I have said what I have said, I will not make you wise
of it. Here then is the fittest notion you can take up God into, to find him
unsearchable beyond all understanding, beyond all speaking; the more ye speak
or think, to find him always beyond what ye speak or think; whatever you
discover of him, to conceive that Infitness is beyond that ad finem cujus
pertransiri non potest, the end of which you cannot reach, that he is an
unmeasureable depth, a boundless Ocean of perfection, that you can neither
found the bottom of it, nor find the breadth of it? Can a child wade the Sea,
or take it up in the hollow of its hand? when ever any thing of God is seen, he
is seen a wonder, Wonderful is the Name he is known by: All our knowledge
reaches no farther than admiration, who is like unto thee? Exodus 15. 11. Psalm.
89. 6, 7. and admiration speaks ignorance. The greatest attainment of knowledge
reaches but such a question as this, Who is like unto thee? To know only that
he is not like any other thing that we know, but not to know what he is: And
the different degrees of knowledge is but in more admiration or less, at his
unconceivablenesse, and in more or less affection expressed in such pathetick
interogations, O who is like theLord? How excellent is his Name? Here is the
greatest degree of Saints knowledge here-away, to ask with admiration and
affection such a question, that no answer can be given to, or none that we can
conceive or understand, so as to satisfy wondering, but such as still more
increases it. There is no other subject, but you may exceed it in
apprehensions, and in expressions: O how often are men's songs, and thoughts,
and discourses above the matter? But here is a subject that there is no excess
into, nay, there is no access unto it, let be excess in it; imagination that
can transcend the created Heavens and Earth, and fancy to it self millions of
new worlds, every one exceeding another, and all of them exceeding this in
perfection, yet it can do nothing here; that which at one instant can pass
from the one end of Heaven to the other, walk about the circumference of the
Heavens, and travel over the breadth of the Sea, yet it can do nothing here.
Can thou by searching find out God? Job 11. imaginations cannot travel in
these bounds, for his Center is every where, and his Circumference no where, as
an old Philosopher speaks of God Deus est, cujus Centrum est ubique,
Circumferentia nusquam, how shall it then find him out? There is nothing sure
here but to lose our selves in a mystery, and to follow his Majesty till we be
swallowed up with an Oh altitudo! O the depth and height, and length and
breadth of God! O the deepth of his wisdom! O the height of his power! O the
breadth of his love! And O the length of Eternity! Its not reason and
disputation, says Bernard will comprehend these, but holiness; and that by
stretching out the arms of fear and love, reverence and affection. What more
dreadful, than power that cannot be resisted, and wisdom that none can be hid
from, and what more lovely than the love wherewith he has so loved us, and his
unchangeablenesse which admits of no suspicion? (...) fear him who has a hand
that does all, and an eye that beholds all things and love him who has so
loved us, and cannot change. God has been the subject of the discourses and
debates of men in all ages, but Oh, Quam long e est in rebus qui est tam
Communis in vocibus? How little a portion has men understood of him? How has
he been hid from the eyes of all living. Every age must give this testimony of
him, we have heard of his fame, but he is hid from the eyes of all living. I
think that Philosopher that took it to his advisement, said more insilence than
all men have done in speaking. Simonides being asked by Hiero a King, what God
was? sought a day to deliberate in and think upon it, when the King sought an
account of his meditation about it: he desired yet two days more: and so as
often as the King asked him, he still doubled the number of the days in which he
might advise upon it. The King wondering at this, asked what the matter by those
delays: says he; Quanto magis considero, tanto magis obscurior mihi videtur;
he more I think on him he is the more dark and unknown to me: This was more
real knowledge then the many subtle disputations of those men, who by their
poor shell of finite capacity, and reason, presume to empty the ocean of Gods
infiniteness, by finding out answers to all the objections of carnal reason,
against all those mysteries and riddles of the Deity; I profess, I know
nothing can satisfy reason in this business, but to lead it captive to the
obedience of Faith, and to silence it with the faith of a mystery which we know
not. Paul's answer is one for all, and better then all the Syllogisms of such
men, what art thou, O man who disputest? Dispute thou, I will believe. Ut
intelligatur tacendum est, silence only can get some account of God, quiet and
humble ignorance in the admiration of such a Majesty, is the profoundest
knowledge. Non est mirum si ignoretur, majoris esset admirationis si sciatur.
It is no wonder that God is not known, all the wonder were to know and
comprehend such a wonder, such a mystery; it is a wonder indeed that he is not
more known; but when I say so, I mean that he is not more wondered at because he
is passing knowledge. If our eyes of flesh cannot see any thing almost when
they look straight and steadfastly upon the Sun, O what can the eye of the soul
behold when it is fixed upon the consideration of that shining and glorious
Majesty, will not that very light be as darkness to it, that it shall be as it
were darkened; and dazzled with a thick mist of light, in superlucente caligne,
confounded with that resplendent darkness. It is said that the Lord covers
himself with light as with a garment, and yet clouds and darkness are about
him and he makes darkness his covering. Psalm 18. 9. 10, 12. His inaccessible
light is this glorious darkness, that strikes the eyes of men blind; as in the
darkness, the Suns light is the night owls night and darkness, when a soul
can find no better way to know him by, then by these Names and notions by which
we deny our own knowledge, when it has conceived all of him it can, then, as
being overcome with that dazzling brightness of his Glory, to think him
inconceivable, and to express him in such terms as with all expresses our
ignorance. There is no name agrees more to God, the^ that which says, we
cannot name him we cannot know him, such as invisible, incomprehensible,
infinite etc. This Socrates an heathen professed to be all his knowledge, that he
knew he did know nothing, and therefore he preached an unknown God to the
Athenians, to whom after they erected an Altar with that inscription; To the
unknown God. I confess indeed, the most part of our discourses, of our
performances have such a writting on them, To the unknown God, because we think
we know him, and so we know nothing; But O that Christians had so much
knowledge of God, so much true wisdom, as solidly, and willingly to confess in
our souls our own ignorance of him, and then I would desire no other knowledge,
and growing in the grace of God, but to grow more and more in the believing
ignorance of such a Mystery, in the knowledge of an unknown, unconceiveable,
and unsearchable God, that in all the degrees of knowledge we might still
conceive we had found less, and that there is more to be found then before we
apprehended. This is the most perfect knowledge of God, that does not drive
away darkness, but increase it in the souls apprehension, any increase in it
does not declare what God is, or satisfy ones admiration in it, but rather
shows him to be more invisible and insearchable; so that the darkness of a
soul's ignorance is more manifested by this light, and not more covered and
ones own knowledge is rather darkened, and disappears in the glorious appearance
of this light, for in all new discoveries there is no other thing appears, but
that this which the soul is seeking is supereminently unknown, and still
further from knowledge than ever it conceived it to be: Therefore what ever you
conceive or see of God; if ye think ye know what ye conceive and see, its not
God ye see, but something of Gods, less than God; for it is said, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to consider what
he has laid up for them that love him: Now certainly, that is himself he has
laid up for them; therefore whatever thou conceive of him, and thinks now thou
knows him, this is not He; for he has not entered into man's heart to conceive
him: Therefore this must be thy souls exercise and progress in it, to remove
all things, all conceptions from him as not beseeming his Majesty, and to go
still foreward in such a dark negative discovery, till thou know not where to
seek him, nor find him next. Si quis Deu^ videat and intelligat quod vidit,
Deum non vidit, If any see God, and understand what they see, God they do not
see; for, God has no man seen, 1 John 4. 12. And no man knows the Father but
the Son, And none knows the Son but the Father, it is his own property, to know
himself, as to be himself: silent and seeing ignorance, is our safest and
highest knowledge.

Exodus 3. 14. I AM THAT I AM. Psalm. 19. 2. Before the mountains etc. from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God. Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Can thou by
searching find out God, etc.
THis is the chief point of saving knowledge, to know God: And this is the
first point or degree of the true knowledge of God, to discern how ignorant we
are of him, and find him beyond all knowledge: The Lord gives a difinition of
himself, but such a one as is no more clear than himself to our capacities: A
short one indeed, and you may think it says not much, I am, What is it that
may not say so? I am that I am: the least and most inconsiderable creature has
its own being; men's wisdom would have learned him to call himself by some high
styles and titles, as the manner and custom of Kings and Princes is, and such
as the flattery of men attributes unto them; you would think the superlatives
of wise, good, strong, excellent, glorious and such like, were more beseeming
his Majesty, and yet there it more Majesty in the simple style than in all
others; but a natural man cannot behold it, for it is spiritually discerned.
Let the pot sheards of the earth (says he) strive with the pot-sheards of the
earth, Isa. 45. 9. But let them not strive with their Maker. So I say, let
creatures compare with creatures, let them take superlative styles, in regard
of others, let some of them be called good, and some better, in the comparison
among themselves, but God must not enter in the comparison. Paul thinks it an
odious comparison, to compare present crosses to eternal glory, I think them
not worthy to be compared, says Paul, Romans 8. But how much more odious is it
to compare God with creatures. Call him Highest, call him most Powerful, call
him most Excellent, Almighty, most Glorious in respect of creatures; you do but
abase his Majesty to bring it down to any terms of comparison with them, which
is beyond all the bounds of understanding; all these do but express him to be
in some degree eminently seated above the creatures, as some creatures are
above all others, so ye do no more but make him the Head of all, as some
creaturs is the head of one line or kind under it; but what is that to his
Majesty? he speaks otherwise of himself, Isa. 40. 17. All nations are before
him as nothing, and they are accounted to him less then nothing. Then certainly
you have not taken up the true notion of God, when you have conceived him the
most eminent of all beings as long as any being appears as a being in his
sight, before whom all beings conjoined are as nothing; while you conceive God
to be the best, you still attribute something to the creature, for all
comparatives include the positive in both extremes: So then, you take up only
some different degrees between them who differs so infinitely, so
incomprehensibly; the distance betwixt heaven and earth is but a poor
similitude, to express the distance between God and Creatures; what is the
distance betwixt a being and nothing? Can you measure it? Can you imagine it?
Suppose you take the most high, and the most low, and measure the distance
betwixt them, you do but consider the difference betwixt two beings, but you do
not express how far nothing is distant from any of them: Now, if any thing
could be imagined less than nothing, could you at all guess at the vast
distance between it and a being; Now, so is it here, thus says the Lord, All
Nations, their glory, perfection and number, all of them, and all their
excellencies united, do not amount to the value of an unity, in regard of my
Majesty; all of them like Ciphers, join never so many of them together they can
never make up a number, they are nothing in this regard, and less than
nothing. So then we ought thus to conceive of God, and thus to attribute a
being and life to him, and as his sight, and in the consideration of it, all
created beings might evanish out of our sight; as the glorious light of the
Sun, though it no not annihilate the Stars, and make them nothing, yet it
annihilates their appearance to our senses, and makes them disappear, as if
they were not; although there be a great difference and inequality of the Stars
in the night, some lighter, some darker, some of the first magnitude, and some
of the second and third, etc. some of greater glory, and some of less: But in
the day time all are alike, all are darkened by the Suns glory: Even so it is
here, though we may compare one creature with another and find different
degrees of perfection and excellency, while we are only comparing them among
themselves; but let once the glorious brightness of God shine upon the soul,
and in that light all these lights shall be obscured, all their differences
unobserved; an Angel and a Man, a Man and a Worm differ much in glory and
perfection of being: But O, in his presence there is no such reckoning upon
this account, all things are alike, God infinitely distant from all, and so not
more or less: Infiniteness is not capable of such terms of comparison. This is
the reason why Christ says There is none good but one, even God. Why? because,
in respect of his goodness, nothing deserves that name lesser light in view of
the greater is a darkness, as less good in comparison of a greater, appears
evil: How much more then shall created light and created goodness lose that
name and notion, in the presence of that uncreated light, and self-sufficient
goodness: And therefore it is, that the Lord calls himself after this manner,
I am, as if nothing else were. I will not say, says he, that I am the highest,
the best and most glorious that is; that supposes other things to have some
being, and some glory that is worthy the accounting of: But I am, and there is
none else, I am alone, I lift up my hand to Heaven, and swear I live for ever.
There is nothing else can say, I am, I live, and there is none else; for there
is nothing has it of it self: Can any boast of that which they have borrowed,
and is not their own? As if the bird that had stolen from other birds its fair
feathers, should come forth and contend with them about beauty, would not they
presently every one pluck out their own, and leave her naked, to be an object
of mockery to all? Even so, since our breath and being is in our nostrils, and
that depends upon his Majesty's breathing upon us, if he should but keep in his
breath, as it were, we should vanish into nothing, he looks upon man as he is
not, Job 7. 8. That is a strange look, that looks man not only out of
countenance, but out of life and being, he looks him into the first nothing,
and then can he say, I live, I am; no, he must always say of himself in
respect of God, as Paul of himself in respect of Christ, I live, yet not I, but
Christ in me, I am, yet not I; but God in me: I live, I am, yet not I but in
God, in whom I live, and have my being. So that there is no other thing beside
God can say, I am, because all things are borrowed drops of this
self-sufficient fountain, and sparkles of this primitive light: Let any thing
interveen between the stream and the fountain and it is cut off and dried up;
let any thing be interposed between the Sun and the Beam and it evanishes.
Therefore this fountain being this original light this self being (...) as
Plato calls him deserves only the name of being; other things that we call
after that name are nearer nothing than God, and so in regard of his Majesty,
may more fitly be called nothing than something, you see then how profound a
mystery of Gods absolute self-sufficient perfection is infolded in these three
Letters, I am, or in these four, Jehovah; If you ask what is God, there is
nothing occures better then this, I am, or he that is, if I should say he is
the Almighty, the only wise, the most perfect, the most glorious, it is all
contained in that word, I am that I am, nempe hoc est ci esse, haec omnia esse:
For that is to be indeed, to be all those perfections simply, absolutely, and as
it were solely; If I say all that, and should reckon out all the
Scripture-Epithets, I add nothing; If I say no more, I deminish nothing.

As this holds out Gods absolute perfection, so we told you that it imports,
his eternity and unchangeablenesse, you know Pilats speech, what I have written
I have written, wherein he meant, that he would not change it, it should stand
so. So this properly belongs to Gods eternity, before the mountains were
brought forth, from everlasting to everlasting he is God, Psalm 90. 2. Now this
is properly to be, and this only deserves the name of being, which never was
nothing, and never shall be nothing, which may always say, I am, you know it is
so with nothing else but God: The Heavens and Earth with the things therein
could not say, 6000. years ago, I am. Adam could once have said, I am, but now
he cannot say it; for that self being and fountain-being has said to him,
Return to dust; and so it is with all the generations past, where are they now?
They were, but they are not: And we then were not, and now are; for we are come
in their place, but within a little time, who of us can say, I am: No, we flee
away and are like a dream, as when one awaketh; we are like a tale that is
told, that makes a present noise, and it is past, within few years this
generation will pass, and none will make mention of us, our place will not
know us, no more than we do now remember those who have been before: Christ
said of John, He was a burning and shining light, he was, says he, but now he
is not: but Christ may always say, I am the light and life of men. Man is, but
look a little backward, and he was not; you shall find his original: and step a
little foreward and he shall not be, you shall find his end, but God is Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end: but oh, who can retire so far backward as to
apprehend a beginning, or go such a start forward as to conceive an end in such
a being as is the beginning, and end of all things, but without all beginning
and end? Whose understanding would it not confound? There is no way here but to
flee into Paul's Sanctuary, O the height and breadth and depth! We cannot
imagine a being, but we must first conceive it nothing and in some instant
receiving its being, and therefore can thou by searching find out God?
Therefore, what his being is, has not entered into the heart of man to
consider. If a man would live out the space but of two generations, he would be
a worlds wonder; but if any had their days prolonged as the Patriarchs before
the flood, they would be called ancient indeed, but then the heavens and earth
are far more ancient; we may go backward the space of near 6000. years in our
own minds, and yet be as far from his beginning as we were, when we are come to
the beginning of all things, a man's imagination may yet extend to self-further,
and suppose to it self as many thousands of years before the beginning of time,
as all the Angels and men of all nations and generations from the beginning, if
they had been employed in no other thing but this, could have summed up: And
then suppose a product to be made of all the several sums of years, it would
be vast and unspeakable, but yet your imagination could reach further, and
multiply that great sum as often into it self as there are unites into it:
Now, when you have done all this, you are never a whit nearer the days of the
ancient of days. Suppose then this should be the only exercise of men and
Angels throughout all eternity, all this mavelous Arithmetic would not
amount unto the least shadow of the countenance of him who is from everlasting:
All that huge product of all the multiplications of men and Angels, has no
proportion unto that never beginning, and never ending duration: The greatest
sum that is imaginable has a certain proportion to the least number, that it
contains it so often and no oftener, so that the least number being multiplied,
will amount unto the greatest that you can conceive. But O, where shall a soul
find it self here? It is enclosed between infiniteness before, and infiniteness
behind, between two everlastings, which way soever it turns, there is no out
going, which way soever it looks, it must lose it self in an infinitness round
about it, it can find no beginning, and no end, when it has wearied it self in
searching, which if it find not, it knows not what it is, and cannot tell what
it is. Now, what are we then? O what are we, who so magnify our selves: We are
but of yesterday, and know nothing, Job 8. 9. Suppose that we had endured the
space of 1000. years, yet, says Moses, Psalm. 90. 4. A thousand years are but
as yesterday in thy sight. Time has no succession to thee, thou beholdest at
once what is not at once, but in several times, all that has not the
proportion of one day to thy days: we change in our days, and are not that to
day we were yesterday, but he is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever,
Heb. 13. 8. Every day we are dying, some part of our life is taken away; we
leave still one day more behind us, and what is behind us is gone and cannot be
recovered: Though we vainly please our selves in the number of our years, and
the extent of our life, and the vicissitudes of time, yet the truth is, we are
but still losing so much of our being and time as passes: First, we lose our
childhood, then we lose our manhood, and then we leave our old age behind us
also, and there is no more before us, even the very present day we decide it
with death: But when he moves all things, he remains immovable; though days
and years be in a continual flux and motion about him, and they carry us down
with their force, yet he abides the same for ever, even the earth that is
established so sure; and the Heavens that are supposed to be incorruptible, yet
they wax old as does a garment, but He is the same, and his years have no end,
Psalm. 102. 26, 27. Sine principio principium, absque finc finis, cui
praeteritum non abit, haud adit futurum, ante omnia, post omnia, totus, unus
ipse, He is the beginning without any beginning, the end without an end, there
is nothing bypast to him, and nothing to come, sed uno mentis c^rnit in ictu,
quae sunt, quae erunt, quae fuerantque, He is one that is all, before all,
after all, and in all: He beholds out of the exalted and supereminent Tower of
Eternity, all the successions and changes of the creatures, and there is no
succession, no mutation in his knowledge, as in ours, Known to him are all his
works, from the beginning. He can declare the end before the beginning, for he
knows the end of all things before he gives them beginning: Therefore he is
never driven to any consultation upon any emergent, or incident, as the wisest
of men are, who could not foresee all accidents and events, but He is in one
mind, says Job, and that one mind, and one purpose is one for all, one
concerning all, he had it from everlasting, and who can turn him? For He will
accomplish what his soul desires.

Now, can thou by searching find out God? Can thou a poor mortal creature,
ascend up unto the height of Heaven, or descend down unto the depths of Hell?
Can thou travel abroad, and compass all the Sea and dry Land, by its
longitude and latitude? Would any martal creature undertake such a voyage, to
compass the Universe? Nay, not only so, but to search into every corner of it,
above and below, on the right hand and on the left: No certainly, unless we
suppose a man whose head reaches unto the height of Heaven, and whose feet is
down unto the depths of hell, and whose arms streached out can fathom the
length of the Earth, and breadth of the Sea, unless, I say, we suppose such a
creature, then it is in vain to imagine, that either the height of the one, or
the depth of the other, the length of the one, and the breadth of the other can
be found out and measured: Now if mortal creatures connot attain the measure of
that which is finite; O then, what can a creature do, what can a creature know
of him that is infinite, and the maker of all these things, you cannot compass
the Sea and Land, how then can a soul comprehend him, who has measured the
waters in the hollow of his hand, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a
measure, and the mountains he weighs in scales, and the hill in a balance,
Isa. 40. 10. Thou cannot measure the circomference of the heaven, how then
can thou find out him, who metteth out the heaven with his span and
streacheth them out as a curtain? Isa. 40. 12. 22. You cannot number the
Nations, or perceive the magnitude of the Earth, and the huge extent of the
Heavens, What then can thou know of him who sits on the circle of the
earth, and the inhabitants are but as Grasse-hoppers before him, and he
spreads out the Heaven as a Tent to dwell into? He made all the pins and
stakes of this Tabernacle, and he fastened them below, but upon nothing, and
stretches this curtain about them, and above them; and it was not so much
difficulty to him, as to you to draw the curtain about your Bed, for, he spoke
and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast. Can thou by searching him
out? And yet thou must search him, not so much out of curiosity to know what he
is, for he dwells in inaccessible light which no man has seen, nor no man can
see, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Not so much to find him, as to be found of him, or to find
what we can not know when we have found; Hic est qui nunquam quaeri frustra
potest cum tamen inveniri non potest; you may seek him, but though you never
find him, yet ye shall not seek him in vain, for ye shall find blessedness in
him: Though you find him, yet can you search him out unto perfection? Then what
you have found were not God? How is it possible for such narrow hearts to frame
an apprehension, or receive an impression of such an immense greatness, and
eternal goodness? Will not a soul lose its power of thinking and speaking,
because there is so much to be thought and spoken; and it so transcends all
that it can think or speak? Silence then must be the best Rhetoric; and the
sweetest eloquence, when eloquence it self must become dumb and silent, it is
the abundance and excess of that inaccessible light, that has no proportion
to our understandings; that strikes us as blind as in the darkness the want of
light: All that we can say of God is, that whatsoever we can think or conceive,
he is not that, because he has not entered into the heart of man to conceive,
and that he is not like any of these things which we know, unto which if he be
not like; we cannot frame any similitude or likeness of him in our knowledge?
What shall we then do? Seek him, and search him indeed; but if we cannot know
him, to reverence fear and adore what we know: So much of him may be known, as
may teach us our duty and show unto us our blessedness, let then all our
inquiries of him have a special relation to this end, that we may out of love
and fear of such a glorious and good God, worship and serve him, and compose
ourselves according to his will, and wholly to his pleasure: what ever thou
knows of God, or searches of him, it is but a vain speculation, and a work of
curiosity, if it do not lead to this end; to frame and fashion thy soul to an
union and communion with him in love; If it do not discover thy self unto thy
self that in that light of Gods glorious Majesty thou may distinctly behold
thy own vileness and wretched misery, thy darkness and deadness and utter
impotency. The Angels that Isaiah saw attending God in the Temple, had wings
covering their faces, and wings covering their feet, those excellent spirits
who must cover their feet from us, because we cannot behold their glory, as
Moses behooved to be veiled, yet they cannot behold his glory, but must cover
their face from the radiment and shining brightness of his Majesty, yet they
have other two wings to flee with; and being thus composed in reverence and
fear to God, they are ready to execute his commands willingly and swiftly. Isa.
1. 2, 3. etc. But what is the use Isaiah makes of all this glorious sight? Woe
is me, I am a man of polluted lips, etc. Oh all is unclean, People and Pastor:
He had known doubtless something of it before; but now he sees it of new as if
he had never seen it: the glory of God shining on him, does not pull him up in
arogancy, and conceit of the knowledge of such profound mysteries, but he is
more abased in himself by it, it shines into his heart, and whole man, and,
lets him see all unclean within and without, and so it was with Job. Job 42. 5.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but as long as it was hear say,
I thought my self something; I often reflected upon my self and actions with a
kind of self complacency and delight: But now says he, since I have seen thee
by the seeing of the eye, I abhor my self in dust and ashes, I cannot look
upon my self with patience, without abhorrency and detestation, self-love made
me loath other men's sins more then mine own, and self-love did cover mine own
from me, it presented me to my self in a seigned likeness, but now I see my
self in my true shape, and all coverings stripped off, Thy light has pierced
into my soul, and behold I cannot endure to look upon my self: Here now is the
true knowledge of Gods Majesty, which discovers within thee a mystery of
iniquity; and here is the knowledge of God indeed, which abases all thing beside
God, not only in opinion, but in affection, that attracts and units thy soul to
God, and draws it from thy self and all created things, this is a right
discovery of Divine purity and glory, that spots even the cleanness of Angels,
and stains the pride of all glory, much more will it represent filthiness; as
filthiness, without a covering. Its knowledge and science (falsely so called)
that pusseth up, for true knowledge emptieth a soul of it self, and humbles a
soul in it self, that it may be full of God. He that thinks he knows any thing,
he knows nothing as he ought to know.

This then is the first property or mark of saving knowledge of God, it removes
all ground of vain confidence; that a soul cannot trust unto it self; and then
the very proper intent of it is, that a soul may trust in God, and depend on
him in all things: For this purpose the Lord has called himself by so many
names in Scripture, answerable to our several necessities, and difficulties,
that he might make known to us how allsufficient he is, that so we may turn our
eyes and hearts toward him: This was the intent of this name, I am, that Moses
might have a support of his faith; for if he had looked to outward appearance
was it not almost a rediculous thing, and like a vain fancy, for a poor
inconsiderable man to go to a King with such a message, that he would dismiss
so many subjects? And was it not attempt of some mad man to go about to lead so
many thousands from a wicked tyrannical King, into another Nation? Well, says
the Lord, I am: I who give althings a being, will give a being to my promise; I
will make Pharaoh hearken, and the people obey. Well then, what is it that this
name of God will not answer? It is a creating Name, a Name that can bring all
things out of nothing by a Word; if he be such as he is, then he can make of us
what he pleases. If our souls had this name constantly engraven on our hearts:
O what power would Divine promises and threatenings have with us? I, even I, am
he that comfort thee, says he: If we believed that it were he indeed, the
Lord Jehovah, how would we be comforted? How would we praise Him by His Name
IAH? How would we stoop unto him, and submit unto His blessed will? If we
believed this, would we not be as dependent on him as if we had no being in our
selves? Would we not make him our habitation and dewlling place? And conclude
our own stability, and the stability of his Church from his unvariable
eternity, as the Psalmist, Ps. 90. 1. and Ps. 102. ult. How can we think of
such a fou^tain being, but we must withal acknowledge our selves to be shadows
of his goodness, and that we ow to him what we are, and so consecrate and
dedicate our selves to his glory? How can we consider such a self being,
independent; and creating goodness, but we must have some desire to cleave to
him, and some confidence to trust in him? Now, this is to know him. When we
think on his unchangeablenesse, let us consider our own vanity whose glory and
perfection is like a summer flower, or like a vapor ascending for a little
time, whose best estate is altogether vanity: Our purposes are soon broken off,
and made of none effect; our resolutions change. This is a Character of
Mortality, we are not always alike, Non sibi constare, nec ubique and semper
sibi parem eundemque esse. To be now one thing, and then another thing, is a
property of sinful and wretched man, therefore let us cease from man whose
breath is in his nostrils, and not trust in Princes who shall die, far less in
our selves who are less then the least of men: But let us put our trust in
God, who changes not, and we shall not be consumed; our waters shall not fail, we
shall never be ashamed of any hope we have in him. There is nothing else you
trust in, but undoubtedly it shall prove your shame and confusion; in sum,
whatever you shall hear or know ofGod, know that i^ is vain and empty, unless
it descend down into the heart to fashion it to his fear and love, and extend
unto the outward man to conform it to obedience; you are but vain in your
imaginations, and your foolish hearts are darkened, while when you know God you
glorify him not as God: If that be not the fruit and end of knowle^ge, that
knowledge shall be worse to thee than ign^rance, for both it brings on judicial
hardening here, and will be thy solemn accuser and witness against thee
hereafter, Romans 1. 21, 24. The knowledge of Jesus Christ, truly so called, is
neither barren, nor unfruitful, for out of its root and sap, springs out
humility, self-abasing, confidence in God, patience in tribula ions, meekness
in provocations, temperance and sobriety in lawful things, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6,
7, 8.

Exodus 24 5, 6, 7, 8. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc.
THere is nothing can separate between God and a people but iniquity, and yet
he is very loath to separate even for that; he makes many shows of departing,
that so we may hold him fast; and indeed he is not difficult to be holden. He
threatens often to remove his presence from a person, or Nation, and he
threatens, that he may not indeed remove, but that they may entreat him to
stay, and he is not hard to be entreated: Who is a God like unto him, slow to
anger, and of great mercy? he is long of being provoked, and not long provoked;
for it is like the anger of a Parents love: Love takes on anger, as the last
remedy, and if it prevail, it is as glad to put it off, as it was unwilling to
take it on. You may see a lively picture of this in Gods dealing with Moses and
this people in the preceding Chapter. He had long endured this rebellious and
obstinate people, had often threatened to cut them off and yet as it were, loath
to do it, and repenting of it, he su^ers himself to be entreated for them; but
all in vain to them, they corrupted their way still more: And in the 32. Chap.
falls in gross Idolatry, the great trespass that he had given them so solemn
warni^g of often, whereupon great wrath is conceived. And the Lord, Chap. 33.
1. threatens to depart from them, Go your way, says he, to Canaan, but I will
not go with you; take your venture of any judgments, and the people of the
Lands cruelty: Here is a sad farewell to Israel, and who would think he could
be detained after all that? Who would think that he could be entreated? And yet
he is not entreated, he is not requested before he give some ground of it, and
before he first condescends; Go, says he, and put off thy ornaments from thee,
that I may know what to do unto thee. Will he then accept a repenting people,
and is there yet hope of mercy? Should he that is going away show us the way to
keep him still? And he that flees from us, will he strengthen us to pursue and
follow after him? This is not after the manner of men, it is true, whose
compassion fails, when their passion arises, but this is the manner and method
of grace; or of him who waits to be gracious: He flees so as he would have a
follower: yea, while he seems to go away, he draws the soul that it may run
after him; hence is that word, Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after thee;
thy righe hand upholds me. Well, the people mourns and puts off their ornaments
in sign of humiliation and abasement, but all this death not pacify and quench
the flame that was kindled: Moses takes the Tabernacle out of the Camp, the
place of judgment where God spoke with the people; and the cloud, the sign of
Gods presence removes: In a word, The signs of Gods loving and kind presence
departs from them, to signify that they were divorced from God, and in a
manner, the Lord by Moses excommunicates all the People, and Rulers both, and
draws away these holy things from the contagion of a profane people: But yet
all is not gone; he goes far off, but not out of sight, that you may always
follow him, and if you follow, he will stand still; he is never without the
reach of crying, though we do not perceive him. Now, in this sad case you may
have a trial who is godly: Every one that seeks the Lord will separate from the
unholy Congregation, and follow the Tabernacle: And this affects the whole
people much, that they all worship in the tent-doors. Now, in the mean time God
admits Moses to speak with him; though he will not speak to the people, yet he
will speak with their Mediator, a typical Mediator, to show us that God is
well pleased in Christ, and so all Christ's intercessions and requests for us
will get a hearing; when they are come once in talking, the business is taken
up, for he is not soon angry, and never implacably angry, slow to anger, and
keeps it not long: Moses falling familiar with God, not only obtains his
request for the people, but becomes more bold in a request for his own
satisfaction and confirmation: He could not endure to lead that people, except
God went with him, and having the promise of his going with them, he cannot
endure distance with him, but aspires to the nearest Communion that may be: Oh
that it were so with us. His request is, That the Lord would show him his
glory; Had he not seen much of this already? And more than any man ever saw,
when he spoke in the Mount with God, etc. Nay, but he would see more, for there
is always more to be seen, and there is in a godly soul always more desire to
see it, the more is seen, the more is loved and desired; tasting of it only
begets a kindly appetite after it, and the more tasted, still the fresher and
more recent; But yet it is above both desire and fruition, thou cannot see my
face etc. All our knowledge of God, all our seize of experience of him,
do reach but to some dark and confused apprehension of what he is; the clearest
and nearest sight of God in the world, is, as if a man were not known but by
his back, which is a great point of estrangement: It Is said, in the heaven we
shall see him face to face, and fully as he is, because then the soul is made
capable of it.

Two things in us here puts us in an incapacity of nearness with God,
Infirmity, and Iniquity? Infirmity in us cannot behold his glory, it is of so
weak eyes that the brightness of the Sun would strike it blind; and Iniquity
in us, he cannot behold it, because he is of pure eyes, that can look on no
unclean thing; it is the only thing in the Creation that Gods holiness has
antipathy at, and therefore he is still about the destroying of the body of sin
in us, about the purging of all filthiness of the flesh and spirit; and till
the soul be thus purged of all sin, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, it
cannot be a Temple for an immediate vision of him; and an immediate exhibition
of God to us. Sin is the wall of partition, and the thick cloud that eclipses
his glory from us; it is the opposite Hemesphere of darkness, contrary to
light, according to the access or recesse of Gods presence, it is more or
less dark; the more sin reigns in thee, the less of God is in thee, and the
more sin be subdued, the readier and nearer is Gods presence: but let us
comfort our selves: That one day shall put off both Infirmity and Iniquity,
mortality shall put on immortality, and corruption be clothed with
incorruption; we shall leave the rags of mortal weakness in the grave, and our
menstruous clothes of sin behind us, and then shall the weak eyes of flesh be
made like Eagles eyes, to behold the Sun; and then shall the soul be clothed
with holiness, as with a Garment, which God shall delight to look upon, because
he sees his own Image in that glass.

We come to the Lords satisfying of Moses desire and proclaiming his Name
before him; it is himself only can tell you what he is, it is not Ministers
preaching, or other discourse, can proclaim that Name to you; we may indeed
speak over those words unto you, but it is the Lord that must write that Name
upon your heart, he only can discover his glory to your spirit: There is a
spirit of life which cannot be enclosed in Letters and Syllables, or
transmitted through your ears into your hearts, but he himself must create it
inwardly, and stir up the outward sense and feeling of that Name, of those
Attributes: Faith indeed comes by hearing, and our knowledge in this life is
through a glass, darkly, through ordinances and senses; but there must be an
inward teaching and speaking to your souls to make that effectual, the
anointing teaches you all things, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. Alas! its the separation of
that from the word that makes it so unprofitable; if the spirit of God were
inwardly writing what the word is teaching, then should our souls be living
Epistles, that ye might read Gods Name on them: O, be much in employing of, and
depending on him that teaches to profit who only can declare unto your souls
what he is.

These names express his Essence or Being, and his Properties, what he is in
himself, and what he is to us; in himself he is Jehovah, or a self-being,
(...), as we heard in the 3. Chap. I am that I am, and EL, a strong God, or
Almighty God; which two hold out to us, the absolute incomprehensible
perfection of God, eminently and infinitely enclosing within himself all
perfections of the creatures; the unchangeable and mutable being of God who
was, and is, and is to come without succession, without variation, or shadow of
turning; and then the Almighty power of God, by which without difficulty, by
the inclination and beck of his will and pleasure, he can make, or unmake all,
create or annihilate, to whom nothing is impossible; which three if they were
pondered by us, till our souls received the stamp of them, they would certainly
be powerful to abstract and draw our hearts from the vain, changeable, and
empty shadow of the creature, and gather our scattered affections that are
parted among them, because of their unsufficiency, that all might unite in one,
and join with this self-sufficient and eternal God; I say, if a soul did indeed
believe and consider how All sufficient he is, how insufficient all things else
are, would it not cleave to him and draw near to him. Psalm. 73. ult It is the
very torment and vexation of the soul to be thus racked, distracted and divided
about many things; and therefore many, because there is none of them can supply
all our wants, our wants are infinite, our desires insatiable, and the good that
is in any thing is limited and bounded, it can serve one but for one use, and
another for another use, and when all are together, they can but supply some
wants, but they leave much of the soul empty: But often these outward things
crosses one another, and cannot consist together; and hence arises much strife
and debate in a soul, his need requires both, and both will not agree, But O
that you could see this one universal good, One for all, and above all, your
souls would choose him certainly, your souls would trust in him; ye would say,
Ashur soal not save us, we will not ride on horses: Creatures shall not satisfy
us, we will seek our happiness in thee, and no where else, since we have
tasted this new wine, away with the old, the new is better. I beseech you make
God your friend, for he is a great one; whether he be a friend or an enemy, he
has two properties, that make him either most comfortable, or most terrible,
according as he is at peace or war with souls, Eternity and Omnipotency. You
were once all enemies to him. O consider what a Party you have, an Almighty
Party, and unchangeable Party; and if you will make peace with him, and that in
Christ, then know, he is the best friend in the world, because he is
unchangeable and Almighty; if he be thy friend, he will do all for thee he can
do, and thou have need of; But many friends willing to do, yet have not
ability, but he has power to do what he will and pleases; Many friends are
changeable, their affections dry up, of themselves die; and therefore even
Princes friendship is but a vain confidence, for they shall die, and then their
thoughts of favor perish with them, but he abides the same for all
Generations, there is no end of his duration, and no end of his affection; He
can still say, I am that I am; What I was, I am, and I will be what I am; men
cannot say so, they are like the Brooks that the companies of Teman looked
after, and thought to have found them in Summer as they left them in Winter;
but behold they were dried up, and the companies ashamed. God cannot make thee
ashamed of thy hope, because he is faithful and able, Ability and Fidelity is
a sure Anchor to hold by in all storms and tempests.

Such is God in himself; now, there are two manner of ways he vents himself
toward the Creatures, In a comfortable way, or in a terrible way. This glorious
perfection, and Almighty power, has an issue upon sinners, and it runs in a
twofold channel, of mercy and justice: Of mercy toward miserable sinners that
finds themselves lost, and flee unto him, and take hold of his strength; and
justice toward all those that flatter themselves in their own eyes, and
continue in their sins and put the evil day far off: There is no mercy for
such as fear not justice, and there is no Justice for such as flee from it unto
mercy. The Lord exhibites himself in a twofold appearance, according to the
condition of sinners, He sits on a Throne and tribunal of Grace and mercy, to
make access to the vil est sinner, who isafraid of his wrath, and would (...)
be at peace with him; and he sits on a Throne of justice and wrath to seclude
and debar presumptuous sinners from his. Holiness. There were two mountains
under the Law, one of cursings, another of blessings; These are the Mountains
God lets his Throne upon, and from these he speaks, and sentences mankind: From
the Mountain of cursings he has pronounced a curse. and condemnatory sentence
upon all flesh, for all have sinned, therefore he concludes all under sin, that
all flesh might stop their mouth, and the whole world become guilty before God.
Now, the Lord having thus condemned all Mankind because of disobedience, he
sits again upon the Mountain of Blessings, and pronounces a sentence of
absolution; of as many as have taken with the sentence of condemnation, and
appealed to his grace and Mercy, and those which do not so, the sentence of
condemnation stands above their heads unrepealed. He erects his Tribunal of
Justice in the Word for this end, that all flesh might once be convicted before
him, and therefore he cites, as it were, and summons all men to fifth themselves
and compear before his Tribunal, to be judged; he lays out an accusation, in
the Word against them; he takes their consciences witness of the truth of all
that is charged on them, and then pronounces that sentence on their conscience,
Cursed is he that abides not in all things, which the conscience subsumes and
concludes it self accursed, and subscribes to the equity of the sentence; and
thus the man is guilty before God, and his mouth stopped; he has no excuses;
no pretenses, he can see no way to escape from Justice, and God is justified by
this means, in his speaking and judging Psalm. 51. 4. The soul ratifies and
confirms the truth and justice of all our threatenings and judgments. Romans 3.
4. Now for such souls as join with God in judging and condemning themselves;
the Lord has erected a Throne of grace, and Tribunal of mercy in the word,
whereupon he has set his Son Jesus Christ, Psalm. 2. 6. and 89. 14. and 45. 6.
Heb. 1. 8. And O, this Throne is a comfortable Throne, mercy and truth goes
before the face of the King to welcome and entertain miserable sinners, and to
make access to them. And from this Throne Jesus Christ holds out the Scepter of
the Gospel to invite sinners, self-condemned sinners, to come to him alone, who
has gotten all final judgment committed to him, that he may give eternal
life to whom he will Ioh. 5. 21, 22. O that is a sweet and ample Commission
given to our Friend and Brother Jesus Christ, power to repeal sentences past
against us, power to loose them whom Justice has bound, power and authority to
absolve them whom justice has condemned, and to bless them whom the Law has
cursed, and to open their mouth to praise whose mouth sin and guiltiness has
stopped; power to give the answer of a good conscience to thy evil
self-tormenting conscience, in a word, he has power to give life, to make
alive, and heal those who are killed or wounded by the Commandment. Now I say
seeing God has of purpose established this Throne of mercy in the Word, thou
may well after receiving and acknowledging of the justice of the curse of
the Law, appeal to divine mercy and grace, sitting on another Throne of the
Gospel, thou may if thy conscience urge thee to despair, and to conclude there
is no hope, thou may appeal, I say, from thy conscience, from Satan, from
Justice unto Jesus Christ, who is holding out the Scepter to thee; the Minister
calls thee: Rise and come, stand no longer before that Bar, for it is a
subordinate Judicatory, there is a way to redress thee by a higher court of
Grace: Thou may say to justice, to Satan, to thy own Conscience, It is true, I
confess that I deserve that sentence; I am guilty and can say nothing against
it, while I stand alone, but though I cannot satisfy, and have not; yet there
is one Jesus Christ, who gave his life a ransom for many, and whom God has
given as a propitiation for sins; he has satisfied and paid the debt in my
name; go and apprehend the Cautioner, since he has undertaken it, nay, he has
done it and is absolved. Thou had him in thy hands, O justice! Thou had him
Prisoner under the power of death; since you have let him go, then he is
acquitted from all the charge of my sins; and therefore, since I know that he is
now a King, and has a Throne to judge the world and plead the cause of his
poor sheep, I will appeal to him; refer the cause to his decision, I will make
my supplication to him, and certainly he will hear, and interpole himself
between wrath and me he will rescind this sentence of condemnation, since he
himself was condemned for us, and is justified, it is Christ that died, nay
rather is risen again, who shall condemn me? He is near that justifies me. Romans
S. 33. 34. Now i^ thou do indeed flee into him for refuge, that City is open
for thee, and nothing to prejudge thy entry: but no curse, no condemnation can
enter in it. Romans 8. 1. He will justify and absolve thee from all things
whereof the Law could not justify thee, but condemn thee, there is
forgivenness with him, that he may be feared. David may teach thee this manner
of appellation, Ps. 130. and 142. 2. of appealing from the deserved curse to
free undeserved blessing and mercy in Christ.

Let us consider this Name of the Lord, and it shall answer all our suspicions
of him; all our objections against coming to him and believing in him, it is
certain, Ignorance is the mother of unbelief, together with the natural
perverseness of our heatts, if we knew his Name we would trust in him, if his
Names were pondered and considered, we would believe in him, Satan knows
this, and therefore his great slight and cunning is, to hold our minds fixed on
the consideration of our misery and desperate estate, he keeps the awakned
conscience still upon that comfortless sight, and he labors to represent God
by halfes, and that it is a false representation of God, he represents him as
clothed with justice and vengeance, as a consuming fire, in which light a soul
can see nothing but desperation written; and he labors to hold out the
thoughts of his mercy and grace, or diverts a soul from the consideration of
his promises, whence it comes, that they are not established, that though
salvation be near, yet it is far from them in their sense and apprehension,
therefore I say, you should labor to get an entire sight of God, and you shall
see him best in his word, there he reveals himself, and there you find, if ye
consider, that which will make you fear him indeed, but never flee from him,
that which may abase you, but withal embolden you to come to him, though
trembling: what ever thought possess thee of thine own misery, of thy own
guiltiness, labor to counterpoise that which a thought of his mercy and free
promises: what ever be suggested of his holiness, and Justice, hea^ himself
speak out his own Name, and thou shall hear as much of mercy and grace, as may
make these not terrible unto thee, though high and honorable. The Lord has so
framed the expression and proclamation of his name in this place, that first a
word of Majesty and power is premised (The Lord, The Lord God) that it may
compass our hearts in fear and reverence of such a glorious One, and make a
preparatory impression of the Majesty of our God, which indeed is the
foundation of all true faith. It begins to adore and admire a Deity, a Majesty
hid from the world, the thoughts of his power and glory possesses the soul
first, and makes it begin to tremble to think that it has such a high and Holy
One to deal with.

But in the next place, you have the most sweet, alluring, comforting styles
that can be imagined, to meet with the trembling and languishing condition of a
soul that would be ready to faint before such a Majesty, here mercy takes it by
the hand, and gives a cordial of grace, pardon, forgiveness, etc. to it, which
revives the soul of the humble, and intermingles some rejoicing with the former
trembling. Majesty and greatness goes before to abase, and humble the soul in
its own eyes, and mercy and goodness seconds them, to lift up those who are
low, and exalt the humble, and in the description of this, the Lord spends more
words, according to the necessity of a soul, to signify to us how great and
strong consolation may be grounded on his Name, how accessible he is, though he
dwell in inaccessible light, how lovely he is though he be the high and the
lofty one, how good he is, though he be great, how merciful he is, though he be
majestic: In a word, that those that flee to him may have all invitation, all
encouragement to come, and nothing to discourage, to prejudge their welcome,
that whoever, will, may come, and nothing may hinder on his part and then after
all this, he subjoynes a word of his Justice, in avenging sin, to show us that
he leaves that as the last, that he assayes all gaining ways of mercy with us,
and that he is not very much delighted with the death of sinners, that so
whosoever perishes may blame themselves, for hating their own salvation, and
forsaking their own mercy.

Now whoever thou art that apprehends a dreadful and terrible God, and thy self
a miserable and wretched sinner, thou can find no comfort in Gods highness
and power, but it looks terrible upon thee, because thou doubts of his
good will to save and pardon thee: thou say with the blind man, if thou will, thou can do it; Thou art a strong God; but what comfort can I have in thy
strength, since I know not thy good will? I say, the Lord answers thee in this
name, I am merciful, says the Lord, if thou be miserable, I am merciful as
well as strong, if thou have sin and misery, I have compassion and pity: my
mercy may be a copy and pattern to all men to learn it of me, even toward
their own brethren, Luke 6. 36. Therefore he is called the Father of mercies. 2
Cor. 1. 3. Misericors est cui alterius miseria cordi est. Mercy has its very
name from misery, for it is no other thing than to lay another misery to
heart, not to despise it, not to add to it, but to help it, it is a strong
inclination to ^uccour the misery of sinners, therefore thou needs no other
thing to commend thee to him: art thou miserable, and knows it indeed? Then he
is merciful, and know that also, these two suit well.

Nay, but says the convinced soul, I know not if he will be merciful to me,
for what am I? There is nothing in me to be regarded, I have nothing to
conciliat favor, and all that may procure hatred. But, says the Lord, I am
gracious, and dispenses most freely, without respect to condition or
qualification: say not, If I had such a measure of humiliation as such a one,
if I loved him so much, if I had so much godly sorrow and repentance, then I
think he would be merciful to me. Say not so, for behold he is gracious, he
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and there is no other cause, no motive
to procure it, it comes from within his own breast; It is not thy repentance
will make him love thee, nor thy hardness of heart will make him hate thee, or
obstruct the vent of his grace toward thee: no, if it be grace, it is no more
of works, no works in that way that thou imagines; it is not of repentance, not
of faith in that sense thou conceivest, but it is freely, without the hyre,
without the price of repentance, or faith, because all those are but the free
gifts of grace, thou would have these graces to procure his favor, and to make
them the ground of thy believing in his promises, but grace is without money,
it immediately contracts with discovered misery, so that if thou do discover in
thy self misery and sin, though thou find nothing else, yet do not cast away
confidence; but so much the more adresse thy self to mercy and grace which does
not seek repentance in thee; yet there is something in the awakened conscience:
It have gone on long in sin, I have been a presumptuous sinner; can he endure
me longer? well, hear what the Lord says, I am long-suffering, and patient,
and if he had not been so, we had been damned ere now, patience has a long
term and we cannot outrun it, out-weary it. Why do we not wonder that he
presently and instantly executed his wrath on angels, and gave them not one
hours space for repentance, but cast them down headlong into destruction, as
in a moment: and yet his Majesty has so long delayed the execution of our
sentence, and calls us to repentance and forgiveness, that we may escape the
condemnation of Angels: His patience is not slacknes and negligence, as men
count it, 2 Pet. 3. 9. He sits not in heaven as an Idol and idle spectator what
men are doing, but he observes all wrongs, and is sensible of them also: And if
we were mindful and sensible of them also, he would forget them; He is
long-suffering: This is extended and stretched-out patience beyond all
expectation, beyond all deserving, yea, contrary to it. Therefore as long as he
forbears if thou apprehend thy misery and sin, and continuance in it; so not
conclude that it is desperate: Why should a living man complain? As long as
patience lengthens thy life, if thou desire to come to him, believe he will
accept thee

But says the doubting soul, I am exceeding perverse and wicked, there is
nothing in me but wickedness, it so abounds in me that there is nothing in me
but wickedness, it so abounds in me that there is none like me; but says the
Lord, I am abundant in goodness. Thy wickedness though it be great, it is
but a created wickedness, but my goodness is the goodness of God; I am as
abundant in grace and goodness as thou art in sin, nay, infinitely more; thy
sin is but the transgression of a finite creature, but my mercy is the
compassion of an infinite God, it can swallow it up; suppose thy sin cry up to
Heaven, yet mercy reaches above Heaven, and is built up for ever. Here is an
invitation to all sinners to come and taste, O come and taste and see how good
the Lord is; goodness is communicative, it diffuses it self like the Suns
light. There is riches of his goodness. Romans 2. 4. Poor soul, thou can not
spend it though thou have many wants.

But I am full of doubtings, fears and jealousies; I cannot believe his
Promises, I often question them; How then will he perform them? I say, (says
the Lord) I am abundant in truth, He will certainly perform. Shall our unbelief
or doubting make the faith of God of none effect etc. Romans 3. 3. God forbid.
His faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds, he will keep Covenant with thee,
whose soul has chosen him, though thou often question and doubt of him. Indeed
thou would not give indulgence to thy doubtings and jealousies, but look on
them as high provocations: for what can be more grievous to fervent love than
to meet with jealousy, jealousy would quench any creatures love; but though
it grieve and provoke him, yet he will not change, he will not diminish his;
only do not think your disputings, and quarrellings innocent and harmless
things; no certainly, they grieve the Spirit, stir up the Beloved to go away,
as it were, before he please, and make thee walk without comfort, and without
fruit; yet he will bear with and quench the smoking flax of a Believers
desires, though they do not arise to the flame of Assurance.

But the wounded spirit has one or two burdens more: I have abused much mercy,
How can mercy pity me? I have turned grace into wantonness, so that when I
look to mercy and grace to comfort me, they do rather challenge me; the sins of
none are like mine, none of such a heinous presumptuous nature: But let us hear
what the Lord speaks, I keep mercy for thousands, and forgive iniquity,
transgression and sin; Thou have wasted much mercy, but more is behind, all the
treasure is not spent; though there were many thousand worlds beside, I could
pardon them all, if they would flee unto my mercy, thou shall not be straightened
in me, mercy will pardon thy abuse of mercy, it will forgive all faults thou
do against it self, Thou that sins against the Son of man, the Redeemer of
the World, and remedy of sin, yet there is pardon for thee what ever thy
quality, condition, or circumstance of thy sin be; whoever convinced of it, and
loadned with it, desires rest to thy soul, thou may find it in Christ, whose
former kindness thou have answered with contempt, many sins, many great sins,
and these presumptuous sins cannot exclude, nay, no sin can exclude a willing
soul. Unbelief keeps thee unwilling, and so excludes thee.

Now as the Spider sucks poison out of the sweetest Flower, so the most part of
souls suck nothing but delusion and presumption, and hardening out of the
Gospel: Many souls reason for more liberty to sin from mercy; but behold how
the Lord backs it with a dreadful word, who will by no means clear the guilty.
As many as do not condemn themselves, and judge themselves before his Tribunal
of Justice, there is no rescinding of the condemnatory Sentence, but it stands
above their heads, He that believes not is condemned already. Justice has
condemned all by sentence; he that does not in the sense of this flee into
Jesus Christ from sin and wrath, is already condemned; his Sentence is
standing, there needs no new one; since he flees not to mercy for absolution;
the sentence of condemnation stands unrepealed. Yo^ guilty souls who clear your
selves, God will not clear you; and alas! How many of you do clear your selves?
Do you not extenuate and mince your sins? How hard is it to extort any
confession of guilt out of you, but in the general? If we condescend to
particulars, many of you will plead innocence, almost in every thing, though ye
have like children, learned to speak these words, That ye are sinners. I
beseech you consider it, it is no light matter, for God will by no means clear
the guilty; by no means, by no entreaties, no flatteries; What? will he not
pardon sin? Yes indeed: His Name tells you he will pardon all kind of sins, and
absolve all manner of guilty persons but yet such as do condemn themselves,
such as are guilty in their own conscience, and their mouths stopped before
God; you who do not enter into the serious examination of your ways, and no
not arraign your selves before Gods Tribunal daily, till you find your selves
loathsome and desperate, and no refuge for you; you who do flatter your selves
always in the hope of heaven, and put the fear of hell always from you, I
say, God will by no mean; no prayers, no entreaties clear or pardon you,
because you come not to Jesus Christ, in whom is preached forgiveness and
remission of sins. You who take liberty to sin, because God is gracious, and
delay repentance till the end, because God is long suffering; know God will not
clear you; he is holy and just as he is merciful. If his mercy make thee not
fear and tremble before him, and do not separate thee from thy sins; if
remission of sins be not the strongest persuasion to thy soul of the removing
of sin, certaiuly thou do in vain presume upon his mercy; Now, consider what
influence all this glorious Proclamation had on Moses; it stirs up in him
reverence and affection, reverence to such a glorious Majesty, and great desire
to have him amongst them, and to be more one with him: If thy soul rightly
discover God, it cannot but abase thee, he made bade haste to bow down and
worship; O, Gods Majesty is a surprising and astonishing thing, it would bow
thy soul in the dust if it were represented to thee; labor to keep the right
and entire representation of God in thy sight, his whole Name, Strong,
Merciful and Just, Great and Holy. I say, keep both in thy view, for half
representations are dangerous, either to beget presumption and security, when
thou looks on mercy alone, or despair, when thou looks on Justice and power
alone; Let thy soul consider all jointly, that it may receive amixed impression
of all; and this is the holy composition and temper of a Believer, Rejoice with
trembling, love with fear; let all thy discoveries of him aim at more union
and communion with him, who is ^ch a self-sufficient, all-sufficient and eternal
Being.

Joh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit, and they who worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth.
WE have here something of the Nature of God pointed out to us, and something of
our duty toward him: God is a spirit, that is his Nature; and man must worship
him, that is his duty; and that in spirit and in truth, that is the right
manner of the duty: if these three were right pondered till they sink in to the
bottom of our spirits, they would make us indeed Christians, not in the
Letter, but in the Spirit: That is presupposed to all Christian worship and
walking, to know what God is; its indeed, the Primo cognitum of Christianity,
the first Principle of true Religion, the very root out of which springs and
grows up walking sutably with. and worshipping answerably of a known God. I
fear much of our Religion be like the Athenians, They builded an Altar to an
unknown God; and like the Samaritanes; Who worshipped they know not what. Such
a Worship I know not what it is; when the God worshipped is not known: The two
parents of true Religion are, the knowledge of God and of our selves, this
indeed is the beginning of the fear of God, which the wise Preacher calls the
beginning of wisdom: And these two, as they beget true Religion, so they cannot
truly be one without the other; It is not many notions and speculations about
the Divine nature, it is not high and strained conceptions of God that
comprises the true knowledge of him, many think they know something when they
can speak of these mysteries in some singular way, and in some terms removed
from common understandings, which neither themselves nor others know what they
mean; and thus they are presumptuous, self-conceited knowing nothing as they
ought to know there is a knowledge that puffes up, and there is a knowledge
that casts down, a a knowledge in many that does bu^ swell them, not grow them;
Its but a rumor full of wind, a vain and empty, and f^othy knowledge, that is
neither good for edifying others, nor saving a man^ self, a knowledge that a
man knows, and reflects upon so, as to ascend upon the height of it, and
measure himself by the degrees of it: this is not the true knowledge of God,
which knows not it self, looks not back upon it self, but straight toward God,
his holiness and glory, and our baseness and misery, and therefore it
constrains the soul to be ashamed of it self in such a glorious presence, and
to make haste to worship, as Moses, Job, Isaiah did.

This definition of God, if we did truly understand it, we could not but
worship him in another manner. God is a spirit: Many ignorant people form in
their own mind some liknesse, and Image of God, who is invisible; you know how
ye fancy to your selves some bodily shape, when you conceive of him, you think
he is some Reverend and Majestic Person, sitting on a Throne in Heaven; But I
beseech you correct your mistakes of him, there is outward idolatry, and there
is inward, there is idolatry in action, when men paint or ingrave some
similitude of God, and there is Idolatry in imagination, when the fancy and
apprehension runs upon some Image, or likeness of God: The first is among
Papists, but I fear the latter be too common among us, and it is indeed all
one, to form such (...) similitude in our mind, and to ingrave or paint it
without, so that the God whom many of us worship, is not the living and true
God, but a painted or graven Idol. When God appeared most visible to the world,
^s at the giving out of the Law, yet no man did see any liknesse at all, he did
not come under the percep^ion of the most subtle sense, he could not be
perceived but by the retired understanding, going aside ^om all things visible,
and therefore you do but fancy ^n idol to your selves in stead of God, when you
ap^rehend him under the likeness of any visible or sen^ble thing, and so what
ever love, or fear, or reverence ^ou have, it is all but misspent superstition,
the love and fear of an idol.

1. I know then that God is a Spirit, and therefore he is like none of all these
things you see, or hear, or smell, or taste, or touch: The heavens are glorious
indeed, the light is full of glory, but he is not like that. If all your senses
should make an inquiry and search for him throughout the world, you should not
find him, though he be near hand every one of us yet your eyes and ears, and
all your senses might travel the length of the earth, and breadth of the sea,
and should not find him, even as you might search all the corners of heaven ere
ye could hear or see an Angel; if you saw a man asunder, and resolve him in
atoms of dust, yet you could not perceive a soul within him, why? Because
these are spirits, and so without the reach of your senses.

II. If God be a Spirit, then he is invisible, and dwells in light inaccessible,
which no man has seen or can see, then ou^ poor narrow minds tha^ are drowned,
as it were, and immersed into bodies of clay, and in this state of mortality,
receives all knowledge of the senses, cannot frame any suitable notion of his
spiritual, and abstracted nature: We cannot conceive what our own soul is, but
by some sensible operation flowing from it, and the height that our knowledge
of that noble part of our selves amounts to, is but this dark and confused
conception, that the soul is some inward principle of life, and sense and
reason; how then is it possible for us to conceive aright of the divine nature,
as it is in it self? but only in a da^k and general way, we guess at his
Majesty, by the glorious emanations of his power, and wisdom, and the rays
thereof which he displayes abroad in all the works of his hands, and from all
these concurring testimonies, and evidences of his Majesty, we gather this
confused notion of him, that he is the fountain-self-independent being, the
original of all these things, and more absolute in the world, then the soul is
in the body, the true Anima, mundi, the very life and the light of men, and the
soul that quickens, moves, and forms all this visible world, that makes all
things visible, and himself invisible: Therefore it is that the Lord speaks to
us in the Scripture of himself, according to our capacities, of his face, his
right hand and arm, his Throne, his Scep^er, his back parts, his anger, his
fury, his repentance, his grief, and sorrow; none of which are properly in his
spiritual, immortal, and unchangeable nature, but because our dullness an^
slownesse in such, in apprehending things spiritual, it being almost without
the sp^e and comprehension of the soul while in the body, which is almost
addicted unto the senses of the body: Therefore the Lord accommodates him^ unto
our terms, and notions; balbutit nobiscum he like a (...) father stammers wi^h
the stammerin^ chil^ren, speaks to them in their own dialect; but withal
would have us conceive he is not really such a one. but infinitely removed in
his own being from all these imperfections. So when you hear of these te^ms in
Scripture, O beware ye conceive God to be such a one, as your selves: but in
these expressions not beseeming his Majesty, because below him; learn your own
ignorance of his glorious Majesty, your dullness and incapacity to be such, as
the Holy One must come down as it were in some bodily appearance, ere you can
understand any thing of him.

III. If God be a Spirit, then he is most perfect, and most powerful, all
imperfection, all infirmity, and weakness in the creature, is founded in the
gross and material part of it, you see the more matter and bodily substance be
in any thing, it is the more lumpish, heavy, and void of all action, it is the
more spiritual, pure, and refined part of the creation, that has most activity
in it, and is the principle of all motions, and actions: You see a little fly
has more action in it than a great mountain, because there are spirits in it
which move it. The bottom of the world contains the dregs of the Creation, as
it were, a mass and lump of heavy earth, but the higher and more distant
bodies be from that, the more pure and subtle they are, and the more pure and
subtle they be, the more action, virtue and efficacy they have; the earth
stands like a dead lump, but the sea moves, and the air being thinner and purer
than both, moves more easily and swiftly; but go up higher, and still the
motion is swifter; and the virtue and influence is the more powerful: What is
a dead body when the soul and spirit is out of it? It has no more virtue nor
efficacy than so much clay; although by the presence of the spirit of it, it
was active, agill, swift, strong and nimble; so much then as any thing has of
spirit in it, so much the more perfect and powerful it is. Then I beseech you
consider what a one the God of the spirits of all flesh must be, the very
fountain-spirit, the self-being spirit, (...). When the soul of a man, or the
spirit of a horse, has so much virtue, to stir up a lump of earth and to
quicken it to many diverse operations even though that soul and spirit did not;
nay, could not make that piece of earth they dwell in; then what must his power
and virtue be, that made all those things? Who gave power and virtue, even to
the spirits of all flesh; their horses, says God, are flesh, and not spirit,
Isa. 30. Because, in comparison of his Majesty, the very spirits in them, are
but like a dead lump of flesh: If he should draw in his breath (as it were)
they would have no more virtue to save the Israelites no^ so many lumps of
flesh or clay; for he is the spirit of all spirits, that quickens, actuates and
moves them in their several operations, and influencies. Anima mundi and anima
animarum mundi, an Angel has more power than all men united in one body. Satan
is called the Prince of the air, and God of this world, for he has more
efficacy and virtue to commove the air, and raise tempests; then all the
swarms of multiplied mankind, though gathered into any army, if the Lord did
not restrain and limit his power, he were able to destroy whole Nations at
once: An Angel killed many thousands of Senacheribs Army in one night; what
would many Angels do then, if the Lord pleased to apply them to that work? O
what is man that he should magnify himself, or glory in strength, or skill?
Beasts are stronger than men, but man's weaker strength being strengthened with
more skill, proves stronger than they; but in respect of Angels he has neither
strength nor wisdom.

IV. If God be a Spirit, then he is not circumscribed by any place; and if an
infinite spirit, then he is every where, no place can include him, and no body
can exclude him. He is within all things, yet not included nor bounded within
them, and he is without all things, yet not excluded from them: intra omnia,
non tamen inclusus in illis; extra omnia, nec tamen exclusus ab all is. You
know every body has its own bounds and limits circumscribed to it, and shoots
out all other bodily things out of the same space, so that before the least
body want some space, it will put all the universe in motion, and make every
thing about it to change its place, and possess another; but a Spirit can
pass through all of them, and never desturb them: A Legion may be in one man,
and have room enough, If there were a well of Brass, or Tower, having no Open,
neither above, or beneath, no body could enter, but by breaking through, and
making a breach into it, but an Angel or Spirit could storm it without a
breach, and pierce through it, without any division of it: How much more does
the Maker of all Spirits fill all in all; the thickness of the earth does not
keep him out, nor the largeness of the heavens contain him: How then do we
circumscribe and limit him within the bounds of a public house, or the
heavens? O, how narrow thoughts have we of his immense greatness? Who without
division or multiplication of himself, fills all the corners of the world,
whose indivisible unity is equivalent to an infinite extension, and
divisibility: How often, I pray you, do you reflect upon this? God is near hand
every one of us. Who of us think of a Divine Majesty nearer us than our very
souls and consciences, in whom we live, and move, and have our being? How is it
we move, and think not with wonder of that first Mover, in whom we move? How is
it we live and persevere in being, and do not always consider this
fountain-being, in whom we live and have our being. O, the Atheism of many
souls prosessing God! We do speak, walk, eat and drink, and go about all our
businesses, as if we were self-being, and independent of any, never thinking of
that all-present quickening Spirit, that acts us, moves us, speaks in us, makes
us to walk, and eat and drink, as the barbarous people, who see, hear, speak
and reason, and never once reflect upon the principle of all these, to discern
a soul within: This is brutish, and in this, Man, who was made of a straight
countenance to look upward to God, and to know himself and his Maker, till he
might be differenced from all creatures below, is degenerated, and become like
the beasts that perish. Who of us believes this alpresent God? We imagine that
he is shut up in heaven, and takes no such notice of affairs below: but
certainly, he is not so far from us: though he show more of his glory above,
yet he is as present and observant below.

V. If he be a Spirit, then as he is incomprehensible and immense in being, so
also there is no comprehension of his knowledge. The nearer any creature come
to the nature of a Spirit, the more knowing and understanding it is; life is
the most excellent being, and understanding is the most excellent life. Materia
est imers and mertua, the nearer any thing is to the earthly matter, as it has
less action, and so less life and feeling: Man is nearer an Angel then
beasts, and therefore he has a knowing and understanding Spirit in him. There
is a spirit in man, and the more or less this spirit of man is abstracted from
sensual and material things, it lives the more excellent and pure life, and is,
as it were, more or less deliverd from the chains of the body. These souls
that have never risen above, and retired from sensible things. O, how narrow
are they, how captivated within the prison of the flesh? But when the Lord
Jesus comes to set free, he delivers a soul from this bondage, he makes these
chains fall off, and leads the soul apart to converse with God himself, and to
meditate on things not seen, sin, wrath, hell, and heaven; and the further it
goes from it self, and the more abstracted it is from the consideration of
present things, the more it lives a life like Angels: And therefore, when the
soul is separated from the body, it is then perfectly free, and has the
largest extent of knowledge: A man's soul must be almost like Paul's (whether out
of the body, or in the body, I know not) if he would understand aright
spiritual things: Now then, this infinite spirit is an alknowing spirit,
al-seeing spirit, as well as al-present; There is no searching of his
understanding, Isa. 40. 28. and Psalm. 147. 5. Who has directed this spirit, or
being his counselor has taught him? Romans 11. 34. Isa. 40. 1^. He calls the
Generations from the beginning, and known to him are all his works from the
beginning. O, that you would always set this God before you, or rather set
your selves always in his presence, in whose sight you are always: How would
it compose our hearts to reverence and fear in all our actions, if we did,
indeed, believe that the Judge of all the World is an eyewitness to our most
retired and secret thoughts and doings? If any man were as privy to thy
thoughts, as thy own spirit and conscience, thou would blush and be ashamed
before him: If every one of us could open a window into one another spirits, I
think this assembly should dismiss as quickly as that of Christ's, when he bade
them that were without sin cast a stone at the Woman, we could not look one
upon another: O then, Why are we so little apprehensive of the al-searching eye
of God, who can even declare to us our thought before it be? How much Atheism
is rooted in the heart of the most holy? We do not always meditate with David,
Psalm. 139. on that al-searching and al-knowing spirit, who knows our
down-sitting and up-rising, and understands our thoughts a far off, and who is
acquainted with all our ways. O, How would we ponder our path, and examine our
words, and consider our thoughts before hand, if we set our selves in the view
of such a Spirit, that is within us, and without us, before us, and behind us.
He may spare sinners as long as he pleases, for there is no escaping from him;
you cannot go out of his dominions; nay, you cannot run out of his presence,
Psalm. 7. 8. 9. He can reach you when he pleases, therefore he may delay as long
as he pleases.

Joh. 4. 24. GOD is a Spirit, etc.
THere are two common notions engraved on the hearts of all men by nature, That
God is, and that he must be worshipped; and these two live and die together;
they are clear, or blotted together. According as the apprehension of God is
clear, and distinct, and more deeply engraven on the soul; so is this notion of
man's duty, of worshipping God, clear and imprinted on the soul; and when ever
the actions of men do prove, that the conception of the worship of God is
obliterate or worn out; when ever their transgressions do witness, that a man
has not a live^y ^otion of this duty of Gods worship, that does al^o prove,
that the very notion of a Godhead is worn out, and cancelled in the soul; For,
How could souls conceive of God as he is indeed, but they must needs with
Moses. Exodus 34 make haste to pray and worship? It is the principle of the very
Law of Nature, which shall make the whole world inexcusable, because that when
they knew God, they gloriesied him not as God. A Father must have honor, and a
Master must have fear, and God who is the common Parent, and absolute Master of
all; must have worship, in which reverence and fear mixed with rejoicing and
affection, predomines: it is supposed, and put beyond all question that it must
be: He that worships him, etc. Its not simply said, God is a Spirit and must be
worshipped, no, for none can doubt of it. If God be then certainly Worship is
due to him, for who is so worshipful? And because it is so beyond all
question, therefore woe to the irreligious world that never puts it in
practice: O What excuse can you have, who have not so much as a form of
Godliness? Do you not know that its beyond all Controversy, that God must be
worshipped? Why then do you deny it in your practice which all men must
confess in their conscience? Is not he God the Lord, a living and self-being
Spirit? Then must he not have Worshippers? Beasts are not created for it, it is
you O sons of men, whom he made for his own praise and it is not more suitable
to your nature than it is honorable and glorious. This is the great dignity
and excellency you are privileged with, beyond the brute beasts, to have
spirits within you capable of knowing and acknowledging the God of your
spirits: Why then do you both rob and spoil God of his glory and cast away your
own excellency? Why do you love to trample on your ornaments, and wallow in the
puddle, like beasts, void of Religion, but so much worse then beasts, that you
ought to be better, and were created for a more noble design. O base spirited
wretches, who hang down your souls to this earth, and follow the dictates of
your own sense and lust, and have not so much as an external form of
worshipping God; How far are you come short of the noble design of your
Creation, and the high end of your Immortal souls? If you will not worship
God, know he will have Worshippers, certainly he will not want it, because he
has designed so many souls to stand before him, and worship him, and that
number will not fail: He might indeed, have wanted worshippers; For what
advantage is it to him? But in this he declares his love and respect to man,
that he will not want honor and service from him: it is rather to put honor
upon him, and to make him blessed and happy, than for any gain can amount to
himself by it: for this is, indeed; the true honor and happiness of man, not
to be worshipped and served of other fellow creatures, but to worship and serve
the Creator: This is the highest advancement of a soul, to lie low before him,
and to obey him, and have our service accepted of his Majesty: I beseech you,
strive about this noble service. Since he must have Worshippers, O say within
your souls, I must be one; if he had but one, I could not be content if I were
not that one; since the Father is seeking Worshippers; ver. 23. O let him find
thee. Offer thy self to him, saying, Lord, here am I, Should he seek you, who
can have no advantage from you? Should he go about so earnest a search for true
VVorshipers, who can have no profit by them? And why do ye not seek him since,
since to you all the gain and profit redounds? Shall be seek you to make you
happy, and why do ye not seek him, and happiness in him? It is your own
service, I may truly say, and not his so much; for in serving him thou do
rather serve thy self, for all the benefit redounds to thy self, though thou
must not intend such an end, to serve him for thy self, but for thy names sake,
else thou shall neither honor him, nor advantage thy self. I pray you let him
not seek in vain, for in these afflictions he is seeking Worshippers, and if he
find you; you are found and saved indeed. Do not then forsake your own mercy,
to run from him who follows you with Salvation.

As none can be ignorant that God is, and must be worshipped, so it is unknown
to the world in what manner he must be worshipped: the most part of men have
some form in worshipping God, and please themselves in it so well that they
think God well-pleased with it; but few there are who know indeed what it is to
worship him in a manner acceptable to his Majesty: Now you know it is all one
not to worship him at all, as not to worship him in that way he likes to be
worshipped: Therefore the most part of men are but self-worshippers, because
they please none but themselves in it, it is not the worship his soul has
chosen, but their own invention, for you must take this as an undeniable
ground, that God must be worshipped according to his own will and pleasure, and
not according to you^ humor, or invention; therefore his soul abhorres
will worship, devised by men out of ignorant zeal, or superstition, though
there might seem much devotion in it, and much affection to God, as in the
Israelits sacrificing their children, whatmore seem ing self-denial? And yet
what more real self-idolatry God owns not such a service, for it is not service
and obedience to his will and pleasure, but to men's own will and humor:
therefore a man must not look for a reward but from himself. Now it is not only
will worship, when the matter and substance of the worship is not commanded of
God, but also when a commanded worship is not discharged in the appointed
manner: Therefore, O how few true worshippers will the Father find? True
worship must have Truth, for the substance, and spirit, for the manner of it:
else it is not such a worship as the father seeks and will be pleased with;
divine worship must have truth in it, that is plain, but what was that truth,
it must be conformed to the rule and pattern of worship, which is Gods will and
pleasure revealed in the word of truth, true worship is the very practice of
the word of truth, it caries the Image and superscription and command upon it,
which is a necessary ingredient in it, and constituent of it. Therefore if thy
service have the Image of thy own will stamped on it, it is not divine worship,
but will worship. Thus all humane ceremonies and ordinances enjoined for
service of God, carry the inscription not of God, but of man who is the author
and original of them, and so are but adulterated and false Coin, that will not
pass current with God, I fear there be many rites and vain customs among
ignorant people in which they place some Religion which have no ground in the
word of God, but are only old wives fables and traditions. How many things of
that nature are used upon a religious account in which God has placed no
Religion: Many have a superstitious conceit of the public place of worship, as
if there were more holiness in it than in any other house, and so they think
their Prayers in the Church are more acceptable then in their Chamber; But
Christ refutes that superstitious opinion of places, and so consequently of
days, meats, and all such external things: The Jews had a great opinion of
their temple, the Samaritans of their mountain, as if these places had
sanctified their services: But says our Lord, verse. 21. The hour comes when
ye shall neither worship in this mountain. etc. but its any where acceptable,
if so be ye worship in spirit and truth: Many of you account it Religion, to
pray and mutter words of your own in the time of public prayer, but who has
required this at your hand? If you would pray your selves, go apart shut the
door behind thee says Christ: private prayer should be in private, and secret:
But when public prayer is, your hearts should close with the petitions and
offer them up jointly to God, it is certainly a great slight of that deceitful
destroyer, the Devil, to possess your minds with an opinion of Religion, in
such vain bablings, that he may withdraw both your ears and your hearts from
the public worship of God, for when every one is busied with his own prayers,
you cannot at all join in the public service of God, which is offered up in
your name: The like I may say of stupid forms of prayer, and tying your selves
to a platform, written in a book, or to some certain words gotten by the
heart, who has commanded this? Sure not the Lord, who has promised his spirit
to teach them to pray and help their infirmities, who know not how, nor what to
pray: it is a device of your own invented by Satan to quench the spirit it of
supplication, which should be the very natural breathing of a christian. But
there are some so grossly ignorant, of what prayer is; that they make use of
the ten commands, and Belief as a Prayer: so void are they of the knowledge and
spirit of God, that they cannot discern betwixt Gods commands to themselves and
their own requests to God betwixt his speaking to men, and their speaking to
him, between their professing of him before men, and praying and confessing to
him, all this is but forged imaginary worship, worship falsely so called which
the Father seeks not and receives not.

But what if I should say that the most part of your worship, even that which
is commanded of God, as Prayer, Hearing, Reading, etc has no truth in it, I
should say nothing amiss, for though you do those things that are commanded;
yet not as Commanded, without any respect to divine appointment, and only
because you have received them as traditions from your fathers, and because you
are taught so by the precepts of men, and are accustomed so to do, therefore
the stamp of Gods will and pleasure is not engraven on them, but of your own
will, or of the will of men; Let me pose your Consciences, many of you, what
difference is there between your praying and your plowing, between your hearing
and your harrowing, between your reading of the Scriptures and your reaping in
the Harvest, between your Religious Service and your common ordinary actions, I
say, what difference is in the rise of these? You do many civil things out of
custom or because of the Precepts of men and is there any other principle at
the bottom of your religious performances? Do you at all consider these are
divine appointments, these have a stamp of his authority on them, and from the
Conscience of such an immediate command of God, and the desire to please him and
obey him, do you go about these? I fear many cannot say it. O I am sure all
cannot, though it may be all will say it: therefore your religious worship can
come in no other account, than will worship or man-worship, it has not the
stamp of truth on it, an express conformity to the truth of God as his truth.

But we must press out this a little more. Truth is opposed to a ceremony and
shadow. The ceremonies of old were shadows, or the external body of Religion,
in which the soul and spirit of godliness should have been enclosed, but the
Lord did always urge more earnestly the substance and truth, then the ceremony
the weightier matters of the Law, Piety, equity, and sobriety, than these
lighter external Ceremonies: he sets an higher account upon mercy then
sacrifice, and upon obedience then Ceremonies, but this people turned just
contrary; they summed up all their Religion in some ceremonial performance, and
separated those things, God had so nearly conjoined; they would be devout men
in offering sacrifices in their washings in their rites, and yet made no
conscience of heart, and Soul-piety toward God, and upright just dealing with
men: Therefore the Lord so often quarrels them and rejects all their service as
being adevice and invention of their own, which never entered in his heart. Isa.
1. from 10. to 16. Ier. 7. throughout. Isa. 66. to 6. Isa, 28. Now if you will
examine it impartially it is even just so with us, there are some external
things in Religion which in comparison with the weightier things of faith, and
obedience are but ceremonial; in these you place the most part, if not all your
Religion, and think your selves good Christians, if you be baptized and hear
the Word, and partake of the Lords table and such like, though in the mean time
you be not given to secret prayer, and reading, and do not inwardly judge and
examine your selves, that you may flee unto a Mediator; though your conversation
be unjust and scandalous among men; I say unto such souls, as the Lord to the
Jews, Who has required this at your hands? who commanded you to hear the
Word, to be baptized, to wait on public Ordinances? Away with all this, it is
abomination to his Majesty though it please you never so well, the more it
displeases him; If you say, why commands he us to hear? etc. I say the Lord
never commanded these external Ordinances for the sum of true Religion; that
was not the great thing which was in his heart that he had most pleasure unto,
but the weightier matters of the Law, piety, equity and sobriety; a holy and
godly conversation adorning the Gospel: What has the Lord required of thee,
but this, O man, To do justly, and walk humbly with thy God? So then thou do
not worship him in Truth, but in shadow; the Truth is holiness and
righteousness; that external profession is but a Ceremony; while you separate
these external Ordinances from these weighty duties of piety and justice, that
they are but as dead body without a soul. If the Lord required truth of old,
much more now, when he has abolished the multitude of Ceremonies, that the
great things of his Law may be more seen and loved.

If you would then be true worshippers, look the whole mind of God, and
especially the chief pleasure of Gods mind, that which he most delights into,
and by any means do not separate what God has conjoined, do not divide
righteousness toward men, from a profession of holiness to God, else it is but
a falsehood, a counterfeit coin; do not please your selves, so much in external
Church privileges, without a holy and godly conversation adorning the Gospel;
but let the chief study, endeavor and delight of your souls be about that,
which God most delights into, let the substantials of Religion have the first
place in the soul, Pray more in secret, that he will be the life of your souls,
you ought indeed to attend public ordinances, but above all, take heed to your
conversation and walking at home, and in secret, prayer in your Family is a
more substantial worship, then to sit and hear prayer in public, and prayer
in secret is more substantial then that: The more retired and immediate a duty
be, the more weighty it is, the more it cross thy corruptions; and evidence
the stamp of God on thy affections, the more divine it is; And therefore to
serve God in these, is to serve him in truth. Practice has more of truth in it
then a profession, When your Fathers executed judgment, was not this to know
me? Duties that have more opposition from our natures against them: and less
sewel or oil to feed the flame of our self love and corruption, have more truth
in them; and if you should worship God in all other duties, and not especially
in those, you do not worship him in truth.

Next, let us consider the manner of Divine Worship: And this is as needful to
true Worship as true matter, that it be commanded, and done as it is commanded,
that compleats true worship. Now, I know no better way, or manner to worship
God in; than so to worship him as our worship may carry the stamp of his Image
upon it, as it may be a glass wherein we may behold Gods Nature and
Properties: For such as himself is, such he would be acknowledged to be, I
would think it were true worship indeed, which had engraven on it the Name of
the true and living God, if it did speak out so much of it self, That God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him diligently. Most part of our
service speaks an unknown God, and carries such an inscription upon it, To the
unknown God: There is so little either reverence, or love, or fear, or
knowledge in it, as if we did not worship the true God, but an Idol. It is
said, that the fool says in his heart that there is no God, because his
thoughts and affections, and actions, are so little composed to the fear and
likeness of that God, as if he did indeed, plainly deny him; I fear it may be
said thus of our Worship; It says, There is no God; it is of such a nature,
that none could conclude from it that it had any relation to the true God, our
prayers deny God, because there is nothing of God appears in them; But this is
true worship, when it renders back to God his own Image and Name: Unde
repercussus redditur ipse sibi. As it is a poor and clean Fountain, in which a
man may see his shadow distinctlie, but a troubled fountain or mire in which
he cannot be hold himself; So it is pure worship, which receives and reflects
the pure Image of God, but impure and unclean worship; which cannot receive it,
and retain it. I pray you Christians, consider this; for it is such Worshippers
the Father seeks; and why seeks he such? But because in them he finds himself
(so to speak:) His own I mage and superscription is upon them, His mercy
isengraven on their faith and confidence; His Majesty and power is stamped on
their humility and reverence; His goodness is to be read on the souls
rejoicing, His Greatness and Justice in the souls trembling. Thus there ought
to be some engravings on the soul answering the Characters of his glorious
Name. O how little of this is among them that desire to know something of God?
How little true Worship, even among them whom the Father has sought out to
make true Worshippers? But alas! How are all of us unacquainted with this kind
of Worship? We stay upon the first principles and practices of Religion, and go
not on to build upon the foundation: Sometimes your Worship has a stamp of
Gods holiness and justice, in fear and terror at such a Majesty which makes
you to tremble before him: But where is the stamp of his mercy and grace which
should be written in your faith and rejoicing? Tremble and fear indeed, but
rejoice with trembling, because there is mercy with him: Sometime their is
rejoicing and quietness in the soul, but that quickly degenerates into carnal
confidence, and makes the soul turn grace into wantonness, and esteem of it
self above what is right, because it is not counterpoised with the sense and
apprehension of his holiness and justice. But, O to have these jointly written
on the heart, in worship, fear, reverence, confidence, humility and faith! That
is a rare thing, it is a divine composition and temper of spirit that makes a
divine soul: For the most part, our Worship savours and smells nothing of God,
neither his power, nor his mercy and grace, nor his holiness and justice, nor
his majesty and glory; a secure, saint, formal way, void of reverence, of
humility, of servency, and of faith: I beseech you, let us consider, as before
the Lord, how much pains and time we lose, and please none but our selves, and
profit none at all: Stir up your selves as in his sight; for it is the keeping
of our souls continually as in his sight, which will stamp our service with his
likeness: The fixed and constant meditation of God and his glorious
properties, this will beget the resemblance between our worship, and the God
whom we worship, and it will imprint his Image upon it, and then it should
please him, and then it should profit thee, and then it should edify others,

But more particularly, The Worship must have the stamp of Gods spiritual
Nature, and be conformed to it in some measure, else it cannot please him:
There must be a conformity between God and souls; this is the great end of the
Gospel, to repair that Image of God which was once upon man, and make him like
God again: Now, it is the way that Jesus Christ repairs this Image, and brings
about this conformity with God; by the souls worshipping of God suitable to his
Nature, it is the more and more like God, and happy in that likeness. Now, God
is a Spirit, therefore (says Christ) you must worship him in spirit and truth.
The worship then of Saints must be of a spiritual nature, that it may be like
the immortal divine Spirit: It is such Worshippers the Father seeks; he seeks
souls to make them like himself, and this likeness and conformity to God is
the very foundation of the souls happiness, and eternal refreshment.

This is a point of great consequence, and, I fear, not laid to heart. The
Worship must be like the Worshipped. It is a Spirit must Worship the Eternal
Spirit, it is not a body that can be the principle and chief Agent in the
business: What Communion can God have with your bodies, while your souls are
removed far from him, more than with beasts? All society and fellowship must be
between those that are like one another: A man can have no comfortable company
with Beasts, or with Stones, and Trees: It is men that can converse with men;
and a Spirit must worship the self-being-spirit. Do not mistake this, as if
under the days of the Gospel we were not called to an external and bodily
Worship, to any service to which our outward man is isntrumental; this is one
of the deep delusions of this Age, into which some men, reprobate (...) the
Faith, has fallen, That there should be no external Ordinances, but that
Christians are now called to worship all Spirit, pure Spirit, etc. This is one
of the Spirits, and spiritual Doctrines (that call themselves so) which ye must
not receive; for it is neither spirit of God, nor of Christ, that teaches
this: nor the spirit of God the Creator, because he has made the whole man,
body and soul, and so must be worshipped of the whole man: He has created man
in such a capacity, as he may offer up external actions in a reasonable manner
with the inward affections; as the Lord has created him so he should serve
him: every member, every part in its own capacity; the soul to preceed, and the
body to follow; the soul to be the chief worshipper, and the body its servant
employed in the worship: True worship has a body and a soul as well as a true
man; and as the soul separated is not a complete man, so neither is the soul
separated a complete worshipper without the body; the external Ordinances of
God is the body, the inward soul-affection is the Spirit, which being joined
together makes complete worship. Neither is it the Spirit of Christ which
teaches this, because our Lord Jesus has taught us to offer up our bodies and
spirits both in a reasonable service, Romans 12. 1, 2. The sacrifice of the
bodily performance, offered up by the spiritual affection, and renewed mind is
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable and reasonable: That spirit which dwelt in
Christ, above measure, did not think it too base to vent it self in the way of
external Ordinances: He was indeed above all, above the Law, yet did willingly
come under them to teach us, who have so much need and want to come under them:
He prayed much, he preached, he did sing and read, to teach us how to worship,
and how much need we have of Prayer and Preaching: This was not the Spirit
Christ promised to his Disciples, and Apostles, which spirit did breath most
lively in the use of the external Ordinances, all their days; and this is not
the spirit which was at the hour in which Christ spoke, The hour is come; and
now is, ver. 23. in which the true worship of God shall not be in the external
and Jewish Ceremonies, and rites, void of all life and inward sense of Piety,
but the true worship of God shall be made up of a soul and body, of spirit and
truth, of the external appointed Ordinances according to the word of truth, and
the spirit of truth, and of the spirit and inward soul-affection and sincerity
which shall quicken and actuate that external performance: There were no such
worshippers then as had no use of Ordinances, Christ was not such, his
Disciples were not such, therefore it is a new Gospel, which if an Angel should
bring from heaven ye ought not to receive it.

As it is certain then, that both soul and body must be employed in this
business, so it is sure that the soul and spirit must be the first mover, and
chiefest agent in it, because it is a spiritual business, and has relation to
the fountain-spirit, which has the most perfect opposition to all false
appearances, and external shows: that part of man that comes nearest God,
must draw near in worshipping of God, and if that be removed far away, there is
no real communion with God; man judges according to the outward appearance, and
can reach no further than the outward man, but God is an all-searching spirit
who tries the heart and rins, and therefore he will pass another judgment
upon your worship then men can do, because he observes all the secret wanderings
and escapes of the heart out of his sight, he misses the soul when you present
attentive ears, or eloquent tongues, there is no dallying with his Majesty,
painting will not deceive him, his very Nature is contrary to Hypocrisy and
dissimulation, and what is it but dissimulation, when you present your selves
to Religious exercises as his people, but within are nothing like it, nothing
awaking; nothing present? O consider, my beloved, what a one you have to do
with! It is not men, but the Father of Spirits; who will not be pleased with
what pleases men of your own flesh, but must have a spirit to serve him. Alas
what are we doing with such empty names and shows in Religion? Busied in the
outside of worship only, as if we had none to do with but men who have eyes of
flesh, all that we do in this kind is lost labor, and will never be reckoned
up in the account of true worship: I am sure you know and may reflect upon your
selves, that you make Religion but a matter of outward fashion and external
custom, you have never almost taken to heart in earnest, you may frequent the
Ordinances, you may have a form of godliness, consisting in some outward
performances and privileges, and O! how void and destitute of all Spirit and
Life; and Power? not to speak of the removal of affection, and the employing
of the marrow of your soul upon base lusts, and creatures, or the scattering of
your desires abroad amongst them, for that is too palpable; but even your very
thoughts and mind^ are removed from this business, you have nothing present but
an ear, or eye, and your minds is about other business, your desires, your
fears, your joys, and delights, your affections never did run in the channel
of religious exercises, all your passion is vented in other things, but here
you are blockish and stupid, without any sensible apprehension of God, his
mercy, or Justice, or wrath, or of your own misery and want. You sorrow in
other things but none here; none for sin; you joy for other things but none
here, you cannot rejoice at the Gospel. Prayer is a burden, not a delight, if
your spiri^s were chiefly employed in Religious duties, Religion would be
almost your Element, your pleasure and Recreation, but now it is wearisome to
the flesh, because the Spirit takes not the chief weight upon it. Oh, be not
deceived! God is not mocked, you do but mock your selves with external shows
while you are satisfied with them: I beseech you look inwardly and be not
satisfied with the outward appearance, but ask at thy Soul, where it is; and
how it is: Retire within, and bring up thy spirit to this work: I am sure you
may observe that any thing goes more smoothly and sweetly with you, then the
Worship of God, because your mind is more upon any thing else, I fear the most
part of us who endeavor to some measure, to seek God, have too much dross of
outward formality, and much scumof filthy hypocrisy and guile. O, pray that
the present furnace may purge away this scum! It is the great ground of Gods
present controversy with Scotland; but alas, the Bellows are like to burn, and
we not be purged, our scum goes not from us, we satisfy our selves with some
outward exercises of Religion, custom undoes us all, and it was never more
undoing then when indignation and wrath is pursuing it: O that you would
ponder what you lose by it, both the sweetness and advantage of godliness,
beside the dishonor of God: You take a formal, neglegent, and secure way, as
the most easy way, and the most pleasing to your flesh, and I am persuaded
you find it the most difficult way, because you want all the pleasant and
sweet refreshment, and soul-delights you might have in God, by a serious and
diligent minding of Religion. The pleasure and sweetness of God tasted and
found, will make diligence and pains more easy, then slothfulnes can be to
the slothful; this oils the wheels, and makes them run swiftly; formality
makes them drive heavily: thus you live always in a complaining humor, fighing
and going backward, because you have some stirring principles or conscience
within, which bears witness against you; and your formal sluggish
disposition on the other hand, refuses to awake and work you are perplexed and
tormented between the two, when thy spirit and affections goes one way, and thy
body another; then thy conscience drives on the Spirit, and thy affections draw
back, it must needs be an unpleasant business.

Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 1 John 5. 7. There
are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
and these three are one.
GReat is the mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Religion and true Godliness
is a bundle of excellent mysteries, of things hid from the world; yea, from the
wise men of the world, 1 Cor. 2. and not only so, but secrets in their own
nature, the distinct know ledge whereof is not given to Saints in this estate
of distance and absence from the Lord: There is almost nothing in Divinity, but
it is a mystery in it self, how common soever it be in the apprehensions of
men: for it is men's overly, and common, and slander apprehensions of the^,
which makes them look so commonly upon them: there is a depth in them, but you
will not know it, till you search it, and sound it, and the more you sound, you
shall find it the more profound: But there are some mysteries small, and some
great, there is a difference amongst them, all are not of one statu^e, of one
measure: The mystery of Christ's Incarnation and Death, and Resurrection, is one
of the great mysteries of Religion, God manifested in the flesh, yet I conceive
there is a greater mystery than it, and of all mysteries in nature or divinity,
I know none to this, the Holy Trinity, and it must needs be greatest of all,
and without controversy greatest, because it is the beginning and end of all,
fons and finis omnium, all mysteries have their rise here, and all of them
return hither. This is furthest removed from the understandings of men, what
God himself is, for himself is infinitely above any manifestation of himself:
God is greater than God manifested in the flesh, though in that respect he be
too great for us to conceive. There is a natural desire in all men to know,
and if any thing be secret and wonderful, the desire is more inflamed after
the knowledge of it, the very difficulty or impossibility of attaining it, in
stead of restraining the curiosity of man's spirit, does rather incense it.
Nitimur in vetitum is the fruit, the sad fruit we plucked and eat from the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil. If the Lord reveal any thing plainly in his Word
to men, that it despised and set at naught, because it is plain, whereas the
most plain truths, which are beyond all controversy, are the most necessary
and most profitable for our eternal salvation; but if there be any secret
mystery in the Scriptures, which the Lord has only pointed out more obscurely
to us, reserving the distinct and clear understanding of it to himself, Deuteronomy.
29. 26. that is the Apple which our cursed natures will long for, and catch
after, though there be never so much choice of excellent saving fruit in the
Paradise of the Scriptures besides. If the Ark be covered to keep men from
looking into it, that does rather provoke the curious spirit of man to prye
into it, 1 Samuel 6. 19. If the Lord show his wonderful glory in the Mount, and
charge his people not to come near, left the glorious presence of God kill
them, he must put rayles about it, to keep them back, or else they will be
meddling, such is the unbridled license of our minds, and the perverse
dispositions of our natures that where God familiarly invites us to come, what
he earnestly presses us to search and know, that we despise as trivial and
common: and what he compasses about with a divine darkness of inaccessible
light, and has removed far from the apprehensions of all living that we will
needs search into, and wander into those forbidden compasses; with daring
boldness. I conceive this holy and profound mystery is one of those secrets
which belongs to God to know, for who knows the Father but the Son, or the Son
but the Father or who knows the mind of God but the Spirit? Yet the foolish
minds of men will not be satisfied with the believing ignorance of such a
mystery, but will needs enquire into those depths, that they may find
satisfaction for their reason, but as it hapeneth with men who will boldly
stare upon the Sun, their eyes are dazzled and darkened with its brightness; or
those that enter into a Labyrinth, which they can find no way to come out, but
they further go into it, the more perplexed it is, and the more intricate; even
so it befalls many unsober and presumptuous spirits, who not being satisfied
with the simple truth of God, clearly asserting that this is, endeavor to
examine it according to reason, and to solve all the objections of carnal wit
and reason (which is often enmity to God) not by the silence of the Scriptures;
but by answers framed according to the several capacities of men, I say all
this is but daring to behold the infinite glory of God with eyes of flesh,
which makes them darkened in mind, and vanishing in their Expressions, while
they seek to behold the inaccessible light, while they enter into an endless
Labyrinth of difficulties; out of which the thread of reason and disputation
can never extricat them or lead them forth. But the Lord has showed us a more
excellent way, though it be more despicable to men: man did fall from his
blessedness, by this curious and wretched aim at some higher happiness, and
more wisdom. The Lord has chosen another way to raise him up again by faith,
rather tha^ knowledge, by believing rather than disputing: therefore the great
command of the Gospel is this, to receive with a ready and willing mind
whatsoever the Lord says to us, whatsoever it may appear to sense and reason;
to dispute no more, to search no more into the secret of Divine mysteries, as
if by searching we could find them out unto perfection, but to believe what is
spoken, till the day break, and the shadows flee away, and the darkness of
ignorance be wholly dispelled by the rising of the Sun of Righteousness. We
are called then to receive this truth that God is one, truly one, and there are
three in this one, the Father, the Son; and the Holy Ghost: This I say, you
must believe, because the wisdom of God faith it, though you know not how it
is, or how it can be, though it seem a contradiction in reason, a Trinity in
Unity, yet you must lead your reason captive to the obedience of faith; and
silence it with this one answer, The Lord has said it: If thou go on to
dispute and to enquire how can these things be? Thou art escaped from under the
power of Faith, and are fled unto the tents of humane wisdom where thou may
learn artheism but no Religion: for the world through wisdom knew not God. 1
Cor. 1. And certainly who ever he be that will not quiet his conscience upon
the bare word of truth in this particular, but will call in for the help of
reason and disputation, how to understand and maintain it; I think he shall be
further from the true knowledge of God, and satisfaction of mind than before;
There is no way here, but to flee into Paul's Sanctuary. Who art thou O man;
that disputes? When ever thou thinks within thy self; How may this be, how can
one be three, and three one, then withal let this of Paul's sound in thine
ears, Who art thou, O man who disputes? Think that thou art man, think that he
is God: Believing ignorance is much better than rash and presumptuous
knowledge; ask not a reason of these things but rather adore and tremble at the
mystery and Majesty of them. Christianity is foolishness to the world upon
this account, because it is an Implicit faith (so to speak) given to God; but
there is no fear of being deceived; though he lead thee blind by a way thou
know not, yet he cannot lead thee wrong. This holy simplicity in believing
every word of God, and trusting without more trying by disputation, is the very
Character of Christianity, and it will be found only true wisdom; for if any
will become wise, he must be a fool in men's account; that he may be wise, he
must quite his reason to learn true Religion, which indeed is a more excellent
and divine reason, neither is it contrary to it, though it be high above it.

In this place of Moses, you have the Unity of God asserted, The Lord thy God
is one Lord; And that is indeed engraven on the very hearts of men by nature,
That God is One: for all may know that the common notion and apprehension of
God, is, that he is a most perfect being; the Original of all things, most
wise, most powerful, and infinite in all perfections. Now common reason may
tell any man that there can be but one thing most perfect and Excellent, there
can be but one infinite, one Almighty, one beginning and end of all, one first
mover, one first cause, of whom are all things, and who is of none.

Again, in this place of John ye have a Testimony of the blessed Trinity of
Persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in that holy Unity of Essence; The great
point which John has in hand, is this fundamental of our Salvation, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God and Savior of the World, in whom all our
confidence should be placed, and upon whom we should lean the weight of our
souls, and this he proves by a twofold testimony, one out of Heaven, another in
the Earth; There are three bearing witness to this truth in heaven, The
Father, the word (that is) Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, whom this
Apostle calls the word of God, or wisdom of God. Ioh. 1. 1. and the Holy Ghost.
The Father witnessed to this truth in an audible voice out of Heaven when
Christ was baptized, Mat. 3. 17. This is my wel-belovd Son, hear him; here is
the Fathers Testimony of the Son when he was baptized, which was given very
solemnly in a great congregation of people, and divinely with great glory and
Majesty from Heaven; as if the heavens had opened upon him; and the
inaccessible light of God had shined down on him, which was confirmed in the
transfiguration. Mat. 17. 5. Where the Lord gave a glorious evidence, to the
astonishment of the three Disciples, how he did account of him, how all Saints
and Angels must serve him; Him has God the Father sealed, says John. Indeed
the stamp of divinity of the divine Image, in such an excellent manner upon
the man Christ, was a Seal set on by God the Father, signifying and confirming
his approbation of his well-beloved Son, and of the work he was going about.
Then the Son himself did give ample Testimony of this, this was the subject of
his Preaching to the World, I am the light and life of men. He that believes
on me shall be saved, and therefore he may be called the word of God, and the
wisdom of God. Joh. 1. 1. Prove. 8. Because he has revealed unto us the
blessed mystery of Wisdom concerning our Salvation; He is the very expression
and Character of the Fathers person, and Glory. Heb. 1. In his own Person, and
he has revealed and expressed his Fathers mind, and his own Office so fully to
the World, that there should be no more doubt of it. Out of the mouth of these
two witnesses, this Word might be established: But for superabundance, behold a
third, the Holy Ghost witnessing at his baptism, in his Resurrection, after
his Ascension, the Holy Ghost signifies his presence and consent to that work,
in the similitude of a Dove, the Holy Ghost testified it in the power that
raised him from the dead, the Holy Ghost put it beyond all question when he
descended upon the Apostles according to Christ's promise. For the other three
witnesses on earth, we shall not stay upon it, only know that the work of the
regeneration of souls by the power of the word and spirit signified by water,
the justification of guilty souls signified by the blood of Jesus Christ, and
the Testimony of the spirit in our Conscience bearing witness to our Spirits,
is an assured Testimony of this, that Jesus Christ in whom we believe, is the
only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. The changing, pacifying
and comforting of souls, in such a wonderful manner, cries aloud, that he in
whom the soul believes is the true and living God, whom to know is eternal
life. But mark I pray you, the accuracy of the Apostle in the change of the
speech, these three witnesses on earth (says he) agree in one, in giving one
common testimony to the Son of God, and Savior of Sinners: But as for the
heavenly witnesses the Father, the Word and Holy Ghost, how ever they be three
after an inconceivable manner, and that they do also agree in one common
Testimony to the Mediator of men, yet moreover they are one, They not only
agree in one, but are one God, one simple undivided self-being infinite Spirit,
holden out to us in three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom be
praise and glory.

Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and Ioh. 5. 7.
ALL Scripture is given by inspiration of God and it is profitable for
instruction, for direction, etc. There is no refuse in it: no simple and plain
History, but it tends to some edification, no profound or deep mystery, but it
is profitable for Salvation; whatsoever secrets there be in the mysteries of
God, which is reserved from us, though it be given us but to know in part, and
darkly through a vail, yet as much is given us to know as may make the man of
God perfect in every good work, as much is given us to know as may build us up
to eternal salvation: if there were no more use of these deep mysteries of the
Holy Trinity, etc. but to silence all flesh, and restrain the unlimited spirits
of men, and keep them within the bounds of Sobriety and Faith, It were enough:
That great secret would teach as much by its silence and darkness, as the
plainer truths do speak out clearly: O that this great mystery did compose our
hearts to some reverend and awful apprehension of that God we have to do with,
and did imprint in our soul a more feeling sense of our darkness, and
ignorance; this were more advantage than all the gain of light, or increase of
knowledge than can come from the search of curiosity: If men would labor to
walk in that light they have attained, rather than curiously enquire after what
they cannot know by enquiry, they should sooner attain more true light, if men
would set about the practice of what they know, without doubt they would more
readily come to a resolution and clearness in doubtful things. Religion is now
turned into questions and School-debates; Men begin to believe nothing, but
dispute every thing, under a pretense of searching for light and resolution,
but for the most part while men look after light, they darken themselves, and
this is the righteous judgment of the Lord upon the world, that does not
receive the truth in love, or walk in the light of what they have already
attained, therefore he gives men up to wander in their search into the dark
dungeons of humane wisdom and fancy, and to lose what they have already. If
those things which are without all Controversy (as the Apostle speaks. 1 Timothy
3. 16.) were indeed made conscience of, and embraced in love and practiced, it
were beyond all controversy, that the most part of present controversies would
cease: But it falls out with many, as with the dog, that catching at a shadow in
the water, lost the substance in his teeth; so they pursuing after new
discoveries in contraverted things, and not taking a heart-hold and inward grip
of the substantial truths of the Gospel, which are beyond all controversy do
even lose what they have. Thus, Even that which they have not is taken from
them, because though they have it in judgment; yet they have it not surely and
solidly in affection, that it may be holden: So, to this present point, if we
could learn to adore and admire this Holy, Holy, Holy One; If we could in
silence and faith sit down and wonder at this mystery, it would be more
profitable to us, and make way for a clearer manifestation of God, than if we
should search and enquire into all the Volums that are written upon it,
thinking by this means to satisfy our reason. I think there is more
profoundnesse in the sobriety of Faith than in the depths of humane wisdom and
learning, when the mystery is such an infinite depth, O, but men's eloquence
and wisdom must be shallow, far too shallow either to find it out; or unfold
it.

But there is yet both more instruction and consolation to be pressed out of
this mystery; and therefore, If you cannot reach it in it self, O consider
what it concerns us, how we may be edified by it, for this is true Religion.
Look upon that place of Moses, what is the great instruction he draws from this
unity of Gods Essence. v. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart; Since God is one, then have no God but one, and that the true and living
God, and this is the very first command of God, which flows as it were
immediately from his absolute Oneness and perfection of Being: There is no man
but he must have some God, that is something whereupon he places his affection
most; every man has some one thing he loves, and respects beyond all other
things, some Lord and Master that commands him, therefore says Christ, No man
can serve two Masters; before a man will want God to love and serve, he will
make them, and then worship them: yea he will make himself his belly, his back,
his honor and pleasure, a God, and sacrifice all his affections and desires,
and endeavors to these: The natural subordination of man to God, the relation
he has as a Creature to a Creator, is the first and fundamental relation,
beyond all respects to himself, or other fellow creatures. This is the
proto-naturall Obligation upon the Creature, therefore it should have returned
in a direct line to his Majesty all its affections and endeavors: But man's
Fall from God has made a wretched throw and cr^ok in the soul, that it cannot
look any more after him, but bows downward toward creatures below, or bends
inwardly toward it self, and so since the Fall, man has turned his heart from
the true God, and set it upon vanity, upon lying vanities, upon base dead
Idols, which can neither help him nor hurt him; your hearts are gone a whoring
from God, O that ye would believe it, none of you will deny, but ye have broken
all the Commands, yet such is the brutish ignorance and stupidity of the most
part, that you will not confess that, when it comes to particulars; and
especially, if you should be challenged for loving other things more than God,
or having other Gods besides the true God, you will instantly deny it, and that
with an asseveration and aversation, God forbid that I have another God: Alas!
this shows, that what you confess in the general is not believed in the
heart, but only is like the parting of children, whom you may learn to say any
thing? I beseech you consider that what you give your time, pains, thoughts,
and affections to, that is your God; you must give God all your heart, and so
retain nothing of your own will if God be your God, but do ye not know that
your care, and grief, and desire, and love, vents another way toward base
things? You know, that you have a will of your own, which goes quite contrary
to his holy will in all things, therefore Satan has bewitched you, and your
hearts deceive you, when they persuade you that you have had no other God but
the true God. Christianity raises the soul again, and advances it by degrees to
this love of God, from which it had fallen; the soul returns to its first
husband, from whom it went awhooring, and now the stamp of God is so upon it,
that it is changed into his Image and glory, having tasted how good this one
self-sufficient-good is, it gladly and easily divorces from all other Lovers;
it renounces formal lusts of ignorance, and now begins to live in another;
Love transplants the soul into God, and in him it lives, and with him it
vvalks: It Is true, this is done gradually, there is much of the heart yet
unbroken to this sweet and easy yoke of love, much of the corrupt nature
untamed, unreclaimed, yet so much is gained by the first conversion of the soul
to God, that all is given up to him in affection and desire; he has the chief
place in the soul, the disposition of the Spirit has some stamp and impression
of his Oneness and singularity: My beloved is one: Though a Christian is not
wholly rid of strange Lords, yet the tie of subjection to them is broken; they
may often intrude by violence upon him, but he is in an hostile posture of
affection, and endeavor against them. I beseech you, since the Lord is one,
and there is none beside him. O, let this be engraven on your hearts, that your
inward affections and outward actions may express that one Lord to be your
God, and none other beside him: It is a great shame and reproach to Christians,
that they do not carry the stamp of the first Principle of Religion upon their
walking, the condition and conversation of many declares how little account
they make of the true God, why do ye enslave your souls to your lusts and the
service of the flesh, if ye believe in this one God? Why do ye all things to
please your selves, if this one Lord be your God? As for you the Israel of God
who are called by Jesus Christ to partake with the Commonwealth of Israel, in
the Covenant of promises, hear, I beseech you, this, and let your souls incline
to it, and receive it. Your God is one Lord; have then, no other Lords over
your souls and consciences; not your selves, not others.

But in the next place let us consider to what purpose John leads such three
witnesses, that we may draw some consolation from it. The thing testified and
witnessed unto, is the groundwork of all a Christians hope and consolation,
that Jesus Christ is the eternal Son of God, and Savior of the World, one able
to save to the utmost all that put their trust in him, so that every soul that
finds it self lost, and not able to subsist nor abide the judgment of God, may
repose their confidence in him, and lay the weight of their eternal welfare
upon his death and sufferings, with assurance to find rest and peace in him to
their souls. He is such a one as faith may triumph in him over the world, and
all things be^de: A Believer may triumph in his victory, and in the faith of
his victory, over hell and death, and the grave, many overcome personally, for
this is our victory over the world, even our faith, verse. 4. And how could a
soul conquer by Faith, if he in whom it believes were not declared to be the
Son of God with power, there is nothing so mean and weakly as Faith in it self,
its a poor despicable thing of it self, and that it sees, and that it
acknowledges; yea, faith is a very act of its self denial, its a renouncing of
all help without and within it self, save only that which is laid on Christ
Jesus; therefore it were the most unsuitable mean of prevailing, and the most
insufficient weapon for gaining the victory, if the object of it were not the
strong God, the Lord Almighty, from whom it derives and borrows all its power
and virtue, either to pacify the conscience, or to expiate sin, or to overcome
the world. Oh! consider Christians where the foundation of your hope is
situated, it is in the divine power of our Savior, if he who declared so much
love and good will to sinners, by becoming so low, and suffering so much, have
also all power in Heaven and Earth, if he be not only man near us, to make for
us boldness of access, but God near God, to prevail effectually with God,
then certainly he is asure foundation laid in Sion, elect and precious; he is
an unm oveable Rock of ages, whosoever trusts their soul to him shall not be
ashamed. I am sure that many of you considers not this, that Christ Jesus who
was in due time born of the Virgin Mary, and died for sinners, is the eternal
Son of God, equal to his Father in all glory and power. O how would this make
the Gospel agreat mystery to souls, and the Redemption of souls a precious and
wonderful work, if it were considered. Would not souls stand at this Anchor
immovable in tentation, if their faith were pitched on this sure foundation,
and their hope cast upon this solid ground: O know your Redeemer is strong and
mighty, and none can pluck you out of his hand, and himself will cast none out
that comes. If the multitude of you believed this, you would not make so little
account of the Gospel that comes to you, and make so little of your sins which
behoved to be taken away by the blood of God, and could be expiated by no other
propitiation, you would not think it so easy to satisfy God with some words
of custom, and some public services of form as you do, you would not for all
the World deal with God alone without this Mediator: and being convinced of sin
(if you believed this solidely, that he in whom forgivennesse of sin and
salvation is preached, is the same Lord God of whom you hear in the Old
Testament, who gave out the Law, and inspired the Prophets, the only begotten
of the Father in a way infinitely removed from all created capacities) you could
not but find the Father well satisfied in him, and find a sufficient ransom in
his death and doings to pacify God, and to settle your consciences.

But as the thing testified is a matter of great consolation, so the witness
testifying to this foundamentall of our Religion, may be a ground of great
encouragement to discouraged souls. It is ordinary, that the apprehensions of
Christians takes up Jesus Christ as very lovely, and more loving than any of
the Persons of the Godhead, either the Father or the Holy Ghost, there are
some thoughts of estrangednesse and distance of the Father, as if the Son did
really reconcile and gain him to love us, who before hated us, and upon this
mistake the soul is filled with continual jealousies, and suspicions of the
love of God: but observe I beseech you, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
all of them first agreeing in one Testimony, the Father declares from heaven,
that he is abundantly well pleased with his Son, not only because he is his
Son, but even in the undertaking and performing of that work of Redemption of
sinners: It is therefore his most serious invitation, and peremptory command to
all to hear him, and believe in him. Mat. 3. 17. 1 Ioh. 3. 23. Nay, if we speak
properly, our salvation it is not the business of Christ alone, as we imagine
it, but the whole Godhead is interessed in it deeply, and so deeply, that you
cannot say, who loves it most, or likes it most. The Father is the very
fountain of it, his love is the spring of all, God so loved the World, that he
has sent his Son Christ has not purchased that eternal love to us, but is
rather the gift, the free gift of eternal love. And therefore, as we have the
Son delighting among the sons of men, Pro. 8. and delighting to be employed and
to do his will, Psalm 40. So we have the Father delighting to send his Son, and
taking pleasure in instructing him, and furnishing him for it, Isa. 42. 1. And
therefore Christ often professed that he was not often about his own work, but
the Fathers work who sent him, and that it was not his own will, but his
Fathers he was fulfilling, Therefore he should not look upon the head-spring of
our salvation in the Son, but rather ascend up to the Father, whose love and
wisdom did frame all this; And thus we may be confident to come to the Father
in the Son, knowing that it was the love of the Father that sent the Son,
though indeed we must come to him only in the Son, in the name of Christ, and
faith of acceptance through a Mediator, not because the Mediator purchases
his good will, but because his love and good will only vents in his beloved Son
Christ, and therefore he will not be known nor worshipped but in him, in whom
he is near sinners, and reconciling the world to himself. And then the Holy
Ghost concurrs in this Testimony, and as the Son had the work of purchasing
rights and interests to grace and glory, so the great work of applying all
these privileges to Saints, and making them actually partakers of the
blessings of Christ his death, is committed in a special way to the Holy Ghost:
I will send the Comforter, etc. So then, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost all agree
in one, that Jesus Christ is a sure refuge for sinners, a plank for ship-broken
men, a firm and sure foundation to build everlasting hopes upon, there is no
party dissenting in all the Gospel, the business of the Salvation of lost
souls is concluded in this holy Counsel of the Trinity with one voice, as at
first, all of them agreed, to make man, Let us make man* So again, they agree
to make him again, to restore him to life in the second Adam. Who ever thou be
that would flee to God for mercy, ^o it in confidence, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost are ready to welcome thee, all of one mind to shut out none,
to cast out none. But to speak properly, it is but one love; one will, one
counsel, and purpose in the Father, Son, and Spirit, for these three are one,
and not only agree in one, they are one, and what one purposes o^ loves, all
love and purpose. I would conclude this matter with a word of direction how to
worship God, which I cannot express in fitter terms then these of Nazianzen, I
cannot think upon one, but by and by I am compassed about with the brightness
of three, and (...) cannot distinguish three, but I am suddenly driven back
unto one: There is great ignorance and mistake of this even amongst the best
Christians, the grosser sort when they hear of one God only, thinks Christ but
some eminent man, and so direct their prayers to God only, excluding the Son,
and Holy Ghost, or when they hear of three Persons, the Father, the Son, and
Holy Ghost, they straight way divide their Worship, and imagine a Trinity of
Gods: And I fear, those of us who know most, use not to worship God as he has
revealed himself, Father, Son, and Holy Chost, and yet one God: our minds are
reduced to such a simple unity, as we think upon one of them alone, or else
distr^cted and divided into such a plurality, that we worship, in a manner,
three Gods in stead of one. It is a great mystery to keep the right middle way.
Learn I beseech you, so to conceive of God, and so to acknowledge him, and pray
to him, as you may do it in the name of Jesus Christ, that all the Persons may
have equal honor, and all of them one honor, that while you consider one God,
you may adore that sacred and blessed Trinity, and while you worship that holy
Trinity, you may straight way be reduced to an Unity. To this wonderful and
holy One, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Praise and Glory.

Ephesians. 1. Who works all things after the Counsel of his own will. Job* 23. He
is in one mind, and who can turn him, etc.
HAving spoken something before of God, in his Nature, and Being, and
Properties, we come in the next place to consider his glorious Majesty as ^e
sta^s in some nearer relation to his creatures, the works of his hands: For we
must conceive the first rise of all things in the world, to be in this
self-being, the first conception of them to be in the Womb of God's everlasting
purpose and Decree, which in due time, according to his appointment, brings
forth the child of the creature to the light of actual existence and being: It
is certain, that his Majesty might have endured for ever, and possessed himself
without any of these things: If he had never resolved to create any thing
without himself, he had been blessed then, as now, because of his full and
absolute self-sufficient perfection. His purposing to make a world, and his
doing of it, ads nothing to his inward blessedness and contentment; this
glorious and Holy One, incloses within in his own being, all imaginable
perfections, in an infinite and transcendent manner; that if you remove all
created ones, you diminish nothing; if you add them all, you increase nothing.
Therefore it was the superabundance of his perfection, that he resolved to show
his Glory thus in the world. It is the creatures indigence and limited
condition, which makes it needful ^o go without its own compass, for the
happiness of its own being: Man cannot be happy in loving himself, he is not
satisfied with his own intrinsic perfections, but he must diffuse himself by
his affections and desires, and endeavors, and as it were, walk abroad upon
these legs, to fetch in some supply from the creatures or Creator: The creature
is constrained out of thus to go out of it self, which speaks much indigence
and want within it self: But it is not so with his Majesty, His own glorious
being contents him, His happiness is to know that, and delight in it, because
it comprehends in it self all, that is at all possible, in the most excellent
and perfect manner that is conceiveable; nay infinitely beyond what can be
conceived by any but himself, so he needs not go without himself to seek love
or delight, for it is all within him, and it cannot be without his own being;
unless it flow from within him, therefore ye may find in Scripture what
complacency God has in himself, and the Father in the Son, and the Son in the
Father: We find Prove. 8. How the wisdomof of God, our Lord Jesus; was the
Fathers delight from all Eternity, and the Father again his delight, for he
rejoiced always before him, verse. 30. And this was an all-sufficient possession
that one had of another. v. 22. the love between the Father and the Son is
holden out as the first pattern of all loves and delight. Ioh. 17. 23, 24. This
then flows from the infinite excess of perfection and exundance of
self-being, that his Majesty is pleased to come without himself, to maintain
his own Glory in the works of his hands, to decree and appoint other things
beside himself, and to execute that decree.

We may consider in these words some particulars for our edification, 1. That
the Lord has from Eternity purposed within himself, and decreed to manifest
his own glory in the making and ruling of the World, that there is a Counsel
and purpose of his will which reaches all things, which have been, are now, or
are to be after this. This is clear, For he works all things according to the
counsel of his own will: 2. That his mind and purpose is one mind one counsel:
I mean not only one for ever, that is perpetual and unchangeable, as the words
speak, but also one for all, that is, with one simple Act and Resolution of his
Holy will he has determined, all these several things, all their times their
conditions, their circumstances. 3. That whatsoever he has from all eternity
purposed, he in time practices it, and comes to execution and working, so that
there is an exact correspondence betwixt his will and his work, his mind and
his hand. He works according to the Counsel of his will, and whatsoever his
soul desires, that he does. 4. That his purpo^e and performance is infallible;
irresistible by any created power, himself will not change it, For he is in one
mind, and none else can hinder it, for who can turn him? he desires and he
does it, as in the Original, there is nothing interveens between the desire
and the doing, that can hinder the meeting of these two.

The first is the constant Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, of which you should
consider four things, 1. 'That his purpose and decree is most wise, therefore
Paul cries out upon such a subject; O the depth of the riches both of the
Wisdom and knowledge of God, Romans 11. 33. His will is always one with wisdom,
therefore you have the purpose of his will mentioned thus [the Counsel of his
will] for his will (as it were) takes Counsel and advice of Wisdom, and
discernes according to the depth and riches of his knowledge and understanding.
We see among men these are separated often, and there is nothing in the world
so disorderly, so unruly and uncomely, as when Will is divided from Wisdom,
when men follow their own will and lusts as a Law, against their conscience,
that is monstrous. The understanding and reason are the eyes of the Will, if
these be put out, or if a man leave them behind him, he cannot but fall into a
pit. But the purposes of Gods will are depths of wisdom, nay his very will is
a sufficient* Rule and Law, so that it may be used of him, stat pro ratione
voluntas, Romans 9. 13, 14. If we consider the glorious Fab^ick of the World, the
Order established in it, the sweet harmony it keeps in all its motions and
successions: O it must be a wise mind and counsel contrived i^. Man now having
the Idea of this world in his mind, might fancy and imagine many other worlds,
bearing some proportion and resemblance to this: but if he had never seen nor
known this world, he could never have imagined the thousand part of this world,
he could in no wise have formed an Image in his mind of all these different
kinds of creatures, Creatures must have some example and copy to look to, but
what was his pattern? Who has been his Counselor* to teach him? Rom 11. 34.
Who gave him the first Rudiments of Principles of that Art? Surely none, He had
no pattern given him, not the least Idea of any of these things furnished him,
but it is absolutely and solely his own wise contrivance. 2. This purpose of
God is most free and absolute, there is no cause, no reason why he has thus
disposed all things, and not otherwise, as he might have done, but his own good
will and pleasure, If it be so in a matter of deepest concernment, Romans 9. 18
It must be so also in all other things; we may find indeed many inferior
causes, many peculiar reasons for such and such a way of administration, many
ends and uses for which they serve, for there is nothing that his Majesty has
appointed, but it is for some use and reason, yet we must rise above all these
and ascend into the Tower of his most high will and pleasure, which is founded
on a depth of wisdom, and from thence we shall behold all the order,
administration and use of the creatures to depend, and herein is a great
difference between his Majesty's purposes and ours, you know there is still
something presented under the notion of good and convenient, that moves our
will, and enclines us for its own goodness to seek after it, and so to fall
upon the means to compass it; therefore the end which we propose to our selves
has its influence upon our purposes, and pleasurs them, so that from it the
motion seems to proceed first, and not so much from within; but there is no
created thing can thus determine his Majesty, Himself, his own glory is the
great end, which he loves for it self, and for which he loves other things: But
among other things, though there be many of them ordained one for another use;
yet his will and pleasure is the Original of that order, He does not find it,
but makes it, you see all the creatures below are appointed for man, as their
immediate and next end, for his use and service, but was it man his goodness
and perfection which did move and incline his Majesty to this appointment? No
indeed, but of his own good will he makes such things serve man, that all of
them together may be for his own glory. 3. The Lords Decree is the first rise
of all things that are, or have been, or are to come; This is the first
Original of them all, to which they must be reduced as their spring and
fountain. All of you may understand that there are many things possible, which
yet actually will never be; The Lords power and Omnipotency is of a further
extent then his Decree and Purpose; His Power is Natural and Essential to his
Being. His Decree is of choice and Voluntary: The Father could have sent a
Legion of Angels to have delivered his Son, the Son could have asked them, but
neither of them would do it. Mat. 26. 53. The Lord could have raised up
Children to Abraham out of stones, but he would not, Matthew. 3, His power then
comprehends within its reach all possible things which do not in their own
nature, and proper conception, imply a contradiction, so that infinite worlds
of creatures more perfect than this, numbers of Angels and men above these, and
creatures in glory surpassing them again, are within the compass of the
boundless power, and omnipotency of God: But yet for all this it might have
fallen out, that nothing should actually and really have been, unless his
Majesty had of his own free^ will decreed what is, or has been, or is to be.
His will determines his power, and as it were; puts it in the nearest capacity
to act, and exercise it self. Here then we must look for the beginning of all
things that are, they are conceived in the womb of the Lords everlasting
purpose; As he speaks, Zeph. 2. 2. The Decree is, as it were, with child of
beings. Isa. 44. 7. Its God Royal Prerogative to appoint things to come, and
none can share with him in it; From whence is it, I pray you, that, of so many
worlds which his power could have framed, this one is brought to light; Is it
not because this one was formed (as it were) in the belly of his eternal
counsel and will? From whence is it that so many men are, and no more That the
Lord Jesus was slain, when the power of God might have kept him alive? That
those men, Judas etc. were the doers of it, when others might have done it?
from whence are all those actions good or evil under the Sun, which he might
have prevented? But from his good will and pleasure, from his determinate
counsel Acts 4. 28. Can you find the Original of these in the Creature, why
it is thus, and why not otherwise? Can you conceive why, of all the infinite
numbers of possible beings, these are, and no other? And, what has translated
that number of creatures; which is from the state of pure possibility to
futurition or actual being, but the decisive vote of Gods everlasting purpose
and counsel? Therefore we should always conceive, that the creatures and all
their actions, which have, or will have any being in the World, have first had
a being in the womb of Gods eternal Counsel, and that his will and pleasure
has past upon all things that are, and are not; His Counsel has concluded of
things that have been, or will be, that thus they shall be; and his Counsel
has determined of all other things which are also impossible; that they shall
never come forth into the light of the world, but remain in the dark bowels of
Omnipotency; that so we may give him the glory of all things that are not, and
that are at all. Then 4. We should consider the extent of his decree, and
Counsel, it is past upon all things, it is Universal, reaching every being or
action of the Universe. This is the strain of the whole Scripture. He did not
(as some dream) once create the creatures in a good state, and put them in
capacity henceforth to preserve themselves, or exercise their own virtue and
power, without dependence on him: as an Artificer makes an Horologe, and orders
it in all things, that it may do its business without him; he is not only a
general original of action and motion, as if we would command a River to flow
by his appointed channels; as if he did only work and rule the world by
Atturneys and Ambassadors; that is the weakness and infirmity of earthly
Kings, that they must substitute Deputies for themselves: But this King
appoints all immediately, and disposes upon all the particular actions of his
Creatures good or evil, and so is the Universal absolute Lord of his Creature,
of its being and doing, it were a long work to rehearse what the Scriptures
speaks of this kind: But, O that ye would read them oftener, and ponder them
better, How there is nothing in this World (which may seem to fall out by
chance to you, that you know not how it is come to pass, and can see no cause
nor reason of it) but it falls out by the holy will of our blessed Father: Be
it of greater or less moment, or be it a hair of thy head fallen, or thy head
cut off; the most casual and contingent thing, thought it surprised the whole
world of men and Angels, that they should wonder from whence it did proceed, it
is no surprisall to him, for he not only knew it, but appointed it; the most
certain and necessary thing, according to the course of nature, it has no
certainty, but from his appointment who has established such a course in the
creatures, and which he can suspend when he pleases: Be it the sin of men and
devils, which seems most opposite to his holiness, yet even that cannot appear
in the World of beings, if it were not in a holy, righteous, and permissive
way, first conceived in the womb of his Eternal Counsel, and if it were not
determined by him for holy and just end, Acts 4. 28.

The second thing propounded is, that his mind and counsel is one, one and the
same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever; therefore the Apostles speaks of
God, That there is no shadow of change or turning in him, James 1. 17. He is
not a man that he should lie, or the son of man that he should repent; Will he
say, and not do it? Numb. 23. 19. and shall he decree and not execute it? Shall
he purpose and not perform it? I am God and changes not, that is his Name, Mal.
3. 6. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart to all
generations, Psalm. 33. 11. Men changes their mind oftener then their garments,
poor vain man, even in their best estate is changeableness, and vicissitude it
self, altogether vanity: And this arises partly from the imperfection of his
understanding, and his ignorance, because he does not understand what may fall
out; there are many things secret and hidden, which if he discovered, he would
not be of that judgment; and many things fall out, which may give ground of
another resolution; and partly from the weakness and perverseness of his will,
that cannot be constant in any good thing, and is not so closely united to it,
as that no fear nor terror can separate from it: But there is no such
imperfection in him, neither ignorance, nor weakness, all things are naked
before him; all their natures, their circumstances, all events, all emergents,
known to him are they, and all his works from the beginning, as perfectly as in
the end: And therefore he may come to a fixed resolution from all eternity, and
being resolved, he can see no reason of change because there can nothing appear
after, which he did not perfectly discover from the beginning, Therefore when
ever ye read in the Scripture of the Lords repenting, as Genesis 6. 7. and Ier.
16. 8. ye should remember that the Lord speaks in our terms, and like nurses
with their children, uses our own dialect, to point out to us our great
ignorance of his Majesty, that cannot conceive more honorably of him, nor more
distinctly of our selves. When he changes all things about him, he is not
changed, for all these changes were at once in his mind, but when he changes
his outward dispensation he is said to repent of what he is doing, because we
use not to change our manner of dealing, without some conceived grief, or
repentance and change of mind. When a man goes to build a house, he has no
mind but that it should continue so, he has not the least thought of taking it
down again, but afterward it becomes ruinous and his estate enlarges, and then
he takes a new resolution, to cast it down to the ground, and build a better;
This it is with man, according as he varies his work, he changes his mind. But
it is not so with God: All these changes of his works, all the successions of
times, the variation of dealings, the alteration of dispensations in all ages
were at once in his mind, and all before him; so that he never goes to build a
house, but he has in his own mind already determined all the changes it shall
be subject to: When he sets up a Throne in a Nation, it is in his mind within
such a period to cast it down again; when he lifts up men in success and
prosperity, he does not again change his mind when he throws them down, for
that was in his mind also; so that there it no surprisal of him by any
unexpectant emergment: Poor man has many co^sultations before he come to a
conclusion; But it is not thus with his Counsel; of all these strange and new
things which fall out in our days, he has one thought of them all from
Eternity; He is one mind, and none of all these things have put him off his
eternal mind, or put him to a new advisement about his great projects: Not
only does he not change his mind, but his mind and thought is one, of all, and
concerning all: Our poor, narrow and limited minds, must part their thoughts
among many bnsinesles, one thought for this, another for that, and one after
another: but with him there is neither succession of Counsels and purposes, nor
yet plurality, but as with one opening of his eye, he beholds all things as
they are: so with one inclination, or nod of his will he has given a law, and
appointed all things: If we can at one instant, and one look, see both light
and colors, and both the glass and the shadow in it, and with one motion of
our wills move toward the end, and the means. O, how much more may he with one
simple undivided act of his good-wil and pleasure pass a determination on all
things, in their times, and orders, and in his own infinite and his glorious
being perceive them all with one look? How much consolation might redound from
this to believing souls? Has the Lord appointed you to suffer persecution and
tribulation here? Has he carved out such a lot unto you in this life? Then
withal consider, that his Majesty has Eternal glory wrapped up in the same
Counsel, from which thy afflictions proceed: Has he made thy soul to melt
before him? Has he convinced thee, and made thee to flee unto the City for
refuge, and expect salvation from no other but himself? Then know, that Life
Eternal is in the bosom of that same purpose which gave thee to believe this;
though the one be born before the other, yet the Decree shall certainly bring
forth the other. And for such souls as upon this vain presumption of the
infallibility of Gods purposes thinks it needless to give diligence in
Religion, know, that it is one mind and purpose that has linked the end and
the means together as a chain, and therefore, if thou expectest to be saved,
according to Election, thou must according to the same Counsel make thy Calling
home from sin to God, sure.

Thirdly, what thing soever he has purposed, he in due time applies to the
performance of it, and then the counsel of his will becomes the work of his
hands, and there is an admirable harmony and exact agreement between these two:
All things come out of the womb of his eternal Decree, by the work of his
power, even just fashioned and framed, as their lineaments and draughts were
proportioned in the decree, nothing failing, nothing wanting, nothing
exceeding; there is nothing in the Idea of his mind but it is expressed in the
works of his hands, there is no raw-halfwishes in God: Men have such imperfect
desires, I would have, or do, such a thing if it were not, etc. He wavers not
thus in suspense, but what he wills and desires, he wills and desires indeed:
He intends it shall be, and what he intends, doubtless he will execute, and
bring to pass: Therefore his will in due time applies Almighty Power to
fulfill the desire of i^ and Almighty Power being put to work by his Will, it
cannot but work all things according to the Counsel of his Will; and
whatsoever his soul desires, that he cannot but do, even as he desires, seeing
he cannot do it. If he will do it, and can do it, what hinders him to work and
do? Know then, that his commands and precepts to you, signifying what is your
duty, they do not so much signify what he desires, or intends to work, or have
done, as his approbation of such a thing in it self to be your duty; and
therefore though he have revealed his Will concerning our duty, though no
obedience follow, yet is not his intention frustrated or disappointed; for his
commands to you say not what is his Intention about it, but what is that which
he approves as good, and a duty obliging men: But whatsoever thing he purposes
and intends should be, certainly, he will do it, and make it to be done; If it
be a work of his own power alone, himself will do it alone: If he require the
concurrence of creatures to it, as in all the works of Providence, then he will
effectually apply the creatures to his work, and not wait in suspense on their
determination: If he have appointed such an end to be attained by such means;
if he have a work to do by such instruments, then, without all doubt, he will
apply the instruments when his time comes, and will not wait on their
concurrence. You see now strange things done, you wonder at them, how we are
brought down from our excellency; how our land is laid desolat by strangers;
how many instruments of the Lords work are laid aside; how he lifts up a rod of
indignation against us, and is like to overturn even the foundations of our
land: All these were not in our mind before, but they were in his mind from
eternity, and therefore he is now working it. Believe then that there is not a
circumstance of all business, not one joint or jot of it, but is even as it was
framed and carved out of old, his present works are according to an ancient
pattern, which he carries in his mind, all the measures and degrees of your
affliction, all the ounces, and grainweights of your cup, were all weighed in
the scales of his Eternal Counsel, the instruments, the time, the manner, all
that is in it. If he change instruments, that was in his mind, if he change
dispensations, that was in his mind also: And seeing you know by the Scriptures
that a blessed end is appointed for the godly, that all things work for their
good, that all is subservient to the Churches welfare, seeing, I say, you know
his purpose is such as the Scriptures speaks, then believe his performance shall
be exact accordingly, nothing dificient, no joint, no sinew, in all his work
of providence, no line in all his book, and volume of the creature, but it was
written in that ancient book of his eternal counsel, and first fashioned in
that, Ps. 39. 16.

Then lastly, his will is irresistible, his Counsel shall stand, who can turn
him from his purpose, and who can hinder him from performance? therefore he
attains his end, in the highest and most superlative degree of certainty and
infallibility: Himself will not change his own purpose, for why should he do
it, if he change to the better, then it reflects on his wisdom, if he change to
the worse, it reflects both on his wisdom and godliness, certainly he can see
no cause why he should change it: But as himself cannot change, so none can
hinder his performance, for what power, think you, shall it be, that may attempt
that? Is it the power of men, of strong men, of high men, of any men? No sure,
for their breath is in their nostrils, they have no power, but as he breaths in
them, if he keep in his breath (as it were) they perish, all nations are as
nothing before him, and what power has nothing? Is it Devils may do it? No,
for they cannot, though they would, he chains them, he limits them: Is it good
Angels? They are powerful indeed, but they neither can, nor will resist his
will. Let (...) be the whole University of the Creation, suppose all their
scattered force and virtue conjoined in one, yet it is all but finite, it
amounts to no more, if you would eternally add unto it: But all victory and
resistance of this kind, must be by a superior power, or at least by an equal;
therefore we may conclude that there i^ no impediment or let, that can be put
in his way, nothing can obstruct his purpose, if all the world should conspire
as one man to obstruct the performance o^ any of his promises and purposes,
they do but rage i^ vain, like dogs barking at the Moon, they shall be s^ far
from attaining their purpose, that his Majesty sha^ disabuse them (so to speak)
to his own purpose, h^ shall apply them quite contrary to their own mind, t^
work out the counsel of his mind? Here is the absolute King, only worth the
name of a King and Lord, whom all things in Heaven and Earth obeyes at the
first nodd and beckning to them. Hills, Seas, Mountains, Rivers, Sun and Moon,
and Clouds, Men and Beasts, Angels and Devils, all of them are acted, moved,
and inclined according to his pleasure, all of them are about his work indeed,
as the result of all in the end shall make it appear, and are servants at his
command, going where he bids go, and coming where he bids come, led by an
invisible hand, though in the mean time they knew it not, but thinks they are
about their own business, applauds themselves for a time in it, ducunt
volentem fata, notentem trahunt, Godly men who knows his Will and loves it, are
led by it willingly, for they yield themselves up to his disposal: but wicked
men who have contrary Wills of their own, they can gain no more by resisting,
but to be drawn along with it.

Now to what purpose is all this spoken of Gods Decrees and purposes, which he
has called a secret belonging to himself? If his works and judgments be a
great depth, and unsearchable, sure his decrees are far more unsearchable: For
it is the secret and hidden purpose of God, which is the very depth of his way,
and judgment. But to what purpose is it all, I say? Not to enquire curiously
into the particulars of them, but to profit by them: The Scripture holds out to
us the unchangeablenesse, freedom, extent, holiness and wisdom of them, for
our advantage, and if this advantage be not reaped we know them in vain. Not to
burden your memory with many particulars, we should labor to draw forth both
instruction and consolation out of them. Instruction, I say, in two things
especially, to submit with reverence and respect to his Majesty in all his
works and ways, and to trust in him who knows all his workss, and will not
change his mind

There is nothing, wherein I know Christians more deficent than in this point
of submission, which I take to be one of the chiefest and sweetest, though
hardest duties of a Christian. It is hardly to be found among men, a through
compliance of the soul to what his soul desires, a real subjection of our
spirits to his good will and pleasure; There is nothing so much blessed in
Scripture, as waiting on him, as yielding to him to be disposed upon. Blessed
are all they that wait on him: Pride is the greatest opposite, and he opposes
himself most to that, for it is in it self most derogatory to the highness and
Majesty of God, which is his very glory: Therefore submission is most
acceptable to him, when the soul yields it self and its will to him, he
condescends far more to it, he cannot be an enemy to such a soul; submission to
his Majesty's pleasure, is the very bowing down of the soul willingly, to any
thing he does or commands; what ever yoke he puts on, of duty or suffering, to
take it on willingly, without answering again, which is the great sin condemned
in servants, to put the mouth in the dust, and to keep silence, because he does
it, I was dumb with silence, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it,
their is submission indeed, silence of mind and mouth, a restraint put upon the
spirit to think nothing grudgingly of him, for any thing he does: It is,
certainly, the greatest fault of Christians, and grounds of many more, that ye
do not look to God, but to creatures in any thing befalls you, therefore there
are so frequent risings of spirits against his yoke, frequent spurnings against
it, as Ephraim unaccustomed with the yoke, so do ye, and this is it only makes
it heavy and troublesome, if there were no more reason for it, but your own
gain, it is the only way to peace and quietness, Durum sed levius fit
patientia, quicquid corrigere est nes as, your impatience cannot help you, but
hurt you, it is the very yoke of your yoke; but quiet and silent stooping makes
it easy in it self, and brings in more help beside, even Divine help: Learn
this, I beseech you, to get your wills abandoned, and your spirits subdued to
God, both in the point of duty and dispensation. If duties commanded cross thy
spirit (as certainly the reality and exercise of Godliness must be unpleasant
to any nature) know what thou art called to, to quit thy own will to him, to
give up thy self to his pleasure singly, without so much respect to thy own
pleasure or gain, learn to obey him simply, because he commands, though no
profit redound to thee, and by this means thou shall in due time have more
sweet peace and real gain, though thou intended it not. And in case any
dispensation cross thy mind, let not thy mind rise up against it, do not fall
out with providence, but commit thy way wholly to him, and let him do what he
pleases in that, be thou minding thy duty, be not anxious in that, but be
diligent in this, and thou shall be the only gainer by it, besides the honor
redounds to him.

Then I would exhort you from this ground, to trust in him; seeing he alone is
the absolute Sovereign Lord of all things, seeing he has past a determination
upon all things, and accordingly they must be, and seeing none can turn him
from his way, O then Christians, learn to commit your selves to him in all
things, both for this life and the life to come; why are ye so vain and
foolish, as to depend and hang upon poor vain depending Creatures? Why do ye
not forsake your selves? Why do ye not forsake all other things as empty
shadows? Are not all created powers, habits, gifts, graces, strength, riches,
etc. like the idols in comparison of him, who can neither do good, neither can
they do ill? Cursed is he that trusts in man, Jer. 17. 15, 16. there needs no
other curse than the very disappointment you shall meet withal. Consider (...)
beseech you, that our God can do all things, what ever ^e pleases in Heaven
and Earth, and that none can obstruct his pleasure, blessed is that soul for whom
the counsel of his will is engaged, and it is engaged for all that trust in him,
he can accomplish his good pleasure in thy behalf, either without, or against
means, all impediments and thorns set in his way, he can burn them up, you who
are heirs of the promises, O know your privilege, what his soul desires, He
does even that; and what he has seriously promised to you, he desires. If you
ask who are heirs of the Promises, I would answer simply, these and these only
who do own them, and challenge them, and claim to them for their life and
salvation, these who seek the Inheritance only by the Promise, and whose soul
desires them and embraces them. O if you would observe how unlike ye are to
God; ye change often, ye turn often out of the way, but that were not so ill if
ye did not imagine him to be like your selves, and it is unbelief which makes
him like to your selves when your frame and tender disposition changes, when
presence and access to God is removed; that is wrong, it speaks out a mortal
creature indeed; but if it be so, O, do no more wrong, do not by your
suspicions and jealousies, and questionings of him imagine that he is like unto
you, and changed also, that is a double wrong and dishonor to his Majesty.
Has he not said, I am God and changes not: He is in one mind, who can turn
him? How comes it then that ye doubt of his love as often as ye change? When ye
are in a good temper, ye think he loves you, when it is not so, ye cannot
believe but he is angry and hates you; is not this to speak quite contrary to
the Word, that he is a God that changes, that he is not in one mind, but now in
one, and then in another, as often as the unconstant wind of a souls
self-pleasing humor turns about. Here is your rest and confidence, if you will
be established, not within your selves, not upon marks and signs within you,
which ebb and flow as the Sea, and change as the Moon, but upon his
unchangeable Nature and faithful promises. This we desire to hold out to you
all, as one ground for all, you would every one have some particular ground in
your own disposition and condition, and thinks it general doctrine only which
lays it no^ home so; but believe it, I know no ground of
realsoul-establishment but general truths, and pinciples common to you all; and
our business is not to lay any other foundation, or more foundations, according
to your different conditions, but to lay this one foundation, Christ, and God
unchangeable; and to exhort every one of you to make that general Foundation
your own in particular, by leaning to it, and building upon it, and claiming to
it, all other are sandy and ruinous.

Let us now in this sad time press consolation from this, the Lords hand is in
all this; it is immediate in every dispensation, and its only carnal-mindednesse
that cannot see him stretching out his hand to every man, with his own portion
of affliction: Know this one thing, that God is in one mind; for all these many
ways and judgments he is in one mind, to gather the Saints to build up the
Church; the body of Christ, this is his end, all other businesses is in the by,
and subservient to this, therefore he will change it as he pleases, but his
great purpose of good to his people all the World cannot hinder. Let us then
establish our souls in this consideration, all is clear above, albeit cloudy
below; All is calm in Heaven albeit tempestuous here upon Earth: There is no
confusion, no disorder in his mind; though we think the world out of course,
and that all things reel about with confusion, he has one mind in it, and who
can turn him? And that mind is good to them that trust in him; And therefore who
can turn away our good? Let men consult and imagine what they please, let them
pass votes and decrees what to do with his people, yet it is all to no purpose
for there is a Counsel above, an older Counsel, which must stand and take place
in all generations. If men's conclusions be not according to the Counsel of his
Will; they are but imaginary dreams, like fancies of a distracted person, who
imagining himself a King, sits down on the Throne, and gives out decrees and
Ordinances. May not He who sits in Heaven laugh at the foolishness and
madness of men, who act in all things as if they had no dependence on him, and
go about their business, as if it were not contrived already; it is a
ridiculous thing for men to order their business, and settle their own
conclusions, without once minding one above them, who has not only a negative,
but an affirmative vote in all things: Its true, that God in his deep wisdom
has kept up his particular purposes secret, that men may walk according to an
appointed Rule, and use all means for compassing their intended ends; and
therefore it is well said, Prudens futuri temporis exitum Caliginosa nocte
premit Deus. But yet withal we should mind that of James, If the Lord will,
and go about all things, even the most probable, with submission to his will
and pleasure. And therefore, when men go without their bounds, either in fear
of dangers, or joy conceived in successes: Ridetque si mortalis ultra fas
trepidet, etc. Excess of fear, excess of hope, excess of joy in these
outward things, is as it were, ridiculous to him, who has all these things
appointed with him. To him be praise and glory.

Ephesians. 1. 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance being predestined,
etc. Romans 9. 22, 23. What if God, willing to show his Wrath, and to make his
power known. etc.
IN the Creation of the World, it pleased the Lord after all things were framed
and disposed, to make one creature to rule over all, and to him he gave the
most excellent nature, and privileges beyond the rest; so that it may appear
that he had made all things for man, and man immediately for his own glory: As
man was the chief of the works of his hands, so we may, according to the
Scriptures, conceive that he was chiefly minded in the Counsels of his heart.
And that, as in the execution of his purpose in creating the World man had the
pre-eminence assigned unto him, and all seemed subordinate unto him; so, in the
Lords purposes concerning the world his purpose about man has the pre-eminence.
He indeed has resolved to declare the glory of his Name in this world;
Therefore the Heavens and Firmament are made Preachers of that Glory, Psalm. 19.
1, 2. etc. But in special manner, his Majesty's glorious Name is manifested in
man, and about man; he has set man, as it were, in the Center or midst of the
Creation, that all the Creatures might direct or bring in their praises unto
him, to be (...) up in his, and their name to the Lord their Maker by him, as
the common mouth of the World: and the Lord has chosen this creature above all
the creatures, so the more solemn and glorious declaration of himself in his
special properties, therefore we should gather our thoughts in this business,
to hear from the Lord what his thoughts are toward us; for certainly, the
right understanding of his everlasting Counsel, touching the eternal state of
Men, is of singular virtue to conform us to the praise of his Name, and
establish us in faith and confidence. Predestination is a mystery indeed into
which we should not curiously and boldly enquire beyond what is revealed, for
then a soul must needs lose it self in that depth of wisdom; and perish in the
search of unsearchableness; And thus the word speaks in Scripture of this
subject intimating unto us, that it is rather to be admired than conceived; and
that there ought to be some ignorance of these secrets, which conjoined with
Faith and reverence, is more learned than any curious knowledge: But withal we
must open our eyes upon so much light as God reveals of these secrets, knowing
that the light of the word is a saving refreshing light, not confounding, as is
his inaccessible light of secret Glory. As far as it pleases his Majesty to
open his mouth, let us not close our ears, but open themalso to his
instruction, knowing that as he will withhold no necessary thing for our
salvation, so he will reve^ nothing but what is profitable. This is the best
bond of sobriety and humble wisdom, to learn what he teaches us, but when he
makes an end of teaching, to desire no more learning: Its humility to seek no
more, and it is true wisdom to be content with no less.

There is much weakness in our conceiving of divine things; we shape and form
them in our minds according to a mould of our own experience, or invention,
and cannot conceive of them as they are in themselves: If we should speak
properly; there are not counsels and purposes in God, but one entire counsel
and resolution concerning all things which are in time, by which he has
disposed all in their several times, seasons, conditions and orders; but
because we have many thoughts about many things, so we cannot well conceive of
God, but in likeness to our selves; And therefore the Scripture, condescending
to our weakness, speaks so. How many are thy precious thoghts toward me,
says David; and yet indeed, there is but one thought of him, and us, and all,
which one thought is of so much virtue, that it is equivalent to an infinite
number of thoughts, concerning infinite objects. The Lord has from everlasting
conceived one purpose of manifesting his own glory in such several ways; and
this is the head-spring of all that befalls creatures, men and Angels. But
because in the execution of this purpose, there is a certain order, and
succession, and variety, therefore men do ordinarily fancy such or such a frame
and order in the Lords mind and purpose. And as the Astronomers do cut and
carve in their Imaginations, Cycles, Orbs and Epicycles in the Heavens, because
of the various and different appearances and motions of stars in them, whereas
it may be, really, there is but one Celestial body, in which all these various
lights and motions do appear: So do men fancy unto themselves an order of the
Lords decree, according to the Phenomenon, or appearances of his works in the
world, whereas it is one purpose and Decree, which in its infinite compass
comprehends all these varieties and orders together: This much we may-indeed
lawfully conceive of his Decree, that there is an exact correspondence and
suteableness between his Majesty's purpose and execution, and that he is a wise
Lord wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, having some great plot and
design before his eyes, which he intends to effect, and which is as it were,
the great Light and Sun of this Firmament, unto which, by that same wonderful
Counsel, all other things are subordinate; And so in the working it shall
appear exactly, as his Counsel did delineate and contrive it.

There is no man so empty or shallow, but he has some great design and purpose
which he chiefly aims at: Shall we not then conceive, that the Lord who
instructs every man to this discretion, and teaches him Isa. 28. 26. Is himself
wise in his Counsel, and has some grand project before him in all this Fabric
of the World, and the upholding of it since it was made? Certainly he has; and
if you ask what it is, the wise man will teach you in the general, He made all
things for himself, even the wicked for the evil day. Pro. 16. 4. Here then is
his great design and purpose, to glorify himself, to manifest his own Name to
men and Angels. Now his Name comprehends Wisdom, Goodness, Power, Mercy and
justice; the first three he declares in all the works of his hands, all are
well done, and wisely done, the excellency of the work shows the wonderful
Counselor, and the wise Contriver, the goodness of any creature in its kind,
declares the inexhausted spring of a selfe-being from whom it proceeds, and the
bringing all these out of nothing, and upholding them is a glorious declaration
of his power: But yet in all the works of his hands, there is nothing found to
manifest his glorious mercy and justice, upon which are the flower and garland
of his Attributes, and unto which wisdom and power seems to be subservient;
Therefore his Majesty, in that one entire purpose of his own glory, resolves to
manifest his wrath, and his mercy upon men and Angels; subjects capable of it;
which two Attributes are as the Poles about which all the Wheels of Election
and Reprobation turns, as you see in that place, Romans 9. 22. 23. Let this then
be established as the end of all his works, as it is designed in his Counsel
and nothing else. It is not the Creature nor any thing in the Creature, which
is first in his mind, but himself, and therefore of him and for him are all
things; Here they have their rise, and thither they return, even to the Ocean
of Gods eternal glory, from whence all did spring.

The right establishing of this will help us to conceive aright of his Counsel
of Predestination: It is a common cavil of carnal reason, How can the Lord
reject so many persons, and foreordain them to destruction? It seems most
contrary to his goodness and wisdom to have such an end of eternal
Predestination before him, in the creating so many thousands to make men for
nothing but to damn them; Here carnal reason, which enmity to God, triumphs;
But consider, I say, that this is not the Lord's end and chief design to
destroy men; even as it is not his Majesty's first look, or furthest reach to
give unto others eternal life, so it is not his prime intent to sink them in
eternal death, as if that were his pleasure and delight, no indeed, neither is
the creatures happiness nor its misery that which first moves him, or is most
desired of him, but himself only, and he cannot move out of himself to any
business but he must return it unto himself, therefore the wise Preacher
expresses it well, He made all for himself, even the wicked for the day of
evil; It was not his great end of creating wicked men to damn them, or creating
righteous men to save them, but both are for a further and higher end, for
himself and his own Glory.

All seem to agree about this, That the great end of all the Lords Counsels and
decrees, is his own glory to be manifested on Men and Angels; and that this
must be first in his mind, not that there is first or last with him, but to
speak after the manner of men; if he had many thoughts as we have, this would
be his first thought, and in this one purpose this end is chiefly aimed at, and
all other things are, by the Lords counsel subordinate to this as means to
compass that: But as concerning the order of these means, and consequently of
his Majesty's purpose about them, men by examining his Majesty according to the
creatures Rules, or according to sense, bring him down far below his own
infinite greatness. Some conceive that, that was first, as it were in his mind
which is first done looking upon the execution of his purpose in the works of
his power, they imagine, that as he first created man righteous, so this was
his first thought concerning man, to creat man for the glory of his goodness
and power, without any particular determination as yet of his end, and I
conceive this is the thought of the multitude of people, they think God was
disapointed in his work, when they hear he created such a glorious creature
that is now become so miserable; they cannot believe that his Majesty had all
this sin and misery determinated with him when he purposed to create him, but
look upon the emergement of man's Fall into sin and misery as a surprisal of his
Majesty; as if he had meant another thing in creating him, and so was upon this
occasion of man's sin, driven to a new consultation about the helping of the
business, and making the best out of it that might be. Thus through wisdom
the world knows not God; They think God altogether like themselves, and so
liken him to the builder of an house, who let nothing before him in doing so,
but to build it after that manner for his own ends, but the^ being surprised
with the fall and ruin of it, takes a new advisement, and builds it up again
upon another surer foundation; but because they cannot say, that God takes any
new advisements in time, but must confess that all his Counsels are
everlasting concerning all the works of his hands; therefore they bring in
foreknowledge to smooth their irreligious conceit of God, as if the Lord upon
his purpose of creating man had foreseen what should befall him, and so
purposed to permit it to be so, that out of it he might erect some glorious
Fabric of mercy and justice upon the ruins of man, And that little or nothing
may be left to the absolute Sovereign will of God, to which the Scripture
ascribes all things, they must again imagine, that upon his purpose of sending
Christ to save sinners, he is yet undetermined about the particular end of
particular men, but watches on the tower of foreknowledge to epsy what they
will do, whether men will believe in his Son or not, whether they will
persevere in faith or not, and according to his observation of their doings, so
he applies his own will to carve out their reward, or portion of life or death.
These are even the thoughts which are imbred in your breasts by nature; that
which the learned call Arminianism, is nothing else but the carnal reason of
men's hearts, which is enmity to God; it is that very Disputation which Paul in
this Chapter exclaims against, Who art thou, O man, that disputes.

But certainly, all this contrivance is nothing beseeming the wisdom of
Soveraignity of God, but reflects upon both, upon his wisdom, that he should
have thoughts of creating the most noble of his creatures, and yet be in
suspense about the end of the creature, and have that in uncertainty, what way
his glory shall indeed be manifested by it. Is it not the first and chief
thought of every wise man, what he intends and aims at in his work, and
according to the measure and reach of his wisdom, so he reaches further in his
end and purpose? Shall we then conceive the only wise God so far to have
mistaken himself, as to do that which no wise man would do: He who is of such
an infinite reach of wisdom and understanding, to fall upon the thoughts of
making such an excellent Creature, and yet to ly in suspense within himself
about the eternal estate of it, and to be in a waiting posture what way his
Glory should be manifested by it; whether in a way of simple goodness only, or
in a way of Justice, or in a way of Mercy, till he should foresee off the Tower
of foreknowledge how that creature should behave it self. Our Text speaks not
thus: For in the place, Ephesians. 1. we have the Lord in his eternal purpose
carving out to such and such particular persons an Inheritance, and Adoption of
Children for that great end of the glory of his grace, verse. 11. and 5, 6. And
Predestination falls out, not according to our carriage, but according to the
purpose of him who works all things that he works after the Counsel of his own
will, without consulting our will; and if you enquire what are these all
things, certainly, we must take it simply for all things that are at all, or
have any real being: His power, his hand must be in it, and that according to
his own Counsel, without respect had to the Creatures will, according to his
own good pleasure. verse. 5. 11. He had no sooner a thought of working and
making man, but this purpose was in it, to make such men to the praise of his
glorious grace, and to fore-ordain them to an inheritance, and others to make
or fit them for destruction; as the Text, Romans 9. 22. bears. Herein the great
and unsearchable wisdom of God appears to be a great depth, that when he has a
thought of making such a vessel, he has this purpose in the bosom of it,
what use it shall be for, whether for honor or dishonor, and accordingly in
his Counsel he prepares it either to glory, or destruction, and in time makes
it for its use, either by sin or grace: Here is the depth that cannot be
sounded by mortal men; O the depths of the riches both of his wisdom and
knowledge! How unchearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out? The whole tenor of the Scripture shows that his Majesty was not
surprised, and taken at unawares by Adam's fall, but that it fell out according
to the determined counsel of his will, if he knew it, and suffered it to be,
certainly he permitted it, because he willed it should be so; and why may he
not determine that in his holy Counsel which his wisdom can disabuse to the
most glorious end that can be? Why may not he decree such a fall, who out of
man's ruins can erect such a glorious Throne for his grace and justice to
triumph into? It is more for the glory of his infinite wisdom, to bring good,
and such a good out of evil, then only to permit that good should be.

Then such Doctrine is repugnant to the Lords absolute power and Sovereignty,
which is Paul's Sanctuary whether he flees unto as a sure refuge, from the
stroke or blast of carnal reason. Has not the Potter power over the clay, to
make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor. verse. 21.
Has not the Lord more absolute dominion over us than the Potter has over the
clay, for the Potter made not the clay, but the Lord has made us of nothing,
so that simply and absolutely we are his, and not our own, and so he has an
absolute right to make any use of us he pleases, without consulting our wills
and diservings. Can any man quarrel him for preparing him to destruction,
seeing he owes nothing to any man, but may do with his own what he pleases?
what if God, willing to make known his Power, and justice and wrath, have
fitted and prepared some vessels for destruction, with which, in time, he bears
much, and forbears long, using much patience toward them? Can any man
challenge him for it? verse. 22. And what if God willing to make known the
riches of his grace, have prepared some vessels to glory; shall any man's eye be
evil because he is good? verse. 23. Shall man be left to be his own disposer, and
the shapes of his own fortune? Sure it was not so with Esau and Jacob, they
were alike in the womb, if there was any prerogative, Esau the eldest had it,
they had done neither good nor evil, what difference was then between them to
cast the balance of his Will? Can you imagine any? Indeed carnal reason will
say, that God fore-knew what they would do, and so he chose or rejected them:
But why does not the Apostle answer thus unto that objection of
unrighteousness in God? verse. 14. It had been ready and plain, but rather he
opposes the will and calling of God, to all works past or to come; he gives no
answer but this, he will have mercy because he will have mercy, that is the
supreme rule of righteousness, and hitherto must we flee, as the surest
Anchor of our hope and stability, our salvation depends not on our willing or
running on our resolving or doing, but upon this primitive good pleasure and
will of God, on which hangs our willing, and running, and obtaining. It is
certainly an unorderly order, to ^ee unto that in men, for the cause of Gods
Eternal Counsels, which only flows from his Eternal Counsel, Ephesians. 1. 4. Has
he chosen us because he did foreknow that we would be holy, and without blame
as men think? or has he not rather chosen us to be holy and without blame: He
cannot behold any good or evil in the creatures, till his will pass a sentence
upon it, for from whence should it come?

Seeing then, this order and contrivance of Gods purpose is but feigned, it
seems to some that the very contrary method were more suitable, even in the
rules of wisdom: You know what is first in men's intention, is last in
execution, the end is first in their mind, then the means to compass that end,
but in practice again, men fall first upon the means and by them come at length
to attain their end, therefore these who would have that first as it were in
Gods mind, which he does first, do even cross common Rules of reason in humane
affairs: It would seem then (say some) that this method might do well, that
what is last in his execution, was first in his purpose, and by him intended as
the end of what he does first, and so some do rank his decrees; that he had
first a thought of glorifying men, and to attain this end he purposed to give
him grace, and for this purpose to suffer him to fall, and for all to create
him: But we must not look thus upon it either; it were a foolish and rediculous
counsel unbeseeming the poor wisdom of man, to purpose the glorifying of man
whom he had not yet determined to create, therefore we should always have in
our mind, that the great end and project of all is the glory of his mercy and
justice upon men, and this we may conceive is first in order, neither men's life
nor death, but Gods glory to be manifested upon men: Now to attain this
glorious end, with one inclination or determination of his will, not to be
distinguished or severed, he condescends upon all that is done in time, as one
complete and entire mean of glorifying himself, so that one of them is not
before another in his mind, but all together: for attaining this, he purposes
to create man, he ordains the fall of all men into a state of sin and misery,
and some of these upon whom he had resolved to show his mercy, he gives them to
Christ to be redeemed, and restored by grace: Others he fore-ordains them to
destructions, and all this at once, without any such order as we imagine: Now
though he intend all this at once and together, yet it does not hence follow
that all these must be executed together, as when a man intends to build a
house for his own accommodation, there are many things in the house, upon which
he has not several purposes: But yet they must be severally, and in some
order done: First the foundation laid, then the Walls raised, then the roof put
on; yet he did not intend the foundation to be for the walls, or the walls for
the roof, but altogether for himself: Even so the Lord purposes to glorify his
mercy and justice upon a certain number of persons, and for this end to give
them a being, to govern their falling into misery, to raise some out of it by a
Mediator, and to live some into it to destruction, and all this as one entire
mean to illustrate his glorious mercy and justice; but these things themselves
must be done not all at once, but one before another, either as their own
nature require, or as he pleases: the very nature of the thing requires that
man be created before he sin, that he sin and fall before a Mediator suffer for
his sin, and that he have a being, before he have a glorious being, and that he
have a sinful and miserable being, before he have this glorious and gracious
being, which may manifest the grace and mercy of God: But it is the pleasure of
the Lord that determines in what time and order Christ shall suffer; either
before or after the conversion of sinners, or whether sinners shall presently be
instated in glory and perfectly delivered from all sin at their first
conversion, or only in part during this life.

Seeing then this was his Majesty's purpose to make so many vessels of honor;
upon whom he might glorify the riches of his grace end mercy: And so many
vessels of wrath, upon whom he might show the power of his anger: You may think
what needed all this business of man's redemption, might not God have either
preserved so many as he had appointed to glory from falling into sin and
misery, or at least have freely pardoned their sin, without any satisfaction,
and out of the exceeding riches of his mercy and power, have as well not
imputed sin to them at all, as imputed their sins to Christ, who was not
guilty? What needed his giving so many to the Son, and the Sons receiving them?
What needed these mysteries of Incarnation, of Redemption, seeing he might have
done all this simply without so much pains and expense, why did he choose this
way? Indeed, that is the wonder, and if there were no more end for it, but to
confound mortality that dare ask him what he does, it is enough: Should he be
call^ down to the Bar of Humane Reason, to give an account of his matters? Who
has known the mind of the Lord, or being his counselor has taught him? That
is in the depths of his unsearchable understa^ding, that he chose to go this
round, and to compass his end by such a strange circuit of means, when he
might have done it simply and directly without so much pain; yet it is not so
hidden, but he has revealed as much as may satisfy or silence all flesh: For
we must consider, that his great project is not simply to manifest the glory of
his goodness, but of his gracious and merciful goodness, the most tender and
excellent of all; and therefore man must be miserable, sinful, and vile, that
the riches of his grace may appear in choosing and saving such persons: But
that it may appear also how excellent he could make man, and how vain all
created perfections are, being left to themselves; therefore he first made man
righteous, and being fallen into sin and misery, he might straight way have
restored him without more ado, but his purpose was to give an exact
demonstration of mercy, tempered and mixed with justice; and therefore he finds
out the satisfaction in his eternal Counsel, I have found a ransom, and so
he chooses Jesus Christ to be the head of these chosen souls, in whom they
might be again restored unto eternal life; and these souls, he, in his
everlasting purpose, gives over to the Son to be redeemed, and these the Son
receives. And thus the glory of mercy and justice shines most brightly; yea,
more brightly than he had at first pardoned. O how does his love and mercy
appear, that he will transfer our sins upon his Holy Son, and accept that
Redemption for us, and his Justice, that a Redemption and price he must have
even from his Son, when once he comes in the stead of sinners, and in this
point do the Songs of Eternity concenter.

Romans 9. 22. and Ephesians. 1. 11.
WE are now upon a high subject; high indeed; for an eminent Apostle, much more
above our reach, the very consideration of Gods infinite wisdom might alone
suffice to restrain our unlimited thoughts, and serve to sober our minds with
the challenge of our own ignorance and darkness, yet the vain and wicked mind
of man will needs quarrel with God, and enter the lists of disputation with
him, about his righteousness and wisdom in the Counsel of Election and
Reprobation: But who art thou, O man, that replyest against God, or desputes,?
ver. 20. This is a thing not to be disputed, but believed; and if ye will
believe no more than ye can comprehend by sense or reason, then ye give his
Majesty no more credit than to weak mortal man: Whatever secret thoughts do
rise up in thy heart when thou hear of Gods fore-ordaining men to Eternal
life, without previous foresight or consideration of their doings, and
preparing men to eternal wrath, for the praises of his Justice, without
previous consideration of their deservings, and passing a definitive sentence
upon the end of all men, before they do either good or evil: When ever any
secret ^urmises rise in thy heart against this learn to answer this, enter not
the lists of disputation with corrupt reason, but put in this bridle of the
fear of Gods greatness, and the conscience of thy own baseness, and labor to
restrain thy undaunted and wild mind by it: Ponder that well, who thou art who
disputes, who God is, against whom thou disputes, and if thou have spoken once,
thou will speak no more, what thou art who is as clay formed out of nothing,
what he is who is the former, and has not the Potter power over the clay?
Consider but how great wickedness it is, so much as to question him, or ask an
account of his matters, after you have found his will to be the cause of all
things, then to enquire further into a cause of his will which is alone the
self-rule of righteousness, it is to seek something above his will, and to
reduce his Majesty into the order of Creatures, it is almost abominable
usurpation and sacrilege, for both it robes him of his royal prerogative, and
instates the base footstool in his Throne: But know, that certainly God will
overcome when he is judged, Psa. 51. 6. If thou judge him he will condemn thee,
if thou opug^ his absolute and holy Decrees, he will hold thee fast bound by
them to thy condemnation, he needs no other defense, but to call out thy own
conscience against thee, and bind thee over to destruction, therefore, as on
says well, Let the rashness of men be restrained from seeking that which is
not, lest peradventure they find that which is. Seek not a reason of his
purposes, lest peradventure thou find thy own death and damnation infolded in
them.

Paul mentions two Objections of carnal and fleshly wisdom against this
Doctrine of Election and reprobation, which indeed contain the sum of all that
is vented and invented even to this day, to defile the spotless truth of God,
all the whisperings of men tend to one of these two, either to justify
themselves, or to accuse God of unrighteousness; And shall any do it and be
guiltless? I confess, some oppose this Doctrine not so much out of an
intention of accusing God, as out of a preposterous and ignorant zeal for God;
even as Jobs friends did speak much for God. nay but it was not well spoken,
they did but speak wickedly for him: some speeak much to the defense of his
righteousness and holiness, and under pretense of that plea make it
inconsistent with these; to fore-ordain to life or death without the foresight
of their carriage; But shall they speak wickedly for God, or will he accept
their person? He who looks into the secrets of their heart knows the rise and
bottom of such defenses and appologies for his Holiness; to be partly
self-love, partly narrow and limited thoughts of him, drawing him down to the
determination of his own greatest enemy, carnal reason. Since men will ascribe
him no righteousness, but such a one of their own shaping, conformed to their
own model; do they not indeed rob Him of His Holiness and Righteousness?

I find two or three Objections which it may be reduced to this Head. First, it
seems unrighteousness with God, to predestinate men to eternal death with out
their own evil deserving, or any forethought of it; that before any man had a
being God should have been in his Counsel, fitting so many to destruction: Is
it not a strange mocking of the creatures, to punish them for that sin and
corruption unto which by his eternal Counsel they were foreordained? This is
even that which Paul objects to himself, is there unrighteousness with God? Is
it not unrighteousness to hate Esau before he deserves it? Is he not
unrighteous to adjudge him to death before he do evil? verse. 14. Let Paul
answer for us, God forbid: Why, there needs no more answer, but all thoughs or
words which may in the least reflect upon his holiness are abomination; though
we could not tell how it is righteous and holy with him to do it, yet this we
must hold, that it is. It is his own property to comprehend the reason of his
Counsels; it is our duty to believe what he reveals of them, without further
enquiry; he tells us that this it is, clearly in this Chapter; this far then we
must believe: he tells us not how it is, then further we should not desire to
learn; God in keeping silence of that may put us to silence, and make us
conceive, that there is a depth to be admired, not sounded. Yet he goes a
little further, and indeed as high as can be to Gods will, he has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardens* now further he cannot go, for
there is nothing above this; we may descend from this, but we cannot ascend, or
rise above it. But is this any answer to the Argument? A Sophister could press
it further, and take advantage from that very ground; What, is not this to
establish a mere tyranny in the Lord, that he does all things of mere will and
pleasure, distributes rewards and punishments without previous consideration of
men's carriage? But here we must stand, and go no further than the Scriptures
walks with us; what ever reasons or causes may be assigned, yet certainly, we
must at length come up thither, All things are, because he so willed; and why
he willed we should not ask a reason, because his will is supreme reason, and
the very self-rule of all Righteousness: Therefore if once we know his will, we
should presently conclude that it is most righteous and holy. If that evasion
of the foreknowledge of men's sins and impenitency had been found ^id,
certainly Paul would have answered so, and not ^ve had his refuge to the
absolute will and pleasure ^f God, which seems to perplex it more; but he knew
well that there could nothing of that kind, whether good or evil, either
actually be without his will, or be to come without the determination of the
same will, and so could not be foreseen without the Counsel of his will upon
it: and therefore it had been but a poor shi^ to have refuge to that starting
hole of foreknowledge, out of which he must presently flee to the will and
pleasure of God, and so he betakes him straight way to that he must hold at,
and opposes that will to man's doings. It is not of him that wills, etc. If he
had meant only that Jacob and Esau had actuallie done neither good nor evil,
he needed not return to the sanctuary of Gods will, for still it might be said,
it is of him that runs and wills, and not of Gods will as the first Original,
because their good and evil foreseen did move him to such love and hatred. It
is all alike of works of men, whether these works be present or to come.
Therefore I would advise every one of you, what ever ye conceive of his
Judgment or Mercy, if he have showed mercy to you, O then rest not in thy
self, but arise and ascend till thou come to the height of his eternal free
purpose, and if thou conceive thy sin and misery and judgment, thou may go up
also to his holy counsels for the glory of his Name, and silence thy self with
them, but it shall be most expedient for thee in the thought of thy miseries to
return always within, and to search the corruption of thy nature, which may
alone make thee hateful enough to God. ^f thou search thy own conscience, it
will stop thy mouth, and make thee guilty before God. Let not the ^hought of
his eternal counsels diminish the convi^tion of thy guilt, or the hatred of thy
self, for sin and ^orruption, but dwell more constantly upon this, because thou
art called and commanded so to do. On^ thing remains fixed: though he has
fore-orda^ men to death* yet none shall be damned till his co^ science be ^orced
to say that he is worthy of it a thousand times.

There is another whispering and suggestion of the wicked hearts of men against
the Predestination of God, which insinuates that God is an accepter of Persons,
and so accuses him of partial and unrighteous dealing, because he deals not
equally with all men: do ye not say this within your selves, ^f he find all
guilty Why does he not punish all? Why does he spare some? And if he look upon
all men in his first and Primitive thought of them, as neither doing good nor
evil, Why does he not have mercy on all? But is thy eye evil because he is
good? May he not do with his own as he pleases? Because he is merciful to some
souls, shall men be displeased, and do well to be angry? Or because he of his
own free grace extends it, shall he be bound by a Rule to do so with all? Is
not he both just and merciful, and is it not meet that both be showed forth: If
he punish thee; thou can not complain, for thou deserves it, If he show
mercy, why should any quarrel, for it is free and undeserved grace; by saving
some he shows his grace, by destroying others, he shows what all deserve. God
is so far from being an accepter of persons according to their qualifications
and conditions, that he finds nothing in any creature to cast the balance of
his choice; if he did choose men for their works sake, or outward privileges*
and (...) others for the want of the^e, then it might be charged on him; but he
rather goes over all these, nay, he finds none of these: in his first view of
men, he beholds them all alike, and nothing to determine his mind to one more
nor another, so that his choice proceeds wholly from within his own breast; I
will have mercy on whom I will* But then thirdly, our hearts object against the
righteousness of God, that this fatal chain of Predestination overturns all
exhortations and persuasions to godliness, all care and diligence in
well-doing: For thus do many profane souls conceive; If he be in one mind, and
who can turn him? Then, What need I pray, since he has already determined what
shall be, and what shall become of me? his purpose will take effect whether I
pray, or pray not; my prayer will not make him change his mind, and if it be in
his mind he will do it; If he have appointed to save, saved we shall be, live as
we list; if he has appointed us to death, die we must, live as we can.
Therefore men, in this desperate estate, throw themselves headlong into all
manner of iniquity, and that with quietness and peace. Thus do many souls
perish upon the stumbling stone laid in Sion, and wrest the Truths and Counsels
of God to their own destruction, even quite contrary to their true intent and
meaning; Paul (Ephesians. 1. 4.) speaks another language, He has chosen us in him
that we should be holy and without blame. His eternal Counsel of life is so
far from loosing the reins to men's lusts, that it is the only certain
foundation of holiness; It is the very spring and fountain from whence our
sanctification flows, by an infallible course. This chain of God counsels
concerning us, has also linked together the end and the means, glory and
grace, happiness and holiness, that there is no destroying of them. Without
holiness it is impossible to see God, so that those who expect the one without
any desire of, and endeavor after the other, they are upon a vain attempt to
loose the links of this eternal chain, Romans 8. It is the only eternal choosing
love of God; which separated so many souls from the common misery of men, it is
that only which in time does appear, and rise, as it were, from under ground,
in the streams of fruits of sanctification, and if the ordinance of life stand,
so shall the ordinance of fruits, Ioh. 15. 16. Ephesians. 2. 9. If he have appointed
thee to life, it is certain he has also ordained the^ to fruits, and chosen
thee to be holy, so that what ever soul casts by the study of this, there is
too gross a brand of pe^dition upon its forehead; it is true, all is already
determined with him, and he is incapable of any change, or shadow of ^urning;
nothing then wants, but he is in one mind about it, and thy prayer cannot turn
him: Yet a godly soul will pray with more confidence, because it knows that as
he has determined upon all its wants and receipts, so he has appointed this
to be the very way of obtaining what it wants, this is the way of familiarity
and grace, he takes with his own, to make them call, and he performs his
purpose in answer to their cry. But suppose there were nothing to be expected
by prayer; yet I say, that is not the thing thou should look to, but what is
required of thee by thy duty, to do that simply out of regard to his (...),
though thou should never profit by it, this is true obedience to serve him for
his own pleasure, though we had no expectation of advantage by it, certainly he
does not require thy supplications for this end to move him, and incline his
affections toward thee, but rather as a testimony of thy homage and subjection
to him, therefore though they cannot make him of another mind than he is, or
hasten performance before his purposed time, so that in reality they have no
influence upon him, yet in praying, and praying diligently, thou declares thy
obligation to him and respect to his Majesty, which is all thou have to look
to, and to commit the event solely to his good pleasure.

The 2. Objection Paul mentions, tends to justify men, Why then does ye yet
find fault, who has resisted his will? Since by his will he has chained us
with an inevitable necessity to sin, what can we do* Men cannot wrestle with
him; why then does he condemn and accuse them? But who art thou, O man, that
disputes against God? as if Paul had said, thou art a man and so I am, why then
looks thou for an answer from me, let us rather both consider whom we speak of,
whom thou accusest, and whom I defend, it is God, what art thou then to charge
him, or what am I ^o to clear Him? Believing ignorance is better than
presumptuous knowledge, especially in these forbidden secrets, in which it is
more concerning to be ignorant which faith and admiration, than to know with
presumption, disputes thou, O man, I will wonder, reply thou; I will believe,
does it become thee, the clay to speak so to the former, Why have thou made me
thus? Let the consideration of the absolute right and dominion of God over us,
more than any creature has over another, yea, or over themselves, let that
restrain us and keep us within bounds. He may do with us what he pleases, for
his own honor and praise, but it is his will that we should leave all the
blame to our selves, and rather behold the evident cause of our destruction in
our sin, which is nearer us, than to search into a secret and incomprehensible
cause in Gods Counsel.

Heb. 11. 3. Through Faith we understand that the worlds were made, etc. with
Genesis 1.
WE are come down from the Lords purposes and decrees to the execution of them,
which is partly in the works of Creation, and partly on the works of
Providence. The Lord having resolved upon it to manifest his own glory, did, in
that due and predeterminate time, apply his own power to this business: Having
in great wisdom conceived a frame of the world in his mind from all eternity,
he at length brings it forth, and makes it visible. We shall not insist upon the
particular story of it, as it is set down in general, but only point at some
things for our instruction.

First, ye see who is the maker of all things, of whom all things visible and
invisible are, it is God. And by this he uses to distinguish himself from
idols, and the vanities of the Nations, that he is that self-being, who gave
all things a being, who made the heavens and the earth. This is even the most
glorious manifestation of an invisible and eternal being: These things that
are made show him forth. If a man were traveling into a far Country, and
wandered into a wilderness where he could see no inhabitants, but only houses,
villages, and cities built, he would straight way conceive, there has been
some workman at this, this has not been done casually, but by the Art of some
reasonable creatures, how much more may we conceive when we look on the Fabric
of this world, how the heavens are streatched out for a Tent to cover them that
dwell on the earth, and the earth settled and established as a firm foundation
for men and living creatures to abide on, how all are done in wisdom and
discretion, we cannot but straight way imagine that there must be some curious
and wise contriver, and mighty Creator of these things. It is here said, that
by Faith we understand that the worlds were made: Indeed faith only in the word
of God gives true and distinct understanding of it, Innumerable have been the
wanderings and mistakes of the wise of the world about this matter, wanting this
lamp and light of the Word of God, which alone gives a true and perfect account
of this thing, many strange dotages and fancies have they fallen into; yet
certain it is that there is so much of the glory of God engraven without on the
creature, and so much reason imprinted on the souls of men within, that (if it
were not for that judicial plague of the Lords darkning their understandings,
who do not glorify him in as far as they know him) no man could seriously and
soberly consider on the visible world, but he would be constrained to conceive
an invisible God. Would not every one think within himself, all these things,
so excellent as they are, cannot be out of chance, neither could they make
themselves, so that of necessity they must owe what they are to something
beside themselves: and of this it is certain, that it cannot have its original
from any other thing, else there should be no end: therefore it must be some
supreme being, that is from no other, and of which are all things.

But next consider, when these things were made: in the beginning; and what
beginning is that? certainly the beginning of the creation, and of time, to
exclude Eternity, what ever may be said of that subtility that, God might have
created the world from all Eternity for it appears even in created things, that
there is no necessity of the precedent existence of the cause, since in the
same instant that many things are into being, in the same do they bring forth
their effects, as the Sun in the first instant of its creation did illuminate;
yet certainly we believe from the word of the Lord, that the world is actually
but of a few thousand years standing, six are not yet out run since the first
creating word was spoken, and since the spirit of the Lord moved upon the
waters: and this we know also, that if it had pleased his Majesty, he might
have created the world many thousand years before that, So that it might have
been at this day of ten hundred times ten thousand years standing, and he might
have given it as many years as there are numbers of men and Angels, Beasts, yea
and pickles of sand upon the seacoast: But it was his good pleasure, that that
very point of time in which it was created should be the beginning of time, and
from that he gives us a History of the World, upon which the Church of God may
rest, and so seek no other God but the God that made these heavens and earth.

This will not satisfy the ungodly curiosity and vanity of men's spirits, who
will reproach the Maker for not applying sooner to his work, and sitting idle
such an unmeasurable space of Eternity: Men wonder what he could be doing all
that time, (if we may call it time which has no beginning) and how he was
employed: I beseech you restrain such thoughts in you with the fear of his
glorious and incomprehensible Majesty, who gives no account of his matters: It
is enough that this is his good pleasure to begin then; and he conceals his
reasons, to prove the sobriety of our faith, that all men may learn an absolute
and simple stouping to his Majesty's pleasure. Remember that which a godly man
answered some wanton curious wit, who in scorn demanded the same of him, He was
preparing hell for curious and proud fools, said he: Let us then keep our
hearts as with a bridle, and repress their boundless wanderings within bounds,
lest we by looking upward, before the beginning of the world, to see what God
was doing, fall headlong into the eternal pit of destruction, and into the
hands of the living God. God has showed himself marvelously these six thousand
years in the upholding this world: if we did consider these continued and
repeated testimonies of his glory, we would be overwhelmed with what we find,
though we search no further; and suppose we would please our selves to imagine,
that it had been created many years before, yet that does not silence and stop
the insolence of men's minds, for it always might be enquired, what the Lord
was doing before that time? For Eternity is as immensurable before those
multiplied thousands of years as before naked six: Let our imagination sit down
to substract from Eternity as many thousands as it can multiply by all the
varieties and numbers in the world, yet there is nothing abated from Eternity,
it is as infinite in extent before that, as before the present six thousand, and
yet we may conceive that the Lord has purposed in the beginning of the world
to declare more manifestly to our understanding his Eternity, his
self-sufficiency and liberty; His Eternity, that when we hear of how short
standing the creature is, we may go upward to God himself, and his everlasting
being before the foundation of it were laid, may shine forth more brightly to
our admiration, when we can strecth our conceptions so immensurably as far
beyond the beginning of the world, and yet God is still beyond the outmost
teach of our imagination (for who can find out the beginning of that which has
not a beginning to be found out) and our most extended apprehensions fall it
finitly short of the days of the Ancient of days; O how glorious then must
his being be, and how boundless? His self-sufficiency and perfection does
herein appear, that from such an inconceiveable space he was as perfect and
blessed in himself as now, the Creatures add nothing to his perfection, or
satisfaction; he was as well pleased with his own al-comprehending-beeing and
with the very thought and purpose of making this world, as now he is when it is
made; the Idea of it in his mind gave him as great contentment as the work it
self when it is done: O to conceive this a right, it would fill a soul with
astonishing and ravishing thoughts of his blindness: Poor men weary if they be
not one way or other employed without; so indigent are all Creatures at home
that they would weary if they went not abroad without themselves; but to think
how absolutely God is well pleased with himself and how all imaginable
perfections can add nothing to his eternal self complacency and delight in his
own being. It would certainly ravish a soul to delight in God also: And as his
self-sufficiency does herein appear, so his liberty and freedom is likewise
manifested in it. If the world had been eternal, who would have thought that
it was free for his Majesty to make it or not? But that it had flowed from his
glorious being with as natural and necessary a resultance, as light from the
body of the Sun? But now it appears to all men, that for his pleasure they are
made and we are created; that it was simply the free and absolute motion of his
Will that gave a being to all things, which he could withhold at his pleasure,
or so long as he pleased.

Thirdly we have it to consider in what condition he made all these things,
very good, and that to declare his goodness and wisdom: the creature may well
be called a large volume extended and spread out before the eyes of all men to
be seen and read of all. It is certain if these things, all of them in their
orders and harmonies, or any of them in their beeings and qualities, were
considered in relation to Gods Majesty, they would teach and instruct the fool
and the wise man both, in the knowledge of God. How many impressions has he
made in the creatures which reflect upon any seeing eye the very Image of God:
to consider of what a vaste and hudge frame the Heavens and the earth are and
yet but one Throne to his Majesty, the footstool whereof is this Earth, wherein
vain men erect many Palaces: To consider what a multitude of creatures, what
variety of Fowls in the heaven, and what multiplicity of Beasts upon the earth,
what Armies (as Moses speaks, Genesis 2. 1.) and yet that none of them are all
useless, but all of them have some special ends and purposes they serve for:
so, that there is no discord nor disorder, no superfluity nor want in all this
monarchy of the world: all of them conspire together in such a discord, or
disagreeing harmony, to one great purpose; to declare the wisdom of him who
made every thing beautyfull in its time, and every thing most fit and opposite
for the use it was created for: so, that the whole earth is full of his
goodness, he makes every creature good one to another, to supply one another
necessity; and then notwithstanding of so many different natures and
dispositions between Elements, and things composed of them, yet all these
contrarieties have such a commixion, and are so moderated by his suppream Art,
that they make up jointly one Excellent and sweet Harmony, or beautiful
proportion in the World: O, how wise must he be who alone contrived it all? We
can do nothing except we have some pattern and copy before us; but now upon
this ground which God has laid, Man may fancy many superstructures, but when
he stretched out the heaven, and laid the foundation of the earth, Who being
his Counselor taught him? At whom did his Spirit take Counsel? Certainy, none
of all these things would have entered into the heart of man to consider or
contrive. Isa. 40. 12, 13. Some ruder Spirits do gaze upon the hudge and
prodigious pieces of creation, as Whales and Elephants, etc. But a wise Solomon
will go to the School of the Ant to learn the wisdom of God, and choose out
such a simple and mean creatur for the object of his admiration; certainly
there are wonders in the smallest and most inconsiderable creatures which Faith
can contemplat: O the curious ingeny and draught of the finger of God, in the
composition of Flees, of Bees, flowers etc. men ordinarily admire more, some
extraordinary things; but the truth is, the whole course of nature is one
continued wonder, and that greater than any of the Lords works without the
Line: The straight and regular line of the wisdom of God (who in one constant
course and tenor has ordained the actions of all his creatures) comprehends
more wonders and mysteries, as the course of the Sun, the motion of the Sea,
the hanging of the Earth in the empty place upon nothing, these we say, are the
wonders indeed, and comprehend something in them which all the wonders of Egypt
and the Wilderness cannot parallel. But it is the stupid security of men, that
are only awakened by some new and unusual passages of Gods works, beyond that
straight Line of Nature,

Then fourthly, look upon the power of God in making all of nothing, which is
expressed here in Heb. 11. There is no Artificer but he must have matter, or
his Art will fail him, and he can do nothing: The Mason must have timber and
stones laid to his hand, or he cannot build a house; the Goldsmiths must have
gold or silver ere he can make a Cup or a Ring; take the most curious and quick
inventer of them all, they must have some matter to work upon, or their
knowledge is no bettter than ignorance; all that they can do is, to give some
shape or form, or to fashion that in some new model which had a being before;
so that what ever men have done in the world, their work; are all made up of
these things which appear, and Art and skill to form and fashion that
excellently, which before was in another mould and fashion, but he needs not
sit idle for want of materials; and therefore, in the beginning he made Heaven
and Earth, not as they now are, but he made first the matter and substance of
this Universe, but it was as yet a rude and confused Chaos or Mass, all in one
lump without difference, but then his Majesty shows his Wisdom and Art, his
excellent invention, in the following days of the creation, in ordering and
beautifying, and forming the world as it is, and that his power might be the
more known: For, how easy is it for him to do all this? There needs no more
for it but a word, let it be, and it is, He spoke, and it was done, He
commanded, and it stood fast. Not, a word pronounced, and audibly composed of
Letters and Syllables, mistake it not so, but a word inwardly formed, as it
were in his infinite Spirit, even the inclination and beck of his will suffices
for his great works: Ye see what labor and pains we have in our business, how
we toil and sweat about it, what wrestlings and strivings in all things we do,
but behold what a great work is done without any pain and travel! It is a
laborious thing to travel through a parcel of this earth, which is yet but as
the point of the Universe: It is troublesome to lift or carry a little piece of
stone or clay, its a toil even to look upward and number the stars of Heaven,
but it was no toil, no difficult thing to his Majesty to stretch out these
Heavens in such an infinite compass, for as large as the Circumference of them
is, yet it is as easy to him to compass them, as it is to us to span a
finger-length or two: It is no difficulty to him to take up hills and mountains
as the dust of the balance in his hand, and weigh them in scales: Has he not
chained the vast and huge Mass of the wighty earth and Sea in the midst of the
empty place without a supporter, without foundations or pillars? He hangs it
on nothing, What is it, I pray you that supports the Clouds? who is it that
binds up their waters in such a way that the clouds are not rent under them,
even though there be more abundance of water in them than is in all the Rivers
and waters round about us? Job. 26. 7, 8. Who is it that restrains and sets
bounds to the Sea, that the waters thereof though they roar, yet do not overflow
the land? But this Almighty Jehovah, whose Decree and commandment is the very
compass, the bulwark over which they cannot flow, and all this he does with
more facility than men can speak; If there were a creature that could do all
things by speaking, that were a strange power: but yet that creature might be
wearied with speaking much; but he speaks and it is done, his word is a
creating word of power, which makes things that are not to be, and there is no
wearying of him besides, for he is Almighty, and cannot saint: but, why then
did he take six days for his work? might he not with one word of his power
have commanded this world to issue out of his omnipotent virtue thus perfect as
it is? What needed all this compass? Why took he six days who in a moment
could have done it all with as much facility? Indeed, herein the Lord would
have us to adore his wisdom as well as his power; he proceeds from more
imperfect things to more perfect, from a confused Chaos to a beautiful World
from motion to rest, to teach man to walk through this wilderness and valley
of Tears, this shapelesse World, into a more beautiful habitation, through the
tossings of time, into an everlasting Sabbath of rest, whether their works shall
follow them, and they shall rest from their labors: He would teach us to take a
steadfast look of his work, and that we should be busied all the days of our
pilgrimage and sojourning, in the consideration of the glorious characters of
God upon the work of his hands; we see that it is but passing looks and
glances of Gods glory we take in the creatures, but the Lord would have us to
make it our work and business all the week through, as it was his to make them:
He would in this teach us his loving care of men, who would not create Man till
he had made for him so glorious an house, replenished with all good things: It
had been a darksome and irksome life to have lived in the first Chaos, without
light, but he has stretched over him the Heavens as his Tent; and set lights
in them to distinguish times and seasons, and ordained the Waters their proper
bounds and peculiar Channels, and then makes the Earth to bring forth all
manner of fruits; and when all is thus disposed, then he c^eats man, To this
God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, be glory and praise.

Heb. 11. 3. and Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister, etc.
THere is nothing more generally known than this, that God at the beginning
made the heaven and the earth, and all the hosts of them, the upper or the
celestial, the lower or sublunary World, but yet there is nothing so little
believed or laid to heart: By faith we understand that the Worlds were made. It
is one of the first Articles of the Creed indeed, Father Almighty, Maker of
Heaven and Earth, but I fear that Creed is not written in the Tables of flesh,
that is, the heart: There is a twofold mistake among men about the point of
believing; some, and the commoner sort, do think it is no other than simply to
know such a thing, and not to question it, to hear it, and not to contradict
it, or object against it: Therefore they do flatter themselves in their own
eyes, and do account themselves to have faith in God; because they can say over
all the Articles of their belief, they think the Word is true, and they never
doubted of it: But, I beseech you, consider how greatly you mistake a main
matter of weighty concernment? If you will search it, as before the Lord, you
will find you have no other belief of these things than children use to have,
whom you teach to think or say any thing; there is no other ground of your not
questioning these truths of the Gospel, but because you never consider on them,
and so they pass for current: Do not deceive your selves, with the heart man
believes; it is a heart-businesse, a soul-matter, no light and useless
opinion, or empty expression, which you have learned from a child: You say, you
believe in God the Maker of Heaven and Earth, and so say children who doubt no
more of it than ye, and yet in sadness they do not retire within their own
hearts, to think what a one he is; they do not remember him in the works of his
hands, there is no more remembrance of that true God than if no such thing were
known: So it is among you, you would think we wronged you, if we said, ye
believed not that God made the world; and yet, certainly, all men have not this
faith, whereby they understand truly in their heart the Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness of God appearing in it, that is the gift of God only given to them
that shall be saved. If I should say, that you believe not the most common
Principles of Religion, you would think it hard, and yet there is no doubt of
it, that the most common truths are least believed; and the reason is plain,
because men have learned them by tongue, and there is none that question them,
and therefore very few ever in sadness and in earnest consider of them: You
say, that God made Heaven and Earth, but how often do you think on that God?
And, how often do you think on him with admiration? Do ye at all wonder at the
glory of God when you gaze on his works? Is not this volume always observant
before your eyes, every thing showing and declaring this glorious Maker, yet
who is it that takes more notice of him than if he were not at all; such is
the general stupidity of men, that they never ponder and digest these things
in their heart till their soul receive the stamp of the glory and greatness of
the invisible God, which shines most brightly in these things that are visible,
and be in some measure transformed in their minds, and conformed to these
glorious appearances of him, which are engraven in great Characters in all that
do at all appear. There is another mistake peculiar to some, especially the
Lords people, that they think faith is limited to some few particular and more
unknown and hid truths and mysteries of the Gospel. Ye think, that it is only
true believing, to embrace some special Gospell-truths, which the multitude of
people know nothing of, as the tenor of the Covenant of Grace and of Works,
etc. And for other common Principles, of Gods making and ruling the World, you
think that a common thing to believe them. But, says the Apostle, By faith we
understand that the worlds were made; it is that same faith spoken of in the
end of Chap. 10. by which the just shall live: So then, here is a point of
saving faith, to believe with the heart in God the Creator and Father Almighty,
to take a view of Gods Almighty Power, and sufficient Goodness, and infinite
Wisdom, shining in the Fabric of the World, and that with delight and
admiration at such a glorious Fountain-being; to rise up to his Majesty by the
degrees of his creatures, this is the climing and aspiring nature of Faith. You
see how much those Saints in the Old Testament were in this; and certainly,
they had more excellent and beseeming thoughts of God than we. It should make
Christians ashamed, that both Heathens who had no other Book opened to them,
but that of Nature, did read it more diligently than we: And that the Saints of
Old, who had not such a plain testimony of God as we now have, yet did learn
more out of the Book of the Creature, then we do both out of it and the
Scriptures: We look on all things with such a careless eye, and do not observe
what may be found of God in them: I think verily there are many Christians, and
Ministers of the Gospel, who do not ascend into those high and ravishing
thoughts of God, in his being and working, as would become even mere
Naturalists; How little can they speak out of his Majesty, or think, as it
becomes his transcendent glory. There is little in Sermons or discourses that
holds out any singular admiring thoughts of a Deity, but in all these we are so
common and careless, as if he were an Idol.

It is not in vain that it is expressed thus, By faith we know that the worlds
were made, for certainly the firm believing and pondering of this one truth,
would be of great moment and use to a Christian in all his journey. You may
observe in what stead it is to the Saints in Scripture: This raises up a soul
to high thoughts, and suitable conceptions of his glorious Name, and so conforms
the worship of his Majesty unto his excllency, it puts the stamp of Divinity
upon it spiritualizes the thoughts and affections so, as to put a true
difference between the true God, and the gods that made not the Heavens and the
Earth. Alace, the worship of many Christians speaks out no diviner or higher
object than a creature, it is so cold, so formal, and empty, so vain and
wandering, there is no more respect testified unto him, than we would give to
some eminent person: You find in the Scripture how the strain of the Saints
affections and devotion rises, when they take up God in his absolute Supremacy
above the creatures, and look on him as the alone fountain of all that is worth
the name of perfection in them. A soul in that consideration cannot choose but
assign unto him the most eminent seat in the heart, and gather those affections
which are scattered after the creatures into one channel, to pour them out on
him who is all in all, and has all that which is lovely in the creatures in an
eminent degree. Therefore know what you are formed for, to show forth his
praise, to gather and take up from the creatures all the fruits of his praise,
and offer them up to his Majesty: This was the end of man, and this is the end
of a Christian, you are made for this, and you were redeemed for this, to read
upon the volumes of his works, and word, and from thence extract songs of
praise to his Majesty.

As this would be of great moment to the right worshipping of God, and to the
exercise of true holiness, so it is most affectual to the establishing of a
soul in the confidence of the promises of God: When a soul by faith understands
the world was made by God, then it relyes with confidence upon that same word
of God, as a word of power, and hopes against hope: There are many things in
the Christians way betwixt him and glory, which look as insuperable: thou art
often emptied into nothing and stripped naked of all encouragements, and there is
nothing remaining but the word of Gods promises to thee and to the Church which
seems contrary to sense and reason; Now, I say if thou do indeed believe that
the world was made by God, then out of all Question thou may silence all thy
fears with this one thought, God created this whole frame out of nothing, he
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, then certainly he can give a
being to his own promises, is not his word of promise as sure and effectual,
as his word of command? This is the grand encouragement of the Church, both
offered by God, from Isa. Chap. 40. and made use of by his Saints, as David,
Hezekiah, etc. What is it would disquiet a soul if it were reposed on this Rock
of creating power and faithfulness? This would always sound in its ears,
faint not, weary not, Jacob, I am God, and none else, the portion of Jacob is
not like others, be it inward or outward difficulties, suppose Hell and Earth
combined together, let all the enemies of a soul, or of the Church assemble,
here is one for all, the God that made the Heaven and the Earth can speak, and
it is done, command, and it stands fast: He creates peace, and who then can
make trouble, when he gives quietness to a Nation, or to a person. Almighty
power works in Saints, and for Saints, let us trust in him.

Genesis 1. 26, 27. And God said, Let us make man after our own Image, with Ephesians.
4. 24. and Heb. 3. 10.
WHile we descend from the meditation of the glory of God shining in the
Heavens, in Sun, Moon, and Stars, unto the consideration of the Lords framing
of Man after this manner, we may fall into admiration with the Psalmist, Psalm
8. Lord what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man that
thou should remember him. It might indeed drown us in wonder, and astonish
us, to think what special notice He has taken of such a creature from the
very beginning, and put more respect upon him then upon all the more Excellent
works of his hands, you find here the Creation of man expressed in other terms
than was used before, He said, let there be light, and it was, let there be dry
land. etc. But it is not such a simple word as that, but let us make man
according to our image, as if God had called a consultation about it, what, was
there any more difficulty in this then the rest of his works? Needed he any
advisement about his frame and constitution? No certainly, for there was a
great work of power, as curious pieces of Art and wisdom, which were instantly
done upon his word, He is not a man that he should advise or consult, as there
is no difficulty nor impediment in the way of his power, (He does all that he
pleases, ad nutum, at his very word or nod, so easy are impossibilities to
him) so there is nothing hard to his wisdom, no knot but it can loose, nothing
so curious or exquisite, but he can as curiously contrive it, as the most
common and gross pieces of the creation, and therefore, He is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working. But ve have here expressed, as it were, a
Counsel of the Holy and Blessed Trinity about Man's Creation, to signify to us
what peculiar respect He puts upon that Creature, and what special notice he
takes of us, that of his own free purpose and good pleasure he was to single
and choose out man from among all other Creatures, for the more eminent
demonstration of his glorious attributs of grace, mercy and justice upon him;
and likewise to point out the excellency that God did stamp upon man in his
Creation beyond the rest of the creatures, as the Apostle shows the excellency
of Christ above Angels, To which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my
Son? Heb. 1. 5. So we may say, of which of the creatures said he at any time,
come, let us make them in our image, after our likeness? O how should this
make us listen to hear, earnest to know what man once was, how magnified of God
and set above the works of his hands? There is a great desire in men to search
into their Original, and to trace backward the dark footsteps of antiquity,
especially if they be put in expectation of attaining any honorable or
memorable extraction? How will men love to hear of the worth of their
Ancestors? But what a stupidity does possess the most part in relation to the
high fountain and head of all, that they do not aim so high as Adam, to know
the very estate of humane nature: hence it is, that the most part of people ly
still astonished, or rather stupid and senseless after this great fall of man,
because they never look upward to the place and dignity from whence man did
fall. It is certain you will never rightly understand your selves, or what ye
are, till ye know first what man was made? You cannot imagine what your present
misery is, till you once know what that selicity was, in which man was made
(let us make man in our image) some have called man a little world, a compend
of the world, because he has heaven and earth, as it were, married together in
him; two most remote and distant natures, the dust of the earth, and the
immortal Spirit, which is called the breath of God, sweetly linked and
conjoined together, with a disposition and inclination one to another. The Lord
was in this piece of workmanship as it were to give a narrow and short compend
of all his works, and so did associate in one piece with his marvelous wisdom,
being, living, moving, sense and reason, which are scattered abroad in the
other creatures, so that a man carries these wonders about with him, which he
admires without him. At his bare and simple word this huge frame of the world
started out of nothing, but in this he acts the part of a cunning Artificer,
let us make man, he makes rather than creats, first raises the walls of flesh,
builds the house of the body withal its Organs, all its Rooms, and then he
puts in a noble and divine guest to dwell in it, He breaths in it the breath of
life, he incloseth, as it were, an Angel within it, and marries these two
together into the most admirable union and communion that can be imagined, so
that they make up one man.

But that which the Lord looks most into is this work, and would have us most
to consider, is that Image of himself that he did imprint on man (let us make
man in our own Image) there was no creature but it had some ingravings of God
upon it, some curious draughts and lineaments of his Power, Wisdom and
goodness upon it, and therefore the Heavens are said, to show forth his glory,
etc. But whatever they have, it is but the lower part of that image, some dark
shaddows and resemblances of him, but that which is the last of his works, he
makes it according to his own image, tanquam ab ultima manu, he therein gives
out himself to be read and seen of all men as in a glass, other creatures are
made, as it were, according to the similitude of his footstep, ad similitudinem
vestigii, but man, ad similitudinem faciei, according to the likeness of his
face (in our image, after our likeness) It is true, there is one only, Jesus
Christ his Son, who is the brightness of his glory, and the express
substantial image of his person, who resembles him perfectly, and thoroughly
in all properties, so that he is alter idem, another-self, both in nature,
properties, and operations, so like him, that he is one with him; so that it is
rather an oneness, than a likeness; but man he created according to his own
Image, and gave him to have some likeness to himself, likeness I say, not
samenesse, or oneness. That is high indeed to be like God; The notion and
expression of it imports some strange thing, how could man be like God, who is
infinite, incomprehensible, whose glory is not communicable to another? It is
true indeed, in these incommunicable properties he has not only, no equal, but
none to liken him, in these he is to be adored, and admired as infinitely
transcending all created perfections and conceptions; but yet in others he has
been pleased to hold forth himself to be imitated and followed: and that this
might be done, he first stamps them upon man in his first moulding of him, and
if ye would know what these are particularly, the Apostle expresses them Col.
3. 10. in knowledge, in rightousnesse, and holiness. Ephesians. 4. 24. This is the
Image of him who created him, which the Creator stamped on man, that he might
seek him, and set him apart for himself to keep communion with him, and to
bless him. There is a spirit given to man with a capacity to know, and to will,
And here is a draught and lineament of Gods face, which is not engraven on any
sensitive creature; It is one of the most noble and excel^ent operations of
life, in which a man is most above beasts, to reflect upon himself and his
Creator: There ^re natural instincts given to other things, natural
^ropensions to those things that are convenient to their own nature, but none
of them have so much ^s a capacity to know what they are, or what they ^ave,
they cannot frame a notion of him who ^ave them a being, but are only
proportionate ^o the discerning of some sensible things, and can ^each no
further: He has limited the eye within co^ours, and light; he has set a bound
to the care that (...) cannot act without sounds, and so every sense he ^ath
assigned his own proper stanse, in which it moves ^ut he teaches man knowledge,
and he enlarges the ^hear of his understanding beyond visible or sensible
things, to things invisible, to spirits; and this capacity ^e has put in the
soul to know all things, and it self among the rest; the eye discerns light,
but sees not it ^lf, but he gives a Spirit to man to know himself, and ^is God:
and then there is a willing power in the soul by which it diffuses it self
toward any thing that is conceived as good, the understanding directing, and
the will-commanding according to its direction, and then the whole faculties
and senses obeying such commands, which makes up an excellent draught of the
image of God: There was a sweet proportion and harmony in Adam, all was in due
place, and subordination; the motions of immortal man did begin within, the
lamp of reason did shine and give light unto it, and till that went before,
here was no stirring, no choosing or refusing, and when reason which was one
sparkle of the divine nature, or a ray of Gods light reflected into the soul of
man, when once that did appear to the discerning of good and evil, this power
was in the soul to apply the whole man accordingly, to chose the good and
refuse the evil, it had not been a lively resemblance of God to have a power of
knowing and willing simply, unless these had been beautified and adorned with
supernatural and divine graces of spiritual light and holiness, and
righteousness, these make up the lively color, and complete the image of God
upon the soul.

There was a Divine Light which did shine in, upon the understanding, ever till
sin interposed and Eclipsed it, and from the light of Gods countenance did the
sweet heat, and warmness of holiness and uprightness in the affections
proceed, so that there was nothing but purity and cleanness in the soul, no
darkness of ignorance, no muddinesse of carnal affections, but the soul pure
and transparent, to receive the refreshing and enlightening rays of Gods
glorious countenance, and this was the very face and beauty of the soul, it is
that only that is the beauty and excellency of the creature, conformity to God,
and this was throughout, in understanding and affections, the understanding
conformed to his understanding, discerning between good and evil, and conformed
it behoved to be, for it was ou^ a ray of that Sun a stream of that fountain of
wisdom, and a light derived from that primitive light of Gods understanding,
and then the will did sympathize as much with his will, approving and choosing
what he approved, and refusing that which he hated: I them velle atque idem
nolle, ea demum firma est amicitia, that was the conjunction, and it is more
strict than any ^ye among men, there was not two wills, they were, as it were,
one the love of God reflecting into the soul, did as it were, carry the soul
back again unto him, and that was the conforming principle which fashioned the
whole man without and within, ^o his likeness, and to his obedience: Thus man
was ^ormed for communion with God, this likeness behoved to be, or they could
no: join as friends.

But now this calls us to a sad meditation, to think ^om whence we have fallen,
and so how great our fall ^s, to fall from such a blessed estate, that must be
great misery: Satan has spoiled us of our rich treasure, that glorious image
of holiness. And has drawn upon our souls the very visage of hell, the
lineaments ^f his hellish countenance, but the most part of men (...) stupid,
insensible of any thing, as beasts that are fel^d with their fall, that can
neither find pain nor rise: (...) we could but return and consider what are all
those ^d and woeful consequences of sin in the world, what (...) strange
distemper it has put in the Creation? What ^iseries that one fall has brought
one all mankind? (...) am sure by these bruises we might conjecture what (...)
strange fall it has been. Sin did interpose between God and us, and this
darkened our souls, and killed them, ^e light of knowledge was put out, and the
life of ho^nesse extinguished, and now there remains nothing (...) all that
stately building, but some ruins of com^on principles of reason, and honesty
engraven on all ^ens consciences; which may show unto us what the ^ilding has
been, we have fallen from holiness, and so from happiness, our souls are
deformed and defiled you see what an ill favored thing it is, to see a child
wanting any members, O if sin were visible, how ugly would the shape of the
soul be to us, since it lost the very proportion and visage of it, that is,
Gods Image? Let us consider this Doctrine that we may know from whence we have
fallen, and into what a gulf of sin and misery we have fallen, that the new
news of Jesus Christ a Mediator and Redeemer of fallen man, may be sweet unto
us. Thus it pleased the Lord to let his Image be marred and quite spoiled in
us, for he had thus design to repair it and renew it better than of old, and
for this end he has created Christ according to his image, he has stamped
that image of holiness upon his flesh, to be a pattern; and not only so, but a
pledge also, of restoring such souls as flee unto him for refuge, unto that
primitive glory and excellency: Know then that he has made his Son like unto
us, that we might again be made like unto him, he said, let one of us be made
man, in the counsel of Redemption, that so it might again be said, let man be
made like unto us, in our image: It is a second Creation must do it, and O that
you would look upon your hearts to enquire if it be framed in you, certainly
you must again be created into that Image if you belong to Christ: To him be
praise and Glory.

Romans ^1. 36. Of him and through him, and for him are all things, etc. Psalm.
103. 19. His Kingdom is over all. Matt. 10. 29. A Sparrow shall not fall
without your Fathers will.
THere is nothing more commonly confessed in words, than that the providence of
God reaches in all the creatures and their actions; But I believe there is no
point ofReligion so superficially and sleight^ considered by the most part of
men: The most part ponder none of these divine truths, there is nothing above
their senses which is the subject of their meditations: and for the children of
God, I fear many do give such truths of God too common and course entertainment
in their minds, through a conceit of the commonnesse of them, I know not what
we are taken up with in this age, with some particular truths more remote from
the knowledge of others in former times, or some particular cases concerning
our selves: You will find the most part of Christians stretch not their
thoughts beyond their own conditions or interests, or some particular
questions, about Faith and repentance, etc. And in the mean time the most
weighty points of Religion, which have been the subject of the meditation and
admiration of Saints in all ages, are wholly laid aside through a
misapprehension of their commonnesse, as if a man would despise the Sun and the
Air, and prefer some rare piece of stone or timber to them. Certainly, as in
the disposal of the World, the Lord has in great wisdom and goodness made
the most needful and useful things most common; those, without which man
cannot live, are always obvious to us, so that if any thing be more rare, it
is not necessary: So in this Universe of Religion; he in mercy and wisdom has
so framed all, that those points of truth and belief, which are most near the
substance of Salvation, and necessary to us, and most fit to exercise us in
true godliness, these are every where to be found, partly engraven on men's
hearts, partly set down most clearly and often in Scripture, that a believing
soul can look no where but it must breath in that air of the Gospel, and look
upon that common Sun of Righteousness, God the Creator, and the healing Sun,
Christ the Redeemer, shining every where in Scripture. The general Providence
of God, and the special Administration of Christ the Savior, these are common,
and these are essential to our happiness; therefore the meditation of
Christians should run most upon them, and not always about some particular
questions or debates of the time. It is a strange thing how people should be
more affected with a discourse of the affairs of the time, or on some inward
thoghts of their own hearts, than if one should speak of Gods Universal
Kingdom over all men and Nations; that is accounted a general and ordinary
discourse; even, as if men would set at naught the Suns light, because it
shines to all, and every day: Or would despise the water, because it may be
found every where: Let the Sun be removed for some few days, and O what would
the world account of it beyond all your curious devices or rare enjoyments.
This is it which would increase to more true godliness, if rightly believed,
than many other things ye are busied withal. Its our general view of them
makes them but general. I spoke once upon this word, Romans 11. 36. but only in
reference to the end of man, which is Gods glory; But the words do extend
further, and we must now consider what further they hold forth. The Apostle
has been speaking of the Lords unsearchable ways and judgments toward men
in the dispensation of grace and salvation, how free and absolute he is in
that. And this he strengthens by the supreme wisdom of God, who did direct
him? Why do thou, O man, take upon thee to direct him now? For, where was
there any Counselor when he alone contrived all the frame of this World, and
then by Sovereign highness and supremacy over the creatures disposed of them?
For he is debtor to none, therefore none can quarrel him for giving or not
giving, for who was it that gave him first, for which he should give a
recompense? Was there any could prevent with a gift? Nay, none could, says he,
for of him, and through him, and for him are all things; And therefore he must
prevent men. For from whence should that gift of the creature, which could
oblidge him, have its rise? It must be of God if it be a creature, and
therefore he is in no man's common, he must give it ere we have it to give him
again.

The words are most comprehensive, they comprehend all things, and that is very
large: There is nothing without this compass, and they comprehend all the
dependence of things. Things depend upon that which made them, that which
preserves them, and for which they are made. All things depend on him as their
producing cause, that first gives them a being: For of him are all things: they
also depend on him as their conserving cause who continues their being by that
self-same influence wherewith he gave it, For through him are all things: And
then they depend on him as their final cause, for whose glory they are, and are
continued, for, For him are all things. Thus you have the beginning, the
countenance, and the end of the whole Creation: This word may lead us through
all: from God as the beginning, the Alpha and original of their Being: Through
God as the only supporter, confirmer and upholder of their being: and unto God
as the very end for which they have their being. Now to travel within this
compass, to walk continualy within this Circle, and to go alongs this blessed
round; to begin at God, and to go along all our way with him, till we arrive
and end at God; and thus to do continually in the journey of meditation, when
it surveyes any of his works, this were, indeed, the very proper work, and the
special happiness man was created for, and, I may say, a great part of that
for which a Christian is created for: Again, there would nothing more powerful
to the conforming of a soul to God, and to his obedience and fear than this, to
have that persuasion firmly rooted in the heart, That of God are all things:
That whatever it be, good or evil, that befalls us or others; whatever we
observe in the World, that is the subject of the thoughts and discourses of
men, and turns men's eyes after them, that all that is of God; that is, it is in
the world, its started out of nothing at his command; it is, because his power
gave it a being: and in this consideration to overlook, and, in a manner
forget all second causes; to have such affecting and up-taking thoughts of the
first principle of all these motions, as to regard the lower wheels, that are
next to us, no more nor the hand or the sword that a man strikes us with: As if
these second causes had no influence of their own, but were merely acted and
moved by this supreme power, as if God did nothing by them, but only at their
presence. We should so labor to look on those things he does by creatures, as
if he did them alone without the creatures, as if he were this day creating a
world: Certainly, the solid Faith of Gods providence will draw off the covering
of the creature, and espy the secret Almighty power which acts in every thing
to bring forth his good pleasure concerning them: And then to consider, with
that same seriousness of meditation, that the same everlasting arm which made
them, is under them to support them; that the most noble and excellent
creatures are but streams, rays, images, and shaddows of Gods Majesty, which
as they have their being by derivation, so they have their continuance by that
same continued influence; so that if he would interpose between himself and
them, or withdraw his countenance, or stop his influence, the most sufficient
of them all should evanish, as the Sunne-beams dry up the streams of a
fountain, and disappear at the image of the glass, Psalm. 102. 29, 30. O that
place were a pertinent object of a Christians meditation: How much of God is to
be pressed out of it by serious pondering of it? Thou hidest thy face and they
are troubled, thou take away thy breath and they die, thou sendest out thy
spirit and they are created. It is even with the very being and faculties of
the creature as with the image of the glass, which when the face removes its
seems no more: The Lord, as it were, breaths into them a being, and when he
takes in his breath they perish, and when he sends it out again they are
renewed; we do not wonder at the standing of the world, but think, if we had
been witnesses of the making of it, we would have been filled with admiration:
But certainly, it is only our stupidity that does not behold that same wonder
continued: For what is the upholding of this by his power, but a very continued
and repeated Creation? Which influence were able to bring a World out of
nothing. If this had not been before the virtue and power he imployes now in
making them subsist, that same alone without any addition of power, would have
in the beginning made all this to be of nothing; so that the countenance of the
World is nothing else but an uninterrupted, and constant flux and emanation of
these things from God, as of light from the body of the Sun. And then to
meditate how all these things are for him, and his glory, though we know no use
nor end of them, yet that his Majesty has appointed them to show forth, one
way or other, the glory of his Name in them; and these things which to our
first and foolish apprehensions seem most contrary to him, and, as it were, so
spread a cloud of darkness over his glorious Name, the sins and perverse
doings of men and Angels, the many disorders and confusions in the world; which
seem to reflect some way upon him; that yet he has holy and glorious ends in
them all; yea, that himself is the end of all: I say, to meditate on these
things till our soul received the stamp of reverence and fear, and faith in
God, this would certainly be the most becoming exercise of a Christian, to
bring all things down from God, that we might return and ascend with all things
again unto God.

This is the most suitable employment of a man, as reasonable, much more as a
Christian, that very duty he is created for. This people have I formed for my
self, they shall show forth my praise. Isa. 43. 21. And this is the showing
forth of his praise, to follow forth the footsteps of God in the Word, and in
the World, and to ponder these paths of divine Power, and goodness, and
Wisdom, and to acknowledge him with our heart in all these. He made many
creatures on which his glory and praise is showed forth, and he made this
creature Man to show forth that praise, and that glory which is showed forth in
other creatures. O but this is a divine Office, it is strange how our hearts
are carried forth toward base things, and busied in many vain, impertinent and
base employments, and scarce ever mind this great one we were created for.

Certainly, this is the employment we were made for, to deduce all things from
God til we again reduce all to him with glory; to bring all down from his
everlasting Counsels until we send all up to his Eternal glory, together with
the sacrifice of our hearts; To behold all things to be of him, that is, of his
eternal Counsel and Decree, to have their rise in the bosom of that; and then
through him, to proceed out of the bosom of his Decree and Purpose by his
Power, quasi obstetricante potentia, and then to return with all the praise and
glory to his ever glorious Name, for whom are all things. There is none but
they will allow God some government in the world; Some would have him as a
King, commanding and doing all by Deputies, and Substitutes; Some would have
his influence general, like the Suns upon sublunary things, but how shallow
are all men's thoughts in regard of that which is. God has prepared, indeed, his
Throne in heaven; that is true, that his glory does manifest it self in some
strange and majestic manner above, but he whole tenor of Scripture shows,
that he is not shut up in heaven, but that he immediately cares for, governs,
and disposes all things in the world, for his kingdom is over all: It is the
weakness of Kings, not their glory, that they have need of Deputies; it is his
glory, not baseness to look to the meanest of their creatures; it is a poor
resemblance and empty shadow that Kings have of him: He rules in the Kingdoms
of men, and to him belongs the dominion and the glory, he deserves the name of
a King, whose beck Heaven and earth obeyes. Can a King command that the Sea
flow not? Can a Parliament act and ordain that the Sun rise not, or will these
obey them? Yet at his decree and command the Sun is dark, the Sea stands still,
the Mountains tremble, at thy rebuke the Seafled. Alas! What do we mean that we
look upon creatures, and act our selves as if we were independent in our being
and moving? How many things fall out and you call them casual, and attribute
them to Fortune? How many things do the World gaze upon, think upon, and
discourse upon, and yet not one thought, one word of God all the time? What
more contingent than the falling of a sparrow on the gro^nd? And yet even that
is not unexpected to him, but it flows from his will and counsel: What less
taken notice of or know than the hairs of your head? yet these are particularly
numbered by him, and so no power in the World can add to them, or diminish from
them, without his counsel. O, what would the belief of this do to raise our
hearts to suitable thoghts of God above the creatures, to increase the fear,
faith and love of God, and to abate from our fear of men, and our vain and
unprofitable cares and perplexities? How would you look upon the affairs of men
the counsels, contrivances, endeavors; and successes of men, when they are
turning upside down, and plotting the ruin of his people, and establishing
themselves alone in the earth? What would you think of all these revolutions at
this time? Many souls are astonished at them, and stand gazing at what is done
and to be done; and this is the very language of your spirits and ways. The
Lord has forsaken the earth, the Lord sees not: this is the language of our
Parliaments and people, they do imagine that they are doing their own
business, and making all sure for themselves: But O, what would a soul think
that could escape above them all and arise up to the first wheel of present
motions? A soul that did stand upon the exaled Tower of the Word of God, and
looked off it by the prospect of faith, would presently discover the circle in
which all these wanderings and changes are confined, and see Men, States,
Armies, Nations, and all of them doing nothing but turning about in a round (as
horse in a Mill) from Gods eternal purpose, by his Almighty Power, to his
unspeakeable glory: you might behold all these extravagant motions of the
creatures, enclosed within those limits, that they must begin here, and end
here, though themselves are so beastly, that they neither know of whom, nor for
whom their counsels and actions are: Certainly, Satan cannot break without this
compass to serve his own humor, principalities and powers cannot do it, if
they will not glorify him, he shall glorify himself by them, and upon them.

Genesis 2. 17. In that day thou eatest, thou snalt die the death. Genesis 1. 26. Let
us make man according to our image.
THe state wherein man was created at first, you heard was exceeding good, all
things very good; and he best of all, the choicest external and visible piece
of Gods workmanship, made according to the most excellent pattern, after our
Image; though it be a double misery to be once happy; yet seeing the knowledge
of our misery is by the grace of God made the entry to a new happiness, it is
most necessary to take a view of what man once was, that we may be more
sensible of what he now is. You may take up this Image and likeness in three
branches. First, there was a sweet conformity of the soul in its understanding,
will, and affections unto Gods holiness and light: A beautiful light in the
mind, dirived from that fountain-light, by which Adam did exactly know both
divine and natural things: What a great difference does yet appear between a
learned man and an ignorant rude person, though it be but in relation to
natural things; the one is but like a beast in comparison of the other? O how
much more was there between Adams knowledge, and that of the most learned? The
highest advancement of Art and Industry in this life, reaches no further then
to a learned ignorance of the mysteries in the works of God, and yet there is a
wonderful satisfaction to the mind in it; But how much sweet complacency has
Adam had, whose heart was so enlarged as to know both thing higher and lower,
their natures, properties, and virtues, and several operations? No doubt could
trouble him, no difficulty vex him, no controversy or question perplex him;
but above all, The knowledge of that glorious and eternal Being, that gave him
a being, and iniused such a spirit into him; the beholding of such infinite
treasures of wisdom, and goodness, and power in him, what an amiable and
refreshfull sight would it be, when there was no cloud of sin and ignorance to
interpose and eclipse the full enjoyment of that increated light? When the
Aspect of the Sun makes the Moon so glorious and beautiful, What may you
conceive of Adams soul framed with a capacity to receive light immediately from
Gods countenance? How fair and beautiful would that soul be, until the dark
cloud of sin did interpose it self? Then consider what a beautiful rectitude
and uprightness, what a comely order and subordination would ensue upon this
light, and make his will and affections wonderful good? Eccl. 7. 29. God made
man upright. There was no throw or crack in all, all the powers of the sou
bending upright toward that fountain of all gooness; now the soul is crooked
and bends downward toward those base earthly things, that is the abasement of
the soul, then it looked upright toward God, had no appetite, no delight but
in him and his fullness, and had the Moon or changeable World under its feet;
there was a beauty of holiness and righteousness, which were the colors that
did perfect and adorn these lineaments of the Image of God, which knowledge did
draw in the soul: He was a burning and shining light, may be truly said of
Adam, who had as much life as light, as much delight in God as knowledge of
him: this was the right constitution and disposition of Man his head lifted up
in holiness and love toward God, his arms stretched out in righteousness and
equity toward man, and all the affections of the man under their command, they
could not trouble this sea with any tempest, because they were under such a
powerful Commander, who kept them under such aw and obedience, as the Centurion
his servants, saying unto one go, and he goes, and to another come, and he
comes, sending out love one way, holy hatred another way. These were as Wings
to the Bird to flee upon, as Wheels to the Chariot to run upon, though now it be
turned just contrary, that the Chariot draws the Coachman, because the motion
is downward. There could be no motion in an upright man's soul till the holy and
righteous will gave out a sentence upon it; that was the Primum mobile, which
was turned about it self by such an Intelligentia as the understanding. And so
it was in Christ, affection could not move him, but he did move his own
affections, He troubled himself. In us the servants rides on horses, and the
Prince walks on foot; and as in a distempered society, the Laws and Ordinances
proceed by an unnatural way, from the violence of unruly subjects usupring
over their Masters. Holy and righteous man could both raise up his affections,
and compose them again, they were under such nurture and discipline; He could
have said, Hitherto, and no further, in which there was some resemblance of
God, ruling the raging and unruly Sea, But now, if once they get entry into our
City, they are more powerful than the Governor, and will not take laws from
him, but give rather; when we have given way to our passions, they do next what
they please, not what we permit.

Next his excellency consisted in such an immunity and freedom from all fear of
misery and danger, from all touch of sorrow or pain, and did enjoy such an holy
complacency and delight in his own estate, as made him completely happy. In
this he was like God. That is, His blessedness that he is absolutely well
pleased in himself, that he is without the reach of fear and danger, that none
can impair it, none can match it, I am God, and none else, that is sufficiency
of delight to know himself and his own sufficiency: Indeed, Man was made
changeable, mutably good, that in this he might know God was above him, and so
might have ground of watchfulness and dependence upon him for continuance of
his happiness who made him happy: But being made so upright, no disquieting
fear, nor perplexing care could trouble him. Then lastly, if you add unto this,
holy satisfaction with his own state and freedom, the dominion and sovereignty
he had over the creatures, as a consequent flowing from (...) Image, you may
imagine what a happy Creature he was. Whatsoever contentment or satisfaction
the Creatures could afford, all of them willingly and pleasantly would concur to
bestow it upon man, without his care or toil, as if they had accounted it their
happiness to serve him. What more excellent than this order? Man counting it his
happiness and delight to serve God, and creatures esteeming it their happiness
to serve Man, all things running toward him with all their goodness, as to a
common Center: And he returning all to God from whence they did immediately
flow: Thus besides the fullness and riches of Gods goodness immediately
conferred upon man, he was enriched with all store and goodness that the earth
was full of.

God having made man thus, and furnished him after this manner, he gave him a
Law, and then he made a Covenant with him, there was a Law first imprinted into
Adam, and then a Law prescribed unto him, there was a Law written in his heart,
the remainder of which, Paul says, makes the Gentiles inexcusable; but it was
perfectly drawn in him: All the principles and notions of good and evil, were
exactly drawn in it: He had a natural discerning of them, and a natural
inclination to all good, and aversion from all evil: As there is a kind of Law
imposed by God upon other creatures, which they constantly keep, and do not
swerve from, even his decree and commandment, to the obedience of which they
are composed and ^amed, the Sea has a Law and command to flow and ebb, and it
is that command that breaks its proud waves on the sand, when they threaten to
overflow mountains, the beasts obey a Law written in their eating and
drinking, of satisfying their senses, and every one has its several instinct
and propension to several operations: So God gave a more noble instinct unto
man, suiteable to his reasonable soul, an instinct and impulse to please God,
in such duties of holiness and righteousness, a sympathy with such ways of
integrity and godliness, and an innate antipathy against such ways as were
displeasing to him or dishonorable to the creature: There is a kind of
comeliness and sweet harmony and proportion, between such works; as the love of
God, and man, the use of all for his glory, of whom all things are, and man's
reasonable being; such a thing does suite and become it: Again other things as
the hatred of God and men, neglect and forgetfulness of him, drunkenness and
abasing lusts of that kind, do disagree, and are undecent to it: O how happy
was Adam when holiness and righteousness were not written on Tables of stone,
but on his heart, and when there was no need of external persuasion, but there
was an inward impulse inclining him strongly, and laying a kind of sweet
necessity, upon him, to that which was both his duty to God and men, and his
own dignity and privilege? This was no question, the very beauty of his soul,
to be not only under a Law, proper and peculiar to himself, but to be inwardly
framed and molded to it, to be a living law unto himself.

But besides this inward imprinted law, of Holiness and Righteousness, which
did without more rules direct and determine him to that which is in it self
good, it pleased the Lord to prescribe and impose a positive Law unto him, to
command him abstinence from a thing neither good nor evil, but indifferent and
such a thing as of it self he might have done, as well as made use of any other
creature; there was no difference between the fruit was discharged him, and the
fruit of the rest of the garden, there was nothing in it did require
abstinence, and nothing in him either. Yet for most wise and holy ends, the
Lord enjoins him to abstain from that fruit, and puts an act of restraint upon
him, to abridge his liberty in that which might prove his obedience and not
hinder his happiness, or diminish it; because he furnished him abundantly
beside. You may perceive two reasons of it: one is, that the sovereign power
and dominion of God over all men may be more eminently held forth and that
visibly in such asymbol and sign. He who put man in such a well furnished
house, and placed in such a plentiful and fruitful garden, reserves one tree,
thou shall not eat thereof, to let Adam see and know that he is the Sovereign
owner of all things, and that his dominion over the creatures, and their
service unto him, was not so much for any natural prerogative of man above
them, as out of divine bounty and indulgence, because he had chosen a creature
to himself, to beautify and make happy. This was a standing visible testimony
to bring man continually to remembrance of his Sovereignty, that being thus far
exalted above other creatures, he might know himself to be under his Creator,
and that he was infinitely above him: That he might remember his own homage and
subjection to God, when ever he looked upon his dominion over the creatures,
and truly in other natural duties which an inward principle and instinct
drives unto, the suitableness and convenience o^ beauty of the thing, does
often preponderate, and might make man to observe them, without so much reward
of the will and pleasure of the most high, but in this the Lord would have no
other reason of obedience to appear, but his own absolute will and pleasure to
teach all men to consider in their actings, rather the will of the Commander,
than the goodness or use of the thing commanded. And then for this reason it
was enjoined to make a more exact trial, and to take a more ample proof of
Adams obedience. Oftentimes we do things commanded of God, but upon what ground
or motive? Because our own interest lies in them, because there is an inward
weight and pondus of affection pressing us to them. The Lord commands the
mutual duties between Parents and Children, between Man and Wife, between
Friends; duties of se^-preservation and defense, and such like; And many are
very exact and diligent in performing these: But from what principle its easy
to discern, not because they are commanded of God (not so much as a thought of
that, for the most part) but because of an inward and natural inclination of
affection toward our selves and our relations, which is like an instinct and
impulse driving us to these duties. And truly we may say, its the goodness and
bounty of the Lord, that has conjoined in most parts of commanded duties, our
own interest and advantage, our own inclination and propension with his
Authority, or else the toil and pain of them would overbalance the weight of
his Authority. Now then is such duties as are already imprinted on man's heart,
and consonant to his own reason, there cannot be a clear proof of obedience to
Gods will, the poor and naked nature of obedience does not so clearly shine
forth in the observation of these, it is no great trial of the creatures
subjection of its will to his suppream will, when there are so many reasons
besides his will, which may incline man's will unto it: But here, in a matter in
it self pleasant to the senses, unto which he had a natural inclination, the
Lord interpoles himself by a command of restraint, to take full probation,
whether man would submit to his good pleasure merely for it self, or whether
he would obey merely because God commands: And indeed in such like duties as
have no commendation but from the will, and authority of the Lawgiver, it will
appear whether man's obedience be poor and simple obedience, and whether men
love obedience for it self alone, or for other reasons: Therefore the Lord
says, obedience is better than sacrifice, and disobedience is rebellion.
Suppose in such things as can neither hurt us nor help us, God put a restraint
upon us, though obedience may be of less worth than in other more substantial
things, yet disobedience in such easy matters is most heinous, because it
proclaims openly rebellion against God; if it be light and easy, it is more
easy obeyed, and the more sin and wickedness in disobeying, and therefore is
Adams sin called disobedience in a signal manner Romans 5. because by refusing
such a small point of homage and subjection, he did cast off Gods power and
authority over him, and would not acknowledge him for his Superior. This
should teach us who believe the repairing that Image by Jesus Christ, to study
such a respect and reverence to Gods holy Will, as to do all things without
more asking, Why it is so? If we once know what it is, there is no more
question to be asked. Of creatures we must enquire a quare, after a quid, a
why, after we know what their will is: But Christians should have their wills
so subdued unto Gods, that though no profit nor advantage were to redound by
obedience, though it were in things repugnant and cross to our inclination and
humor, yet we should serve and obey him, as a testimony of our homage and
subjection to him, and till we learn this and be more abstracted from our own
interests in the ways of obedience, even from the interests of peace, and
comfort, and liberty, we do not obey him, because he commands, but for our own
sakes. It is the practice of Antinomians, and contrary to true Godliness, to
look upon the Law of God as the creatures bondage, as most of us do in our
walking; (...) Christian in whom that image of God is renewed according to
righteousness and holiness should esteem subjection and conformity to a Law,
and to the will of God his only true liberty, yea the very beauty of the soul;
and never is a soul advanced in conformity to God, till this be its delight,
not a burden or task.

Gal. 3. 12. The Law is not of faith, but the man that does them shall live
therein. Genesis 2. 17. What day thou eatest thereof thou shall die.
THe Lord made all things for himself, to show forth the glory of his Name, and
man in a more eminent and special manner, for the more eminent manifestations
of himself, therefore all his dealings toward men, whether righteous or
sinful, do declare the glory of God. Particularly, in reference to the present
purpose, he resolved to manifest two shining properties, his Sovereignty and
Goodness, his Sovereignty is showed in giving out a Law and Command to the
creature, and his goodness is manifested in making a Covenant with his
creature: As here you see the terms of a Covenant, a duty required, and a
promise made, and in case of failing, a threatening conformed to the promise. He
might have requi^ed obedience simply, as the Lord and Sovereign owner of the
Being and operations of the creatures, and that was enough of obligation to
bind all flesh; that the Creator is Lawgiver, that he who gives a being does
set bounds and limits to the exercise and use of that being? But it pleased the
Lord in his infinite goodness and love, to add a promise and threatening to that
Law and Command, and so turns it to the nature of a voluntary Covenant and
agreement whereby he does mitigate and sweeten his Authority and Power, and
condescends so low to man as to take on himself a greater obligation than he
puts upon man, Do this and thou shall live. He might then out of his
absoluteness and power, have required at the creatures hand any terms he
pleased, even the hardest could be imagined, and yet no injustice in him, he
might have put Laws on men to restrain all their natural liberty, and in every
thing to proclaim nothing but his own supremacy. But O what goodness and
condescension is even in the very matter of the Law, and then in the manner of
prescribing it with a promise: In the matter so just and equitable to convince
all men's consciences; yea, even engraven on their hearts, that he lays not
many burdens on, but what men's consciences must lay on themselves, that there
is nothing in it all when summed up harder than this, love God most of all, and
thy neighbor as thy self, which all men must proclaim to be due, though it had
not been required: And but one precept added by his mere Will, which yet was
so easy a thing, as it was a wonder the Lord of all put no other conditions on
the creature: And then for the manner, that it is propounded in Covenant-wise,
with a promise (not to expect the creatures consent, for it did not depend on
his acception, he being bound to accept any terms his Lord propounded) but
because the matter and all was so equitable, and the conditions so ample, that
if it had been propounded to any rational man, he would have consented with an
admiration at Gods goodness: Indeed if we speak strictly, there cannot be a
proper Covenant between God and man, there is such an infinite distance between
such unequal parties, our obedience and performance being absolutely in his
power, we cannot promise it as our own, and it being but our duty, we cannot
crave or expect a reward in justice, neither can he owe any thing to the
creature; yet it pleased his Majesty to propound it in these terms, and to
stoop so low unto men's capacities, and as it were come off the throne of his
Sovereignty, both to repuire such duties of men, and to promise unto them such
a free reward, and the reasons of this may be plain upon Gods part, and upon
ours: in such dealing, he consulted his own glory, and man's good. His own
glory, I say, is manifested in it, and chiefly the glory of his goodness and
love, that the most High comes down so low as to article with his own
footstool, that he changes his absolute right, into a moderate and temperate
Government, and tempers his Lordly and truly Monarchical power by such a
commix^ure of gentleness and goodness, in requiring nothing but what man
behoved to call reasonable and due; and in promising so much as no crea^ure
could challenge any title of it. When the Law was promulgate. Do this, Eat not
of this Tree, Adams conscience behoved to say, Amen Lord, all is due, all the
reason in the Word for it: But when the promise is added, and the Trumpet
sounds longer, thou shall live, O more than reason, more then is due, must his
conscience say, It was reason, that the most high Lord should use his
footstool as his footstool, and set his servant in the place of a servant,
and so keep distance from him: But how strange is it, that he humbles himself
to make friendship with man to assume him in a kind of familiarity and
equality? And this Christ is not forgetful of, when he restores men, he puts
them in all their former dignities, I call you not servants, but friends: Next,
his wisdom does appear in this, that when he had made a reasonable creature,
he takes a way of dealing suitable to his Nature, to bring forth willing and
free obedience by the persuasion of such a reward, and the terror of such a
punishment. He most wisely did enclose the will of man as it were one both
sides with hedges of punishment and reward, which might have been a sufficient
defense or guard against all the irruptions of contrary persuasions, that man
might continue in obedience, and that when he went to the right hand or left,
he might be kept in, by the hope of such an ample promise, and the fear of such
a dreadful threatening. But then the righteousness of God does appear in this:
for there is nothing does more illustrate the justice of the Judge, then when
the Malefactor has before consented to such a punishment in case of
transgression; when the Law is confirmed by the consent and approbation of man,
now he has man subscribing already to his judgment, and so all the world must
stop their mouth and become guilty in case of transgression of such a righteous
command after such warning.

But in the next place, its no less for man's good: What a honor and dignity
was put upon man, when he was taken into friendship with God? To be in covenant
of friendship with a King, O what a dignity is it accounted? And some do
account it a great privilege to be in company and converse with some eminent
and great person. But may not man say with the Psalmist, Lord what is man that
thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him? Psalm. 8.
Again, what way more fit and suitable to stir up and constrain Adam unto a
vvilling and constant obedience? When he had the encouragement of such a
gracious reward, and the determent of such a fearful punishment: Between these
two banks might the silver streams of obedience have run for ever without
breaking over. He was bound to all, though nothing had been promised: But then
to have such a hope, what spirits might it add to him? The Lord had been free
upon man's obedience either to continue him his happy estate, or to denude him
of it, or to annihilate him, there was no obligation lying on him; but now,
what confirmation might man have by looking upon the certain recompense of
reward? When God brings himself freely under an Obligation of a Promise, and so
ascertains it to his soul, which he could never have dreamed of, and gives him
liberty to challenge him upon his faithfulness to perform it. And then lastly,
there was no way so fit to commend God, and sweeten him unto his soul, as this.
Adam knew that his goodness could not extend to God, that his righteousness
could not help him, nor his wickedness hurt him, and so could expect nothing
from his exact obedience; but now when Gods goodness does so overflow unto
the creature, and the Lord takes pleasure to communicate himself to make others
happy, though he had need of none: O, how must it engage the heart of man to a
delightful remembrance and converse with that God? As his authority should
imprint reverence, so his goodness thus manifested should engrave confidence.
And thus the life of man was not only a life of obedience, but a life of
pleasure and delight; not only a holy, but a happy life, yea, happy in
holiness.

Now as it was Paul's great business in preaching, to ride marches between the
covenant of grace, and the covenant of works, to take men off that old broken
ship to this sure plank of grace that is offered by Jesus Christ to drowning
souls: So it would be our great work to show unto you the nature of this
Covenant, and the terms thereof, that you may henceforth find and know that
salvation to be now impossible by the Law, which so many seek in it; We have no
errand to speak of the first Adam, but the better to lead you to the second:
Our life was once in the first, but he lost himself and us both, but the second
by losing himself saves both. We have nothing to do to speak of the first
Covenant, but that we may lead you or pursue you rather to the second,
established upon better terms and better promises.

The terms of this covenant are, Do this and live: perfect obedience without
one jot of failing or falling, an entire and universal accomplishment of the
whole will of God, that is the duty required of Man; there is no latitude left
in the bargain, to admit endeavors in stead of performance, or desire in stead
of duty: there is no place for Repentance here, if a Man fall in one point he
falls from the whole promise; by the tenor of this bargain, there is no hope
of recovery. If you would have the duty in a word, Its a love of God with all
our heart and soul, and our Neighbor as our self, and that testified and
verified in all duties and offices of obedience to God, and love to men,
without the least mixture of sin and infirmity. Now, the promise on Gods part
is indeed larger then that Duty, not only because undeserved, but even in the
matter of it, it is so abundant; Life, eternal life, continuance in a happy
estate. There is a threatening added, In what day thou eatest, thou shall die:
that is, thou shall become a mortal and miserable creature, subject to misery,
here and hereafter, which is more pressingly set down in that Word, Cursed is
he that abides not in all things written in the law to do them. It is very
peremptory, that men dream not of escaping wrath, when they break but in one
suppose they did abide in all the rest Cursed is every man from the highest to
the lowest, the Lord Almighty is engaged against him, his countenance, his
Power is against him to destroy him and make him miserable; whoever does fail
but in one jot of the commands, he shall not only fall from that blessed
condition freely promised, but lose all that he already possessed, fall from
that image of God, dominion over the creatures, and incur, in stead of that
possessed and expected happiness, misery here on soul and body, in pains,
sicknesses, troubles, griefs, etc. And Eternal misery on both, without measure
hereafter. Eternal destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power.

Now, This Law is not of Faith, says the Apostle: This opens up the nature of
the bargain, and the opposition between the present Covenant and that which is
made with lost sinners in a Mediator. This Covenant is called, of Works, Do
this and live, To him that works is the promise made, though freely too. It
is grace that once a reward should be promised to obedience, but having once
resolved to give it, herein justice appears in an equal and uniform
distribution of the reward, according to Works, So that where there is an
equality of works there shall be an equality of reward, and no difference put
between persons equal: Which is the very freedom of the Covenant of grace,
that it passes overall such considerations; and deals equally in mercy with
unequal sinners, and unequally it may be with them that are equal in nature.

You may ask was not Adam to believe in God, and did not the Law require faith?
I answer, Christ distinguishes a twofold faith, You believe in God, believe
also in me. No question he was called to believe in God the Creator of the
World, and that in a threefold consideration.

First to depend on God the self-beeing and fountain-good: his own goodness
was but a flux and emanation from that Sun of righteousness, and so was to be
perpetuated by constant abiding in his sight; the interposition of man's self
between him and God did soon bring on this eternal night of darkness. Nature
might have taught him to live in him in whom he had life, and being, and
motion, and to forget and look over his own perfections as evanishing shadows:
But this quickly extinguished his life when he began to to live in himself.

Next, he was obliged to believe in Gods word both threatening and promise, and
to have these constantly in his view: And certainly if he had kept, in his
serious consideration, the inestimable blessing of life promised, and the
fearful curse of death threatened, if he had not been induced first to doubt,
and then to deny the truth and reality of these, he had not attempted such a
desperate rebellion against the Lord.

Then thirdly, he was to believe and persuade himself of the Lords fatherly
love, and that the Lord was well pleased with his obedience, and this faith
would certainly beget much peace and quietness in his mind and also constrain
him to love him, and live to him who loved him, and gave him life and
happiness out of love; yet this holds true that the Apostle says, the law is
not of faith, to wit, in a Mediator and Redeemer; it was a bond of immediate
friendship, there needed none to mediate between God and man, there needed no
reconciler, where there was no ods nor distance? But the Gospel is of Faith in
a Mediator; its the souls plighting its hope upon Jesus Christ in its desperate
necessity, and so supposes man sinful and miserable in himself and in his own
sense too, and so putting over his weight and burden upon one whom God has
made mighty to save: The Law is not of Faith, but of perfect works, a
watchword brought in of purpose to bring men off their hankering after a
broken and desperate Covenant; It admits no repentance, it speaks of no pardon,
it declares no Cautioner or Redeemer; there is nothing to be expected,
according to the tenor of that Covenant, but wrath from Heaven; either
personal obedience in all, or personal punishment for ever, that is the very
terms of it, and it knows no other thing. Either bring complete righteousness
and holiness to the promise of life, or expect nothing but death.

This may be a sad meditation to us, to stand and look back to our former
estate and compare it with that into which we are fallen: that Image we spoke
of is defaced and blotted out, which was the glory of the Creation, and now
there is nothing so monstrous, so deformed in the world as man; the corruption
of the best thing is always worst, the ruins of the most noble creature are
most ruinous, the spot of the soul most abominable; we are nothing but a mass
of darkness, ignorance, error, inordinate lust, nothing but confusion,
disorder and distempers in the soul, and in the conversation of men, and in
sum, that blessed bond of friendship with God broken, discord and enmity
entered upon our side, and separated us from God, and so we can expect nothing
from that first Covenant, but the curse and wrath threatened: By one man's
disobedience sin entered upon all, and death by sin; because in that agreement
Adam was a common person representing us, and thus are all men once subject to
Gods judgment, and come short of the glory of God, fallen from life into a
state of death, and for any thing could be expected irrevocably. But it has
pleased the Lord in his infinite mercy, to make a better Covenant in Christ his
Son, that what was impossible to the Law, by reason of our weakness and
wickedness, his Son, sent in the flesh, condemned for sin, might accomplish,
Romans 8. 3. There is some comfort yet after this, that Covenan^ was not last,
and that sentence was not irrevocable: He makes a new transaction, lays the
iniquity of his elect upon Christ, and puts the curse upon his shoulders which
was due to them: Justice cannot admit the abrogation of the Law; but mercy
pleads for a temperament of it: and thus the Lord dispenses with personal
satisfaction, which in rigor he might have craved; and finds out a ransom,
admits another satisfaction in their name: And in the Name of that Cautioner
and Redeemer, is salvation preached upon better terms, Believe, and thou shall
be saved, Romans 10. Thou lost and undone sinner, whoever thou art, that find
thy self guilty before God, and that thou can not stand in judgment by the
former Covenant; thou who have no personal righteousness, and trusts in none,
come here, embrace the righteousness of thy Cautioner; receive him, and ^est on
him, and thou shall be saved.

Eccles. 7. 29. God made man upright, but he sought out many inventions.
THe one half of true Religion consists in the knowledge of ourselves, and the
other half in the knowledge of God; and whatever besides this, men study to
know and apply their hearts unto, it is vain and impertinent, and like meddling
in other men^ matters, neglecting our own, if we do not give our minds to the
search of these All of us must needs grant this in the general, that it is an
idle and improfitable wandering abroad, to be carried forth to the knowledge
and use of other things, and in the mean time to be strangers to our selves,
with whom v^ should be most acquainted. If any man was diligen^ and earnest
in the enquiry and use of the things of the world, Solomon was; he applied
his heart to seek out wisdom, and what satisfaction was in the knowledge of
all things natural, and in this he attained a great degree beyond all other
men; yet he pronounces of it all, after experience and trial, that this also
was vanity, and vexation of spirit; not only empty and unprofitable, and not
conducing to that true blessedness he sought after; but hurtful and
destructive, nothing but grief and sorrow in it. After he had proved all, with
a resolution to be wise, yet it was far from him, I said, I will be wise, but
it was far from me, verse 23. And therefore, after long wandering abroad, he
returns at length home to himself, to know the estate of mankind; Lo, this only
have I sound, etc. ver. 29. When I have searched all other things, and found
many things by search, yet (says he) what does it all concern me, when I am
ignorant of my self? There is one thing concerns me more then all, to know the
original of Man, what he once was made, and to know how far he is departed
from his Original. This only I have found profitable to men, and as the entry
and preparation to that blessedness I enquire for, To have the true discovery
of our misery.

There are two things then concerning man that you have to search and to know,
and that not in a tri^ing or curious manner, as if you had no other end in it
but to know it, as men do in other things, but in a serious and earnest way, as
(...) a matter of so much concernment to our eternal well-being. In things that
relate particularly to our selves, we labor to know them for ome advantage,
besides the knowing of them, even though they be but ^mal and lower things; how
much more should we propose this unto our selves in the search and examination
of our own estate, not mee^ly to ^now such a thing; but to know it that we may
be (...) up and provoked in the sense of it, to look after the remedy that God
holds forth? There are two things that you have to know, What man once was
made, and how he is now unmade: how happy once, and how miserable now. And
answerable to these two, are the branches of the Text; God made man^upright,
that he was once; and they have fought out many inventions, not being contented
with that blessedness they were created into, by catching at a higher estate
of wisdom, have fallen down into a gulf of misery, as the man that gazed on
the stars above him, and did not take notice of the pit under his feet till he
fell into it; and thus man is now. So you have a short account of the two
estates of men, of the estate of grace and righteousness without sin, and the
estate of sin and misery (...) grace: You have the (...) story of man, from the
creation unto his present condition. But all the matter is, to have the lively
sens^ of this upon our hearts: I had rather that we went home bewailing our
loss, and lamenting our misery, and longing for the recovery of that (...),
then that we went out with the exact memory of all (...) is spoken, and
could repeat it again.

God made man upright. At hi^ ^st moulding the Lord showed excellent Art and
Wisdom, and Goodness too: Man did come forth from under his hand in the first
edition very glorious, to show what he could do. Upright, that is, all right
and very exactly conformed to the noble and high pattern, endowed with divine
wisdom, such (...) might direct him to true happiness, and furnished with a
divine vvillingness to follow that direction: The command was not above his
head as a rod, but within his heart as a natural instinct; all that was
within him was comely and beautiful: for that glorious light that shined upon
him, having life and love with it, produced a sweet harmony in the soul; he
knew his duty, and loved it, and v^as able to perform it. O! how much is in
this one word* Upright? Not only sincerity and integrity in the soul, but
perfection of all the degrees and parts; no part of holiness wanting, and no
measure of these parts; no mixture of darkness or ignorance, no mixture of
indisposition or unwillingness; godliness was ^weet, and not laborious; the
love of God possessing the heart, did conform all within and without to the
will of God: and, O how beautiful was that conformity, and that love of God!
the fountain-being did send forth as a stream, love and good will to all
things, as they did partake of Gods Image: and so holiness toward God did
beget righteousness toward men, and made men to partake of one another
happiness.

This is a survey of him in his integrity as God ^de him; but there follows a
sad but, a sad and vvo^l exception: but they have sought out many inventions.
We cannot look upon that glorious estate whereinto m^n was made, but
straightway we must turn our eyes upon the misery into which he has plunged
himself, and be the more affected with it, that it was once otherwise. It is
misery in a high degree to have been once happy; this ^ost of all agredges our
misery, and may increase the sense of it, that such Man once was, and such we
might have been, if we had not destroyed our selves. Who can look upon these
ruins, and refrain ^ouring? It Is said, that those who saw the glory of the
first Temple, went when they beheld the second, because it was not answerable
to it in magni^ence and glory: So, I say, it might occasion much ^ness and
grief, even to the children of God, in whom that Image is in part repaired; and
that by a second Creation, to think how much more happy and blessed Man once
was, who had grace and holiness without sin. But certainly, it should and must
be at first, before this Image be restored, the bitter lamentation of a soul,
to look upon it self wholly ruinous and defaced, in the view of that glorious
stately fabric which once was made. How lamentable a sight is it to behold the
first Temple demolished, or the first Creation defaced, and the second not yet
begun in many souls, the foundation-stone yet not laid? It was a sad and dol^ul
invention which Satan inspired at first into man's heart, to go about to find
out another happiness, to seek how to be wise as God; an invention tha^ did
proceed from hell, how to know evil experimentally and practically by doing it;
that invention has invented and found out all the sin and misery under which
the world groans. It is a poor invention to devise misery and torment to the
creature; this was the height of solly and madness, for a happy creature to
invent how to make it self miserable, and all others. Indeed he intended
another thing to be more happy, but pride and ambition got a deserved fall: the
result of all, is sin and misery.

And now, from this first devilish invention, the heart of man is possessed
with a multitude of vain imaginations. Man is now become vain in his
imaginations, and his foolish heart is darkened; that divine wisdom he was
endowed withal, is eclipsed; for it was a ray of Gods countenance, and now he
is left wholly in the dark, without a guide, without a director or leader; he
is turned out of the path of holiness, and so of happiness; a night of gross
darkness and blindness is come on, and the way is full of pits and snares, and
the end of it is at best, eternal misery; and there is no lamp, no light to
shine in it, to show him either the misery that he is posting unto, or the
happiness that he is flying from: There is nothing within him sufficient to
direct his way to blessedness, and nothing willing nor able to follow such a
direction. And thus Man is left to the invention and counsel of his own
desperately wicked and d^ful heart; and that is above all plagues to be given
up to a reprobate mind. He is now left to such a tutor and guide^, and it is
full of inventions indeed. But they are all in vain, that is, all of them
unsufficient for this great purpose; all of them cannot make one hair that is
black white, much les^ redeem the soul, but besides, they are destructive; they
pretend to deliver, but they destroy; a desperate wicked heart imagines evil
continually, evil against God and evil to our own souls; and a deceitful heart
^mooths over the evil, and presents it under another notion, and so, under
pretense of a friend, it is the greatest enemy a man has, a bosom enemy. Al
men's inventions, thoughts, cogitations, projects and endeavors, what do they
tend to, but to the satisfaction of their lusts; either the lusts of the mind,
as Ambition, Pride, Avarice, Passion, Revenge, and such like, or the lusts of
the body, as pleasure to the ears; and to the eyes, and to the flesh? Man was
made with an upright soul, with a dominion over that brutish part more like
Angels: But now, all his invention run upon that base and beastly part, how to
adorn it, how to beautify it, how to satisfy it, and for this his soul must
be a drudge and slave: And if men rise up to any thoughts of a higher life, yet
what is it for, but to magnify and exalt the flesh to seek an Excellency
within which is lost, and so to satisfy the pride and self-love of the heart.
If any man comes this length, (...) to apprehend some misery; yet how vain are
his inventions about the remedy of it, not knowing how desperate the disease
is, men seek help in themselves, and think by industry and care, and art, to
raise themselves up in some measure, and please God by some expiations or
sacrifices of their own works: Now, this tends to no other purpose; but to
satisfy the lust of man's pride, and so it increases that which was man's first
malady, and keeps them from the true Physician. In a word, all men's inventions
are to hasten misery on him, or to blindfold himself till it come on; all his
invention cannot reach a delivery from this misery: Let us therefore consider
this which Solomon has found out, and if we carefully consider it, and
accurately ponder it in relation to our own souls, the^ have we also ^ound it
with him. Consider I say what man once was, and what you are now, and bewail
your misery and the fountain of it, our departure from the fountain of life and
blessedness: know what you are, not only weak, but wicked, whose art and power
lies only in wickedness, skilful, and able only to make your self miserable,
and let this consideration make you cast away all your confidence in your
selves, and carry you forth to a Redeemer, who has ^ound a ransom, who has
found out an excellent invention to cure all our distempers and desperate
diseases. The counsel of the holy Trinity that met about (if I may speak so)
our creation in holiness and righteousness after his own Image, that same has
consulted about the rest of it, and has found out this course, that one of
them shall be made after man's Image, and for this purpose that he may restore
again Gods Image unto us: O bless this deep invention and happy contrivance of
heaven that could never have bred in any breast but in the depths of eternal
wisdom, and let us abandon and forsake our own imaginations, and foolish
inventions; let us become fools in our own eyes, that we may become wise. Man
by seeking to be wise, became a fool, that was an unhappy invention; now its
turned contrary, let all men take with their folly and desperate wickedness,
let not the vain thoughts and dreams of our own vvelbeing and sufficiency lodge
within us, and we shall be made wise; come to the Fathers wisdom, unto Jesus
Christ, who is that blessed invention of Heaven, for our remedy. How long shall
vain thoughts lodge within you? O when will you be washed from them? How long
shall not your thoughts transcend this temporal and bodily life? How long do you
imagine to live in sin, and die in the Lord; to continue in sin, and escape
wrath? Why do you delude your souls with a dream of having interest in the love
of God, and purchasing his favor by your works? These are some of those many
inventions man has sought out.

Romans 5. 22. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, so death past upon all men, for that all have sinned.
THis is a sad subject to speak upon, yet it is not more sad then useful:
though it be unpleasant to hold out a glass to men to see their own vile faces
into, yet it is profitable, yea and so necessary, that till once a soul
apprehend its broken and desolate condition in the first Adam, it can never
heartily embrace and come to the second Adam. You have here the woeful and
dreadful effects and consequents of the first transgression upon all mankind;
the effect is twofold, sin and misery, or sin and death; the subject is
universal in both, all men, the whole world. Behold what a flood of calamity
has entered at a small cranny, by one man's transgression? May it not be said of
sin in general, which the wise man speaks of strife? The beginning of sin is as
when one lets out water, therefore it had been good leaving it off, before it
had been meddled with; it entered at a small hole, but it has overflowed a
whole world since.

That which first occurs, is, that all mankind proceeding from Adam by
ordinary birth, are involved in sin by Adams transgression. But that may seem a
hard saying, that sin and death should flow unto the whole posterity who had
no accession to Adams transgression. It would seem that every man should die
for his own iniquity, and that it should reach no further in justice. But
consider, I pray you, the relation that Adam stood into, and in which he is
here holden out as a figure of Christ. Adam the first man was a common person
representing all mankind, in whose happiness or misery all should share: God
contracts with him on these terms, that his posterities estate should depend
on his behavior. Now if all mankind would have reaped the benefit and
advantage of Adams perseverance, i^ such an undeserved reward of eternal life
would have redounded by the free promise unto them all, what iniquity is it
that they also be sharers in his misery? Our stock and treasure was ventured
in this vessel; and if we were to partake of its gain, why not of its loss?
You see amongst men, children have one common lot with their parents; if the
father be fore-faulted, the heirs suffer in it, and are cast out of the
inheritance. It might appear a surer way to have the fortunes of all (so to
speak) depend upon one, and their happiness assured unto them, upon the
standing of one, then to have every one left unto himself, and his own
vvell-being depending upon his own standing, as it is more likely one, and that
the first one, shall not sin, then many, and especially when that one knew that
the weight of all his posterity hung upon him, it might have made him very
circumspect, knowing of how great moment his carriage (...). But certainly we
must look a little higher then such reasons, there was a glorious purpose of
Gods predominant in this, else there was no natural necessity of imputing Adams
sin to the children not yet born, or propagating it to the children: He that
brought a holy one and undefiled out of a Virgin who was defiled, could have
brought all others clean out of unclean parents: but there is a higher counsel
about it, the Lord would have all men subject to his judgment; al men once
guilty, once in an equal state of misery, to illustrate that special grace
showed in Christ the more, and demonstrate his power and wrath upon others.
That which concerns us most; is to believe this that sin has overspread all;
and, to have the lively impression of this, were of more moment to true
Religion, than many discourses upon it. I had rather ye went home not cursing
Adam, or murmuring against the most High; but bemoaning yourselves for your
wretched estate, then be able to give reasons for the general imputation and
propagation of sin. Ye all see it is, and therefore you should rather mourn for
it, then ask why it is.

There is sin entered into the world by imputation, and also by propagation,
Adams first sin and heinous transgression, is charged upon all his posterity,
and imputed unto them, even unto them who have not sinned according to the
similitude of Adams transgression, that is, actually as he did, Infants whom
you call innocents (and indeed so they are in respect of you who are come to
age) yet they are guilty before God of that sin that ruined all. Now that you
may know what you are, and what little reason you have to be pleased with your
selves, and absolve your selves as ye do. I shall unbowel that iniquity unto
you, First, there was in it an open banner displayed against God: When the
sovereign Lord had enjoined his (...) ^uch a testimony of his homage and
loyalty* and that so easy to be performed, and such as not a whit could ^ba e
from his happiness; what open rebellion was it to refuse it? It was a casting
off the Sovereign dominion of God than which nothing can be more heinous as if
the clay should refuse to serve the Potters pleasure, and therefore it is
eminently and signally styled disobedience, as having nothing in it but the
pure naked nature of disobedience; no difficulty to excuse it, for it was most
easy, no pleasure to plead for it, for there were as good fruit beside, and a
world of them. No necessity to extenuate it, so that you can see nothing in it,
but the ugly face of disobedience and rebellion, verse. 19. Whereby man draws
himself from his allegiance due to his Maker, and shakes off the yoke in
reproach of the most High. Next, you may behold the vile and abominable ^ace of
ingratitude and unthankfulness in it, and truly heathens have so abhorred
unthankfulness toward men, that they could not digest the reproach of it.
Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris: If you call me unthankful, your may call me
anything, or all things, its a compend of al vices; Its even iniquity grown to
maturity and (...): But that such a fruit should grow out of such a holy and
good spyle, so well dressed and manured by the Lord, was a wonder, Lord what is
man that thou so magnified him, and made him a little lower tha^ the Angels?
That thou put all things sublunary under his feet, and exalted him above them:
For that creature chosen and elected from among all, to be his minion, to stand
in his presence, adorned, and beautified with such gifts and graces, magnified
with such glorious privileges, made according to the most excellent pattern,
His own Image, to ^orget all, and forget so soon; and when he had such a
spacious Garden to make use of (as is supposed to make up the third part of the
earth) to eat of no fruit but that which was forbidden there is no such
monstrous ingratitude can be imagined as here was acted. But then consider the
two fountains from which this flowed, unbelief and pride; and ye shall find it
the heaviest sin in the world: unbelief of his word and threatening, first he
was brought to question it and doubt of it, and then to deny it. A Word so
solemnly and particularly told him by the truth it self, that ever a question
of it could arise in his mind to get entry, what else was it than to impute
iniquity to the Holy One? And that iniquity or falsehood and lying, which his
nature most abhors? What was it to blaspheme the most High and faithful God, by
harkening to the suggestions of his enemy, and credit them more then the
threatening of God? To give the very flat contradiction to God, we shall not die;
and to assent so heartily to Satan's slanders and reproaches of God. And this
unbelief opened a door to ambition and bride, the most sacrilegious ingredient
of all, which is most opposite to God, and unto which he most opposed himself
from the beginning. You shall be like gods, Was he not happy enough already, and
according to Gods Image? Nay, but this evil principle would arise up to the
throne of God and sit down in his stead. Pride has Atheism in it, to deny the
true God, and yet would be a god it self. For the footstool to lift up it self
thus, what an indignity was it? and indeed this wretched aim at so high an
estate has thrown us down as low as hell. You see then how injurious this
transgression was to God. There was disobedience and rebellion in it, which
denies his dominion and supremacy, there was unthankfulness in it, denying his
goodness and bounty, there was unbelief in it contradicting his truth and
faithfulness, and finally pride opposing it self to all that is in God,
reaching up to his very crown of Majesty to take it off. You see then what you
are guilty of, in being guilty of Adams transgression, many of you flatter your
selves in your own eyes, that ye have not done much evil, and ye will justify
your selves in your comparisons with others. But I beseech you consider this;
though you had never done personally good or evil, here that which drowned the
World in misery is your sin, and charged upon you; you are guilty of that which
ruined all mankind, and makes the Creation subject to vanity and corruption. O
if ye believe this, ye would find more need of the second Adam than ye do. O
how precious would this righteousness and obedience be to you, if ye had
rightly apprehended your interest in the first man's disobedience?

But besides this imputation, there is much more propagated unto all, and that
is a total corruption and depravation of nature in soul and body whereby man is
utterly indisposed, disabled and made opposite unto all that is truly and
spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that continually which
is commonly called Original sin: A total averseness from God, and from al
goodness, an antipathy against the ways of holiness, and a propension and
strong impulse toward evil, even as a stone move downward; This poison and
contagion of sin entering into the world, has infected al, and gone through
all the members; Neither is it any wonder it be so, when this leprosy has
defiled the walls and roof of the house, I mean, has made the Creation subject
to vanity and corruption, It is no wonder that it spread abroad in his issue,
and makes al unclean like himself; And truly this is it which most abases man's
nature, and being seen, would most humble men; yea, til this be discerned no
man can be indeed humbled, he will never apprehend himself so bad as he is, but
still imagine some excellency in himself, til he s^e himself in this glass:
You talk of good natures, and good dispositions, but in our flesh (says the
Apostle) dwells no good thing: the seed of all wickedness are in every one of
us, and its the goodness of God for preserving humane society, that they are
restrained and kept down in any from the grossest outbreakings. They know not
themselves, who know any good of themselves, and they know not themselves who
either are in admiration at, or in bitterness or in contempt against other
sinners, whose sins are manifest to all. This were the only way to profit by
looking on others evils, if we could straight way retire within and behold the
root of that in our sevles, the fountain of it within us, and so grow in
loathing not of these persons, but of humane nature, and in suitable thoughts
of our selves and others, and might wonder at the goodness and undeserved
bounty of the Lord that passes an act of restraint upon our corruption, and
dammes it up. Oh that we could learn to loath our selves in other men's evils*
thus we might reap good out of the evil, and prevent more in our selves; But
the looking upon gross provocations as singularities, make them more general,
because every man does not charge himself with the corruption that is in all
these, but prefers himself to another, therefore are reins loosed to
corruption; and a sluice opened, that it may come out, that he who would not see
his own Image in another man's face, may behold it in the glass of his own
abominations. There is no point less believed than this, though generally
confessed, that man is dead in sins and trespasses, and impotent to help
himself. You will hardly take with wickedness when you confess weakness, as
if nature were only sick, but not dead, hurt, but not killed; therefore it is
that so many do abide in themselves; and trusting to their own good purposes,
and resolutions, and endeavo^s* do think to pacify God* and help themselves
out of their misery. But, O look again, and look in upon your selves in the
glass of the Word, and there is no doubt but you will straightway be filled
with confusion of face, and be altogether spoiled of good confidence and hope,
as you call it: you will find your self plunged in a pit of misery, and all
strength gone, and none on the right hand or the left to help you; and then,
and not till then, will the second Adams hand stretched out for our help be
seasonable.

That which next follows, is, that which is the companion of sin inseparably,
Death has past upon all, and that by sin. Adams one disobedience opened a port
for all sin to enter upon mankind, and sin cannot enter without this companion
Death. Sin goes before, and Death follows on the back of it, and these suite
one another, as the work and the wages; as the tree and the fruit, they have
a sibness one to another; sowing to corruption, reaps an answerable harvest, to
wit, corruption: Sowing to the vvind, and reaping the vvhirlewind, how
suitable are they? That men may know how evil and bitter a thing sin is, he
makes this the fruit of it. In his first Law and sanction given out to men, he
joins them inseparably, sin and death, sin and wrath, sin and a curse.

By Death is not only meant bodily death, which is the separation of the soul
from the body; but first the spiritual death of the soul, consisting in a
separation of the soul from Gods blessed enlightening, enlivening, and
comforting countenance. Man's true life wherein he differs from beasts, consists
in the right aspect of God upon his soul, in his walking with God, and keeping
communion* with him; all things besides this, are but common and base, and this
was cut off: his comfort, his joy and peace in God extinct; God became terrible
to his conscience; and therefore man did flee and was araid when he heard his
voice in the garden. Sin being interposed between God and the soul, cut off all
the influence of heaven: Hence arises darkness o^ mind, hardness of heart,
delusions, vile affections, horror of conscience. Look what difference is
between a living creature and a dead carcass, so much is between Adams soul
upright, living in God, and Adams soul separated from God by sin. Then upon the
outward man the curse redounds, the body becoms mortal which had been
incorruptible: it is now like a besiedged City, now some outward sorts are
gained by diseases, now by pains and torments, the outward walls of the body are
at length overcome; and when life has fled into a Castle within the City, the
heart, that is at last all besiedged so straightly, and stormed so violently,
that it must render unto death, upon any terms. The body of man is even a
seminary of a world of diseases and grievances, that if men could look upon it
aright, they might see the sentence of death every day performed. Then how many
evils in estate, in friends and relations, in employments; which being
considered by Heathens, has made them praise the dead more then the living;
but him not yet born most of all, because the present life is nothing else but
a valley of misery and tears, a sea of troubles, where one wave continually
prevents another, and comes on like Jobs messengers; before he speak out his
wo^ul tidings, another comes with such like, or worse. But that which is the
sum and accomplishment of Gods curse and man's misery, is that death to come,
eternal death; not death simply, but an everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power. An infinite loss, because the
loss of such a glorious life in the enjoyment of Gods presence, and an infinite
hurt and torment beside, and both eternal. Now this is that we would lay before
you; you are under such an heavy sentence from the womb, a (...)* of the
Almighty, adjudging you for Adams guilt, and your own, to all the misery in
this world; and the next, to all the treasures of wrath that are heaped up
against the day of wrath: and strange it is, how we can live in peace, and not
be troubled in mind, who have so great and formidable a party. Be persuaded, O
be persuaded, that there shall not one ^ot of this be removed, it must be
fulfilled in you, or your Cautione^; and why then is a Savior offered, a City
of refuge opened, and secure sinners will not flee into it? But as for as many
as have the inward dreadful apprehension of this wrath to come, and knows not
what to do, know, that to you is Jesus Christ preached, the second Adam, a
quickening Spirit, and in that consideration better then the first; not only a
living soul himself, but a Spirit to quicken you who are dead in sins; one
that has undertaken for you, and will hold you fast: Adam who should have
kept us, lost himself. Christ in a manner, lost himself, to save us: And as by
Adams disobedience all this sin and misery has abounded on man, know, that the
second Adam his obedience and righteousness is of greater virtue and efficacy
to save; and in stead of sin, to restore righteousness; and in stead of death,
to give life: therefore you may come to him, and you shall be more surely kept
then before.

1. Tim. 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came in the world to save sinners.
OF all Doctrines that ever were published to men, this contained here is the
choicest, as you see the very preface prefixed to it import* And truly, as it
is the most excellent in it self, it could not but be sweet unto us, if we had
received into the heart the belief of our own wretchedness and misery. I do not
know a more sovereign cordial for a fainting soul, then this faithful saying,
That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. And therefore we are most
willing to dwell on this ^ubject, and to inculcate it often upon you, That
without him ye are undone, and lost, and in him you may be saved. I profess,
all other subjects (howsoever they might be more pleasing to some hearers) are
unpleasant and unsavory to me. This is that we would once learn and ever be
learning, to know him that came to save us, and come to him.

We labored to show unto you the state of sin and misery that Adams first
transgression has subjected all mankind unto, which if it were really and
truly apprehended, I do not think but it would make this saying welcome to our
souls. Man being plunged into such a deep pit of misery, sin and death having
over-flowed the whole world, and this being seen and acknowledged by a sinner,
certainly the next question in order of nature is this, Has God left all to
perish in this estate? Is there any remedy provided for sin and misery? And
this will be indeed the query of a self-condemned sinner. Now there is a plank
after this broken ship, there is an answer sweet and satisfactory to this
question: Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

We shall not expatiate into many notions about this, or multiply many branches
of this. The matter is plain and simple, and we desire to hold it out plainly
and simply, that this is the remedy of sin and misery. When none could be ^ound
on the right hand or left hand, here a Savior from heaven comes down from
above, whence no good could be expected, because a good God was provoked. Can
any good come out of Nazareth; that was a proverb concerning him. But I think
in some sense, it might be said, can any good thing come down from heaven, from
his holy ^abitation to this accursed earth? Could any thing ^e expected from
heaven but wrath and vengeance? And if no good could be expected that way, what
way could it come? Sure if not from heaven, then from no ^rt: yet from heaven
ou^ help is come, from whence it could not be looked for, even from him who
was offended, and his justice engaged against man, that he might both satisfy
justice, and save man, that he might not vvrong himself, nor destroy man
utterly, he sends his only begotten Son, equal with himself in majesty and
glory into the world, in the state of a servant, to accomplish man's salvation,
and perform him satisfaction. Therefore Christ came into the world to save
sinners.

There were two grand impediments in the way of man's salvation, which made it
impossible to man; one is Gods justice, another is man's sin: these two behoved
to be satisfied or removed, ere there can be access to save a sinner. The
sentence of divine Justice is pronounced against all mankind. Death past on
all. A sentence of death and condemnation. Now, when the righteousness and
faithfulness of God is engaged into this, how strong a party do you think that
must be? What power can break that prison of a divine curse and take out a
sinner from under Justice hand? Certainly there is no coming out till the
uttermost farthing be paid that was owing, till complete satisfaction be given
to all wrongs. Now truly the redemption of the soul had ceased for ever (it is
so precious that no creature can give any thing in exchange for it) except
Jesus Christ had come into the world, one that might be able to tread that
winepress of wrath alone, and give his life a ransomer in value far above the
soul, and pay the debt of sin that we were owing to Go^ And indeed he was
furnished for this purpose, a pe^ son suited and fitted for such a work. A man
to undertake it in our name, and God to perform it in hi^ own strength. A Man,
that he might be made under the Law, and be humbled even to the death of (...)
cross, that so he might obey the commandment, a^ suffer the punishment due to
us; and all this was elevated beyond the vvorth of created actions or
sufferings by that divine nature. This perfumed all hi^ Humanity, and all done
by it, or in it: this put the stamp of Divinity upon all, and imposed an
infinite value upon the coin of finite obedience and sufferings: And so in his
own person, by coming into the world, and acting and suffering in the place of
sinners, he has taken the first great impediment out of the way; taken down
the high wall of divine Justice which had enclosed round about the sinner, and
satisfied all its demands by paying the price, so that there is nothing upon
Gods part to accuse or condemn, to hinder or obstruct salvation.

But then there is an inner wal, or dark dungeon of sin, into which the
sinner is shut up, and reserved in chains of his own lusts, until the time of
everlasting darkness; and when Heaven is opened by Christ's death, yet this
keeps a sinner from entering i^ Therefore Jesus Christ who came himself into
the world to satisfy Justice, and remove its plea, the there might be no
obstruction from that airth, (...) sends out his powerful Spirit with the
Word, to deliver poor captive sinners, to break down the wal of ignorance and
blindness, to cast down the high tower of wickedness and enmity against God,
to take captive and chain our lusts that kept us in bondage. And as he made
Heaven accessible by his own personal obedience and sufferings, so he makes
sinners ready and free to enter into salvation, by his Spirits vvorking in
their persons. In the one, he had God, as it were, his party; and him he has
satisfied so far, that ^here was a voice came from heaven to testify it, ^is
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. and therefore, in testimony of
it, God raised him from the dead. In the other, he has Satan and man's wicked
nature as his party, and these he must conquer and subdue; these he must
overcome, ere we can be saved: A strange business indeed, and a great work,
to bring such two opposite and distant parties togethe^; a holy and just God,
and a sinful and rebellious creature, and to take them both as parties, that he
might reconcile both.

Now, what do ye think of this, my beloved, that ^uch a glorious person is
come down from Heaven, ^or such a glorious work as the salvation of sinners?
(...) put no doubt, it would be most acceptable unto you, (...) ye knew your
misery; and knowing your misery, you could not but accept it, if you believed
that it were true and faithful. I find one of these two, the great obstruction
in the way of souls receiving advan^age by such glad tidings, either the
absolute necessity and excellency of the Gospel is not considered, or ^he truth
and reality of it is not believed. Men ei^er do not behold the beauty of
goodness in it, or (...) not see the light of truth in it; either there is
no^ing discovered to engage their affections, or nothing ^en to persuade their
understandings. Therefore ^he Apostle sounds a Trumpet, as it were, in the
entry, before the publication of these glad news, and commends this unto all
men, as a true and faithful ^aying, and as worthy of all acceptance. There is
^ere the highest truth and certainty to satisfy the mind, It Is a faithful
saying; and there is here also the chiefest good to satiate the heart, It Is
worthy of al^ acceptance. Now, if you do really apprehend your lost and
miserable estate, you cannot but behold that ravishing goodness in it; and
behold that you cannot, til you see the other first: Whence is it, I pray you
that so many souls are never stirred with the prop^sition of such things in
the Gospel, that the riches a^ beauty of salvation in JESUS CHRIST does not
once move them? Is it not because ther^ is no lively apprehension of their
misery vvitho^ him?

FINIS.
GLASGOW, Printed by ROBERT SANDERS and are to be sold at his Shop. M. DC.
LXVII.


