XII. ARGUMENTS Drawn out of the Scripture: WHEREIN The commonly-received
Opinion touching the Deity of the Holy Spirit, is clearly and fully refuted.

To which is prefixed a Letter tending to the same purpose, written to a Member
of the PARLIAMENT.

And to which is subjoyned, An Exposition of seven principal Passages of the
Scripture, alleged by the Adversaries to prove the Deity of the HOLY SPIRIT.

Together with an Answer to their grand Objection touching the supposed
Omnipresence of the Holy Spirit.

BY JOHN BIDDLE, Master of Arts.

1, These. 5. 21. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good.

Printed in the year 1647.

To the impartial Reader.
Reader,
WHen I consider with my self, how many Truths have (in their dawnings) gone
forth like the Morning, and are now risen unto a glorious day, unto the
amazement and confounding of those, who were grand Opposers of them; (though I
know truth has, and still shall have many Adversaries; whilst the face of the
covering, and the vail spread over all Nations remains undestroyed; yet I know
too, that Truth's bare breasts are Armor of Prooff against all the daring darts
of Satan, and all the furious attempts and storms of the flesh;) I cannot but
abundantly rejoice in the glory of its strength. How many things have in
several Ages (as well as in Ours) been cried up for truths? And how has God
blown upon them, that they have withered, and the whirlewind has taken them
away as stubble? Again, how many Truths have been cried down as Blasphemy and
Error, the beams of whose glory are now ready to dazzle and obscure all the
glory of the flesh? Sometimes taking in those (through the goings forth of God
in it.) who have been the mightiest enemies, insomuch that (standing amazed a
while) they have soon been swallowed up in the power of it: And Oh that mine
eyes might behold more of that day of Gods power, and of the out-lettings of
the beauties of his holiness; that the tall Cedars of Lebanon might be bended,
and the Oaks of Bashan ashamed; that the creature and its glory might be
brought low, and men who are now like bullocks unaccustomed unto the yoke,
might be made willing, and the Lord alone exalted in them, by them, and amongst
them.

Did we but seriously consider, how most men are adorned with living names
(viz. of Believers, Christians, Protestants, etc.) whilst they are indeed dead,
(as will appear, seeing there are no symptoms of life in them) we could not
but startle at it: what is the profession, or Religion, of most part of men,
but formal and fleshly? Are they not like those barbarous Lettoes, who were
always in the fields and woods, heard uttering these words, Feru Feru Masco
Lon: but being demanded the reason, they replied, That they knew nothing, but
that they had been so of long taught by their Ancestors. Men's mouths are now
filled with Forms, and they are daily crying out, The Temple of the Lord. the
Temple of the Lord; God, and Christ, and Spirit; when it is evident, they have
no more then what Education affords, nay less, because not moralized; wherein
Heathens out-stript them: they know not God, did they, they could not lightly
Blaspheme him; they go Christless, and have not received the Spirit of wisdom
in the Revelation and knowledge of him; and this makes them to cry out that
whatsoever is not according to their fleshly Forms, is Error, Heresy,
Blasphemy, because it will not hold according to carnal principals, unto which
they must needs reduce all things, who have no principal of life within them;
such are those who are called Christians, and yet reel to and fro through wine
and strong drink, and swell by reason of Oaths, living in abominations; of
which sort of men, most of our Parish-Churches are constituted: such men have
not discerning spirits, neither are they competent judges, because enemies to
Truth, as well as Error; wherefore the Author betakes himself to the Christian
Reader, i. e. one that is so indeed.

I know many men (as well as my self) will be ready to cry out. Blasphemy,
Blasphemy, at the first view of the Title Page; yet I could wish that they
would embrace the Apostles counsel, Prove all things, bolding fast that which
is good: Call all things to a serious examen, and reject nothing hand
over-head, take nothing upon trust, without a fore-examining of every
circumstance, lest in the one, they should reject truth in stead of error; and
in the other, embrace error in stead of truth.

The Author has a long time waited upon learned men, for a satisfactory answer
to these Arguments; but has received none: his hopes are, that the publishing
of them will be a means to produce it, that he may receive satisfaction, and
others may be held no longer in suspense, who are in travel with an earnest
expectation of a speedy resolution, as well as he. I should desire those who
view it, but especially those who undertake to answer it (for my hopes are,
that some one will) to consider, first, that to say, Such an Argument is
invalid, and weak, and not worth the Answering, is no convincing way of
arguing, nor able to yield the least satisfaction to a doubting spirit.
Secondly, that invectives, railings, or reproachful terms, are no convincing
Arguments (as all men of a sober judgment well know;) at these rates the
weakest man may subvert the strongest Controversy: yet these have been the
arguings of our times, both in Press and Pulpit. Thirdly, to prohibit the
progress of it can no ways unscruple doubting spirits, amongst whom (for the
present) I number my self expecting an Answer to these ensuing Arguments; and
that God will be with him that undertaketh it, and give in a spirit of
meekness, and of wisdom, in the revelation and knowledge of truth, shall be the
matter of his prayers, who desires truth may be cleared up, and shine like the
noonday, and all error confounded, and vanish before truth, like a mist before
the Sun.

I. H.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader,
I beseech thee, as thou tenderest thy salvation, that thou would thoroughly
examine the following Disputation, in the fear of God, considering how much his
glory is concerned therein; and at any hand forbear to condemn my opinion as
erroneous, till thou art able to bring pertinent and solid Answers to all my
Arguments; for thou must know, that though I have contested with sundry learned
men, yet has none hitherto produced a satisfactory Answer to so much as one
Argument.

Farewell. J. B.

A Letter written to a certain Knight, a Member of the Honorable house of
Commons.
Sir,
HAving now attended for the space of sixteen Months, partly in the Country,
and partly in Westminster, that I might come to my Answer before the
Parliament, and finding after all this tarriance, that I am still as far from
having my cause determined, as ever; I am even forced to make my address to
you, and to beseech you, if you have any bowels toward them that are in
misery, that you would either procure my discharge, or at least make report to
the House touching my denial of the supposed Deity of the Holy Spirit. For that
this only is the matter in contestation, you very well know, having both heard
my confession before the Committee, and remembering how when I was urged to
declare my judgment concerning the Deity of Christ, I waved the question, as
neither being that I was accused of, nor which I had yet sufficiently studied,
to engage my self publicly therein. As for my opinion touching the Holy
Spirit, it is thus: I believe the holy Spirit to be the chief of all See Heb.
1. 1, 14. whence these words are borrowed; and compare it with 1 Pet. 1. 12. as
also Heb. 1. 7. compared with Act. 2. 2, 3, 4. and it will easily appear that
the holy Spirit is a minister of God, as well as others.
ministering spirits, pecultarly sent out from heaven to minister on their
behalf that shall inherit salvation; and I do place him, both according to the
Scripture, and the Primitive Christians; and by name Justin Martyr in his
Apology, in the third rank after God and Christ, giving him a pre-eminence
above all the rest of the heavenly host: So that as there is one principal
spirit amongst the evil angels, known in the Scripture by the name of Satan, or
the 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Adversary, or Zech. 13. 2.
the unclean spirit, or 1 Samuel 16. 15, 16.
the evil spirit of God, or Ibid. verse the last.
the Spirit of God, or 1 Kings 22. 21. See the Original.
the Spirit by way of eminence: even so is there one principal Spirit (I borrow
this appellation from the Septuagint, who render the later clause of the 12
verse. of Psalm. 51. in this manner; (...), Spiritu principali fulci me, Stablish
me with thy principal Spirit) there is, I say, one principal spirit amongst the
good Angels, called by the name of the Joh. 16. 7.
Advoate, or Ephesians. 4. 30.
the holy Spirit, or Neh. 9. 20.
the good Spirit of God, or 1 Cor. 7. 40.
the Spirit of God, or Acts 10. 19.
the Spirit, by way of eminence. This opinion of mine is attested by the whole
tenor of the Scripture, which perpetually speaks of him as differing from
God, and inferior to him, but is irrefragably proved by these places of
Scripture, Neh. 9. 6, 20. Thou, even thou art Lord (or Jehovab) alone, thou
have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their have. Thou gave thy
good Spirit to instruct them (the Children of Israel.)] John 16. 7, 8. etc.
Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: for
if I go not away, the So the word (...) in the Original perpetually signifies
amongst Greek Authors, and is so rendered by the Translators themselves, 1 John
2. 1. and ought to have been so rendered here, especially because he says in
the following words, that the Holy Spirit shall convince the world; for it is
proper to an Advocate to convince.
Advocate will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.
And when he is come, he will reprove (in the Original, convince) the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is
come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall be speak; and he shall show you things to
come. He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you. All things that the Father has are mine: therefore said I, be shall
take of mine, and show it unto you.] Romans 8. 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought:
but the Spirit himself makes intercession for us, with groans that cannot be
uttered. But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind (or
desire) of the spirit: for be makes intercession for the Saints according to
the will of God.] Acts 19. 2. And (Paul) finding certain Disciples, said unto
them, Have ye received the holy Spirit since ye believed? And they said unto
him, we have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Spirit.] Ephesians. 4. 4,
5, 6. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye have been called in one
hope of your calling. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. One God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.] 1 Cor. 12. 3, 4. etc.
Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God,
calls Jesus accursed; and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Spirit; But there are diversities of gifts, yet the same Spirit. And
there are diversities of administrations, yet the same Lord; and there are
diversities of operations, yet it is the same God that works all in all.]
Luke 3. 21, 22. It came to pass that Jesus also being baptized, and praying,
the Heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily shape like a
Dove upon him.] 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12, 13. But God has revealed them to us by his
Spirit: for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God. For what
man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him?
even so the things of God knows none, but the Spirit of God, (he does not
add, as before, which is in him.) Now we have received, not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given us of God.] Rev. 22. 12, 17. Behold I come quickly, and my reward
is with me, to give unto every man according as his work shall be: and the
Spirit and the ^ride say, Come.] Act. 5. 32. And we are his witnesses of these
things, and so is also the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to them that obey
him.] Gal. 3. 5. He therefore that ministers (or gives) to you the Spirit,
and works miracles among you, does he it by the works of the Law, or by the
hearing (or rather preaching) of Faith?] He that ministers or gives the
Spirit to you, a strange kind of speech, if the Holy Ghost were God. The
Scripture is wont to speak more soberly of Almighty God, then to say that he is
given by another, much less by men, as it is here said of the Holy Spirit, 1
Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6. [We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there
is no other God but one. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in
Heaven, or in Earth; as there be many Gods, and many Lords, yet unto us there
is but one God, even the Father, of whom are all things, and we unto him; and
one Lord, even Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.] You see
here that the Apostle being about to set down, who is the only God, and only
Lord of Christians, makes no mention of the Holy Spirit; which could not have
been done by so faithful an Apostle, had the Holy Spirit been either God or
Lord. Of these places thus recited, no man, though never so subtle, and though
he turn and wind his wit every way, shall ever be able to make sense, unless he
take the Holy Spirit to be what I say.

Behold now the cause for which I have lien under persecution, raised against
me by my adversaries; who being unable to justify by Argument their practice
of giving glory to the Holy Spirit, as God, in the end of their prayers, since
there is neither precept nor example for it in all the Scriture; and being
taxed by me for giving the glory of God to another, and w(...)ing what the has
not commanded, nor ever came into his heart, have in a cruel and unchristian
manner resorted to the arm of flesh, and instigated the Magistrate against me,
hoping by his sword, (not that of the Spirit) to uphold their Will Worship; but
in vain, since every plant that the Heavenly Father has not set, shall be
rooted up; and that this practice of Worshipping the Holy Spirit as God, is
such a plant as God never set in his word, would soon appear to the Honorable
House, could they be but so far prevailed with, as, laying aside all prejudice,
seriously to weigh the many and solid proofs that I produce for my opinion out
of the Scripture, together with the slight, or rather no proofs of the
adverse party for their opinion; which they themselves know not what to make
of, but that they endeavor to delude both themselves and others with
Personalities, Moods, Subsistences, and such like brainsick Notions, that have
neither sap nor sense in them, and were first hatched by the subtilty of Satan
in the heads of Platonists, to pervert the worship of the true God. Neither
could this controversy be set on on foot in a fitter juncture of time then
this; wherein the Parliament and Kingdom have solemnly engaged themselves to
reform Religion both in Discipline and Doctrine. For amongst all the
corruptions in Doctrine, which certainly are many, there is none that more
deserves to be amended then this, that so palpably thwarteth the whole renour
of the Scripture, and trencheth to the very object of our worship, and
therefore ought not to be lightly passed over by any man that professes
himself a Christian, much more a Reformer. God is jealous of his honor, and
will not give it to another; we therefore, as beloved children, should imitate
our Heavenly Father hetein, and not upon any pretense whatsoever depart from
his express command, and give the worship of the supreme Lord of Heaven and
Earth, to him whom the Scripture nowhere affirms to be God. For my own
particular, after a long impartial inquiry of the truth, in this controversy,
and after much and earnest calling upon God, to give unto me the spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him; I find my self obliged, both
by the principles of Scripture and of Reason, to embrace the opinion I now hold
forth, and as much as in me fyeth, to endeavor that the honor of Almighty God
be not transferred to another, not only to the offense of God himself, but
also of his Holy Spirit, who cannot but be grieved to have that ignorantly
ascribed to himself, which is proper to God that sends him, and which he
nowhere challenges to himself in the Scripture. What shall befall me in the
pursuance of this work, I refer to the disposal of the all wise God, whose
glory is dearer to me, not only then my libery, but then my life. It will be
your part, Honored Sir, into whose hands God has put such an opportunity, to
examine the business impartally, and to be an helper to the truth, considering
that this controversy is of the greatest importance in the world, and that the
divine truth suffers her self not to be despised scot-free. Neither let the
meanness of my outward presence deter you from stirring, since it is the part
of a wise man, as in all things, so especially in matters of Religion, not to
regard so much who it is that speaks, as what it is that is spoken;
remembering how our Savior in the Gospel says, that God is wont to hide his
secrets from the wise and prudent, and to reveal them unto Children. In which
number I willingly reckon myself, being conscious of mine own personal
weakness, but well assured of the strength and evidence of the Scripture to
bear me out in this cause; and remain

April 1. 1647. Yours in the Lord, J. Biddle.

XII. ARGUMENTS drawn out of the Scripture; Wherein the commonly-received
Opinion touching the Deity of the Holy Spirit, is clearly and fully refuted.
Argument 1.
HE that is distinguished from God, is not God. The holy Spirit is
distinguished from God: Ergo.

The Major is evident: for if he should be both God, and distinguished from
God, he would be distinguished from himself; which implies a contradiction.
The Minor is confirmed by the whole current of the Scripture, which calls him
the Spirit of God, and says that he is sent by God, and searches the depths
of God, etc. Neither let any man here think to fly to that ignorant refuge of
making a distinction between the Essence and Person of God, saying that the
holy Spirit is distinguished from God, taken Personally, not Essentially: For
this wretched distinction (to omit the mention of the Primitive Fathers) is not
only unheard of in Scripture, and so to be rejected, it being presumption to
affirm any thing of the unsearchable nature of God, which he has not first
affirmed of himself in the Scripture; but is also disclaimed by Reason. For
first, it is impossible for any man, if he would but endeavor to conceive the
thing, and not delude both himself and others with empty terms, and words
without understanding, to distinguish the Person from the Essence of God, and
not to frame two beings or things in his mind, and consequently two Gods.
Secondly, If the person be distinct from the Essence of God, then it must needs
be something; since nothing has no accident, and therefore neither can it
happen to it to be distinguished. If something, then either some finite or
infinite thing: if finite, then there will be something finite in God, and
consequently, since by the confession of the adversaries every thing in God is
God himself, God will be finite; which the adversaries themselves will likewise
confess to be absurd. If infinite, then there will be two infinites in God, to
wit, the Person and Essence of God, and consequently two Gods; which is more
absurd then the former. Thirdly, to talk of God taken impersonally, is
ridiculous, not only because there is no example thereof in Scripture, but
because God is the name of a By Person, I understand, as Philosophersdo,
suppositum intelligens, that is an intellectual substance complete, and not a
mood or subststence, which are fantastical and senseless terms, brought in to
cozen the simple.
Person, and signifies him that has sublime dominion or power: and when it is
put for the most high God, it denotes him who with Sovereign and absolute
authority rules over all; but none but a person can rule over others, all
actions being proper to persons: wherefore to take God otherwise then
personally, is to take him otherwise then he is, and indeed to mistake him.

Argument II.
If he that gave the Holy Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them, be Jehovah
alone, then the Holy Spirit is not Jehovah or God.

But he that gave the Holy to the Israelites to instruct them, is Jehovah alone:

Ergo.

The sequel of the major is plain; for if he that gave the Holy Spirit be
Jehovah alone, and yet the Holy Spirit that was given be Jehovah too, the same
will be Jehovah alone, and not Jehovah alone, which implies a contradiction.
The minor is evidenced by Neh. 9. 6, 20.

Argument III.
He that speaks not of himself, is not God.

The Holy Spirit speaks not of himself.

Ergo.

The minor is clear from Joh. 16. 13. The major is proved thus: God speaks of
himself; therefore if there be any one that speaks not of himself, he is not
God. The antecedent is of it self apparent; for God is the primary Author of
whatsoever he does; but should he not speak of himself, he must speak from
another, and so nor be the primary, but secondary author of his speech; which
is absurd, if at least that may be called absurd, which is impossible. The
consequence is undeniable. For further confirmation of this Argument, it is to
be observed, that to speak or to do any thing not of himself, according to the
ordinary phrase of the Scripture, is to speak or do by the showing, teaching,
commanding, authorizing, or enabling of another, and consequently incompatible
with the supreme and self-sufficient Majesty of God. Vid. John 5. 19. 20, 30.
Joh. 7. 15, 16, 17, 18, 28. John 8. 28, 42. Joh. 11. 50, 51. John 12. 49, 50.
John 14. 10, 24. John 15. 4. John 18. 34. Luke 12. 56, 57. Luke 21. 30. 2 Cor.
3. 5.

Argument IIII.
He that hears from another what he shall speak, is not God.

The Holy Spirit does so:

Ergo.

The Minor is plain from the forecited place, John 16. 13. The Major is proved
thus:

He that is taught, is not God.

He that hears from another, what he shall speak, is taught:

Ergo.

The Major is clear by Isa. 40. 13, 14. compared with Romans 11. 34. 1 Cor. 2.
16. For these places of the Apostle, compared with that of the Prophet, show
that Isaiah did not by the Spirit of the Lord there understand the Holy Spirit,
but the mind, or intention of God. The Minor is evidenced by John B. where our
Savior having said in the 26. verse, Whatsoever I have he ard from him (the
Father) these things I speak;] in the 28. verse he expresses the same sense
thus; According as the Father has taught me, these things I speak. Neither let
any man go about to elude so pregnant an Argument, by saying that this is
spoken of the Holy Spirit improperly: For let him turn himself every way, and
scrue the words as he pleases, yet shall he never be able to make it out to a
wise and considering man, how it can possibly be said, that any one hears
from another what he will speak, who is the prime Author of his speech, and
into whom it is not at a certain time insinuated by another. For this
expression plainly intimates, that whatsoever the Holy Spirit speaks to the
Disciples, is first discovered and committed to him by Christ, whose
Ambassador he is, it being proper to an Ambassador to be the Interpreter nor
of his own, but of another will. But it is contradictious, to imagine that the
most high God can have any thing discovered and committed to him by another.

Argument V.
He that receives of another, is not God.

The Holy Spirit does so: Ergo.

The Minor is witnessed by the aforesaid place, John 16. 14. The Major is
proved thus; God is he that gives all things to all; wherefore if there be any
one that receives of another, he cannot be God. The antecedent is plain by
Acts 17. 25. Romans 11. 35, 36. The consequence is undeniable: for if God should
give all things to all, and yet recieve of another, he would both give all
things, and not give all things; have all things of his own, and have
something of another; both which imply a contradiction. The Major of the
Prosyllogisme is otherwise urged, thus: He that is dependent, is not God. He
that receives of another, is dependent: Ergo. The Major is unquestionable:
for, to say that one is dependent, and yet God, is in effect to say he is God,
and not God, which implies a contradiction. The Minor also is evident: for to
receive of another, is the notion of dependency.

Argument VI.
He that is sent by another, is not God.

The Holy Spirit is sent by another:

Ergo.

The Minor is plain from the fore-quoted place, John. 16. 7. The Major is
evinced thus:

He that Ministers, is not God.

He that is sent, Ministers:

Ergo.

The Major is indubitable, it being dissonant to the supreme Majesty of God to
Minister, and serve another; for that were to be God and not God; to exercise
sovereign dominion over all, and not to exercise it. The Minor is confirmed by
Heb. 1. ult. where the divine Author shows, that the Angels are all
Ministering Spirits, in that they are sent forth; as he before intimates Christ
to be Lord, because he sits at the right hand of God. Thus David, Psalm. 2.
declares the Sovereignty of God, in saying that he sits in Heaven. The
Minor is further proved thus:

He that receives a command for the performance of something, does Minister:

He that is sent forth, receives a command for the performance of something:

Ergo.

The Major is evident to common sense, since it suiteth with none but Ministers
and inferiors to receive commands. The Minor is manifested by John 12. 49. The
Father that has sent me, he gave me a Command what I shall speak.] Neither let
any man here reply, that this very thing is spoken also of Christ, unless,
having first proved that Christ is supreme God, he will grant that whatsoever
is spoken of him, is spoken of him as God; or can make good that to be sent at
least may agree to him as God. The contrary whereof I suppose I have clearly
proved in this Argument, showing that it is unsuitable to the divine Majesty.

Argument VII.
He that is the gift of God, is not God.

The holy Spirit is the gift of God:

Ergo.

The Minor is plain by Acts. 12. 17. Forasmuch then as God gave them the like
gift (meaning the Spirit) as he did unto us, who have believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ, was I one that could withstand God? The Major, though of it self
sufficiently clear, is yet further evidenced thus:

He that is not the giver of all things, is not God.

He that is the gift of God, is not the giver of all things:

Ergo.

The Major is apparent from Act. 17. 25. God gives to all, life, breath, and
all things.] The Minor is proved thus:

He that is himself given, is not the giver of all things:

He that is the gift of God, is himself given:

Ergo.

The Major is undeniable, for otherwise the same would be the giver of all
things, and yet not the giver of all things, inasmuch as he himself, a
principal thing, is given, which implies a contradiction. The Minor needs no
proof. Moreover, a gift is in the power, and at the disposal of the giver; but
it is gross and absurd to imagine that God can be in the power, or at the
disposal of another. Neither let any man here think to evade, by saying, that
not the Holy Spirit himself, but only his gifts are imparted to men; Since
both the more learned adversaries themselves confess, that the Person of the
Holy Spirit is given together with his gifts, and the Scripture puts the
matter out of doubt, if you consult Neh. 9. 20. and Romans 5. 5. In both which
places, the Holy Spirit is said to be given contradistinctly from his gifts and
operations: in the first, contradistinctly from the instruction flowing from
him; in the other, contradistinctly from the love of God diffused in our hearts
by him. Whence we may draw this Corollary, that if the Person of the Holy
Spirit be out of favor given to certain men, as the aforesaid places testify,
then he was not personally present with them before, and consequently, by the
concession of the adversaries themselves, cannot be God, since they will not
deny that God is always personally present with all alike. But I forestal the
following Argument.

Argument VIII.
He that changes place, is not God.

The holy Spirit changes place:

Ergo.

The Major is plain: for if God should change place, he would cease to be where
he was before, and begin to be where he was not before; which everteth his
Omnipresence, and consequently, by the confession of the adversaries
themselves, his Deity. The Minor is ocularly apparent, if following the Abi,
Ariane, ad Jordanem, and Trinitatem videbis.
advice of the adversaries, you will but go to Jordan; for there you shall have
the holy Spirit in a bodily shape despending from heaven, which is the terminus
a quo; and alighting upon Christ, which is the terminus ad-quem, Luke 3. 21,
22. Joh. 1. 32. Neither let any man allege, that as much is spoken of God,
Exodus 3. and chap. 20. and Genesis 18. For if you compare Acts 7. 30, 35, 38, 53.
Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 2. 2, 3. and chap. 13. 2. with the foresaid places, you shall
find, that it was not God himself that came down, but only an Angel,
sustaining the Person and Name of God; which has no place in the history
touching the descent of the holy Spirit.

Argument IX.
He that prays unto Christ, to come to judgment, is not God.

The holy Spirit does so:

Ergo.

The Major is granted. The Minor is evident from Revel. 22. 17. compared with
the 12 verse. Neither let any man think to elude this proof, by saying, that
the Spirit is here said to pray, only because he makes the Bride to pray: for
when the Scripture would signify the assistance of the holy Spirit in causing
men to speak, it is wont to affirm, either that the holy Spirit speaks in
them, as Matthew. 10. 20. or that they spoke by the holy Spirit, as Romans 8. 15.
We have received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, Abba, Father.] But
here it is expressly said, that the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; not the
Spirit in the Bride, nor the Bride by the Spirit.

Argument X.
He in whom men have not believed, and yet have been disciples and believers,
is not God.

Men have not believed in the holy Spirit, and yet have been so:

Ergo.

The Major is plain: for how can they be disciples and believers, according to
the phrase of Scripture, and not believe in him that is God? The Minor is
proved thus:

Men have not so much as heard whether there were an holy Spirit, and yet have
been disciples and believers:

Ergo, They have not believed in the holy Spirit, and yet have been disciples
and believers.

The Antecedent is apparent from Acts 19. 2. The Consequence is grounded on
that of the Apostle, Romans 10. 14. [How shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard?] Now if any man, to decline the dint of this Argument, shall
say, that by holy Spirit in these words [(...)] is meant not the Person, but
the Gifts of the holy Spirit; He, besides that he perverteth the plain and
genuine meaning of the words, and speaks without example For when the verb
Substantive to be is joined with the holy Spirit, it signifies his Being or
Person, not the gifts issuing from him.
; does also evacuate the emphasis of the Particles (...), which imply that
these disciples were so far from having received the gifts of the holy Spirit,
whereof we may, without prejudice to our cause, grant that the question made
mention, that they had not so much as heard whether there were an holy Spirit
or not. Again, that the holy Spirit is not God, does further appear by this
very instance, since the Apostle, when there was so ample an occasion offered
to declare it, (if it had been so) does quite decline it: for it is incredible
that he, who was so intent and vigilant in propagating the Truth, as that
casually seeing an Altar at Athens inscribed To the unknown God, he presently
took a hint from thence, to preach unto the Heathen the true God; yet here
being told by disciples that they had not so much as heard whether there were
an holy Spirit, or not, should not make use of the opportunity to discover unto
them, and in them to us, the Deity of the holy Spirit, but suffer them to
remain in ignorance touching a point of such consequence, that without the
knowledge thereof, (if we believe many nowadays) men cannot be saved.
Certainly, the Apostle had a greater care both of the Truth of God, and the
salvation of men, then to do so.

Argument XI.
He that has an understanding distinct from that of God, is not God.

The holy Spirit has an understanding distinct from that of God:

Ergo.

The Major is clear: for he that has an understanding distinct from that of
another, must needs likewise have a distinct essence, wherein that
understanding may reside. The Minor is proved thus:

He that hears from God at the second hand, namely, by Christ Jesus, what he
shall speak, has an understanding distinct from that of God.

The holy Spirit so hears from God:

Ergo.

The Minor is evident from Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15. The Major is confirmed thus:

He that is taught of God, has an understanding distinct from that of God.

He that hears from God what he shall speak, is taught of God:

Ergo.

The Minor is manifest from Joh. 8. where our Savior Christ having said, in
verse. 26. Whatsoever I have heard from him (the Father) these things I speak.]
In verse. 28. he expresses the same sense thus: [According as the Father has
taught me, these things I speak.] The Major is of it self clear: for he that is
taught, has an unknowing understanding, since none can be taught what he
knows already; and he that teaches, has a knowing understanding, otherwise
he could not teach another something; but it implies a contradiction, that the
same understanding should at the same time be both knowing and unknowing of the
same thing. Besides, that the holy Spirit has an understanding distinct from
that of God, is easily deducible from the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
where he affirms, that the Spirit searches the depths of God, (as Romans 8.
27. he intimates, that God searches the heart of the Spirit:) but to search
the depths of any one, necessarily supposes one understanding in him that
searches, and another understanding in him-whose depths are searched, as is
evident not only by collation of other places of the Scripture, as 1 Pet. 1.
11. Rev. 2. 23. but even by common sense, dictating to every man so much, that
none can without absurdity be said to search the depths of his own
understanding. Whence the Apostle going about to illustrate what he had spoken
of the Spirit of God, by a similitude drawn from the spirit of a man, does not
say, that the spirit of a man does search, but know the things of a man, though
his former words did seem to lead him thereunto.

Argument XII.
He that has a will distinct in number from that of God, is not God.

The Holy Spirit has a will distinct in number from that of God.

Ergo.

The Major is irrefragable. The Minor is asserted thus.

He that wills conformably to the will of God, has a will distinct in number
from that of God.

The Holy Spirit so wills:

Ergo.

The Major is plain: for conformity must be between twain at least, else it
will not be conformity, but Identity. The Minor is confirmed by Romans 8. 26, 27.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit himself makes intercession for us, with groans
unutterable: But he that searches the hearts, knows the mind of the Spirit;
for he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God.
Neither let any man here reply, that there is no mention made in the Greek
either of the will of the Spirit, or of the will of God: For first, the word
intercede, which signifies to make suit for something, implies both the will
of him that makes the suit, for if he did not will the thing, he would not
make suit for it; and also the will of him to whom the suit is made, for were
he not endued with a will, it would be bootless to make suit unto him, all
suits whatsoever being made to bend the will of him to whom they are made: so
that this, without any more, sufficiently shows that the Holy Spirit has a
will distinct in number from that of God; since the one sueth, the other is
sued to at the same time, and for the same thing. Secondly, the word (...), in
English rendered Mind, does here signify the same with Will or Desire, as
appears from the 6. and 7. verses of this Chapter, and also from the verb
(...), whence it is derived, which signifies to Affect, Will, Desire, Pursue:
see verse 5. of the same chapter, and Col. 3. 2. Thirdly, though the Greek has
(...), according to God, yet is this, in the judgment of the English
Translators themselves, the same as if it had been said, (...), according to
the will of God; neither can any other commodious interpretation be put upon
the words.

But this passage of the Apostle, does further afford us a second and third
impregnable Argument of the Holy Spirit's being inferior to God. For first, he
is here said to make intercession for us (as we before urged his praying to
Christ, Argument 9.) and that with groans unutterable; which is not so to be
understood, as if the Holy Spirit were here said to help our infirmities, only
by suggesting petitions and groans unto us (as is commonly, but falsely
affirmed) for the very words of the context sufficiently exclude such a gloss;
since they say, that the Spirit himself, not we by the Spirit, (as we have it
in the 15. verse of the same chapter) makes intercession for us: yea,
vicarious intercession, as the Greek word (...) signifies: But to help others
infirmities, by making intercession; and, what is more, vicarious intercession
for them, is not to instill petitions into them, but to pour out petitions apart
in their behalf; as is apparent both from the thing is self; since none can
intercede for himself, all intercession (at least such as is here spoken of)
requiring the entermise of a third person; and by the Collation of verse 34. of
the same Chapter, and 1 Timothy 2. 1. Heb. 7. 25. Neither let any man think to
baffle off this place, (which is written with a beam of the Sun, and has
together with that, Joh. 16. 13, 14. quite nonplussed, not only Modern
Authors, but the Fathers themselves,) by saying, that this is improperly spoken
of the Holy Spirit: for, besides that he has no other ground to say so, but
his own preconceived opinion touching the Deity of the Holy Spirit, he ought to
know that the Scripture, though it speaks some things of God in a figure, and
improperly, yet does it nowhere say any thing that argues his inferiority to,
and dependence on another. But this passage of the Apostle plainly intimates,
that the Holy Spirit is inferior to God, and dependent on him; otherwise what
need had he to make intercession to God, and that with groans unutterable, for
the Saints? Secondly, the Holy Spirit is here distinguished from him that
searches the hearts; and this description is made use of to put a difference
between God and the Holy Spirit: but how could this be done, were the holy
Spirit also a searcher of the hearts? For can a description that is common, yea
alike common to twain (for so the Adversaries hold concerning God, and the Holy
Spirit) be set to distinguish the one from the other? For instance; to prepare
the Passover for Christ, is an action common to Peter with John, for they twain
were sent by Christ to that purpose, and did accordingly perform it; see Luke
22. 8, 13. wherefore can a description taken from this action, be fit to
difference Peter from John? and is it suitable to say, He that prepared the
Passover for Christ, was a greater Apostle then John? would not this plainly
argue, that John did not prepare the Passover for Christ? So that it is
apparent, that the Holy Spirit is not a searcher of the hearts. If therefore it
would not follow that the Holy Spirit is God, although it had been said in the
Scripture, that he searches the hearts, unless he had such a faculty
originally, and of himself (for nothing hinders but that God may confer it upon
others, as we see by the Scripture, that he has de facto conferred it on
Christ, having given him all judgment, and that because he is the Son of man,
John 5. 22, 27. for such judgment requires that he be a searcher of the
hearts) If, I say, it would not even then follow that he is God; how clearly,
how irrefragably does it on the contrary follow, that he is not God, but has
an understanding distinct from, and inferior to that of God; inasmuch as he is
distitute of such a perfection, as the searching of the hearts, which is
inseparable from the divine majesty? These two considerations have I added at
the close of my twelfth Argument; because they are not so much new Arguments,
as props and further confirmations of the ninth and eleventh Arguments.

An Exposition of Mat. 28. 19.
GO ye therefore, and make all the Nations Disciples, (so the Original has it)
baptizing them into the name (so it is also in the Original) of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe whasoever I have
commanded you. Into the name of the Holy Spirit; that is, into the holy Spirit;
by a circumlocution usual in the Scripture, see Act. 19. 5. And when they had
heard, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus: compared with Romans
6. 3. Know ye not that as many of us as have been baptized into Christ, have
been baptized into his death? And into the Holy Spirit, that is, into the
guidance of the Holy Spirit. Thus the Jews are said to have been all baptized
into Moses, (for so the Greek has it) 1 Cor. 10. 2. So that our Savior's
words amount to thus much; Initiating them into the confession and obedience of
God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, and of the
Holy Spirit the Advocate and Guide of all the Truth. Now the Holy Spirit is
mentioned together with God and Christ, because he is their chief instrument
whereby they guide, govern, sanctify, and endow the Church; and to intimate,
that whereas men, before they gave their names to Christ, lived according to
the Prince of this world, the unclean Spirit, that works in the Children of
disobedience; they ought henceforth, being sequestered from the world, and
admitted into the Church, to resign up themselves to the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, whom God and Christ appoint, and send to order and direct the Church.
Neither can it be rightly inferned, that because the Holy Spirit is here ranked
with the Father and the Son, therefore he is equal to them: by this account,
when the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 21. says, I charge thee (Gr. I obtest) before God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things
without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality: joining the elect Angels with
the Father and the Son, in so great a matter as obtestation, to excite an
Evangelist to do his duty with sincerity; this would imply, that the elect
Angels are equal to the Father and the Son. Nor does it follow, that because it
is said, not into the names, but into the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit; therefore they three have but one Name, power, or
dignity; since by the like reasoning I might argue, that because Christ, Luke
9. 26. says, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in the glory of himself, (so it
is in the Greek) and of the Father, and of the Holy Angels; therefore the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Angels, have but one and the selfsame glory. For
that the Holy Spirit is not ranked with the Father, and the Son, as being equal
to them, is evident by other punctual places of the Scripture, as 1 Cor. 12. 3,
4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. where when the mention of him is joined with that of
the Father and of the Son, he is expressly, and emphatically excluded from being
either that one God, or that one Lord of Christians, by being
contradistinguished from both: but if he be neither that one God, nor that one
Lord of Christians; as the Apostle, not only in the fore-quoted places, but
elsewhere also plainly testifies; see 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. Yet to us there is one
God, the Father, of whom are all the things, and we for him. And one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all the things, and we by him: he cannot be equal to the
Father and the Son, but is only the chief Minister of both, peculiarly sent
out to Minister on their behalf that shall inherit salvation.

An Exposition of 1 John 5. 7.
[For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Spirit; and these three are one.] It would have been hard, if not
impossible, (had not men been precorrupted) that it should ever come into any
ones head to imagine, that this phrase [are one] did signify [have one
Essence] since such an exposition is not only contrary to common sense, but
also to other places of the Scripture, wherein this kind of speaking
perpetually signifies an union in consent and agreement, or the like, but
never an union in Essence. To omit other Sacred Writers, this very Apostle in
his Gospel, chap. 17. verse 11. 21, 22, 23, uses the same expression six
times, intimating no other but an union of agreement; yea, in verse 8. of this
very chapter in his Epistle, he uses it in the same sense. For though the
expression variech somewhat in the ordinary Greek Testaments, in that the
preposition [(...)] is prefixed, (although the Complutensian Bible reads it
[(...)] in both verses:) yet is the sense the same; this latter being spoken
after the Hebrew idiome, the former according to the ordinary phrase: for
confirmation whereof, see Matthew. 19. comparing verse 5. and 6. together in the
Original; wherefore this expression ought to be rendered alike in both verses,
as the former Interpreters did it, though the latter Interpreters, in verse 8.
have rendered it [agree in one] putting the gloss in stead of the Translation.
So that this place makes nothing for them that hold the Holy Spirit to have
one and the same Essence with the Father, unless they can prove that those who
are one in agreement must likewise necessarily be one in essence; or that two
or three cannot be one, but it must presently be in essence. I omit for the
present to speak of the suspectedness of this place, how it is not extant in
the ancient Greek Copies, and namely in that famous one of Tecla here in
England, nor in the Syriack Translation, nor in most ancient Books of the
Latin edition, and rejected by sundry Interpreters both ancient and modern.

An Exposition of Act. 5. 3, 4.
But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to (or
deceive) the Holy Spirit, and keep back part of the price of the Farm? while it
remained, remained it not to thee? and being sold, was it not in thine own
power? why fast thou conceived (or put, or purposed) in thy heart this thing?
Thou have not lied to men; but to God. In this passage, the Holy Spirit is
neither expressly (as every one sees) nor by good consequence called God. For
admit the ordinary Translation were true (as it is not) yet would it not
presently follow, because Ananias by lying to men endued with the Holy Spirit
(for even Piscator in the words acknowledges, and the words themselves
according to this Interpretation imply a Metonymie of the adjunct, the Holy
Spirit being put for men endued with the Holy Spirit) lied not to men, but to
God, that there fore the Holy Spirit is God; because in lying to them that are
endued with the Spirit of God, one may lie to God, and yet neither they, nor
the Spirit in them, be God, but only the messengers of God; for what is done
to the messengers, redoundeth to him that sends them; see 1 These. 4. 8. John
13. 20. Luke 10. 16. But if any man look more narrowly into the words, he shall
find that the verb (...) is construed in a different manner, namely with an
accusative, verse 3^ and with a dative verse 4. with an accusative, it
signifies in Greek Authors, to belly, pretend, or counterfeit: thus Lucian in
his Pseudomantis, (...), nomen quoddam mentitus, counterfeiting a certain name.
This being so, the words are to be rendered thus; Why has Satan filled thy
heart to belly the Holy Spirit, and keep back part of the price? (that is, Why
have thou skffered the unclean Spirit so to prevail with thee, as that thou
should sell thy Farm, and lay down this money at his suggestion, as
appears in that thou have purloined part of the price, and not laid down all;
and yet to bear us in hand, that thou did it at the motion of the Holy
Spirit?) thou have not lied to men, but to God: (that is, assure thy self that
this dissimulation of thine, is not so much to us, as to God himself, whose
Servants we are.) This Exposition is not only agreeable to the Greek context,
and scope of the place, but is also seconded by Erasmus, Calvin, and Aretius.
But if any man will contend, that though (...) be not here rendered to lie unto
(as I have not yet met with an instance where it is so rendered, when an
Accusative is put after it;) yet the other signification, set in the Margin of
our English Bible, is altogether to be admitted (and I confess I have in good
Greek Authors found the word so used) and the place to be rendered, Why has
Satan filled thy heart to deceive the Holy Spirit? This will overthrow the
opinion, touching the Godhead of the Holy Spirit: For if the Holy Spirit be
God, then will it be all one as if it had been said, Why has Satan filled thy
heart to deceive God? Which seems to be blasphemy; for it imports, either
that God may be deceived, or else that Satan, or at least Ananias thought so,
otherwise he would not have purposed in his heart to do it. But what force or
use (if this Interpretation of (...) be admitted) will those words have, And to
keep back part of the price; and also those, While it remained, remained it not
to thee? and being sold, was it not in thy power? For these expressions argue,
that Ananias pretended to have received a command from the Holy Spirit to sell
his Farm, and lay down the price thereof at the Apostles feet; and so did not
deceive, or lie to, but belly the Holy Spirit; and consequently, was guilty not
only of coverousness, in keeping some of the money back; but also of Blasphemy
against the Holy Spirit, in fathering upon the Holy Spirit, that which was
injected into his heart by the unclean Spirit: For he alike Blasphemeth the
Holy Spirit, who does with Ananias wilfully father the works of the Devil upon
the Holy Spirit, as he who with the Pharisees, Mat. 12. 24. wilfully ascribes
the works of the Holy Spirit to the Devil.

An Exposition of 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
What? know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Spirit that is (
or, dwells) in you, whom ye have from God, and ye are not your own? for ye
have been bought with a price. Wherefore glorify God both with your body, and
your spirit, which are God's. Whereas it is objected by some, out of this
place, that the holy Spirit is God, in that our body is said to be his Temple;
I answer, that it would follow, could it be proved that our body is so the
temple of the holy Spirit, as to be his by the highest interest, and primarily
dedicated to his honor; for every one will confess our body to be God's in
such a manner. But these things are so far from being intimated in this
passage, yea that our body is at all his by interest, or dedicated to his
honor, (both which are here affirmed of God contradistinctly from the Spirit)
as that the contrary may from thence not obscurely be evinced. For after the
Apostle had hinted in what respect our body is the Temple of the holy Spirit,
to wit, by inhabitation, (for so much is implied by those words, that is, or
dwells in you; since descriptions in sacred Writers are not idle and
impertinent) he adds, that we have the Spirit from God, thereby implying that
he is disposed of, and given by God to us, and consequently he is ours by
interest, not we his; and accordingly concludes from thence, that we ought
with our body to glorify, not the Spirit, but God, who is openly distinguished
from the Spirit, and declared to be the Proprietor of our body.

An Exposition of Matthew. 12. 31.
All sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against
the holy Spirit shall not be forgiven. For the Objection drawn from hence, that
the sin against the holy Spirit is unpardonable; I answer, that the sin against
the holy Spirit is not therefore unpardonable, because he is God, (for this the
Scripture nowhere acknowledges; and besides, by the same reason, every sin
against God would be unpardonable:) but because he that sins against the
holy Spirit, does in the same act sin against God (for every sin, against
whomsoever committed, is terminated in God) with an high hand, to wit, either
by slandering and opposing such works, whereof a man is convinced in conscience
that God has wrought them by the holy Spirit, as the Pharisees did; or by
renouncing and opposing such Truths, whereof a man is convinced in conscience,
that God has revealed them by his holy Spirit, as the Renegadoes did, who are
mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 10. 25, 26, etc. which things are
the greatest affronts that can be offered to God, who uses the ministry of
the Spirit in none but things of the highest importance, and makes the
clearest discovery of himself, as to his Power and Majesty, by him. Hence it
comes to pass, that a sin against the Father or the Son may be forgiven, but
not a sin against the holy Spirit, inasmuch as it is also against the greatest
light. For God the Father makes no discovery of himself to the world
immediately; and Christ, to prove his Authority and Mission from God, appealeth
to the works which he did by the finger of God, the Holy Spirit; see Luke 11.
20. compared with Mat. 12. 28. Wherefore I report this Argument against the
Adversaries, as quite subverting their opinion touching the Godhead of the Holy
Spirit: For if the Holy Spirit were God, you would commit no sin, but what
would be against the holy Spirit, in that all sins are committed against God,
as being the transgressions of his Law. Again, when we sinned against the
Father, we must of necessity also sin against the holy Spirit, if he be the
same God with the Father. For as the Adversaries hold that the works of the
Trinity ad extra, that is, to without, are common to all three: so must they by
the same reason confess, that whatsoever is done to any one of them ab extra,
that is, from without, is also common to all three.

An exposition of Isai. 6. 9, 10.
And he said, Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not: and
see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.]
compared with Acts 28. 25, 26, 27. Well spoke the holy Spirit by Isaias the
Prophet, unto our Fathers, saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye
shall hear, and shall not understand, etc. Because that which in Isaiah is
attributed to the Lord, is in the Acts ascribed to the holy Spirit; the
Adversaries hence conclude, that the holy Spirit is the Lord. Which kind of
arguing, though it be very frequent with them, is yet very frivolous; for at
this rate I may also conclude, that because what is attributed to the Lord,
Exodus 32. 11. [Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou
have brought forth out of the land of Egypt?] is in the seventh verse of the
same chapter ascribed to Moses: [And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee
down: for thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, etc.]
therefore Moses is the Lord. And because what is attributed to the Lord, Isa.
65. 1. [I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of them that
sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called
by my name] is in the 10 of the Romans, verse. 20. ascribed to Isaiah: [But
Isaias is very bold, and says, I was found of them that sought me not: I was
made manifest unto them that asked not after me:] therefore Isaiah is the Lord.
And because what is attributed to God, 2 Timothy 1. 8, 9. [According to the power
of God, who has saved us, and called us, etc.] is by Paul attributed to
himself, 1 Cor. 9. 22. [I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some,] and to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 16. [In doing this, thou shall both
save thy self, and them that hear thee:] therefore Paul, yen Timothy is God. If
the Adversaries say, that these things are otherwise ascribed to the Lord, then
to the men aforesaid: I answer, This is more then is held forth in the texts
themselves, which neither express nor intimate any such thing. If they further
contend, that though such a thing be neither expressed nor intimated in the
said texts, yet other texts, and the nature of the thing it self, does
sufficiently teach it: I reply, that I can make the same answer touching the
Lord and the holy Spirit. But it is well that there is such an intimation in
the texts themselves; for in the one, the Lord speaks those things to Isaiah
in a vision; in the other it is said, that the holy Spirit spoke them by Isaiah
to the Fathers. Which twain every one may easily perceive to be different,
since Isaiah only heard those words in the vision: for had the Fathers, the
people of Israel, been also there, why should God bid Isaiah, go and tell them
to the people? wherefore Paul ascribes these words to the Holy Spirit, only
to intimate that whatsoever is spoken in the Scripture, was recorded by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and so spoken by him.

An Exposition of 2 Cor. 3. 17.
Now the Lord is that Spirit. By that Spirit is not here meant the third Person
of the HOLY TRINITY, otherwise the Lord, that is, Christ (for the Apostle Paul,
by (...) the Lord, does always, unless he cite some place out of the Old
Covenant, understand Christ) will be the Holy Spirit; which is repugnant to the
Scripture, wherein there is a plain distinction everywhere made between Christ
and the holy Spirit. Understand therefore (what the expression it self
implies) the same Spirit that was before in the sixth verse opposed to the
Letter, and consequently the mystery or hidden sense of the Law, denoted by the
Letter: for thus the word Spirit is also taken, Romans 2. 29. Circumcision is
that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter. And Romans 7. 6. But now
we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we are held; so that we
serve in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter. And
Rev. 11. 8. Their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.
Jerusalem is here spiritually, that is, mystically called Sodom and Egypt,
because of the abominable filthiness thereof, and cruelty toward the people of
God. Wherefore the sense of the words of Paul is this, namely, that the Lord
Christ is the Mystery, Life, Scope, and Kernel of the Law, as being both
foretold therein, and prefigured by the Ceremonies thereof.

An Answer to the grand Objection of the Adversaries, touching the supposed
Omnipresence of the HOLY SPIRIT.
AFter I had thoroughly sifted this Controversy, I found that the Adversaries,
who so much cry down Reason, saying that we must renounce it when we speak of
Divine Mysteries, and simply rest in the words of the Scripture, do
notwithstanding in the upshot wave the Scripture, as giving a very uncertain
testimony to their doctrine in this point, and ground themselves on the mere
conjectures of their own Reason. For thus they argue: The holy Spirit, if he
were not omnipresent, and consequently God, could not inspire and dwell in so
many men at one time. For answer hereunto, I will only ask them one Question,
which if they resolve, I will then tell them how the holy Spirit, though he be
not omnipresent, may inspire all the faithful in the world at one time. Our
Savior, in the fourth of Mark, explaining the Parable of the sower, says, in
verse. 15. [And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown: but when
they have heard, Satan comes immediately, and takes the word that was sown in
their hearts.] Suppose now that the seed of the Word be sown in ten thousand
places at one time, as it happens on every Lords day, How can Satan, whom the
Adversaries will deny to be omnipresent, come and immediately snatch the Word
out of the hearts of the greatest part of the hearers? The same Resolution that
they shall give to this Question, will I apply to their own Objection. If this
be not sufficient, take yet more proofs, that may seem to evince the
omnipresence of the unclean spirit. Thus is he said to have been a lying spirit
in the mouth of four hundred false prophets, 1 King. 22. 22, 23. (and there is
the same reason between four hundred, and four millions.) Thus is he said to
hold the impenitent (who make the greatest part of mankind) in his snare, and
to take them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. ult. To blind the minds of them
that believe not, 2 Cor. 4. 4. To dwell in the ungodly, Rev. 2. 13. To show the
wicked whatsoever they practice, Joh. 8. 38. Yea, to deceive the whole world,
Rev. 12. 9. and 20. 2, 3. If they dare not, for all this, to affirm the unclean
spirit to be omnipresent, Why do they on less ground conclude the omnipresence
of the holy Spirit, especially when the Scripture so plainly testifies that he
changes place, as Joh. 15. 26. But when the Advocate is come, whom I will send
you from the Father, the Spirit of Truth which proceeds (or, goes out) from
the Father, he shall testify of me. How could the holy Spirit be sent, and go
out from the Father to the disciples, if he were already with them, and could
not but stay with the Father? Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent out
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. This shows that
the Spirit was not in their hearts before, otherwise he needed not to be sent
out into them. 1 Pet. 1. 12. The things which are now reported unto you by them
that have preached the Gospel unto you with the holy Spirit sent down from
heaven. Could the holy Spirit be sent down from heaven, if he were already upon
the earth, and continued still in heaven? For, that the coming of the holy
Spirit down from heaven is properly to be taken, appears by the very sight,
in that John the Baptist did see the Spirit descending from heaven in a bodily
shape like a dove, and he abode on Christ, Joh. 1. 32. compared with Luke 3.
21, 22. where the words of the Scripture are diligently to be heeded; for it is
not said, that the bodily shape did descend, but the Spirit in the shape: so
that the descent did primarily and by it self agree to the holy Spirit; but in
a secondary way, and by accident, to the shape which he had assumed. Now is it
possible to descend out of heaven to the earth, and not change place? Or is
there any thing better then an ocular demonstration to evince a change of
place? Certainly, if notwithstanding all this, and much more which may be
alleged, it is yet true that the holy Spirit does not go from place to place;
what assurance can I have, when the Scripture says of any one whomsoever, that
he is sent, or comes down, or goes out, that he moves from one place to
another, and does not abide where he was before? Neither is it rightly done by
the Adversaries, when against so many evident Scriptures they allege one
obscure passage, Psalm. 139. 7, 8. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art
there: if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there. For, to omit that the
Psalmist, as the precedent and subquent words, yea the passage it self cited at
large does show, intends only to prove the omnipresence of God himself, and
not of his Spirit; and that diverse of the very Adversaries, as namely the
Divines of the Assembly in their Annotations on this place, do by Spirit here
understand the knowledge or power of God, and not the holy Spirit: should it be
granted that thesewords, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? are meant of the
holy Spirit, yet do they import no more, then that David could go into no
place; but the Spirit could be there with him; and so sign fie, not that he is
in all places at one time, but can be in them at several times, accordingly as
David should come into them. Again, should it be further granted, (what the
Adversaries are not able to evince) that David's meaning is, that he could go
into no place where the Spirit was not present; yet would not this presently
argue, that he was there present in his person or substance (as the Adversaries
conceive, when they say that he is Omnipresent, and therefore God) since it is
sufficient for the truth hereof, that he is in every place by his knowledge, so
that a man can be in no place whatsoever, but the holy Spirit will know where
he is. This Omnipresence, which I verily believe belongs to the holy Spirit,
does not hinder him to go from one place to another. Yea, whosoever diligently
looks into David's words, shall find that he intended in this Psalm to assert
no other Omnipresence to God himself, then that of knowledge and power. For he
openly speaks of the knowledge of God in the first six verses, saying in the
second of them, Thou understandest my thoughts afar off. Which implies that
the person or substance of God himself was not upon the earth with David,
otherwise he would understand David's thought near at hand, and not afar off.
But in the tenth verse, which is an explication of the three preceding ones, he
speaks of the hand of God, whereby is wont to be understood his power.
Afterward, verse. 11. and 12. he returns to the knowledge of God, whereof he
had before spoken. Moreover, the main current of the Scripture runs that
way, and plainly intimates, that the person, or substance, or shape of God (I
speak the language of the Scripture; see Job 13. 7. Will ye accept his (God's)
Person? will ye contend for God? Heb. 1. 3. Who being the brightness of his
(God's) Glory, and express Image of his person (Gr. substance) John 5. 37. And
the Father himself which has sent me, has born witness of me. Ye have neither
heard this voice at any time, nor seen his shape:) is nowhere else but in
Heaven. Neither let the Adversaries reply, that if I ascribe an universal
knowledge of humane affairs to the holy Spirit, this very thing will evince him
to be God. For first, I have already excepted the searching of the heart,
proving in the twelfth Argument that it agrees not to the holy Spirit.
Secondly, had the holy Spirit an Universal knowledge, as of other things, so
also of the heart, yet would not this prove him to be God, unless he had this
knowledge originally and of himself. For it is apparent from the Scripture,
John 5. 22. that God has given all judgment unto Christ, and consequently all
knowledge, without which that judgment cannot be managed. But if he has given
all knowledge unto Christ, he can as well give it to the holy Spirit:
Wherefore, let the Adversaries, when they are driven from their opinion by that
invincible Argument drawn from the Intercession which the holy Spirit is said
to make for the Saints, cease to take up the same weapon, and contend, that the
holy Spirit, inasmuch as he makes intercession for the Saints, must needs know
all their wants, and so be God. For is not Christ also said to make
intercession for the Saints? and does he not intercede with God as a man, and
so as a man know all their wants? But if Christ, as a man, and so as a
Creature, makes intercession unto God for the Saints, and knows all their
wants, why not the holy Spirit also, though he be a created Spirit, and not God?

As for the dwelling of the holy Spirit in so many persons, though I might
forbear to show in what manner this is done, until the Adversaries had
answered my Querie, yet will I (for the satisfaction of such as are studious of
the truth) here declare it. He dwells therefore in all the Saints dispersed
through the whole world, not in his person or substance, for then his person or
substance would fill the world, and dwell in all men a like, whereas the
indwelling of the holy Spirit is by the Scripture made a peculiar privilege of
the Saints, Rom 8. 9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be
(or for) the Spirit of God dwells in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. Wherefore he dwells in them by his Gifts, or
Effects, (since no other dwelling can be imagined) which is an Expression
frequent in the writings of the Adversaries themselves, but that they are wont
to forget it when they reason about the Godhead of the holy Spirit.

FINIS.

