THE Saints Freedom From TYRANNY VINDICATED: OR, The Power of Pagan Caesar's,
and Antichristian Kings Examined, and they Condemned by the Prophets and
Apostles, as no Magistrates of God to be obeyed by Saints for the Lords sake.

Being The Copy of an Answer to a Private Letter; wherein the Civil Power of
Pagan and Antichristian States is soberly debated, and the chief or main
Arguments for Saints Subjection to them, is answered with much Love, Brevity
and Plainness; and now brought forth for the Consideration of others

By a Lover of TRUTH.

Jam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to Save and to Destroy.

Isa. 1. 26, 27. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning: etc. Isa. 10. 27. Ezekiel. 21. 26, 27. Zech. 14.
9.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
DIvine Commands put into Act, or Gods revealed Will and Psa. 19. 1, ^, etc.
Laws put into Execution, gave Being, Usefulness and Beauty to the whole
Creation; when Gods Will is done by Men on Eearth (as by the Angels in Heaven)
Gods Mat. 6. 10.
Kingdom, Rule, and Government is then come in this World, as promised, prayed
for, and expected by Believers.

When Jehovah had perfected his six days work of the Creation, Genesis 1. 31.
he looked over all that he had made, and saw that it was very good; but Man's
disobedience to that Law which God gave to him, brought Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19.
the Curse upon Man, and upon the Ground for Man's sake, so that darkness,
disorder, sorrow, and death has been the fruits of Man's sin. This Curse was in
some measure abated, and restrained by Gods grace in the promised Messiah; and
when God had freely chosen and called Abraham, and promised to him, That the
Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 1. 1. Exodus 19 4, 5, etc. Exodus 20. 1, ^. 3, etc. and
Chapter p. 21. 22, 23, 24, 25, etc.
Messiah (in the flesh) should come of his Seed, God after gathered Israel into
Covenant with himself, (and besides the Ceremonial Law for Worship) God also
renewed the Morral Law, (or Law of Nature) by the hand of Moses, that Israel
had written Laws for the well ordering of every Person, and Family, whether as
Members of Families, Church or State. Under this Divine Government for Bodies,
and Souls, Israel enjoyed the presence and protection of Deuteronomy. 4. 5, ^, etc. 2 Chronicles. 18. 2.
God Almighty in the midst of Brutish Heathen States. When Israel kept close to
Gods Laws and Government in Church and State, God kept close to Israel, and was
their safety, peace and glory.

But as Adam at first, Israel after (in their time) brake Covenant Jer. 2. 17,
18, 19.
with God, and God gave them up into the hands of beastly bruitish-heathen
Kings, or States, to make them know what a sad and bitter thing it was to
depart from God. Israel became Gods visible People by visible Covenant, as a
church, and as a State, wherein they Exodus 24. 3, 4, 5, etc. Jer. 3. 14. Ezekiel
16. 38* Hos. 1. 2*
promised Obedience and Subjection, in the way of a Marriage Covenant between
Man and Wife; and in that sense the Lord so often charged Israel and Judah, for
adultery, whoredom, and breaking the Bond of Wedlock, and at last gave them a
Bill of Divorce and Jer. 3. 8. ^os. 2. 2.
left his visible Protection of them. In the latter part of the Jewish
oppressed State, God fulfilled Old Jacob's Prophecy of Christ, and Genesis 49. 10.
sent forth his Son Jesus Christ into the World, and laid the Government upon
his Shoulders. When Christ was invested into his Mediatory Isa. 9. 6.
Authority, he founded the New Testament State, or the Mat. 16. 17, 18.
Kingdom of God, or the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Heavenly Kingdom, Rule and
Government of God upon Earth, in visible Believers; and as King, ordained Laws,
Ordinances, Officers, and Government Mat. 16. 19, 20. and 26. 26, 27, etc. and
28. 18, 19. 20. Mat. 9. 15.
to his Disciples or Followers, professing him, or his Sovereignty, and
separated from the World. In that time that He (the Bridegroom) was with his
Bride on Earth, the Disciples had a taste and earnest of this his Kingdom,
Dominion and Government, which (in his time) he will more manifest (in this
world) in greater Power 1 Timothy ^. 15. 2 These. 2. 7. 1 John 2. 19. 2 These. 2. 3,
4 v. 9. 10. Rev. 13. 8.
and Glory. The Mystery of Iniquity began early to appear in the Apostles
times, and there were then many Antichrists, but the Antichrist after arose as
a Curse and Judgment upon the formal hyyocritical professing Party in the
Christian Church or State. Christ by the Spirit in the Apostles did reveal or
fore-shew the Rise and Tyranny of the apostate state, 2 King. 24 2 Luke 21 20,
21 22, 23, 24. Dan. 7. 25. Rev. 17. 6.
yoke of Heathen Tyranny the Jewish State was wasted and destroyed; and under
Antichristian Tyranny the Christian Churches and Saints have been much worn
out; but by the Saints long darkness and Bondage, they have been (like Israel
in Egypt) Naturalized to Servi^ude, and taught to subject to oppressing
Tyrants, as the Ordinance of God, and as lawful Magistrates set over them by
God. But still God and his Word abides the same that it was; and God has
promised to Redeem his Sion, and Restore his Polittical Government, Isa. 1. 26,
27. and 11. 1. to 9.
in Justice, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, under the Peaceable
Kingdom and Rule of Jesus the Christ. It Is therefore the Saints Privilege and
Duty to pray for this, and to seek for a through Reformation in the State, as in
the Church. Mat. 6. 10.
Worship is National, Purity in the Church cannot long stand with Corruption in
State. This is that Generation-Truth, which this Author labors to demonstrate,
and bring forth into Victory, and only appeals to the Word and Law of God, the
great, only, and infallible Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 16 17.
Judge in all Cases for Faith and Manners.

Providence brought this Copy to my hand, and upon the serious perusal of it,
I took my self bound to give my assistance to bring it forth to the View of
others, not questioning but the Subject it self will gain acceptance with all
People, who desire so to live and walk with God on Earth, that they may Reign
with Jesus Christ in Glory. This is the utmost end of him who waits and prays
for Sions promised Redemp^ion.

A, B.

THE Saints Freedom from Tyranny Vindicated, etc.
SIR,
YOur Return upon the Paper I sent you, came to my hand, the which I thankfully
receive, and acknowledge that you exceeded my expectation; I am not altogether
a Stranger to the continued engagements which lie upon you: But my great
assurance of your Love, and Zeal for our Lords Honor, and Interest (with your
approved Wisdom, and Meekness to manage this point in Controversy) has made
me bold thus to presume upon you. But I may say also (as I humbly judge) that
you have some engagement upon you, to hear and answer the humble desires of
your Brethren for Light in the Mystical Visions of the Revelation; and upon
that ground also I was the rather emboldened to desire your Return upon the
Paper I sent you, and you have done like your self, to make so sudden and large
return to me. Yours I have perused, and on the behalf of our Lord, (and of
Truth, as I conceive) I am emboldned to make some Reply in what I cannot
receive. I do say with great confidence, that I believe your heart is one with
mine, to find out and advance our Lords Interest in truth and clearness, but
when we consider the Time, and State we have been born, educated, and lived in;
we have cause to admire the riches of free grace, which has made us to differ
from gross Idolaters, and has given us any Light, and Faith to be Witnesses
for Christ in any of his Mediatory Offices. We, I say, who have had our Birth
and Education under so great Antichristian darkness and bondage, it is only of
Free Grace that we are what we are. Though some have a little more light then
others in Divine Mysteries, yet it may be said to those of highest seize
What have you that you have not received? Therefore such as have most Light,
have not to boast in themselves, or carry it proudly to their Brethren of lower
Light and Faith in Generation Truths. If I mistake not, the opening of the
seven-seald Book of Divine Mysteries, speaks a gradual discovery of Light in
Generation Truths; and now the Generation Truth is Christ Kingly Authority
Civil and Spiritual for the Bodies and Souls of his People or Saints in
Covenant Relation unto him. The Beast (here) does not openly and professedly
deny Christ's Prophetical Office, and the authority of Holy Scriptures nor the
Priestly Office of Christ, in the sufficiency of this Merit and Righteousness
to the Justification and Salvation of Believers. But the Kingly Office of
Christ is only denied, in his Sovereignty over his People in things
Ecclesiastical and Civil. And this is the Generation-Truth now witnessed to,
and suffered for; and in which, or for which the Witnesses are Rev. 11. 7.
slain, by the Beast ascending out of the botomless pit, in my understanding.

There are few real Professors at this day, but in words they confess Christ's
Royal Sovereignty over their Souls in Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical things
(though they live not in practice up to that profession:) but there are very
few who in Light, Faith, and Profession witness to Christ's Royal Authority over
the Saints Bodies, Estates, and Liberties in Civil or Temporal things here on
Earth. 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
upon Christian Professors from God for their earthliness and hypocrisy. But
it is promised, That, that wicked one shall be revealed (discovered, or made
naked) whom the Lord will 2 These. 2. 8.
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming.

Although (as yet) the Beast Antichrist is not fully made manifest to the Lords
People as he will be, yet we have great cause to bless and praise God for what
we see, and thankfully accept our measures of present Light, as earnests of
what is promised, and as evidences of our Lords appearing. As our Lords right
to Sovereign Rule in Civil things is now the great Question and Controversy
amongst real believing Christian Professors, it is our great duty to search the
Scriptures therein, and humbly to lie at Gods feet, and beg for the teaching of
the John 16. 13.
Spirit of Truth to lead us into this truth also. We are under the promise of
the Last Times, That many shall run to and fro, Dan. 12. 4.
and knowledge shall be increased. And I hope that this our intercourse to
communicate our present Light to each other, (in this great point, in love and
in meekness) may tend greatly to bring us both to more perfect and distinct
knowledge of Gods will in this Truth, and the Truth into Victory.

In your Paper, I humbly accept your grave and Christian Answers (in case of
male administration of a Lawful Power) in many particulars; but I must confess
that I yet see it not proved from the Scriptures of Old or New Testament, That
the Heathen Roman Caesar's were ever Magistrates Ordained by God, to Rule and
Govern his People, before or after Christ was invested with his Mediatory
Authority; and then much Deuteronomy. 1. 9, 13, 14. and 16. 18, 19, etc. Romans 13. 1,
2, 3, etc. 1 Pet 2. 13. 14. Josh. 7. 9.
less that the Civil Power of Antichrist was a Beam of Divine Sovereignty, and
the Ordinance of God to be submitted and subjected to by the Lords People, for
the Lords sake. Magistracy, or Polittical Government, and Governors in Civil
and Temporal things, I own to be the Ordinance and appointment of God, to Rule
and Order his People according to his Law, as Polittical Fathers, to whom the
Lords People (in discharge of that Office and Trust) do owe obedience and
subjection to for the Lords sake, and Conscience sake (actively) as of duty,
and passively, when they transgress the Laws and Commands of God. But that
either the Heathen Emperors, or Antichristian Kings were called by God to this
Office and Authority, I yet understand not.

That which does constitute, specify, and denominate a Exodus 18. 21, 22. etc.
Political Governor, or Magistrate to be the Ordinance of God, is, That he be
so Qualified, so called to Office, and so Deuteronomy 1. 9, 13, 14. and 4. 1, 2, 5.
and 16. 18. and 17. 18, 19, 20. 2 Samuel 23. 3.
Ruling as God has commanded, and ordained, or ordered, as his Minister in the
State, 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

I humbly judge, That due qualifications in a man for a Magistrate, makes not a
man to be a Magistrate; That a Call of a People only, makes not a Magistrate;
That a Person duly Qualified, and rightly Called by a People to Rule, if he
rule not by Gods Laws, he is yet no Magistrate, or Minister of God, (as the
Ordinance of God, or by Gods appointment) to be obeyed by the Lords People, for
the Lords sake, or for Conscience, not having the Essentials of a Governor, or
Magistrate, which God Ordained and Commanded.

The Priesthood under the Law was, and the Ministry under the Exodus 28. 1, 2,
etc. and 29. 1, 2, etc. Ephesians. 4 11, 12. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3 etc. Act. 20. 28. Heb.
5. 4.
Gospel, is the Ordinance of Gods appointment; their Qualifications, Investment
into Office, and Duties of Office, were all Ordained and commanded of God; but
if any Person put himself into the Priests Office, or a Pastoral Charge, by
might, or force, or pretended right; or if a People should Call a Fool, or a
Person (Man or Woman) to Office in the Church, as a Pastor, not duly
Qualified, as God has appointed; duly Qualified, and rightly Called to
Office, do yet reject the Laws and Ordinances of God and the Gospel (when in
Office) and offer sacrifices to Idols, and obey the Comands of Men, contrary to
the Institutions of God; these, under the Law, were Sons of 1 Samuel 2, 12. 13. 1
King. 18. 19, etc. 1 John 2. 18, 22 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17.
Belial, and Priests of Baal; and in the Gospel-state, such are Ministers of
Antichrist, and not Ministers of God, or the Ordinance of God, to be obeyed for
the Lords sake, as commanded by God. I might give other Demonstrations in the
Ordinances of the Law and Gospel, what Essentials were, and now are necessary
to constitute and denominate an Ordinance of God for matter and form; but I
consider to whom I write. Indeed Antichrist has assumed the Sovereign
Authority of God and of Christ Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and by Popish
darkness and slavery, 2 These. 2. 3, 4. 1 John 2. 22.
his Subjects have received his Commands as Divine; not questioning or denying
his usurped Power over Bodies and Souls, how contrary soever his Commands and
Appointments Rev. 13. 15, 16, 17. and 17. 4.
were, or are, to the Ordinances and Appointments of God, they must be recieved
as Gods Ordinances.

Through the Lords rich and free grace, the Antichristian Vail is (in a good
measure) taken away from many Professors, in Ecclesiastical and
Church-concerns; But the great Body of Protestants are still stumbled about
Antichrists Civil Power, and do own Antichrist (in his Civil Power) for the
Ordinance of God, though some few cannot: But that very way by which God has
led his People to discover the true and pure Ordinances of God in the Church
(from false Antichristian cheats and delusions in Worship) Political State, and
difference between Magistracy as the Psalm. 119. 104, 105. Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3.
16, 17.
Ordinance of God, and the Tyranny of wicked Men, viz. by coming to Gods Law
and Testimony, and thereby examine Church and State Officers, and Ordinances,
as ordained, constituted, and appointed of God, and by God.

What Christ required of, and answered the Jews Messengers Mat. 22. 15, 16, etc.
when they were sent to entrap him in point of Caesar's Power, I would query and
answer, both of the Heathen and Antichristian Exodus 18. 19, 20, etc. Deuteronomy. 1.
9, 13, 14. 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7. Psalm. 82. 1, 6. Rev. 14. 1. and 17. 14. Rom 13. 3,
4, 5 Rev. 13. 1, 2. and 11, etc. Rev. 2. 10. and 11. 7. and 12. 9. and 13. 5,
6, 7.
Emperors and Kings, viz. Whose is the Image and Superscription upon them? If
they bear the Image and Superscription of God upon them, if they have the Name
of God written in their foreheads, and they in the Place, Office, and Work of
God, to Rule his People by Divine Authority; then they were and are to be
subjected to, for the Lords sake: But if those Emperors and Kings bear the
Image and Superscription of the Devil, are raised by the Devil, and do the
Devils work, (all which is true) there is no Scripture-Warrant (as I conceive)
for the Lords People to obey such Emperors or Kings, as the Ordinance of God.

The first rise and original of Polittical Government, and Magistracy, Exodus 2
10 and 18 15, 16, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. 9, 13, 14. Exodus 21, 22, 23 Chapters, etc.
as Ordained and Appointed by God, was amongst the Jews at their coming out of
Egypt, and in the Wilderness, in their way to Canaan: God first called Moses,
immediately, and entrusted him (Ministerially) with Magistratical Power and
Authority, to Lead and Govern Israel (not other Nations) his ^ovenant-People.
In Moses time God gave Israel Laws, and Poli^tical Government, which they were
to exercise and put in Deuteronomy. 16. 18, etc. and 17, 14, 15, etc.
execution when they came into Canaan, both as a Commonwealth, and as a
Kingdom. At that time when God constituled Israel a Polittical State, there
were many and great Nations Deu. 4. 5, 6, etc and 7. 7, 8.
in the World, who made themselves Kings, and exercised Polittical Government,
from the Light and Law of Nature, (by the Permission of God) but not by the
Ordination and Appointment of God, as Israel had: this is recorded by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6, etc. and 7. 7, 8. And long after Moses, David said, He showed
his Word to Jacob, his Statutes, and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not
dealt so [with any Nation;] and as Psa. 147. 19, 20
for his Judgments they have not known them. Nimrod to David the Heathen
Emperors and Kings were not the Ordinance of God, to rule and govern his
People. Again, in David's Psalm. 72, and 89 20, 21, 22, etc. Mat. 1. 1 an^ 2. 1.
2. Luke 1. 35, 36 and v. 69, 70, etc. Genesis 49. 10. Ezekiel. 21. 27, and 34. 24, 25.
time, God by Covenant entailed the Royal Scepter of Judah upon David and his
Heirs in the flesh, but chiefly upon Jesus Christ, as the Son of David,
according to Jacobs Prophecy: The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a
Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come: and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be.

These Scriptures clearly assert Jesus Christ, the Son of David, and so he had
right to the Royal Government of Judah so soon as he was born; Judah, by Gods
Donation, from first to last.

But Christ, as Mediator, had also another Royal Sovereignty Psa. 2. 7, 8, etc.
Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10. Mat. 28 18, 19 Mar. 16. 15.
given him by God the Father, over Jews and Gentiles, for Souls and Bodies,
which Authority was published and declared by Christ himself. Jesus came and
spoke unto them (the eleven Disciples) saying, All Power is given unto me in
Heaven and in Earth; Go ye therefore, etc.

Royal and Magisterial Authority (as Gods Ordinance) was clearly in and amongst
Gods Vovenant People, from Moses to Christ, and with none other. Daniels
expounding Nebuchadnezzars Dream, of the great Dan. 2. 37, etc.
Image, said to him, Thou, O King, art a King of Kings; for the God of heaven
has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and Strength, and Glory: and after thee shall
arise another Kingdom, etc. Therefore these four Kings, or Imperial States,
were the Ordinance of God, and lawful Magistrates, or Ministers of God, to whom
the Lords People did, and still do owe Obedience to, in Civil things.



First, This was a Vision opened, of four Imperial States, (which God would
Providentially raise in the World, successively one after another) and use at
his pleasure either to afflict, Dan. 4. 17.
or help his People, and one to destroy the other; but neither this Prophecy,
or any other Word of God speaks their Ordination and Constitution of Governors,
Magistrates, or Misters Romans 13. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
of God, sent for the good of his People; for the encouragement of godliness,
and to be a terror to evil-deers; (which are the great ends of Magistracy
ordained by God) and wherein the Lords People are commanded subjection, for the
Lords sake.

Secondly, These Kings came successively to their Kingdoms and Rule, by the
power of the Sword, and Strength, (as was prophesied) but not by Power and
Authority; and so accordingly were represented, by Monstrous Beasts, and no
Births of Dan. 7. 4, to 8. and 8. 4, etc.
Nature. All these Monstrous States (or Kings) came successively to Rule (by
Gods Providence) in their times, as they got power or strength to Conquer. The
King of Babylon Conquered 2 King. 24. 1, 2, etc. verse. 10. and 25. 1, 2, etc.
and Captivated the Jews for their sin, by Power and Might, not by Authority or
Right. By Gods providence a Thief, or Thieves, rob or kill the honest
Traveller;

Thirdly, Though Daniel said to the King of Babylon, That God gave him a
Kingdom, Power, and Strength; yet this was prophesied after he had taken
Jerusalem, and captived the Jews Dan. 2. 37.
living; therefore this Commission was not warrant for the former Cruelty.

Fourthly, Not any of these Kings had the Essentials of Gods Magistrates, viz.
As fearing God, as chosen out of themselves, and Exodus 18. 21. Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
Romans 13. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14
invested with authority by them: nor ruling by Gods Laws, to encourage
godliness, and be a terror to evildoers. Therefore upon these grounds, not any
of the Heathen Kings were the Ordinance of God, to be obeyed by the Lords
People for the Lords sake.

That God brought upon Israel, the King of the Caldees: and God gave Jehoiakim,
King of Judah into the hand of the King of Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 36. 17. Dan. 1. 1,
2.

2 Chr. 36. 14, 15, 16, 17. Isa. 10. 5, etc. 2 King. 24. 1, etc. 8. 10, etc.
stubbornness, and incorrigible rebellions against him: but not as his
Minister, for their good; as a Magistrate ordained by God to rule and feed
them. The Kings of Assyria and Babylon, etc. were such powers of the Earth, or
earthly powers, which God by his Almighty Power providentially used as his
Creatures, to afflict, or relieve, to distress or save his Vovenant People,
when he pleased; but not to rule and govern them under God, or for God, as his
Magistrates ordained by him. God by his Almighty Sovereign power, and pleasure,
threatened the disobedience of his people with many sore judgments, Ezekiel. 14,
12, 13 Deuteronomy. 28. 15, etc.
and he used what Creatures he thought good to do it by, viz. Either noysom
Beasts, Famine, Pestilence or Sword. By Sword was meant the Sword of Kings or
States, whom he providentially brought upon them; which Kings were only led by
principles of Nature, and opportunities, and providence; when they knew not
God, or his designs; and so they were Isa 10. 5, 6, 7. v. 12. to 19. Jer. 51.
and 52.
judged by God, and destroyed, for the misery, desolation and blood of the
Lords People.

etc. (or the Devil) are the Ordinance of God.

But God gave it in Charge to those Jews who were carried Captives to Babylon,
to seek the peace of the City, and to pray unto the Lord for it: for in the
peace thereof ye shall have peace, Jer. 29. 7.



First, That short time of Isreal's Captivity was foreshewed, and also by whom
their Deliverance should come, viz. by Cyrus, Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1, 2, etc.
Jer. 29. 10, 11.

Secondly, Their Captivity was very easy; they had the Liberty of Conscience
in Religion; they had liberty to build Houses, to plant Vineyards, and to eat
the Fruit; to marry Wives, and to live in safety, therefore to seek the Peace
of the place, but not of the King of Babylon.

Thirdly, This command, To seek the Peace of the place, implies a Charge laid
upon them, not to raise trouble by seeking their Deliverance (yet not to pray
for the pros^^^ity of the King, or the establishment of that Kingdom) for God
had declared Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1, 2, 3, etc. Dan. 5. 30, 31. Rev. 18 6, 7.
his determination to destroy Babylon, and in Babylons destruction their
deliverance should come. Therefore God used the King of Persia to redeem
Israel; but this is not the case of Christians under Mystery Babylon.

But Daniel and other Servants of the Lord served the King of Babylon, etc.

Magistrates or Ministers of God to rule over them, for then they had had no
cause to return to their own Country and Government. The Captive Jews under the
King of Babylon, and Captive Christians under the Turk are one in Nature,
Turkish slavery do not see themselves bound (by the preceptive will of God) to
abide in slavery, if by Gods providence a way be opened for their escape. The
Jews, under the Government of Judges, were Judge. 2. 11, 12 v. 14, 15, 16, etc.
often (providentially) given up by God into the hands of several Heathen Kings
or States, for their great transgressions against God; and when they humbled
themselves before the Lord and repented, the Lord also providentially delivered
them. But in the time of their Bondage, they looked not upon those Tyrants as
Gods Ordinance to rule over them, or as Magistrates they were bound to obey.

But Joseph (the Husband of Mary) obeyed the Edict of Agustus Caesar, and went
with Mary his Wife from Nazareth to Jerusalem, to be taxed, Luke 2. 1, 2, etc.

Joseph proves not Caesar a Lawful Power, or Magistrate of God to rule over his
people. For,

First, Every act of a good man is not therefore lawful because a good man does
it: In many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2.

Secondly, Though Joseph obeyed the Edict of the Emperor, yet no Text can be
showed, that he did it by the Command of God.

Thirdly, Though Caesar exacted a small Tribute of the Jews, to show that they
were Captives, Conquered by the Sword, yet he left them free in Religion, and
many outward Privileges, which Antichrist denies to Christians, Mat. 27. 1, 2.
John 18. 31.

Fourthly, Joseph and all Israel in Egypt. As Joseph and Mary, and other Jews
in Canaan. And as many Christian Martyrs have done under Antichristian Bondage
and Tyranny, Genesis 42 15. Exodus 6. 9. Act. 7. 24, 25.

But Christ himself paid Tribute to Caesar.

Mat. 17. 26, 27.
God, who had power over his Body. For,

First, Christ declared himself free.

Secondly, Christ at that time was entered upon his Mediatory Offices; and had
put out Royal Acts of Authority, as King over Jews and Gentiles, Mat. 3. 16,
17, and 4. 18, 19, etc.

Thirdly, Christ only paid that Tax for Himself and Peter, as persons only
concerned, and not for the rest of his Disciples.

Fourthly, Christ did at that time, in that thing, give up or let go his own
right, out of a gracious end and design, to propagate the Gospel; and that was
lawful, or no sin in him, which yet would be sin in his Servants.

Fifthly, Dark Scriptures are to be expounded from the consent and current of
Scriptures to make a harmony, that one text do not contradict another. But to
bring this text, to prove hence, that Caesar was a lawful Magistrate, and had
Authority from God to tax Christ and his disciples, contradicts the words of
Christ. And has given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is
the Son of Man. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. John 5. 17.
Mat. 28. 18. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. with many other texts, and current of
Scriptures Old and New.

But we find the Apostle Paul approved, and appealed to Caesar's Authority,
which was not only a bare subjection to, but an owning of that Power, Act. 25.
10, 11.

Paul did so, yet it is to be questioned, Whether Paul did that by a Command
from God, or Christ? It is Divine 1 Cor. 11. 1. 8. 23.
Authority which makes the Acts of the Apostles lawful, and imitable for
Saints. 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11 Gal. 2. 11, 12, etc.
in failings. Peter and Paul were chief Apostles of Christ, and yet had the
infirmities of men. And as Paul blamed Peter in some things, no doubt but Peter
also might have blamed Paul in some things, had he lived and traveled with
Paul. Paul himself is much in confession of his humane frailties, and Romans 7.
14, 15, etc, Act. 22. 24, 25, 26. and 23. 35. and 24. 26, 27. and 25 1, 2, 3,
8, 10, 11.
infirmities, through corruption and temptation. And it is clear, that Paul's
appealing to Caesar at Rome, was in design to deliver himself, and save his
Life from the Jews, and that Judicature at Jerusalem, where he was surprised
and kept by violence of arms (which has been the case of many of the Lords
people) and not that Paul approved, or owned Caesar, as having Divine Authority
or Jurisdiction over his Body; Paul had his Liberty. And we do not read that
ever he was brought to further trial at Rome. This Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles, did yet Circumcise Timothy; Romans 11. 13. Act. 16 8.
Jews rage (fell into Peter's transgression, which he accused him for) who were
set against him for preaching down the Ceremonial Law, and Circumcision; Paul
did yet pretend himself (as a Jew, under the Law, and under a Vow) and after
the manner of the Law purified himself, and went into the Temple; To signify
the Act. 21. 23, 24. etc.
accomplishment of the days of Purification, until that an Offering should be
made. These acts were not lawful in Paul an Apostle, nor imitable for the
Saints now, though done by an Apostle; but how far God may wink at these, and
the like weaknesses in his People, I will not judge.

But it is said, that Paul wrote to the Saints at Rome, to subject to the
Emperors of Rome though Beasts and Tyrants, saying, Let every soul be subject
to the higher Powers, for there is no power but of Romans 13. 1.
God: the powers that be, are ordained (or ordered) of God.

First, The Apostle in this place speaks clearly of Saints subjection to
Magistracy, or to Magistrates as Ordained by God; and Ministers of State, sent
by God, for the good of his People; and not of the Caesar's then Tyrannizing
over the Lords heritage, at that time (I judge) that the right of Civil
Government 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, and ^.
over the Saints was in themselves, though they had not the power of strength
to put out all Acts. Thus it was with the Jews in Babylon, under the Romans,
etc. The Jews as Gods Vovenant People, had right to the exercise of all Civil
Jurisdiction Genesis 49. 10. Deuteronomy. 1. 9, 13. and 16. 18, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 25, 47,
48, etc.
amongst themselves by Gods appointment: But as a Curse and Punishment of their
sins, the exercise of that Power and Authority was, (by Gods permission) taken
from them by the force and power of Enemies, especially to some Joh. 18. 31.
acts of Jurisdiction. Thus it was with the Christians; Christ left Authority
with his own servants (in all things without exception) amongst themselves; and
the Saints were in the Mar. 13. 34. Mat. 25. 14. 1 Cor. 6. 1, etc.
exercise of that Authority in Civil affairs, though debarred the public
exercise of some acts, or all acts, by the Armies or Strength of Heathen Kings.
And because the Churches, or Saints had not then power or strength to execute
some Laws on offenders, Gods Ordinance, to be obeyed for the Lords sake, and
Conscience sake, as commanded by God.

Secondly, It is evident (both from the rise, and exercise of power in Heathen
Kings) that they were not ordained by God Dan. 7* 2, 3, etc. 2 Chr. 36. 17,
etc. Isa. 10 5, 6, etc. and 42. 24, 25. Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24.
to rule over his People under him, neither had they power and authority to
govern from God; but only power and strength to burn, destroy, kill and captive
the Lords People rebelling against him; and so called, Gods Staff, Hammer,
Saw, etc. not Fathers, Shepherds, etc.

But Paul exhorted Timothy, That supplications, and prayers should be made for
all men; for Kings, and all that are in Authority, (or eminent place) that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Life.

First, If by Kings, we understand the then Heathen Kings, Paul may be
understood to enjoin the Saints, to pray either for the conversion of their
souls, or restraint of their power, that the Saints Peace and Godliness were
not hindered, viz. That God would not suffer those heathen Kings to put out
their power and strength to persecute, or hinder the Saints Peace, Liberty, and
Holiness: But this text asserts not the Divine Authority of heathen Kings to
govern the Lords People, or Saints to subject to them.

Secondly, If the Apostle be taken as referring to any time, when a Magistrate
(called King) shall be called to rule over the Lords people in Authority (or
eminent place of Trust) as appointed and ordained by God; then it will be the
duty of Saints to pray for such Magistrates, That their Rule and Government may
answer the end of their Power and Trust, as Ordained by Romans 13. 3, 4, etc. 1
Pet. 2. 13, 14
God, viz. Saints Peace and Holiness.

But the Apostle Peter also gave this in charge to Saints; Submit your selves
to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors (as to them that are sent by him) for the
punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14.

First. In this the Apostle is clear, that he presses Saints Subjection to
Kings or Governors, as called or sent of God, (and encouragement) of them that
do well. This is the current of Scripture.

Secondly, Saints Subjection to Kings, or Governors (as the Ordinance of Man,
or as Man's appointment in the State) when they answer the ends of Civil
Government, as Ordained by God. If we should take the Apostle exhorting Saints,
To subject to every Law and Ordinance of man (for the Lords sake) then the Laws
of Men should be obeyed by Saints, how unjust, unnatural, or contrary soever
they were to the Laws of God; but this is too gross, and contrary to the
current of Scripture, not answering the ends of Government, as Ordained by God.

Thirdly, If we take the Apostle, speaking of Kings, or Governors, as the
Ordinance of Man; then the title King, or Power of Kings, is only humane; and
God has left it in the wisdom, power, and will of a State, or Body Politic,
to call to Office and Power, one Person, or a set number of Persons jointly, to
rule over them, as they judge best for the whole; submit, for the Lords sake.

I am humbly bold thus to give my sense; That both Paul, in Rom, 13. 1. and in
his other Epistles, Peter in this text, had no respect to the Heathen Kings of
that time; but that both these Apostles do assert Magistracy to be the
Ordinance of God, amongst his People, To suppress evildoers, and to encourage
them that do well, Romans 13. 3, 4. to which Magistrates the Saints owe
subjection, for the Lords sake. Peter also implies, That the designation of
Magisterial Authority, upon one person, or upon several persons (with the Names
and Titles by which they are called or dignified) are humane, and left to men;
and therefore Saints should not deny subjection upon that account.

In the first constitution of the Jewish Polittick State, God gave them Judges
about the space of 450 years; after which Deuteronomy. 16. 18, Act. 13. 20, 21, etc. 1 Samuel 8. 1, 2, etc. v. 19, 22.
(upon the ill government of Samuels Sons) Israel resolved to change the
Government, from Judge, to King, and God gave way to them. But as God foresaw
that Israel would change the Government of State (in which his secret counsel
was fulfilled, to bring in David's Kingdom, and make way for Christ's Kingdom)
God enjoined and commanded Israel, that Deuteronomy. 17. 14,
Kings should rule by the same Laws which he gave to the Judges. The Apostle
Peter then seeing (or supposing that in after-time) some difference might arise
amongst Saints about Political Government, or Governors, viz. Whether the
chief should be in one Person, or in many; and by what names they should be
dignified; Peter inferrs, that this is in man to order, ordain, and appoint;
and therefore exhorts Saints, not The Body or State Pol^^ick are the first Seat
of Power ^y P^t^r.
to differ, or dissent from what the Body of the People, or State ordain and
appoint in that matter, so as the Governors do answer the ends of Government,
as ordained by God.

I must say, I know not that this was questioned by Saints in Peter's time;
Israel) are the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, Christ ratified and confirmed them in
his Ministry; and the Apostles gave many general directions to Saints about
Political Government and Governors, as Ordained by God;

But Rulers and Governors were commonly called Gods, and it is not likely that
they should be so dignified by holy men, if they were not ordained by God, and
bare upon them some Image or Beam of Divine Sovereignty.

David, by Christ, and by Paul, referring Exodus 22. 28. Psalm. 82. 1, 6. John.
10. 34. Act. 23. 4, 5.
to Moses Law; but ever, and only to Magistrates, in the Jewish State, as
Ordained and Constituted by God. If there can be any one Scripture produced to
the contrary, let it be urged.

But in Scripture, the Heathen or Pagan Governors were commonly called
Magistrates, which name or appellation of State Officers was given to the
Jewish Judges and Governors; which implies, That heathen Governors were
Ordained by God.

First, The Title Magistrate, Ruler, or Governor, are terms equivolent to
Officers in the Civil State, as Bishop, Elder, and Judge. 18. 7. Ezra. 7. 25.
Deuteronomy. 16. 18; etc.
Pastor are in the Church State. Where the Title, or Appellation of Ruler,
Governor, or Magistrate, is given to Officers in the Jews Politic State, it
is given to them, as such as were so Ordained and Appointed of God; but there
is not one Text can be showed in all the Old Testament, where any of the Lords
People gave the Title of Magistrate to Heathens.

Secondly, Such as had Magisterial Rule and Government among the Heathens, were
Magistrates to them (or in the place Act. 16. 20, 22, 35, 36, etc.
of Magistrates) and therefore so owned and distinguished with Heathens; but I
read not that ever Christ, or the Apostles dignified any Heathens with the
Title Magistrate; Yet if they had, that clears not the matter; for as it is
common in Heathen and Antichristian States to take the Names of Offices and
Officers, from the pattern and example of the Jewish, or Christian State; yet
that makes them not to be the Ordinance of God, by having the Name, and not the
Thing. It is possible for a Cheat to counterfeit Letters Pattents, or Letters
Testimonial to crave the charitable benevolence of good People, in one or in
many Countries, as a Person of Estate, Credit, or Usefulness in the time of his
Prosperity, but is fallen into decay and poverty, by Fire, great Losses at Sea,
etc. many of these Cheats have gone on long in their wickedness, and have been
much pitied and relieved by Charitable People; but as these Cheats have been
discovered, and their villainies manifest, those sober People who before pitied
and supplied them in their ignorance, will after turn to hate such wretches,
and seek to bring them to due punishment, answering their demerit. Thus the
Antichristian Kings and 2 These. 2. 3, 4, 7, 9, 10.
States have played the grand Cheats of the World, and have Rev. 13. 2. and 17.
1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and 18. 2, 3, 7.
feigned their Missions, and Commissions, and Successions to to be signed and
sealed by God, when they were from the Devil; and they tell the People of their
usefulness, and necessity of their Government, to enlarge and support Kingdoms
in Wealth, Peace, Riches, and Honor, etc. But all is to subject the People to
their Lusts, and mainly to support their Pride, Luxury, and Domination in the
World. This vile hypocrisy cannot be charged upon the Heathen, or Pagan Kings,
for as they knew not God, nor ever received the holy Scriptures, Those very
Nations and People, who bowed to the Beast, and committed fornication with that
Scarlet Whore, will hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and will
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Rev. 13. 1, 5, 6, and 17. 3. Rev. 11. 7.
and 12. 9. and 13. 2. and 17. 16.

There are some few other Texts urged, to prove Saints subjection to Heathen
Kings (in Civil things) although they were Tyrants, but these which I have
spoken to are the chief; the Ordination of Pagan Kings, to be Magistrates of
God, appointed to govern his People; But the force of the best Arguments lie in
supposed Examples, and mistaken Scriptures, (as I humbly judge) of some
Apostolic Precepts. Deu^. 1 9, 13, 14, and 16. 18. and 17. 14, 15, etc. 2 Samuel
2. 3. and 5. 3. 1 Samuel 8. 1, etc.
Seat of Power Administerial, (and only Ministerial) and no absolute Monarchs
of Gods ordaining) they must also see, that evil Governors are the Effect of
Power neglected, or abused in the first Seat of Power.

It is possible for Kings, or Governors, who were rightly called or invested
with Ministerial Authority, That Tyrants (in this last sense) are not to be
obeyed as Magistrates and Ministers of God upon these two grounds.

First, As they answer not the ends of Political Government, as Ordained by God.

Secondly, As Governors (by Gods Appointment) are under 2 Samuel 2. 4 and 5. 3.
Laws, Articles, and Covenants, with the People, who call them to Office and
Authority; therefore if Governors break Covenant with the People, they break
the bond of Relation, and the People are disingaged, on their part from
Subjection. 1 King. 12. 1, etc. Ezekiel. 16. 38.
That a People Opposing or Deposing a wicked or oppressing King or Ruler, is no
Opposition to Magistracy, for they own and honor Magistracy as Gods Ordinance,

But some again suppose, That Heathen Kings were Lawful Magistrates and Gods
Ordinance, until the rise of Antichrist, and since that time the Saints do owe
no subjection to Antichrist in his Political or Ecclesiastical State; or to the
Ten Kings.

This Assertion (in this latter State) is my Judgment; but I confess, I know
not how this can be maintained by Scripture-Warrant, Mediator) before
Antichrist arose. I know not any Scripture which hints the Deputation and
Investment of Christ into this Royal Sovereignty, at, or upon the rise of
Antichrist, but what was in him long before. And if Christ was invested by the
Father Mat. 28. 18. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, etc.
with all Power in Heaven and Earth, Then the Heathen Kings from Christ's time
to the rise of Antichrist, were Usurpers, and not the Ordinance of God, to be
obeyed by Saints in Civil things.

But it is your thoughts (as I take it) that Antichrist (in his Civil State) is
the Ordinance of God Magisterial, and to be obeyed by the Lords People in Civil
things, as derived from the Heathen Magistratical Power, or from the Roman
State. Your words are these.

I take the Dragon to be the Old Pagan Empire, as it was acted by Satan in
advancing Idolatrous Worship. And by the Beast I mean the Roman Empire, as
Antichristian, or rather Antichrist agitated by Satan in advancing Idolatry and
Superstition under other Names: And therefore if it were not a sin in the one,
to yield obedience; I do not see how it should be sin in the other, since Satan
acted both.



First, I am not yet convinced from Scripture or Argument, That any Heathen
Emperors or Kings were Ordained by God, to Rule and Govern his People from him
as his Magistrates or Ministers of State, who were acted and influenced by the
Devil, and answered not the ends of Magistracy, as Ordained by God.

Secondly, It is my understanding, That upon Christ's Baptism, he entered upon
his Mediatorship, and upon all his Mediatory Mat. 3. 16, 17. John 1. 41.
Offices actually, and visibly in the World; and that all Disciples believing
and visibly closing with Christ as Mediator, Prophet, Priest, and King, Isa.
10. 27. John. 1. 41, 45.
their Rebellions against God, his Laws, and Government.

Thirdly, I can easily grant, Pagan Empire and Antichrist; and also that the
Dragon, or Pagan Empire gave to the Beast Antichrist, his Power, his ^ev. 13. 2
Seat, and great Authority, viz. All that Power and Authority in the Roman or
Western Empire, which rested in the Dragon or the Devil to give. And this Power
and Authority is all which the Beast Antichrist ever had. Devil such Power, or
invested the Pagan Empire, either with the power of Government in that Empire,
or with Power and Authority, to Invest and Instal another State to Rule as Gods
Ministers. And it is my Judgment, that neither the Dragon had Power of
Authority from God to constitute a New State, or to divolve Civil Power and
Authority Magisterial (as Gods Ordinance) upon the Beast Antichrist; or that
Christian Believers are bound (from God) to receive and obey Antichrists
Commands in Civil things, because the Dragon gave him his Power.

I humbly judge, That your Inference cannot be binding to the Lords People,
until these two things be proved.

First, That the Heathen Dragonical State was the Ordinance of God, entrusted
with Supreme Authority Royal, in all the World, as Lord and Lawgiver.

Secondly, That the Dragonical State, or Power, was Invested, and Entrusted by
God, to constitute another Supreme Royal State, Civil in the World.

Power and Authority which is acted Isa. 10. 5, etc. 2 King. 24. 1, 2, etc. 2
These. 2. 10, 11.
and influenced from the Devil, is not of Gods appointing or ordaining; but
only by Gods permission and suffering in his just Judgments. And to this I may
add, Old Babylon, and Mystery Babylon, are declared the Objects, and Subjects
of Divine Wrath and Vengeance, and therefore not the Ordinance of God, as
mostly taken to be Divine. I can grant (that by corruption) evil and vile men
may get in, and be in power of Government, Psalm. 12. 8 Hos. 5. 1. and 8. 4.
Isa. 3. 1, 4.
which is appointed by God, the which God does not approve; but threatens, and
judges where such offenses are committed and not reformed. Now this is the
evil of Persons, and not the evil of Government, as ordained by God. Israel and
Judah, yet still continued Magistracy as his Ordinance; but both Babylon
Literally, Isa. 1. 24, 25, 26.
and Babylon Mystically (in their Civil and Ecclesist^ical States, shall be
perfectly destroyed, which is yet remaining) and therefore Jer. 25. 12, 13.
Rev. 18. 21, etc
neither the Dragon, or Antichrist, are Magistrates, or Magistracy, as Gods
Ordinance.

As for those Inferences, or Arguments drawn from Paul's practice, and from
Peter and Paul's Writings to Saints or Churches, I have given my understanding
in them, and so pass them; but to what I have said, I humbly crave leave to
offer my thoughts in these Particulars following.

First, I see it not clearly proved, That the Pagan Roman Caesar's are signified
by the Dragon, Rev. 12. 3, 4, etc. but that the Dragon may rather represent
Antichrist: for two Reasons.

First, The Man of Sin, Antichrist, sits in the Temple of God, 1 These. 2. 4.
And this Dragon appeared in Heaven, Rev. 12. 3. viz. in the visible Church:
which the Pagan Caesar's did not.

Secondly, This Dragon drove the Woman into the Wilderness 1260 days, the same
time with the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, Rev 12 6. and 11. 2, 3. and
13. 5
and one state of time with Antichrists Reign. Therefore the Dragon must
signify Antichrist, or the Antichristian State, and not the Pagan Roman State.
For, if we take the Dragon for the Pagan Empire, then the Pagan Persecutions
are included in the Antichristian Persecution of 1260 days; or else John only
hints the Pagan Persecutions, and then falls into, and states the Antichristian
Persecution, 1260 days.

Secondly, It is not clear, That the Beast arising out of the Sea, Rev. 13. 1,
etc. and Daniels fourth Beast, are one Beast, and Rev. 13. 1. Dan. 7. 7. 2
These. 2 7. Rev. 17 18.
both representing the Roman Empire: I humbly judge, That upon the fall of
Daniels fourth Beast, the Beast with ten Horns Crowned then arose, over whom
the Woman reigns; Beast Antichrist, as they are professed Christian 1 John 2.
22. 2 These. 2 7.
States, and yet oppose and deny the Fathers, and the Sons Sovereignty. Paul
infers that the Pagan Empire ceased, or was taken away when Antichrist arose,
and every of the ten horns, or kingdoms, as they put on Crowns, they became
entire and distinct Monarchies. So Daniel makes the little horn, Dan. 7. 8.
Antichrist, to be another, or distinct supernumerary horn to the ten horns of
the Roman Beast; three of which ten horns, this little horn plucked up. John's
Vision of the Beast with ten horns crowned, upon whom the Woman sits, I take to
be a more ample Rev. 13. 1. Rev. 17. 3, 18.
and full description of the Antichristian State in general; but neither
Daniel, or John make God the Appointer or Ordainer of either of those States,
as Pagan, or Antichristian; neither do I see, but when the Beast Antichrist had
driven the Church into Rev. 12. 6, 7.
the Wilderness, Israel was from Egypt, when they were in the Wilderness.

Thirdly, I am greatly persuaded, the Beast, Rev. 13. 11, etc. is the Beast
as^ending out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11. 7. and is a distinct Beast from
that Rev. 13. 1, etc. though the latter Beast possess one of the ten horns, or
kingdoms of the Pagan Empire. That Beast which ascends out of the bottomless
pit, and kills the Witnesses, possesses or reigns over the great and chief
Street of Mystery Babylon, spiritually called Sodom, and Rev. 11. 7, 8.
Egypt, or one horn and kingdom of the Beast; which Beast is more fully
described, Rev. 13. 11, 12, etc. All the ten horns of the great Beast, or the
ten streets of Babylon as a City, were under the Whore; and that Woman reigned
over the whole immediately, Rev. 17. 3, 18.
for the most part of the 1260 days. verse. 11. the Holy Ghost describes to be
another Beast, distinct from the former; and as it were one of the horns,
rending and separating it self from the other Body, or subjection from the
Woman, under a seeming pretense of Reformation, or of more Purity, and easy
Government to the former, but is still the Dragon in cruelty and tyranny.

That this is a distinct Beast from the former is evident. As,

First, This Beast, verse. 11. had another original from verse. 1. The first
Beast arose out of the Sea, viz. Confusion in the Roman State; but this Beast
arose out of the Earth, viz. Earthly and Rev. 13. 1^
carnal Wisdom, or Prudence of State, to cast off Imperial Papal Jurisdiction
over them.

Secondly, This Beast had two horns, or two Powers, viz. the Sword, and the
Keys; Power Civil and Ecclesiastical. ten Kings, had only ten horns, viz. Civil
Power; and the Woman which rode them, kept the Keys from them all; and this
Beast got two horns, viz. both Powers to himself.

But the two horns of this Beast, are said to be horns like a Rev. 13. 11.
Lamb, viz.

First, Horns (like a Lamb) but new budding or putting forth, very tender and
able to do little hurt.

Secondly, Horns (like a Lamb) viz. Powers meekned and abated of that hardness
and strength, as was in the ten horns; or Powers greatly limited and
restrained, to what the former horns were: and yet this Beast still spoke as a
Dragon, viz. Rev. 1^. 11.
he lays claim to Imperial Majesty, as absolute Monarch in his Dominions.

Thirdly, Again, it is said of this Beast, And he exercises Rev. 13. 12.
[all the Power of the first Beast before him] viz. All the Power of the whole
Antichrist, Civil and Ecclesiastical; therefore this is another Antichrist,
distinct from the former, viz. the Antichrist with ten horns. Mark the words,
He exercises (or puts out) all the power of the former Beast, in Church and
in State; yet not by donation, or designation from the former Rev. 13. 12.
Beast, as the former Beast did by designation from the Dragon, but merely by
abruption, or breaking off from the former Beast, and so assuming absolute
Jurisdiction Civil and Ecclesiastical in his own Kingdom, as Hen. 8. did.

Fourthly, It is further said of this Beast, And he had power to give Life to
the Image of the Beast, etc. viz. To the whole Rev. 13. 15, 16, 17.
form of the Government of the former great Beast, (or the old Antichrist) in
Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Or this Beast with two horns, had power
to give life, breath, or efficacy to Civil and Ecclesiastical Officers; to
force and compel obedience to all his Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastical, as any
See the Acts of Allegiance and Supremacy.
of the Emperors, Kings, or Popes did, or do in their Dominions. From all which
we may Observe,

First, That this Beast is not said to act his own Power singly and simply, but
he acts the Power of others. And he had Rev. 13. 15.
Power to give Life.

Secondly, Though it is said, He had Power to give Life, but not said to be
from God, or the Dragon, or the former Beast; therefore it must follow that
this Beast had his Power from the Earth, viz. from that earthly Interest out of
which he arose, and so is one of the Kings of the Earth.

Thirdly, He had Power to give Life to the Image of the former Beast; Therefore
this Beast, and the former Beast differ, as a Beast and the Image of that Beast
differ. This latter Beast has the Power of the former Beast Civil and
Ecclesiastical, but not lo fully and absolutely. The Pope of Rome, and other
Monarchs are Powers absolute, and Independent from the People; but this Beast
with two horns is a Power under limitation and restraint, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and is but the Image, Likeness, or Picture of the former great
Antichrist, and not the same Beast.

I might mention other distinct marks set upon this latter Beast, to difference
him from the former Beast, and yet show him to be one in Nature with the other
Beast; so that both make up but the great Beast Antichrist in the whole: Yet
they are so distinct, that they are properly two Beasts, and two Antichrists,
which may be distinguished most properly by Antichrist Papal, and Antichrist
Protestant; and if this New Name of Antichrist hold good, and Antichrist be
really found and discovered in the name and show of a Protestant or
Protestantism, then Satan, the Devil, or Dragon, is discovered in his Cheats.
First, In influencing Heathen, or Pagan Powers. Secondly, As Satan's cheats
discovered.
influencing Antichristian Powers Papal. Thirdly, As influencing Antichristian
Powers Protestant, under which many Saints deeply suffer in several Countries,
as will be more manifested in little time, as I humbly judge.

Fourthly, I take the Politic Sat of this Nation to be different and distinct
from the Four Empires; It is plain both Dan. 5. 19. verse. 30, 31. and 8. 3, etc.
from Prophecy and History, That the Four Empires arose by the Sword and
Conquest successively, and so gave Laws at pleasure. And though we should
grant, that William of Normandy invaded England by the Sword and Policy, and
was called, William the Conqueror, yet he could not hold his Monarchy, but by
Agreement The People of England are the first Seat of Power
with the People, and to Rule by Law. Therefore by the Civil Constitution of
England, The People are the first Seat of Power; and the Kings of England have
been as well bound by Oath to Govern by Law, as the People are bound by Oath,
or Law, to subject to Kings as Governors in Chief.

Fifthly, and lastly; The Lords People in England, have by the Light of the
Gospel, and brightness of Christ's coming, (and 2 These. 3. 3, 4, 8
with the smart of Heathenish and Antichristian Tyranny) made great discoveries
of the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God; Tyrannizing over their Souls and Bodies; and now
sighing and saying, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had Dominion
over us; but now by thee only will we make mention of thy Name, Isa. 26. 13.

Now for the Lords Remnant, under and after all these Bonds and Engagements to
God, and one to another, with experiences of Gods appearing for them; for them
to turn back to Egypt and Babylon, and break Covenant with God, and one with
another; For them again to set up what they had destroyed in Gods Name, Spirit,
and Power, and from which they were redeemed by so great Grace, through many
Prayers, with the exhausting of so great Treasure, and the price of so much
Blood of Saints, with others; and again (for those redeemed Souls) to submit
their Necks to the same Yoke of Tyranny: this must needs be a sin of high
nature, and dreadfully provoking God.

SIR,

YOu were pleased to give your Understanding upon several Passages in that
Paper, which I willingly pass, as loath to take up much of your time to read
over my thoughts in every particular; but if the Lord shall be pleased to bring
to light more of his secret Will, and our Duty in our Day, this Labor will not
be lost, or this time merely spent; and it will be found both our honor and
our Souls quiet, to be witnessing for Christ against Antichrist, however it
goes with our outward man.

The 10th. Month, the 12th. Day, 1667.
SIR,
SOme days after I had written my thoughts in what I judged then meet in
return to yours, I was under some conviction in my self, that I had not fully
explained my Understanding upon Romans 13. 1, etc. a Scripture which I had
several times cited in a sense which some do not receive. I am therefore humbly
bold to add these Lines as a Postscript to the former. I find it is the
opinion of some men (godly and learned) That the Pagan Roman Caesar's were, and
the Antichristian Kings are (though idolatrous, beastly, bloody Tyrants) the
Magistrates and Ministers of God, Constituted and Ordained, and Invested by God
with all Supreme Authority (in Civil affairs) to rule over the Lords People;
and that the Saints are commanded by God to submit, and subject to those Powers
(in their Bodies and Estates) for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake. This
I humbly judge is Written, Printed, Preached, and Professed, etc.

It seems to me, That the Old Testament (the Law and Prophets, which speak most
of Political Government) are yet silent in this point, neither recording the
time when, the manner how, or the words of Gods Commission, and their
Investment into such absolute Sovereign Authority over his People; nor is there
(as I know, or can be produced) any one Text from the Old Testament, where God
by Moses, or any of the Prophets commanded his People to submit to Pagan Roman
Caesar's, or Antichristian, Idolatrous, Beastly, bloody Tyrants (as Gods
Ordinance) for the Lords sake, or for Conscience sake. But the proof of this
Doctrine is taken out of the New Testament; and two great Apostles of Christ,
Peter and Paul, are made the only Fathers of this Opinion, which I desire to
examine.

The Rise and Original of the Pagan Caesar's (or the 4th. Empire) was first
fore-shewed by the Prophet Daniel, in these words; After this I saw in the
Night-Visions, and behold, a fourth Beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong
exceedingly; and it Dan. 7. 7. expounded. v. 23.
had great iron teeth; it devoured, and brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue with the feet of it. And it was diverse from all the Beasts that were
before it; and it had ten horns. Here Daniel (in his time) described the fourth
Empire, whence it was, verse. 3. after what it was, and how it acted in power
and strength (by Gods permission) but not by Gods Institution and Commission,
that can be proved.

The Rise and Original also of Antichrist (or the Antichristian State) I take
to be darkly represented by Daniel, in the little ^a^. 7. 8. verse. 24, 25, 26,
27.
horn that came up among the ten horns of the Roman Empire, or Roman Beast; and
how that acted also (by Gods permission) and how that Horn and Beast shall end.

But this Horn or Beast is showed to the Apostle John, and described fully Rev.
13. 1, 2, etc. which is generally taken to represent, the Antichristian State
Civil or Political. The Rise of this Beast, was out of the Sea; and he had ten
horns, and upon his horns ten Crowns, and upon his Heads the names of
Blasphemy, verse. 1. The Dragon (or the Devil) gave this Beast his Power, and
his Seat, and great Authority, verse. 2. And there was given him a mouth (viz.
to the Beast Antichrist) speaking great things, and Blasphemies, verse. 5. And
he opened his mouth in Blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, verse. 6. And it was given him to
make war with the Saints, and to overcome them, verse. 7. Now when the Original
of Antichrist is thus plainly set out, Pagan Roman Caesar's, and Antichristian
Kings, to be Constituted, Ordained, and Invested by God with all Supreme,
Magisterial Authority, to rule over his People (in Civil Affairs) and that the
Saints owe submission, and subjection unto those Powers, in their Bodies and
Estates, how intolerable, bloody, and tyrannical soever they be. But (to me)
there seems to be an unanswerable Argument couched against this, verse. 7. in
these words; And it was given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them. From hence I argue,

If in the rising State, or under the Antichristian Civil State, the Saints
were in Arms lawfully, upon their own defense, against Antichrist in his Civil
State, and Antichrist overcame the Saints in war; then the Saints had Civil
Privileges which they lawfully defended against Antichrist: But under the
Civil State of Antichrist, etc. Ergo.

I will not follow this Argument as I might, to prove it from the consent of
Scriptures, and History; but I shall humbly add my thoughts upon these words
(which some think there is much in for Antichrist) viz. And it was given him;
Rev. 13. 7.


Here we are to enquire, First, Who is here to be underderstood by this
particle him.

To this the Answer is clear, It is the Beast Antichrist, v. 1, 2.

Secondly, What Power Antichrist had?

The Answer is common, viz. Civil Power to make war, or power and strength to
raise Armies, and make war with, and overcome the Saints.

Thirdly, How Antichrist had or came by this Power?

To this the Text answers; It was given him.

Fourthly, But the great Question is, Who gave Antichrist this Power? viz. God,
or some other?

The Answer is plain, The Dragon gave him his Power, and Rev. 13. ^^
his Seat, and great Authority.

Now when the holy Ghost is thus plain, and punctual in describing Antichrist
in the Original of his Power, and in the improvement of it, against God,
Holiness and Saints; that yet Antichrist should be asserted, the Ordinance of
God, and Minister of God, etc. I confess I see no ground for it from these
Scriptures.

Pilate; Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above; therefore he that delivered me to thee, Joh. 19. 10, 11.
had the greater sin.

Pilate was) Antichrist was permitted of God (in whom it was to have hindered
it) to arise and get strength, and power to make war with the Rev. 2. 5, 10.
Saints, and to overcome them, either for trial of their Faith, or rebuke of
their sin. Pilate and the Jews could have put out Act. 2. 22, 23. Romans 9. 17.
no act of power against Christ, or Antichrist against the Saints, but as God
permitted and suffered, in his own wisdom and counsel, to bring to pass his
designs of greater Grace, Power, and Glory. So the Devil had no power over
Job, but as God Job. 1. 9, 10,
suffered and permitted. Pagan Caesa^^, and Antichristian Kings are asserted to
be the Ordinance of God, and to be obeyed by the Lords People; by the same
Argument the Devil must be acknowledged to be the Orninance of God, and to be
obeyed by the Saints.

That God does the Saints good by the Afflictions and Persecutions from
Tyrants. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23


Rom 8. 28.
neither the Devil, or wicked men are the efficient cause of that good which
comes to Saints by sanctified afflictions. Pagan Caesar's, or Antichristian
Kings are the Ordinance of God, and to be obeyed by the Saints, in their Bodies
and Estates, for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake; because God uses
these Rods to chastize the Saints with. As there has no Heathen or
Antichristian State arisen in the World but by Gods Permission and Providence,
Dan 4. 1^.
so there has been a concurrance of Natural Causes, leading to such Changes of
States and Governments (God secretly carrying on his designs in them) and yet
so as the Agents or Instruments therein have not seen God in those things, and
so they have been cursed in the designs which they have accomplished against
the Lords People and Interest. Thus the Heathen Isa. 10. 5, 6, etc Mat. 27. 1,
2, etc. ^ct. 2. 22, 23.
State, Judas, and the Jews, came under the Curse for destroying Jerusalem, for
betraying Christ, and putting him to death, although they fulfilled the
determinate Counsel of God. Therefore what Christ said of Judas, may be said of
every apostate Professor, who (for gain or self ends) has either formerly or
in later times, betrayed the Lords Interest and People into the hands of
Antichristian Kings (though by Gods secret counsel and permission.) The
distressed Saints may say, He (or they) that delivered us into the hands of
beastly bloody men, J^hn 19. 11
have the greater sin.

But still some suppose that they have but done their duty, and to confirm
their opinion and practice, in subjecting unto Pagan, or Antichristian Kings
(as having power of Rule over them in Civil Affairs, by Gods appointment) they
urge the Writings of Peter, and both Paul's Doctrine and Practice; but the two
chief Corner Stones on which they found their Opinion, is, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
and Romans 13. 1. Of these Scriptures therefore, I will take a further view.

The words of Peter are these: Submit your selves to every Ordinance 1 Pe^. 2.
(...)
of Man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, etc.

In these words Peter enjoins Saints universal obedience to every Ordinance of
Man, or Law of Man (as some take it) Civil and Ecclesiastical; not considering
the state, condition, or quality of the Kings, Pagan, or Antichristian. But as
Peter wrote this to Saints under the Pagan Roman Caesar's, it is taken for
granted, that Peter in his time commanded those Saints to submit to every
Ordinance of those Emperors (without exception) though idolat^ous, beastly,
bloody Tyrants.

Some men again (godly and learned) see cause to put a restriction upon Peter's
universal, and say, That Peter's exhortation to Saints in that day, was to
submit to every Ordinance of Man in Civil Affairs concerning the Bodies and
Estates of Saints;

But the main and chief Text in all the Scriptures urged, are the words of
Paul, written to the Saints at Rome. His words are these,

Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of
God: the Powers that be, are ordained (or ordered) of Romans 13. 1
God.

From this Text, some argue thus.

First, That Paul commands a universal obedience to the Higher Powers (by
Saints and Sinners) Let every soul.

Secondly, The Powers (that be) are ordained of God. Paul says not, The Powers
that have been, or, the Powers that shall be, are Ordained of God; But, the
Powers [which be] are Ordained of God. And the Powers which then were in being,
were the Pagan Roman Caesar's, idolatrous, beastly, bloody Tyrants; the which
command is still binding to Christians under the like Powers.

From this Text, some give the sole Supreme Power to Kings to rule over men's
Bodies and Souls, as God. Some again restrain the Royal Power of Kings only to
the Bodies of Saints in Civil Affairs, and give the Sovereignty of Souls to Ephesians
1. 21, 22, 23.
Christ, as Head of the Church, upon the grounds before expressed.

But I must take the humble boldness (in Truths behalf) to dissent from others
in their sense upon this Text* I humbly judge, that this Text proves neither
the one nor the others opinion, though some be godly and learned, as to the
opinion of those, who from this Text (or any other) do give the sole Supreme
Power to Men, as Lords, and Lawgivers to others, both for Soul and Body; I
pass them by.

But to those godly and Learned, who from this Text (or any other) do plead for
Saints Subjection to Pagan, or Antichristian Kings (though idolatrous, beastly,
bloody Tyrants) in Civil Affai^s, or Temporal Jurisdiction, for the Lords sake,
and for Conscience sake. I humbly Reply, that they mistake the Apostle, and
mis-apply the Text, who so take the place; and to these I humbly offer these my
Reasons, against that sense, to consideration.

First, Though Paul say, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; yet he
does not say, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers in all Civil
Affairs, concerning Bodies and Estates; neither does he say, to Pagan, or to
Antichristian Powers, but with restriction, to Powrs ordained of God, Paul
commands subjection Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
from every soul, yet it is not in all things, or to all Persons, or Powers,
but as Ordained by God.

My thoughts are, That those who see cause to restrain general Scriptures
(which speak of Sovereign Magisterial Power) to Civil Jurisdiction over the
outward man; and except their Power and Jurisdiction (over souls in Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical things) will (upon good consideration) see cause also to
restrain Magisterial Power and Jurisdiction,

If we take these words of Paul, (or Peter) as commanding Saints subjection to
the Higher Powers, (be they what they will) in all outward things; Law, which
sets bounds between man and man, Superior and Inferior. Therefore upon this
ground the Apostle cannot be taken in that sense, viz. to give a power to some
men (viz. to Kings) to command others to break Gods Moral Laws, which Moral
Laws Paul himself maintained, and also taught others in his Epistles.

But I shall humbly give my sense upon this Text (as of other the like
Scriptures) That both Paul and Peter do only call and command Saints Obedience,
to all Lawful Magistrates, in all Lawful things commanded by God, for the Lords
sake, and for Conscience sake, as to God.

Secondly, The scope of the Apostle in this place (as I judge) is to press
Saints to submit and subject to Higher Powers, or Magistrates, as Ordained and
set over them by God, as his Ministers in State for their good, to restrain
sins against the Moral Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. Exodus 18. 15, 16, etc. 2 Chr. 19. 6,
7.
Law, and to maintain Justice, Equity, and Peace between man and man. Paul
describes not here these Ministers of State by Names, but by their Qualities,
and gives only a general description of Magistracy, to be obeyed, Ordained by
God.

In the same way, and after the same manner that Paul describes Antichrist, the
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, to be 2 These. 2. 3, 4. Rev. 14 9, 10. Rev.
13. 1, etc,
rejected of Saints; he here describes the true Magistrates of God, to be
obeyed by the Lords People, for the Lords sake.

Surely those have little sight who see not, that the general Government of
Nations is still beastly Tyranny, Paul, The Powers that be. The great question
here is, The question to what Powers Paul refers.
to what Powers the Apostle refers? viz. Whether to the Pagan Caesar's Power,
who were then Monarchs of all the World, or to the Civil Power and Jurisdiction
then exercised amongst the Saints, as far as they could, or to Magistracy, as
ordained and constituted by God in the Jewish State.

If we take the Apostle in either of the latter senses, there is
Scripture-grounds for it; but if we refer Paul's words to the Pagan Caesar's
State, there is only this poor plea for it, That Luke ^. 1, 2, with Pa^ls time.
the Pagan Caesar's were then being, and reigning in the World; but answered not
to the qualifications of those Ministers of God as Paul describes, Magistrates
Ordained by God, now answering the ends of Government. The Caesar's then being
and reigning Romans 1^. 3, 4, 5
in the World, is but a circumstance of time, but the qualifications of Rulers,
and the ends of Government, are Essentials in Magistracy; and therefore to
expound Paul by a conceived circumstance, when and where the Essentials of
Government (as Ordained by God) are wanting, cannot be held Orthodox and sound.
But if we take Paul in these words, The Powers that be, to refer to that Civil
Power and Jurisdiction resting at that time, and seated in the Saints by God,
(according to the Moral Law given to Israel) there is much Reason and Scripture
to confirm this Exposition.

First, Before Christ left the World, he devolved the administration of all
that Power and Authority (Civil and Spiritual) Mat. 28. 18, and, Mat. 25. 14.
Mar. 13. 34.
over his own People, (as entrusted with him by the Father) to his own Servants.

Secondly, In Paul's time, there were Saints in the Churches who were fitted and
qualified for Civil Governors or Magistrates. 1 Cor. 6. 4.


Thirdly, In Paul's time, the Sain^s had sufficient Laws, and power of
Jurisdiction, to hear and determine all Civil differences amongst themselves,
that they needed not to go to Law before the Pagan Governors; and therefore
Paul sharply reproved the Saints of Corinth for going to Law before the unjust,
and not before the Saints. 1 Cor. 6. 4


These Considerations have swayed with me, and I know not one argument to shake
me in my judgment, as this sense has the current of Scripture with it.
Magistrates as constituted by God) carries Paul's sense from the Pagan Roman
Caesar's, that they were not the Powers which he intended, neither Antichristian
Kings.

My Third Reason is, If we infer from Paul, or Peter, That Pagan, or
Antichristian Kings were, or are Powers to be submitted and subjected to by
Saints in all Civil affairs (without limitation, or restriction to the Law of
God) then Saints were, and are to obey Men (in Civil things) rather than God;
and the Command of a King is Authority for Saints to break the Moral Laws of
God, and Nature, and not sin. Surely, if the Bodies and Estates of men, be left
by God, to the Wills, Lusts and Commands of any Emperors, Kings or States (and
Saints bound to obey them in all outward natural things) viz. That as Paul has
bounded the Authority of Parents over Children, and of Ephesians. 6. 1. v. 4. 5, 6.
Col. 3. 20, 21, etc.
Masters over Servants, to the Law of God, and Rules of God; and therein
commands Children to obey Parents, and Servants to obey Masters in all things
in the Lord, as to God and Christ: So the same Apostle enjoins Saints
subjection to Lawful Magistrates, in all lawful things, and no further.

My Fourth Reason follows. It is recorded in Scripture (as an approved evidence
of the Fear of God, in many of the Lords Servants) to slight and disobey the
cruel Laws and Commands of Kings in Moral Civil things; and in that
disobedience, God owned and honored them. Of these the Scriptures give many
Examples: As The Midwives of Egypt; Exodus 1. 17, 20 v. 22. Heb. 11. 23, v. 27.
1 King. 18. 3, 4.
The Parents of Moses; Moses himself; Obediah, etc. And though those high
expressions of the Three Children, of Peter, and other Apostles, spoken boldly
before Magistrates in Counsel, be ordinarily restrained to spiritual things and
worship, yet I judge, that those Saints did not intentionally so take them, but
they may also as truly be spoken by Saints in Civil natural Privileges, when
demnaded from them, or they commanded by man to break any Moral Law of God. We
are not Dan. 3. 16. Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29.
careful to answer thee in this matter; We ought to obey God rather than Man.

My Fifth and Last Reason is; God is Supreamly (above all Persons and Powers)
to be feared, obeyed, and served by Saints and Sinners, in all Commands,
Natural and Spiritual, Mat. 10. 26, 28. Luke 12. 5. Isa. 8. 13, 14.
Civil or Ecclesiastical, as he made, and has power over Bodies and Souls, to
save, or to destroy eternally. God is only to be feared and obeyed by his
Children and Servants, and not Deuteronomy. 13. 4. 1 Chr. 16. 25. Genesis 17. 1.
Emperors, Kings, or States (whoever they be) in any Commands which are
contrary to the Laws and Commands of God Almighty. Magistrates can exercise
over their Brethren (by Divine Right) is by the Law and appointment of God for
the good of Mankind. No one man, as a Child of Adam, has power of Jurisdiction
over another, but in the way and manner which God has Ordained and Appointed
in his Law: Therefore it stands not with the Revealed Will of God in the
Scriptures, or Natural Reasons, that any Persons, or Powers on Earth, are
Invested by God with Supreme Power, either to command any Person to do what God
forbids, or to forbid what God commands, in matters Civil, Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical.

Thus I have given my understanding upon Romans 13. 4. at which so many have, and
yet do stumble and fall sorely.

The 10th. Month, the 20th. Day, 1667.
FINIS.

